[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc35006)  [Next](cc35008.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 35: John, Part II*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="viii"></span>

<span id="viii-p1"></span>CHAPTER 18.

<span id="viii.i"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p1"></span><span id="viii.i-p1.1"></span>[John
18:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#001.md)<span id="viii.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p2"></span>**1.** When Jesus had spoken these words, he
went out with his disciples over the brook Kedron, where was a garden,
into which he entered, and his disciples. **2.** And Judas also, who
betrayed him, knew the place; for Jesus often resorted thither with his
disciples. **3.** Then Judas, having received a band of soldiers, and
officers from the chief pricsts and Pharisees, came thither with
lanterns, and torches, and weapons. **4.** Now Jesus, knowing all the
things which were coming upon him, went forward and said to them, Whom
seek ye? **5.** They answered him, Jesus of Nazareth. Jesus saith to
them, It is I. And Judas also, who betrayed him, stood with them. **6.**
As soon therefore as he said to them, It is I, they went backward, and
fell to the ground.

<span id="viii.i-p3"></span> 

<span id="viii.i-p4"></span><span id="viii.i-p4.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p5"></span>**1.** *When Jesus bad spoken these words.*
In this narrative John passes by many things which the other three
Evangelists relate, and he does so on purposej as his intention was to
collect many things worthy of being recorded, about which they say
nothing; and, therefore, let the reader go to the other Evangelists to
find what is wanting here.

<span id="viii.i-p6"></span>*Over the brook Kedron.* In the Greek
original there is an article prefixed to *Kedron,* which would seem to
intimate that the *brook* takes its name from the *cedars;*  <span
id="fr_129"></span>[130](#fn_129.md) but this is probably an error which
has crept into the text; for *the valley* or *brook Kedron* is often
mentioned in Scripture. The place was so called from its being *dark* or
*gloomy,* because, being a hollow valley, it was shady,  <span
id="fr_130"></span>[131](#fn_130.md) on that point, however, I do not
dispute: I only state what is more probable.

<span id="viii.i-p9"></span>The chief thing to be considered is, the
intention of the Evangelist in pointing out the place; for his object
was, to show that Christ went to death willingly. He came into a place
which, he knew, was well known to *Judas.* Why did he do this but to
present himself, of his own accord, to the traitor and to the enemies?
Nor was he led astray by inadvertency, for he knew beforehand all that
was to happen. John afterwards mentions also that he went forward to
meet them. He therefore suffered death, not by constraint, but
willingly, that he might be a voluntary sacrifice; for without obedience
atonement would not have been obtained for us. Besides, he entered into
the garden, not for the purpose of seeking a place of concealment, but
that he might have a better opportunity, and greater leisure, for
prayer. That he prayed three times to be delivered from death, (<span
id="viii.i-p9.1"></span>[Mt 26:44](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#044.md)<span
id="viii.i-p9.1"></span>,) is not inconsistent with that voluntary
obedience of which we have spoken;  <span
id="fr_131"></span>[132](#fn_131.md) for it was necessary that he should
contend with difficulties, that he might be victorious. Now, having
subdued the dread of death, he advances to death freely and willingly.

<span id="viii.i-p11"></span><span id="viii.i-p11.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p12"></span>**3.** *Judas, therefore, having received a
band of soldiers.* That *Judas* came accompanied by soldiers and by so
large a retinue, is a sign of a bad conscience, which always trembles
without any cause. It is certain that the *band of soldiers* was
borrowed from the governor, who also sent a captain at the head of a
thousand soldiers; for, on account of sudden mutinies, a garrison was
stationed in the city, and the governor himself kept a body-guard,
wherever he was. The rest were *officers* sent by *the priests;* but
John makes separate mention *of the Pharisee,* because they were more
enraged than all the rest, as if they had cared more about religion.

<span id="viii.i-p13"></span><span id="viii.i-p13.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p14"></span>**4.** *Jesus therefore, hnowing.* The
Evangelist states more clearly with what readiness Christ went forward
to death, but, at the same time, describes the great power which he
exercised by a single word, in order to inform us that wicked men had no
power over him, except so far as he gave permission.

<span id="viii.i-p15"></span><span id="viii.i-p15.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p16"></span>**5.** *It is I.* He replies mildly that he
is the person *whom they seek,* and yet, as if they had been struck down
by a violent tempest, or rather by a thunderbolt, he lays them prostrate
on the ground. There was no want of power in him, therefore, to restrain
their hands, if he had thought proper; but he wished to obey his Father,
by whose decree he knew that he was called to die.

<span id="viii.i-p17"></span>We may infer from this how dreadful and
alarming to the wicked the voicc of Christ will be, when he shall ascend
his throne to judge the world. At that time he stood as a lamb ready to
be sacrificed; his majesty, so far as outward appearance was concerned,
was utterly gone; and yet when he utters but a single word, his armed
and courageous enemies fall down. And what was the word? He thunders no
fearful excommunication against them, but only replies, *It is I* What
then will be the result, when he shall come, not to be judged by a man,
but to be the Judge of the living and the dead; not in that mean and
despicable appearance but shining in heavenly glory, and accompanied by
his angels? He intended, at that time, to give a proof of that efficacy
which Isaiah ascribes to his voice. Among other glorious attributes of
Christ, the Prophet relates that

<span id="viii.i-p18"></span>he will strike the earth with the rod of
his mouth,  
and will slay the wicked by the breath of his lips,  
(<span id="viii.i-p18.3"></span>[Isa
11:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#004)<span id="viii.i-p18.3"></span>..md)

<span id="viii.i-p19"></span>True, the fulfillment of this prophecy is
declared by Paul to be delayed till the end of the world, (<span
id="viii.i-p19.1"></span>[2Th 2:8](../../../bib/kjv/th2002.htm#008.md)<span
id="viii.i-p19.1"></span>.) Yet we daily see the wicked, with all their
rage and pride, struck down by the voice of Christ; and, when those men
fell down who had come to bind Christ, there was exhibited a visible
token of that alarm which wicked men feel within themselves, whether
they will or not, when Christ speaks by his ministers. Besides, as this
was in some measure accidental to the voice of Christ, to whom it
peculiarly belongs to raise up men who were lying in a state of death,
he will undoubtedly display toward us such power as to raise us even to
heaven.

<span id="viii.ii"></span>

<span id="viii.ii-p1"></span><span id="viii.ii-p1.1"></span>[John
18:7-9](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#007.md)<span id="viii.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ii-p2"></span>**7.** He therefore asked them again, Whom
seek ye? And they said, Jesus of Nazareth. **8.** Jesus answered, I told
you that it is I: if therefore you seek me, allow these to go away.
**9.** That the word which he had spoken might be fulfilled, Of those
whom thou gavest to me I have lost none.

<span id="viii.ii-p3"></span> 

<span id="viii.ii-p4"></span><span id="viii.ii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ii-p5"></span>**7.** *He therefore asked them again.*
Hence it appears what is the powerful effect of that blindness with
which God strikes the minds of wicked men, and how dreadful is their
stupidity, when, by a just judgment of God, they have been bewitched by
Satan. Oxen and asses, if they fall, are touched with some kind of
feeling; but those men, after having had an open display of the divine
power of Christ, proceed as fearlessly as if they had not perceived in
him even the shadow of a man; nay, Judas himself remains unmoved. Let us
learn, therefore, to fear the judgment of God, by which the reprobate,
delivered into the hands of Satan, become more stupid than brute beasts.
Nor can it be doubted that Satan hurried them on, with wild fury, to
such a desperate hardihood; for there is no insanity that drives a man
with such viohnee as this kind of blindness; Wicked men, after having
been *given over to a reprobate mind,* (<span
id="viii.ii-p5.1"></span>[Ro 1:28](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#028.md)<span
id="viii.ii-p5.1"></span>,) care no more about rushing against God than
if they had only to do with a fly. They feel his power, indeed, but not
so as to be disposed to obey; for sooner will they be broken a hundred
times than they will yield. In short, their malice is a veil to hinder
them from observing the light of God; their obstinacy renders them
harder than stones, so that they never suffer themselves to be subdued.

<span id="viii.ii-p6"></span><span id="viii.ii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ii-p7"></span>**8.** *I have told you that it is I.* Here
we see how the Son of God not only submits to death of his own accord,
that by his obedience he may blot out our transgressions, but also how
he discharges the office of a good Shepherd in protecting his flock. He
sees the attack of the wolves, and does not wait till they come to the
sheep which have been committed to his care, but immediately goes
forward to guard them. Whenever, therefore, either wicked men or devils
make an attack upon us, let us not doubt that this good Shepherd is
ready  <span id="fr_132"></span>[133](#fn_132.md) to aid us in the same
manner. Yet by his example Christ has laid down to shepherds a rule
which they ought to follow, if they wish to discharge their office in a
right manner.

<span id="viii.ii-p9"></span><span id="viii.ii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ii-p10"></span>**9.** *I have lost none.* This passage
appears to be inappropriately quoted, as it relates to their souls
rather than to their bodies; for Christ did not keep the apostles safe
to the last, but this he accomplished, that, amidst incessant dangers,
and even in the midst of death, still their eternal salvation was
secured. I reply, the Evangelist does not speak merely of their bodily
life, but rather means that Christ, sparing them for a time, made
provision for their eternal salvation. Let us consider how great their
weakness was; what do we think they would have done, if they had been
brought to the test? While, therefore, Christ did not choose that they
should be tried beyond the strength which he had given to them, he
rescued them from eternal destruction. And hence we may draw a general
doctrine, that, though he try our faith by many temptations, still he
will never allow us to come into extreme danger without supplying us
also with strength to overcome. And, indeed, we see how he continually
bears with our weakness, when he puts himself forward to repel so many
attacks of Satan and wicked men, because he sees that we are not yet
able or prepared for them. In short, he never brings his people into the
field of battle till they have been fully trained, so that even in
perishing they do not perish, because there is gain provided for them
both in death and in life.

<span id="viii.iii"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p1"></span><span id="viii.iii-p1.1"></span>[John
18:10-14](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#010.md)<span
id="viii.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p2"></span>**10.** Then Simon Peter, having a sword,
drew it, and struck the high priest's servant, and cut off his right
ear; and the servant's name was Malchus. **11.** Jesus therefore said to
Peter, Put up thy sword into the sheath. Shall I not drink the cup which
my Father hath given me? **12.** Then the band, and the captain, and
officers of the Jews, took Jesus, and bound him; **13.** And led him
away to Annas first; for he was father-in-law to Caiaphas, who was the
high priest of that year. **14.** And Caiaphas was he who had given
counsel to the Jews, that it was expedient that one man should die for
the people.

<span id="viii.iii-p3"></span> 

<span id="viii.iii-p4"></span><span id="viii.iii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p5"></span>**10.** *Then Simon Peter, having a sword,
drew it.* The Evangelist now describes the foolish zeal *of Peter,* who
attempted to defend his Master in an unlawful manner. Boldly and
courageously, indeed, he incurs great risk on Christ’s account; but as
he does not consider what his calling demands, and what God permits, his
action is so far from deserving praise, that he is severely blamed by
Christ. But let us learn that, in the person of *Peter,* Christ condemns
every thing that men dare to attempt out of their own fancy. This
doctrine is eminently worthy of attention; for nothing is more common
than to defend, under the cloak of zeal, every thing that we do, as if
it were of no importance whether God approved, or not, what men suppose
to be right, whose prudence is nothing else than mere vanity.

<span id="viii.iii-p6"></span>If we saw nothing faulty in the zeal of
*Peter,* still we ought to be satisfied on this single ground, that
Christ declares that he is displeased with it. But we see that it was
not owing to him that Christ did not turn aside from death, and that his
name was not exposed to perpetual disgrace; for, in offering violence to
the captain and the soldiers, he acts the part of a highwayman, because
he resists the power which God has appointed. Christ having already been
more than enough hated by the world, this single deed might give
plausibility to all the calumnies which his enemies falsely brought
against him. Besides, it was exceedingly thoughtless in Peter to attempt
to prove his faith by his sword, while he could not do so by his tongue.
When he is called to make confession, he denies his Master; and now,
without his Master’s authority, he raises a tumult.

<span id="viii.iii-p7"></span>Warned by so striking an example, let us
learn to keep our zeal within proper bounds; and as the wantonness of
our flesh is always eager to attempt more than God commands, let us
learn that our zeal will succeed ill, whenever we venture to undertake
any thing contrary to the word of God. It will sometimes happen that the
commencement gives us flattering promises, but we shall at length be
punished for our rashness. Let obedience, therefore, be the foundation
of all that we undertake. We are also reminded, that those who have
resolved to plead the cause of Christ do not always conduct themselves
so skilfully as not to commit some fault; and, therefore, we ought the
more earnestly to entreat the Lord to guide us in every action by the
spirit of prudence.

<span id="viii.iii-p8"></span><span id="viii.iii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p9"></span>**11.** *Put up thy sword into the
sheath.* By this command Christ reproves Peter’s action. But we must
attend to the reason, which is, that a private individual was not
permitted to rise in opposition to those who had been invested with
public authority; for this may be inferred from the other three
Evangelists, who relate Christ’s general declaration,

<span id="viii.iii-p10"></span>He who strikes with the sword shall
perish by the sword,  
(<span id="viii.iii-p10.2"></span>[Mt
26:52](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#052.md)<span
id="viii.iii-p10.2"></span>.)

<span id="viii.iii-p11"></span>We must also beware of repelling our
enemies by force or violence, even when they unjustly provoke us, except
so far as the institutions and laws of the community admit; for whoever
goes beyond the limits of his calling, though he should gain the
applause of the whole world, will never obtain for his conduct the
approbation of God.  <span id="fr_133"></span>[134](#fn_133.md)

<span id="viii.iii-p13"></span>*Shall I not drink the cup which my
Father hath given to me?* This appears to be a special reason why Christ
ought to be silent, that he might be *led as a lamb to be sacrificed,*
(<span id="viii.iii-p13.1"></span>[Isa
53:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#007.md)<span
id="viii.iii-p13.1"></span>;) but it serves the purpose of an example,
for the same patience is demanded from all of us. Scripture compares
afflictions to medicinal draughts; for, as the master of a house
distributes meat and drink to his children and servants, so God has this
authority over us, that he has a right to treat every one as he thinks
fit; and whether he cheers us by prosperity, or humbles us by adversity,
he is said to administer a sweet or a bitter draught. The draught
appointed for Christ was, to suffer the death of the cross for the
reconciliation of the world. He says, therefore, that he must *drink the
cup which his Father* measured out and delivered to him.

<span id="viii.iii-p14"></span>In the same manner we, too, ought to be
prepared for enduring the cross. And yet we ought not to listen to
fanatics, who tell us that we must not seek remedies for diseases and
any other kind of distresses, lest we reject *the cup* which the
Heavenly Father  <span id="fr_134"></span>[135](#fn_134.md) presents to us.
Knowing that *we must once die,* (<span id="viii.iii-p15.2"></span>[Heb
9:27](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#027.md)<span
id="viii.iii-p15.2"></span>,) we ought to be prepared for death; but the
time of our death being unknown to us, the Lord permits us to defend our
life by those aids which he has himself appointed. We must patiently
endure diseases, however grievous they may be to our flesh; and though
they do not yet appear to be mortal, we ought to seek alleviation of
them; only we must be careful not to attempt any thing but what is
permitted by the word of God. In short, provided that this remain always
fixed in our hearts, *Let the will of the Lord be done,* (<span
id="viii.iii-p15.3"></span>[Ac
21:14](../../../bib/kjv/act021.htm#014.md)<span
id="viii.iii-p15.3"></span>,) when we seek deliveralice from the evils
which press upon us, we do not fail *to drink the cup* which the Lord
has given to us.

<span id="viii.iii-p16"></span><span id="viii.iii-p16.1"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p17"></span>**12.** *Then the band of soldiers and
the captain.* It might be thought strange that Christ, who laid the
soldiers prostrate on the ground by a single word, now allows himself to
be *taken;* for if he intended at length to surrender to his enemies,
what need was there for performing such a miracle? But the demonstration
of divine power was advantageous in two respects; for, first, it serves
to take away the offense, that we may not think that Christ yielded as
if he had been overcome by weakness; and, secondly, it proves that in
dying he was altogether voluntary. So far as it was useful, therefore,
he asserted his power against his enemies; but when it was necessary to
obey the Father, he restrained himself, that he might be offered as a
sacrifice. But let us remember that the body of the Son of God was
bound, that our souls might be loosed from the cords of sin and of
Satan.

<span id="viii.iii-p18"></span><span id="viii.iii-p18.1"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p19"></span>**13.** *And led him away to Annas
first.* The other Evangelists omit this circumstance, because it does
not greatly affect the substance of the narrative; for nothing was done
there that was worthy of being recorded. Perhaps the convenience of the
place induced them to imprison Christ in the house of Annas, till the
high priest assembled the council.

<span id="viii.iii-p20"></span>*The high priest of that year.* He does
not mean that the office of the high priesthood was annual, as many have
falsely imagined, but that *Caiaphas was high priest* at that time,
which appears plainly from Josephus. By the injunction of the Law, this
honor was perpetual, and ended only at the death of him who held it; but
ambition and intestine broils gave occasion to the Roman governors to
dethrone one high priest and put another in his room, at their own
pleasure, either for money or for favor. Thus Vitellius deposed
Caiaphas, and appointed Jonathan, the son of Annas, to be his successor.

<span id="viii.iii-p21"></span><span id="viii.iii-p21.1"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p22"></span>**14.** *Who had given counsel to the
Jews.* The Evangelist repeats the opinion of Caiaphas, which formerly
came under our notice;  <span id="fr_135"></span>[136](#fn_135.md) for God
employed the foul mouth of a wicked and treacherous *high priest* to
utter a prediction, (<span id="viii.iii-p23.2"></span>[Joh
11:50](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#050.md)<span
id="viii.iii-p23.2"></span>,) just as he guided the tongue of the
prophet Baham, contrary to his wish, so that he was constrained to bless
the people, though he desired to curse them, to gain favor with king
Balak, (<span id="viii.iii-p23.3"></span>[Num.
23:7](../../../bib/kjv/num023.htm#007.md),
[8](../../../bib/kjv/num023.htm#008)<span id="viii.iii-p23.3"></span>..md)

<span id="viii.iv"></span>

<span id="viii.iv-p1"></span><span id="viii.iv-p1.1"></span>[John
18:15-18](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#015.md)<span
id="viii.iv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="viii.iv-p2"></span>**15.** And Simon Peter followed Jesus, and
another disciple;  <span id="fr_136"></span>[137](#fn_136.md) and that
disciple was known to the high priest; therefore he went in with Jesus
into the court of the high priest. **16.** But Peter stood without at
the door. The other disciple, therefore, who was known to the high
priest, went out, and spoke to her that kept the door, and brought in
Peter  <span id="fr_137"></span>[138](#fn_137.md) **17.** Then the maid
that kept the door said to Peter, Art not thou also one of that man's
disciples? He saith, I am not. **18.** And the servants and officers,
who had kindled a fire of coals, because it was cold, stood there and
warmed themselves; and Simon Peter was also standing with them, and
warming himself.

<span id="viii.iv-p5"></span> 

<span id="viii.iv-p6"></span><span id="viii.iv-p6.1"></span>

<span id="viii.iv-p7"></span>**15.** *And another disciple.* Some have
been led astray, by a slight conjecture, to suppose that this *disciple*
was the Evangelist  <span id="fr_138"></span>[139](#fn_138.md) John,
because he is accustomed to speak of himself without mentioning his
name. But what intimacy with a proud *high priest* could John have, who
was a mean fisherman? And how was it possible for him, being one of
Christ’s household, to be in the habit of visiting the house of *the
high priest?* It is more probable that he was not one of the twelve, but
that he is called a disciple, because he had embraced the doctrine of
the Son of God.

<span id="viii.iv-p9"></span>John is not very exact in arranging the
narrative, being satisfied with drawing up a brief summary; for, after
having related that Peter once denied Christ, he intermingles other
matters, and afterwards returns to the other two denials. Inattentive
readers were led by this circumstance to conclude that the first denial
took place in the house of *Annas.* The words, however, convey no such
meaning, but rather state clearly that it was the high priest’s maid
that constrained Peter to deny Christ. We must, therefore, understand
that, when Christ was brought before the high priest, admission was not
granted to any person who chose, but that *the disciple who was known to
the high priest* requested, as a personal favor, that Peter might be
admitted. There is no reason to doubt that godly zeal was the motive
that induced both of them to follow Christ; but since Christ had plainly
declared that he spared Peter and the others, he who was so weak would
have found it to be far better for him to groan and pray in some dark
corner than to go into the presence of men. He now undertakes, with
great earnestness, the performance of a duty from which Christ had
released him; and when he comes to the confession of faith, in which he
ought to have persevered even to death, his courage fails. We ought
always to consider what the Lord requires from us, that those who are
weak may not undertake what is not necessary.

<span id="viii.iv-p10"></span><span id="viii.iv-p10.1"></span>

<span id="viii.iv-p11"></span>**17.** *Then the maid that kept the door
said to Peter. Peter* is introduced into the high priest’s hall; but it
cost him very dear, for, as soon as he sets his foot within it, he is
constrained to deny Christ. When he stumbles so shamefully at the first
step, the foolishness of his boasting is exposed. He had boasted that he
would prove to be a valiant champion, and able to meet death with
firmness; and now, at the voice of a single *maid,* and that voice
unaccompanied by threatening, he is confounded and throws down his arms.
Such is a demonstration of the power of man. Certainly, all the strength
that appears to be in men is smoke, which a breath immediately drives
away. When we are out of the battle, we are too courageous; but
experience shows that our lofty talk is foolish and groundless; and,
even when Satan makes no attacks, we contrive for ourselves idle alarms
which disturb us before the time. The voice of a feeble woman terrified
Peter: and what is the case with us? Do we not continually tremble at
the rustling of a falling leaf? A false appearance of danger, which was
still distant, made Peter tremble: and are we not every day led away
from Christ by childish absurdities? In short, our courage is of such a
nature, that, of its own accord, it gives way where there is no enemy;
and thus does God revenge the arrogance of men by reducing fierce minds
to a state of weakness. A man, filled not with fortitude but with wind,
promises that he will obtain an easy victory over the whole world; and
yet, no sooner does he see the shadow of a thistle, than he immediately
trembles. Let us therefore learn not to be brave in any other than the
Lord.

<span id="viii.iv-p12"></span>*I am not.* This does not seem, indeed, to
be an absolute denial of Christ; but when Peter is afraid to acknowledge
that he is *one of Christs disciples,* it amounts to an assertion that
he has nothing to do with him. This ought to be carefully observed, that
no one may imagine that he has escaped by acting the part of a sophist,
when it is only in an indirect manner that he shrinks from the
confession of his faith.

<span id="viii.iv-p13"></span><span id="viii.iv-p13.1"></span>

<span id="viii.iv-p14"></span>**18.** *And Simon Peter was standing with
them.* When the evangelist adds that *Peter was standing near the fire,
along with the others and servants,* this serves to connect the various
parts of the narrative, as we shall afterwards see. But this shows how
great was Peter’s stupidity, when, without the least concern, he *warmed
himself* along with a multitude of wicked men, after having denied his
Master; though it is possible that he may have been restrained by fear
lest, in going out of the high priest’s house, he should fall into
another danger of the same kind.

<span id="viii.v"></span>

<span id="viii.v-p1"></span><span id="viii.v-p1.1"></span>[John
18:19-24](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#019.md)<span id="viii.v-p1.1"></span>

<span id="viii.v-p2"></span>**19.** The high priest then asked Jesus
concerning his disciples, and concerning his doctrine. **20.** Jesus
answered him, I spoke openly in the world; I always taught in the
synagogue and in the temple, where all the Jews assemble, and in secret
I have spoken nothing. **21.** Why askest thou me? Ask those who have
heard what I have spoken to them: behold, they know what I have said.
**22.** When he had said these things, one of the officers that stood by
struck Jesus with the palm of his hand, saying, Answerest thou the high
priest so? **23.** Jesus answered him, If I have spoken evil, bear
witness of the evil; but if well, why smitest thou me? **24.** Now Annas
had sent him bound to Calaphas the high priest.

<span id="viii.v-p3"></span> 

<span id="viii.v-p4"></span><span id="viii.v-p4.1"></span>

<span id="viii.v-p5"></span>**19.** *The high priest then asked Jesus.*
*The high priest* interrogates Christ, as if he had been some seditious
person, who had split the Church into parties by collecting *disciples;*
and he interrogates him as if he had been a false prophet, who had
endeavored to corrupt the purity of the faith by new and perverse
*doctrines.* Our Lord  <span id="fr_139"></span>[140](#fn_139.md) Jesus
Christ, having completely and faithfully discharged the office of
teacher, does not enter into a new defense; but, that he may not abandon
the cause of truth, he shows that he was prepared to defend all that *he
had taught.* Yet he likewise reproves the impudence of the high priest,
who inquires about a matter perfectly well known, as if it had been
doubtful. Not satisfied with having rejected the Redeemer offered,
together with the salvation promised to them, they likewise condemn all
the exposition of the Law.

<span id="viii.v-p7"></span><span id="viii.v-p7.1"></span>

<span id="viii.v-p8"></span>**20.** *I spoke openly in the world.* It is
a childish error into which some have fallen, who think that this reply
of Christ condemns those who expound the word of God in private
apartments, when the tyranny of wieked men does not allow them to
expound it publicly; for Christ does not argue as to what is lawful and
what is not lawful, but his intention was to put down the insolent
malice of Caiaphas.

<span id="viii.v-p9"></span>This passage, however, appears to be
inconsistent with another saying of Christ, where he enjoins the
apostles to

<span id="viii.v-p10"></span>proclaim on the house-tops what he had
whispered in their ear,  
(<span id="viii.v-p10.2"></span>[Mt
10:27](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#027)<span id="viii.v-p10.2"></span>;.md)

<span id="viii.v-p11"></span>and again, when he declares that

<span id="viii.v-p12"></span>it is not given to all to know the
mysteries of the kingdom of heaven,  
(<span id="viii.v-p12.2"></span>[Mt
13:14](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#014)<span id="viii.v-p12.2"></span>.md)

<span id="viii.v-p13"></span>and that he therefore confers this favor on
none but the twelve apostles. I answer, when he says in the passage now
under review, that *he spoke nothing in secret,* this refers to the
substance of the doctrine, which was always the same, though the form of
teaching it was various; for he did not speak differently among the
disciples, so as to instruct them in something different; nor did he act
cunningly, as if he purposely intended to conceal from the people what
he spoke to a small number of persons in the house. He could, therefore,
testify with a good conscience that he had openly declared and honestly
proclaimed the substance of his doctrine.

<span id="viii.v-p14"></span><span id="viii.v-p14.1"></span>

<span id="viii.v-p15"></span>**22.** *When he had said these things.*
This is added, in order to inform us, first, how great was the rage of
the enemies of Christ, and how tyrannical their government was; and,
secondly, what sort of discipline existed among those priests. They sit
like judges, but they are as cruel as ferocious beasts. A council is
assembled, in which the utmost gravity ought to have prevailed; and yet
a single *officer* is so daring and presumptuous, that, in the midst of
the judicial proceedings, and in the presence of the judges, he strikes
the person accused, who was not found to be in any respect guilty. We
need not wonder, therefore, that the doctrine of Christ is condemned by
so barbarous an assembly, from which not only all justice, but likewise
all humanity and modesty, are banished.

<span id="viii.v-p16"></span><span id="viii.v-p16.1"></span>

<span id="viii.v-p17"></span>**23.** *If I have spoken evil.* That is,
“If I have sinned, accuse me, that, when the cause has been tried, I may
be punished according to the offense; for this is not a lawful mode of
procedure, but very different order and very different modesty ought to
be maintained in judicial courts.” Christ complains, therefore, that a
grievous injury has been clone to him, if he has committed no offense,
and that, even if he has committed an offense, still they ought to
proceed in a lawful manner, and not with rage and violence.

<span id="viii.v-p18"></span>But Christ appears not to observe, in the
present instance, the rule which he elsewhere lays down to his
followers; for he does not

<span id="viii.v-p19"></span>hold out the right cheek to him who had
struck him on the left,  
(<span id="viii.v-p19.2"></span>[Mt
5:39](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#039)<span id="viii.v-p19.2"></span>..md)

<span id="viii.v-p20"></span>I answer, in Christian patience it is not
always the duty of him who has been struck to brook the injury done him,
without saying a word, but, first, to endure it with patience, and,
secondly, to give up all thoughts of revenge, and to endeavor to
*overcome evil by good,* (<span id="viii.v-p20.1"></span>[Ro
12:21](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#021)<span id="viii.v-p20.1"></span>..md)
Wicked men are already too powerfully impelled by the spirit of Satan to
do injury to others, in order that nobody may provoke them. It is a
foolish exposition of Christ’s words, therefore, that is given by those
who view them in such a light as if we were commanded to hold out fresh
inducements to those who already are too much disposed to do mischief;
for he means nothing else than that each of us should be more ready to
bear a second injury than to take revenge for the first; so that there
is nothing to prevent a Christian man from expostulating, when he has
been unjustly treated, provided that his mind be free from rancour, and
his hand from revenge.

<span id="viii.v-p21"></span><span id="viii.v-p21.1"></span>

<span id="viii.v-p22"></span>**24.** *Now Annas had sent him bound.*
This sentence must be read by way of parenthesis; for, having said that
Christ was taken to the house of Annas, and having continued his
narrative, as if the assembly of the priests had been held there, the
Evangelist now reminds the reader that Christ was taken from the house
of Annas to the high priest’s house. But as the tense of the Greek verb
<span id="viii.v-p22.1"></span>ἀπέστειλε has led many people into a
mistake, I have preferred translating it by the pluperfect tense, *Had
sent.*  <span id="fr_140"></span>[141](#fn_140.md)

<span id="viii.vi"></span>

<span id="viii.vi-p1"></span><span id="viii.vi-p1.1"></span>[John
18:25-27](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#025.md)<span
id="viii.vi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="viii.vi-p2"></span>**25.** And Simon Peter was standing there
and warming, himself. They said therefore to him, Art not thou also one
of his discipYes? He denied it?  <span id="fr_141"></span>[142](#fn_141.md)
and said, I am not. **26.** One of the servants of the high priest, who
was a kinsman of him whose ear Peter had cut off, said, Did not I see
thee in the garden with him? **27.** Then Peter denied it again;  <span
id="fr_142"></span>[143](#fn_142.md) and immediately the cock crew.

<span id="viii.vi-p5"></span> 

<span id="viii.vi-p6"></span><span id="viii.vi-p6.1"></span>

<span id="viii.vi-p7"></span>**25.** *He denied it.* How shocking the
stupidity of Peter, who, after having denied his Master, not only has no
feeling of repentance, but hardens himself by the very indulgence he
takes in sinning! If each of them in his turn had asked him, he would
not have hesitated to deny his Master a thousand times. Such is the
manner in which Satan hurries along wretched men, after having degraded
them. We must also attend to the circumstance which is related by the
other Evangelists, (<span id="viii.vi-p7.1"></span>[Mt
26:74](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#074.md)<span id="viii.vi-p7.1"></span>;
<span id="viii.vi-p7.2"></span>[Mr
14:71](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#071)<span id="viii.vi-p7.2"></span>,.md)
that *he began to curse and to swear, saying, that he did not know
Christ.* Thus it happens to many persons every day. At first, the fault
will not be very great; next, it becomes habitual, and at length, after
that conscience has been laid asleep, he who has accustomed himself to
despise God will think nothing unlawful for him, but will dare to commit
the greatest wickedness. There is nothing better for us, therefore, than
to be early on our guard, that he who is tempted by Satan, while he is
yet uncorrupted, may not allow himself the smallest indulgence.

<span id="viii.vi-p8"></span><span id="viii.vi-p8.1"></span>

<span id="viii.vi-p9"></span>**27.** *Immediately the coch crew.* The
Evangelist mentions *the crowing of the coch,* in order to inform us,
that Peter was warned by God at the very time; and for this reason the
other Evangelists tell us, that *he then remembered the words of the
Lord,* (<span id="viii.vi-p9.1"></span>[Mt
26:75](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#075.md)<span id="viii.vi-p9.1"></span>;
<span id="viii.vi-p9.2"></span>[Mr
14:72](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#072)<span id="viii.vi-p9.2"></span>,.md)
though Luke relates that the mere *crowing of the cock* did not produce
any effect on Peter, till Christ *looked at him,* (<span
id="viii.vi-p9.3"></span>[Lu
22:61](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#061)<span id="viii.vi-p9.3"></span>..md)
Thus, when any person has once begun to fall through the suggestions of
Satan, no voice, no sign, no warning, will bring him back, until the
Lord himself cast his eyes upon him.

<span id="viii.vii"></span>

<span id="viii.vii-p1"></span><span id="viii.vii-p1.1"></span>[John
18:28-32](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#028.md)<span
id="viii.vii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="viii.vii-p2"></span>**28.** Then they lead Jesus from Caiaphas
into the hall of the governor;  <span id="fr_143"></span>[144](#fn_143.md)
and it was early in the morning; and they themselves did not enter into
the hall, that they might not be defiled, but might eat the passover
 <span id="fr_144"></span>[145](#fn_144.md) **29.** Pilate therefore went
out to them, and said, What accusation do you bring against this man?
**30.** They answered and said to him, If he were not a malefactor, we
would not have delivered him to thee. **31.** Pilate therefore said to
them, Take you him, and judge him according to your law. The Jews
therefore said to him, We are not allowed to put any man to death:
**32.** That the word of Jesus might be fulfilled, which he had spoken,
signifying by what death he should die.

<span id="viii.vii-p5"></span> 

<span id="viii.vii-p6"></span><span id="viii.vii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="viii.vii-p7"></span>**28.** *Then they lead Jesus.* That
trial, which the Evangelist mentions, took place before daybreak; and
yet there can be no doubt, that they had their bellows at work
throughout the whole of the city to inflame the people. Thus the rage of
the people was suddenly kindled, as if all, with one consent, demanded
that Christ should be put to death, Now, the trial was conducted by the
priests, not that they had it in their power to pronounce a sentence,
but that, after having excited a prejudice against him by their previous
decislon, they might deliver him to the governor, as if he had already
been fully tried.  <span id="fr_145"></span>[146](#fn_145.md) The Romans
gave the name *Praetorium* both to the governor’s house or palace,
 <span id="fr_146"></span>[147](#fn_146.md) and to the judgment-seat, where
he was wont to decide causes.

<span id="viii.vii-p10"></span>*That they might not be defiled.* In
abstaining from all *defilement,* that, being purified according to the
injunction of the Law, *they may eat* the Lord’s *Passover,* their
religion, in this respect, deserves commendation. But there are two
faults, and both of them are very heinous. The first is,  <span
id="fr_147"></span>[148](#fn_147.md) they do not consider that they carry
more pollution within their hearts, than they can contract by entering
any place however profane; and the second is, they carry to excess their
care about smaller matters, and neglect what is of the highest
importance.

<span id="viii.vii-p12"></span>To the defiled and to unbelievers, says
Paul, nothing is pure;  
because their minds are polluted,  
(<span id="viii.vii-p12.3"></span>Titus 1:15.)

<span id="viii.vii-p13"></span>But these hypocrites, though they are so
full of malice, ambition, fraud, cruelty, and avarice, that they ahnost
infect heaven and earth with their abominable smell, are only afraid of
external pollutions. So then it is an intolerable mockery, that they
expect to please God, provided that they do not contract defilement by
touching some unclean thing, though they have disregarded true purity.

<span id="viii.vii-p14"></span>Another fault connected with hypocrisy
is, that, while it is careful in performing ceremonies, it makes no
scruple of neglecting matters of the highest importance; for God
enjoined on the Jews those ceremonies which are contained in the Law,
for no other reason, than that they might be habituated to the love and
practice of true holiness. Besides, no part of the Law forbade them to
enter into the house of a Gentile, but it was a precaution derived from
the traditions of the fathers, that no person might, through oversight,
contract any pollution from an unclean house. But those venerable
expounders of the Law, while they carefully *strain at a gnat, swallow
the camel*  <span id="fr_148"></span>[149](#fn_148.md) without any
hesitation, (<span id="viii.vii-p15.1"></span>[Mt
23:24](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#024.md)<span
id="viii.vii-p15.1"></span>;) and it is usual with hypocrites to reckon
it a greater crime to kill a flea than to kill a man. This fault is
closely allied to the other, of greatly preferring the traditions of men
to the holy commandments of God. In order *that they may eat the
passover* in a proper manner, they wish to keep themselves pure; but
they suppose uncleanness to be confined within the wails of the
governor’s house, and yet they do not hesitate, while heaven and earth
are witnesses, to pursue an innocent person to death. In short, they
observe the shadow of *the passover* with a false and pretended
reverence, and yet not only do they violate the true *passover* by
sacrilegious hands, but endeavor, as far as lies in their power, to bury
it in eternal oblivion,  <span id="fr_149"></span>[150](#fn_149.md)

<span id="viii.vii-p17"></span><span id="viii.vii-p17.1"></span>

<span id="viii.vii-p18"></span>**29.** *Pilate therefore went out to
them.* This heathen is not unwilling to encourage a superstition, which
he ridicules and despises; but in the main point of the cause, he
performs the duty of a good judge, when he orders them, if they have any
accusation, to bring it forward. The priests, on the other hand, not
having sufficient authority to condemn him whom they pronounce to be
guilty, make no other reply, than that he ought to abide by their
previous decision.

<span id="viii.vii-p19"></span><span id="viii.vii-p19.1"></span>

<span id="viii.vii-p20"></span>**30.** *If he were not a malefactor, we
would not have delivered him to thee.* They indirectly complain of
Pilate, that he has not a proper reliance on their integrity. “Why do
you not, without further concerns” say they, “hold it to be certain,
that the person whom we prosecute deserves to die?” Such is the manner
in which wicked men, whom God has raised to a high degree of honor,
blinded as it were by their own greatness, allow themselves to do
whatever they choose. Such, too, is the intoxicating nature of pride.
 <span id="fr_150"></span>[151](#fn_150.md) They wish that Christ should be
reckoned a malefactor, and for no other reason  <span
id="fr_151"></span>[152](#fn_151.md) but because they accuse him. But if we
come to the truth of the matter, what deeds of *a malefactor* shall we
find in him, except that he has cured every kind of diseases, has driven
the devils out of men, has made the paralytics and the lame to walk, has
restored sight to the blind, hearing to the deaf, and life to the dead?
Such were the real facts, and those men knew them well; but, as I said a
little ago, when men are intoxicated with pride, nothing is more
difficult than to arouse them to form a sound and correct judgment.

<span id="viii.vii-p23"></span><span id="viii.vii-p23.1"></span>

<span id="viii.vii-p24"></span>**31.** *According to your law.* Pilate,
offended by their barbarous and violent proceedings, undoubtedly
reproaches them by stating that this form of condemnation, which they
were eager to carry into effcct, was at variance with the common law of
all nations and with the feelings of mankind; and, at the same time he
censures them for boasting that they had a *law* given to them by God.

<span id="viii.vii-p25"></span>*Take you him.* He says this ironically;
for he would not have allowed them to pronounce on a man a sentence of
capital punishment; but it is as if he had said, “Were he in your power,
he would instantly be executed, without being heard in his own defense;
and, is this the equity of your Law, to condemn a man without any
crime?” Thus do wicked men, falsely assuming the name of God as an
excuse for their conduct, expose his holy doctrine to the reproaches of
enemies, and the world eagerly seizes on it as an occasion of slander.

<span id="viii.vii-p26"></span>*We are not allowed.* Those who think
that the Jews refuse an offer, which Pilate had made to them, are
mistaken; but rather, knowing that he had said to them in mockery, *Take
you him,* they reply, “You would not allow it; and since you are the
judge, execute your office.”

<span id="viii.vii-p27"></span><span id="viii.vii-p27.1"></span>

<span id="viii.vii-p28"></span>**32.** *That the word of Jesus might be
fulfilled.* Finally, the Evangelist adds, that it was necessary that
this should be done, in order that the prediction which Christ had
uttered

<span id="viii.vii-p29"></span>might be fulfilled, The Son of man shall
be delivered into the hands of the Gentiles,  
(<span id="viii.vii-p29.2"></span>[Mt
20:19](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#019.md)<span
id="viii.vii-p29.2"></span>.)

<span id="viii.vii-p30"></span>And, indeed, if we wish to read with
advantage the history of Christ’s death, the chief point is, to consider
the eternal purpose of God. The Son of God is placed before the tribunal
of a mortal man. If we suppose that this is done by the caprice of men,
and do not raise our eyes to God, our faith must necessarily be
confounded and put to shame. But when we perceive that by the
condemnation of Christ, our condemnation before God is blotted out,
because it pleased the Heavenly Father to take this method of
reconciling mankind to himself, raised on high by this single
consideration, we boldly, and without shame, glory even in Christ’s
ignominy. Let us therefore learn, in each part of this narrative, to
turn our eyes to God as the Author of our redemption.

<span id="viii.viii"></span>

<span id="viii.viii-p1"></span><span id="viii.viii-p1.1"></span>[John
18:33-36](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#033.md)<span
id="viii.viii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="viii.viii-p2"></span>**33.** Then Pilate went again into the
hall, and called Jesus, and said to him, Art thou the King of the Jews?
**34.** Jesus answered him, Sayest thou this from thyself, or did others
tell it thee of me? **35.** Pilate answered, Am I a Jew? Thine own
nation and the priests have delivered thee to me: what hast thou done?
**36.** Jesus answered, My kingdom is not of this world: if my kingdom
were of this world, my servants would have striven that I should not be
delivered to the Jews. But now my kingdom is not from hence.

<span id="viii.viii-p3"></span> 

<span id="viii.viii-p4"></span><span id="viii.viii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="viii.viii-p5"></span>**33.** *Then Pilate went again into the
hall.* It is probable that many things were said on both sides, which
the Evangelist passes over; and this conclusion might be readily drawn
from the other Evangelists. But John dwells chiefly on a single point,
that Pilate made a laborious inquiry whether Christ was justly or
unjustly accused. In the presence of the people, who were inflamed with
sedition, nothing could be done but in a riotous manner. He therefore
*goes again into the hall;* and, indeed, his intention is to acquit
Christ, but Christ himself, in order that he may obey his Father,
presents himself to be condemned; and this is the reason why he is so
sparing in his replies. Having a judge who was favorable, and who would
willingly have lent an ear to him, it was not difficult for him to plead
his cause; but he considers for what purpose he came down into the
world, and to what he is now called by the Father. Of his own accord,
therefore, he refrains from speaking, that he may not escape from death.

<span id="viii.viii-p6"></span>*Art thou the King of the Jews?* It would
never have struck Pilate’s mind to put this question about *the
kingdom,* if this charge had not been brought against Christ by the
Jews. Now, Pilate takes up what was more offensive than all the rest,
that, having disposed of it, he may acquit the prisoner. The tendency of
Christ’s answer is to show that there is no ground for that accusation;
and thus it contains an indirect refutation; as if he had said, “It is
absurd to bring that charge against me, fbr not even the slightest
suspicion of it can fall upon me.”

<span id="viii.viii-p7"></span>Pilate appears to have taken amiss that
Christ asked him why he suspected him of such a crime;  <span
id="fr_152"></span>[153](#fn_152.md) and, therefore, he angrily reproaches
him, that all the evil comes from *his own nation.* “I sit here as a
judge,” says he; “it is not foreigners, but your own countrymen, who
accuse you. There is no reason, therefore, why you should involve me in
your quarrels. You would be allowed by me and by the Romans to live at
peace; but you raise disturbances among yourselves, and I am reluctantly
compelled to bear a part in them.”

<span id="viii.viii-p9"></span><span id="viii.viii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="viii.viii-p10"></span>**36.** *My kingdom is not of this
world.* By these words he acknowledges that he is *a king,* but, so far
as was necessary to prove his innocence, he clears himself of the
calumny; for he declares, that there is no disagreement between his
kingdom and political government or order;  <span
id="fr_153"></span>[154](#fn_153.md) as if he had said, “I am falsely
accused, as if I had attempted to produce a dis-turbanee, or to make a
revolution in public affairs. I have preached about *the kingdom of
God;* but that is spiritual, and, therefore, you have no right to
suspect me of aspiring to kingly power.” This *defense* was made by
Christ before Pilate, but the same doctrine is useful to believers to
the end of the world; for if the kingdom of Christ were earthly, it
would be frail and changeable, because

<span id="viii.viii-p12"></span>the fashion of this world passeth
away,  
(<span id="viii.viii-p12.2"></span>[1Co
7:31](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#031.md)<span
id="viii.viii-p12.2"></span>;)

<span id="viii.viii-p13"></span>but now, since it is pronounced to *be*
heavenly, this assures us of its perpetuity. Thus, should it happen,
that the whole world were overturned, provided that our consciences are
always directed to *the kingdom* of Christ, they will, nevertheless,
remain firm, not only amidst shakings and convulsions, but even amidst
dreadful ruin and destruction. If we are cruelly treated by wicked men,
still our salvation is secured by *the kingdom* of Christ, which is not
subject to the caprice of men. In short, thougll there are innumerable
storms by which *the world* is continually agitated, *the kingdom* of
Christ, in which we ought to seek tranquillity, is separated from *the
world.*

<span id="viii.viii-p14"></span>We are taught, also, what is the nature
of this kingdom; for if it made us happy according to the flesh, and
brought us riches, luxuries, and all that is desirable for the use of
the present life, it would smell of the earth and of the world; but now,
though our condition be apparently wretched, still our true happiness
remains unimpaired. We learn from it, also, who they are that belong to
this Mngdom; those who, having been renewed by the Spirit of God,
contemplate the heavenly life in holiness and righteousness. Yet it
deserves our attention, likewise, that it is not said, that the kingdom
of Christ is not in this world; for we know that it has its seat in our
hearts, as also Christ says elsewhcre, The kingdom of God is within you,
(<span id="viii.viii-p14.1"></span>[Lu
17:21](../../../bib/kjv/luk017.htm#021.md)<span
id="viii.viii-p14.1"></span>.) But, strictly speaking, *the kingdom of
God*, while it dwells in us, is a stranger to the world, because its
condition is totally different.

<span id="viii.viii-p15"></span>*My servants would strive.* He proves
that he did not aim at an earthly kingdom, because no one moves, no one
takes arms in his support; for if a private individual lay claim to
royal authority, he must gain power by means of seditious men. Nothing
of this kind is seen in Christ; and, therefore, it follows that he is
not an earthly king.

<span id="viii.viii-p16"></span>But here a question arises, Is it not
law fill to defend the kingdom of Christ by arms? For when Kings and
Princes  <span id="fr_154"></span>[155](#fn_154.md) are commanded to kiss
the Son of God, (<span id="viii.viii-p17.2"></span>[Ps
2:10-12](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#010.md)<span
id="viii.viii-p17.2"></span>) not only are they enjoined to submit to
his authority in their private capacity, but also to employ all the
power that they possess, in defending the Church and maintaining
godliness. I answer, first, they who draw this conclusion, that the
doctrine of the Gospel and the pure worship of God ought not to be
defended by arms, are unskillful and ignorant reasoners; for Christ
argues only from the facts of the case in hand, how frivolous were the
calumnies which the Jews had brought against him. Secondly, though godly
kings defend the kingdom of Christ by the sword, still it is done in a
different manner from that in which worldly kingdoms are wont to be
defended; for the kingdom of Christ, being spiritual, must be founded on
the doctrine and power of the Spirit. In the same manner, too, its
edification is promoted; for neither the laws and edicts of men, nor the
punishments inflicted by them, enter into the consciences. Yet this does
not hinder princes from accidentally defending the kingdom of Christ;
partly, by appointing external discipline, and partly, by lending their
protection to the Church against wicked men. It results, however, from
the depravity of the world, that the kingdom of Christ is strengthened
more by the blood of the martyrs than by the aid of arms.

<span id="viii.ix"></span>

<span id="viii.ix-p1"></span><span id="viii.ix-p1.1"></span>[John
18:37-40](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#037.md)<span
id="viii.ix-p1.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ix-p2"></span>**37.** Pilate therefore said to him, Art
thou then aking? Jesus answered, Thou sayest that I am a king. For this
cause was I born, and for this cause came I into the world, that I may
bear testimony to the truth: every one that is of the truth heareth my
voice. **38.** Pilate saith to him, What is truth? And when he had said
this, he went out again to the Jews, and said to them, I find no guilt
in him. **39.** But you have a custom, that I should release to you some
one at the passover; do you wish then that I should release to you the
King of the Jews? **40.** Then they all cried out again, saying, Not
this man, but Barabbas. Now Barabbas was a robber.

<span id="viii.ix-p3"></span> 

<span id="viii.ix-p4"></span><span id="viii.ix-p4.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ix-p5"></span>**37.** *Thou sayest that I am a king.*
Although Pilate had already learned, from the former answer, that Christ
claims for himself some sort of kingdom, yet now Christ asserts the same
thing more firmly; and, not satisfied with this, he makes an additional
statement, which serves for a seal, as it were, to ratify what he had
said. Hence we infer, that the doctrine concerning Christ’s *kingdom* is
of no ordinary importance, since he has deemed it worthy of so solemn an
affirmation.

<span id="viii.ix-p6"></span>*For this cause was I born, that I may bear
witness to the truth.* This is, no doubt, a general sentiment; but it
must be viewed in relation to the place which it holds in the present
passage. The words mean, that it is natural for Christ to speak *the
truth;* and, next, that he was sent *for this purpose* by the Father;
and, consequently, that this is his peculiar office. There is no danger,
therefore, that we shall be deceived by trusting him, since it is
impossible that he who has been commissioned by God, and whose natural
disposition leads him to maintain *the truth,* shall teach any thing
that is not *true.*

<span id="viii.ix-p7"></span>*Every one that is of the truth.* Christ
added this, not so much for the purpose of exhorting Pilate, (for he
knew that he would gain nothing by doing so,) as of defending his
doctrine against the base reproaches which had been east on it; as if he
had said, “It is imputed to me as a crime that I have asserted that *I
am a king;* and yet this is an unquestionable truth, which is received
with reverence and without hesitation by all who have a correct judgment
and a sound understanding.” When he says, that they are *of the truth*
he does not mean that they naturally know the truth, but that they are
directed by the Spirit of God.

<span id="viii.ix-p8"></span><span id="viii.ix-p8.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ix-p9"></span>**38.** *What is truth?* Some think that
Pilate puts this question through curiosity, as irreligious men are
sometimes accustomed to be eagerly desirous of learning something that
is new to them, and yet do not know why they wish it; for they intend
nothing more than to gratify their ears. For my own part, I rather think
that it is an expression of disdain; for Pilate thought himself highly
insulted when Christ represented him as destitute of all knowledge of
*the truth.* Here we see in Pilate a disease which is customary among
men. Though we are all aware of our ignorance, yet there are few who are
willing to confess it; and the consequence is, that the greater part of
men reject the true doctrine. Afterwards, the Lord, who is the Teacher
of the humble, blinds the proud, and thus inflicts on them the
punishment which they deserve. From the same pride arises such disdain,
that they do not choose to submit to learn, because all lay claim to
sagacity and acuteness of mind. *Truth* is believed to be a common
thing; but God declares, on the contrary, that it far exceeds the
capacity of the human understanding.

<span id="viii.ix-p10"></span>The same thing happens in other matters.
The principal articles of theology are, the curse pronounced on the
human race, the corruption of nature, the mortification of the flesh,
the renewal of the life, the reconciliation *effected* by free grace
through the only sacrifice, the imputation of righteousness, by means of
which a sinner is accepted by God, and the illumination of the Holy
Spirit. These, being paradoxes, are disdainfully rejected by the
ordinary understanding of men. Few, therefore, make progress in the
school of God, because we scarcely find one person in ten who attends to
the first and elementary instructions; and why is this, but because they
measure the secret wisdom of God by their own understanding?

<span id="viii.ix-p11"></span>That Pilate spoke in mockery is evident
from this circumstance, that he immediately goes out. In short, he is
angry with Christ for boasting that he brings forward *the truth,* which
formerly lay hidden in darkness. Yet this indignation of Pilate shows
that wicked men never reject the doctrine of the Gospel so spitefully as
not to be somewhat moved by its efficacy; for, though Pilate did not
proceed so far as to become humble and teachable, yet he is constrained
to feel some inward compunction.

<span id="viii.ix-p12"></span><span id="viii.ix-p12.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ix-p13"></span>**39.** *But you have a custom.* Pilate
was all along pondering in what way he might save Christ’s life; but,
the people being so fiercely enraged, he attempted to keep a middle
path, in order to allay their fury; for he thought that it would be
enough if Christ, being dismissed *as a malefactor,* were marked with
perpetual ignominy, lie therefore selects *Barabbas* above all others,
in order that, by a comparison with that man, the hatred which they bore
to Christ might be softened down; for Barabbas was universally and
strongly detested on account of his atrocious crimes. And, indeed, is
there any thing more detestable than *a robber?* But Luke (<span
id="viii.ix-p13.1"></span>[Lu
23:19](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#019)<span id="viii.ix-p13.1"></span>.md)
relates that, in addition to this, he was guilty of other crimes.

<span id="viii.ix-p14"></span>That the Jews preferred him to Christ, did
not happen without a singular interposition of the providence of God;
for it would have been highly unbecoming, that the Son of God should be
rescued from death by so dishonorable a price. Yeb by his death, he was
thrown into the deepest ignominy, so that, in consequence of the release
of *Barabbas,* he was crucified between two robbers; for he had taken
upon himself the sins of all, which could not be expiated in any other
way; and the glory of his resurrection, by which it was speedily
followed, caused his death itself to be a splendid triumph.

<span id="viii.ix-p15"></span>This *custom,* by which the Roman governor
delivered up to the Jews, every year, at the passover, some criminal,
involved a base and heinous crime. It was done, no doubt in order to
honor the sacredness of the day, but was, in reality, nothing else than
a shameful profanation of it; for Scripture declares, that

<span id="viii.ix-p16"></span>he who acquitteth the guilty is
abomination in the sight of God,  
(<span id="viii.ix-p16.2"></span>[Pr
17:15](../../../bib/kjv/pro017.htm#015.md)<span
id="viii.ix-p16.2"></span>;)

<span id="viii.ix-p17"></span>and therefore he is far from taking
delight in that improper kind of forgiveness. Let us learn by this
example, that nothing is more ridiculous, than to attempt to serve God
by our inventions; for, as soon as men begin to follow their own
imaginations, there will be no end till, by falling into some of the
most absurd fooleries, they openly insult God. The rule for the worship
of God, therefore, ought to be taken from nothing else than from his own
appointment.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_129"></span>[130](cc35007.htm#fr_129.md) <span
id="viii.i-p6.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p7"></span> Is <span id="viii.i-p7.1"></span>Κέδρων, a
proper name, or an appellative? Calvin does not mean that the presence
of the article settles this question, but that it depends on the
preference which shall be given to one or another of the various
readings. If we read <span id="viii.i-p7.2"></span>τῶν Κέδρων, it will
be difficult to resist the conclusion that <span
id="viii.i-p7.3"></span>Κέδρων is the genitive plural of <span
id="viii.i-p7.4"></span>Κέδρος*, a cedar;* but if we read <span
id="viii.i-p7.5"></span>τοῦ Κέδρων, or rather, <span
id="viii.i-p7.6"></span>τοῦ Κεδρὼν, we must treat <span
id="viii.i-p7.7"></span>Κεδρὼν, as an indeclinable Hebrew word, though
Josephus chooses sometimes to decline it, as in the phrase, <span
id="viii.i-p7.8"></span>χείμαρρον Κεδρῶνος, *the brook of Kedron,* (Ant.
8:1.) “Instead of the common reading, <span id="viii.i-p7.9"></span>τῶν
Κέδρων,” says Bloomfield, “four of the most ancient MSS. and six ancient
Versions, with some Fathers, have,<span id="viii.i-p7.10"></span>τοῦ
Κεδρὼν, which was preferred by Beza, Casaubon, Campbell, Castalio,
Drusius, Lightfoot, Bols, Bynmus, Reland, and others of the best
Commentators down to Middleton, Kuinoel, and Tittmann, and has been
received by Bengel, Griesbach, Knapp, Vater, and Scholz. The common
reading, however, is strenuously, but not satisfactorily, defended by
Lampe and Matthsei.” Our Author proceeds no further than to propose,
<span id="viii.i-p7.11"></span>τοῦ instead of <span
id="viii.i-p7.12"></span>τῶν, as a conjectural emendation; but
Bloomfield has given a prodigious list of authorities on the same side.
— *Ed.*

<span id="fn_130"></span>[131](cc35007.htm#fr_130.md) <span
id="viii.i-p7.13"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p8"></span> The Hebrew name <span
id="viii.i-p8.1"></span>קדרון (*Kidron*) is derived from <span
id="viii.i-p8.2"></span>קדר, (*Kadar,*) *it was black,* and signifies
*the black brook.* — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_131"></span>[132](cc35007.htm#fr_131.md) <span
id="viii.i-p9.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p10"></span> On this point the reader will do well to
consult our Author’s elaborate exposition and argument, *Harmony of the
Evangelists,* vol. 3, pp. 226-234.

<span id="fn_132"></span>[133](cc35007.htm#fr_132.md) <span
id="viii.ii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ii-p8"></span> “<span id="viii.ii-p8.1"></span>Que ce bon
Pasteur ne soit prest.”

<span id="fn_133"></span>[134](cc35007.htm#fr_133.md) <span
id="viii.iii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p12"></span> The reader will find our Author’s views
on this subject stated fully in the *Harmony of the Evangelists,* vol.
3, page 244.

<span id="fn_134"></span>[135](cc35007.htm#fr_134.md) <span
id="viii.iii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p15"></span> “<span id="viii.iii-p15.1"></span>Le
Pere Celeste.”

<span id="fn_135"></span>[136](cc35007.htm#fr_135.md) <span
id="viii.iii-p22.1"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p23"></span> Vol. 1: page 453.

<span id="fn_136"></span>[137](cc35007.htm#fr_136.md) <span
id="viii.iv-p2.1"></span>

<span id="viii.iv-p3"></span> “<span id="viii.iv-p3.1"></span>Or Simon
Pierre, avec un autre disciple, suyvoit Jesus.” — “Now Simon Peter, with
another disciple, followed Jesus.”

<span id="fn_137"></span>[138](cc35007.htm#fr_137.md) <span
id="viii.iv-p3.2"></span>

<span id="viii.iv-p4"></span> “<span id="viii.iv-p4.1"></span>Et parla a
la portiere, *laquelle fit entrer* Pierre;” — “and spoke to her that
kept the door, *who brought in* Peter.”

<span id="fn_138"></span>[139](cc35007.htm#fr_138.md) <span
id="viii.iv-p7.1"></span>

<span id="viii.iv-p8"></span> “<span id="viii.iv-p8.1"></span>Nostre
Evangeliste.”

<span id="fn_139"></span>[140](cc35007.htm#fr_139.md) <span
id="viii.v-p5.1"></span>

<span id="viii.v-p6"></span> “<span id="viii.v-p6.1"></span>Nostre
Seigneur.”

<span id="fn_140"></span>[141](cc35007.htm#fr_140.md) <span
id="viii.v-p22.2"></span>

<span id="viii.v-p23"></span> “<span id="viii.v-p23.1"></span>J’ay mieux
aime tourner en ceste sorte, Avoit envoye; que, I1 a envoy;“ — “I have
chosen to render it in this way, *Annas* Had Sent, rather than, *Annas*
Sent.”

<span id="fn_141"></span>[142](cc35007.htm#fr_141.md) <span
id="viii.vi-p2.1"></span>

<span id="viii.vi-p3"></span> “<span id="viii.vi-p3.1"></span>Il le
nia.”

<span id="fn_142"></span>[143](cc35007.htm#fr_142.md) <span
id="viii.vi-p3.2"></span>

<span id="viii.vi-p4"></span> “<span id="viii.vi-p4.1"></span>Le nia
derechef.”

<span id="fn_143"></span>[144](cc35007.htm#fr_143.md) <span
id="viii.vii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="viii.vii-p3"></span> “<span id="viii.vii-p3.1"></span>In
Praetorium;” — “<span id="viii.vii-p3.2"></span>au Pretoire;” — “into
the Pretorium.”

<span id="fn_144"></span>[145](cc35007.htm#fr_144.md) <span
id="viii.vii-p3.3"></span>

<span id="viii.vii-p4"></span> “<span id="viii.vii-p4.1"></span>L’agneau
de pasque;” — “the paschal lamb.”

<span id="fn_145"></span>[146](cc35007.htm#fr_145.md) <span
id="viii.vii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="viii.vii-p8"></span> “<span id="viii.vii-p8.1"></span>Mals a
fin de livrer au juge, etant desja charge, et comme suffisamentconveincu
par leur premiere cognoissance et les interrogatoires qu’ils luy avoient
faites;” — “but to deliver him to the judge as a person already accused,
and as having been sufficiently convicted by their previous trial, and
by the questions which they had put to him.”

<span id="fn_146"></span>[147](cc35007.htm#fr_146.md) <span
id="viii.vii-p8.2"></span>

<span id="viii.vii-p9"></span> “<span id="viii.vii-p9.1"></span>La
maison ou palais du *gouverneur.”*

<span id="fn_147"></span>[148](cc35007.htm#fr_147.md) <span
id="viii.vii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="viii.vii-p11"></span> “<span id="viii.vii-p11.1"></span>La
premiere fkute est.”

<span id="fn_148"></span>[149](cc35007.htm#fr_148.md) <span
id="viii.vii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="viii.vii-p15"></span> See *Harmony of the Evangelists,* vol. 3
page 93.

<span id="fn_149"></span>[150](cc35007.htm#fr_149.md) <span
id="viii.vii-p15.2"></span>

<span id="viii.vii-p16"></span> “<span id="viii.vii-p16.1"></span>De la
ruiner et en abolir la memoire a jamais.”

<span id="fn_150"></span>[151](cc35007.htm#fr_150.md) <span
id="viii.vii-p20.1"></span>

<span id="viii.vii-p21"></span> “<span id="viii.vii-p21.1"></span>Voyla
aussi comme orgueil remplit les gens d’une yvrognerle, et les met hors
du sens.” — “See, too, how pride fills people with a sort of
drunkenness, and puts them out of their senses.”

<span id="fn_151"></span>[152](cc35007.htm#fr_151.md) <span
id="viii.vii-p21.2"></span>

<span id="viii.vii-p22"></span> “<span id="viii.vii-p22.1"></span>Et non
pour autre raison.”

<span id="fn_152"></span>[153](cc35007.htm#fr_152.md) <span
id="viii.viii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="viii.viii-p8"></span> “<span id="viii.viii-p8.1"></span>De tel
crime.”

<span id="fn_153"></span>[154](cc35007.htm#fr_153.md) <span
id="viii.viii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="viii.viii-p11"></span> “<span id="viii.viii-p11.1"></span>Et
le goavernement ou ordre politique.”

<span id="fn_154"></span>[155](cc35007.htm#fr_154.md) <span
id="viii.viii-p16.1"></span>

<span id="viii.viii-p17"></span> “<span
id="viii.viii-p17.1"></span>Quand il est commande aux Rois ct Princes.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 19](cc35008.md)
