[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Yoga](../yoga/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](hyp01)  [Next](hyp03) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/8121505755/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Hatha Yoga Pradipika*, tr. by Pancham Sinh, \[1914\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_i">p. i</span>

### INTRODUCTION.

There exists at present a good deal of misconception with regard to the
practices of the Haṭha Yoga. People easily believe in the stories told
by those who themselves heard them second hand, and no attempt is made
to find out the truth by a direct reference to any good treatise. It is
generally believed that the six practices, (<span
id="img__00100"></span> ![](img/_00100.jpg)) in Haṭha Yoga are
compulsory on the student and that besides being dirty, they are fraught
with danger to the practiser. This is not true, for these practices are
necessary only in the existence of impurities in the Nâdis, and not
otherwise.

There is the same amount of misunderstanding with regard to the
Prâṇâyâma. People put their faith implicitly in the stories told them
about the dangers attending the practice, without ever taking the
trouble of ascertaining the fact themselves. We have been inspiring and
expiring air from our birth, and will continue to do so till death; and
this is done without the help of any teacher. Prâṇâyâma is nothing but a
properly regulated form of the otherwise irregular and hurried flow of
air, without using much force or undue restraint; and if this is
accomplished by patiently keeping the flow slow and steady, there can be
no danger. It is the impatience for the Siddhis which cause undue
pressure on the organs and thereby causes pains in the ears, the eyes,
the chest, etc. If the three bandhas (<span id="img__00101"></span>
![](img/_00101.jpg)) be carefully performed while practising the
Prâṇâyâma, there is no possibility of any danger.

There are two classes of students of Yoga: (1) those who study it
theoretically; (2) those who combine the theory with practice.

Yoga is of very little use, if studied theoretically. It was never meant
for such a study. In its practical form, however, the path of the
student is beset with difficulties. The books on Yoga give instructions
so far as it is possible to express the methods in words, but all
persons, not being careful enough to follow these instructions to the
very letter, fail in their object. Such persons require a teacher versed
in the practice of Yoga. It is easy to find a teacher who will explain
the language of the books, but this is far from being satisfactory. For
instance, a Pandit without any knowledge of the science of Materia
Medica will explain <span id="img__00102"></span> ![](img/_00102.jpg) as
<span id="img__00103"></span> ![](img/_00103.jpg) or an enemy of thorns,
*i.e.*, shoes, while it is in reality the name of a medicinal plant,

<span id="page_ii">p. ii</span>

The importance of a practical Yogî as a guide to a student of Yoga
cannot be overestimated; and without such a teacher it is next to
impossible for him to achieve anything. The methods followed by the
founders of the system and followed ever afterwards by their followers,
have been wisely and advisedly kept secret; and this is not without a
deep meaning. Looking to the gravity of the subject and the practices
which have a very close relation with the vital organs of the human
body, it is of paramount importance that the instructions should be
received by students of ordinary capacity, through a practical teacher
only, in order to avoid any possibility of mistake in practice. Speaking
broadly, all men are not equally fitted to receive the instructions on
equal terms. Man inherits on birth his mental and physical capitals,
according to his actions in past births, and has to increase them by
manipulation, but there are, even among such, different grades. Hence,
one cannot become a Yogî in one incarnation, as says Śri Kṛiṣṇa <span
id="img__00200"></span> ![](img/_00200.jpg) and again <span
id="img__00201"></span> ![](img/_00201.jpg)

There are men who, impelled by the force of their actions of previous
births, go headlong and accomplish their liberation in a single attempt;
but others have to earn it in their successive births. If the student
belongs to one of such souls and being earnest, desires from his heart
to get rid of the pains of birth and death, he will find the means too.
It is well-known that a true Yogî is above temptations and so to think
that he keeps his knowledge secret for selling it to the highest bidder
is simply absurd. Yoga is meant for the good of all creatures, and a
true Yogî is always desirous of benefitting as many men as possible. But
he is not to throw away this precious treasure indiscriminately. He
carefully chooses its recipients, and when he finds a true and earnest
student, who will not trifle with this knowledge, he never hesitates in
placing his valuable treasure at the disposal of the man. What is
essential in him is that he should have a real thirst for such
knowledge—a thirst which will make him restless till satisfied; the
thirst that will make him blind to the world and its enjoyments. He
should be, in short, fired with <span id="img__00202"></span>
![](img/_00202.jpg) or desire for emancipation. To such a one, there is
nothing dearer than the accomplishment of this object. A true lover will
risk his very life to gain union with his beloved like Tulasîdâs. A true
lover will see everywhere, in every direction, in every tree and leaf,
in every blade of grass his own beloved. The whole of the world, with
all its beauties, is a dreary waste in his eyes, without his beloved.
And he will court death, fall into

<span id="page_iii">p. iii</span>

the mouth of a gaping grave, for the sake of his beloved. The student
whose heart burns with such intense desire for union with Paraṃâtmâ, is
sure to find a teacher, and through him he will surely find Him It is a
tried experience that Paraṃâtmâ will try to meet you half way, with the
degree of intensity with which you will go to meet Him. Even He Himself
will become your guide, direct you on to the road to success, or put you
on the track to find a teacher, or lead him to you.

Well has it been said <span id="img__00300"></span> ![](img/_00300.jpg)
It is the half-hearted who fail. They hold their worldly pleasures
dearer to their hearts than their God, and therefore He in His turn does
not consider them worthy of His favours. Says the Upaniṣad:—

<span id="img__00301"></span> ![](img/_00301.jpg)

The âtmâ will choose you its abode only if it considers you worthy of
such a favour, and not otherwise. It is therefore necessary that one
should first make oneself worthy of His acceptance. Having prepared the
temple (your heart) well fitted for His installation there, having
cleared it of all the impurities which stink and make the place
unsuitable for the highest personage to live in, and having decorated it
beautifully with objects as befit that Lord of the creation, you need
not wait long for Him to adorn this temple of yours which you have taken
pains to make it worthy of Him. If you have done all this, He will shine
in you in all His glory. In your difficult moments, when you are
embarrassed, sit in a contemplative mood, and approach your Parama Guru
submissively and refer your difficulties to Him, you are sure to get the
proper advice from Him. He is the Guru of the ancients, for He is not
limited by Time. He instructed the ancients in bygone times, like a
Guru, and if you have been unable to find a teacher in the human form,
enter your inner temple and consult this Great Guru who accompanies you
everywhere, and ask Him to show you the way. He knows best what is best,
for you. Unlike mortal beings, He is beyond the past and the future,
will either send one of His agents to guide you or lead you to one and
put you on the right track. He is always anxious to teach the earnest
seekers, and waits for you to offer Him an opportunity to do so. But if
you have not done your duty and prepared yourself worthy of entering His
door, and try to gain access to His presence, laden with your unclean
burden, stinking with Kama, Krodha, Lobha, and Moha, be sure He will
keep you off from Him.

<span id="page_iv">p. iv</span>

The Âsanas are a means of gaining steadiness of position and help to
gain success in contemplation, without any distraction of the mind. If
the position be not comfortable, the slightest inconvenience will draw
the mind away from the lakśya (aim), and so no peace of mind will be
possible till the posture has ceased to cause pain by regular exercise.

Of all the various methods for concentrating the mind, repetition of
Praṇava or Ajapâ Jâpa and contemplation on its meaning is the best. It
is impossible for the mind to sit idle even for a single moment, and,
therefore, in order to keep it well occupied and to keep other
antagonistic thoughts from entering it, repetition of Praṇava should be
practised. It should be repeated till Yoga Nidrâ is induced which, when
experienced, should be encouraged by slackening all the muscles of the
body. This will fill the mind with sacred and divine thoughts and will
bring about its one-pointedness, without much effort.

Anâhata Nâda is awakened by the exercise of Prâṇâyâma. A couple of
weeks’ practice with 80 prâṇâyâmas in the morning and the same number in
the evening will cause distinct sounds to be heard; and, as the practice
will go on increasing, varied sounds become audible to the practiser. By
hearing these sounds attentively one gets concentration of the mind, and
thence Sahaja Samâdhi. When Yoga sleep is experienced, the student
should give himself up to it and make no efforts to check it. By and by,
these sounds become subtle and they become less and less intense, so the
mind loses its waywardness and becomes calm and docile; and, on this
practice becoming well-established, Samâdhi becomes a voluntary act.
This is, however, the highest stage and is the lot of the favoured and
fortunate few only.

During contemplation one sees, not with his eyes, as he does the objects
of the world, various colours, which the writers on Yoga call the
colours of the five elements. Sometimes, stars are seen glittering, and
lightning flashes in the sky. But these are all fleeting in their
nature.

At first these colours are seen in greatly agitated waves which show the
unsteady condition of the mind; and as the practice increases and the
mind becomes calm, these colour-waves become steady and motionless and
appear as one deep ocean of light. This is the ocean in which One should
dive and forget the world and become one with his Lord—which is the
condition of highest bliss.

Faith in the practices of Yoga, and in one's own powers to accomplish
what others have done before, is of great importance to insure speedy
success. I mean "faith that will move mountains," will accomplish

<span id="page_v">p. v</span>

anything, be it howsoever difficult. There is nothing which cannot be
accomplished by practice. Says Śiva in Śiva Saṃhitâ.

<span id="img__00500"></span> ![](img/_00500.jpg)

Through practice success is obtained; through practice one gains
liberation.

Perfect consciousness is gained through practice; Yoga is attained
through practice; success in mudrâs comes by practice. Through practice
is gained success in Prâṇâyâma. Death can be evaded of its prey through
practice, and man becomes the conqueror of death by practice. And then
let us gird up our loins, and with a firm [resolution](errata.htm#0)
engage in the practice, having faith in <span id="img__00501"></span>
![](img/_00501.jpg), and the success must be ours. May the Almighty
Father, be pleased to shower His blessings on those who thus engage in
the performance of their duties. Om Siam.

PANCHAM SINH.

AJMER:  
31st *January*, 1915.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 1. On Âsanas](hyp03)
