<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Malachi Index](mal)  
  [Previous](mal003)  [Next](mat000) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Scofield Bible Commentary*, by Cyrus Ingerson Scofield, \[1917\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Malachi Chapter 4](../../../bib/kjv/mal004.htm#001)

[Malachi 4:2](../../../bib/kjv/mal004.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">mal 4:2</span></span>

fear

See note, ([Psa 19:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#009)).

(See Scofield) - ([Psa 19:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#009)).

Sun of righteousness

(See Scofield) - ([Gen 1:16](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#016)).

[Malachi 4:6](../../../bib/kjv/mal004.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">mal 4:6</span></span>

From Malachi to Matthew

The close of the Old Testament canon left Israel in two great divisions.
The mass of the nation were dispersed throughout the Persian Empire,
more as colonists than captives. A remnant, chiefly of the tribe of
Judah, with Zerubbabel, a prince of the Davidic family, and the
survivors of the priests and Levites, had returned to the land under the
permissive decrees of Cyrus and his successors

(See Scofield) - ([Dan 5:31](../../../bib/kjv/dan005.htm#031)).

(See Scofield) - ([Dan 9:25](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#025))

and had established again the temple worship. Upon this remnant the
interest of the student of Scripture centres; and this interest concerns
both their political and religious history.

I. Politically, the fortunes of the Palestinian Jews followed, with one
exception -- the Maccabean revolt -- the history of the Gentile
world-empires foretold by Daniel (Daniel 2, 7.)

\(1\) The Persian rule continued about one hundred years after the close
of the Old Testament canon, and seems to have been mild and tolerant,
allowing the high priest, along with his religious functions, a measure
of civil power, but under the overlordship of the governors of Syria.
The sources of the history of the Jewish remnant during the Persian
period were purely legendary when Josephus wrote. During this period the
rival worship of Samaria ([Joh 4:19](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#019));
([Joh 4:20](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#020)) was established.

Palestine suffered much from the constant wars between Persia and Egypt,
lying as it did "between the anvil and the hammer."

\(2\) In 333 B.C. Syria fell under the power of the third of the
world-empires, the Graeco-Macedonian of Alexander. That conqueror, as
Josephus related, was induced to treat the Jews with much favour; but,
upon the breaking up of his empire, Judaea again fell between the hammer
and anvil of Syria and Egypt, falling first under the power of Syria,
but later under Egypt as ruled by the Ptolemaic kings. During this
period (B.C. 320-198) great numbers of Jews were established in Egypt,
and the Septuagint translation of the Old Testament was made (B.C. 285).

\(3\) In B.C. 198 Judaea was conquered by Antiochus the Great, and
annexed to Syria. At this time the division of the land into the five
provinces familiar to readers of the Gospels, Galilee, Samaria, Judaea
(often collectively called Judaea), Trachonitis and Peraea, was made.
The Jews at first were permitted to live under their own laws under the
high priest and a council. About B.C. 180 the land became the dowry of
Cleopatra, a Syrian princess married to Ptolemy Philometor, king of
Egypt, but on the death of Cleopatra was reclaimed by Antiochus
Epiphanes (the "little horn" of

(See Scofield) - ([Dan 8:9](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#009))

after a bloody battle. In 170 B.C, Antiochus, after repeated
interferences with the temple and priesthood, plundered Jerusalem,
profaned the temple, and enslaved great numbers of the inhabitants.
December 25, B.C. 168, Antiochus offered a sow upon the great altar, and
erected an altar to Jupiter. This is the "desolation" of ([Dan
8:13](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#013)) type of the final "abomination
of desolation" of ([Mat 24:15](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#015)). The
temple worship was forbidden, and the people compelled to eat swine's
flesh.

\(4\) The excesses of Antiochus provoked the revolt of the Maccabees,
one of the most heroic pages of history. Mattathias, the first of the
Maccabees, a priest of great sanctity and energy of character, began the
revolt. He did little more than to gather a band of godly and determined
Jews pledged to free the nation and restore the ancient worship, and was
succeeded by his son Judas, known in history as Maccabaeus, from the
Hebrew word for hammer. He was assisted by four brothers of whom Simon
is best known.

In B.C. 165, Judas regained possession of Jerusalem, purified and
rededicated the temple, an event celebrated in the Jewish Feast of the
Dedication. The struggle with Antiochus and his successor continued.
Judas was slain in battle, his brother Jonathan succeeding. In him the
civil and priestly authority were united (B.C. 143). Under Jonathan, his
brother Simon, and his nephew John Hyrcanus, the Hasmonean line of
priest-rulers was established, under sufferance of other powers. They
possessed none of the Maccabean virtues.

\(5\) A civil war followed, which was terminated by the Roman conquest
of Judaea and Jerusalem by Pompey (B.C. 63), who left Hyrcanus, the last
of the Hasmoneans, a nominal sovereignty, Antipater, an Idumean,
wielding the actual power. B.C. 47 Antipater was made procurator of
Judaea by Julius Caesar, and appointed his son, Herod, governor of
Galilee. After the murder of Caesar disorder ensued in Judaea, and Herod
fled to Rome. There he was appointed (B.C. 40) king of the Jews, and
returning, he conciliated the people by his marriage (B.C. 38) with
Mariamne, the beautiful grand-daughter of Hyrcanus, and appointed her
brother, the Maccabean Aristobulus III, high priest. Herod was king when
Jesus Christ was born.

II\. The religious history of the Jews during the long period from
Malachi (B.C. 397) to Christ followed, as to outer ceremonial, the
high-priestly office, and the temple worship, the course of the
troublous political history, and is of scant interest.

Of greater moment are the efforts and means by which the real faith of
Israel was kept alive and nurtured.

\(1\) The tendency to idolatry seems to have been destroyed by the Jews'
experience and observation of it during the captivity. Deprived of
temple and priest, and of the possibility of continuing a ceremonial
worship, the Jewish people were thrown back upon that which was
fundamental in their faith, the revelation of God as One, the Creator,
to be conceived of as having made man in His own image, and therefore as
having such analogies to the nature and life of man as to be
comprehensible by man, while remaining the Eternal Spirit, God. This
conception of God, enforced by the mighty ministries of the pre-exilic
and exilic prophets, finally prevailed over all idolatrous conceptions,
and this ministry was continued amongst the returned remnant by Haggai,
Zechariah, and Malachi. The high ethics of the older prophets, their
stern rebuke of mere formalism, and their glowing prophecies of the
ultimate restoration of Israel in national and religious supremacy under
Messiah, were all repeated by the three prophets of the restoration.

The problem was to keep alive this exalted ideal in the midst of outward
persecutions and sordid and disgraceful divisions within.

\(2\) The organic means to this end was the synagogue, an institution
which formed no part of the biblical order of the national life. Its
origin is obscure. Probably, during the captivity, the Jews, deprived of
the temple and its rites, met on the Sabbath day for prayer. This would
give opportunity for the reading of the Scriptures. Such meetings would
require some order of procedure, and some authority for the restraint of
disorder. The synagogue doubtless grew out of the necessities of the
situation in which the Jews were placed, but it served the purpose of
maintaining familiarity with the inspired writings, and upon these the
spiritual life of the true Israel

(See Scofield) - ([Rom 9:6](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#006))

was nourished.

\(3\) But during this period, also, was created that mass of tradition,
comment and interpretation, known as Mishna, Gemara (forming the
Talmud), Halachoth, Midrashim and Kabbala, so superposed upon the Law
that obedience was transferred from the Law itself to the traditional
interpretation.

\(4\) During this period also rose the two great sects know to the
Gospel narratives as Pharisees and Sadducees.

(See Scofield) - ([Mat 3:7](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#007)) notes 2,
3.

The Herodians were a party rather than a sect.

Amongst such a people, governed, under the suzerainty of Rome, by an
Idumean usurper, rent by bitter and unspiritual religious controversies,
and maintaining an elaborate ritual, appeared Jesus, the Son and Christ
of God.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Matthew Introduction](mat000)

</div>
