[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index) [Buddhist Articles](index.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# THE EKASHLOKA SHASTRA

## of Nagarjuna

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# CHINESE BUDDHISM:

## A Volume of Sketches,

### HISTORICAL, DESCIPTIVE, AND CRITICAL.

 

##### BY

### REV. JOSEPH EDKINS, D.D.

 

#### LONDON

#### KEGAN PAUL, TRENCH, TRUBNER & CO. L<sup><span class="small"><u>TD</u></span></sup>

#### \[1893\]

###### {Scanned and edited by Christopher M. Weimer, May 2002}

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_302">p. 302</span>

## CHAPTER XIX.

THE EKASHLOKA SHASTRA.

<span class="small">The "Ekashloka Shastra," translated from the
Chinese, with an analysis and notes.<span
id="page_302_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_302_note_1.md)</span>

THE author of the original work, of which a translation is here given
from the Chinese version, was the patriarch "Nagarjuna" (or *Lung-shu*),
of whom much has been said in the preceding part of this book. Beside
being the writer of many of the more important Shastras, he also
composed several of the Sutras, though these works are generally
attributed to Shakyamuni Buddha. A keen reasoner, acute thinker, and
voluminous author, such as Nagarjuna, deserves to be better known, and
it is hoped that the following translation of one of his lesser works
will prove not altogether useless in the elucidation of Buddhism.

   It is called *Yih-shu-lu-kia-lun*, the "Shastra of One shloka." The
three characters *shu-lu-kia* are in old Chinese pronunciation
*sho-lo-ka*. When a double consonant begins a syllable, it is usual to
employ the same vowel after each consonant in transcribing them in
Chinese characters.

   *Shloka* is a Sanscrit term for "verse," and particularly for a
couplet of a certain kind. I take the following account of it from
Williams' Sanscrit Grammar:--"The Institutes of Manu are written in the
*Sloka*, or *Anushtubh* <span id="page_303">p. 303</span> *metre*. This
is the commonest of all the infinite variety of Sanscrit metres, and is
that which chiefly prevails in the great epic poems of the East. It
consists of two lines of sixteen syllables each, but the rules which
regulate one line apply equally to the other." "The 1st, 2d, 3d, 4th,
9th, 10th, 11th, and 12th syllables may be either long or short. The
16th, as ending the line, is also common; so too the 8th." "The 5th
syllable ought always to be short. The 6th may be either long or short;
but if long, then the 7th ought to be long also; and if short, then the
7th ought to be short also." "The last four syllables form two iambics."

   The Hindoo author has in the present instance taken a single couplet
as his theme, and hence the name of his short treatise. This couplet,
consisting in its Chinese form of four short sentences, appears at the
commencement.

   We are also informed by an introductory note that the treatise was
translated into Chinese, from the original of Lung-shu p'u-sa, by the
Brahman Gaudama Prajnaluti, at the city of Lo-yang, in the reign of the
Yuen-Wei dynasty. This city is that now called Ho-nan fu, on the south
bank of the Yellow River, in Ho-nan province. The time of the
translation is the fourth century of our era.

 

TRANSLATION OF "YIH-SHU-LU-KIA-LUN"

(THE SHASTRA OF ONE SHLOKA).

<table data-align="center">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td>"My body (or substance) in its nature is not permanent;<br />
Thus, then, my body is not a body.<br />
My body in its nature not being a body,<br />
I therefore say that it is empty and not permanent."</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

   "It is asked, Why write this "stanza" (*Gâtha*)? What is its meaning?
What man's opinions is it intended to overthrow? I reply, It is written
on account of those, who in reading Shastras of great length grow weary;
and also for those intelligent persons, who have studied many Shastras,
and exercised their thoughts (deeply) in the sea of Buddha's law, but
growing fatigued have begun to doubt <span id="page_304">p. 304</span>
about the doctrine, not by any means to be questioned or suspected, of
the non-permanence of things and the nothingness of my own body. To
destroy such doubts I have composed this Shastra.

   "What says my doctrine? That all kinds of "acting" (*fa*) are
non-permanent, and my own body is nothing. The non-reaIity of my body is
not separate from the non-permanence of all action, my nature and my
body being nothing. Therefore there is no such thing as permanence.

   "All the Buddhas, and their disciples of the two classes *Yuen-kioh*
and *Sheng-wen* ("Listeners," *Shrâvaka*), have obtained their
liberation from ignorance by means of this principle of nothingness; not
by the opposite principle, which maintains the existence of breaking
off, and of permanence in actions. The *Gâtha* says:--

<table data-align="center">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td>"Lose sight of this principle of nothingness; and prefer to reside in body;<br />
You then obtain a view of things as permanent.<br />
If you say that afterwards they are to be destroyed,<br />
You thus come to see things as having cessation."</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

   "With this meaning I speak of all actions as being in themselves
without real embodiment. The Buddhas, the 'Enlightened' (*Yuen-kioh*),
the Listeners, and the Arhans have gained their benefits and successes
by believing in this principle.

   "I will now speak of what men are to be opposed. If a man who has
gained some knowledge says that, without reference to 'action' (*hing*),
there is non-permanence, his view is not the correct one. If the
so-called non-permanence is separated from 'existence,' *yeu-wei*, or
(actuality), in order to be called non-permanent, then permanence
becomes nothing. Thus, then, actuality and non-reality are not
essentially different. If actuality and non-reality combine, the actual
being joined to the unreal, a bottle cannot be broken (which is absurd,
a bottle being an *actual* thing). If the unreal and the actual combine,
the unreal <span id="page_305">p. 305</span> being joined to the actual,
the Nirvâna is destructible (which is absurd, the Nirvâna being not an
actual thing). If the actual and the unreal are, as thus argued,
identical, all kinds of 'teaching' (or 'action,' *fa*) are
indestructible, like the Nirvâna, which is permanent, and is, therefore,
not produced from any cause. If 'actions' (*king*) are not produced from
causes, they do not differ from the empty Nirvâna. In this case, the
method or state of 'actuality' (*yeu-wei*) need not be called constant.
But if the things done, being not produced from causes, are still
non-permanent, then the empty Nirvâna is not called permanent. If this
be true, the methods of actuality and of non-reality are neither of them
good. If the non-permanent is parted from actuality and is still called
non-permanent, then actuality apart from constancy ought to be called
constant. But this is not correct reasoning. In which of the Sutras are
there such words as these?

   "What ideas are to be discoursed upon? What meaning is there in that
which you now say? There is much in it that is unreasonable, such as
your crooked mind cannot fathom. Therefore what you say, is not correct
doctrine. If men, who have gained some knowledge, maintain that the
(action or) 'law ' of the past, present, and future is in each case
completed from and in itself, this is to be regarded as a false view.
Why so? Because it is a view which omits the notion of cause. If we
speak of the future as not being produced from causes, but as formed
from and in itself, then the present is also not produced from causes,
but is formed from its own nature. For the future and the present are,
in their own nature, even and equal, without any difference. If so, and
the law of the present comes from causes, why, in this case, should not
the law of the future come from causes also? You ground this view either
on the Sutras, or upon your own judgment. But the statement is incorrect
and unreasonable. Being unreasonable, it is not to be believed. If the
law that regards the future is not produced from causes, but <span
id="page_306">p. 306</span> comes from its own nature, it must be an
empty thing. Being cut off from any connection with causes, it cannot be
produced from any cause. It is, therefore, not truly future in itself.
But if the future is non-existent, then the present and past are also
non-existent. The present and the past being non-existent, then time in
its threefold aspect is really nothing in itself. If it be said that it
has a real existence, this is to say that it is permanent, and is
produced without a cause.

   "If the disciple of Buddha thinks so, who has reached some depth in
perception, he does not differ from the heretical teachers, Kapila and
others. This Shastra, however, is not made for such as Kapila and Uluka,
but for you who hold the same views with me. What I have thus far said,
in opposition to the opinions of certain persons, is for the sake of you
who have made some advancement, that you may reject incorrect views.

   "It is on this account that I have compiled this Shastra and the
'*Gâtha* of one *shloka*' (*Yi-sho-lo-ka-lun*), which commences my book.
I shall now explain the meaning of this *Gâtha*.

   "When it is said, 'My body, in its nature, is not permanent,' 'my
body' refers to that which is born and acts, and which is, therefore,
called 'my body.' He who has made advancement in right perception, being
in the midst of this acting, thinks out for himself that this is the
body (or takes it to be the body). This acting commences in the region
of the physical and mental operations.<span
id="page_306_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_306_note_1.md) In it are involved also
the *Sheng-wen* and *Yuen-kioh*, who wander circuitously (in this lower
region). Thus, when we speak of bodies, as one, two, or several; or of
men, as one, two, or several; each is considered as having a body
independent of the rest, and they are commonly spoken of as such. As
earth, water, fire, and wind are respectively hard, moist, hot, and
movable, each according to its nature; so every <span id="page_307">p.
307</span> man (and thing) has his own form and substance. Hence the
expression, 'my body.'

   "If he who has made some advancement in knowledge says that man in
his birth, in his continued life, and in his death, is the same in form,
he speaks erroneously. The body of man is, in its nature, not permanent,
and, therefore, its being called body has arisen from the circumstance
that men who have advanced somewhat in true knowledge have made this
distinction. Therefore apart from the various modes of action, there is
no non-permanent body; because man is, in his form, not permanent.

   "Therefore Buddha, in instructing the Bikshus respecting various
acts, represents them all as not constant. This is on account of what
has been already said.

   "If it be maintained that, apart from acting, men and things are
non-permanent, retaining their own form, such an opinion is wrong.
Should you not underetand why the phrase non-permanent is used, I will
now explain it. It is because of what is said in the opening stanza,
'Body is not body.' The notions of body and not body you easily
distinguish. The non-permanent, what is it? It is without body.
Therefore it is, that body is not body. In its own nature it is not
body, and therefore it is formally stated to be without body.

   "When it is said, 'My substance, in its nature, is not substance,' it
is asserted that there is no substance but that which is 'not substance'
(*wu-t'i*). For this reason it is said that substance in itself is not
such. If you hold that there is some substance existing beside *wu-t'i*,
you are wrong; this mode of arguing is not that of the Sutras. If you
assert that the 'absence of body' (*wu-t'i*) is what constitutes
substance, this also is incorrect; because the Sutras do not say so. In
what Sutra has Buddha, the World's Honoured one, taught such a doctrine?
It is not to be found in any Sutra, for it is not 'correct teaching'
(*king-shwo*, the 'teaching of the classics'); such arguments cannot
succeed, because they are not the doctrine of the great <span
id="page_308">p. 308</span> holy Sutras; they ought not, therefore, to
be believed. It is, then, not only my own words that I bring as
evidence.

   "The last sentence says, 'Therefore it is stated to be empty and not
permanent.' Refer, for example, to the Sutra,
T*iau-juh-san-mih-t'i-king*, 'Narrative of Buddha pacifying and subduing
Samidhi,' which says, that Buddha addressed Samidhi with the words, 'The
eye of man is empty and not permanent. There is no eye that does not
move, that does not perish, that does not change. And why? It is its
nature so to do. The ear, nose, tongue, body, and mind have all the same
changeable and destructible nature.'

   "Buddha, the World's Honoured one, speaking in this Sutra of
emptiness and of non-permanence, on this account expressed the opinion
here stated. Thus we know that all acts are empty and non-permanent.
Being not permanent, they are without 'body' (*t'i*). Consequently all
acts are, in their nature and of themselves, without bodily form. It is
in this way that the meaning of the words *wu-t'i*, 'without body,' is
established.

   "If, in this manner, an opinion be tested by the Sutras, it will be
well established. If it will not bear this test, it must fall to the
ground. In my view, what is in the Sutras must be completely
satisfactory. Therefore it is that the opinion, that '(my) nature
(*sing*) is in itself without body,' has been now employed to bring to
its completion 'the Shastra of one Shloka.'

   "All kinds of action (or existence), such as body, nature, 'act'
(doctrine), thing, matter, 'existence' (*yeu*), are different in name,
but the same in meaning. Whichever of these we speak of, the only
difference between them is in the word *yeu*, 'to be.'

   "This word *yeu* is, in the original language, *subhava*.<span
id="page_308_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_308_note_1.md) It <span
id="page_309">p. 309</span> is translated in several ways, as 'the
substance which gives substance to itself' (*tsï-t'i-t'i*), or as
'without action and with action' (*wu-fa-yeu-fa*), or as 'the nature
which has no nature of its own' (*wu-tsï-sing-sing*)."

 

   *Analysis and Remarks*.--The author begins with stating, in a
rhythmical form, the principles he is about to establish. My substance
or body, *i.e.*, my whole nature, material and intellectual, is a
passing, changing thing, and is, consequently, not a real substance at
all. It is, therefore, only right to say of it that it is empty and not
permanent.

   This principle agrees with the description given of the Buddhists by
Colebrooke, who observes that they are called by their adversaries the
orthodox Hindoos, *Sarvavainásicas*, or "Those who argue total
perishableness." They deny the permanent existence of atoms, and only
allow that images of things are formed which immediately pass away.

   The author then gives his reasons for composing the treatise, and the
*Gâtha* or rhythmical statement with which it commences. He wrote it for
the sake of such persons as cannot read through the very long and
tedious works found in the Buddhist library. He also wished to place in
a short compass the argument for the transitory, unreal nature of all
existing things, for the use of advanced students; lest they should be
influenced by those arguments, self-suggested or presented by others,
which go to prove that the world is real and that the information given
by the senses is trustworthy.

   The composition of Buddhist works is varied by the frequent
introduction of passages in a rhythmical form, not indeed with rhymes or
any fixed succession of long and short syllables, but with lines
constantly of the same length. In the Nepaul originals, there is also a
difference in dialect between the prosaic and rhythmical parts, the
Sanscrit and Pracrit being interchanged. There is no such transition of
dialects in the Chinese translations. <span id="page_310">p. 310</span>
The rhythmical parts are called "*Gâtha*," *Kiè*; in the old Chinese
pronounciation, *Gat*.

   The author lays down as his order of procedure, that he will first
unfold his meaning, then attack the upholders of opposite views, and
afterwards support his own opinions. He holds that all kinds of action
are transitory and not lasting, that the actor or observer is himself
nothing real, and that these two things are connected. Hence the
doctrine of non-permanence.

   The Buddhas and their disciples, he says, had in the belief of the
principle of nothingness obtained "liberation" (*móksha*) from the bonds
which restrain the soul. The opposite doctrine, which holds that things
are permanent, or break off, has never had such an exemplification of
its truth.

   Colebrooke says that the followers of Kanáde maintained that things
are partly perishable and transitory, but in part also unchangeable. His
followers are called Vaiséshikas.

   The disciples of Buddha here alluded to, *Yuen-kioh* and *Sheng-wen*,
occupy the third and fourth rank in the Buddhist scale of being. Their
position will be understood by the following scheme copied from a
Buddhist work:--

<table data-align="center" data-border="">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 33%" />
<col style="width: 33%" />
<col style="width: 33%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td style="text-align: center;">Four degrees<br />
in "holiness"<br />
(<em>sheng</em>)</td>
<td>Buddha.<br />
Boddhisattwa.<br />
Yuen-kio.<br />
Sheng-wen.</td>
<td>Intelligence.<br />
Knowledge and mercy.<br />
Perception gained by the study of causes.<br />
"Listeners," <em>Shravakas</em>.</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td style="text-align: center;">Six states<br />
of<br />
"ignorance"<br />
(<em>fan</em>).</td>
<td>Devas.<br />
Asuras.<br />
Men.<br />
Pretas.<br />
Animals.<br />
Naraka.</td>
<td>"Gods," <em>T'ien</em>.<br />
Monsters, demons.<br />
 <br />
Hungry ghosts.<br />
 <br />
Hell.</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

   Four lines in the form of *Gâtha* are here introduced, representing
the doctines of opponents. Two views are given--that which regards the
universe as permanent, and <span id="page_311">p. 311</span> that which
describes it as liable to cessation. Both are considered as erroneous by
the champion of Buddhism. Safety is only to be found in the doctrine of
nihility.

   In again appealing to the testimony of the Buddhas and their
disciples, he mentions the Arhans. These form the last in a series of
four grades of discipleship. The attainment of a certain amount of
enlightenment in the Buddhist doctrine is represented as "fruit." These
four grades of discipleship, or "fruits," are called, *Su-da-wan*,
*Si-da-gam*, *A-na-gam*, and *A-la-han*. In Sanscrit these names are
read "Srôtâ-panna," "Sagardagam," "Anagamin," and "Arhan." They are also
called the four paths to the Nirvâna.

   Lung-shu proceeds to controvert by argument, the opinions of two
classes of reasoners, and first of those who hold the doctrine of
non-permanence in an incorrect manner. It ought not to be held so as to
deny the reality of action, or so as to confound action and inaction.
These terms in Chinese, *yeu-wei*, *wu-wei*, may perhaps be translated
"actuality" and "non-reality." Their meaning will be seen by the
illustrations used. An earthenware bottle is adduced as an example of an
"actual thing" (*yeu-wei*), while the Nirvâna belongs to the
"non-actual" or *wu-wei* class. These instances are brought forward to
show that things of the two classes of objects must not be confounded.
For if actuality be identified with non-reality, a bottle, it is said,
would become a non-actual thing, and it would be wrong to say that it
was destructible. So if non-actual things were identified with what is
actual, the Nirvâna would cease to be indestructible. The distinction,
then, between the actual and the non-actual must be preserved.

   The Sutras are again appealed to in proof of this doctrine. These
works are thus seen to be, in the view of the Buddhist, the standard of
truth. They contain the very words of Buddha, which are held to be
necessarily true. Several hundreds of these books, thus shown to
constitute the scriptures of this religion, have been translated <span
id="page_312">p. 312</span> into the language of China, and of the other
countries where Buddhism prevails. These treatises are not said to be
divine, or to be inspired, for the Buddhist has neither God nor
inspiration in his creed. He only knows Buddha, the self-elevated human
intellect, as the most exalted being; and he looks on his teaching to be
the purest truth and the highest wisdom. Throughout the Shastra, which
is now presented to the reader, Lung-shu supports his opinions by the
authority of the Sutras which Buddha has left for the use of his
disciples as the repository of his doctrine.

   He goes on to overthrow the notion that the past, the present, and
the future are self-produced, and do not come from the action of causes.
He observes that the present and the future are as to their nature
similar, and controlled by the same laws; but the present results from
causes, and therefore the future must also originate in the same manner.
If the past, present, and future do not come from causes, he argues that
they can be nothing real at all. The holder of such views would thus
fall into the error of Kapila and other heretical teachers.

   Kapila, here referred to, was a remarkable personage, perhaps the
most noted of the Indian philosophers. He founded the Sankhya school.
"This system," says Cousin, in his *History of Modern Philosophy*,<span
id="page_312_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_312_note_1.md) "is at once a system of
physics, psychology, dialectics, and metaphysics. It is a universal
system, a complete philosophy." Cousin says of Kapila that he advocated
sensualism, and that "one of the ideas which are most opposed to
sensualism being that of cause, Kapila made an effort to destroy it. The
argumentation of Kapila is, in the history of philosophy, the antecedent
of that of Ænesidemus and that of Hume. According to Kapila, there is no
proper notion of cause, and that which we call a cause is only an effect
in its relation to the cause which precedes it, which is also an effect
for the same reason, and continually thus, so <span id="page_313">p.
313</span> that the whole is a necessary concatenation of effects,
without veritable and independent cause."

   Professor Wilson, in his learned comment on the *Sankhya Karika*,
criticises this statement of the French philosopher, and denies that
Kapila asserts the non-existence of cause. He admits, however, that "he
may so far agree with the philosophers referred to, in recognising no
difference between *material cause and material effects*;" and adds that
"his doctrine is that of Brown in his lectures on power, cause, and
effect."

   There being such a difference of opinion on the views of this Hindoo
philosopher, it is interesting to notice in the treatise of Lung-shu,
that Kapila is incidentally condemned for denying the existence of
cause. Our Chinese evidence goes to uphold the statement of the French
philosopher, where he is called in question by his English critic.

   Colebrooke questions whether Kapila be not altogether a mythological
personage. With this distinct allusion to him in our little work, dating
indubitably from near the beginning of the Christian era, we may perhaps
infer his historical reality, and we also obtain an approximation to the
period in which he lived.

   Lung-shu proceeds to say that he did not write for the purpose of
confuting such philosophers as Kapila and Uluka,<span
id="page_313_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_313_note_1.md) but for the sake of
correcting and confirming the views of the disciples of Buddhism.

   The philosopher, Uluka, I have not found mentioned by Colebrooke or
other writers on the metaphysical systems of India.

   It appears to me that Lung-shu is not explicit enough in his argument
for the production of events from causes, where he asserts that the
present proceeds from causes, and therefore the future does also, being
in all respects similar to the present in its nature. He does not first
make plain that the present proceeds from cause.<span
id="page_313_fr_2"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">2</span></sup>](#page_313_note_2.md)

<span id="page_314">p. 314</span>

   As already remarked, Lung-shu appeals repeatedly to the authority of
the Sutras. So the advocates of the Sankhya philosophy appeal to the
Sutras of Kapila, which are, however, brief aphorisms, and not, like
those of Buddha, long treatises. Yet Lung-shu has besides this another
test of the validity of doctrines, namely, their reasonableness or
unreasonableness. To this second test he here brings the doctrines he
opposes and condemns them.

   In explaining the introductory stanza, Lung-shu first discusses the
origin of the phrase "my body." He observes that it consists of the body
and its actions; *i.e.*, it means *myself*. In the region of mental and
physical actions, we come to the consciousness of *myself*. In this
region the inferior classes of Buddha's disciples continue to wander
partially enlightened.

   Advancing from this incomplete view, we speak ordinarily of men and
things, in the singular, dual, and plural numbers, as separate beings
existing independently of each other, thus increasing the first error.
The four elements, earth, water, fire, and wind, differ in their nature,
as being hard, moist, hot, and moving, and so each man and thing is
looked at as having its characteristic differences from others. Hence
the common but erroneous expression *my body, my self*.

   Lung-shu complains that some persons maintain birth, duration, and
destruction to be the same thing. He then proceeds to state that the
body in its nature is not permanent, that its being called *body* has
arisen from the distinctions which men in their ignorance have made, and
that the correct doctrine of the body being non-permanent is inseparably
connected with the various physical and mental operations which spring
from the body; because, he adds, man is in his entire form
non-permanent.

   Buddha, in the instructions he gave to the Bikshus his disciples,
always held the doctrine that actions are non-permanent. This must ever
be kept in mind in making the statement that the body is non-permanent.

<span id="page_315">p. 315</span>

   Bikshu is one of the names given to the followers of Buddha
generally. They are also called *Shamen* and *Ho-shang*.

   The author then undertakes to prove the second sentence of his theme,
namely, "Thus, then, my body is not a body." The doctrine of
non-permanence has been introduced to aid in proving this. The
non-permanent is necessarily unsubstantial. The things we see are liable
to perish. Therefore they are not real things. We must speak of things
as they really are. Hence the words "my body is not body," are correct
and appropriate.

   The third sentence, when it says, "My body in its nature is not
body," asserts that, apart from the unsubstantial and the vanishing, no
body exists; and that therefore it is right to say of my own body, that
it does not exist.

   Cousin, in his lectures already referred to, speaks of the psychology
of Buddhism as being contained in two propositions, extracted by Burnouf
from Buddhist books.

   1st, Thought or spirit--for the faculty is not distinguished from the
subject--appears only with sensation, and does not survive it.

   2d, The spirit cannot itself lay hold of itself; and in directing its
attention to itself, it draws from it only the conviction of its
powerlessness to see itself otherwise than as successive and transitory.

   Burnouf adds, these theses are radically opposed to Brahmanism, whose
first article of faith is the perpetuity of the thinking subject.

   We see that the non-permanence of things, which is so important a
principle with our author, also pervades the books of Nepaul which
Burnouf studied, and constitutes a watchword of Buddhism.

   Lung-shu proceeds to observe that some persons hold false views on
this subject. One opinion is that independently of the unsubstantial
there is substance, but this is contrary to the Sutras. Others say the
unsubstantial is my body, but this is wrong (although it is correct to
<span id="page_316">p. 316</span> say that my body is unsubstantial),
because it is not found in the Sutras. Such are not the words of Buddha,
nor are they met with in the great holy Sutras, and they must not be
believed.

   The last sentence, "I therefore say that it is empty and not
permanent," is illustrated by appealing to the teaching of Buddha in one
of the Sutras. He takes the eye as an example. There is no eye that does
not move, that is not destroyed, that does not change. It is therefore
empty and non-permanent. So it is with the other sensorial organs. The
nature of them all is to change and decay.

   The Buddhists in enumerating the organs of sense, after mentioning
the eye, ear, nose, tongue, and body, add the mind. Lung-shu does so in
this passage. The mind, as the organ of consciousness, is viewed as a
sense. We limit the term sensorial organs to those which are material,
but the Buddhist, not believing in the reality of material things, calls
every organ by which impressions are communicated a sense.

   Buddha having thus expressed his opinion in the Sutras, it is added,
we know that all acts are empty, non-permanent, and therefore without
body. Thus we arrive at the doctrine that body does not exist.

   It should be remembered that the Buddhists regard the acts of the
thinking being as one with his substance. They do not distinguish
between the agent and the act, but deny the reality and permanence of
both in their unity. Thus they will say, as in this case, "all acts"
(*yih-ts'iè-fa*) are without body, instead of predicating this of the
actor.

   Hence also he proceeds to say, that human nature is without body,
resting his doctrine on the authority of the Sutras, and adding that it
is the object of this entire treatise, "The Shastra of one Shloka," to
illustrate it.

   The same confusion of the agent with his acts presents itself in the
closing sentences of the treatise, where it is <span id="page_317">p.
317</span> asserted that all kinds of action, including body, nature,
acts, thing, being, are but different names for the same thing.

   All these varieties in phraseology, he adds, are but differences in
the term *yeu*, "being." The original word, adds the translator into
Chinese, is *subhava*, which is variously explained "the substance which
gives substance to itself," "without action and with action," and "the
nature which has no nature of its own."

   *Bhawo*, says Gogerly in his *Essay on Buddhism*,<span
id="page_317_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_317_note_1.md) is two-fold, consisting
of moral causative acts and the state of being. Of these, he adds,
*kamma-bhawo*, or "moral causative acts," are merit, demerit, and an
those actions which lead to existence. The various worlds of the
Buddhist universe are designated by the term *bhawo*. "Worlds of sensual
pleasure and pain" are *kama-bhawo*. The "Brahma worlds" are
*rúpa-bhawo*. The "incorporeal worlds" are *arúpa-bhawo*, and so on.
Here the term *bhava* means "states of being."

   The numerous modifications of meaning belonging to this word help to
account for the three translations of the related word *subhava*, which
close the treatise.

   I may observe here, that it is common with the modern Chinese
Buddhists, to defend the doctrine of the non-reality of material things,
by appealing to their liability to destruction. A priest will contend
that a wooden table, on the application of fire, passing into smoke and
ashes, there is necessarily nothing real in it.

   The truth is, that reality and changeableness are both rightly
affirmed of a table, or any other material thing. The Buddhist asserts
with perfect correctness, that the objects of sense are non-permanent,
but he is wrong when he argues that therefore they are unreal.
Christianity, modern science, and all sound philosophy agree in
ascribing reality and changeableness to the objects of sense. Lung-shu
erred in not seeing that these two things can be reconciled. {And Edkins
here errs in asserting that Nagarjuna holds the view that impermanence
equates with *non*-existence. Objects lack *inherent* existence, meaning
that they do not exist independantly of their causes, a view with which
Christianity, modern science, and all sound philosophy can agree. - CMW}

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buddhist Articles](index.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="footnotes_page_302">p. 302</span>

<span id="page_302_note_1"></span>[1](#page_302_fr_1.md) Read before the
Shanghai Literary and Scientific Society, 17th November 1857.

<span id="footnotes_page_306">p. 306</span>

<span id="page_306_note_1"></span>[1](#page_306_fr_1.md) The "human
operations are five," *wu-yin*--namely, *shè*, "vision;" *sheu*,
"reception;" *siang*, "thinking;" *hing*, "doing;" *shi*, "perception."

<span id="footnotes_page_308">p. 308</span>

<span id="page_308_note_1"></span>[1](#page_308_fr_1.md) This word is a
compound of *su*, "good," and *bháva*, one of the twelve causes "being."
By Colebrooke and Professor Wilson it is variously translated,
"dispositions," "sentiments," "conditions of being." *Abháva* is
"privation" or "negation." *Prágabháva* is "present negation of what
will be." *Anubháva* is "notion."

<span id="footnotes_page_312">p. 312</span>

<span id="page_312_note_1"></span>[1](#page_312_fr_1.md) Translated by O.
W. Wight, vol. i.

<span id="footnotes_page_313">p. 313</span>

<span id="page_313_note_1"></span>[1](#page_313_fr_1.md) *Kia-pi-lo*; in
the old pronunciation, *Ka-pi-la*. *Yeu-leu-kia* (*U-lu-ka*).

<span id="page_313_note_2"></span>[2](#page_313_fr_2.md) A friend has,
however, suggested to me, that he may regard this as obvious, being what
consciousness is ever teaching us.

<span id="footnotes_page_317">p. 317</span>

<span id="page_317_note_1"></span>[1](#page_317_fr_1.md) Quoted in Hardy's
Eastern Monachism.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
