[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index) [Buddhist Articles](index.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

 

# Â.TÂNÂ.TIYA-SUTTA

### (Dîgha Nikâya 20)

### translated by Rev. Daniel John Gogerly

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## SEPT

# SUTTAS PÂLIS

#### TIRÉS DU *DÎGHA-NIKÂYA*,

##### PAR

### M. P. GRIMBLOT,

###### ANCIEN CONSUL DE FRANCE À CEYLAN ET EN BIRMANIE.

 

##### TRADUCTIONS DIVERSES ANGLAISES ET FRANÇAISES.

 

###### \[Paris, L'imprimerie nationale\]

#### \[1876\]

###### {Scanned and edited by Christopher M. Weimer, May 2002}

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_332">p. 332</span>

## Â.TÂNÂ.TIYA-SUTTA.

### THE DISCOURSE CALLED Â.TÂNÂ.TIYA.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

   Thus I heard. Buddha resided on the mountain Gijjha-kuta (the
Eagle-peak) near Râjagaha. One night the four gods, regents of the four
quarters, visited him, attended by a large retinue of demons, inferior
gods and Nâgas, and arranged themselves on the four sides, illuminating
the whole of the Eagle-rock with their splendour, and having worshipped
him, sat down near him. Some of the demons (Yakkhas) worshipped him and
sat down; others sat down after having had pleasing conversation with
Buddha; others merely bowed themselves with elevated clasped hands and
sat down; some announced their names and race, and others sat down in
silence. When they were seated the great king Vessavana (chief of the
demons) thus addressed Buddha: There are, my Lord, some demons of great
power who are opposed to Buddha and some who are attached to him; there
are some demons of the middle class who are opposed to Buddha and some
who are attached to him; there are some demons of the lowest order who
are attached to Buddha and some who are opposed to him. What is the
reason, my Lord, that many demons are opposed to Buddha? Buddha, my
Lord, has preached abstinence from destroying life, abstinence from
theft, from lewdness, from lying, and from intoxicating drinks which
cause irreligion, and they are dissatisfied and displeased with these
doctrines.

   My Lord, there are disciples of Buddha who reside in solitary <span
id="page_333">p. 333</span> parts of forests, free from noise and
tumult, in quiet and retirement, remote from men. In those retired
places demons of great power reside who are opposed to the doctrines of
Buddha. Therefore, my Lord, to placate them, learn the Â.tânâ.tiya
defence (or Paritta) by which the priests and priestesses, the male and
female disciples (lay members) may be preserved, defended, kept free
from harm, and live in peace. Buddha silently assented to his request.
Then the great king Vessavana perceiving that Buddha silently consented,
spoke the Â.tânâ.tiya defence.

   Adored be the all seeing and glorious Vipassi; adored be Sikhi,
compassionate to all creatures<span
id="page_333_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_333_note_1.md).

   Adored be Vessabhû, the subjector and destroyer of the passions;
adored be Kakusandha, the conqueror of the hosts of Mâra.

   Adored be the pure and perfect Konâgama, adored be Kassapa, the
perfectly free.

   Adored be the glorious Buddha, the son of Sakya<span
id="page_333_fr_2"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">2</span></sup>](#page_333_note_2.md), who teaches the
doctrines destroying all sorrow.

   Those in the world whose passions are extinguished perceive things as
they really are; they, mild in speech, noble, and free from fear,

   Worship Gotama, the benefactor of gods and men, who has attained to
the paths of wisdom, who is noble and fearless.

   Where the sun rises with its large resplendent orb, the night ceases.

   When he arises it is called day. There is the deep, the abyss, the
sea, the wide spread expanse of water.

   It is known that there is the sea, the expanse of waters: this side
is named by men the front (i.e. the East).

   This quarter is guarded by the great and glorious king Dhatara.t.tha,
chief of the Gandhabbas, attended by his Gandhabbas, and delighted by
their songs and dances.

<span id="page_334">p. 334</span>

   He has many sons, all as I have heard of one name; ninety one named
Inda (a chieftain), of vast power.

   They also perceiving Buddha, of the solar race, the great and the
fearless, worship from afar.

   Adoration to thee, first of men! adoration to thee, chief of the
people! excellently thou beholdest all! The Amanussa (those who are not
men, the demons), we have ever heard, worship thee!

   Therefore let us say, Worship Gotama, the conqueror! We worship
Gotama the conqueror; we worship Gotama the Buddha endued with all
knowledge.

   There is a place where they who are called Petâ (a kind of hobgoblin)
reside; harsh in speech, contemptuous, murderous, fierce, thievish,
deceitful.

   Men name the place they occupy the right (i.e. the South).

   The great and glorious king Virû.lha, the chief of the Kumbha.n.das
(a class of demi-gods), is regent of that quarter, and resides there
attended by them, and delighted with their songs and dances.

   He also has many sons, all as I have heard of one name; ninety one
named Inda, of vast power.

   They also perceiving Buddha, Buddha of the solar race, the great and
the fearless, worship from afar.

   Adoration to thee, first of men! adoration to thee, chief of the
people! excellently thou beholdest all. Those who are not men worship
thee: this we have ever heard.

   Therefore let us say, Worship Gotama the conqueror! We worship Gotama
the conqueror; we worship Gotama, the Buddha endued with all knowledge.

   Where the sun with its large resplendent orb sets, there the day
ceases.

   When he sets it becomes night: there is the depth, the sea, the
expanse of waters;

   There the sea, the expanse of waters is known to be. This is named by
men the hinder part (i.e. the West).

   The great and glorious king Virûpakkha, chief of the Nâgas <span
id="page_335">p. 335</span> (cobra capello with superhuman powers, who
can assume the human form and intermarry with the human race), is regent
of that quarter, and resides there, attended by Nâgas, and delighted
with their songs and dances.

   He also has many sons, all as I have heard of one name; ninety one
named Inda, of vast power.

   They also perceiving Buddha, Buddha of the solar race, the great and
the fearless, worship from afar.

   Adoration to thee, first of men! adoration to thee, chief of the
people! excellently thou beholdest all! Those who are not men worship
thee: this we have ever heard.

   Therefore let us say, Worship Gotama the conqueror! We worship Gotama
the conqueror; we worship Gotama, the Buddha endued with all knowledge.

   On one side are the delightful Uttara-kuru (the Northern continent),
and the beautiful Mahâ Meru. There the inhabitants have all things in
common and have no private rights.

   They do not use the plough nor sow seed, but without the labours of
husbandry eat the most delicious food, spontaneously produced.

   The inhabitants travel from place to place on oxen, or on other
quadrupeds, on men, women, youths and maidens, and the attendants on
that king (Vessavana) mount these vehicles and travel in every
direction.

   The splendid king uses elephants, horses, celestial charriots,
palaces and state palanquins.

   He has cities well built in the sky, Â.tânâ.tâ, Kusinâ.tâ,
Parakusinâ.tâ, Nâ.tapuriyâ, Parakusitanâ.tâ;

   On the North, Kapivanta; on the West, Janogha, Navanavatiya, Ambara,
Ambaravatiya, and the province of Â.lakamanda.

   Happy one! the great king Kuvera possesses the province of Visânâ,
therefore he is called Vessavana.

   His attendants are known, Tatolâ, Tattalâ, Tatotalâ, Ojasi, Tejasi,
Tatojasi, Sûro râja, Ari.t.tha, Nemi.

   There is also the deep lake Dhara.nî, from which the clouds descend
in scattered rain; and there is the hall Bhagalavati, <span
id="page_336">p. 336</span> where the Yakkhas assemble. Fruit bearing
trees are in constant verdure, among which multitudes of birds live and
sing (the names of many are inserted), and there the lotus of Kuvera is
ever seen.

   This is called by men the upper side (i.e. the North).

   The glorious king Kuvera, the chief of the Yakkhas (commonly called
in English devils, but answering to the daimonia of the Greeks), is the
regent of this quarter, and resides there attended by his demons,
delighted with their songs and dances.

   He also has many sons, all as I have heard of one name; ninety one
named Inda, of vast power.

   They also perceiving Buddha, Buddha of the solar race, the great and
the fearless, worship from afar.

   Adoration to thee, first of men! adoration to thee, chief of the
people! excellently thou beholdest all! Those who are not men worship
thee: this we have ever heard.

   Therefore let us say, Worship Gotama the conqueror! We worship Gotama
the conqueror; we worship Gotama, the Buddha endued with all knowledge.

   This, Happy one! is the Â.tânâ.tiya defence, for the preserving in
safety and peace, free from injury, priests and priestesses, male and
female disciples.

   If any priest or priestess, male or female disciple, fully and
perfectly learn this, none of the Amanussa (not man), no male nor female
Yakkha, no youth nor maiden of the Yakkha, no chief Yakkha, nor his
attendants, nor his servants; no male nor female Gandhabba, no youth nor
maiden of the Gandhabba, no chief of the Gandhabba; nor his attendants,
nor his servants; no Kumbha.n.da, etc.; no Nâga, etc., will approach him
with an evil design whether walking, standing, sitting, or reclining.

   Happy one! should any of my amanussa act so (i.e. approach with an
evil intent one who has used this Paritta), he will obtain neither
hospitality nor respect in town nor in village; neither garden nor
habitation in the province of Â.lakamanda, nor be allowed to join in the
assemblies, and is neither worthy of being given or received in
marriage, but be <span id="page_337">p. 337</span> an object of contempt
and reproach, and compelled to hang down his head like a dried leaf, or
have it split into seven pieces.

   Happy one! there are some Amanussa who are fierce, cruel,
contemptuous; they attend not to the four guardian gods, nor to their
ministers, but are rebellious, even as in the kingdom of Magadha the
thieves rebel against the king and his ministers. But, Happy one! if any
such Yakkha, etc. (the classes are all named) should approach with an
evil intent any priest, etc. (who has used this Paritta), whether
walking, standing, sitting, or reclining, the chief commanders of the
Yakkhas will command to have them apprehended and punished, saying,
Seize that Yakkha, torment that Yakkha, etc.

   Who are these chief commanders? Inda, Soma, Varu.na, Bhâradvâja,
Pajâpati, Candana, Kâmase.t.tha, Kinnugha.n.du, Niga.n.du, Panâda,
Opamañña, Devasuta, Mâtali, Cittasena, Gandhabba, Nâla-râja, Janesabha,
Sâtâgira, Hemavata, Pu.n.naka, Karatiya, Gu.la, Sivaka, Mucalinda,
Vessâmitta, Yugandhara, Gopâla, Suppageda, Hiri, Netti, Mandiya,
Pañcâlaca.n.da, Â.lavaka, Pajjunna, Sumana, Sumukha, Dadhimukha, Ma.ni,
Mâ.nicara, Dîgha, Atha, Serissaka. These are the chiefs who will punish
the disobedient demons.

   This, Happy one! is the Â.tânâ.tiya defence for the priests, etc.

   We now, Happy one! depart, for we have much to attend to.

   Buddha replied: Great kings, attend to your occupations.

   They then arose from their seats, worshipped Buddha and departed.

   In the morning Buddha called his priests and related to them, word
for word, what had been said by the four guardian gods, and commanded
the priests to learn the Paritta.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buddhist Articles](index.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="footnotes_page_333">p. 333</span>

<span id="page_333_note_1"></span>[1](#page_333_fr_1.md) These are the
names of former Buddhas.

<span id="page_333_note_2"></span>[2](#page_333_fr_2.md) Gotama, the
present Buddha.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
