[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index) [Buddhist Articles](index)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

 

# MAHÂ-SAMAYA-SUTTA

### (Dîgha Nikâya 20)

### translated by Rev. Daniel John Gogerly

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## SEPT

# SUTTAS PÂLIS

#### TIRÉS DU *DÎGHA-NIKÂYA*,

##### PAR

### M. P. GRIMBLOT,

###### ANCIEN CONSUL DE FRANCE À CEYLAN ET EN BIRMANIE.

 

##### TRADUCTIONS DIVERSES ANGLAISES ET FRANÇAISES.

 

###### \[Paris, L'imprimerie nationale\]

#### \[1876\]

###### {Scanned and edited by Christopher M. Weimer, May 2002}

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_289">p. 289</span>

## MAHÂ-SAMAYA-SUTTA,

OR

DISCOURSE ADDRESSED TO THE GREAT ASSEMBLY.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

   Thus I heard. When Buddha was once residing in the forest called
Mahâ-vana, situated in the city of Kapilavatthu in the country of Sakya,
attended by a numerous retinue of bhikkhus, all of them arahats,
amounting to about five hundred in number, the devas from the ten
thousand Sakvalas congregated in great numbers for the purpose of seeing
Buddha and the bhikkhus. At that time the following thought occurred to
four of the devas residing in the world called Suddhâ-vâsa-kâya: Bhagavâ
is residing at the forest called Mahâ-vana in the city of Kapilavatthu
in the country of Sakya, attended by a numerous retinue of bhikkhus, all
of them arahats, amounting to about five hundred in number, and the
devas from the ten thousand Sakvalas have congregated in great numbers
for the purpose of seeing Buddha and the bhikkhus. It is well if we
should also repair to the place where Buddha is, and speak, each of us,
respectively a different stanza in the presence of Buddha. Instantly the
said four devas vanished from their residence, the world called
Suddhâ-vâsa-kâya, and descending as quickly as a strong made man would
stretch out his hand which had been bent, or bend his hand which has
been stretched out, presented themselves before Buddha. Having
worshipped him they stood on one side. One of them then spoke in his
presence the following stanza:

<span id="page_290">p. 290</span>

   There is a great assembly! a concourse of devas has assembled in the
forest; we also came to the righteous assembly for the purpose of seeing
the invincible bhikkhus.

   Then the other deva spoke in the presence of Buddha the following
stanza:

   The bhikkhus are engaged in samâdhi (meditation); they have wrought
up their minds to uprightness; those wise bhikkhus control their senses
as a charioteer who holds the reins steadily.

   Then the other deva said in the presence of Buddha the following
stanza:

   Those bhikkhus are moving, having cut off the stake (of lust, anger,
and ignorance), having cut off the shield (of lust, anger, and
ignorance), and demolished the threshold (of lust, anger, and
ignorance), they are moving like unto young elephants, being destitute
of desire, free from passions, pure, endued with eyes (the five
eyes<span id="page_290_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_290_note_1)), and orderly in their
conduct.

   Then the other deva said in the presence of Buddha the following
stanza:

   If any body place himself under the protection of Buddha, he would
not go to the four hells; he would quit the human body and acquire a
divine body (i.e. he would be born in heaven).

   Buddha then called the priests and addressed them thus: Bhikkhus, the
devas from the ten thousand Sakvalas have in great numbers congregated
for the purpose of seeing Tathâgata and the bhikkhus. Bhikkhus! in
respect of the sanctified and omniscient Buddhas who had, in the past
ages, appeared and on account of those Bhagavas also there were
assemblies of devas equal to that which has now congregated because of
me. In respect of those sanctified and omniscient Buddhas who would
<span id="page_291">p. 291</span> appear in future, on account of those
Bhagavas also, Bhikkhus! there would be assemblies of devas equal to the
one which has now congregated on account of me. Bhikkhus! I shall tell
the names of the devas, Bhikkhus! I shall proclaim the names of the
devas, Bhikkhus! I shall declare the names of the devas. Do ye listen to
the same, bear it well in mind, and I shall tell the same.

   The priests, in reply to Bhagavâ, saying: "Be it so, our Lord!"
Bhagavâ declared the following:

   I shall repeat stanzas: Are these terrestrial devas anywhere, they
reside there. Is there any priest who lives in rocky clefts, in his mind
prepared (for the attainment of Nibbâna), is he of tranquil mind; are
many of them like unto lions, possessed of calmness of mind; are they
intrepid; are they immaculate in mind; are they pure; are they of
undisturbed mind: such priest knew that there were more than five
hundred bhikkhus in the forest in the neighbourhood of Kapilavatthu. At
that time Satthâ (the divine teacher, i.e. Buddha) called his disciples,
devotedly attached to his religion, and addressed them thus: Bhikkhus!
the multitude of devas is present: do ye know them? and the priests
hearing the directions of Buddha, instantly obeyed the same. They became
endowed with the faculty of perceiving the Amanussas<span
id="page_291_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_291_note_1) (invisible or spiritual
beings). Some of them saw hundreds of invisible beings, some saw
thousands, and others seventy thousand. Some perceived hundred thousand
invisible beings; some, beyond number, every quarter being filled with
them. Cakkhumâ<span id="page_291_fr_2"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">2</span></sup>](#page_291_note_2) Buddha knowing the whole
distinctly and well, subsequently called his disciples devotedly
attached to his religion and said thus: Bhikkhus, shall I announce to
you in due order any devas? Know ye them, they being present: seven
thousands of Yakkhas<span id="page_291_fr_3"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">3</span></sup>](#page_291_note_3) born in Kapilavatthu
<span id="page_292">p. 292</span> city, who are possessed of the faculty
of iddhi, of power, of personal attractions, and of a retinue of
attendants, have come rejoicing to the assembly of priests in the
forest; six thousands of Yakkhas horn in Himalaya mountains, who are of
various colours, endowed with the faculty of iddhi, full of power,
possessed of personal attractions, and with a retinue of attendants,
have come rejoicing to the assembly of priests in the forest; three
thousands of Yakkhas born in Sâta-giri mountain, who are of various
colours, etc.

   Thus these sixteen thousand Yakkhas, who are of various colours, etc,

   Five hundred Yakkhas Wessâmittas, who are of various colours, etc.

   There is a Yakkha named Kumbhîra of Râjagaha city; his residence is
in the mountain Vepulla; he is attended by hundred thousand Yakkhas; and
that Kumbhîra of the city of Râjagaha has also come to the assembly of
priests in the forest.

   The king Dhatara.t.tha regent of the East; he rules the inhabitants
of the East; he is the chief of the Gandhabbas<span
id="page_292_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_292_note_1); he is attended by a
retinue of attendants. His many sons also of vast power and of the name
of Inda, endowed with the faculty of iddhi, etc.

   The king Virû.lha regent of the South; he rules the inhahitants of
the South; he is the chief of the Kumbha.n.das<span
id="page_292_fr_2"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">2</span></sup>](#page_292_note_2), and he is attended by a
retinue of attendants. His many sons also of vast power and of the name
of Inda, endowed with the faculty of iddhi, etc.

   The king Virupakkha the regent of the West; he rules the inhahitants
of the West; he is the chief of the Nâgas<span
id="page_292_fr_3"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">3</span></sup>](#page_292_note_3), and he is attended by a
retinue of attendants. His many sons also of <span id="page_293">p.
293</span> vast power and of the name of Inda, endowed with the faculty
of iddhi, etc.

   The king Kuvera the regent of the North; he rules the inhabitants of
the North; he is the chief of the Yakkhas<span
id="page_293_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_293_note_1), and he is attended by a
retinue of attendants. His many sons also of vast power and of the name
of Inda, endowed with the faculty of iddhi, etc.

   The four devas (regents of the four quarters) stood in the forest in
the vicinity of the city Kapilavatthu illuminating all the four quarters
with their splendour, each illuminating his own quarter: Dhatara.t.tha,
the East; Virû.lha, the South; Virupakkha, the West; and Kuvera, the
North. Their slaves who are versed in devices, tricks, and
dissimulation, have also come, and their names are: Mâyâ, Kute.n.du,
Ve.te.n.du, Vitucca, and Vitucco; and also: Candana, Kâmase.t.tha,
Kinnugha.n.du and Niga.n.du; (the Gandhabba devas named) Panâda, and
Opamañña, Matali the charioteer, Citta and Sena, the king of Nala,
Janesabha, have also come, as well as Pañcasikha, Timbaru, and
Suriya-vacasâ (the daughter of Timbaru). Along with these devas other
Gandhabbas also came rejoicing to the assembly of priests in the forest;
and Nâgas of the (lake) Nâbhasa, those of the city Visala, accompanied
by their retinue called Taccakas; Kambala and Assatara, and Nâgas of
Pâyâga also have come, accompanied by their relatives. The Nâgas of
Yamuna, and those of the race of Dhatara.t.tha, who are attended by a
retinue of attendants, have also come to the assembly of priests in the
forest. Erâvana, the great Nâga, has also come to the assembly of
priests in the forest. Are there any that carry away by force the Nâgas
endowed with divine power, that are twice born, that are furnished with
wings, possessed of clear eyes, those (Garulas) have also come down from
the sky to the middle of the forest and their names are Citrâ Supannâ.
At that time the Nâgas were fearless (of their enemies the Garulas).
Buddha <span id="page_294">p. 294</span> vouchsafed his protection to
the Nâgas (from the Garulas), and inviting each, in soft words, the
Nâgas and Garulas took refuge in Buddha. The Asuras (literally "not
gods"), who had been vanquished by Sakka covered the sea: they are
cousins (in relationship derived from the virgin Sujâta) to Sakka; they
are also possessed of the power of iddhi, and attended by a retinue of
attendants. Kâlakañjâ assumed a hideous form, Dânaveghasâ, Vepacitti,
Sucitti, Pahârada, Namuci (also came). Hundred of the sons of Bali, and
all who have the name of Râhu (those who have Râhu for their head)
having accoutred an army in full armour, repaired to Bhadda Râhu, and he
(giving his benediction) said: "May prosperity attend on you! it is time
for you to go to the assembly of priests in the forest." The devas Apa
(those who have received birth in heaven by indulging Apa kasina),
Pathavi (those who have obtained a celestial birth by means of Pathavi
kasina), Teja (those who had been born in heaven by means of Teja
kasina), and Vâya (those who had obtained a like birth in heaven by the
practice of Vâya kasina), also came at that time; and also the devas
Varu.na, Vâru.na, and Soma accompanied by Yasasa. The devas who had
obtained their birth by the practice of benevolence, kindness and
meditations, and possessed of great retinue of attendants also came: all
of these ten bodies of devas composed of as many sorts who were of
different colours, endowed with the faculty of iddhi, etc.

   The devas Ve.nhu, Sahali, Asamâ, two of the name of Yama; the devas
dwelling in the moon, preceded by the moon, and the devas residing in
the sun, preceded by the sun, came. The devas of wind, cloud, and heat
came, preceded by devas of planets; and Sakka, the chief of terrestrial
devas and who is also called Vâsava and Purindada, also came; all of
these ten bodies of devas, composed of as many sorts, who were of
different colours, etc.

   Subsequently the devas Sahabhû, shining like unto a flame of fire,
Ari.t.thakâ, and Rojâ, shining like the flowers of the Ummâ (Pontederia
hastaka), came; Varu.na, Dhamma, Accuta, <span id="page_295">p.
295</span> Anejaka, Suleya, Rucira came, also came Vasavanesi: all of
these ten bodies of devas, composed of as many sorts who are of various
colours, etc.

   Sama.nas, Mahâ-Sama.nas, Mânussas, and Uttama-Mânussas,
Khi.d.dâpadusikas came, also came Manopâdusikas. And the devas Hari,
those of Lohita came, also came Pâragas, Mahâ-pâragas: the whole of the
ten bodies of devas, etc.

   Sukka, Karumha, Aru.na, and Veghanasa came; Pamokkha called
Odâtagayha (from the whiteness of his body), and Vicakkhana are also
come. Sadamatta, Hâragaja, and Missaka, possessed of prosperity,
Pajjuna, who causes rain to pour in every direction, came thundering:
the whole of the ten bodies of devas, etc.

   Khemiyas (the devas of the) Tusita (heaven), the Yamas, and Katthaka
possessed of prosperity, Lambitaka, Lâma-se.t.tha, Joti (called so from
personal attractions), Asava, those of Nimmânarati (heaven) are come,
and also those of Parinimmita (heaven): all the ten bodies of devas,
etc.

   All these sixty kinds of devas who are of different colours and each
distinguished by a particular name have come, and if there be any other
(known by other colours and names), they have also come with those
enumerated above. They have come saying: "Let us see the arahat priests
who will never be born again, who are destitute of the stake (of lust,
anger and ignorance), who have crossed the (four) streams, and who are
free from passions, and also (Buddha) who has crossed the (four)
streams, who is called Nâga (from the circumstance of his never
committing an offence) and who shines like the moon free from darkness."
Subrahma and Paramatto, with their sons possessed of the faculty of
iddhi, and Tissa sanam-kumâra, came to the assembly of priests in the
forest. Are there any who are superior to the Mahâ-Brahmas in the
Brahma-worlds, possessed of great powers, of a vast body, prosperous,
thousands of such Brahmas are come. Among these ten chief Brahmas, each
of whom have control over a different body, have come; and in the midst
of them the Brahma called Harita has also <span id="page_296">p.
296</span> come attended (by ten thousand attendants). When all of the
devas headed by Inda, and all the Brahmas headed by Harita came, the
retinue of Mâra also came: look at the power of wicked Mâra! Mâra called
Mahâ-sena saying: "Come here, capture (them), tie (them), let them be
bound by lust, surround (them), suffer not any body to escape," and
striking the earth with his hands, and thereby producing a dreadful
shock, sent his black army to the midst of the devas. In the same manner
as rain does not fall after lightning and thunder, so Mâra finding his
own followers disobedient to him, and being greatly irritated, remained
silent. Buddha who is endowed with (five) eyes, knowing perfectly well
all that was transpiring, called his disciples who are devotedly
attached to his religion and addressed them thus: "Priests, the retinue
of Mâra is present, do you known {*sic*} them?" and they hearing the
words of Buddha prepared to enter into meditation. The army of Mâra
receded from among those free from lust, even so much as a hair in them
was not affected. Then Mâra saying: "All these (priests) having proved
victorious in the war of passions become intrepid, endowed with
prosperity, became famous among the people, and these disciples live
rejoicing with the arahats of the religion of Buddha," departed.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buddhist Articles](index)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="footnotes_page_290">p. 290</span>

<span id="page_290_note_1"></span>[1](#page_290_fr_1) The five eyes of
Buddha are, his divine eye, his human eye, his mental eye, his
omniscient eye, the eye of a Buddha i.e. knowledgc of Nibbâna.

<span id="footnotes_page_291">p. 291</span>

<span id="page_291_note_1"></span>[1](#page_291_fr_1) Literally inhuman
beings.

<span id="page_291_note_2"></span>[2](#page_291_fr_2) An epithet applied
to Buddha in allusion to his five faculties of perception explained
above. Literally one endowed with eyes.

<span id="page_291_note_3"></span>[3](#page_291_fr_3) Yakkha means deva
or god throughout this Sutta.

<span id="footnotes_page_292">p. 292</span>

<span id="page_292_note_1"></span>[1](#page_292_fr_1) The heavenly
musicians.

<span id="page_292_note_2"></span>[2](#page_292_fr_2) A class of
demi-gods.

<span id="page_292_note_3"></span>[3](#page_292_fr_3) Cobra capello with
superhuman powers who can assume the human form and intermarry with the
human race.

<span id="footnotes_page_293">p. 293</span>

<span id="page_293_note_1"></span>[1](#page_293_fr_1) Commonly called in
English devils, but answering to the demonia of the Greeks.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
