[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Northwest](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cht05)  [Next](cht07) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_51">p. 51</span>

# 3. AnêktcXô'lEmiX

There was a town the chief of which had died. His two children were
grown up; one was a girl and one a, boy. Early every morning the people
went out to hunt sea-otters. The girl was always in the stern of the
canoe. At dark they returned home. Five times they had gone hunting,
then it grew foggy. Her hair became wet and she swallowed the water
which dripped down from her hair. A long time the people remained there.
Then she became pregnant. Blue-Jay was the first to observe it. He said:
"Don't you notice it? He made his sister pregnant." Robin said: "Be
quiet, Blue-Jay, you will make our chief's children ashamed." "Ha, he is
the elder of us two and he ought to know better than I." After some time
she became stouter. "Heh, we will run," said Blue-Jay. "I am ashamed
because her brother made her pregnant. We will leave them; we will
move!" Then, indeed, the people believed Blue-Jay. Again the brother and
sister went hunting sea-otters. In the evening they came home. Now there
were no people and no houses. "Lo, they deserted us. Blue-Jay advised
them to do so." Then the brother continued: "Tell me who made you
pregnant?" She replied, "I do not know. Once when we went out hunting
sea-otters a mist came up and I swallowed the water which made me
qualmish." Then they searched for fire. But the people had poured water
into all the fires. The last house was that of their aunt, the Crow. It
also was taken away. They walked about and there they heard the
crackling of fire. The brother said to his sister: "Do you hear the
fire?" After awhile it crackled again. They found the place from where
the sound appeared to come. They dug into the ground and found a shell.
In the shell there was burning coal. "Oh," they said to each other, "our
aunt pitied us; she put the fire into the shell for us." Now they
started a fire. The next day they

<span id="page_52">p. 52</span>

built a small house. There they lived for a long time. One day a sea
breeze arose. Early in the morning the man rose and went down to the
beach. There he found ten cedar planks, each ten fathoms long, which had
drifted ashore. He went up to the house and said to his sister: "I have
found ten planks, each ten fathoms long." They went to the beach, hauled
them up to their house, and the brother made a large house. Then the
brother said: "What kind of a blanket will you make for your son?" In
the morning he went down to the beach and there he found two small
sea-otters. He said: "Oh, my poor nephew, this will be your blanket."
"He took them up to the house and said to his sister: "I found these
sea-otters." Then she was very glad. The brother said: "What soup are
you going to make for your son?" In the morning he arose and went down
to the beach. There he found a sea-lion. He skinned it and cut it, and
then they boiled it. Every day he went down to the beach, and every time
he found two sea-otters. And their house was full of sea-otter skins.
One morning he went to the beach; there was a whale. Then he ran back to
his sister and cried: "A whale is on the beach!" His sister said in
reply: "Every night the people on the other side of the ocean send us
food. Those supernatural people love me. My boy's father came. Now cut
the whale." Then he skinned it and cut it and they carried up the meat.

Now the Crow made herself ready to look for her nephew and her niece.
She launched her canoe and paddled across, wailing all the time. When
she had almost crossed the bay she discovered a house and saw smoke
rising. She went on. When she was near the shore she saw a chief sitting
on the roof of the house. \[The latter said to his sister, when he saw
the Crow coming:\] "Our aunt who pitied us is coming there." She arrived
and saw the whale on the beach. She \[was very hungry,\] went to the
whale and pulled at the meat. Then her nephew said: "Come up to the
house; why do you touch that rotten meat?" She replied: "Oh, I only
looked at it," and went up to the house. She entered and saw that it was
full of whale meat. She went right up to the child \[and wanted to take
it in her arms\], but the child began to cry. The sister said: "Oh, he
is afraid of your tears." They gave her water and she washed her face.
Then she tried again to take him, but still he cried. The sister said
"He, is afraid of your breath." Then she took water, cleaned her mouth
and took him again, but still he cried. Then the sister said to her
aunt: "Do you think he is a human being? Look here, he is the son of a
supernatural being. They gave us that whale to eat." "Oh," said the
Crow. They boiled whale meat for her and she ate it. After she had
finished eating she went home. They gave her two pieces of blubber which
she put into her mat.

The Crow went across the bay; and when she approached the town she
cried: "O, my sister's children, my sister's children, birds flew up

<span id="page_53">p. 53</span>

from you many times; eagles were eating you. O, my sister's children, my
sister's children, gulls were eating you. Ravens were eating you, O, my
sister's children." Now she came still nearer the town. Blue-Jay was
sitting outside and saw her coming. When she had nearly arrived she
cried again: "O, my sister's children, my sister's children, birds flew
up from you; crows were eating you." Then Blue-Jay shouted: "Do you not
notice? She names the Crow; she names the Crow." Now she landed and went
up to the house. Now all the people came into the Crow's house. They
asked her how she had found her sister's children. She replied and told
much. "I went across and I found their bodies full of birds which ate
them. All kinds of birds ate them." After she had finished, Blue-Jay was
the first to leave the house. He went to the rear of the house, where he
stayed. Now, the Crow was silent. Robin, who was her deceased husband's
brother, remained with her. They sat on opposite sides of the fire. She
had five children. Then she told him everything in a low voice, and
Blue-Jay listened outside. She pulled out the food which she had carried
home, cut it to pieces, and gave it to her children and to Robin. Her
youngest daughter choked \[when eating the blubber\]. Then Blue-Jay, who
had been peeping through the chinks of the wall, entered and slapped her
nape. The piece of whale, meat flew out of her month. Blue-Jay took it
up, went out, showed it to the people, and said: "Do you see? The Crow
fed me." He went to three houses showing it around, then he ate it.
After some time it grew dark. The people were very hungry.

Then Blue-Jay said to the chief of the town: "O, chief, the house \[of
the young man whom we deserted\] is full of whale meat. A supernatural
being loved his sister. He invites me, and he has invited the Crow and
Robin." Late in the evening Blue-Jay came out of the house, took his
large blanket \[and went to his elder brother, Robin,\] saying, "Robin,
let us sleep under one blanket; I always get cold." Robin replied:
"Ya-a, I always sleep alone, and do not want anyone with me; sleep there
at my feet." Now Blue-Jay lay down at Robin's feet. Blue-Jay remained
awake. When it was nearly morning Blue-Jay fell asleep. Now Robin and
Crow made a canoe \[ready\]. Then Robin and the Crow went to their canoe
and carried their property into it. Now Robin took a sharp stick and put
it in the ground at Blue-Jay's feet. Then Robin and the Crow went across
to the young man and to his sister, and left Blue-Jay alone. Early in
the morning when he awoke, he said: "Wake up, Robin," and kicked him;
but his feet struck the stick, and he hurt himself. "O, my feet!" he
cried. "They left me here alone." Then he went home to his children.
Crow and Robin crossed the bay and went up to the house of the young
man.

Early next morning Blue-Jay said: "Now, let us all go across." They made
themselves ready and went across. When they were in the middle of the
bay a heavy gale arose, and the people almost died. They

<span id="page_54">p. 54</span>

had to turn back. Five days \[they tried to cross the bay\], but every
time they were driven back. Then they got across. Now it began to snow,
and the people were covered with snow. They became very cold. Thus their
chief took revenge upon them. Then Blue-Jay went up to the house. \[He
found a knothole and called to Robin, who was in the house:\] "Robin,
open for me, I am cold. Bring me food, Robin, I am starving." Robin did
not reply. "Robin, take the tongs and put some food through this hole."
Robin was boiling meat. Then he took the tongs and put them into the
boiling kettle. He pushed the tongs through the knothole. Blue-Jay \[was
so hungry that he\] licked the fat off from the tongs. He said: "Robin,
Robin, tell the chief that I will give him my daughter in marriage, but
let him open the door." "Ya-a," said Robin; "What shall he do with her?
He wants your chief's daughter \[not yours\]." Then Blue-Jay ran down to
the beach and said to his chief: "The young man asks for your daughter
and for my daughter." The chief did not reply, and Blue-Jay ran back to
the house and said: "Robin, the chief says he will give him his
daughter." Five times Blue-Jay ran down to the beach and back to the
house. Then his chief spoke; he made his daughter ready, and put on her
dentalia, and so did Blue-Jay. Once more he ran up to the house and
said: "Robin, I have made my daughter ready." "Ya," replied Robin; "She
shall look after the chamber." Now they brought the chief's daughter up
to the house and they opened the door.

On the following morning the sister had disappeared. Lo! The
supernatural beings had taken her and her child away. The people
remained in this place and made new houses.

Once upon a time the Crow gathered many potentilla roots \[put them into
her canoe\] and crossed the sea. When she arrived at the country of the
supernatural beings they all came down to the beach. They searched among
her roots and found one ôguê'mEskôtit and one LE'môksin among them.
These they ate, and threw away the Crow's potentilla roots. Then she
went up to the house and met her niece, who said: "Do you think they are
men, that you bring them potentilla, roots? Gather ôguê'mEskôtit and
LE'môksin. When you come again bring all kinds of nice smelling roots,
and bring one small basket of potentilla roots for me." Then she said to
her: "Take this bitch along; it belongs to your grandson. When you come
near the shore say: 'Catch a whale, Q<u>!</u>acî'nEmicLX.'" "Yes," said
the Crow, and then she went home. When she was in the middle of the
ocean she said to the dog: "Catch a whale, Q<u>!</u>acî'nEmicLX. Do you
know indeed how to catch whales?" Then the bitch who lay in the stern of
the boat arose. A whale came up. She bit it. Then the canoe rocked
violently. "Hold it fast, Q<u>!</u>acî'nEmicLX." Then the Crow became
afraid and said: "Let go, let go, Q<u>!</u>acî'nEmicLX." Then she let go
the whale and lay down to sleep. The Crow landed \[and when she
arrived\], she had

<span id="page_55">p. 55</span>

lost her dog. She ran about and searched for it in. all the houses, but
did not find it. Then she \[was very sad and\] did not eat because she
liked her dog.

The Crow stayed here five days, and then again she gathered many roots
of plants. She gathered ôguê'mEskôtit and LE'môksin. She gathered all
kinds of nice smelling roots. She put potentilla roots in to one small
basket. Then she crossed again to the country of the supernatural
beings. Then they all came down to the beach. They \[took the nice
smelling roots and\] ate them right there at the beach. She carried the
potentilla roots up to her niece. Now she saw her dog, which was in the
house. \[Her niece said:\] "Do you think this is a common bitch? She
returns. Why did you say in the middle of the ocean: 'Take the whale?'
Therefore you became afraid. You must not say so until you are near the
shore. Do you think they gave her to you as a present? She always
returns. You will take her again when you go home. Do not search for her
when you have lost her. She provides you with food when you are going."
The Crow replied: "Yes." And when she went back she carried that bitch
along. "When you approach the land say: 'Catch a whale,
Q<u>!</u>acî'nEmicLX.'" Then she went home. The dog lay in the stern of
the canoe. When they were near the town the Crow said: "Catch a whale,
Q<u>!</u>acî'nEmicLX." She did not move. Then the Crow took some water,
poured it over her and said: "Catch a whale; are you indeed able to
catch a whale? "When they were quite near the shore she said again:
"Catch a whale, Q<u>!</u>acî'nEmicLX." Then she arose and caught a
whale. Again the canoe rocked. She said: "Hold it fast,
Q<u>!</u>acî'nEmicLX." Sometimes she did not say it right and cried:
"Let go the whale, Q<u>!</u>acî'nEmicLX." Then the whale drifted ashore.
The people went down to the beach and cut the whale. They carried the
meat up to house.

After some time the chief said: "I desire to go and see my sister." Now
the people made themselves ready and started in a large canoe. When they
came near the country of the supernatural beings their chief said: "Take
care, they will test us." \[When they had gone a little farther\] the
whole sea was covered with ice. He said to his people: "We will land
after awhile." Now Blue-Jay became very cold, but he said: "I never get
cold, I will stay in the canoe." He jumped into the water and sank out
of sight at once. Then a person shouted on shore: "Ehehiu, \[Blue-Jay\]
killed himself." Then the chief arose in the canoe; he took the ice and
threw it away. Then that person shouted: "Ehehiu, how he threw away the
ice of the supernatural beings." "'Ehehiu,' you say, I threw it away;
what made me fall down?" \[said Blue-Jay\]. Then they went up to the
house. The chief said: "Do not enter at once. After a while they will
open their house." Now there was a sea-lion and a sea-cow (?), one at
each side of the door. They stood in the doorway. Now Blue-Jay became
very cold. He tried to jump into the house and the animals bit him. They
had almost been unable

<span id="page_56">p. 56</span>

to recover him. Then the chief stepped up and he took one sea monster in
each hand and threw them away. "Ehehiu," shouted the person \["how he
throws away the sea lions of the supernatural people"\]. "'Ehehiu', you
say; I threw away those who bit me," said Blue-Jay. Then they all
entered the house and stayed there. There were no people in it except
the chief's sister. \[Blue-Jay said to his brother Robin:\] "What will
they give us to eat, Robin?" "Oh, be quiet," replied Robin. Then said
Blue-Jay: "Our chief's fire makes noise just as this here." There was
only one log in the house. Then the person shouted: "Come down to the
fire you who splits wood with his beak." Then a being came out \[from
under the bed\] with a long beak who split the log. "Robin," said
Blue-Jay, "that was our great-great-grandfather's slave." "I do not know
that he was our slave; you alone have slaves." Then a fire was made and
the whole house was full of smoke. The person shouted: "Come down to the
fire, Smoke-eater." "Robin," said Blue-Jay, he also was our
(great-great-grandfather's) slave; he always carried me on his back and
led you by the hand." "I do not know that he was our slave; you alone
have slaves." Then the smoke man came down and \[they saw that\] he had
an enormous belly. He stepped into the middle of the house and swallowed
all the smoke. The house became light. Then they brought a small dish
and one cut of meat was in it. "Robin," said Blue-Jay, "that is too
little; that is not enough for all of us; I certainly shall not get
enough." Then a person shouted: "Come down to the fire you who cuts
whale with his beak." Then a person came to the fire with a very sharp
beak, who began to cut meat. He cut and cut until the whole dish was
full. Then he blew upon it and it became a large canoe full of meat.
They boiled it, and when it was nearly done they all went out and their
chief took reeds. These he put into their months \[and pushed them right
through them\] so that they came out at the anus. They all did so, also
Blue-Jay. Then they entered again and sat down. They made small holes
where they sat and began to eat. They swallowed the meat and it went
right out at the anus. Blue-Jay arose and there lay his anus. "Look
here, Robin, my anus fell down right here!" Then the people took him by
his arms, carried him out of the house, and pulled the reed out of his
mouth. Then the chief and Blue-Jay entered again; he took three
spoonfuls and he had enough. Then the people continued to eat and the
whale meat became less and less. Then they went out, took out the reeds
and reentered. They continued to eat. Now they ate in the right way and
finished all they had boiled. Then a person cried: "Ehehiu, how they eat
all the meat of the supernatural beings!" Then Blue-Jay said: "Did you
think I could not finish what you gave me to eat?"

Now they stayed in the house. Blue-Jay went out. He was oversatiated. He
looked and saw a patch of kinnikinnik berries. He began to eat them,
when a person called: "Oh, Blue-Jay eats the excrements

<span id="page_57">p. 57</span>

of the supernatural people;" whereupon Blue-Jay said: "'Ehehiu', you
say; do you think I eat them? I merely look at your kinnikinnik
berries."

They stayed there. After awhile a person came out of the house and said:
"They wish to play with you; you will dive." Blue Jay said: "We always
dive in our country." "Do you think they do as you are accustomed to?"
said the woman. "When they dive the one dies and the other one has won."
She said to them: "Blue-Jay shall dive." Blue-Jay went down to the water
and threw the bushes out of his canoe into the water. Then he and the
diver fought against each other. They dived. Blue-Jay hid his club under
his blanket. They jumped into the water and after awhile Blue Jay's
breath gave out. He came up and hid under the bushes which he had thrown
out of his canoe. There he breathed and dived again. He said to the
diver: "Where are you?" "Here I am," she replied. After awhile his
breath gave out again. Once more he came up under the bushes. Four times
he did so, and then he became tired. He went to look for the diver. He
found her biting the bottom of the sea. She had her eyes closed.
Blue-Jay took his club and hit her on the nape. The people saw something
floating on the water and then a person said: "There is Blue-Jay." He
was, however, in the bushes which he had thrown out of his canoe. After
a little while Blue-Jay jumped ashore and a person shouted: "Ehehiu, how
Blue-Jay won over the diver of the supernatural beings." "'Ehehiu', you
say; we always dive so in our country," said Blue Jay.

Then again a person stepped out and said: "They want to play with you;
you will climb up a tree together." Then Blue-Jay said: "We climb every
day in our country." But the young woman remarked: "Do you think they
are just like Indians? They will place a piece of ice upright, then you
will have to climb up the ice. When a climber falls down he breaks to
pieces and the other one wins." Then they said to Blue Jay: "You shall
climb up." They placed upright a piece of ice which was so long that it
reached to the sky. Blue-Jay made himself ready and tied his bearskin
blanket around his belly. \[The supernatural beings sent a\] chipmunk
who made himself ready \[to climb up the ice\]. They began to climb, and
when they had reached a certain height Blue-Jay grew tired. \[Then he
let go of the ice\] and flew upward. \[When he had rested\] he again
took hold of the ice. Then he grew tired again. He looked back to the
one with whom he was racing and saw her climbing up with her eyes shut.
She did not grow tired. Then Blue-Jay took his club \[from under his
blanket\] and struck her on the nape. The chipmunk fell down. The people
looked up and saw a person falling down. "Ah, that is Blue-Jay! There he
falls down." \[But when they saw the chipmunk\] a person shouted:
"Ehehiu, how they won over the chipmunk of the supernatural beings."

<span id="page_58">p. 58</span>

\[paragraph continues\] "'Ehehiu', you say; we always climb in our
country." Then their chief won two sea-otters.

Then they stayed awhile longer. Then again a person came out and said:
"They want to have a shooting match with you." Blue-Jay said: "We have
shooting matches every day in our country." The young woman said: "Do
you think they are like Indians? They place people against each other.
One stands on one side, the other on the other. \[They shoot at each
other,\] the one dies, and the other wins." Then they said to the
Beaver: "You stand up \[on our side\]." They took a grindstone and tied
it to his belly. They took another one and tied it to his back. The
supernatural beings made the loon stand up on their side. Then \[the
beaver and the loon\] took their arrows and the loon shot at the beaver.
The arrow broke and fell down. Then the beaver shot at the loon. "Uhû,"
said he when he was struck by the arrow. Then the loon shot again. "Ha,"
he said, and the arrow broke and fell down. Then he shot again at the
loon. "Uhû," he said, then fell on his back and died. "Ehehiu! How they
won over the bird of the supernatural people." Blue-Jay spoke: "You say
'ehehiu'; we have shooting matches in our country every day."

They stayed there some time longer. Then again a person came out of the
house and said: "They want to play with you; you will sweat in the sweat
house." Blue-Jay spoke: "We always sweat in our country." Then the young
woman said: "They always heat caves, and when they are hot, they enter
them. The one party will die, the other will win." Then their chief
said: "We must go into the cave." Now the supernatural beings heated the
caves. They got hot. There were two caves in a rock. \[The chief and
some of his people\] went into one, the supernatural beings went into
the other. Then the caves were closed. The chief, however, took some ice
and put it under their feet. They stood on it. After a little while a
sound was heard like the bursting of a shell that is being roasted. Five
times that sound was heard. Then the caves were opened; first that of
Blue Jay's people--they were all alive; next that of the supernatural
beings--five of them were dead. They had won again. "Ehehiu! How they
won over the supernatural beings." "'Ehehiu', you say," replied
Blue-Jay, we use the sweat house every day in our country."

Now the chief's brother-in-law said: "Let us catch whales." The sister
told him: "Take care; they will try to put you to shame. This is their
last attempt at you." In the evening they went to catch whales. She took
Blue-Jay and put him into her right armpit. Then she took Robin and put
him into her left armpit \[and told them\]: "Now I shall keep you here;
do not say 'ehehiu,' do not look!" Then in the evening they all went
down to the beach. She said to her elder brother: "Four whales will pass
you, but do not throw your harpoon; when the fifth comes, then harpoon
it." Now the supernatural people stood there. The young woman took a
torch in order to help her brother.

<span id="page_59">p. 59</span>

\[paragraph continues\] After a while a person shouted: "Yuyayuya, a
flatfish whale comes." \[The chief did not stir.\] After a while a
person shouted: "Yuyayuya, an albatross whale comes; raise your
harpoons." Blue-Jay tried to look \[from under the arms of the woman\].
At once her torch began to flicker, and she pressed Blue-Jay, saying:
"Do not look!" Then again a person shouted: "Yuyayuya, an elk whale
comes; raise your harpoons." \[The chief did not stir.\] Next a person
shouted: "Yuyayuya, a sperm-whale comes; raise your harpoons." Then the
sister said to him: "Now, look out; now the real whale will come." Then
a person shouted: "Yuyayuya, the whale of the supernatural people
comes." Blue-Jay tried to look \[from his hiding place\]. Then the torch
of the young woman began to flicker and was almost extinguished. The
people said: "Why does AnêktcXô'lEmiX's torch always flicker?" The
person shouted once more: "Yuyayuya, the whale of the supernatural
people comes." Then AnêktcXô'lEmiX said to her brother: "Now the real
whale will come." The chief harpooned it and threw it ashore. "Ehehiu!
How they threw ashore the whale of the supernatural people." Blue-Jay
replied: "Ehehiu," and at once the torch was extinguished, and Blue-Jay
\[fell down from the armpit of the woman and\] was drowned. He drifted
away. Thus they won again. Their chief won again. Then they went home.
AnêktcXô'lEmiX said: "Coil up this rope in your canoe; when you get
across tie Robin's blanket to it." \[Then they started. When they were
in the middle of the ocean the supernatural people\] created a strong
gale against those going home. Now they tied \[Mink\] on to the gunwale
of their canoe \[thus making it higher and preventing its being
swamped\]. They almost perished; finally they reached their home
\[safely. Then they tied Robin's blanket to the rope. AnêktcXô'lEmiX
pulled it back, and when she found the blanket at the end of the rope
she knew that her brother had reached home safely\].

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 4. The Salmon](cht07)
