[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Northwest](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cht14)  [Next](cht16) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_147">p. 147</span>

# 12. The Skunk

A chieftainess sang her conjurer's song. She made a large house and
invited the people. The people landed. Blue-Jay was the chorus leader of
the chieftainess. "Who are those outside who want to dance?" "Ah, the
maggots; they will dance." Now the maggots entered; they sang: "We make
move the rotten meat; we make move the rotten meat." Blue-Jay joined
their song and they gave him a mountain goat blanket in payment. He said
to his wife: "Put it on, old woman." But she replied; "Llop, Llop, nêq,
nêq, tcu, tcu." "Certainly," said Blue-Jay, "when conjurers assemble it
is better not to put on beautiful clothing." Now other people sang in
front of the door. "Who are those who want to dance?" "Ah, the geese;
they want to dance." Now the geese entered; they sang: "We pull out the
sea-grass, the sea-grass, the sea-grass, and it drifts away." They gave
Blue-Jay in payment a blanket made of geese skins. Other people stood at
the door. "Who are those who want to dance?" "Ah, the elks; they want to
dance." Now they entered and sang: "We hiss on bluffs; we make z-z-z on
bluffs." Blue-Jay joined their song: "You hiss on bluffs." They gave him
a blanket made of the skin of a young elk in payment. He said to his
wife: "Put it on, old woman." She replied: "Llop, Llop, nêq, nêq, tcu,
tcu." "Certainly," said Blue-Jay, "when conjurers assemble it is better
not to put on beautiful clothing." Again people stood at the door. "Who
are those who want to dance?" "The wolves; they want to dance." They
entered and sang: "We carry deer-fawns in our months; we have our faces
blackened." Blue-Jay joined their song and they gave him a wolf blanket
in payment.

<span id="page_148">p. 148</span>

The chieftainess, the skunk, was singing by herself: "Blue-Jay's and my
ancestors used to keep company." Blue-Jay said to his brother: "Robin,
go out, I shall speak to her." Robin replied: "No, be quiet, do not
speak to her, she will say herself what she resolves to do. Do not speak
to her."

Then more people stood in front of the door. "Ah, who are those who want
to dance?" "The grizzly bears." Now the grizzly bears danced. They
danced a long time in the house. Then a person said outside: "When will
they go out; do they think they alone want to dance?" Then the chief of
the grizzly bears said: "Who is talking there? I shall tear him to
pieces; I shall eat him." "I am talking; I have a braid on one side of
my head only. When I enter a man in the morning he must die before
noon." Then the grizzly bear said to his people: "Let us go out and let
them dance. Behold the arrows are growling."

Next the birds Ênts<u>!</u>x danced. They sang in a rapid movement: "Our
legs are small, but we make the ground shake." Blue-Jay said: "Ha, how
miserable are your legs, they will make the ground shake! Be quiet, you
bad people." The birds danced and after a little while the house began
to shake. Blue-Jay arose and said: "Slowly, slowly, slowly, younger
brothers, the house will fall." The birds finished dancing, and next the
gray cranes began to dance. Coyote was their husband. He sang his
shaman's song, "Do not look back, younger sister, because you cause our
children to make mistakes." Then he bit one of the children and tore off
his neck. After they finished dancing the rabbits came and sang: "Step
aside, step aside, post, heha, heha, I will shoot you, heha, heha!" He
spanned his bow and Blue-Jay said: "Step aside for my younger brother,
post, heha, else he will shoot you, heha!" They gave him a blanket made
of rabbit skins. \[Blue-Jay gave it to his wife and said:\] "Put it on,
old woman." She replied: "Llop, Llop, nêq, nêq, tcu, tcu." "O, yes,"
remarked Blue-Jay, "when conjurers assemble it is better not to put on
beautiful clothing." Now the chieftainess continued to sing her
conjurer's song: "Blue-Jay's and my ancestors used to keep company,
m-m-m-m." Again Blue-Jay said to his brother: "Go out, Robin, I am
hungry. She shall kill the whale quickly." Robin replied: "Iä, do you
think you alone see this? She will say herself what she wants to do."
Five times Blue-Jay said to his elder brother to go out, but Robin did
not leave the house. Then Blue-Jay shouted: "The skunk is a wind-maker;
she will make sick those whom she invited to the dance." She made wind
and the whale fell down dead right there. Blue-Jay was blown away and he
was caught in a knot-hole in the wall, in which he stuck. Now the people
exit the whale. Blue-Jay cried: "Take me out, Robin, take me out." When
the whale was all cut, Robin went up and took him out. Then Blue-Jay cut
the meat only.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 13. Robin and Blue-Jay](cht16)
