[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Northwest](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cht25)  [Next](cht27) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_236">p. 236</span>

# The Elk Hunter

A youth was in the habit of setting traps. He always killed bears. One
year he had set his traps \[as usual\], and when he went to look after
them \[he heard\] a woman crying in a trap. He reached her. Her hand was
caught in the trap. She was a pretty woman. Her hair was brown, her feet
and her hands were tattooed. He opened the trap and took her hand out of
it. She said to him: "You will excel all the [people](errata.htm#0). You
have caught even me in your trap. You will be a great hunter." The youth
said: "I shall carry you to our town." Thus he spoke to his supernatural
helper. "I shall show you to the Indians." Now he carried her home. His
relatives saw her and all died. He died also.

After many years another boy saw her. He had no father and no mother. He
was poor. He was a small boy. She said to him: "When you have grown a
little larger, you will excel all hunters. I did not tell the first
Indian \[not to show me\] and behold, he showed me to the people. When
you go elk hunting carry only a stick in your hand and paint that
stick." The boy grew up and became a youth. Then he sang:

"I did not tell him thus, the first one, and behold, he showed me to the
Indians.  
I did not tell him thus, the first one. Behold!"

He also sang:

"If the orphan boy remembers what is told of olden times,  
If the orphan boy remembers what is told of olden times,  
He shall excel all others."

The people helped him singing. An old man was brought there who came to
listen. He had been a hunter. He listened to the singer and said: "Oh,
help our boy sing; he saw a supernatural being. He saw

<span id="page_237">p. 237</span>

the hunter spirit." He sang five days. Cedar bark was dyed red and put
on him. A stick was painted red and given to him. Then he went up the
river. He went a long distance. He sang when he was going into the
woods. Now he drove the elks \[toward the water\]. His relatives had
remained in the town. One of them said: "An elk is coming down to the
water." They took their arrows. Another one came; again one and again
one came. They counted them, but when they had counted seventy they lost
the number. The old man said: "Let the elks alone; do not shoot them;
perhaps the boy who sings is driving these elks." They stood near the
water and the opening was quite full of them. Then the boy came down
singing. He took that stick and pointed seaward to the water. The elks
stood there a short while and then they swam seaward. When the boy came
to the sea he shouted, and all the elks died. Now he called the wind to
blow landward and a northerly wind arose. The elks drifted ashore, and
the beach in front of the town was full of them. Now his relatives went
down to the beach. They cut up only the fat ones. The lean ones were
skinned merely. Then the houses of his relatives became full. Now,
whenever he went to hunt elk, he carried only a stick, and shouted. As
soon as an elk met him it died. He excelled all hunters,

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Pregnancy and Birth](cht27)
