[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Northwest](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cht34)  [Next](cht36.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_273">p. 273</span>

# War Between Quileute And Clatsop

A youth at Clatsop was sent to bathe at Nakôt<u>!</u>â't. After five
days he returned, going along the beach. In the evening he approached
Clatsop and came around the point. Then he looked landward and saw many
canoes lying side by side. "Where did these canoes come from?" he
thought; "I will turn back." He was going to turn back, then many people
pursued him. The beach was full of people. He looked in the direction
where he wanted to go. Now there also the people went down to the beach.
They cut him off and he was surrounded. They all held spears in their
hands. They threw the spears at him. He jumped up and they missed him,
the spears passing below him. "Ha, ha!" said the people. They threw
their spears again and aimed higher. He stooped and they missed him, the
spears passing above him. Again the people said "Ha, ha!" Now he jumped
right through them and escaped. They pursued him. They threw spears at
him, but he jumped high. He escaped and arrived at Clatsop. The youth
had no mother and no father; they were dead. He lived with his
grandfather. Now it was evening when he came back to Clatsop. The
Tillamook stood there and were dancing. "What are you doing?" he said.
"Take your arrows. We shall be attacked. The beach is full of people.
Make yourselves ready." "Eia, he lies," said the people. "He wanted to
see the ghosts and became frightened." Then the youth said to his
grandfather, "Take your blanket. Let us go inland and hide ourselves."
Then he and his grandfather went inland to hide. Now the Tillamook
danced. At midnight they lay down. When the dawn of the day approached,
an attack was made on the village. The

<span id="page_274">p. 274</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Tillamook who slept outside were all killed. Now
they attacked the houses. Only a few were killed in the upper half of
the town, when the people awoke. The Clatsop awoke. Now the \[enemy
retired and\] carried away the children. The Quileute carried away many
boys. Now a person ran up the river to inform the people at Konô'pê. Now
he told them what had happened; they took their arrows and ran down the
river. The Quileute took away the nets. Now the people fought, and the
Quileute were driven away. One half of them were killed. Then \[the dead
ones\] were carried into the canoes and they launched their canoes. Part
they left on the shore.

The Clatsop took those canoes and launched them. They went into the
canoes of the Quileute and pursued them. They shot their arrows at them.
Then the Quileute threw a boy into the water. They struck him on his
head and he was drowned. They threw another one into the water and
struck him on his head. He swam, and the Clatsop took him into their
canoe when they reached him. Thus many boys were thrown into the water.
Part survived and part were drowned. Now they passed Point Canby. The
Clatsop pursued them on the open sea. Now only three or four men
survived in each canoe, and a few canoes only were left. Then the chief
of the Clatsop said, "We will return. We have killed a great many." Now
the Clatsop returned and the Quileute went home. They arrived at
Quenaiult. Their canoes were full of corpses. They placed them upright
and put on their hats. Then the survivors went ashore, where they were
fed by the Quenaiult. The Quileute ate. Now the Quenaiult carried food
to their relatives to the canoes. Behold, they were dead! The Quileute
had lied because they were ashamed \[that so many of their number had
been killed\].

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The First Ship Seen by the Clatsop](cht36.md)
