[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Northwest](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cht30)  [Next](cht32) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_262">p. 262</span>

# Whaling

When the people of Sealand find a whale they tell a youth to go to the
town and to inform the people. A person who has to observe taboos is
asked to go up and down \[in his canoe\] below the whale. Then he goes
up and down below the whale. Thus also a person who cohabited the
preceding night goes up and down below the whale. If no person who has
to observe taboos would go up and down, it would drift away. Those who
found the whale do not cut it; they wait for the chief. All the people
reach the whale. Then the chief takes a stick and measures the whale
from the head to the tail. Then he tells the people: "You will cut here;
you will cut there." It is distributed among those people. The common
people cut from the tail end. When it is all cut, it is carried to the
town into the houses. When the whale is measured, the chief tells the
people to make the \[measuring\] sticks two spans and one hand width
long, if the whale is large\[; two spans wide if the whale is smaller\].
The people are told: "You cut here," and they cut the whale. Everything
is done this way. A cut two spans and one hand width large is exchanged
for one blanket, or for a string of dentalia five shells longer than a
fathom. When a cut two spans large is sold it is exchanged for a
ground-hog blanket.

When travelers from Chehalis find a whale it is taken back from them. If
it is found at Oysterville, it belongs to the people of Sealand; when it
is found north of Oysterville, it belongs to the Willapa. When the
people of Sealand find a whale north of Oysterville, it is claimed by
the Willapa. If the Willapa find one south of Oysterville, it is claimed
by the people of Sealand.

When a person who has taboos sees a whale nearly drifting ashore, it
will drift out to sea again. This happens with one who has cohabited the
preceding night, with a menstruating woman, with a girl who is
menstruant for the first time, and with a murderer. People who have
taboos do not go to the beach. When they go often to the beach, no whale
will be found and the people get hungry.

When a whale is found in Chehalis all the Nisal and Willapa go to buy
whale meat. When a whale is found in Sealand, all the Chehalis go to buy
its meat.

When the people are starving, a person who has a supernatural helper of
the sea sings to bring a whale. No woman who has her regular menses
enters, no young man; else a person might see the singing

<span id="page_263">p. 263</span>

who has cohabited the preceding night. Therefore, also, no woman must
enter, as she might become menstruant in the house where they sing. Only
old people, boys, and young girls help sing. For five days he sings.
Then a youth is sent and told to look seaward. Five times he is sent;
then, indeed, he finds a whale adrift. When a man who has cohabited the
preceding night enters the house in which the singing goes on, the
supernatural helper vanishes at once. Thus also when a menstruant woman
enters. The singer is covered with down. He places a pole upright on the
beach and says: "Here a whale will drift ashore," and, indeed, it drifts
ashore there after he has sang five days. The name of the supernatural
helper of the sea is Ikê'tal.

When the Clatsop find a whale, and there are two people, they make holes
\[in the skin\] and tie their straps to it. If they have no strap they
take kelp. Each ties as many straps to it as he has relatives. Then they
cut the whale. They cut much. Now they send one man to bring word to the
town. Then the people go and all cut it. They will not cut where a strap
has been tied to it. When the man arrives for whom the strap has been
tied to the whale, he cuts at that place. If one man cuts at the strap
of another one, they will fight. Those who come last take the lower side
of the whale. All those people sell their whale meat. The pieces are not
cut--when they are large they are left large, when they are small they
are left small. Small ones are not expensive. Large ones are exchanged
for a blanket. If there is a strong woman who can carry several cuts,
she does so and is paid \[for her services\]. Sometimes she helps three
people; when she is strong she may help four people. Thus also is a
youth paid who helps the people carrying several cuts of meat. The
Clatsop always eat very early. When a person has not yet eaten and they
learn \[that a whale has stranded\] and they run there, he gets faint
and is left behind. He comes too late to the whale and finds that only
little is left. He may not arrive until the cutting is finished. The
Clatsop always carry their straps and knives, which are tied together,
and their mats. All do thus.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Elk Hunting](cht32)
