[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Northwest](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cht29)  [Next](cht31) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_256">p. 256</span>

# Death

When a person dies who has many relatives, much property, and many
slaves, his relatives tie \[dentalia\] to his body. Two young men are
selected to prepare the corpse. If \[the deceased\] had a good canoe,

<span id="page_257">p. 257</span>

he is placed into it and it is put up. It is painted and two holes are
made in its stern. The people go down to the beach and wash and comb
themselves. They cut their hair--men, women, and children. After they
have cut their hair, they take other names. Women, men, and children
change their names. Then the dentalia of the deceased are distributed.
His relatives take them as well as his slaves and canoes. If the
deceased liked one of his relatives \[particularly\] he would say. "He
shall take my wife after I am dead." If he had two wives he speaks in
this way to two persons. Now the women are taken to his relatives. When
a woman loves her husband and she is near her death, she will say to her
elder sister: "Your brother-in-law shall marry you;" or she may say so
to her younger sister. When an old man dies and his widow is young, she
is taken to his younger brother. In the same way \[when and old woman
dies and her widower is young, he is given his wife's younger sister\].

When there is a chief, he takes the \[deceased chief's name a long time,
after the death of the latter\]. His relative takes his name. Two people
are told to name him. Now two people give him the name. They are given
much property \[for performing this service\]. This is done when a man,
a woman, or a child is named. After a year the corpse is cleaned. Two
young men are hired, who also rearrange the canoe and paint it.

When a man dies who has a guardian spirit, his baton is placed next to
the canoe. When a shaman dies, his baton is placed next to the canoe.
His rattle of bear claws is hung on to the stern of the canoe. When he
had a rattle made of shell, it is hung in the same place. When a shaman
has many children, his baton is carried far into the woods. His rattle
is carried there also. When a brave dies, his headdress is placed on top
of a pole near his canoe burial. When he had a shell rattle, it is hung
on to the canoe. When a woman dies, only her coat is hung on the canoe
burial.

When anybody takes the dentalia away from a corpse, the person who took
them is killed. When anybody makes fun of a canoe burial, and \[the
relatives of the deceased\] learn about it, he must give away many
dentalia, else he is killed. If he gives away many dentalia he is not
killed.

When the child of a chief dies, he becomes very sad. He says to his
relatives: "Let us go to the chief of that town." The chief tries to
please him. Now the people go to another town. Then he is given three
slaves, canoes, and dentalia by the chief whom he visits. He receives
many dentalia. He distributes all these dentalia and canoes among his
relatives. He keeps only two slaves. If \[the chief of\] that town does
not give him any dentalia they fight. Many people are killed, and now a
feud originates. When a relative \[of the chief\] who has given dentalia
dies, he assembles all his relatives and goes to the

<span id="page_258">p. 258</span>

man whom he had given dentalia. Now the same is done \[as before\]. They
give him slaves, dentalia, and canoes. His heart becomes glad.

When a chief dies, his relatives are sad. They speak to each other and
go to war. They kill the chief of another town.

When a person has been killed, an old man who has a guardian spirit is
asked to work over the murderer. The old man takes coal and mixes it
with grease. He puts it onto the face \[of the murderer\]. He gives him
a head ring of cedar bark. Cedar bark is also tied around his ankles and
knees and around his wrists. For five days he does not drink water. He
does not sleep, and does not lie down. He always, stands. At, night he
walks about and whistles on bone whistles. He always says ä ä ä. For
five days he does not wash his face. Then on the next morning the old
man washes his face. He takes off that coal. He removes the black paint
from his face. He puts red paint on his face. A little coal is mixed
with the red paint. The old man puts this again on to his face.
Sometimes this is done by an old man, sometimes by an old woman. The
cedar bark which was tied to his legs and arms is taken off and buckskin
straps are tied around his arms and his legs. Now, after five days he is
given water. He is given a bucket, out of which he drinks. Now food is
roasted for him, until it is burned. When it is burned black it is given
to him. He eats standing. He takes five mouthsful, and no more. After
thirty days he is painted with new red paint. Good red paint is taken.
Now he carries his head ring and his bucket to a spruce tree and hangs
it on top of the tree. \[Then the tree will dry up.\] People never eat
in company of a murderer. He never eats sitting, but always standing.
When he sits down \[to rest\] he kneels on one leg. The murderer never
looks at a child and must not see people while they are eating.

When a woman's husband dies she becomes a widow. Then she goes up the
river. \[There she stays\] sometimes one day, sometimes two days. She
bathes. For thirty days she does not eat fresh food. She also does not
look at a child or at a sick person. She bathes every day. She rubs her
body with sweet-smelling herbs. She never wears a good blanket. Her
blanket is always bad. For one year she must not laugh. Then her dead
husband's relatives tell her: "Now be glad; your brother-in-law will
marry you;" then she puts on a good blanket. When she laughs shortly
after becoming a widow, her husband's relatives are not pleased. When
she marries again quickly, they ask a shaman to send disease to her and
she dies. When a widow has a child which is small, her dead husband's
relatives say to her soon: "Now be glad," and, indeed, she gets glad.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Whaling](cht31)
