<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](j1016)  [Next](j1018) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Jataka, Volume I*, tr. by Robert Chalmers, \[1895\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_44">p. 44</span> <span id="an_j014"></span>

### No. 14.

### VĀTAMIGA-JĀTAKA.

"*There's nothing worse*." This story was told by the Master while at
Jetavana, about the Elder Tissa, called Direct-alms the Less. Tradition
says that, while the Master was dwelling at the Bamboo-grove near
Rājagaha, the scion of a wealthy house, Prince Tissa by name, coming one
day to the Bamboo-grove and there hearing a discourse from the Master,
wished to join the Brotherhood, but, being refused because his parents
would not give their consent, obtained their consent by following
Raṭṭha-pāla's <span id="fr_56"></span>[1](#fn_56) example and refusing
food for seven days, and finally took the vows with the Master.

About a fortnight after admitting this young man, the Master repaired
from the Bamboo-grove to Jetavana, where the young nobleman undertook
the Thirteen Obligations <span id="fr_57"></span>[2](#fn_57) and passed
his time in going his round for alms from house to house, omitting none.
Under the name of the Elder Tissa Direct-alms the Less, he became as
bright and shining a light in Buddhism as the moon in the vault of
heaven.

A festival having been proclaimed at this time at Rājagaha, the Elder's
mother and father laid in a silver casket the trinkets he used to wear
as a-layman, and took it to heart, bewailing thus,--"At other festivals
our son used to wear this or that bravery as he kept the festival; and
he, our only son, has been taken away by the sage Gotama to the town of
Sāvatthi. Where is our son sitting now or standing?" Now a slave-girl
who came to the house, noticed the lady of the house weeping, and asked
her why she was weeping; and the lady told her all.

"What, madam, was your son fond of?" "Of such and such a thing," replied
the lady. "Well, if you will give me authority in this house, I'll fetch
your son back." "Very good," said the lady in assent, and gave the girl
her expenses and despatched her with a large following, saying, "Go, and
manage to fetch my son back."

So away the girl rode in a palanquin to Sāvatthi, where she took up her
residence in the street which the Elder used to frequent for alms.
\[157\] Surrounding herself with servants of her own, and never allowing
the Elder to see his father's people about, she watched the moment when
the Elder entered the street and at once bestowed on him an alms of
victual and drink. And when she had bound him in the bonds of the
craving of taste, she got him eventually to seat himself in the house,
till she knew that her gifts of food as alms had put him in her power.
Then she feigned sickness and lay down in an inner chamber.

In the due course of his round for alms at the proper time, the Elder
came to the door of her house; and her people took the Elder's bowl and
made him sit down in the house.

When he had seated himself, he said, "Where is the lay-sister?" "She's
ill, sir; she would be glad to see you."

Bound as he was by the bonds of the craving of taste, he broke his vow
and obligation, and went to where the woman was lying.

<span id="page_45">p. 45</span>

Then she told him the reason of her coming, and so wrought on him that,
all because of his being hound by the bonds of the craving of taste, she
made him forsake the Brotherhood; when he was in her power, she put him
in the palanquin and came back with a large following to Rājagaha again.

All this was noised abroad. Sitting in the Hall of Truth, the Brethren
discussed the matter, saying, "Sirs, it is reported that a slave-girl
has bound in the bonds of the craving of taste, and has carried off, the
Elder Tissa the Less, called Direct-alms." Entering the Hall the Master
sat down on his jewelled seat, and said, "What, Brethren, is the subject
of discussion in this conclave?" They told him the incident.

"Brethren," said he, "this is not the first time that, in bondage to the
craving of taste, he has fallen into her power; in bygone days too he
fell into her power in like manner." And so saying, he told this story
of the past.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

Once on a time when Brahmadatta was reigning in Benares he had a
gardener named Sañjaya. Now there came into the king's pleasaunce a
Wind-antelope, which fled away at the sight of Sañjaya, but the latter
let it go without terrifying the timid creature. After several visits
the antelope used to roam about in the pleasaunce. Now the gardener was
in the habit of gathering flowers and fruits and taking them day by day
to the king. Said the king to him one day, "Have you noticed anything
strange, friend gardener, in the pleasaunce?" "Only, sir, that a
Wind-antelope has come about the grounds." "Could you catch it, do you
think?" "Oh, yes; if I had a little honey, I'd bring it right into your
majesty's palace."

The king ordered the honey to be given to the man and he went off with
it to the pleasaunce, where he first anointed with the honey the grass
at the spots frequented by the antelope, \[158\] and then hid himself.
When the antelope came and tasted the honied grass it was so snared by
the lust of taste that it would go nowhere else but only to the
pleasaunce. Marking the success of his snare, the gardener began
gradually to show himself. The appearance of the man made the antelope
take to flight for the first day or two, but growing familiar with the
sight of him, it gathered confidence and gradually came to eat grass
from the man's hand. He, noting that the creature's confidence had been
won, first strewed the path as thick as a carpet with broken boughs;
then tying a gourd full of honey on his shoulder and sticking a bunch of
grass in his waist-cloth, he kept dropping wisps of the honied grass in
front of the antelope till at last he got it right inside the palace. No
sooner was the antelope inside than they shut the door. At sight of men
the antelope, in fear and trembling for its life, dashed to and fro
about the hall; and the king coming down from his chamber above, and
seeing the trembling creature, said, "So timid is the Wind-antelope that
for a whole week it will not revisit a spot where it has so much as seen
a man; and if it has once been frightened anywhere, it never goes back
there again all its life long. Yet,

<span id="page_46">p. 46</span>

ensnared by the lust of taste, this wild thing from the jungle has
actually come to a place like this. Truly, my friends, there is nothing
viler in the world than this lust of taste." And he put his teaching
into this stanza:--

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

There's nothing worse, men say, than taste to snare,  
At borne or with one's friends. Lo! taste it was  
That unto Sañjaya deliver’d up  
The jungle-haunting antelope so wild.

</div>

And with these words he let the antelope go back to its forest again.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

\[159\] When the Master had ended his lesson, and had repeated what he
had said as to that Brother's having fallen into that woman's power in
bygone days as well as in the present time, he shewed the connexion and
identified the Birth, by saying, "In those days this slave-girl was
Sañjaya, Direct-alms the Less was the wind-antelope, and I myself was
the King of Benares."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_56"></span>[44:1](j1017.htm#fr_56) See *Raṭṭhapāla-sutta*
in the *Majjhima-Nikāya* (No. 83), translated in the Ceylon R. A. S.
Journal, 1847. See also *Vinaya*, Vol. III. pages 13 and 148.

<span id="fn_57"></span>[44:2](j1017.htm#fr_57) These are meritorious
ascetic practices for quelling the passions, of which the third is an
undertaking to eat no food except alms received direct from the giver in
the Brother's alms-bowl. Hence "ticket-food" (Jātaka [No.
5](j1008.htm#an_j005)) was inadmissible.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: No. 15. Kharādiya-Jātaka](j1018)

</div>
