<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](j1059)  [Next](j1061) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Jataka, Volume I*, tr. by Robert Chalmers, \[1895\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_142">p. 142</span> <span id="an_j057"></span>

### No. 57.

### VĀNARINDA-JĀTAKA.

"*Whoso, O monkey-king*."--This story was told by the Master, while at
the Bamboo-grove, about Devadatta's going about to kill him. Being
informed of Devadatta's murderous intent, the Master said, "This is not
the first time, Brethren, that Devadatta has gone about seeking to kill
me; he did just the same in bygone days, but failed to work his wicked
will." And so saying, he told this story of the past.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

Once on a time when Brahmadatta was reigning in Benares, the Bodhisatta
came to life again as a monkey. When full-grown, he was as big as a
mare's foal and enormously strong. He lived alone on the banks of a
river, in the middle of which was an island whereon grew mangoes and
bread-fruits, and other fruit-trees. And in mid-stream, half-way between
the island and the river-bank, a solitary rock rose out of the water.
Being as strong as an elephant, the Bodhisatta used to leap from the
bank on to this rock and thence on to the island. Here he would eat his
fill of the fruits that grew on the island, returning at evening by the
way he came. And such was his life from day to day.

Now there lived in those days in that river a crocodile and his mate;
and she, being with young, was led by the sight of the Bodhisatta
journeying to and fro to conceive \[279\] a longing for the monkey's
heart to eat. So she begged her lord to catch the monkey for her.
Promising that she should have her fancy, the crocodile went off and
took his stand on the rock, meaning to catch the monkey on his evening
journey home.

After ranging about the island all day, the Bodhisatta looked out at
evening towards the rock and wondered why the rock stood so high out of
the water. For the story goes that the Bodhisatta always marked the
exact height of the water in the river, and of the rock in the water.
So, when he saw that, though the water stood at the same level, the rock
seemed to stand higher out of the water, he suspected that a crocodile
might be lurking there to catch him. And, in order to find out the facts
of the case, he shouted, as though addressing the rock, "Hi! rock!" And,
as no reply came back, he shouted three times, "Hi! rock!" And

<span id="page_143">p. 143</span>

as the rock still kept silence, the monkey called out, "How comes it,
friend rock, that you won't answer me to-day?"

"Oh!" thought the crocodile; "so the rock's in the habit of answering
the monkey. I must answer for the rock to-day." Accordingly, he shouted,
"Yes, monkey; what is it?" "Who are you?" said the Bodhisatta. "I'm a
crocodile." "What are you sitting on that rock for? "To catch you and
eat your heart." As there was no other way back, the only thing to be
done was to outwit the crocodile. So the Bodhisatta cried out, "There's
no help for it then but to give myself up to you. Open your mouth and
catch me when I jump."

Now you must know that when crocodiles open their mouths, their eyes
shut <span id="fr_115"></span>[1](#fn_114). So, when this crocodile
unsuspiciously opened his mouth, his eyes shut. And there he waited with
closed eyes and open jaws! Seeing this, the wily monkey made a jump on
to the crocodile's head, and thence, with a spring like lightning,
gained the bank. When the cleverness of this feat dawned on the
crocodile, he said, "Monkey, he that in this world \[280\] possesses the
four virtues overcomes his foes. And you, methinks, possess all four."
And, so saying, he repeated this stanza:--

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

Whose, O monkey-king, like you, combines  
Truth, foresight, fixed resolve, and fearlessness,  
Shall see his routed foemen turn and flee.

</div>

And with this praise of the Bodhisatta, the crocodile betook himself to
his own dwelling-place.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

Said the Master, "This is not the first time then, Brethren, that
Devadatta has gone about seeking to kill me; he did just the sane in
bygone days too." And, having ended his lesson, the Master shewed the
connexion and identified the Birth by saying, "Devadatta was the
crocodile of those days, the brahmin-girl Ciñcā <span
id="fr_116"></span>[2](#fn_115) was the crocodile's wife, and I myself
the Monkey-King."

\[*Note*. Cf. No. 224 (*Kumbhīla-jātaka*). A Chinese version is given by
Beal in the 'Romantic Legend' p. 231, and a Japanese version in
Griffin's 'Fairy Tales from Japan.'\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_114"></span>[143:1](j1060.htm#fr_115) This assertion is not
in accord with the facts of natural history.

<span id="fn_115"></span>[143:2](j1060.htm#fr_116) Her identification
here as the crocodile's wicked wife is due to the fact that Ciñcā, who
was a "female ascetic of rare beauty," was suborned by Gotama's enemies
to simulate pregnancy and charge him with the paternity. How the deceit
was exposed, is told in Dhammapada, pp. 338-340.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: No. 58. Tayodhamma-Jātaka](j1061)

</div>
