<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](j1096)  [Next](j1098) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Jataka, Volume I*, tr. by Robert Chalmers, \[1895\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_229">p. 229</span>

### No. 94.

### LOMAHAṀSA-JĀTAKA.

"*Now scorched*."--This story the Master told while at Pāṭikārāma near
Vesāli, about Sunakkhatta.

For at that time Sunakkhatta, having become an adherent of the Master,
was travelling about the country as a Brother with bowl and robes, when
he was perverted to the tenets of Kora the Kshatriya <span
id="fr_153"></span>[1](#fn_152). So he returned to the Blessed Buddha
his bowl and robes-and reverted to a lay life by reason of Kora the
Kshatriya, about the time when this latter had been re-born as the
offspring of the Kālakañjaka Asura. And he went about within the three
walls of Vesāli defaming the Master by affirming that there was nothing
superhuman about the sage Gotama, who was not distinguished from other
men by preaching a saving faith; that the sage Gotama had simply worked
out a system which was the outcome of his own individual thought and
study; and that the ideal for the attainment of which his doctrine was
preached, did not lead to the destruction of sorrow in those who
followed it <span id="fr_154"></span>[2](#fn_153).

Now the reverend Sāriputta was on his round for alms when he heard
Sunakkhatta's blasphemies; and on his return from his round he reported
this to the Blessed One. Said the Master, "Sunakkhatta is a hot-headed
person, Sāriputta, and speaks idle words. His hot-headedness has led him
to talk like this and to deny the saving grace of my doctrine.
Unwittingly, this foolish person is extolling me; I say unwittingly, for
he has no knowledge \[390\] of my efficacy. In me, Sāriputta, dwell the
Six Knowledges, and herein am more than human; the Ten Powers are within
me, and the Four Grounds of Confidence. I know the limits of the four
types of earthly existence and the five states of possible re-birth
after earthly death. This too is a superhuman quality in me; and whose
denies it must retract his words, change his belief, and renounce his
heresy, or he will without ado be cast into hell." Having thus magnified
the superhuman nature and power which existed within him, the Master
went on to say, "Sunakkhatta, I hear, Sāriputta, took delight in the
misguided self-mortifications of the asceticism of Kora the Kshatriya;
and therefore it was that he could take no pleasure in me. Ninety-one
aeons ago I lived the higher life in ail its four forms <span
id="fr_155"></span>[3](#fn_154), examining into that false asceticism to
discover whether the truth abode therein. An ascetic was I, the chief of
ascetics; worn and emaciated was I, beyond all others; loathing of
comfort had I, a loathing surpassing that of all others; I dwelt apart,
and unapproachable was my passion for solitude." Then, at the Elder's
request, he told this story of the past.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

Once on a time, ninety-one æons ago, the Bodhisatta set himself to
examine into the false asceticism. So he became a recluse, according to
the Naked Ascetics (Ājīvikas),--unclothed and covered with dust,
solitary and lonely, fleeing like a deer from the face of men; his food
was small

<span id="page_230">p. 230</span>

fish, cowdung, and other refuse; and in order that his vigil might not
be disturbed, he took up his abode in a dread thicket in the jungle. In
the snows of winter, he came forth by night from the sheltering thicket
to the open air, returning with the sun-rise to his thicket again; and,
as he was wet with the driving snows by night, so in the day time he was
drenched by the drizzle from the branches of the thicket. Thus day and
night alike he endured the extremity of cold. In summer, he abode by day
in the open air, and by night in the forest--scorched by the blazing sun
by day, and fanned by no cooling breezes by night, so that the sweat
streamed from him. And there presented itself to his mind this stanza,
which was new and never uttered before:--

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

Now scorched, now frore, lone in the lonesome woods,  
Beside no fire, but all afire within,  
Naked, the hermit wrestles for the Truth.

</div>

\[391\] But when after a life spent in the rigours of this asceticism,
the vision of hell rose before the Bodhisatta as he lay dying, he
realised the worthlessness of all his austerities, and in that supreme
moment broke away from his delusions, laid hold of the real truth, and
was re-born in the Heaven of Devas.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

His lesson ended, the Master identified the Birth by saying, "I was the
naked ascetic of those days."

\[*Note*. For the 'story of the past'? cf. *Cariyā Piṭaka*, p. 102. For
the introductory story see Sutta No. 12 of the Majjhima Nikāya.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_152"></span>[229:1](j1097.htm#fr_153) See Hardy's *Manual
of Budhism*, p. 330.

<span id="fn_153"></span>[229:2](j1097.htm#fr_154) This is a quotation
from the *Majjhima Nikāya* I. 68.

<span id="fn_154"></span>[229:3](j1097.htm#fr_155) *i.e.* as a learner,
householder, *réligieux*, and recluse.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: No. 95. Mahāsudassana-Jātaka](j1098)

</div>
