<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](j1143)  [Next](j1145) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Jataka, Volume I*, tr. by Robert Chalmers, \[1895\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="an_j141"></span>

### No. 141.

### GODHA-JĀTAKA.

\[487\] "*Bad company*."--This story was told by the Master while at the
Bamboo-grove, about a traitorous Brother. The introductory incident is
the same as that told in the Mahilā-mukha jātaka <span
id="fr_200"></span>[1](#fn_199).

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

Once on a time when Brahmadatta was reigning in Benares, the Bodhisatta
was born an iguana. When he grew up he dwelt in a big burrow in the
river bank with a following of many hundreds of other iguanas. Now the
Bodhisatta had a son, a young iguana, who was great friends with a
chameleon, whom he used to clip and embrace. This intimacy being
reported to the iguana king, he sent for his young son and said that
such friendship was misplaced, for chameleons were low creatures, and
that if the intimacy was persisted in, calamity would befall the whole
of the tribe of iguanas. And he enjoined his son to haw no more to do
with the chameleon. But the son continued in his intimacy. Again and
again did the Bodhisatta speak with his son, but finding his words of no
avail, and foreseeing danger to the iguanas from the chameleon, he had
an outlet cut on one side of their burrow, so that there might be a
means of escape in time of need.

Now as time went on, the young iguana grew to a great size, whilst the
chameleon never grew any bigger. And as these mountainous embraces of
the young giant grew painful indeed, the chameleon foresaw

<span id="page_303">p. 303</span>

that they would be the death of him if they went on a few days longer,
and he resolved to combine with a hunter to destroy the whole tribe of
iguanas.

One day in the summer the ants came out after a thunder-storm <span
id="fr_201"></span>[1](#fn_200), and \[488\] the iguanas darted hither
and thither catching them and eating them. Now there came into the
forest an iguana trapper with spade and dogs to dig out iguanas; and the
chameleon thought what a haul he would put in the trapper's way. So he
went up to the man, and, lying down before him, asked why he was about
in the forest. "To catch iguanas," was the reply. "Well, I know where
there's a burrow of hundreds of them," said the chameleon; "bring fire
and brushwood and follow me." And he brought the trapper to where the
iguanas dwelt. "Now," said the chameleon, "put your fuel in there and
smoke the iguanas out. Meantime let your dogs be all round and take a
big stick in your hand. Then as the iguanas dash out, strike them down
and make a pile of the slain." So saying, the treacherous chameleon
withdrew to a spot hard by, where he lay down, with his head up, saying
to himself,--"This day I shall see the rout of my enemy."

The trapper set to work to smoke the iguanas out; and fear for their
lives drove them helter-skelter from their burrow. As they came out, the
trapper knocked them on the head, and if he missed them, they fell a
prey to his dogs. And so there was great slaughter among the iguanas.
Realising that this was the chameleon's doing, the Bodhisatta cried,
"One should never make friends of the wicked, for such bring sorrow in
their train. A single wicked chameleon has proved the bane of all these
iguanas." So saying, he escaped by the outlet he had provided, uttering
this stanza:--

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

Bad company can never end in good.  
Through friendship with one sole chameleon  
The tribe of iguanas met their end.

</div>

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

\[489\] His lesson ended, the Master identified the Birth by saying,
"Devadatta was the chameleon of those days; this traitorous Brother was
the disobedient young iguana, the son of the Bodhisatta; and I myself
the king of the iguanas."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_199"></span>[302:1](j1144.htm#fr_200) No.
[26](j1029.htm#an_j026).

<span id="fn_200"></span>[303:1](j1144.htm#fr_201) *Makkhikā* may refer
to the wings which the ants get in India at the beginning of the rainy
season; cf. [p. 297](j1141.htm#page_297).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: No. 142. Sigāla-Jātaka](j1145)

</div>
