[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Earth Mysteries](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ams00)  [Next](ams02) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002EEP30M/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*A Miracle in Stone: The Great Pyramid*, by Joesph A. Seiss, \[1877\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_3">p. 3</span>

### PREFACE.

THIS book is meant to give a succinct comprehensive account of the
oldest and greatest existing monument of intellectual man, particularly
of the recent discoveries and claims with regard to it.

If the half that learned and scientific investigators allege respecting
the Great Pyramid of Gizeh be true, it is one of the most interesting
objects on earth, and ought to command universal attention. It has been
unhesitatingly pronounced, and perhaps it is, "the most important
discovery made in our day and generation."

Simply as an architectural achievement, this mysterious pillar, from the
time of Alexander the Great, has held its place at the head of the list
of "The Seven Wonders of the World." But, under the researches and
studies of mathematicians, astronomers, Egyptologists, and divines, it
has of late been made to assume a character vastly more remarkable.
Facts and coincidences so numerous and extraordinary have been evolved,
that some of the most sober and philosophic minds have been startled by
them. It would verily seem as if it were about to prove itself a sort of
key to the universe—a symbol of the profoundest truths of science, of
religion, and of all the past and future history of man. So at least
many competent

<span id="page_4">p. 4</span>

persons have been led to regard it, after the most thorough sifting
which the appliances of modern science and intelligence have been able
to give it.

Particularly in Scotland, England, and France has the subject elicited
much earnest interest. Quite a number of works and treatises, most of
them voluminous, costly, and learned, have been devoted to it, and not
without a marked and serious impression. St. John Vincent Day, Fellow of
the Royal Scottish Society of Arts, member of sundry institutions of
Engineers, and honorable librarian of the Philosophical Society of
Glasgow, says:

"A former published work on the subject, besides one or two papers in
the transactions of a scientific Society, have of necessity brought me
into contact with every shade of opinion as to the various theories
respecting the Pyramid, and the facts belonging to it. I have thus been
enabled, both by verbal and written discussions and arguments, to
ascertain the weight of evidence on which theories, assertions,
contradictions, and alleged facts have been supported; and I can only
state that in those cases where the Pyramid subject has been examined
into with a diligent spirit of inquiry, that is with the aim of not
merely strengthening preconceived notions or prejudices, but to evolve
absolute realities, I have not yet met any one but who is more or less
convinced by the modern theory."—Preface to *Papers on the Great
Pyramid*, 1870.

In this country, the publications on the subject have been very
circumscribed. A few tracts, short papers, review articles, or
incidental discussions in

<span id="page_5">p. 5</span>

connection with other subjects, is about all that has thus far appeared
from the American press. And as the European books are mostly large,
expensive, and not readily accessible, comparatively few among us have
had the opportunity of learning what has developed in this interesting
field. A just résumé of the matter, of moderate length and price, in
plain and easy form, would seem to be needed and specially in place.

In the absence of anything of the sort, and with a view to what might in
measure supply the want, the preparation of the following Lectures was
undertaken. How far the effort has succeeded, the candid reader will
determine. It has at least been honest. Persuaded of the varied worth of
the subject, the author has endeavored to be accurate in his
presentations, and as thorough as the space would allow. For his data
concerning the Pyramid he has been obliged to rely on the original works
of explorers, to which due reference is given. Though in Egypt in the
latter part of 1864, with a view to some personal examinations, a severe
sickness, contracted in Syria and Palestine, prevented him from
accomplishing the purpose for which he visited the land of the Pharaohs.
But his interest did not therefore abate. In 1869 he gave out a small
publication on the Great Pyramid, and having tried to master and digest
what has thus far been adduced by others, he now ventures a larger
exhibition of the case as it presents itself to him. The intricacies of
mathematics and astronomy, so deeply involved in these pyramid
investigations, he has intentionally

<span id="page_6">p. 6</span>

avoided, seeking rather to explain for the many than to demonstrate for
the few. He has confined himself mostly to descriptions and statements
of results, which he has sought to give in a way which all readers of
average intelligence can readily follow and understand.

If what he has thus produced is so far favored as to promote a more
general and deeper inquiry and study into this surprising and most
perfect monument of primeval man, the chief object of the author will
have been attained. The interest awakened by the Lectures at their oral
delivery during the past winter, and the numerous applications to
procure them in print, also encourage the belief that, with the notes
and amplifications since added, they may perchance be acceptable and
serve a good purpose. With the hope, therefore, of thus contributing
something towards the furtherance of correct science, true philosophy,
and a proper Christianity, the author herewith commits these sheets to
the press, and to an appreciative and indulgent public.

<span class="small">PHILADELPHIA, JUNE 25th, 1877.</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Contents](ams02)
