[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index.md)  [English
Bibles](../eb)  [Index](index)  [Previous](joh)  [Next](rom.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### American Standard Version: Acts

<span id="an_1:1">1:1</span> The former treatise I made, O Theophilus,
concerning all that Jesus began both to do and to teach,

<span id="an_1:2">1:2</span> until the day in which he was received up,
after that he had given commandment through the Holy Spirit unto the
apostles whom he had chosen:

<span id="an_1:3">1:3</span> To whom he also showed himself alive after
his passion by many proofs, appearing unto them by the space of forty
days, and speaking the things concerning the kingdom of God:

<span id="an_1:4">1:4</span> and, being assembled together with them, he
charged them not to depart from Jerusalem, but to wait for the promise
of the Father, which, \[said he\], ye heard from me:

<span id="an_1:5">1:5</span> For John indeed baptized with water; but ye
shall be baptized in the Holy Spirit not many days hence.

<span id="an_1:6">1:6</span> They therefore, when they were come
together, asked him, saying, Lord, dost thou at this time restore the
kingdom to Israel?

<span id="an_1:7">1:7</span> And he said unto them, It is not for you to
know times or seasons, which the Father hath set within His own
authority.

<span id="an_1:8">1:8</span> But ye shall receive power, when the Holy
Spirit is come upon you: and ye shall be my witnesses both in Jerusalem,
and in all Judaea and Samaria, and unto the uttermost part of the earth.

<span id="an_1:9">1:9</span> And when he had said these things, as they
were looking, he was taken up; and a cloud received him out of their
sight.

<span id="an_1:10">1:10</span> And while they were looking stedfastly
into heaven as he went, behold, two men stood by them in white apparel;

<span id="an_1:11">1:11</span> who also said, Ye men of Galilee, why
stand ye looking into heaven? this Jesus, who was received up from you
into heaven shall so come in like manner as ye beheld him going into
heaven.

<span id="an_1:12">1:12</span> Then returned they unto Jerusalem from
the mount called Olivet, which is nigh unto Jerusalem, a Sabbath day's
journey off.

<span id="an_1:13">1:13</span> And when they were come in, they went up
into the upper chamber, where they were abiding; both Peter and John and
James and Andrew, Philip and Thomas, Bartholomew and Matthew, James
\[the son\] of Alphaeus, and Simon the Zealot, and Judas \[the son\] of
James.

<span id="an_1:14">1:14</span> These all with one accord continued
stedfastly in prayer, with the women, and Mary the mother of Jesus, and
with his brethren.

<span id="an_1:15">1:15</span> And in these days Peter stood up in the
midst of the brethren, and said (and there was a multitude of persons
\[gathered\] together, about a hundred and twenty),

<span id="an_1:16">1:16</span> Brethren, it was needful that the
Scripture should be fulfilled, which the Holy Spirit spake before by the
mouth of David concerning Judas, who was guide to them that took Jesus.

<span id="an_1:17">1:17</span> For he was numbered among us, and
received his portion in this ministry.

<span id="an_1:18">1:18</span> (Now this man obtained a field with the
reward of his iniquity; and falling headlong, he burst asunder in the
midst, and all his bowels gushed out.

<span id="an_1:19">1:19</span> And it became known to all the dwellers
at Jerusalem; insomuch that in their language that field was called
Akeldama, that is, The field of blood.)

<span id="an_1:20">1:20</span> For it is written in the book of Psalms,
Let his habitation be made desolate, And let no man dwell therein: and,
His office let another take.

<span id="an_1:21">1:21</span> Of the men therefore that have companied
with us all the time that the Lord Jesus went in and went out among us,

<span id="an_1:22">1:22</span> beginning from the baptism of John, unto
the day that he was received up from us, of these must one become a
witness with us of his resurrection.

<span id="an_1:23">1:23</span> And they put forward two, Joseph called
Barsabbas, who was surnamed Justus, and Matthias.

<span id="an_1:24">1:24</span> And they prayed, and said, Thou, Lord,
who knowest the hearts of all men, show of these two the one whom thou
hast chosen,

<span id="an_1:25">1:25</span> to take the place in this ministry and
apostleship from which Judas fell away, that he might go to his own
place.

<span id="an_1:26">1:26</span> And they gave lots for them; and the lot
fell upon Matthias; and he was numbered with the eleven apostles.

<span id="an_2:1">2:1</span> And when the day of Pentecost was now come,
they were all together in one place.

<span id="an_2:2">2:2</span> And suddenly there came from heaven a sound
as of the rushing of a mighty wind, and it filled all the house where
they were sitting.

<span id="an_2:3">2:3</span> And there appeared unto them tongues
parting asunder, like as of fire; and it sat upon each one of them.

<span id="an_2:4">2:4</span> And they were all filled with the Holy
Spirit, and began to speak with other tongues, as the Spirit gave them
utterance.

<span id="an_2:5">2:5</span> Now there were dwelling at Jerusalem Jews,
devout men, from every nation under heaven.

<span id="an_2:6">2:6</span> And when this sound was heard, the
multitude came together, and were confounded, because that every man
heard them speaking in his own language.

<span id="an_2:7">2:7</span> And they were all amazed and marvelled,
saying, Behold, are not all these that speak Galilaeans?

<span id="an_2:8">2:8</span> And how hear we, every man in our own
language wherein we were born?

<span id="an_2:9">2:9</span> Parthians and Medes and Elamites, and the
dwellers in Mesopotamia, in Judaea and Cappadocia, in Pontus and Asia,

<span id="an_2:10">2:10</span> in Phrygia and Pamphylia, in Egypt and
the parts of Libya about Cyrene, and sojourners from Rome, both Jews and
proselytes,

<span id="an_2:11">2:11</span> Cretans and Arabians, we hear them
speaking in our tongues the mighty works of God.

<span id="an_2:12">2:12</span> And they were all amazed, and were
perplexed, saying one to another, What meaneth this?

<span id="an_2:13">2:13</span> But others mocking said, They are filled
with new wine.

<span id="an_2:14">2:14</span> But Peter, standing up with the eleven,
lifted up his voice, and spake forth unto them, \[saying\], Ye men of
Judaea, and all ye that dwell at Jerusalem, be this known unto you, and
give ear unto my words.

<span id="an_2:15">2:15</span> For these are not drunken, as ye suppose;
seeing it is \[but\] the third hour of the day.

<span id="an_2:16">2:16</span> but this is that which hath been spoken
through the prophet Joel:

<span id="an_2:17">2:17</span> And it shall be in the last days, saith
God, I will pour forth of my Spirit upon all flesh: And your sons and
your daughters shall prophesy, And your young men shall see visions, And
your old men shall dream dreams:

<span id="an_2:18">2:18</span> Yea and on my servants and on my
handmaidens in those days Will I pour forth of my Spirit; and they shall
prophesy.

<span id="an_2:19">2:19</span> And I will show wonders in the heaven
above, And signs on the earth beneath; Blood, and fire, and vapor of
smoke:

<span id="an_2:20">2:20</span> The sun shall be turned into darkness,
And the moon into blood, Before the day of the Lord come, That great and
notable \[day\].

<span id="an_2:21">2:21</span> And it shall be, that whosoever shall
call on the name of the Lord shall be saved.

<span id="an_2:22">2:22</span> Ye men of Israel, hear these words: Jesus
of Nazareth, a man approved of God unto you by mighty works and wonders
and signs which God did by him in the midst of you, even as ye
yourselves know;

<span id="an_2:23">2:23</span> him, being delivered up by the
determinate counsel and foreknowledge of God, ye by the hand of lawless
men did crucify and slay:

<span id="an_2:24">2:24</span> whom God raised up, having loosed the
pangs of death: because it was not possible that he should be holden of
it.

<span id="an_2:25">2:25</span> For David saith concerning him, I beheld
the Lord always before my face; For he is on my right hand, that I
should not be moved:

<span id="an_2:26">2:26</span> Therefore my heart was glad, and my
tongue rejoiced; Moreover my flesh also shall dwell in hope:

<span id="an_2:27">2:27</span> Because thou wilt not leave my soul unto
Hades, Neither wilt thou give thy Holy One to see corruption.

<span id="an_2:28">2:28</span> Thou madest known unto me the ways of
life; Thou shalt make me full of gladness with thy countenance.

<span id="an_2:29">2:29</span> Brethren, I may say unto you freely of
the patriarch David, that he both died and was buried, and his tomb is
with us unto this day.

<span id="an_2:30">2:30</span> Being therefore a prophet, and knowing
that God had sworn with an oath to him, that of the fruit of his loins
he would set \[one\] upon his throne;

<span id="an_2:31">2:31</span> he foreseeing \[this\] spake of the
resurrection of the Christ, that neither was he left unto Hades, nor did
his flesh see corruption.

<span id="an_2:32">2:32</span> This Jesus did God raise up, whereof we
all are witnesses.

<span id="an_2:33">2:33</span> Being therefore by the right hand of God
exalted, and having received of the Father the promise of the Holy
Spirit, he hath poured forth this, which ye see and hear.

<span id="an_2:34">2:34</span> For David ascended not into the heavens:
but he saith himself, The Lord said unto my Lord, Sit thou on my right
hand,

<span id="an_2:35">2:35</span> Till I make thine enemies the footstool
of thy feet.

<span id="an_2:36">2:36</span> Let all the house of Israel therefore
know assuredly, that God hath made him both Lord and Christ, this Jesus
whom ye crucified.

<span id="an_2:37">2:37</span> Now when they heard \[this,\] they were
pricked in their heart, and said unto Peter and the rest of the
apostles, Brethren, what shall we do?

<span id="an_2:38">2:38</span> And Peter \[said\] unto them, Repent ye,
and be baptized every one of you in the name of Jesus Christ unto the
remission of your sins; and ye shall receive the gift of the Holy
Spirit.

<span id="an_2:39">2:39</span> For to you is the promise, and to your
children, and to all that are afar off, \[even\] as many as the Lord our
God shall call unto him.

<span id="an_2:40">2:40</span> And with many other words he testified,
and exhorted them, saying, Save yourselves from this crooked generation.

<span id="an_2:41">2:41</span> They then that received his word were
baptized: and there were added \[unto them\] in that day about three
thousand souls.

<span id="an_2:42">2:42</span> And they continued stedfastly in the
apostles' teaching and fellowship, in the breaking of bread and the
prayers.

<span id="an_2:43">2:43</span> And fear came upon every soul: and many
wonders and signs were done through the apostles.

<span id="an_2:44">2:44</span> And all that believed were together, and
had all things common;

<span id="an_2:45">2:45</span> and they sold their possessions and
goods, and parted them to all, according as any man had need.

<span id="an_2:46">2:46</span> And day by day, continuing stedfastly
with one accord in the temple, and breaking bread at home, they took
their food with gladness and singleness of heart,

<span id="an_2:47">2:47</span> praising God, and having favor with all
the people. And the Lord added to them day by day those that were saved.

<span id="an_3:1">3:1</span> Now Peter and John were going up into the
temple at the hour of prayer, \[being\] the ninth \[hour\].

<span id="an_3:2">3:2</span> And a certain man that was lame from his
mother's womb was carried, whom they laid daily at the door of the
temple which is called Beautiful, to ask alms of them that entered into
the temple;

<span id="an_3:3">3:3</span> who seeing Peter and John about to go into
the temple, asked to receive an alms.

<span id="an_3:4">3:4</span> And Peter, fastening his eyes upon him,
with John, said, Look on us.

<span id="an_3:5">3:5</span> And he gave heed unto them, expecting to
receive something from them.

<span id="an_3:6">3:6</span> But Peter said, Silver and gold have I
none; but what I have, that give I thee. In the name of Jesus Christ of
Nazareth, walk.

<span id="an_3:7">3:7</span> And he took him by the right hand, and
raised him up: and immediately his feet and his ankle-bones received
strength.

<span id="an_3:8">3:8</span> And leaping up, he stood, and began to
walk; and he entered with them into the temple, walking, and leaping,
and praising God.

<span id="an_3:9">3:9</span> And all the people saw him walking and
praising God:

<span id="an_3:10">3:10</span> and they took knowledge of him, that it
was he that sat for alms at the Beautiful Gate of the temple; and they
were filled with wonder and amazement at that which had happened unto
him.

<span id="an_3:11">3:11</span> And as he held Peter and John, all the
people ran together unto them in the porch that is called Solomon's,
greatly wondering.

<span id="an_3:12">3:12</span> And when Peter saw it, he answered unto
the people, Ye men of Israel, why marvel ye at this man? or why fasten
ye your eyes on us, as though by our own power or godliness we had made
him to walk?

<span id="an_3:13">3:13</span> The God of Abraham, and of Isaac, and of
Jacob, the God of our fathers, hath glorified his Servant Jesus; whom ye
delivered up, and denied before the face of Pilate, when he had
determined to release him.

<span id="an_3:14">3:14</span> But ye denied the Holy and Righteous One,
and asked for a murderer to be granted unto you,

<span id="an_3:15">3:15</span> and killed the Prince of life; whom God
raised from the dead; whereof we are witnesses.

<span id="an_3:16">3:16</span> And by faith in his name hath his name
made this man strong, whom ye behold and know: yea, the faith which is
through him hath given him this perfect soundness in the presence of you
all.

<span id="an_3:17">3:17</span> And now, brethren, I know that in
ignorance ye did it, as did also your rulers.

<span id="an_3:18">3:18</span> But the things which God foreshowed by
the mouth of all the prophets, that his Christ should suffer, he thus
fulfilled.

<span id="an_3:19">3:19</span> Repent ye therefore, and turn again, that
your sins may be blotted out, that so there may come seasons of
refreshing from the presence of the Lord;

<span id="an_3:20">3:20</span> and that he may send the Christ who hath
been appointed for you, \[even\] Jesus:

<span id="an_3:21">3:21</span> whom the heaven must receive until the
times of restoration of all things, whereof God spake by the mouth of
His holy prophets that have been from of old.

<span id="an_3:22">3:22</span> Moses indeed said, A prophet shall the
Lord God raise up unto you from among your brethren, like unto me. To
him shall ye hearken in all things whatsoever he shall speak unto you.

<span id="an_3:23">3:23</span> And it shall be, that every soul that
shall not hearken to that prophet, shall be utterly destroyed from among
the people.

<span id="an_3:24">3:24</span> Yea and all the prophets from Samuel and
them that followed after, as many as have spoken, they also told of
these days.

<span id="an_3:25">3:25</span> Ye are the sons of the prophets, and of
the covenant which God made with your fathers, saying unto Abraham, And
in thy seed shall all the families of the earth be blessed.

<span id="an_3:26">3:26</span> Unto you first God, having raised up his
Servant, sent him to bless you, in turning away every one of you from
your iniquities.

<span id="an_4:1">4:1</span> And as they spake unto the people, the
priests and the captain of the temple and the Sadducees came upon them,

<span id="an_4:2">4:2</span> being sore troubled because they taught the
people, and proclaimed in Jesus the resurrection from the dead.

<span id="an_4:3">4:3</span> And they laid hands on them, and put them
in ward unto the morrow: for it was now eventide.

<span id="an_4:4">4:4</span> But many of them that heard the word
believed; and the number of the men came to be about five thousand.

<span id="an_4:5">4:5</span> And it came to pass on the morrow, that
their rulers and elders and scribes were gathered together in Jerusalem;

<span id="an_4:6">4:6</span> and Annas the high priest \[was there\],
and Caiaphas, and John, and Alexander, and as many as were of the
kindred of the high priest.

<span id="an_4:7">4:7</span> And when they had set them in the midst,
they inquired, By what power, or in what name, have ye done this?

<span id="an_4:8">4:8</span> Then Peter, filled with the Holy Spirit,
said unto them, Ye rulers of the people, and elders,

<span id="an_4:9">4:9</span> if we this day are examined concerning a
good deed done to an impotent man, by what means this man is made whole;

<span id="an_4:10">4:10</span> be it known unto you all, and to all the
people of Israel, that in the name of Jesus Christ of Nazareth, whom ye
crucified, whom God raised from the dead, \[even\] in him doth this man
stand here before you whole.

<span id="an_4:11">4:11</span> He is the stone which was set at nought
of you the builders, which was made the head of the corner.

<span id="an_4:12">4:12</span> And in none other is there salvation: for
neither is there any other name under heaven, that is given among men,
wherein we must be saved.

<span id="an_4:13">4:13</span> Now when they beheld the boldness of
Peter and John, and had perceived that they were unlearned and ignorant
men, they marvelled; and they took knowledge of them, that they had been
with Jesus.

<span id="an_4:14">4:14</span> And seeing the man that was healed
standing with them, they could say nothing against it.

<span id="an_4:15">4:15</span> But when they had commanded them to go
aside out of the council, they conferred among themselves,

<span id="an_4:16">4:16</span> saying, What shall we do to these men?
for that indeed a notable miracle hath been wrought through them, is
manifest to all that dwell in Jerusalem; and we cannot deny it.

<span id="an_4:17">4:17</span> But that it spread no further among the
people, let us threaten them, that they speak henceforth to no man in
this name.

<span id="an_4:18">4:18</span> And they called them, and charged them
not to speak at all nor teach in the name of Jesus.

<span id="an_4:19">4:19</span> But Peter and John answered and said unto
them, Whether it is right in the sight of God to hearken unto you rather
than unto God, judge ye:

<span id="an_4:20">4:20</span> for we cannot but speak the things which
we saw and heard.

<span id="an_4:21">4:21</span> And they, when they had further
threatened them, let them go, finding nothing how they might punish
them, because of the people; for all men glorified God for that which
was done.

<span id="an_4:22">4:22</span> For the man was more than forty years
old, on whom this miracle of healing was wrought.

<span id="an_4:23">4:23</span> And being let go, they came to their own
company, and reported all that the chief priests and the elders had said
unto them.

<span id="an_4:24">4:24</span> And they, when they heard it, lifted up
their voice to God with one accord, and said, O Lord, thou that didst
make the heaven and the earth and the sea, and all that in them is:

<span id="an_4:25">4:25</span> who by the Holy Spirit, \[by\] the mouth
of our father David thy servant, didst say, Why did the Gentiles rage,
And the peoples imagine vain things?

<span id="an_4:26">4:26</span> The kings of the earth set themselves in
array, And the rulers were gathered together, Against the Lord, and
against his Anointed:

<span id="an_4:27">4:27</span> for of a truth in this city against thy
holy Servant Jesus, whom thou didst anoint, both Herod and Pontius
Pilate, with the Gentiles and the peoples of Israel, were gathered
together,

<span id="an_4:28">4:28</span> to do whatsoever thy hand and thy council
foreordained to come to pass.

<span id="an_4:29">4:29</span> And now, Lord, look upon their
threatenings: and grant unto thy servants to speak thy word with all
boldness,

<span id="an_4:30">4:30</span> while thy stretchest forth thy hand to
heal; and that signs and wonders may be done through the name of thy
holy Servant Jesus.

<span id="an_4:31">4:31</span> And when they had prayed, the place was
shaken wherein they were gathered together; and they were all filled
with the Holy Spirit, and they spake the word of God with boldness.

<span id="an_4:32">4:32</span> And the multitude of them that believed
were of one heart and soul: and not one \[of them\] said that aught of
the things which he possessed was his own; but they had all things
common.

<span id="an_4:33">4:33</span> And with great power gave the apostles
their witness of the resurrection of the Lord Jesus: and great grace was
upon them all.

<span id="an_4:34">4:34</span> For neither was there among them any that
lacked: for as many as were possessors of lands or houses sold them, and
brought the prices of the things that were sold,

<span id="an_4:35">4:35</span> and laid them at the apostles' feet: and
distribution was made unto each, according as any one had need.

<span id="an_4:36">4:36</span> And Joseph, who by the apostles was
surnamed Barnabas (which is, being interpreted, Son of exhortation), a
Levite, a man of Cyprus by race,

<span id="an_4:37">4:37</span> having a field, sold it, and brought the
money and laid it at the apostles' feet.

<span id="an_5:1">5:1</span> But a certain man named Ananias, with
Sapphira his wife, sold a possession,

<span id="an_5:2">5:2</span> and kept back \[part\] of the price, his
wife also being privy to it, and brought a certain part, and laid it at
the apostles' feet.

<span id="an_5:3">5:3</span> But Peter said, Ananias, why hath Satan
filled thy heart to lie to the Holy Spirit, and to keep back \[part\] of
the price of the land?

<span id="an_5:4">5:4</span> While it remained, did it not remain thine
own? and after it was sold, was it not in thy power? How is it that thou
hast conceived this thing in thy heart? thou has not lied unto men, but
unto God.

<span id="an_5:5">5:5</span> And Ananias hearing these words fell down
and gave up the ghost: and great fear came upon all that heard it.

<span id="an_5:6">5:6</span> And the young men arose and wrapped him
round, and they carried him out and buried him.

<span id="an_5:7">5:7</span> And it was about the space of three hours
after, when his wife, not knowing what was done, came in.

<span id="an_5:8">5:8</span> And Peter answered unto her, Tell me
whether ye sold the land for so much. And she said, Yea, for so much.

<span id="an_5:9">5:9</span> But Peter \[said\] unto her, How is it that
ye have agreed together to try the Spirit of the Lord? behold, the feet
of them that have buried thy husband are at the door, and they shall
carry thee out.

<span id="an_5:10">5:10</span> And she fell down immediately at his
feet, and gave up the ghost: and the young men came in and found her
dead, and they carried her out and buried her by her husband.

<span id="an_5:11">5:11</span> And great fear came upon the whole
church, and upon all that heard these things.

<span id="an_5:12">5:12</span> And by the hands of the apostles were
many signs and wonders wrought among the people; and they were all with
one accord in Solomon's porch.

<span id="an_5:13">5:13</span> But of the rest durst no man join himself
to them: howbeit the people magnified them;

<span id="an_5:14">5:14</span> and believers were the more added to the
Lord, multitudes both of them and women;

<span id="an_5:15">5:15</span> insomuch that they even carried out the
sick into the streets, and laid them on beds and couches, that, as Peter
came by, at the least his shadow might overshadow some one of them.

<span id="an_5:16">5:16</span> And there also came together the
multitudes from the cities round about Jerusalem, bring sick folk, and
them that were vexed with unclean spirits: and they were healed every
one.

<span id="an_5:17">5:17</span> But the high priest rose up, and all they
that were with him (which is the sect of the Sadducees), and they were
filled with jealousy,

<span id="an_5:18">5:18</span> and laid hands on the apostles, and put
them in public ward.

<span id="an_5:19">5:19</span> But an angel of the Lord by night opened
the prison doors, and brought them out, and said,

<span id="an_5:20">5:20</span> Go ye, and stand and speak in the temple
to the people all the words of this Life.

<span id="an_5:21">5:21</span> And when they heard \[this\], they
entered into the temple about daybreak, and taught. But the high priest
came, and they that were with him, and called the council together, and
all the senate of the children of Israel, and sent to the prison-house
to have them brought.

<span id="an_5:22">5:22</span> But the officers that came found them not
in the prison; and they returned, and told,

<span id="an_5:23">5:23</span> saying, The prison-house we found shut in
all safety, and the keepers standing at the doors: but when we had
opened, we found no man within.

<span id="an_5:24">5:24</span> Now when the captain of the temple and
the chief priests heard these words, they were much perplexed concerning
them whereunto this would grow.

<span id="an_5:25">5:25</span> And there came one and told them, Behold,
the men whom ye put in the prison are in the temple standing and
teaching the people.

<span id="an_5:26">5:26</span> Then went the captain with the officers,
and brought them, \[but\] without violence; for they feared the people,
lest they should be stoned.

<span id="an_5:27">5:27</span> And when they had brought them, they set
them before the council. And the high priest asked them,

<span id="an_5:28">5:28</span> saying, We strictly charged you not to
teach in this name: and behold, ye have filled Jerusalem with your
teaching, and intend to bring this man's blood upon us.

<span id="an_5:29">5:29</span> But Peter and the apostles answered and
said, We must obey God rather than men.

<span id="an_5:30">5:30</span> The God of our fathers raised up Jesus,
whom ye slew, hanging him on a tree.

<span id="an_5:31">5:31</span> Him did God exalt with his right hand
\[to be\] a Prince and a Saviour, to give repentance to Israel, and
remission of sins.

<span id="an_5:32">5:32</span> And we are witnesses of these things; and
\[so is\] the Holy Spirit, whom God hath given to them that obey him.

<span id="an_5:33">5:33</span> But they, when they heard this, were cut
to the heart, and minded to slay them.

<span id="an_5:34">5:34</span> But there stood up one in the council, a
Pharisee, named Gamaliel, a doctor of the law, had in honor of all the
people, and commanded to put the men forth a little while.

<span id="an_5:35">5:35</span> And he said unto them, Ye men of Israel,
take heed to yourselves as touching these men, what ye are about to do.

<span id="an_5:36">5:36</span> For before these days rose up Theudas,
giving himself out to be somebody; to whom a number of men, about four
hundred, joined themselves: who was slain; and all, as many as obeyed
him, were dispersed, and came to nought.

<span id="an_5:37">5:37</span> After this man rose up Judas of Galilee
in the days of the enrolment, and drew away \[some of the\] people after
him: he also perished; and all, as many as obeyed him, were scattered
abroad.

<span id="an_5:38">5:38</span> And now I say unto you, Refrain from
these men, and let them alone: for if this counsel or this work be of
men, it will be overthrown:

<span id="an_5:39">5:39</span> but if it is of God, ye will not be able
to overthrow them; lest haply ye be found even to be fighting against
God.

<span id="an_5:40">5:40</span> And to him they agreed: and when they had
called the apostles unto them, they beat them and charged them not to
speak in the name of Jesus, and let them go.

<span id="an_5:41">5:41</span> They therefore departed from the presence
of the council, rejoicing that they were counted worthy to suffer
dishonor for the Name.

<span id="an_5:42">5:42</span> And every day, in the temple and at home,
they ceased not to teach and to preach Jesus \[as\] the Christ.

<span id="an_6:1">6:1</span> Now in these days, when the number of the
disciples was multiplying, there arose a murmuring of the Grecian Jews
against the Hebrews, because their widows were neglected in the daily
ministration.

<span id="an_6:2">6:2</span> And the twelve called the multitude of the
disciples unto them, and said, It is not fit that we should forsake the
word of God, and serve tables.

<span id="an_6:3">6:3</span> Look ye out therefore, brethren, from among
you seven men of good report, full of the Spirit and of wisdom, whom we
may appoint over this business.

<span id="an_6:4">6:4</span> But we will continue stedfastly in prayer,
and in the ministry of the word.

<span id="an_6:5">6:5</span> And the saying pleased the whole multitude:
and they chose Stephen, a man full of faith and of the Holy Spirit, and
Philip, and Prochorus, and Nicanor, and Timon, and Parmenas, and
Nicolaus a proselyte of Antioch;

<span id="an_6:6">6:6</span> whom they set before the apostles: and when
they had prayed, they laid their hands upon them.

<span id="an_6:7">6:7</span> And the word of God increased; and the
number of the disciples multiplied in Jerusalem exceedingly; and a great
company of the priests were obedient to the faith.

<span id="an_6:8">6:8</span> And Stephen, full of grace and power,
wrought great wonders and signs among the people.

<span id="an_6:9">6:9</span> But there arose certain of them that were
of the synagogue called \[the synagogue\] of the Libertines, and of the
Cyrenians, and of the Alexandrians, and of them of Cilicia and Asia,
disputing with Stephen.

<span id="an_6:10">6:10</span> And they were not able to withstand the
wisdom and the Spirit by which he spake.

<span id="an_6:11">6:11</span> Then they suborned men, who said, We have
heard him speak blasphemous words against Moses, and \[against\] God.

<span id="an_6:12">6:12</span> And they stirred up the people, and the
elders, and the scribes, and came upon him, and seized him, and brought
him into the council,

<span id="an_6:13">6:13</span> and set up false witnesses, who said,
This man ceaseth not to speak words against this holy place, and the
law:

<span id="an_6:14">6:14</span> for we have heard him say, that this
Jesus of Nazareth shall destroy this place, and shall change the customs
which Moses delivered unto us.

<span id="an_6:15">6:15</span> And all that sat in the council,
fastening their eyes on him, saw his face as it had been the face of an
angel.

<span id="an_7:1">7:1</span> And the high priest said, Are these things
so?

<span id="an_7:2">7:2</span> And he said, Brethren and fathers, hearken:
The God of glory appeared unto our father Abraham, when he was in
Mesopotamia, before he dwelt in Haran,

<span id="an_7:3">7:3</span> and said unto him, Get thee out of thy
land, and from thy kindred, and come into the land which I shall show
thee.

<span id="an_7:4">7:4</span> Then came he out of the land of the
Chaldaeans, and dwelt in Haran: and from thence, when his father was
dead, \[God\] removed him into this land, wherein ye now dwell:

<span id="an_7:5">7:5</span> and he gave him none inheritance in it, no,
not so much as to set his foot on: and he promised that he would give it
to him in possession, and to his seed after him, when \[as yet\] he had
no child.

<span id="an_7:6">7:6</span> And God spake on this wise, that his seed
should sojourn in a strange land, and that they should bring them into
bondage, and treat them ill, four hundred years.

<span id="an_7:7">7:7</span> And the nation to which they shall be in
bondage will I judge, said God: and after that shall they come forth,
and serve me in this place.

<span id="an_7:8">7:8</span> And he gave him the covenant of
circumcision: and so \[Abraham\] begat Isaac, and circumcised him the
eighth day; and Isaac \[begat\] Jacob, and Jacob the twelve patriarchs.

<span id="an_7:9">7:9</span> And the patriarchs, moved with jealousy
against Joseph, sold him into Egypt: and God was with him,

<span id="an_7:10">7:10</span> and delivered him out of all his
afflictions, and gave him favor and wisdom before Pharaoh king of Egypt;
and he made him governor over Egypt and all his house.

<span id="an_7:11">7:11</span> Now there came a famine over all Egypt
and Canaan, and great affliction: and our fathers found no sustenance.

<span id="an_7:12">7:12</span> But when Jacob heard that there was grain
in Egypt, he sent forth our fathers the first time.

<span id="an_7:13">7:13</span> And at the second time Joseph was made
known to his brethren; and Joseph's race became manifest unto Pharaoh.

<span id="an_7:14">7:14</span> And Joseph sent, and called to him Jacob
his father, and all his kindred, threescore and fifteen souls.

<span id="an_7:15">7:15</span> And Jacob went down into Egypt; and he
died, himself and our fathers;

<span id="an_7:16">7:16</span> and they were carried over unto Shechem,
and laid in the tomb that Abraham bought for a price in silver of the
sons of Hamor in Shechem.

<span id="an_7:17">7:17</span> But as the time of the promise drew nigh
which God vouchsafed unto Abraham, the people grew and multiplied in
Egypt,

<span id="an_7:18">7:18</span> till there arose another king over Egypt,
who knew not Joseph.

<span id="an_7:19">7:19</span> The same dealt craftily with our race,
and ill-treated our fathers, that they should cast out their babes to
the end they might not live.

<span id="an_7:20">7:20</span> At which season Moses was born, and was
exceeding fair; and he was nourished three months in his father's house.

<span id="an_7:21">7:21</span> and when he was cast out, Pharaoh's
daughter took him up, and nourished him for her own son.

<span id="an_7:22">7:22</span> And Moses was instructed in all the
wisdom of the Egyptians; and he was mighty in his words and works.

<span id="an_7:23">7:23</span> But when he was well-nigh forty years
old, it came into his heart to visit his brethren the children of
Israel.

<span id="an_7:24">7:24</span> And seeing one \[of them\] suffer wrong,
he defended him, and avenged him that was oppressed, smiting the
Egyptian:

<span id="an_7:25">7:25</span> and he supposed that his brethren
understood that God by his hand was giving them deliverance; but they
understood not.

<span id="an_7:26">7:26</span> And the day following he appeared unto
them as they strove, and would have set them at one again, saying, Sirs,
ye are brethren; why do ye wrong one to another?

<span id="an_7:27">7:27</span> But he that did his neighbor wrong thrust
him away, saying, Who made thee a ruler and a judge over us?

<span id="an_7:28">7:28</span> Wouldest thou kill me, as thou killedst
the Egyptian yesterday?

<span id="an_7:29">7:29</span> And Moses fled at this saying, and became
a sojourner in the land of Midian, where he begat two sons.

<span id="an_7:30">7:30</span> And when forty years were fulfilled, an
angel appeared to him in the wilderness of Mount Sinai, in a flame of
fire in a bush.

<span id="an_7:31">7:31</span> And when Moses saw it, he wondered at the
sight: and as he drew near to behold, there came a voice of the Lord,

<span id="an_7:32">7:32</span> I am the God of thy fathers, the God of
Abraham, and of Isaac, and of Jacob. And Moses trembled, and durst not
behold.

<span id="an_7:33">7:33</span> And the Lord said unto him, Loose the
shoes from thy feet: for the place whereon thou standest is holy ground.

<span id="an_7:34">7:34</span> I have surely seen the affliction of my
people that is in Egypt, and have heard their groaning, and I am come
down to deliver them: and now come, I will send thee into Egypt.

<span id="an_7:35">7:35</span> This Moses whom they refused, saying, Who
made thee a ruler and a judge? him hath God sent \[to be\] both a ruler
and a deliverer with the hand of the angel that appeared to him in the
bush.

<span id="an_7:36">7:36</span> This man led them forth, having wrought
wonders and signs in Egypt, and in the Red Sea, and in the wilderness
forty years.

<span id="an_7:37">7:37</span> This is that Moses, who said unto the
children of Israel, A prophet shall God raise up unto you from among
your brethren, like unto me.

<span id="an_7:38">7:38</span> This is he that was in the church in the
wilderness with the angel that spake to him in the Mount Sinai, and with
our fathers: who received living oracles to give unto us:

<span id="an_7:39">7:39</span> to whom our fathers would not be
obedient, but thrust him from them, and turned back in their hearts unto
Egypt,

<span id="an_7:40">7:40</span> saying unto Aaron, Make us gods that
shall go before us: for as for this Moses, who led us forth out of the
land of Egypt, we know not what is become of him.

<span id="an_7:41">7:41</span> And they made a calf in those days, and
brought a sacrifice unto the idol, and rejoiced in the works of their
hands.

<span id="an_7:42">7:42</span> But God turned, and gave them up to serve
the host of heaven; as it is written in the book of the prophets, Did ye
offer unto me slain beasts and sacrifices Forty years in the wilderness,
O house of Israel?

<span id="an_7:43">7:43</span> And ye took up the tabernacle of Moloch,
And the star of the god Rephan, The figures which ye made to worship
them: And I will carry you away beyond Babylon.

<span id="an_7:44">7:44</span> Our fathers had the tabernacle of the
testimony in the wilderness, even as he appointed who spake unto Moses,
that he should make it according to the figure that he had seen.

<span id="an_7:45">7:45</span> Which also our fathers, in their turn,
brought in with Joshua when they entered on the possession of the
nations, that God thrust out before the face of our fathers, unto the
days of David;

<span id="an_7:46">7:46</span> who found favor in the sight of God, and
asked to find a habitation for the God of Jacob.

<span id="an_7:47">7:47</span> But Solomon built him a house.

<span id="an_7:48">7:48</span> Howbeit the Most High dwelleth not in
\[houses\] made with hands; as saith the prophet,

<span id="an_7:49">7:49</span> The heaven is my throne, And the earth
the footstool of my feet: What manner of house will ye build me? saith
the Lord: Or what is the place of my rest?

<span id="an_7:50">7:50</span> Did not my hand make all these things?

<span id="an_7:51">7:51</span> Ye stiffnecked and uncircumcised in heart
and ears, ye do always resist the Holy Spirit: as your fathers did, so
do ye.

<span id="an_7:52">7:52</span> Which of the prophets did not your
fathers persecute? and they killed them that showed before of the coming
of the Righteous One; of whom ye have now become betrayers and
murderers;

<span id="an_7:53">7:53</span> ye who received the law as it was
ordained by angels, and kept it not.

<span id="an_7:54">7:54</span> Now when they heard these things, they
were cut to the heart, and they gnashed on him with their teeth.

<span id="an_7:55">7:55</span> But he, being full of the Holy Spirit,
looked up stedfastly into heaven, and saw the glory of God, and Jesus
standing on the right hand of God,

<span id="an_7:56">7:56</span> and said, Behold, I see the heavens
opened, and the Son of Man standing on the right hand of God.

<span id="an_7:57">7:57</span> But they cried out with a loud voice, and
stopped their ears, and rushed upon him with one accord;

<span id="an_7:58">7:58</span> and they cast him out of the city, and
stoned him: and the witnesses laid down their garments at the feet of a
young man named Saul.

<span id="an_7:59">7:59</span> And they stoned Stephen, calling upon
\[the Lord\], and saying, Lord Jesus, receive my spirit.

<span id="an_7:60">7:60</span> And he kneeled down, and cried with a
loud voice, Lord, lay not this sin to their charge. And when he had said
this, he fell asleep.

<span id="an_8:1">8:1</span> And Saul was consenting unto his death. And
there arose on that day a great persecution against the church which was
in Jerusalem; and they were all scattered abroad throughout the regions
of Judaea and Samaria, except the apostles.

<span id="an_8:2">8:2</span> And devout men buried Stephen, and made
great lamentation over him.

<span id="an_8:3">8:3</span> But Saul laid waste the church, entering
into every house, and dragging men and women committed them to prison.

<span id="an_8:4">8:4</span> They therefore that were scattered abroad,
went about preaching the word.

<span id="an_8:5">8:5</span> And Philip went down to the city of
Samaria, and proclaimed unto them the Christ.

<span id="an_8:6">8:6</span> And the multitudes gave heed with one
accord unto the things that were spoken by Philip, when they heard, and
saw the signs which he did.

<span id="an_8:7">8:7</span> For \[from\] many of those that had unclean
spirits, they came out, crying with a loud voice: and many that were
palsied, and that were lame, were healed.

<span id="an_8:8">8:8</span> And there was much joy in that city.

<span id="an_8:9">8:9</span> But there was a certain man, Simon by name,
who beforetime in the city used sorcery, and amazed the people of
Samaria, giving out that himself was some great one:

<span id="an_8:10">8:10</span> to whom they all gave heed, from the
least to the greatest, saying, This man is that power of God which is
called Great.

<span id="an_8:11">8:11</span> And they gave heed to him, because that
of long time he had amazed them with his sorceries.

<span id="an_8:12">8:12</span> But when they believed Philip preaching
good tidings concerning the kingdom of God and the name of Jesus Christ,
they were baptized, both men and women.

<span id="an_8:13">8:13</span> And Simon also himself believed: and
being baptized, he continued with Philip; and beholding signs and great
miracles wrought, he was amazed.

<span id="an_8:14">8:14</span> Now when the apostles that were at
Jerusalem heard that Samaria had received the word of God, they sent
unto them Peter and John:

<span id="an_8:15">8:15</span> who, when they were come down, prayed for
them, that they might receive the Holy Spirit:

<span id="an_8:16">8:16</span> for as yet it was fallen upon none of
them: only they had been baptized into the name of the Lord Jesus.

<span id="an_8:17">8:17</span> Then laid they their hands on them, and
they received the Holy Spirit.

<span id="an_8:18">8:18</span> Now when Simon saw that through the
laying on of the apostles' hands the Holy Spirit was given, he offered
them money,

<span id="an_8:19">8:19</span> saying, Give me also this power, that on
whomsoever I lay my hands, he may receive the Holy Spirit.

<span id="an_8:20">8:20</span> But Peter said unto him, Thy silver
perish with thee, because thou hast thought to obtain the gift of God
with money.

<span id="an_8:21">8:21</span> Thou hast neither part nor lot in this
matter: for thy heart is not right before God.

<span id="an_8:22">8:22</span> Repent therefore of this thy wickedness,
and pray the Lord, if perhaps the thought of thy heart shall be forgiven
thee.

<span id="an_8:23">8:23</span> For I see that thou art in the gall of
bitterness and in the bond of iniquity.

<span id="an_8:24">8:24</span> And Simon answered and said, Pray ye for
me to the Lord, that none of the things which ye have spoken come upon
me.

<span id="an_8:25">8:25</span> They therefore, when they had testified
and spoken the word of the Lord, returned to Jerusalem, and preached the
gospel to many villages of the Samaritans.

<span id="an_8:26">8:26</span> But an angel of the Lord spake unto
Philip, saying, Arise, and go toward the south unto the way that goeth
down from Jerusalem unto Gaza: the same is desert.

<span id="an_8:27">8:27</span> And he arose and went: and behold, a man
of Ethiopia, a eunuch of great authority under Candace, queen of the
Ethiopians, who was over all her treasure, who had come to Jerusalem to
worship;

<span id="an_8:28">8:28</span> and he was returning and sitting in his
chariot, and was reading the prophet Isaiah.

<span id="an_8:29">8:29</span> And the Spirit said unto Philip, Go near,
and join thyself to this chariot.

<span id="an_8:30">8:30</span> And Philip ran to him, and heard him
reading Isaiah the prophet, and said, Understandest thou what thou
readest?

<span id="an_8:31">8:31</span> And he said, How can I, except some one
shall guide me? And he besought Philip to come up and sit with him.

<span id="an_8:32">8:32</span> Now the passage of the Scripture which he
was reading was this, He was led as a sheep to the slaughter; And as a
lamb before his shearer is dumb, So he openeth not his mouth:

<span id="an_8:33">8:33</span> In his humiliation his judgment was taken
away: His generation who shall declare? For his life is taken from the
earth.

<span id="an_8:34">8:34</span> And the eunuch answered Philip, and said,
I pray thee, of whom speaketh the prophet this? of himself, or of some
other?

<span id="an_8:35">8:35</span> And Philip opened his mouth, and
beginning from this Scripture, preached unto him Jesus.

<span id="an_8:36">8:36</span> And as they went on the way, they came
unto a certain water; and the eunuch saith, Behold, \[here is\] water;
what doth hinder me to be baptized?

<span id="an_8:37">8:37</span> \[And Philip said, If thou believest with
all thy heart, thou mayest. And he answered and said, I believe that
Jesus Christ is the Son of God.\]

<span id="an_8:38">8:38</span> And he commanded the chariot to stand
still: and they both went down into the water, both Philip and the
eunuch, and he baptized him.

<span id="an_8:39">8:39</span> And when they came up out of the water,
the Spirit of the Lord caught away Philip; and the eunuch saw him no
more, for he went on his way rejoicing.

<span id="an_8:40">8:40</span> But Philip was found at Azotus: and
passing through he preached the gospel to all the cities, till he came
to Caesarea.

<span id="an_9:1">9:1</span> But Saul, yet breathing threatening and
slaughter against the disciples of the Lord, went unto the high priest,

<span id="an_9:2">9:2</span> and asked of him letters to Damascus unto
the synagogues, that if he found any that were of the Way, whether men
or women, he might bring them bound to Jerusalem.

<span id="an_9:3">9:3</span> And as he journeyed, it came to pass that
he drew nigh unto Damascus: and suddenly there shone round about him a
light out of heaven:

<span id="an_9:4">9:4</span> and he fell upon the earth, and heard a
voice saying unto him, Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me?

<span id="an_9:5">9:5</span> And he said, Who art thou, Lord? And he
\[said\], I am Jesus whom thou persecutest:

<span id="an_9:6">9:6</span> but rise, and enter into the city, and it
shall be told thee what thou must do.

<span id="an_9:7">9:7</span> And the men that journeyed with him stood
speechless, hearing the voice, but beholding no man.

<span id="an_9:8">9:8</span> And Saul arose from the earth; and when his
eyes were opened, he saw nothing; and they led him by the hand, and
brought him into Damascus.

<span id="an_9:9">9:9</span> And he was three days without sight, and
did neither eat nor drink.

<span id="an_9:10">9:10</span> Now there was a certain disciple at
Damascus, named Ananias; and the Lord said unto him in a vision,
Ananias. And he said, Behold, I \[am here\], Lord.

<span id="an_9:11">9:11</span> And the Lord \[said\] unto him, Arise,
and go to the street which is called Straight, and inquire in the house
of Judas for one named Saul, a man of Tarsus: for behold, he prayeth;

<span id="an_9:12">9:12</span> and he hath seen a man named Ananias
coming in, and laying his hands on him, that he might receive his sight.

<span id="an_9:13">9:13</span> But Ananias answered, Lord, I have heard
from many of this man, how much evil he did to thy saints at Jerusalem:

<span id="an_9:14">9:14</span> and here he hath authority from the chief
priests to bind all that call upon thy name.

<span id="an_9:15">9:15</span> But the Lord said unto him, Go thy way:
for he is a chosen vessel unto me, to bear my name before the Gentiles
and kings, and the children of Israel:

<span id="an_9:16">9:16</span> for I will show him how many things he
must suffer for my name's sake.

<span id="an_9:17">9:17</span> And Ananias departed, and entered into
the house; and laying his hands on him said, Brother Saul, the Lord,
\[even\] Jesus, who appeared unto thee in the way which thou camest,
hath sent me, that thou mayest receive thy sight, and be filled with the
Holy Spirit.

<span id="an_9:18">9:18</span> And straightway there fell from his eyes
as it were scales, and he received his sight; and he arose and was
baptized;

<span id="an_9:19">9:19</span> and he took food and was strengthened.
And he was certain days with the disciples that were at Damascus.

<span id="an_9:20">9:20</span> And straightway in the synagogues he
proclaimed Jesus, that he is the Son of God.

<span id="an_9:21">9:21</span> And all that heard him were amazed, and
said, Is not this he that in Jerusalem made havoc of them that called on
this name? and he had come hither for this intent, that he might bring
them bound before the chief priests.

<span id="an_9:22">9:22</span> But Saul increased the more in strength,
and confounded the Jews that dwelt at Damascus, proving that this is the
Christ.

<span id="an_9:23">9:23</span> And when many days were fulfilled, the
Jews took counsel together to kill him:

<span id="an_9:24">9:24</span> but their plot became known to Saul. And
they watched the gates also day and night that they might kill him:

<span id="an_9:25">9:25</span> but his disciples took him by night, and
let him down through the wall, lowering him in a basket.

<span id="an_9:26">9:26</span> And when he was come to Jerusalem, he
assayed to join himself to the disciples: and they were all afraid of
him, not believing that he was a disciple.

<span id="an_9:27">9:27</span> But Barnabas took him, and brought him to
the apostles, and declared unto them how he had seen the Lord in the
way, and that he had spoken to him, and how at Damascus he had preached
boldly in the name of Jesus.

<span id="an_9:28">9:28</span> And he was with them going in and going
out at Jerusalem,

<span id="an_9:29">9:29</span> preaching boldly in the name of the Lord:
and he spake and disputed against the Grecian Jews; but they were
seeking to kill him.

<span id="an_9:30">9:30</span> And when the brethren knew it, they
brought him down to Caesarea, and sent him forth to Tarsus.

<span id="an_9:31">9:31</span> So the church throughout all Judaea and
Galilee and Samaria had peace, being edified; and, walking in the fear
of the Lord and in the comfort of the Holy Spirit, was multiplied.

<span id="an_9:32">9:32</span> And it came to pass, as Peter went
throughout all parts, he came down also to the saints that dwelt at
Lydda.

<span id="an_9:33">9:33</span> And there he found a certain man named
Aeneas, who had kept his bed eight years; for he was palsied.

<span id="an_9:34">9:34</span> And Peter said unto him, Aeneas, Jesus
Christ healeth thee: arise and make thy bed. And straightway he arose.

<span id="an_9:35">9:35</span> And all that dwelt at Lydda and in Sharon
saw him, and they turned to the Lord.

<span id="an_9:36">9:36</span> Now there was at Joppa a certain disciple
named Tabitha, which by interpretation is called Dorcas: this woman was
full of good works and almsdeeds which she did.

<span id="an_9:37">9:37</span> And it came to pass in those days, that
she fell sick, and died: and when they had washed her, they laid her in
an upper chamber.

<span id="an_9:38">9:38</span> And as Lydda was nigh unto Joppa, the
disciples, hearing that Peter was there, sent two men unto him,
entreating him, Delay not to come on unto us.

<span id="an_9:39">9:39</span> And Peter arose and went with them. And
when he was come, they brought him into the upper chamber: and all the
widows stood by him weeping, and showing the coats and garments which
Dorcas made, while she was with them.

<span id="an_9:40">9:40</span> But Peter put them all forth, and kneeled
down and prayed; and turning to the body, he said, Tabitha, arise. And
she opened her eyes; and when she saw Peter, she sat up.

<span id="an_9:41">9:41</span> And he gave her his hand, and raised her
up; and calling the saints and widows, he presented her alive.

<span id="an_9:42">9:42</span> And it became known throughout all Joppa:
and many believed on the Lord.

<span id="an_9:43">9:43</span> And it came to pass, that he abode many
days in Joppa with one Simon a tanner.

<span id="an_10:1">10:1</span> Now \[there was\] a certain man in
Caesarea, Cornelius by name, a centurion of the band called the Italian
\[band\],

<span id="an_10:2">10:2</span> a devout man, and one that feared God
with all his house, who gave much alms to the people, and prayed to God
always.

<span id="an_10:3">10:3</span> He saw in a vision openly, as it were
about the ninth hour of the day, an angel of God coming in unto him, and
saying to him, Cornelius.

<span id="an_10:4">10:4</span> And he, fastening his eyes upon him, and
being affrighted, said, What is it, Lord? And he said unto him, Thy
prayers and thine alms are gone up for a memorial before God.

<span id="an_10:5">10:5</span> And now send men to Joppa, and fetch one
Simon, who is surnamed Peter:

<span id="an_10:6">10:6</span> he lodgeth with one Simon a tanner, whose
house is by the sea side.

<span id="an_10:7">10:7</span> And when the angel that spake unto him
was departed, he called two of his household-servants, and a devout
soldier of them that waited on him continually;

<span id="an_10:8">10:8</span> and having rehearsed all things unto
them, he sent them to Joppa.

<span id="an_10:9">10:9</span> Now on the morrow, as they were on their
journey, and drew nigh unto the city, Peter went up upon the housetop to
pray, about the sixth hour:

<span id="an_10:10">10:10</span> and he became hungry, and desired to
eat: but while they made ready, he fell into a trance;

<span id="an_10:11">10:11</span> and he beholdeth the heaven opened, and
a certain vessel descending, as it were a great sheet, let down by four
corners upon the earth:

<span id="an_10:12">10:12</span> wherein were all manner of fourfooted
beasts and creeping things of the earth and birds of the heaven.

<span id="an_10:13">10:13</span> And there came a voice to him, Rise,
Peter; kill and eat.

<span id="an_10:14">10:14</span> But Peter said, Not so, Lord; for I
have never eaten anything that is common and unclean.

<span id="an_10:15">10:15</span> And a voice \[came\] unto him again the
second time, What God hath cleansed, make not thou common.

<span id="an_10:16">10:16</span> And this was done thrice: and
straightway the vessel was received up into heaven.

<span id="an_10:17">10:17</span> Now while Peter was much perplexed in
himself what the vision which he had seen might mean, behold, the men
that were sent by Cornelius, having made inquiry for Simon's house,
stood before the gate,

<span id="an_10:18">10:18</span> and called and asked whether Simon, who
was surnamed Peter, were lodging there.

<span id="an_10:19">10:19</span> And while Peter thought on the vision,
the Spirit said unto him, Behold, three men seek thee.

<span id="an_10:20">10:20</span> But arise, and get thee down, and go
with them, nothing doubting: for I have sent them.

<span id="an_10:21">10:21</span> And Peter went down to the men, and
said, Behold, I am he whom ye seek: what is the cause wherefore ye are
come?

<span id="an_10:22">10:22</span> And they said, Cornelius a centurion, a
righteous man and one that feareth God, and well reported of by all the
nation of the Jews, was warned \[of God\] by a holy angel to send for
thee into his house, and to hear words from thee.

<span id="an_10:23">10:23</span> So he called them in and lodged them.
And on the morrow he arose and went forth with them, and certain of the
brethren from Joppa accompanied him.

<span id="an_10:24">10:24</span> And on the morrow they entered into
Caesarea. And Cornelius was waiting for them, having called together his
kinsmen and his near friends.

<span id="an_10:25">10:25</span> And when it came to pass that Peter
entered, Cornelius met him, and fell down at his feet, and worshipped
him.

<span id="an_10:26">10:26</span> But Peter raised him up, saying, Stand
up; I myself also am a man.

<span id="an_10:27">10:27</span> And as he talked with him, he went in,
and findeth many come together:

<span id="an_10:28">10:28</span> and he said unto them, Ye yourselves
know how it is an unlawful thing for a man that is a Jew to join himself
or come unto one of another nation; and \[yet\] unto me hath God showed
that I should not call any man common or unclean:

<span id="an_10:29">10:29</span> wherefore also I came without
gainsaying, when I was sent for. I ask therefore with what intent ye
sent for me.

<span id="an_10:30">10:30</span> And Cornelius said, Four days ago,
until this hour, I was keeping the ninth hour of prayer in my house; and
behold, a man stood before me in bright apparel,

<span id="an_10:31">10:31</span> and saith, Cornelius, thy prayer is
heard, and thine alms are had in remembrance in the sight of God.

<span id="an_10:32">10:32</span> Send therefore to Joppa, and call unto
thee Simon, who is surnamed Peter; he lodgeth in the house of Simon a
tanner, by the sea side.

<span id="an_10:33">10:33</span> Forthwith therefore I sent to thee; and
thou hast well done that thou art come. Now therefore we are all here
present in the sight of God, to hear all things that have been commanded
thee of the Lord.

<span id="an_10:34">10:34</span> And Peter opened his mouth and said, Of
a truth I perceive that God is no respecter of persons:

<span id="an_10:35">10:35</span> but in every nation he that feareth
him, and worketh righteousness, is acceptable to him.

<span id="an_10:36">10:36</span> The word which he sent unto the
children of Israel, preaching good tidings of peace by Jesus Christ (He
is Lord of all.) --

<span id="an_10:37">10:37</span> that saying ye yourselves know, which
was published throughout all Judaea, beginning from Galilee, after the
baptism which John preached;

<span id="an_10:38">10:38</span> \[even\] Jesus of Nazareth, how God
anointed him with the Holy Spirit and with power: who went about doing
good, and healing all that were oppressed of the devil; for God was with
him.

<span id="an_10:39">10:39</span> And we are witnesses of all things
which he did both in the country of the Jews, and in Jerusalem; whom
also they slew, hanging him on a tree.

<span id="an_10:40">10:40</span> Him God raised up the third day, and
gave him to be made manifest,

<span id="an_10:41">10:41</span> not to all the people, but unto
witnesses that were chosen before of God, \[even\] to us, who ate and
drank with him after he rose from the dead.

<span id="an_10:42">10:42</span> And he charged us to preach unto the
people, and to testify that this is he who is ordained of God \[to be\]
the Judge of the living and the dead.

<span id="an_10:43">10:43</span> To him bear all the prophets witness,
that through his name every one that believeth on him shall receive
remission of sins.

<span id="an_10:44">10:44</span> While Peter yet spake these words, the
Holy Spirit fell on all them that heard the word.

<span id="an_10:45">10:45</span> And they of the circumcision that
believed were amazed, as many as came with Peter, because that on the
Gentiles also was poured out the gift of the Holy Spirit.

<span id="an_10:46">10:46</span> For they heard them speak with tongues,
and magnify God. Then answered Peter,

<span id="an_10:47">10:47</span> Can any man forbid the water, that
these should not be baptized, who have received the Holy Spirit as well
as we?

<span id="an_10:48">10:48</span> And he commanded them to be baptized in
the name of Jesus Christ. Then prayed they him to tarry certain days.

<span id="an_11:1">11:1</span> Now the apostles and the brethren that
were in Judaea heard that the Gentiles also had received the word of
God.

<span id="an_11:2">11:2</span> And when Peter was come up to Jerusalem,
they that were of the circumcision contended with him,

<span id="an_11:3">11:3</span> saying, Thou wentest in to men
uncircumcised, and didst eat with them.

<span id="an_11:4">11:4</span> But Peter began, and expounded \[the
matter\] unto them in order, saying,

<span id="an_11:5">11:5</span> I was in the city of Joppa praying: and
in a trance I saw a vision, a certain vessel descending, as it were a
great sheet let down from heaven by four corners; and it came even unto
me:

<span id="an_11:6">11:6</span> upon which when I had fastened mine eyes,
I considered, and saw the fourfooted beasts of the earth and wild beasts
and creeping things and birds of the heaven.

<span id="an_11:7">11:7</span> And I heard also a voice saying unto me,
Rise, Peter; kill and eat.

<span id="an_11:8">11:8</span> But I said, Not so, Lord: for nothing
common or unclean hath ever entered into my mouth.

<span id="an_11:9">11:9</span> But a voice answered the second time out
of heaven, What God hath cleansed, make not thou common.

<span id="an_11:10">11:10</span> And this was done thrice: and all were
drawn up again into heaven.

<span id="an_11:11">11:11</span> And behold, forthwith three men stood
before the house in which we were, having been sent from Caesarea unto
me.

<span id="an_11:12">11:12</span> And the Spirit bade me go with them,
making no distinction. And these six brethren also accompanied me; and
we entered into the man's house:

<span id="an_11:13">11:13</span> and he told us how he had seen the
angel standing in his house, and saying, Send to Joppa, and fetch Simon,
whose surname is Peter;

<span id="an_11:14">11:14</span> who shall speak unto thee words,
whereby thou shalt be saved, thou and all thy house.

<span id="an_11:15">11:15</span> And as I began to speak, the Holy
Spirit fell on them, even as on us at the beginning.

<span id="an_11:16">11:16</span> And I remembered the word of the Lord,
how he said, John indeed baptized with water; but ye shall be baptized
in the Holy Spirit.

<span id="an_11:17">11:17</span> If then God gave unto them the like
gift as \[he did\] also unto us, when we believed on the Lord Jesus
Christ, who was I, that I could withstand God?

<span id="an_11:18">11:18</span> And when they heard these things, they
held their peace, and glorified God, saying, Then to the Gentiles also
hath God granted repentance unto life.

<span id="an_11:19">11:19</span> They therefore that were scattered
abroad upon the tribulation that arose about Stephen travelled as far as
Phoenicia, and Cyprus, and Antioch, speaking the word to none save only
to Jews.

<span id="an_11:20">11:20</span> But there were some of them, men of
Cyprus and Cyrene, who, when they were come to Antioch, spake unto the
Greeks also, preaching the Lord Jesus.

<span id="an_11:21">11:21</span> And the hand of the Lord was with them:
and a great number that believed turned unto the Lord.

<span id="an_11:22">11:22</span> And the report concerning them came to
the ears of the church which was in Jerusalem: and they sent forth
Barnabas as far as Antioch:

<span id="an_11:23">11:23</span> who, when he was come, and had seen the
grace of God, was glad; and he exhorted them all, that with purpose of
heart they would cleave unto the Lord:

<span id="an_11:24">11:24</span> for he was a good man, and full of the
Holy Spirit and of faith: and much people was added unto the Lord.

<span id="an_11:25">11:25</span> And he went forth to Tarsus to seek for
Saul;

<span id="an_11:26">11:26</span> and when he had found him, he brought
him unto Antioch. And it came to pass, that even for a whole year they
were gathered together with the church, and taught much people, and that
the disciples were called Christians first in Antioch.

<span id="an_11:27">11:27</span> Now in these days there came down
prophets from Jerusalem unto Antioch.

<span id="an_11:28">11:28</span> And there stood up one of them named
Agabus, and signified by the Spirit that there should be a great famine
over all the world: which came to pass in the days of Claudius.

<span id="an_11:29">11:29</span> And the disciples, every man according
to his ability, determined to send relief unto the brethren that dwelt
in Judea:

<span id="an_11:30">11:30</span> which also they did, sending it to the
elders by the hand of Barnabas and Saul.

<span id="an_12:1">12:1</span> Now about that time Herod the king put
forth his hands to afflict certain of the church.

<span id="an_12:2">12:2</span> And he killed James the brother of John
with the sword.

<span id="an_12:3">12:3</span> And when he saw that it pleased the Jews,
he proceeded to seize Peter also. And \[those\] were the days of
unleavened bread.

<span id="an_12:4">12:4</span> And when he had taken him, he put him in
prison, and delivered him to four quaternions of soldiers to guard him;
intending after the Passover to bring him forth to the people.

<span id="an_12:5">12:5</span> Peter therefore was kept in the prison:
but prayer was made earnestly of the church unto God for him.

<span id="an_12:6">12:6</span> And when Herod was about to bring him
forth, the same night Peter was sleeping between two soldiers, bound
with two chains: and guards before the door kept the prison.

<span id="an_12:7">12:7</span> And behold, an angel of the Lord stood by
him, and a light shined in the cell: and he smote Peter on the side, and
awoke him, saying, Rise up quickly. And his chains fell off from his
hands.

<span id="an_12:8">12:8</span> And the angel said unto him, Gird
thyself, and bind on thy sandals. And he did so. And he saith unto him,
Cast thy garment about thee, and follow me.

<span id="an_12:9">12:9</span> And he went out, and followed; and he
knew not that it was true which was done by the angel, but thought he
saw a vision.

<span id="an_12:10">12:10</span> And when they were past the first and
the second guard, they came unto the iron gate that leadeth into the
city; which opened to them of its own accord: and they went out, and
passed on through one street; and straightway the angel departed from
him.

<span id="an_12:11">12:11</span> And when Peter was come to himself, he
said, Now I know of a truth, that the Lord hath sent forth his angel and
delivered me out of the hand of Herod, and from all the expectation of
the people of the Jews.

<span id="an_12:12">12:12</span> And when he had considered \[the
thing\], he came to the house of Mary the mother of John whose surname
was Mark; where many were gathered together and were praying.

<span id="an_12:13">12:13</span> And when he knocked at the door of the
gate, a maid came to answer, named Rhoda.

<span id="an_12:14">12:14</span> And when she knew Peter's voice, she
opened not the gate for joy, but ran in, and told that Peter stood
before the gate.

<span id="an_12:15">12:15</span> And they said unto her, Thou art mad.
But she confidently affirmed that it was even so. And they said, It is
his angel.

<span id="an_12:16">12:16</span> But Peter continued knocking: and when
they had opened, they saw him, and were amazed.

<span id="an_12:17">12:17</span> But he, beckoning unto them with the
hand to hold their peace, declared unto them how the Lord had brought
him forth out of the prison. And he said, Tell these things unto James,
and to the brethren. And he departed, and went to another place.

<span id="an_12:18">12:18</span> Now as soon as it was day, there was no
small stir among the soldiers, what was become of Peter.

<span id="an_12:19">12:19</span> And when Herod had sought for him, and
found him not, he examined the guards, and commanded that they should be
put to death. And he went down from Judaea to Caesarea, and tarried
there.

<span id="an_12:20">12:20</span> Now he was highly displeased with them
of Tyre and Sidon: and they came with one accord to him, and, having
made Blastus the king's chamberlain their friend, they asked for peace,
because their country was fed from the king's country.

<span id="an_12:21">12:21</span> And upon a set day Herod arrayed
himself in royal apparel, and sat on the throne, and made an oration
unto them.

<span id="an_12:22">12:22</span> And the people shouted, \[saying\], The
voice of a god, and not of a man.

<span id="an_12:23">12:23</span> And immediately an angel of the Lord
smote him, because he gave not God the glory: and he was eaten of worms,
and gave up the ghost.

<span id="an_12:24">12:24</span> But the word of God grew and
multiplied.

<span id="an_12:25">12:25</span> And Barnabas and Saul returned from
Jerusalem, when they had fulfilled their ministration, taking with them
John whose surname was Mark.

<span id="an_13:1">13:1</span> Now there were at Antioch, in the church
that was \[there\], prophets and teachers, Barnabas, and Symeon that was
called Niger, and Lucius of Cyrene, and Manaen the foster-brother of
Herod the tetrarch, and Saul.

<span id="an_13:2">13:2</span> And as they ministered to the Lord, and
fasted, the Holy Spirit said, Separate me Barnabas and Saul for the work
whereunto I have called them.

<span id="an_13:3">13:3</span> Then, when they had fasted and prayed and
laid their hands on them, they sent them away.

<span id="an_13:4">13:4</span> So they, being sent forth by the Holy
Spirit, went down to Seleucia; and from thence they sailed to Cyprus.

<span id="an_13:5">13:5</span> And when they were at Salamis, they
proclaimed the word of God in the synagogues of the Jews: and they had
also John as their attendant.

<span id="an_13:6">13:6</span> And when they had gone through the whole
island unto Paphos, they found a certain sorcerer, a false prophet, a
Jew, whose name was Bar-jesus;

<span id="an_13:7">13:7</span> who was with the proconsul, Sergius
Paulus, a man of understanding. The same called unto him Barnabas and
Saul, and sought to hear the word of God.

<span id="an_13:8">13:8</span> But Elymas the sorcerer (for so is his
name by interpretation) withstood them, seeking to turn aside the
proconsul from the faith.

<span id="an_13:9">13:9</span> But Saul, who is also \[called\] Paul,
filled with the Holy Spirit, fastened his eyes on him,

<span id="an_13:10">13:10</span> and said, O full of all guile and all
villany, thou son of the devil, thou enemy of all righteousness, wilt
thou not cease to pervert the right ways of the Lord?

<span id="an_13:11">13:11</span> And now, behold, the hand of the Lord
is upon thee, and thou shalt be blind, not seeing the sun for a season.
And immediately there fell on him a mist and a darkness; and he went
about seeking some to lead him by the hand.

<span id="an_13:12">13:12</span> Then the proconsul, when he saw what
was done, believed, being astonished at the teaching of the Lord.

<span id="an_13:13">13:13</span> Now Paul and his company set sail from
Paphos, and came to Perga in Pamphylia: and John departed from them and
returned to Jerusalem.

<span id="an_13:14">13:14</span> But they, passing through from Perga,
came to Antioch of Pisidia; and they went into the synagogue on the
sabbath day, and sat down.

<span id="an_13:15">13:15</span> And after the reading of the law and
the prophets the rulers of the synagogue sent unto them, saying,
Brethren, if ye have any word of exhortation for the people, say on.

<span id="an_13:16">13:16</span> And Paul stood up, and beckoning with
the hand said, Men of Israel, and ye that fear God, hearken:

<span id="an_13:17">13:17</span> The God of this people Israel chose our
fathers, and exalted the people when they sojourned in the land of
Egypt, and with a high arm led he them forth out of it.

<span id="an_13:18">13:18</span> And for about the time of forty years
as a nursing-father bare he them in the wilderness.

<span id="an_13:19">13:19</span> And when he had destroyed seven nations
in the land of Canaan, he gave \[them\] their land for an inheritance,
for about four hundred and fifty years:

<span id="an_13:20">13:20</span> and after these things he gave \[them\]
judges until Samuel the prophet.

<span id="an_13:21">13:21</span> And afterward they asked for a king:
and God gave unto them Saul the son of Kish, a man of the tribe of
Benjamin, for the space of forty years.

<span id="an_13:22">13:22</span> And when he had removed him, he raised
up David to be their king; to whom also he bare witness and said, I have
found David the son of Jesse, a man after My heart, who shall do all My
will.

<span id="an_13:23">13:23</span> Of this man's seed hath God according
to promise brought unto Israel a Saviour, Jesus;

<span id="an_13:24">13:24</span> when John had first preached before his
coming the baptism of repentance to all the people of Israel.

<span id="an_13:25">13:25</span> And as John was fulfilling his course,
he said, What suppose ye that I am? I am not \[he\]. But behold, there
cometh one after me the shoes of whose feet I am not worthy to unloose.

<span id="an_13:26">13:26</span> Brethren, children of the stock of
Abraham, and those among you that fear God, to us is the word of this
salvation sent forth.

<span id="an_13:27">13:27</span> For they that dwell in Jerusalem, and
their rulers, because they knew him not, nor the voices of the prophets
which are read every sabbath, fulfilled \[them\] by condemning \[him\].

<span id="an_13:28">13:28</span> And though they found no cause of death
\[in him\], yet asked they of Pilate that he should be slain.

<span id="an_13:29">13:29</span> And when they had fulfilled all things
that were written of him, they took him down from the tree, and laid him
in a tomb.

<span id="an_13:30">13:30</span> But God raised him from the dead:

<span id="an_13:31">13:31</span> and he was seen for many days of them
that came up with him from Galilee to Jerusalem, who are now his
witnesses unto the people.

<span id="an_13:32">13:32</span> And we bring you good tidings of the
promise made unto the fathers,

<span id="an_13:33">13:33</span> that God hath fulfilled the same unto
our children, in that he raised up Jesus; as also it is written in the
second psalm, Thou art my Son, this day have I begotten thee.

<span id="an_13:34">13:34</span> And as concerning that he raised him up
from the dead, now no more to return to corruption, he hath spoken on
this wise, I will give you the holy and sure \[blessings\] of David.

<span id="an_13:35">13:35</span> Because he saith also in another
\[psalm\], Thou wilt not give Thy Holy One to see corruption.

<span id="an_13:36">13:36</span> For David, after he had in his own
generation served the counsel of God, fell asleep, and was laid unto his
fathers, and saw corruption:

<span id="an_13:37">13:37</span> but he whom God raised up saw no
corruption.

<span id="an_13:38">13:38</span> Be it known unto you therefore,
brethren, that through this man is proclaimed unto you remission of
sins:

<span id="an_13:39">13:39</span> and by him every one that believeth is
justified from all things, from which ye could not be justified by the
law of Moses.

<span id="an_13:40">13:40</span> Beware therefore, lest that come upon
\[you\] which is spoken in the prophets:

<span id="an_13:41">13:41</span> Behold, ye despisers, and wonder, and
perish; For I work a work in your days, A work which ye shall in no wise
believe, if one declare it unto you.

<span id="an_13:42">13:42</span> And as they went out, they besought
that these words might be spoken to them the next sabbath.

<span id="an_13:43">13:43</span> Now when the synagogue broke up, many
of the Jews and of the devout proselytes followed Paul and Barnabas;
who, speaking to them, urged them to continue in the grace of God.

<span id="an_13:44">13:44</span> And the next sabbath almost the whole
city was gathered together to hear the word of God.

<span id="an_13:45">13:45</span> But when the Jews saw the multitudes,
they were filled with jealousy, and contradicted the things which were
spoken by Paul, and blasphemed.

<span id="an_13:46">13:46</span> And Paul and Barnabas spake out boldly,
and said, It was necessary that the word of God should first be spoken
to you. Seeing ye thrust it from you, and judge yourselves unworthy of
eternal life, lo, we turn to the Gentiles.

<span id="an_13:47">13:47</span> For so hath the Lord commanded us,
\[saying\], I have set thee for a light of the Gentiles, That thou
shouldest be for salvation unto the uttermost part of the earth.

<span id="an_13:48">13:48</span> And as the Gentiles heard this, they
were glad, and glorified the word of God: and as many as were ordained
to eternal life believed.

<span id="an_13:49">13:49</span> And the word of the Lord was spread
abroad throughout all the region.

<span id="an_13:50">13:50</span> But the Jews urged on the devout women
of honorable estate, and the chief men of the city, and stirred up a
persecution against Paul and Barnabas, and cast them out of their
borders.

<span id="an_13:51">13:51</span> But they shook off the dust of their
feet against them, and came unto Iconium.

<span id="an_13:52">13:52</span> And the disciples were filled with joy
with the Holy Spirit.

<span id="an_14:1">14:1</span> And it came to pass in Iconium that they
entered together into the synagogue of the Jews, and so spake that a
great multitude both of Jews and of Greeks believed.

<span id="an_14:2">14:2</span> But the Jews that were disobedient
stirred up the souls of the Gentiles, and made them evil affected
against the brethren.

<span id="an_14:3">14:3</span> Long time therefore they tarried
\[there\] speaking boldly in the Lord, who bare witness unto the word of
his grace, granting signs and wonders to be done by their hands.

<span id="an_14:4">14:4</span> But the multitude of the city was
divided; and part held with the Jews, and part with the apostles.

<span id="an_14:5">14:5</span> And when there was made an onset both of
the Gentiles and of the Jews with their rulers, to treat them shamefully
and to stone them,

<span id="an_14:6">14:6</span> they became aware of it, and fled unto
the cities of Lycaonia, Lystra and Derbe, and the region round about:

<span id="an_14:7">14:7</span> and there they preached the gospel.

<span id="an_14:8">14:8</span> And at Lystra there sat a certain man,
impotent in his feet, a cripple from his mother's womb, who never had
walked.

<span id="an_14:9">14:9</span> The same heard Paul speaking, who,
fastening eyes upon him, and seeing that he had faith to be made whole,

<span id="an_14:10">14:10</span> said with a loud voice, Stand upright
on thy feet. And he leaped up and walked.

<span id="an_14:11">14:11</span> And when the multitude saw what Paul
had done, they lifted up their voice, saying in the speech of Lycaonia,
The gods are come down to us in the likeness of men.

<span id="an_14:12">14:12</span> And they called Barnabas, Jupiter; and
Paul, Mercury, because he was the chief speaker.

<span id="an_14:13">14:13</span> And the priest of Jupiter whose
\[temple\] was before the city, brought oxen and garlands unto the
gates, and would have done sacrifice with the multitudes.

<span id="an_14:14">14:14</span> But when the apostles, Barnabas and
Paul, heard of it, they rent their garments, and sprang forth among the
multitude, crying out

<span id="an_14:15">14:15</span> and saying, Sirs, why do ye these
things? We also are men of like passions with you, and bring you good
tidings, that ye should turn from these vain things unto a living God,
who made the heaven and the earth and the sea, and all that in them is:

<span id="an_14:16">14:16</span> who in the generations gone by suffered
all the nations to walk in their own ways.

<span id="an_14:17">14:17</span> And yet He left not himself without
witness, in that he did good and gave you from heaven rains and fruitful
seasons, filling your hearts with food and gladness.

<span id="an_14:18">14:18</span> And with these sayings scarce
restrained they the multitudes from doing sacrifice unto them.

<span id="an_14:19">14:19</span> But there came Jews thither from
Antioch and Iconium: and having persuaded the multitudes, they stoned
Paul, and dragged him out of the city, supposing that he was dead.

<span id="an_14:20">14:20</span> But as the disciples stood round about
him, he rose up, and entered into the city: and on the morrow he went
forth with Barnabas to Derbe.

<span id="an_14:21">14:21</span> And when they had preached the gospel
to that city, and had made many disciples, they returned to Lystra, and
to Iconium, and to Antioch,

<span id="an_14:22">14:22</span> confirming the souls of the disciples,
exhorting them to continue in the faith, and that through many
tribulations we must enter into the kingdom of God.

<span id="an_14:23">14:23</span> And when they had appointed for them
elders in every church, and had prayed with fasting, they commended them
to the Lord, on whom they had believed.

<span id="an_14:24">14:24</span> And they passed through Pisidia, and
came to Pamphylia.

<span id="an_14:25">14:25</span> And when they had spoken the word in
Perga, they went down to Attalia;

<span id="an_14:26">14:26</span> and thence they sailed to Antioch, from
whence they had been committed to the grace of God for the work which
they had fulfilled.

<span id="an_14:27">14:27</span> And when they were come, and had
gathered the church together, they rehearsed all things that God had
done with them, and that he had opened a door of faith unto the
Gentiles.

<span id="an_14:28">14:28</span> And they tarried no little time with
the disciples.

<span id="an_15:1">15:1</span> And certain men came down from Judaea and
taught the brethren, \[saying\], Except ye be circumcised after the
custom of Moses, ye cannot be saved.

<span id="an_15:2">15:2</span> And when Paul and Barnabas had no small
dissension and questioning with them, \[the brethren\] appointed that
Paul and Barnabas, and certain other of them, should go up to Jerusalem
unto the apostles and elders about this question.

<span id="an_15:3">15:3</span> They therefore, being brought on their
way by the church, passed through both Phoenicia and Samaria, declaring
the conversion of the Gentiles: and they caused great joy unto all the
brethren.

<span id="an_15:4">15:4</span> And when they were come to Jerusalem,
they were received of the church and the apostles and the elders, and
they rehearsed all things that God had done with them.

<span id="an_15:5">15:5</span> But there rose up certain of the sect of
the Pharisees who believed, saying, It is needful to circumcise them,
and to charge them to keep the law of Moses.

<span id="an_15:6">15:6</span> And the apostles and the elders were
gathered together to consider of this matter.

<span id="an_15:7">15:7</span> And when there had been much questioning,
Peter rose up, and said unto them, Brethren, ye know that a good while
ago God made choice among you, that by my mouth the Gentiles should hear
the word of the gospel, and believe.

<span id="an_15:8">15:8</span> And God, who knoweth the heart, bare them
witness, giving them the Holy Spirit, even as he did unto us;

<span id="an_15:9">15:9</span> and he made no distinction between us and
them, cleansing their hearts by faith.

<span id="an_15:10">15:10</span> Now therefore why make ye trial of God,
that ye should put a yoke upon the neck of the disciples which neither
our fathers nor we were able to bear?

<span id="an_15:11">15:11</span> But we believe that we shall be saved
through the grace of the Lord Jesus, in like manner as they.

<span id="an_15:12">15:12</span> And all the multitude kept silence; and
they hearkened unto Barnabas and Paul rehearsing what signs and wonders
God had wrought among the Gentiles through them.

<span id="an_15:13">15:13</span> And after they had held their peace,
James answered, saying, Brethren, hearken unto me:

<span id="an_15:14">15:14</span> Symeon hath rehearsed how first God
visited the Gentiles, to take out of them a people for his name.

<span id="an_15:15">15:15</span> And to this agree the words of the
prophets; as it is written,

<span id="an_15:16">15:16</span> After these things I will return, And I
will build again the tabernacle of David, which is fallen; And I will
build again the ruins thereof, And I will set it up:

<span id="an_15:17">15:17</span> That the residue of men may seek after
the Lord, And all the Gentiles, upon whom my name is called,

<span id="an_15:18">15:18</span> Saith the Lord, who maketh these things
known from of old.

<span id="an_15:19">15:19</span> Wherefore my judgment is, that we
trouble not them that from among the Gentiles turn to God;

<span id="an_15:20">15:20</span> but that we write unto them, that they
abstain from the pollutions of idols, and from fornication, and from
what is strangled, and from blood.

<span id="an_15:21">15:21</span> For Moses from generations of old hath
in every city them that preach him, being read in the synagogues every
sabbath.

<span id="an_15:22">15:22</span> Then it seemed good to the apostles and
the elders, with the whole church, to choose men out of their company,
and send them to Antioch with Paul and Barnabas; \[namely\], Judas
called Barsabbas, and Silas, chief men among the brethren:

<span id="an_15:23">15:23</span> and they wrote \[thus\] by them, The
apostles and the elders, brethren, unto the brethren who are of the
Gentiles in Antioch and Syria and Cilicia, greeting:

<span id="an_15:24">15:24</span> Forasmuch as we have heard that certain
who went out from us have troubled you with words, subverting your
souls; to whom we gave no commandment;

<span id="an_15:25">15:25</span> it seemed good unto us, having come to
one accord, to choose out men and send them unto you with our beloved
Barnabas and Paul,

<span id="an_15:26">15:26</span> men that have hazarded their lives for
the name of our Lord Jesus Christ.

<span id="an_15:27">15:27</span> We have sent therefore Judas and Silas,
who themselves also shall tell you the same things by word of mouth.

<span id="an_15:28">15:28</span> For it seemed good to the Holy Spirit,
and to us, to lay upon you no greater burden than these necessary
things:

<span id="an_15:29">15:29</span> that ye abstain from things sacrificed
to idols, and from blood, and from things strangled, and from
fornication; from which if ye keep yourselves, it shall be well with
you. Fare ye well.

<span id="an_15:30">15:30</span> So they, when they were dismissed, came
down to Antioch; and having gathered the multitude together, they
delivered the epistle.

<span id="an_15:31">15:31</span> And when they had read it, they
rejoiced for the consolation.

<span id="an_15:32">15:32</span> And Judas and Silas, being themselves
also prophets, exhorted the brethren with many words, and confirmed
them.

<span id="an_15:33">15:33</span> And after they had spent some time
\[there\], they were dismissed in peace from the brethren unto those
that had sent them forth.

<span id="an_15:34">15:34</span> \[But it seemed good unto Silas to
abide there.\]

<span id="an_15:35">15:35</span> But Paul and Barnabas tarried in
Antioch, teaching and preaching the word of the Lord, with many others
also.

<span id="an_15:36">15:36</span> And after some days Paul said unto
Barnabas, Let us return now and visit the brethren in every city wherein
we proclaimed the word of the Lord, \[and see\] how they fare.

<span id="an_15:37">15:37</span> And Barnabas was minded to take with
them John also, who was called Mark.

<span id="an_15:38">15:38</span> But Paul thought not good to take with
them him who withdrew from them from Pamphylia, and went not with them
to the work.

<span id="an_15:39">15:39</span> And there arose a sharp contention, so
that they parted asunder one from the other, and Barnabas took Mark with
him, and sailed away unto Cyprus;

<span id="an_15:40">15:40</span> but Paul choose Silas, and went forth,
being commended by the brethren to the grace of the Lord.

<span id="an_15:41">15:41</span> And he went through Syria and Cilicia,
confirming the churches.

<span id="an_16:1">16:1</span> And he came also to Derbe and to Lystra:
and behold, a certain disciple was there, named Timothy, the son of a
Jewess that believed; but his father was a Greek.

<span id="an_16:2">16:2</span> The same was well reported of by the
brethren that were at Lystra and Iconium.

<span id="an_16:3">16:3</span> Him would Paul have to go forth with him;
and he took and circumcised him because of the Jews that were in those
parts: for they all knew that his father was a Greek.

<span id="an_16:4">16:4</span> And as they went on their way through the
cities, they delivered them the decrees to keep which had been ordained
of the apostles and elders that were at Jerusalem.

<span id="an_16:5">16:5</span> So the churches were strengthened in the
faith, and increased in number daily.

<span id="an_16:6">16:6</span> And they went through the region of
Phrygia and Galatia, having been forbidden of the Holy Spirit to speak
the word in Asia;

<span id="an_16:7">16:7</span> and when they were come over against
Mysia, they assayed to go into Bithynia; and the Spirit of Jesus
suffered them not;

<span id="an_16:8">16:8</span> and passing by Mysia, they came down to
Troas.

<span id="an_16:9">16:9</span> And a vision appeared to Paul in the
night: There was a man of Macedonia standing, beseeching him, and
saying, Come over into Macedonia, and help us.

<span id="an_16:10">16:10</span> And when he had seen the vision,
straightway we sought to go forth into Macedonia, concluding that God
had called us to preach the gospel to them.

<span id="an_16:11">16:11</span> Setting sail therefore from Troas, we
made a straight course to Samothrace, and the day following to Neapolis;

<span id="an_16:12">16:12</span> and from thence to Philippi, which is a
city of Macedonia, the first of the district, a \[Roman\] colony: and we
were in this city tarrying certain days.

<span id="an_16:13">16:13</span> And on the sabbath day we went forth
without the gate by a river side, where we supposed there was a place of
prayer; and we sat down, and spake unto the women that were come
together.

<span id="an_16:14">16:14</span> And a certain woman named Lydia, a
seller of purple of the city of Thyatira, one that worshipped God, heard
us: whose heart the Lord opened to give heed unto the things which were
spoken by Paul.

<span id="an_16:15">16:15</span> And when she was baptized, and her
household, she besought us, saying, If ye have judged me to be faithful
to the Lord, come into my house, and abide \[there\]. And she
constrained us.

<span id="an_16:16">16:16</span> And it came to pass, as we were going
to the place of prayer, that a certain maid having a spirit of
divination met us, who brought her masters much gain by soothsaying.

<span id="an_16:17">16:17</span> The same following after Paul and us
cried out, saying, These men are servants of the Most High God, who
proclaim unto you the way of salvation.

<span id="an_16:18">16:18</span> And this she did for many days. But
Paul, being sore troubled, turned and said to the spirit, I charge thee
in the name of Jesus Christ to come out of her. And it came out that
very hour.

<span id="an_16:19">16:19</span> But when her masters saw that the hope
of their gain was gone, they laid hold on Paul and Silas, and dragged
them into the marketplace before the rulers,

<span id="an_16:20">16:20</span> and when they had brought them unto the
magistrates, they said, These men, being Jews, do exceedingly trouble
our city,

<span id="an_16:21">16:21</span> and set forth customs which it is not
lawful for us to receive, or to observe, being Romans.

<span id="an_16:22">16:22</span> And the multitude rose up together
against them: and the magistrates rent their garments off them, and
commanded to beat them with rods.

<span id="an_16:23">16:23</span> And when they had laid many stripes
upon them, they cast them into prison, charging the jailor to keep them
safely:

<span id="an_16:24">16:24</span> who, having received such a charge,
cast them into the inner prison, and made their feet fast in the stocks.

<span id="an_16:25">16:25</span> But about midnight Paul and Silas were
praying and singing hymns unto God, and the prisoners were listening to
them;

<span id="an_16:26">16:26</span> and suddenly there was a great
earthquake, so that the foundations of the prison-house were shaken: and
immediately all the doors were opened, and every one's bands were
loosed.

<span id="an_16:27">16:27</span> And the jailor, being roused out of
sleep and seeing the prison doors open, drew his sword and was about to
kill himself, supposing that the prisoners had escaped.

<span id="an_16:28">16:28</span> But Paul cried with a loud voice,
saying, Do thyself no harm: for we are all here.

<span id="an_16:29">16:29</span> And he called for lights and sprang in,
and, trembling for fear, fell down before Paul and Silas,

<span id="an_16:30">16:30</span> and brought them out and said, Sirs,
what must I do to be saved?

<span id="an_16:31">16:31</span> And they said, Believe on the Lord
Jesus, and thou shalt be saved, thou and thy house.

<span id="an_16:32">16:32</span> And they spake the word of the Lord
unto him, with all that were in his house.

<span id="an_16:33">16:33</span> And he took them the same hour of the
night, and washed their stripes; and was baptized, he and all his,
immediately.

<span id="an_16:34">16:34</span> And he brought them up into his house,
and set food before them, and rejoiced greatly, with all his house,
having believed in God.

<span id="an_16:35">16:35</span> But when it was day, the magistrates
sent the sergeants, saying, Let those men go.

<span id="an_16:36">16:36</span> And the jailor reported the words to
Paul, \[saying\], The magistrates have sent to let you go: now therefore
come forth, and go in peace.

<span id="an_16:37">16:37</span> But Paul said unto them, They have
beaten us publicly, uncondemned, men that are Romans, and have cast us
into prison; and do they now cast us out privily? Nay verily; but let
them come themselves and bring us out.

<span id="an_16:38">16:38</span> And the sergeants reported these words
unto the magistrates: and they feared when they heard that they were
Romans;

<span id="an_16:39">16:39</span> and they came and besought them; and
when they had brought them out, they asked them to go away from the
city.

<span id="an_16:40">16:40</span> And they went out of the prison, and
entered into \[the house\] of Lydia: and when they had seen the
brethren, they comforted them, and departed.

<span id="an_17:1">17:1</span> Now when they had passed through
Amphipolis and Apollonia, they came to Thessalonica, where was a
synagogue of the Jews:

<span id="an_17:2">17:2</span> and Paul, as his custom was, went in unto
them, and for three sabbath days reasoned with them from the Scriptures,

<span id="an_17:3">17:3</span> opening and alleging that it behooved the
Christ to suffer, and to rise again from the dead; and that this Jesus,
whom, \[said he,\] I proclaim unto you, is the Christ.

<span id="an_17:4">17:4</span> And some of them were persuaded, and
consorted with Paul and Silas, and of the devout Greeks a great
multitude, and of the chief women not a few.

<span id="an_17:5">17:5</span> But the Jews, being moved with jealousy,
took unto them certain vile fellows of the rabble, and gathering a
crowd, set the city on an uproar; and assaulting the house of Jason,
they sought to bring them forth to the people.

<span id="an_17:6">17:6</span> And when they found them not, they
dragged Jason and certain brethren before the rulers of the city,
crying, These that have turned the world upside down are come hither
also;

<span id="an_17:7">17:7</span> whom Jason hath received: and these all
act contrary to the decrees of Caesar, saying that there is another
king, \[one\] Jesus.

<span id="an_17:8">17:8</span> And they troubled the multitude and the
rulers of the city, when they heard these things.

<span id="an_17:9">17:9</span> And when they had taken security from
Jason and the rest, they let them go.

<span id="an_17:10">17:10</span> And the brethren immediately sent away
Paul and Silas by night unto Beroea: who when they were come thither
went into the synagogue of the Jews.

<span id="an_17:11">17:11</span> Now these were more noble than those in
Thessalonica, in that they received the word with all readiness of the
mind, examining the Scriptures daily, whether these things were so.

<span id="an_17:12">17:12</span> Many of them therefore believed; also
of the Greek women of honorable estate, and of men, not a few.

<span id="an_17:13">17:13</span> But when the Jews of Thessalonica had
knowledge that the word of God was proclaimed of Paul at Beroea also,
they came thither likewise, stirring up and troubling the multitudes.

<span id="an_17:14">17:14</span> And then immediately the brethren sent
forth Paul to go as far as to the sea: and Silas and Timothy abode there
still.

<span id="an_17:15">17:15</span> But they that conducted Paul brought
him as far as Athens: and receiving a commandment unto Silas and Timothy
that they should come to him with all speed, they departed.

<span id="an_17:16">17:16</span> Now while Paul waited for them at
Athens, his spirit was provoked within him as he beheld the city full of
idols.

<span id="an_17:17">17:17</span> So he reasoned in the synagogue with
Jews and the devout persons, and in the marketplace every day with them
that met him.

<span id="an_17:18">17:18</span> And certain also of the Epicurean and
Stoic philosophers encountered him. And some said, What would this
babbler say? others, He seemeth to be a setter forth of strange gods:
because he preached Jesus and the resurrection.

<span id="an_17:19">17:19</span> And they took hold of him, and brought
him unto the Areopagus, saying, May we know what this new teaching is,
which is spoken by thee?

<span id="an_17:20">17:20</span> For thou bringest certain strange
things to our ears: we would know therefore what these things mean.

<span id="an_17:21">17:21</span> (Now all the Athenians and the
strangers sojourning there spent their time in nothing else, but either
to tell or to hear some new thing.)

<span id="an_17:22">17:22</span> And Paul stood in the midst of the
Areopagus, and said, Ye men of Athens, in all things, I perceive that ye
are very religious.

<span id="an_17:23">17:23</span> For as I passed along, and observed the
objects of your worship, I found also an altar with this inscription, TO
AN UNKNOWN GOD. What therefore ye worship in ignorance, this I set forth
unto you.

<span id="an_17:24">17:24</span> The God that made the world and all
things therein, he, being Lord of heaven and earth, dwelleth not in
temples made with hands;

<span id="an_17:25">17:25</span> neither is he served by men's hands, as
though he needed anything, seeing he himself giveth to all life, and
breath, and all things;

<span id="an_17:26">17:26</span> and he made of one every nation of men
to dwell on all the face of the earth, having determined \[their\]
appointed seasons, and the bounds of their habitation;

<span id="an_17:27">17:27</span> that they should seek God, if haply
they might feel after him and find him, though he is not far from each
one of us:

<span id="an_17:28">17:28</span> for in him we live, and move, and have
our being; as certain even of your own poets have said, For we are also
his offspring.

<span id="an_17:29">17:29</span> Being then the offspring of God, we
ought not to think that the Godhead is like unto gold, or silver, or
stone, graven by art and device of man.

<span id="an_17:30">17:30</span> The times of ignorance therefore God
overlooked; but now he commandeth men that they should all everywhere
repent:

<span id="an_17:31">17:31</span> inasmuch as he hath appointed a day in
which he will judge the world in righteousness by the man whom he hath
ordained; whereof he hath given assurance unto all men, in that he hath
raised him from the dead.

<span id="an_17:32">17:32</span> Now when they heard of the resurrection
of the dead, some mocked; but others said, We will hear thee concerning
this yet again.

<span id="an_17:33">17:33</span> Thus Paul went out from among them.

<span id="an_17:34">17:34</span> But certain men clave unto him, and
believed: among whom also was Dionysius the Areopagite, and a woman
named Damaris, and others with them.

<span id="an_18:1">18:1</span> After these things he departed from
Athens, and came to Corinth.

<span id="an_18:2">18:2</span> And he found a certain Jew named Aquila,
a man of Pontus by race, lately come from Italy, with his wife
Priscilla, because Claudius had commanded all the Jews to depart from
Rome: and he came unto them;

<span id="an_18:3">18:3</span> and because he was of the same trade, he
abode with them, and they wrought, for by their trade they were
tentmakers.

<span id="an_18:4">18:4</span> And he reasoned in the synagogue every
sabbath, and persuaded Jews and Greeks.

<span id="an_18:5">18:5</span> But when Silas and Timothy came down from
Macedonia, Paul was constrained by the word, testifying to the Jews that
Jesus was the Christ.

<span id="an_18:6">18:6</span> And when they opposed themselves and
blasphemed, he shook out his raiment and said unto them, Your blood
\[be\] upon your own heads; I am clean: from henceforth I will go unto
the Gentiles.

<span id="an_18:7">18:7</span> And he departed thence, and went into the
house of a certain man named Titus Justus, one that worshipped God,
whose house joined hard to the synagogue.

<span id="an_18:8">18:8</span> And Crispus, the ruler of the synagogue,
believed in the Lord with all his house; and many of the Corinthians
hearing believed, and were baptized.

<span id="an_18:9">18:9</span> And the Lord said unto Paul in the night
by a vision, Be not afraid, but speak and hold not thy peace:

<span id="an_18:10">18:10</span> for I am with thee, and no man shall
set on thee to harm thee: for I have much people in this city.

<span id="an_18:11">18:11</span> And he dwelt \[there\] a year and six
months, teaching the word of God among them.

<span id="an_18:12">18:12</span> But when Gallio was proconsul of
Achaia, the Jews with one accord rose up against Paul and brought him
before the judgment-seat,

<span id="an_18:13">18:13</span> saying, This man persuadeth men to
worship God contrary to the law.

<span id="an_18:14">18:14</span> But when Paul was about to open his
mouth, Gallio said unto the Jews, If indeed it were a matter of wrong or
of wicked villany, O ye Jews, reason would that I should bear with you:

<span id="an_18:15">18:15</span> but if they are questions about words
and names and your own law, look to it yourselves; I am not minded to be
a judge of these matters.

<span id="an_18:16">18:16</span> And he drove them from the
judgment-seat.

<span id="an_18:17">18:17</span> And they all laid hold on Sosthenes,
the ruler of the synagogue, and beat him before the judgment-seat. And
Gallio cared for none of these things.

<span id="an_18:18">18:18</span> And Paul, having tarried after this yet
many days, took his leave of the brethren, and sailed thence for Syria,
and with him Priscilla and Aquila: having shorn his head in Cenchreae;
for he had a vow.

<span id="an_18:19">18:19</span> And they came to Ephesus, and he left
them there: but he himself entered into the synagogue, and reasoned with
the Jews.

<span id="an_18:20">18:20</span> And when they asked him to abide a
longer time, he consented not;

<span id="an_18:21">18:21</span> but taking his leave of them, and
saying, I will return again unto you if God will, he set sail from
Ephesus.

<span id="an_18:22">18:22</span> And when he had landed at Caesarea, he
went up and saluted the church, and went down to Antioch.

<span id="an_18:23">18:23</span> And having spent some time \[there\],
he departed, and went through the region of Galatia, and Phrygia, in
order, establishing all the disciples.

<span id="an_18:24">18:24</span> Now a certain Jew named Apollos, an
Alexandrian by race, an eloquent man, came to Ephesus; and he was mighty
in the scriptures.

<span id="an_18:25">18:25</span> This man had been instructed in the way
of the Lord; and being fervent in spirit, he spake and taught accurately
the things concerning Jesus, knowing only the baptism of John:

<span id="an_18:26">18:26</span> and he began to speak boldly in the
synagogue. But when Priscilla and Aquila heard him, they took him unto
them, and expounded unto him the way of God more accurately.

<span id="an_18:27">18:27</span> And when he was minded to pass over
into Achaia, the brethren encouraged him, and wrote to the disciples to
receive him: and when he was come, he helped them much that had believed
through grace;

<span id="an_18:28">18:28</span> for he powerfully confuted the Jews,
\[and that\] publicly, showing by the scriptures that Jesus was the
Christ.

<span id="an_19:1">19:1</span> And it came to pass, that, while Apollos
was at Corinth, Paul having passed through the upper country came to
Ephesus, and found certain disciples:

<span id="an_19:2">19:2</span> and he said unto them, Did ye receive the
Holy Spirit when ye believed? And they \[said\] unto him, Nay, we did
not so much as hear whether the Holy Spirit was \[given\].

<span id="an_19:3">19:3</span> And he said, Into what then were ye
baptized? And they said, Into John's baptism.

<span id="an_19:4">19:4</span> And Paul said, John baptized with the
baptism of repentance, saying unto the people that they should believe
on him that should come after him, that is, on Jesus.

<span id="an_19:5">19:5</span> And when they heard this, they were
baptized into the name of the Lord Jesus.

<span id="an_19:6">19:6</span> And when Paul had laid his hands upon
them, the Holy Spirit came on them; and they spake with tongues, and
prophesied.

<span id="an_19:7">19:7</span> And they were in all about twelve men.

<span id="an_19:8">19:8</span> And he entered into the synagogue, and
spake boldly for the space of three months, reasoning and persuading
\[as to\] the things concerning the kingdom of God.

<span id="an_19:9">19:9</span> But when some were hardened and
disobedient, speaking evil of the Way before the multitude, he departed
from them, and separated the disciples, reasoning daily in the school of
Tyrannus.

<span id="an_19:10">19:10</span> And this continued for the space of two
years; so that all they that dwelt in Asia heard the word of the Lord,
both Jews and Greeks.

<span id="an_19:11">19:11</span> And God wrought special miracles by the
hands of Paul:

<span id="an_19:12">19:12</span> insomuch that unto the sick were
carried away from his body handkerchiefs or aprons, and the evil spirits
went out.

<span id="an_19:13">19:13</span> But certain also of the strolling Jews,
exorcists, took upon them to name over them that had the evil spirits
the name of the Lord Jesus, saying, I adjure you by Jesus whom Paul
preacheth.

<span id="an_19:14">19:14</span> And there were seven sons of one Sceva,
a Jew, a chief priest, who did this.

<span id="an_19:15">19:15</span> And the evil spirit answered and said
unto them, Jesus I know, and Paul I know, but who are ye?

<span id="an_19:16">19:16</span> And the man in whom the evil spirit was
leaped on them, and mastered both of them, and prevailed against them,
so that they fled out of that house naked and wounded.

<span id="an_19:17">19:17</span> And this became known to all, both Jews
and Greeks, that dwelt at Ephesus; and fear fell upon them all, and the
name of the Lord Jesus was magnified.

<span id="an_19:18">19:18</span> Many also of them that had believed
came, confessing, and declaring their deeds.

<span id="an_19:19">19:19</span> And not a few of them that practised
magical arts brought their books together and burned them in the sight
of all; and they counted the price of them, and found it fifty thousand
pieces of silver.

<span id="an_19:20">19:20</span> So mightily grew the word of the Lord
and prevailed.

<span id="an_19:21">19:21</span> Now after these things were ended, Paul
purposed in the spirit, when he had passed through Macedonia and Achaia,
to go to Jerusalem, saying, After I have been there, I must also see
Rome.

<span id="an_19:22">19:22</span> And having sent into Macedonia two of
them that ministered unto him, Timothy and Erastus, he himself stayed in
Asia for a while.

<span id="an_19:23">19:23</span> And about that time there arose no
small stir concerning the Way.

<span id="an_19:24">19:24</span> For a certain man named Demetrius, a
silversmith, who made silver shrines of Diana, brought no little
business unto the craftsmen;

<span id="an_19:25">19:25</span> whom he gathered together, with the
workmen of like occupation, and said, Sirs, ye know that by this
business we have our wealth.

<span id="an_19:26">19:26</span> And ye see and hear, that not alone at
Ephesus, but almost throughout all Asia, this Paul hath persuaded and
turned away much people, saying that they are no gods, that are made
with hands:

<span id="an_19:27">19:27</span> and not only is there danger that this
our trade come into disrepute; but also that the temple of the great
goddess Diana be made of no account, and that she should even be deposed
from her magnificence whom all Asia and the world worshippeth.

<span id="an_19:28">19:28</span> And when they heard this they were
filled with wrath, and cried out, saying, Great is Diana of the Ephesus.

<span id="an_19:29">19:29</span> And the city was filled with the
confusion: and they rushed with one accord into the theatre, having
seized Gaius and Aristarchus, men of Macedonia, Paul's companions in
travel.

<span id="an_19:30">19:30</span> And when Paul was minded to enter in
unto the people, the disciples suffered him not.

<span id="an_19:31">19:31</span> And certain also of the Asiarchs, being
his friends, sent unto him and besought him not to adventure himself
into the theatre.

<span id="an_19:32">19:32</span> Some therefore cried one thing, and
some another: for the assembly was in confusion; and the more part knew
not wherefore they were come together.

<span id="an_19:33">19:33</span> And they brought Alexander out of the
multitude, the Jews putting him forward. And Alexander beckoned with the
hand, and would have made a defense unto the people.

<span id="an_19:34">19:34</span> But when they perceived that he was a
Jew, all with one voice about the space of two hours cried out, Great is
Diana of the Ephesians.

<span id="an_19:35">19:35</span> And when the townclerk had quieted the
multitude, he saith, Ye men of Ephesus, what man is there who knoweth
not that the city of the Ephesians is temple-keeper of the great Diana,
and of the \[image\] which fell down from Jupiter?

<span id="an_19:36">19:36</span> Seeing then that these things cannot be
gainsaid, ye ought to be quiet, and to do nothing rash.

<span id="an_19:37">19:37</span> For ye have brought \[hither\] these
men, who are neither robbers of temples nor blasphemers of our goddess.

<span id="an_19:38">19:38</span> If therefore Demetrius, and the
craftsmen that are with him, have a matter against any man, the courts
are open, and there are proconsuls: let them accuse one another.

<span id="an_19:39">19:39</span> But if ye seek anything about other
matters, it shall be settled in the regular assembly.

<span id="an_19:40">19:40</span> For indeed we are in danger to be
accused concerning this day's riot, there being no cause \[for it\]: and
as touching it we shall not be able to give account of this concourse.

<span id="an_19:41">19:41</span> And when he had thus spoken, he
dismissed the assembly.

<span id="an_20:1">20:1</span> And after the uproar ceased, Paul having
sent for the disciples and exhorted them, took leave of them, and
departed to go into Macedonia.

<span id="an_20:2">20:2</span> And when he had gone through those parts,
and had given them much exhortation, he came into Greece.

<span id="an_20:3">20:3</span> And when he had spent three months
\[there,\] and a plot was laid against him by Jews as he was about to
set sail for Syria, he determined to return through Macedonia.

<span id="an_20:4">20:4</span> And there accompanied him as far as Asia,
Sopater of Beroea, \[the son\] of Pyrrhus; and of the Thessalonians,
Aristarchus and Secundus; and Gaius of Derbe, and Timothy; and of Asia,
Tychicus and Trophimus.

<span id="an_20:5">20:5</span> But these had gone before, and were
waiting for us at Troas.

<span id="an_20:6">20:6</span> And we sailed away from Philippi after
the days of unleavened bread, and came unto them to Troas in five days,
where we tarried seven days.

<span id="an_20:7">20:7</span> And upon the first day of the week, when
we were gathered together to break bread, Paul discoursed with them,
intending to depart on the morrow; and prolonged his speech until
midnight.

<span id="an_20:8">20:8</span> And there were many lights in the upper
chamber where we were gathered together.

<span id="an_20:9">20:9</span> And there sat in the window a certain
young man named Eutychus, borne down with deep sleep; and as Paul
discoursed yet longer, being borne down by his sleep he fell down from
the third story, and was taken up dead.

<span id="an_20:10">20:10</span> And Paul went down, and fell on him,
and embracing him said, Make ye no ado; for his life is in him.

<span id="an_20:11">20:11</span> And when he was gone up, and had broken
the bread, and eaten, and had talked with them a long while, even till
break of day, so he departed.

<span id="an_20:12">20:12</span> And they brought the lad alive, and
were not a little comforted.

<span id="an_20:13">20:13</span> But we going before to the ship set
sail for Assos, there intending to take in Paul: for so had he
appointed, intending himself to go by land.

<span id="an_20:14">20:14</span> And when he met us at Assos, we took
him in, and came to Mitylene.

<span id="an_20:15">20:15</span> And sailing from thence, we came the
following day over against Chios; and the next day we touched at Samos;
and the day after we came to Miletus.

<span id="an_20:16">20:16</span> For Paul had determined to sail past
Ephesus, that he might not have to spend time in Asia; for he was
hastening, if it were possible for him, to be at Jerusalem the day of
Pentecost.

<span id="an_20:17">20:17</span> And from Miletus he sent to Ephesus,
and called to him the elders of the church.

<span id="an_20:18">20:18</span> And when they were come to him, he said
unto them, Ye yourselves know, from the first day that I set foot in
Asia, after what manner I was with you all the time,

<span id="an_20:19">20:19</span> serving the Lord with all lowliness of
mind, and with tears, and with trials which befell me by the plots of
the Jews;

<span id="an_20:20">20:20</span> how I shrank not from declaring unto
you anything that was profitable, and teaching you publicly, and from
house to house,

<span id="an_20:21">20:21</span> testifying both to Jews and to Greeks
repentance toward God, and faith toward our Lord Jesus Christ.

<span id="an_20:22">20:22</span> And now, behold, I go bound in the
spirit unto Jerusalem, not knowing the things that shall befall me
there:

<span id="an_20:23">20:23</span> save that the Holy Spirit testifieth
unto me in every city, saying that bonds and afflictions abide me.

<span id="an_20:24">20:24</span> But I hold not my life of any account
as dear unto myself, so that I may accomplish my course, and the
ministry which I received from the Lord Jesus, to testify the gospel of
the grace of God.

<span id="an_20:25">20:25</span> And now, behold, I know that ye all,
among whom I went about preaching the kingdom, shall see my face no
more.

<span id="an_20:26">20:26</span> Wherefore I testify unto you this day,
that I am pure from the blood of all men.

<span id="an_20:27">20:27</span> For I shrank not from declaring unto
you the whole counsel of God.

<span id="an_20:28">20:28</span> Take heed unto yourselves, and to all
the flock, in which the Holy Spirit hath made you bishops, to feed the
church of the Lord which he purchased with his own blood.

<span id="an_20:29">20:29</span> I know that after my departing grievous
wolves shall enter in among you, not sparing the flock;

<span id="an_20:30">20:30</span> and from among your own selves shall
men arise, speaking perverse things, to draw away the disciples after
them.

<span id="an_20:31">20:31</span> Wherefore watch ye, remembering that by
the space of three years I ceased not to admonish every one night and
day with tears.

<span id="an_20:32">20:32</span> And now I commend you to God, and to
the word of his grace, which is able to build \[you\] up, and to give
\[you\] the inheritance among all them that are sanctified.

<span id="an_20:33">20:33</span> I coveted no man's silver, or gold, or
apparel.

<span id="an_20:34">20:34</span> Ye yourselves know that these hands
ministered unto my necessities, and to them that were with me.

<span id="an_20:35">20:35</span> In all things I gave you an example,
that so laboring ye ought to help the weak, and to remember the words of
the Lord Jesus, that he himself said, It is more blessed to give than to
receive.

<span id="an_20:36">20:36</span> And when he had thus spoken, he kneeled
down and prayed with them all.

<span id="an_20:37">20:37</span> And they all wept sore, and fell on
Paul's neck and kissed him,

<span id="an_20:38">20:38</span> sorrowing most of all for the word
which he had spoken, that they should behold his face no more. And they
brought him on his way unto the ship.

<span id="an_21:1">21:1</span> And when it came to pass that were parted
from them and had set sail, we came with a straight course unto Cos, and
the next day unto Rhodes, and from thence unto Patara:

<span id="an_21:2">21:2</span> and having found a ship crossing over
unto Phoenicia, we went aboard, and set sail.

<span id="an_21:3">21:3</span> And when we had come in sight of Cyprus,
leaving it on the left hand, we sailed unto Syria, and landed at Tyre;
for there the ship was to unlade her burden.

<span id="an_21:4">21:4</span> And having found the disciples, we
tarried there seven days: and these said to Paul through the Spirit,
that he should not set foot in Jerusalem.

<span id="an_21:5">21:5</span> And when it came to pass that we had
accomplished the days, we departed and went on our journey; and they
all, with wives and children, brought us on our way till we were out of
the city: and kneeling down on the beach, we prayed, and bade each other
farewell;

<span id="an_21:6">21:6</span> and we went on board the ship, but they
returned home again.

<span id="an_21:7">21:7</span> And when we had finished the voyage from
Tyre, we arrived at Ptolemais; and we saluted the brethren, and abode
with them one day.

<span id="an_21:8">21:8</span> And on the morrow we departed, and came
unto Caesarea: and entering into the house of Philip the evangelist, who
was one of the seven, we abode with him.

<span id="an_21:9">21:9</span> Now this man had four virgin daughters,
who prophesied.

<span id="an_21:10">21:10</span> And as we tarried there some days,
there came down from Judaea a certain prophet, named Agabus.

<span id="an_21:11">21:11</span> And coming to us, and taking Paul's
girdle, he bound his own feet and hands, and said, Thus saith the Holy
Spirit, So shall the Jews at Jerusalem bind the man that owneth this
girdle, and shall deliver him into the hands of the Gentiles.

<span id="an_21:12">21:12</span> And when we heard these things, both we
and they of that place besought him not to go up to Jerusalem.

<span id="an_21:13">21:13</span> Then Paul answered, What do ye, weeping
and breaking my heart? for I am ready not to be bound only, but also to
die at Jerusalem for the name of the Lord Jesus.

<span id="an_21:14">21:14</span> And when he would not be persuaded, we
ceased, saying, The will of the Lord be done.

<span id="an_21:15">21:15</span> And after these days we took up our
baggage and went up to Jerusalem.

<span id="an_21:16">21:16</span> And there went with us also \[certain\]
of the disciples from Caesarea, bringing \[with them\] one Mnason of
Cyprus, an early disciple, with whom we should lodge.

<span id="an_21:17">21:17</span> And when we were come to Jerusalem, the
brethren received us gladly.

<span id="an_21:18">21:18</span> And the day following Paul went in with
us unto James; and all the elders were present.

<span id="an_21:19">21:19</span> And when he had saluted them, he
rehearsed one by one the things which God had wrought among the Gentiles
through his ministry.

<span id="an_21:20">21:20</span> And they, when they heard it, glorified
God; and they said unto him, Thou seest, brother, how many thousands
there are among the Jews of them that have believed; and they are all
zealous for the law:

<span id="an_21:21">21:21</span> and they have been informed concerning
thee, that thou teachest all the Jews who are among the Gentiles to
forsake Moses, telling them not to circumcise their children neither to
walk after the customs.

<span id="an_21:22">21:22</span> What is it therefore? They will
certainly hear that thou art come.

<span id="an_21:23">21:23</span> Do therefore this that we say to thee:
We have four men that have a vow on them;

<span id="an_21:24">21:24</span> these take, and purify thyself with
them, and be at charges for them, that they may shave their heads: and
all shall know that there is no truth in the things whereof they have
been informed concerning thee; but that thou thyself also walkest
orderly, keeping the law.

<span id="an_21:25">21:25</span> But as touching the Gentiles that have
believed, we wrote, giving judgment that they should keep themselves
from things sacrificed to idols, and from blood, and from what is
strangled, and from fornication.

<span id="an_21:26">21:26</span> Then Paul took the men, and the next
day purifying himself with them went into the temple, declaring the
fulfilment of the days of purification, until the offering was offered
for every one of them.

<span id="an_21:27">21:27</span> And when the seven days were almost
completed, the Jews from Asia, when they saw him in the temple, stirred
up all the multitude and laid hands on him,

<span id="an_21:28">21:28</span> crying out, Men of Israel, help: This
is the man that teacheth all men everywhere against the people, and the
law, and this place; and moreover he brought Greeks also into the
temple, and hath defiled this holy place.

<span id="an_21:29">21:29</span> For they had before seen with him in
the city Trophimus the Ephesian, whom they supposed that Paul had
brought into the temple.

<span id="an_21:30">21:30</span> And all the city was moved, and the
people ran together; and they laid hold on Paul, and dragged him out of
the temple: and straightway the doors were shut.

<span id="an_21:31">21:31</span> And as they were seeking to kill him,
tidings came up to the chief captain of the band, that all Jerusalem was
in confusion.

<span id="an_21:32">21:32</span> And forthwith he took soldiers and
centurions, and ran down upon them: and they, when they saw the chief
captain and the soldiers, left off beating Paul.

<span id="an_21:33">21:33</span> Then the chief captain came near, and
laid hold on him, and commanded him to be bound with two chains; and
inquired who he was, and what he had done.

<span id="an_21:34">21:34</span> And some shouted one thing, some
another, among the crowd: and when he could not know the certainty for
the uproar, he commanded him to be brought into the castle.

<span id="an_21:35">21:35</span> And when he came upon the stairs, so it
was that he was borne of the soldiers for the violence of the crowd;

<span id="an_21:36">21:36</span> for the multitude of the people
followed after, crying out, Away with him.

<span id="an_21:37">21:37</span> And as Paul was about to be brought
into the castle, he saith unto the chief captain, May I say something
unto thee? And he said, Dost thou know Greek?

<span id="an_21:38">21:38</span> Art thou not then the Egyptian, who
before these days stirred up to sedition and led out into the wilderness
the four thousand men of the Assassins?

<span id="an_21:39">21:39</span> But Paul said, I am a Jew, of Tarsus in
Cilicia, a citizen of no mean city: and I beseech thee, give me leave to
speak unto the people.

<span id="an_21:40">21:40</span> And when he had given him leave, Paul,
standing on the stairs, beckoned with the hand unto the people; and when
there was made a great silence, he spake unto them in the Hebrew
language, saying,

<span id="an_22:1">22:1</span> Brethren and fathers, hear ye the defence
which I now make unto you.

<span id="an_22:2">22:2</span> And when they heard that he spake unto
them in the Hebrew language, they were the more quiet: and he saith,

<span id="an_22:3">22:3</span> I am a Jew, born in Tarsus of Cilicia,
but brought up in this city, at the feet of Gamaliel, instructed
according to the strict manner of the law of our fathers, being zealous
for God, even as ye all are this day:

<span id="an_22:4">22:4</span> and I persecuted this Way unto the death,
binding and delivering into prisons both men and women.

<span id="an_22:5">22:5</span> As also the high priest doth bear me
witness, and all the estate of the elders: from whom also I received
letters unto the brethren, and journeyed to Damascus to bring them also
that were there unto Jerusalem in bonds to be punished.

<span id="an_22:6">22:6</span> And it came to pass, that, as I made my
journey, and drew nigh unto Damascus, about noon, suddenly there shone
from heaven a great light round about me.

<span id="an_22:7">22:7</span> And I fell unto the ground, and heard a
voice saying unto me, Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me?

<span id="an_22:8">22:8</span> And I answered, Who art thou, Lord? And
he said unto me, I am Jesus of Nazareth, whom thou persecutest.

<span id="an_22:9">22:9</span> And they that were with me beheld indeed
the light, but they heard not the voice of him that spake to me.

<span id="an_22:10">22:10</span> And I said, What shall I do, Lord? And
the Lord said unto me, Arise, and go into Damascus; and there it shall
be told thee of all things which are appointed for thee to do.

<span id="an_22:11">22:11</span> And when I could not see for the glory
of that light, being led by the hand of them that were with me I came
into Damascus.

<span id="an_22:12">22:12</span> And one Ananias, a devout man according
to the law, well reported of by all the Jews that dwelt there,

<span id="an_22:13">22:13</span> came unto me, and standing by me said
unto me, Brother Saul, receive thy sight. And in that very hour I looked
up on him.

<span id="an_22:14">22:14</span> And he said, The God of our fathers
hath appointed thee to know his will, and to see the Righteous One, and
to hear a voice from his mouth.

<span id="an_22:15">22:15</span> For thou shalt be a witness for him
unto all men of what thou hast seen and heard.

<span id="an_22:16">22:16</span> And now why tarriest thou? arise, and
be baptized, and wash away thy sins, calling on his name.

<span id="an_22:17">22:17</span> And it came to pass, that, when I had
returned to Jerusalem, and while I prayed in the temple, I fell into a
trance,

<span id="an_22:18">22:18</span> and saw him saying unto me, Make haste,
and get thee quickly out of Jerusalem; because they will not receive of
thee testimony concerning me.

<span id="an_22:19">22:19</span> And I said, Lord, they themselves know
that I imprisoned and beat in every synagogue them that believed on
thee:

<span id="an_22:20">22:20</span> and when the blood of Stephen thy
witness was shed, I also was standing by, and consenting, and keeping
the garments of them that slew him.

<span id="an_22:21">22:21</span> And he said unto me, Depart: for I will
send thee forth far hence unto the Gentiles.

<span id="an_22:22">22:22</span> And they gave him audience unto this
word; and they lifted up their voice, and said, Away with such a fellow
from the earth: for it is not fit that he should live.

<span id="an_22:23">22:23</span> And as they cried out, and threw off
their garments, and cast dust into the air,

<span id="an_22:24">22:24</span> the chief captain commanded him be
brought into the castle, bidding that he should be examined by
scourging, that he might know for what cause they so shouted against
him.

<span id="an_22:25">22:25</span> And when they had tied him up with the
thongs, Paul said unto the centurion that stood by, Is it lawful for you
to scourge a man that is a Roman, and uncondemned?

<span id="an_22:26">22:26</span> And when the centurion heard it, he
went to the chief captain and told him, saying, What art thou about to
do? for this man is a Roman.

<span id="an_22:27">22:27</span> And the chief captain came and said
unto him, Tell me, art thou a Roman? And he said, Yea.

<span id="an_22:28">22:28</span> And the chief captain answered, With a
great sum obtained I this citizenship. And Paul said, But I am \[a
Roman\] born.

<span id="an_22:29">22:29</span> They then that were about to examine
him straightway departed from him: and the chief captain also was afraid
when he knew that he was a Roman, and because he had bound him.

<span id="an_22:30">22:30</span> But on the morrow, desiring to know the
certainty wherefore he was accused of the Jews, he loosed him, and
commanded the chief priests and all the council to come together, and
brought Paul down and set him before them.

<span id="an_23:1">23:1</span> And Paul, looking stedfastly on the
council, said, Brethren, I have lived before God in all good conscience
until this day.

<span id="an_23:2">23:2</span> And the high priest Ananias commanded
them that stood by him to smite him on the mouth.

<span id="an_23:3">23:3</span> Then said Paul unto him, God shall smite
thee, thou whited wall: and sittest thou to judge me according to the
law, and commandest me to be smitten contrary to the law?

<span id="an_23:4">23:4</span> And they that stood by said, Revilest
thou God's high priest?

<span id="an_23:5">23:5</span> And Paul said, I knew not, brethren, that
he was high priest: for it is written, Thou shalt not speak evil of a
ruler of thy people.

<span id="an_23:6">23:6</span> But when Paul perceived that the one part
were Sadducees and the other Pharisees, he cried out in the council,
Brethren, I am a Pharisee, a son of Pharisees: touching the hope and
resurrection of the dead I am called in question.

<span id="an_23:7">23:7</span> And when he had so said, there arose a
dissension between the Pharisees and Sadducees; and the assembly was
divided.

<span id="an_23:8">23:8</span> For the Sadducees say that there is no
resurrection, neither angel, nor spirit; but the Pharisees confess both.

<span id="an_23:9">23:9</span> And there arose a great clamor: and some
of the scribes of the Pharisees part stood up, and strove, saying, We
find no evil in this man: and what if a spirit hath spoken to him, or an
angel?

<span id="an_23:10">23:10</span> And when there arose a great
dissension, the chief captain, fearing lest Paul should be torn in
pieces by them, commanded the soldiers to go down and take him by force
from among them, and bring him into the castle.

<span id="an_23:11">23:11</span> And the night following the Lord stood
by him, and said, Be of good cheer: for as thou hast testified
concerning me at Jerusalem, so must thou bear witness also at Rome.

<span id="an_23:12">23:12</span> And when it was day, the Jews banded
together, and bound themselves under a curse, saying that they would
neither eat nor drink till they had killed Paul.

<span id="an_23:13">23:13</span> And they were more than forty that made
this conspiracy.

<span id="an_23:14">23:14</span> And they came to the chief priests and
the elders, and said, We have bound ourselves under a great curse, to
taste nothing until we have killed Paul.

<span id="an_23:15">23:15</span> Now therefore do ye with the council
signify to the chief captain that he bring him down unto you, as though
ye would judge of his case more exactly: and we, before he comes near,
are ready to slay him.

<span id="an_23:16">23:16</span> But Paul's sister's son heard of their
lying in wait, and he came and entered into the castle and told Paul.

<span id="an_23:17">23:17</span> And Paul called unto him one of the
centurions, and said, Bring this young man unto the chief captain; for
he hath something to tell him.

<span id="an_23:18">23:18</span> So he took him, and brought him to the
chief captain, and saith, Paul the prisoner called me unto him, and
asked me to bring this young man unto thee, who hath something to say to
thee.

<span id="an_23:19">23:19</span> And the chief captain took him by the
hand, and going aside asked him privately, What is it that thou hast to
tell me?

<span id="an_23:20">23:20</span> And he said, The Jews have agreed to
ask thee to bring down Paul tomorrow unto the council, as though thou
wouldest inquire somewhat more exactly concerning him.

<span id="an_23:21">23:21</span> Do not thou therefore yield unto them:
for there lie in wait for him of them more than forty men, who have
bound themselves under a curse, neither to eat nor to drink till they
have slain him: and now are they ready, looking for the promise from
thee.

<span id="an_23:22">23:22</span> So the chief captain let the young man
go, charging him, Tell no man that thou hast signified these things to
me.

<span id="an_23:23">23:23</span> And he called unto him two of the
centurions, and said, Make ready two hundred soldiers to go as far as
Caesarea, and horsemen threescore and ten, and spearmen two hundred, at
the third hour of the night:

<span id="an_23:24">23:24</span> and \[he bade them\] provide beasts,
that they might set Paul thereon, and bring him safe unto Felix the
governor.

<span id="an_23:25">23:25</span> And he wrote a letter after this form:

<span id="an_23:26">23:26</span> Claudius Lysias unto the most excellent
governor Felix, greeting.

<span id="an_23:27">23:27</span> This man was seized by the Jews, and
was about to be slain of them, when I came upon them with the soldiers
and rescued him, having learned that he was a Roman.

<span id="an_23:28">23:28</span> And desiring to know the cause
wherefore they accused him, I brought him down unto their council:

<span id="an_23:29">23:29</span> whom I found to be accused about
questions of their law, but to have nothing laid to his charge worthy of
death or of bonds.

<span id="an_23:30">23:30</span> And when it was shown to me that there
would be a plot against the man, I sent him to thee forthwith, charging
his accusers also to speak against him before thee.

<span id="an_23:31">23:31</span> So the soldiers, as it was commanded
them, took Paul and brought him by night to Antipatris.

<span id="an_23:32">23:32</span> But on the morrow they left the
horsemen to go with him, and returned to the castle:

<span id="an_23:33">23:33</span> and they, when they came to Caesarea
and delivered the letter to the governor, presented Paul also before
him.

<span id="an_23:34">23:34</span> And when he had read it, he asked of
what province he was; and when he understood that he was of Cilicia,

<span id="an_23:35">23:35</span> I will hear thee fully, said he, when
thine accusers also are come: and he commanded him to be kept in Herod's
palace.

<span id="an_24:1">24:1</span> And after five days the high priest
Ananias came down with certain elders, and \[with\] an orator, one
Tertullus; and they informed the governor against Paul.

<span id="an_24:2">24:2</span> And when he was called, Tertullus began
to accuse him, saying, Seeing that by thee we enjoy much peace, and that
by the providence evils are corrected for this nation,

<span id="an_24:3">24:3</span> we accept it in all ways and in all
places, most excellent Felix, with all thankfulness.

<span id="an_24:4">24:4</span> But, that I be not further tedious unto
thee, I entreat thee to hear us of thy clemency a few words.

<span id="an_24:5">24:5</span> For we have found this man a pestilent
fellow, and a mover of insurrections among all the Jews throughout the
world, and a ringleader of the sect of the Nazarenes:

<span id="an_24:6">24:6</span> who moreover assayed to profane the
temple: on whom also we laid hold: \[and we would have judged him
according to our law.\]

<span id="an_24:7">24:7</span> \[But the chief captain Lysias came, and
with great violence took him away out of our hands,\]

<span id="an_24:8">24:8</span> \[commanding his accusers to come before
thee.\] from whom thou wilt be able, by examining him thyself, to take
knowledge of all these things whereof we accuse him.

<span id="an_24:9">24:9</span> And the Jews also joined in the charge,
affirming that these things were so.

<span id="an_24:10">24:10</span> And when the governor had beckoned unto
him to speak, Paul answered, Forasmuch as I know that thou hast been of
many years a judge unto this nation, I cheerfully make my defense:

<span id="an_24:11">24:11</span> Seeing that thou canst take knowledge
that it is not more than twelve days since I went up to worship at
Jerusalem:

<span id="an_24:12">24:12</span> and neither in the temple did they find
me disputing with any man or stirring up a crowd, nor in the synagogues,
nor in the city.

<span id="an_24:13">24:13</span> Neither can they prove to thee the
things whereof they now accuse me.

<span id="an_24:14">24:14</span> But this I confess unto thee, that
after the Way which they call a sect, so serve I the God of our fathers,
believing all things which are according to the law, and which are
written in the prophets;

<span id="an_24:15">24:15</span> having hope toward God, which these
also themselves look for, that there shall be a resurrection both of the
just and unjust.

<span id="an_24:16">24:16</span> Herein I also exercise myself to have a
conscience void of offence toward God and men always.

<span id="an_24:17">24:17</span> Now after some years I came to bring
alms to my nation, and offerings:

<span id="an_24:18">24:18</span> amidst which they found me purified in
the temple, with no crowd, nor yet with tumult: but \[there were\]
certain Jews from Asia--

<span id="an_24:19">24:19</span> who ought to have been here before
thee, and to make accusation, if they had aught against me.

<span id="an_24:20">24:20</span> Or else let these men themselves say
what wrong-doing they found when I stood before the council,

<span id="an_24:21">24:21</span> except it be for this one voice, that I
cried standing among them, Touching the resurrection of the dead I am
called in question before you this day.

<span id="an_24:22">24:22</span> But Felix, having more exact knowledge
concerning the Way, deferred them, saying, When Lysias the chief captain
shall come down, I will determine your matter.

<span id="an_24:23">24:23</span> And he gave order to the centurion that
he should be kept in charge, and should have indulgence; and not to
forbid any of his friends to minister unto him.

<span id="an_24:24">24:24</span> But after certain days, Felix came with
Drusilla, his wife, who was a Jewess, and sent for Paul, and heard him
concerning the faith in Christ Jesus.

<span id="an_24:25">24:25</span> And as he reasoned of righteousness,
and self-control, and the judgment to come, Felix was terrified, and
answered, Go thy way for this time; and when I have a convenient season,
I will call thee unto me.

<span id="an_24:26">24:26</span> He hoped withal that money would be
given him of Paul: wherefore also he sent for him the oftener, and
communed with him.

<span id="an_24:27">24:27</span> But when two years were fulfilled,
Felix was succeeded by Porcius Festus; and desiring to gain favor with
the Jews, Felix left Paul in bonds.

<span id="an_25:1">25:1</span> Festus therefore, having come into the
province, after three days went up to Jerusalem from Caesarea.

<span id="an_25:2">25:2</span> And the chief priests and the principal
men of the Jews informed him against Paul; and they besought him,

<span id="an_25:3">25:3</span> asking a favor against him, that he would
send for him to Jerusalem; laying a plot to kill him on the way.

<span id="an_25:4">25:4</span> Howbeit Festus answered, that Paul was
kept in charge at Caesarea, and that he himself was about to depart
\[thither\] shortly.

<span id="an_25:5">25:5</span> Let them therefore, saith he, that are of
power among you go down with me, and if there is anything amiss in the
man, let them accuse him.

<span id="an_25:6">25:6</span> And when he had tarried among them not
more than eight or ten days, he went down unto Caesarea; and on the
morrow he sat on the judgment-seat, and commanded Paul to be brought.

<span id="an_25:7">25:7</span> And when he was come, the Jews that had
come down from Jerusalem stood round about him, bringing against him
many and grievous charges which they could not prove;

<span id="an_25:8">25:8</span> while Paul said in his defense, Neither
against the law of the Jews, nor against the temple, nor against Caesar,
have I sinned at all.

<span id="an_25:9">25:9</span> But Festus, desiring to gain favor with
the Jews, answered Paul and said, Wilt thou go up to Jerusalem, and
there be judged of these things before me?

<span id="an_25:10">25:10</span> But Paul said, I am standing before
Caesar's judgment-seat, where I ought to be judged: to the Jews have I
done no wrong, as thou also very well knowest.

<span id="an_25:11">25:11</span> If then I am a wrong-doer, and have
committed anything worthy of death, I refuse not to die; but if none of
those things is \[true\] whereof these accuse me, no man can give me up
unto them. I appeal unto Caesar.

<span id="an_25:12">25:12</span> Then Festus, when he had conferred with
the council, answered, Thou hast appealed unto Caesar: unto Caesar shalt
thou go.

<span id="an_25:13">25:13</span> Now when certain days were passed,
Agrippa the King and Bernice arrived at Caesarea, and saluted Festus.

<span id="an_25:14">25:14</span> And as they tarried there many days,
Festus laid Paul's case before the King, saying, There is a certain man
left a prisoner by Felix;

<span id="an_25:15">25:15</span> about whom, when I was at Jerusalem,
the chief priests and the elders of the Jews informed \[me\], asking for
sentence against him.

<span id="an_25:16">25:16</span> To whom I answered, that it is not the
custom of the Romans to give up any man, before that the accused have
the accusers face to face, and have had opportunity to make his defense
concerning the matter laid against him.

<span id="an_25:17">25:17</span> When therefore they were come together
here, I made no delay, but on the next day sat on the judgment-seat, and
commanded the man to be brought.

<span id="an_25:18">25:18</span> Concerning whom, when the accusers
stood up, they brought no charge of such evil things as I supposed;

<span id="an_25:19">25:19</span> but had certain questions against him
of their own religion, and of one Jesus, who was dead, whom Paul
affirmed to be alive.

<span id="an_25:20">25:20</span> And I, being perplexed how to inquire
concerning these things, asked whether he would go to Jerusalem and
there be judged of these matters.

<span id="an_25:21">25:21</span> But when Paul had appealed to be kept
for the decision of the emperor, I commanded him to be kept till I
should send him to Caesar.

<span id="an_25:22">25:22</span> And Agrippa \[said\] unto Festus, I
also could wish to hear the man myself. To-morrow, saith he, thou shalt
hear him.

<span id="an_25:23">25:23</span> So on the morrow, when Agrippa was
come, and Bernice, with great pomp, and they were entered into the place
of hearing with the chief captains and principal men of the city, at the
command of Festus Paul was brought in.

<span id="an_25:24">25:24</span> And Festus saith, King Agrippa, and all
men who are here present with us, ye behold this man, about whom all the
multitude of the Jews made suit to me, both at Jerusalem and here,
crying that he ought not to live any longer.

<span id="an_25:25">25:25</span> But I found that he had committed
nothing worthy of death: and as he himself appealed to the emperor I
determined to send him.

<span id="an_25:26">25:26</span> Of whom I have no certain thing to
write unto my lord. Wherefore I have brought him forth before you, and
specially before thee, king Agrippa, that, after examination had, I may
have somewhat to write.

<span id="an_25:27">25:27</span> For it seemeth to me unreasonable, in
sending a prisoner, not withal to signify the charges against him.

<span id="an_26:1">26:1</span> And Agrippa said unto Paul, Thou art
permitted to speak for thyself. Then Paul stretched forth his hand, and
made his defence:

<span id="an_26:2">26:2</span> I think myself happy, king Agrippa, that
I am to make my defense before thee this day touching all the things
whereof I am accused by the Jews:

<span id="an_26:3">26:3</span> especially because thou art expert in all
customs and questions which are among the Jews: wherefore I beseech thee
to hear me patiently.

<span id="an_26:4">26:4</span> My manner of life then from my youth up,
which was from the beginning among mine own nation and at Jerusalem,
know all the Jews;

<span id="an_26:5">26:5</span> having knowledge of me from the first, if
they be willing to testify, that after the straitest sect of our
religion I lived a Pharisee.

<span id="an_26:6">26:6</span> And now I stand \[here\] to be judged for
the hope of the promise made of God unto our fathers;

<span id="an_26:7">26:7</span> unto which \[promise\] our twelve tribes,
earnestly serving \[God\] night and day, hope to attain. And concerning
this hope I am accused by the Jews, O king!

<span id="an_26:8">26:8</span> Why is it judged incredible with you, if
God doth raise the dead?

<span id="an_26:9">26:9</span> I verily thought with myself that I ought
to do many things contrary to the name of Jesus of Nazareth.

<span id="an_26:10">26:10</span> And this I also did in Jerusalem: and I
both shut up many of the saints in prisons, having received authority
from the chief priests, and when they were put to death I gave my vote
against them.

<span id="an_26:11">26:11</span> And punishing them oftentimes in all
the synagogues, I strove to make them blaspheme; and being exceedingly
mad against them, I persecuted them even unto foreign cities.

<span id="an_26:12">26:12</span> Whereupon as I journeyed to Damascus
with the authority and commission of the chief priests,

<span id="an_26:13">26:13</span> at midday, O king, I saw on the way a
light from heaven, above the brightness of the sun, shining round about
me and them that journeyed with me.

<span id="an_26:14">26:14</span> And when we were all fallen to the
earth, I heard a voice saying unto me in the Hebrew language, Saul,
Saul, why persecutest thou me? it is hard for thee to kick against the
goad.

<span id="an_26:15">26:15</span> And I said, Who art thou, Lord? And the
Lord said, I am Jesus whom thou persecutest.

<span id="an_26:16">26:16</span> But arise, and stand upon thy feet: for
to this end have I appeared unto thee, to appoint thee a minister and a
witness both of the things wherein thou hast seen me, and of the things
wherein I will appear unto thee;

<span id="an_26:17">26:17</span> delivering thee from the people, and
from the Gentiles, unto whom I send thee,

<span id="an_26:18">26:18</span> to open their eyes, that they may turn
from darkness to light and from the power of Satan unto God, that they
may receive remission of sins and an inheritance among them that are
sanctified by faith in me.

<span id="an_26:19">26:19</span> Wherefore, O king Agrippa, I was not
disobedient unto the heavenly vision:

<span id="an_26:20">26:20</span> but declared both to them of Damascus
first and at Jerusalem, and throughout all the country of Judaea, and
also to the Gentiles, that they should repent and turn to God, doing
works worthy of repentance.

<span id="an_26:21">26:21</span> For this cause the Jews seized me in
the temple, and assayed to kill me.

<span id="an_26:22">26:22</span> Having therefore obtained the help that
is from God, I stand unto this day testifying both to small and great,
saying nothing but what the prophets and Moses did say should come;

<span id="an_26:23">26:23</span> how that the Christ must suffer,
\[and\] how that he first by the resurrection of the dead should
proclaim light both to the people and to the Gentiles.

<span id="an_26:24">26:24</span> And as he thus made his defense, Festus
saith with a loud voice, Paul, thou art mad; thy much learning is
turning thee mad.

<span id="an_26:25">26:25</span> But Paul saith, I am not mad, most
excellent Festus; but speak forth words of truth and soberness.

<span id="an_26:26">26:26</span> For the king knoweth of these things,
unto whom also I speak freely: for I am persuaded that none of these
things is hidden from him; for this hath not been done in a corner.

<span id="an_26:27">26:27</span> King Agrippa, believest thou the
prophets? I know that thou believest.

<span id="an_26:28">26:28</span> And Agrippa \[said\] unto Paul, With
but little persuasion thou wouldest fain make me a Christian.

<span id="an_26:29">26:29</span> And Paul \[said\], I would to God, that
whether with little or with much, not thou only, but also all that hear
me this day, might become such as I am, except these bonds.

<span id="an_26:30">26:30</span> And the king rose up, and the governor,
and Bernice, and they that sat with them:

<span id="an_26:31">26:31</span> and when they had withdrawn, they spake
one to another, saying, This man doeth nothing worthy of death or of
bonds.

<span id="an_26:32">26:32</span> And Agrippa said unto Festus, This man
might have been set at liberty, if he had not appealed unto Caesar.

<span id="an_27:1">27:1</span> And when it was determined that we should
sail for Italy, they delivered Paul and certain other prisoners to a
centurion named Julius, of the Augustan band.

<span id="an_27:2">27:2</span> And embarking in a ship of Adramyttium,
which was about to sail unto the places on the coast of Asia, we put to
sea, Aristarchus, a Macedonian of Thessalonica, being with us.

<span id="an_27:3">27:3</span> And the next day we touched at Sidon: and
Julius treated Paul kindly, and gave him leave to go unto his friends
and refresh himself.

<span id="an_27:4">27:4</span> And putting to sea from thence, we sailed
under the lee of Cyprus, because the winds were contrary.

<span id="an_27:5">27:5</span> And when we had sailed across the sea
which is off Cilicia and Pamphylia, we came to Myra, \[a city\] of
Lycia.

<span id="an_27:6">27:6</span> And there the centurion found a ship of
Alexandria sailing for Italy; and he put us therein.

<span id="an_27:7">27:7</span> And when we had sailed slowly many days,
and were come with difficulty over against Cnidus, the wind not further
suffering us, we sailed under the lee of Crete, over against Salmone;

<span id="an_27:8">27:8</span> and with difficulty coasting along it we
came unto a certain place called Fair Havens; nigh whereunto was the
city of Lasea.

<span id="an_27:9">27:9</span> And when much time was spent, and the
voyage was now dangerous, because the Fast was now already gone by, Paul
admonished them,

<span id="an_27:10">27:10</span> and said unto them, Sirs, I perceive
that the voyage will be with injury and much loss, not only of the
lading and the ship, but also of our lives.

<span id="an_27:11">27:11</span> But the centurion gave more heed to the
master and to the owner of the ship, than to those things which were
spoken by Paul.

<span id="an_27:12">27:12</span> And because the haven was not
commodious to winter in, the more part advised to put to sea from
thence, if by any means they could reach Phoenix, and winter \[there;
which is\] a haven of Crete, looking northeast and south-east.

<span id="an_27:13">27:13</span> And when the south wind blew softly,
supposing that they had obtained their purpose, they weighed anchor and
sailed along Crete, close in shore.

<span id="an_27:14">27:14</span> But after no long time there beat down
from it a tempestuous wind, which is called Euraquilo:

<span id="an_27:15">27:15</span> and when the ship was caught, and could
not face the wind, we gave way \[to it,\] and were driven.

<span id="an_27:16">27:16</span> And running under the lee of a small
island called Cauda, we were able, with difficulty, to secure the boat:

<span id="an_27:17">27:17</span> and when they had hoisted it up, they
used helps, under-girding the ship; and, fearing lest they should be
cast upon the Syrtis, they lowered the gear, and so were driven.

<span id="an_27:18">27:18</span> And as we labored exceedingly with the
storm, the next day they began to throw the \[the freight\] overboard;

<span id="an_27:19">27:19</span> and the third day they cast out with
their own hands the tackling of the ship.

<span id="an_27:20">27:20</span> And when neither sun nor stars shone
upon \[us\] for many days, and no small tempest lay on \[us,\] all hope
that we should be saved was now taken away.

<span id="an_27:21">27:21</span> And when they had been long without
food, then Paul stood forth in the midst of them, and said, Sirs, ye
should have hearkened unto me, and not have set sail from Crete, and
have gotten this injury and loss.

<span id="an_27:22">27:22</span> And now I exhort you to be of good
cheer; for there shall be no loss of life among you, but \[only\] of the
ship.

<span id="an_27:23">27:23</span> For there stood by me this night an
angel of the God whose I am, whom also I serve,

<span id="an_27:24">27:24</span> saying, Fear not, Paul; thou must stand
before Caesar: and lo, God hath granted thee all them that sail with
thee.

<span id="an_27:25">27:25</span> Wherefore, sirs, be of good cheer: for
I believe God, that it shall be even so as it hath been spoken unto me.

<span id="an_27:26">27:26</span> But we must be cast upon a certain
island.

<span id="an_27:27">27:27</span> But when the fourteenth night was come,
as we were driven to and fro in the \[sea of\] Adria, about midnight the
sailors surmised that they were drawing near to some country:

<span id="an_27:28">27:28</span> and they sounded, and found twenty
fathoms; and after a little space, they sounded again, and found fifteen
fathoms.

<span id="an_27:29">27:29</span> And fearing lest haply we should be
cast ashore on rocky ground, they let go four anchors from the stern,
and wished for the day.

<span id="an_27:30">27:30</span> And as the sailors were seeking to flee
out of the ship, and had lowered the boat into the sea, under color as
though they would lay out anchors from the foreship,

<span id="an_27:31">27:31</span> Paul said to the centurion and to the
soldiers, Except these abide in the ship, ye cannot be saved.

<span id="an_27:32">27:32</span> Then the soldiers cut away the ropes of
the boat, and let her fall off.

<span id="an_27:33">27:33</span> And while the day was coming on, Paul
besought them all to take some food, saying, This day is the fourteenth
day that ye wait and continue fasting, having taken nothing.

<span id="an_27:34">27:34</span> Wherefore I beseech you to take some
food: for this is for your safety: for there shall not a hair perish
from the head of any of you.

<span id="an_27:35">27:35</span> And when he had said this, and had
taken bread, he gave thanks to God in the presence of all; and he brake
it, and began to eat.

<span id="an_27:36">27:36</span> Then were they all of good cheer, and
themselves also took food.

<span id="an_27:37">27:37</span> And we were in all in the ship two
hundred threescore and sixteen souls.

<span id="an_27:38">27:38</span> And when they had eaten enough, they
lightened the ship, throwing out the wheat into the sea.

<span id="an_27:39">27:39</span> And when it was day, they knew not the
land: but they perceived a certain bay with a beach, and they took
counsel whether they could drive the ship upon it.

<span id="an_27:40">27:40</span> And casting off the anchors, they left
them in the sea, at the same time loosing the bands of the rudders; and
hoisting up the foresail to the wind, they made for the beach.

<span id="an_27:41">27:41</span> But lighting upon a place where two
seas met, they ran the vessel aground; and the foreship struck and
remained unmoveable, but the stern began to break up by the violence
\[of the waves\].

<span id="an_27:42">27:42</span> And the soldiers' counsel was to kill
the prisoners, lest any \[of them\] should swim out, and escape.

<span id="an_27:43">27:43</span> But the centurion, desiring to save
Paul, stayed them from their purpose; and commanded that they who could
swim should cast themselves overboard, and get first to the land;

<span id="an_27:44">27:44</span> and the rest, some on planks, and some
on \[other\] things from the ship. And so it came to pass, that they all
escaped safe to the land.

<span id="an_28:1">28:1</span> And when we were escaped, then we knew
that the island was called Melita.

<span id="an_28:2">28:2</span> And the barbarians showed us no common
kindness; for they kindled a fire, and received us all, because of the
present rain, and because of the cold.

<span id="an_28:3">28:3</span> But when Paul had gathered a bundle of
sticks and laid them on the fire, a viper came out by reason of the
heat, and fastened on his hand.

<span id="an_28:4">28:4</span> And when the barbarians saw the
\[venomous\] creature hanging from his hand, they said one to another,
No doubt this man is a murderer, whom, though he hath escaped from the
sea, yet Justice hath not suffered to live.

<span id="an_28:5">28:5</span> Howbeit he shook off the creature into
the fire, and took no harm.

<span id="an_28:6">28:6</span> But they expected that he would have
swollen, or fallen down dead suddenly: but when they were long in
expectation and beheld nothing amiss came to him, they changed their
minds, and said that he was a god.

<span id="an_28:7">28:7</span> Now in the neighborhood of that place
were lands belonging to the chief man of the island, named Publius, who
received us, and entertained us three days courteously.

<span id="an_28:8">28:8</span> And it was so, that the father of Publius
lay sick of fever and dysentery: unto whom Paul entered in, and prayed,
and laying his hands on him healed him.

<span id="an_28:9">28:9</span> And when this was done, the rest also
that had diseases in the island came, and were cured:

<span id="an_28:10">28:10</span> who also honored us with many honors;
and when we sailed, they put on board such things as we needed.

<span id="an_28:11">28:11</span> And after three months we set sail in a
ship of Alexandria which had wintered in the island, whose sign was The
Twin Brothers.

<span id="an_28:12">28:12</span> And touching at Syracuse, we tarried
there three days.

<span id="an_28:13">28:13</span> And from thence we made a circuit, and
arrived at Rhegium: and after one day a south wind sprang up, and on the
second day we came to Puteoli;

<span id="an_28:14">28:14</span> where we found brethren, and were
entreated to tarry with them seven days: and so we came to Rome.

<span id="an_28:15">28:15</span> And from thence the brethren, when they
heard of us, came to meet us as far as The Market of Appius and The
Three Taverns; whom when Paul saw, he thanked God, and took courage.

<span id="an_28:16">28:16</span> And when we entered into Rome, Paul was
suffered to abide by himself with the soldier that guarded him.

<span id="an_28:17">28:17</span> And it came to pass, that after three
days he called together those that were the chief of the Jews: and when
they were come together, he said unto them, I, brethren, though I had
done nothing against the people, or the customs of our fathers, yet was
delivered prisoner from Jerusalem into the hands of the Romans:

<span id="an_28:18">28:18</span> who, when they had examined me, desired
to set me at liberty, because there was no cause of death in me.

<span id="an_28:19">28:19</span> But when the Jews spake against it, I
was constrained to appeal unto Caesar; not that I had aught whereof to
accuse my nation.

<span id="an_28:20">28:20</span> For this cause therefore did I entreat
you to see and to speak with \[me\]: for because of the hope of Israel I
am bound with this chain.

<span id="an_28:21">28:21</span> And they said unto him, We neither
received letters from Judaea concerning thee, nor did any of the
brethren come hither and report or speak any harm of thee.

<span id="an_28:22">28:22</span> But we desire to hear of thee what thou
thinkest: for as concerning this sect, it is known to us that everywhere
it is spoken against.

<span id="an_28:23">28:23</span> And when they had appointed him a day,
they came to him into his lodging in great number; to whom he expounded
\[the matter,\] testifying the kingdom of God, and persuading them
concerning Jesus, both from the law of Moses and from the prophets, from
morning till evening.

<span id="an_28:24">28:24</span> And some believed the things which were
spoken, and some disbelieved.

<span id="an_28:25">28:25</span> And when they agreed not among
themselves, they departed after that Paul had spoken one word, Well
spake the Holy Spirit through Isaiah the prophet unto your fathers,

<span id="an_28:26">28:26</span> saying, Go thou unto this people, and
say, By hearing ye shall hear, and shall in no wise understand; And
seeing ye shall see, and shall in no wise perceive:

<span id="an_28:27">28:27</span> For this people's heart is waxed gross,
And their ears are dull of hearing, And their eyes they have closed;
Lest, haply they should perceive with their eyes, And hear with their
ears, And understand with their heart, And should turn again, And I
should heal them.

<span id="an_28:28">28:28</span> Be it known therefore unto you, that
this salvation of God is sent unto the Gentiles: they will also hear.

<span id="an_28:29">28:29</span> \[And when he had said these words, the
Jews departed, having much disputing among themselves.\]

<span id="an_28:30">28:30</span> And he abode two whole years in his own
hired dwelling, and received all that went in unto him,

<span id="an_28:31">28:31</span> preaching the kingdom of God, and
teaching the things concerning the Lord Jesus Christ with all boldness,
none forbidding him.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Romans](rom.md)
