[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index.md)  [English
Bibles](../eb)  [Index](index)  [Previous](num)  [Next](jos.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### American Standard Version: Deuteronomy

<span id="an_1:1">1:1</span> These are the words which Moses spake unto
all Israel beyond the Jordan in the wilderness, in the Arabah over
against Suph, between Paran, and Tophel, and Laban, and Hazeroth, and
Di-zahab.

<span id="an_1:2">1:2</span> It is eleven days' \[journey\] from Horeb
by the way of mount Seir unto Kadesh-barnea.

<span id="an_1:3">1:3</span> And it came to pass in the fortieth year,
in the eleventh month, on the first day of the month, that Moses spake
unto the children of Israel, according unto all that Jehovah had given
him in commandment unto them;

<span id="an_1:4">1:4</span> after he had smitten Sihon the king of the
Amorites, who dwelt in Heshbon, and Og the king of Bashan, who dwelt in
Ashtaroth, at Edrei.

<span id="an_1:5">1:5</span> Beyond the Jordan, in the land of Moab,
began Moses to declare this law, saying,

<span id="an_1:6">1:6</span> Jehovah our God spake unto us in Horeb,
saying, Ye have dwelt long enough in this mountain:

<span id="an_1:7">1:7</span> turn you, and take your journey, and go to
the hill-country of the Amorites, and unto all \[the places\] nigh
thereunto, in the Arabah, in the hill-country, and in the lowland, and
in the South, and by the sea-shore, the land of the Canaanites, and
Lebanon, as far as the great river, the river Euphrates.

<span id="an_1:8">1:8</span> Behold, I have set the land before you: go
in and possess the land which Jehovah sware unto your fathers, to
Abraham, to Isaac, and to Jacob, to give unto them and to their seed
after them.

<span id="an_1:9">1:9</span> And I spake unto you at that time, saying,
I am not able to bear you myself alone:

<span id="an_1:10">1:10</span> Jehovah your God hath multiplied you,
and, behold, ye are this day as the stars of heaven for multitude.

<span id="an_1:11">1:11</span> Jehovah, the God of your fathers, make
you a thousand times as many as ye are, and bless you, as he hath
promised you!

<span id="an_1:12">1:12</span> How can I myself alone bear your
cumbrance, and your burden, and your strife?

<span id="an_1:13">1:13</span> Take you wise men, and understanding, and
known, according to your tribes, and I will make them heads over you.

<span id="an_1:14">1:14</span> And ye answered me, and said, The thing
which thou hast spoken is good \[for us\] to do.

<span id="an_1:15">1:15</span> So I took the heads of your tribes, wise
men, and known, and made them heads over you, captains of thousands, and
captains of hundreds, and captains of fifties, and captains of tens, and
officers, according to your tribes.

<span id="an_1:16">1:16</span> And I charged your judges at that time,
saying, Hear \[the causes\] between your brethren, and judge righteously
between a man and his brother, and the sojourner that is with him.

<span id="an_1:17">1:17</span> Ye shall not respect persons in judgment;
ye shall hear the small and the great alike; ye shall not be afraid of
the face of man; for the judgment is God's: and the cause that is too
hard for you ye shall bring unto me, and I will hear it.

<span id="an_1:18">1:18</span> And I commanded you at that time all the
things which ye should do.

<span id="an_1:19">1:19</span> And we journeyed from Horeb, and went
through all that great and terrible wilderness which ye saw, by the way
to the hill-country of the Amorites, as Jehovah our God commanded us;
and we came to Kadesh-barnea.

<span id="an_1:20">1:20</span> And I said unto you, Ye are come unto the
hill-country of the Amorites, which Jehovah our God giveth unto us.

<span id="an_1:21">1:21</span> Behold, Jehovah thy God hath set the land
before thee: go up, take possession, as Jehovah, the God of thy fathers,
hath spoken unto thee; fear not, neither be dismayed.

<span id="an_1:22">1:22</span> And ye came near unto me every one of
you, and said, Let us send men before us, that they may search the land
for us, and bring us word again of the way by which we must go up, and
the cities unto which we shall come.

<span id="an_1:23">1:23</span> And the thing pleased me well; and I took
twelve men of you, one man for every tribe:

<span id="an_1:24">1:24</span> and they turned and went up into the
hill-country, and came unto the valley of Eshcol, and spied it out.

<span id="an_1:25">1:25</span> And they took of the fruit of the land in
their hands, and brought it down unto us, and brought us word again, and
said, It is a good land which Jehovah our God giveth unto us.

<span id="an_1:26">1:26</span> Yet ye would not go up, but rebelled
against the commandment of Jehovah your God:

<span id="an_1:27">1:27</span> and ye murmured in your tents, and said,
Because Jehovah hated us, he hath brought us forth out of the land of
Egypt, to deliver us into the hand of the Amorites, to destroy us.

<span id="an_1:28">1:28</span> Whither are we going up? our brethren
have made our heart to melt, saying, The people are greater and taller
than we; the cities are great and fortified up to heaven; and moreover
we have seen the sons of the Anakim there.

<span id="an_1:29">1:29</span> Then I said unto you, Dread not, neither
be afraid of them.

<span id="an_1:30">1:30</span> Jehovah your God who goeth before you, he
will fight for you, according to all that he did for you in Egypt before
your eyes,

<span id="an_1:31">1:31</span> and in the wilderness, where thou hast
seen how that Jehovah thy God bare thee, as a man doth bear his son, in
all the way that ye went, until ye came unto this place.

<span id="an_1:32">1:32</span> Yet in this thing ye did not believe
Jehovah your God,

<span id="an_1:33">1:33</span> who went before you in the way, to seek
you out a place to pitch your tents in, in fire by night, to show you by
what way ye should go, and in the cloud by day.

<span id="an_1:34">1:34</span> And Jehovah heard the voice of your
words, and was wroth, and sware, saying,

<span id="an_1:35">1:35</span> Surely there shall not one of these men
of this evil generation see the good land, which I sware to give unto
your fathers,

<span id="an_1:36">1:36</span> save Caleb the son of Jephunneh: he shall
see it; and to him will I give the land that he hath trodden upon, and
to his children, because he hath wholly followed Jehovah.

<span id="an_1:37">1:37</span> Also Jehovah was angry with me for your
sakes, saying, Thou also shalt not go in thither:

<span id="an_1:38">1:38</span> Joshua the son of Nun, who standeth
before thee, he shall go in thither: encourage thou him; for he shall
cause Israel to inherit it.

<span id="an_1:39">1:39</span> Moreover your little ones, that ye said
should be a prey, and your children, that this day have no knowledge of
good or evil, they shall go in thither, and unto them will I give it,
and they shall possess it.

<span id="an_1:40">1:40</span> But as for you, turn you, and take your
journey into the wilderness by the way to the Red Sea.

<span id="an_1:41">1:41</span> Then ye answered and said unto me, We
have sinned against Jehovah, we will go up and fight, according to all
that Jehovah our God commanded us. And ye girded on every man his
weapons of war, and were forward to go up into the hill-country.

<span id="an_1:42">1:42</span> And Jehovah said unto me, Say unto them,
Go not up, neither fight; for I am not among you; lest ye be smitten
before your enemies.

<span id="an_1:43">1:43</span> So I spake unto you, and ye hearkened
not; but ye rebelled against the commandment of Jehovah, and were
presumptuous, and went up into the hill-country.

<span id="an_1:44">1:44</span> And the Amorites, that dwelt in that
hill-country, came out against you, and chased you, as bees do, and beat
you down in Seir, even unto Hormah.

<span id="an_1:45">1:45</span> And ye returned and wept before Jehovah;
but Jehovah hearkened not to your voice, nor gave ear unto you.

<span id="an_1:46">1:46</span> So ye abode in Kadesh many days,
according unto the days that ye abode \[there\].

<span id="an_2:1">2:1</span> Then we turned, and took our journey into
the wilderness by the way to the Red Sea, as Jehovah spake unto me; and
we compassed mount Seir many days.

<span id="an_2:2">2:2</span> And Jehovah spake unto me, saying,

<span id="an_2:3">2:3</span> Ye have compassed this mountain long
enough: turn you northward.

<span id="an_2:4">2:4</span> And command thou the people, saying, Ye are
to pass through the border of your brethren the children of Esau, that
dwell in Seir; and they will be afraid of you: take ye good heed unto
yourselves therefore;

<span id="an_2:5">2:5</span> contend not with them; for I will not give
you of their land, no, not so much as for the sole of the foot to tread
on; because I have given mount Seir unto Esau for a possession.

<span id="an_2:6">2:6</span> Ye shall purchase food of them for money,
that ye may eat; and ye shall also buy water of them for money, that ye
may drink.

<span id="an_2:7">2:7</span> For Jehovah thy God hath blessed thee in
all the work of thy hand; he hath known thy walking through this great
wilderness: these forty years Jehovah thy God hath been with thee; thou
hast lacked nothing.

<span id="an_2:8">2:8</span> So we passed by from our brethren the
children of Esau, that dwell in Seir, from the way of the Arabah from
Elath and from Ezion-geber. And we turned and passed by the way of the
wilderness of Moab.

<span id="an_2:9">2:9</span> And Jehovah said unto me, Vex not Moab,
neither contend with them in battle; for I will not give thee of his
land for a possession; because I have given Ar unto the children of Lot
for a possession.

<span id="an_2:10">2:10</span> (The Emim dwelt therein aforetime, a
people great, and many, and tall, as the Anakim:

<span id="an_2:11">2:11</span> these also are accounted Rephaim, as the
Anakim; but the Moabites call them Emim.

<span id="an_2:12">2:12</span> The Horites also dwelt in Seir aforetime,
but the children of Esau succeeded them; and they destroyed them from
before them, and dwelt in their stead; as Israel did unto the land of
his possession, which Jehovah gave unto them.)

<span id="an_2:13">2:13</span> Now rise up, and get you over the brook
Zered. And we went over the brook Zered.

<span id="an_2:14">2:14</span> And the days in which we came from
Kadesh-barnea, until we were come over the brook Zered, were thirty and
eight years; until all the generation of the men of war were consumed
from the midst of the camp, as Jehovah sware unto them.

<span id="an_2:15">2:15</span> Moreover the hand of Jehovah was against
them, to destroy them from the midst of the camp, until they were
consumed.

<span id="an_2:16">2:16</span> So it came to pass, when all the men of
war were consumed and dead from among the people,

<span id="an_2:17">2:17</span> that Jehovah spake unto me, saying,

<span id="an_2:18">2:18</span> Thou art this day to pass over Ar, the
border of Moab:

<span id="an_2:19">2:19</span> and when thou comest nigh over against
the children of Ammon, vex them not, nor contend with them; for I will
not give thee of the land of the children of Ammon for a possession;
because I have given it unto the children of Lot for a possession.

<span id="an_2:20">2:20</span> (That also is accounted a land of
Rephaim: Rephaim dwelt therein aforetime; but the Ammonites call them
Zamzummim,

<span id="an_2:21">2:21</span> a people great, and many, and tall, as
the Anakim; but Jehovah destroyed them before them; and they succeeded
them, and dwelt in their stead;

<span id="an_2:22">2:22</span> as he did for the children of Esau, that
dwell in Seir, when he destroyed the Horites from before them; and they
succeeded them, and dwelt in their stead even unto this day:

<span id="an_2:23">2:23</span> and the Avvim, that dwelt in villages as
far as Gaza, the Caphtorim, that came forth out of Caphtor, destroyed
them, and dwelt in their stead.)

<span id="an_2:24">2:24</span> Rise ye up, take your journey, and pass
over the valley of the Arnon: behold, I have given into thy hand Sihon
the Amorite, king of Heshbon, and his land; begin to possess it, and
contend with him in battle.

<span id="an_2:25">2:25</span> This day will I begin to put the dread of
thee and the fear of thee upon the peoples that are under the whole
heaven, who shall hear the report of thee, and shall tremble, and be in
anguish because of thee.

<span id="an_2:26">2:26</span> And I sent messengers out of the
wilderness of Kedemoth unto Sihon king of Heshbon with words of peace,
saying,

<span id="an_2:27">2:27</span> Let me pass through thy land: I will go
along by the highway, I will turn neither unto the right hand nor to the
left.

<span id="an_2:28">2:28</span> Thou shalt sell me food for money, that I
may eat; and give me water for money, that I may drink: only let me pass
through on my feet,

<span id="an_2:29">2:29</span> as the children of Esau that dwell in
Seir, and the Moabites that dwell in Ar, did unto me; until I shall pass
over the Jordan into the land which Jehovah our God giveth us.

<span id="an_2:30">2:30</span> But Sihon king of Heshbon would not let
us pass by him; for Jehovah thy God hardened his spirit, and made his
heart obstinate, that he might deliver him into thy hand, as at this
day.

<span id="an_2:31">2:31</span> And Jehovah said unto me, Behold, I have
begun to deliver up Sihon and his land before thee: begin to possess,
that thou mayest inherit his land.

<span id="an_2:32">2:32</span> Then Sihon came out against us, he and
all his people, unto battle at Jahaz.

<span id="an_2:33">2:33</span> And Jehovah our God delivered him up
before us; and we smote him, and his sons, and all his people.

<span id="an_2:34">2:34</span> And we took all his cities at that time,
and utterly destroyed every inhabited city, with the women and the
little ones; we left none remaining:

<span id="an_2:35">2:35</span> only the cattle we took for a prey unto
ourselves, with the spoil of the cities which we had taken.

<span id="an_2:36">2:36</span> From Aroer, which is on the edge of the
valley of the Arnon, and \[from\] the city that is in the valley, even
unto Gilead, there was not a city too high for us; Jehovah our God
delivered up all before us:

<span id="an_2:37">2:37</span> only to the land of the children of Ammon
thou camest not near; all the side of the river Jabbok, and the cities
of the hill-country, and wheresoever Jehovah our God forbade us.

<span id="an_3:1">3:1</span> Then we turned, and went up the way to
Bashan: and Og the king of Bashan came out against us, he and all his
people, unto battle at Edrei.

<span id="an_3:2">3:2</span> And Jehovah said unto me, Fear him not; for
I have delivered him, and all his people, and his land, into thy hand;
and thou shalt do unto him as thou didst unto Sihon king of the
Amorites, who dwelt at Heshbon.

<span id="an_3:3">3:3</span> So Jehovah our God delivered into our hand
Og also, the king of Bashan, and all his people: and we smote him until
none was left to him remaining.

<span id="an_3:4">3:4</span> And we took all his cities at that time;
there was not a city which we took not from them; threescore cities, all
the region of Argob, the kingdom of Og in Bashan.

<span id="an_3:5">3:5</span> All these were cities fortified with high
walls, gates, and bars; besides the unwalled towns a great many.

<span id="an_3:6">3:6</span> And we utterly destroyed them, as we did
unto Sihon king of Heshbon, utterly destroying every inhabited city,
with the women and the little ones.

<span id="an_3:7">3:7</span> But all the cattle, and the spoil of the
cities, we took for a prey unto ourselves.

<span id="an_3:8">3:8</span> And we took the land at that time out of
the hand of the two kings of the Amorites that were beyond the Jordan,
from the valley of the Arnon unto mount Hermon;

<span id="an_3:9">3:9</span> (\[which\] Hermon the Sidonians call
Sirion, and the Amorites call it Senir;)

<span id="an_3:10">3:10</span> all the cities of the plain, and all
Gilead, and all Bashan, unto Salecah and Edrei, cities of the kingdom of
Og in Bashan.

<span id="an_3:11">3:11</span> (For only Og king of Bashan remained of
the remnant of the Rephaim; behold, his bedstead was a bedstead of iron;
is it not in Rabbah of the children of Ammon? nine cubits was the length
thereof, and four cubits the breadth of it, after the cubit of a man.)

<span id="an_3:12">3:12</span> And this land we took in possession at
that time: from Aroer, which is by the valley of the Arnon, and half the
hill-country of Gilead, and the cities thereof, gave I unto the
Reubenites and to the Gadites:

<span id="an_3:13">3:13</span> and the rest of Gilead, and all Bashan,
the kingdom of Og, gave I unto the half-tribe of Manasseh; all the
region of Argob, even all Bashan. (The same is called the land of
Rephaim.

<span id="an_3:14">3:14</span> Jair the son of Manasseh took all the
region of Argob, unto the border of the Geshurites and the Maacathites,
and called them, even Bashan, after his own name, Havvoth-jair, unto
this day.)

<span id="an_3:15">3:15</span> And I gave Gilead unto Machir.

<span id="an_3:16">3:16</span> And unto the Reubenites and unto the
Gadites I gave from Gilead even unto the valley of the Arnon, the middle
of the valley, and the border \[thereof\], even unto the river Jabbok,
which is the border of the children of Ammon;

<span id="an_3:17">3:17</span> the Arabah also, and the Jordan and the
border \[thereof\], from Chinnereth even unto the sea of the Arabah, the
Salt Sea, under the slopes of Pisgah eastward.

<span id="an_3:18">3:18</span> And I commanded you at that time, saying,
Jehovah your God hath given you this land to possess it: ye shall pass
over armed before your brethren the children of Israel, all the men of
valor.

<span id="an_3:19">3:19</span> But your wives, and your little ones, and
your cattle, (I know that ye have much cattle,) shall abide in your
cities which I have given you,

<span id="an_3:20">3:20</span> until Jehovah give rest unto your
brethren, as unto you, and they also possess the land which Jehovah your
God giveth them beyond the Jordan: then shall ye return every man unto
his possession, which I have given you.

<span id="an_3:21">3:21</span> And I commanded Joshua at that time,
saying, Thine eyes have seen all that Jehovah your God hath done unto
these two kings: so shall Jehovah do unto all the kingdoms whither thou
goest over.

<span id="an_3:22">3:22</span> Ye shall not fear them; for Jehovah your
God, he it is that fighteth for you.

<span id="an_3:23">3:23</span> And I besought Jehovah at that time,
saying,

<span id="an_3:24">3:24</span> O Lord Jehovah, thou hast begun to show
thy servant thy greatness, and thy strong hand: for what god is there in
heaven or in earth, that can do according to thy works, and according to
thy mighty acts?

<span id="an_3:25">3:25</span> Let me go over, I pray thee, and see the
good land that is beyond the Jordan, that goodly mountain, and Lebanon.

<span id="an_3:26">3:26</span> But Jehovah was wroth with me for your
sakes, and hearkened not unto me; and Jehovah said unto me, Let it
suffice thee; speak no more unto me of this matter.

<span id="an_3:27">3:27</span> Get thee up unto the top of Pisgah, and
lift up thine eyes westward, and northward, and southward, and eastward,
and behold with thine eyes: for thou shalt not go over this Jordan.

<span id="an_3:28">3:28</span> But charge Joshua, and encourage him, and
strengthen him; for he shall go over before this people, and he shall
cause them to inherit the land which thou shalt see.

<span id="an_3:29">3:29</span> So we abode in the valley over against
Beth-peor.

<span id="an_4:1">4:1</span> And now, O Israel, hearken unto the
statutes and unto the ordinances, which I teach you, to do them; that ye
may live, and go in and possess the land which Jehovah, the God of your
fathers, giveth you.

<span id="an_4:2">4:2</span> Ye shall not add unto the word which I
command you, neither shall ye diminish from it, that ye may keep the
commandments of Jehovah your God which I command you.

<span id="an_4:3">4:3</span> Your eyes have seen what Jehovah did
because of Baal-peor; for all the men that followed Baal-peor, Jehovah
thy God hath destroyed them from the midst of thee.

<span id="an_4:4">4:4</span> But ye that did cleave unto Jehovah your
God are alive every one of you this day.

<span id="an_4:5">4:5</span> Behold, I have taught you statutes and
ordinances, even as Jehovah my God commanded me, that ye should do so in
the midst of the land whither ye go in to possess it.

<span id="an_4:6">4:6</span> Keep therefore and do them; for this is
your wisdom and your understanding in the sight of the peoples, that
shall hear all these statutes, and say, Surely this great nation is a
wise and understanding people.

<span id="an_4:7">4:7</span> For what great nation is there, that hath a
god so nigh unto them, as Jehovah our God is whensoever we call upon
him?

<span id="an_4:8">4:8</span> And what great nation is there, that hath
statutes and ordinances so righteous as all this law, which I set before
you this day?

<span id="an_4:9">4:9</span> Only take heed to thyself, and keep thy
soul diligently, lest thou forget the things which thine eyes saw, and
lest they depart from thy heart all the days of thy life; but make them
known unto thy children and thy children's children;

<span id="an_4:10">4:10</span> the day that thou stoodest before Jehovah
thy God in Horeb, when Jehovah said unto me, Assemble me the people, and
I will make them hear my words, that they may learn to fear me all the
days that they live upon the earth, and that they may teach their
children.

<span id="an_4:11">4:11</span> And ye came near and stood under the
mountain; and the mountain burned with fire unto the heart of heaven,
with darkness, cloud, and thick darkness.

<span id="an_4:12">4:12</span> And Jehovah spake unto you out of the
midst of the fire: ye heard the voice of words, but ye saw no form; only
\[ye heard\] a voice.

<span id="an_4:13">4:13</span> And he declared unto you his covenant,
which he commanded you to perform, even the ten commandments; and he
wrote them upon two tables of stone.

<span id="an_4:14">4:14</span> And Jehovah commanded me at that time to
teach you statutes and ordinances, that ye might do them in the land
whither ye go over to possess it.

<span id="an_4:15">4:15</span> Take ye therefore good heed unto
yourselves; for ye saw no manner of form on the day that Jehovah spake
unto you in Horeb out of the midst of the fire.

<span id="an_4:16">4:16</span> Lest ye corrupt yourselves, and make you
a graven image in the form of any figure, the likeness of male or
female,

<span id="an_4:17">4:17</span> the likeness of any beast that is on the
earth, the likeness of any winged bird that flieth in the heavens,

<span id="an_4:18">4:18</span> the likeness of anything that creepeth on
the ground, the likeness of any fish that is in the water under the
earth;

<span id="an_4:19">4:19</span> and lest thou lift up thine eyes unto
heaven, and when thou seest the sun and the moon and the stars, even all
the host of heaven, thou be drawn away and worship them, and serve them,
which Jehovah thy God hath allotted unto all the peoples under the whole
heaven.

<span id="an_4:20">4:20</span> But Jehovah hath taken you, and brought
you forth out of the iron furnace, out of Egypt, to be unto him a people
of inheritance, as at this day.

<span id="an_4:21">4:21</span> Furthermore Jehovah was angry with me for
your sakes, and sware that I should not go over the Jordan, and that I
should not go in unto that good land, which Jehovah thy God giveth thee
for an inheritance:

<span id="an_4:22">4:22</span> but I must die in this land, I must not
go over the Jordan; but ye shall go over, and possess that good land.

<span id="an_4:23">4:23</span> Take heed unto yourselves, lest ye forget
the covenant of Jehovah your God, which he made with you, and make you a
graven image in the form of anything which Jehovah thy God hath
forbidden thee.

<span id="an_4:24">4:24</span> For Jehovah thy God is a devouring fire,
a jealous God.

<span id="an_4:25">4:25</span> When thou shalt beget children, and
children's children, and ye shall have been long in the land, and shall
corrupt yourselves, and make a graven image in the form of anything, and
shall do that which is evil in the sight of Jehovah thy God, to provoke
him to anger;

<span id="an_4:26">4:26</span> I call heaven and earth to witness
against you this day, that ye shall soon utterly perish from off the
land whereunto ye go over the Jordan to possess it; ye shall not prolong
your days upon it, but shall utterly be destroyed.

<span id="an_4:27">4:27</span> And Jehovah will scatter you among the
peoples, and ye shall be left few in number among the nations, whither
Jehovah shall lead you away.

<span id="an_4:28">4:28</span> And there ye shall serve gods, the work
of men's hands, wood and stone, which neither see, nor hear, nor eat,
nor smell.

<span id="an_4:29">4:29</span> But from thence ye shall seek Jehovah thy
God, and thou shalt find him, when thou searchest after him with all thy
heart and with all thy soul.

<span id="an_4:30">4:30</span> When thou art in tribulation, and all
these things are come upon thee, in the latter days thou shalt return to
Jehovah thy God, and hearken unto his voice:

<span id="an_4:31">4:31</span> for Jehovah thy God is a merciful God; he
will not fail thee, neither destroy thee, nor forget the covenant of thy
fathers which he sware unto them.

<span id="an_4:32">4:32</span> For ask now of the days that are past,
which were before thee, since the day that God created man upon the
earth, and from the one end of heaven unto the other, whether there hath
been \[any such thing\] as this great thing is, or hath been heard like
it?

<span id="an_4:33">4:33</span> Did ever a people hear the voice of God
speaking out of the midst of the fire, as thou hast heard, and live?

<span id="an_4:34">4:34</span> Or hath God assayed to go and take him a
nation from the midst of \[another\] nation, by trials, by signs, and by
wonders, and by war, and by a mighty hand, and by an outstretched arm,
and by great terrors, according to all that Jehovah your God did for you
in Egypt before your eyes?

<span id="an_4:35">4:35</span> Unto thee it was showed, that thou
mightest know that Jehovah he is God; there is none else besides him.

<span id="an_4:36">4:36</span> Out of heaven he made thee to hear his
voice, that he might instruct thee: and upon earth he made thee to see
his great fire; and thou heardest his words out of the midst of the
fire.

<span id="an_4:37">4:37</span> And because he loved thy fathers,
therefore he chose their seed after them, and brought thee out with his
presence, with his great power, out of Egypt;

<span id="an_4:38">4:38</span> to drive out nations from before thee
greater and mightier than thou, to bring thee in, to give thee their
land for an inheritance, as at this day.

<span id="an_4:39">4:39</span> Know therefore this day, and lay it to
thy heart, that Jehovah he is God in heaven above and upon the earth
beneath; there is none else.

<span id="an_4:40">4:40</span> And thou shalt keep his statutes, and his
commandments, which I command thee this day, that it may go well with
thee, and with thy children after thee, and that thou mayest prolong thy
days in the land, which Jehovah thy God giveth thee, for ever.

<span id="an_4:41">4:41</span> Then Moses set apart three cities beyond
the Jordan toward the sunrising;

<span id="an_4:42">4:42</span> that the manslayer might flee thither,
that slayeth his neighbor unawares, and hated him not in time past; and
that fleeing unto one of these cities he might live:

<span id="an_4:43">4:43</span> \[namely\], Bezer in the wilderness, in
the plain country, for the Reubenites; and Ramoth in Gilead, for the
Gadites; and Golan in Bashan, for the Manassites.

<span id="an_4:44">4:44</span> And this is the law which Moses set
before the children of Israel:

<span id="an_4:45">4:45</span> these are the testimonies, and the
statutes, and the ordinances, which Moses spake unto the children of
Israel, when they came forth out of Egypt,

<span id="an_4:46">4:46</span> beyond the Jordan, in the valley over
against Beth-peor, in the land of Sihon king of the Amorites, who dwelt
at Heshbon, whom Moses and the children of Israel smote, when they came
forth out of Egypt.

<span id="an_4:47">4:47</span> And they took his land in possession, and
the land of Og king of Bashan, the two kings of the Amorites, who were
beyond the Jordan toward the sunrising;

<span id="an_4:48">4:48</span> from Aroer, which is on the edge of the
valley of the Arnon, even unto mount Sion (the same is Hermon),

<span id="an_4:49">4:49</span> and all the Arabah beyond the Jordan
eastward, even unto the sea of the Arabah, under the slopes of Pisgah.

<span id="an_5:1">5:1</span> And Moses called unto all Israel, and said
unto them, Hear, O Israel, the statutes and the ordinances which I speak
in your ears this day, that ye may learn them, and observe to do them.

<span id="an_5:2">5:2</span> Jehovah our God made a covenant with us in
Horeb.

<span id="an_5:3">5:3</span> Jehovah made not this covenant with our
fathers, but with us, even us, who are all of us here alive this day.

<span id="an_5:4">5:4</span> Jehovah spake with you face to face in the
mount out of the midst of the fire,

<span id="an_5:5">5:5</span> (I stood between Jehovah and you at that
time, to show you the word of Jehovah: for ye were afraid because of the
fire, and went not up into the mount;) saying,

<span id="an_5:6">5:6</span> I am Jehovah thy God, who brought thee out
of the land of Egypt, out of the house of bondage.

<span id="an_5:7">5:7</span> Thou shalt have no other gods before me.

<span id="an_5:8">5:8</span> Thou shalt not make unto thee a graven
image, \[nor\] any likeness \[of anything\] that is in heaven above, or
that is in the earth beneath, or that is in the water under the earth:

<span id="an_5:9">5:9</span> thou shalt not bow down thyself unto them,
nor serve them; for I, Jehovah, thy God, am a jealous God, visiting the
iniquity of the fathers upon the children, and upon the third and upon
the fourth generation of them that hate me;

<span id="an_5:10">5:10</span> and showing lovingkindness unto thousands
of them that love me and keep my commandments.

<span id="an_5:11">5:11</span> Thou shalt not take the name of Jehovah
thy God in vain: for Jehovah will not hold him guiltless that taketh his
name in vain.

<span id="an_5:12">5:12</span> Observe the sabbath day, to keep it holy,
as Jehovah thy God commanded thee.

<span id="an_5:13">5:13</span> Six days shalt thou labor, and do all thy
work;

<span id="an_5:14">5:14</span> but the seventh day is a sabbath unto
Jehovah thy God: \[in it\] thou shalt not do any work, thou, nor thy
son, nor thy daughter, nor thy man-servant, nor thy maid-servant, nor
thine ox, nor thine ass, nor any of thy cattle, nor thy stranger that is
within thy gates; that thy man-servant and thy maid-servant may rest as
well as thou.

<span id="an_5:15">5:15</span> And thou shalt remember that thou wast a
servant in the land of Egypt, and Jehovah thy God brought thee out
thence by a mighty hand and by an outstretched arm: therefore Jehovah
thy God commanded thee to keep the sabbath day.

<span id="an_5:16">5:16</span> Honor thy father and thy mother, as
Jehovah thy God commanded thee; that thy days may be long, and that it
may go well with thee, in the land which Jehovah thy God giveth thee.

<span id="an_5:17">5:17</span> Thou shalt not kill.

<span id="an_5:18">5:18</span> Neither shalt thou commit adultery.

<span id="an_5:19">5:19</span> Neither shalt thou steal.

<span id="an_5:20">5:20</span> Neither shalt thou bear false witness
against thy neighbor.

<span id="an_5:21">5:21</span> Neither shalt thou covet thy neighbor's
wife; neither shalt thou desire thy neighbor's house, his field, or his
man-servant, or his maid-servant, his ox, or his ass, or anything that
is thy neighbor's.

<span id="an_5:22">5:22</span> These words Jehovah spake unto all your
assembly in the mount out of the midst of the fire, of the cloud, and of
the thick darkness, with a great voice: and he added no more. And he
wrote them upon two tables of stone, and gave them unto me.

<span id="an_5:23">5:23</span> And it came to pass, when ye heard the
voice out of the midst of the darkness, while the mountain was burning
with fire, that ye came near unto me, even all the heads of your tribes,
and your elders;

<span id="an_5:24">5:24</span> and ye said, Behold, Jehovah our God hath
showed us his glory and his greatness, and we have heard his voice out
of the midst of the fire: we have seen this day that God doth speak with
man, and he liveth.

<span id="an_5:25">5:25</span> Now therefore why should we die? for this
great fire will consume us: if we hear the voice of Jehovah our God any
more, then we shall die.

<span id="an_5:26">5:26</span> For who is there of all flesh, that hath
heard the voice of the living God speaking out of the midst of the fire,
as we have, and lived?

<span id="an_5:27">5:27</span> Go thou near, and hear all that Jehovah
our God shall say: and speak thou unto us all that Jehovah our God shall
speak unto thee; and we will hear it, and do it.

<span id="an_5:28">5:28</span> And Jehovah heard the voice of your
words, when ye spake unto me; and Jehovah said unto me, I have heard the
voice of the words of this people, which they have spoken unto thee:
they have well said all that they have spoken.

<span id="an_5:29">5:29</span> Oh that there were such a heart in them,
that they would fear me, and keep all my commandments always, that it
might be well with them, and with their children for ever!

<span id="an_5:30">5:30</span> Go say to them, Return ye to your tents.

<span id="an_5:31">5:31</span> But as for thee, stand thou here by me,
and I will speak unto thee all the commandment, and the statutes, and
the ordinances, which thou shalt teach them, that they may do them in
the land which I give them to possess it.

<span id="an_5:32">5:32</span> Ye shall observe to do therefore as
Jehovah your God hath commanded you: ye shall not turn aside to the
right hand or to the left.

<span id="an_5:33">5:33</span> Ye shall walk in all the way which
Jehovah your God hath commanded you, that ye may live, and that it may
be well with you, and that ye may prolong your days in the land which ye
shall possess.

<span id="an_6:1">6:1</span> Now this is the commandment, the statutes,
and the ordinances, which Jehovah your God commanded to teach you, that
ye might do them in the land whither ye go over to possess it;

<span id="an_6:2">6:2</span> that thou mightest fear Jehovah thy God, to
keep all his statutes and his commandments, which I command thee, thou,
and thy son, and thy son's son, all the days of thy life; and that thy
days may be prolonged.

<span id="an_6:3">6:3</span> Hear therefore, O Israel, and observe to do
it; that it may be well with thee, and that ye may increase mightily, as
Jehovah, the God of thy fathers, hath promised unto thee, in a land
flowing with milk and honey.

<span id="an_6:4">6:4</span> Hear, O Israel: Jehovah our God is one
Jehovah:

<span id="an_6:5">6:5</span> and thou shalt love Jehovah thy God with
all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy might.

<span id="an_6:6">6:6</span> And these words, which I command thee this
day, shall be upon thy heart;

<span id="an_6:7">6:7</span> and thou shalt teach them diligently unto
thy children, and shalt talk of them when thou sittest in thy house, and
when thou walkest by the way, and when thou liest down, and when thou
risest up.

<span id="an_6:8">6:8</span> And thou shalt bind them for a sign upon
thy hand, and they shall be for frontlets between thine eyes.

<span id="an_6:9">6:9</span> And thou shalt write them upon the
door-posts of thy house, and upon thy gates.

<span id="an_6:10">6:10</span> And it shall be, when Jehovah thy God
shall bring thee into the land which he sware unto thy fathers, to
Abraham, to Isaac, and to Jacob, to give thee, great and goodly cities,
which thou buildest not,

<span id="an_6:11">6:11</span> and houses full of all good things, which
thou filledst not, and cisterns hewn out, which thou hewedst not,
vineyards and olive-trees, which thou plantedst not, and thou shalt eat
and be full;

<span id="an_6:12">6:12</span> then beware lest thou forget Jehovah, who
brought thee forth out of the land of Egypt, out of the house of
bondage.

<span id="an_6:13">6:13</span> Thou shalt fear Jehovah thy God; and him
shalt thou serve, and shalt swear by his name.

<span id="an_6:14">6:14</span> Ye shall not go after other gods, of the
gods of the peoples that are round about you;

<span id="an_6:15">6:15</span> for Jehovah thy God in the midst of thee
is a jealous God; lest the anger of Jehovah thy God be kindled against
thee, and he destroy thee from off the face of the earth.

<span id="an_6:16">6:16</span> Ye shall not tempt Jehovah your God, as
ye tempted him in Massah.

<span id="an_6:17">6:17</span> Ye shall diligently keep the commandments
of Jehovah your God, and his testimonies, and his statutes, which he
hath commanded thee.

<span id="an_6:18">6:18</span> And thou shalt do that which is right and
good in the sight of Jehovah; that it may be well with thee, and that
thou mayest go in and possess the good land which Jehovah sware unto thy
fathers,

<span id="an_6:19">6:19</span> to thrust out all thine enemies from
before thee, as Jehovah hath spoken.

<span id="an_6:20">6:20</span> When thy son asketh thee in time to come,
saying, What mean the testimonies, and the statutes, and the ordinances,
which Jehovah our God hath commanded you?

<span id="an_6:21">6:21</span> then thou shalt say unto thy son, We were
Pharaoh's bondmen in Egypt: and Jehovah brought us out of Egypt with a
mighty hand;

<span id="an_6:22">6:22</span> and Jehovah showed signs and wonders,
great and sore, upon Egypt, upon Pharaoh, and upon all his house, before
our eyes;

<span id="an_6:23">6:23</span> and he brought us out from thence, that
he might bring us in, to give us the land which he sware unto our
fathers.

<span id="an_6:24">6:24</span> And Jehovah commanded us to do all these
statutes, to fear Jehovah our God, for our good always, that he might
preserve us alive, as at this day.

<span id="an_6:25">6:25</span> And it shall be righteousness unto us, if
we observe to do all this commandment before Jehovah our God, as he hath
commanded us.

<span id="an_7:1">7:1</span> When Jehovah thy God shall bring thee into
the land whither thou goest to possess it, and shall cast out many
nations before thee, the Hittite, and the Girgashite, and the Amorite,
and the Canaanite, and the Perizzite, and the Hivite, and the Jebusite,
seven nations greater and mightier than thou;

<span id="an_7:2">7:2</span> and when Jehovah thy God shall deliver them
up before thee, and thou shalt smite them; then thou shalt utterly
destroy them: thou shalt make no covenant with them, nor show mercy unto
them;

<span id="an_7:3">7:3</span> neither shalt thou make marriages with
them; thy daughter thou shalt not give unto his son, nor his daughter
shalt thou take unto thy son.

<span id="an_7:4">7:4</span> For he will turn away thy son from
following me, that they may serve other gods: so will the anger of
Jehovah be kindled against you, and he will destroy thee quickly.

<span id="an_7:5">7:5</span> But thus shall ye deal with them: ye shall
break down their altars, and dash in pieces their pillars, and hew down
their Asherim, and burn their graven images with fire.

<span id="an_7:6">7:6</span> For thou art a holy people unto Jehovah thy
God: Jehovah thy God hath chosen thee to be a people for his own
possession, above all peoples that are upon the face of the earth.

<span id="an_7:7">7:7</span> Jehovah did not set his love upon you, nor
choose you, because ye were more in number than any people; for ye were
the fewest of all peoples:

<span id="an_7:8">7:8</span> but because Jehovah loveth you, and because
he would keep the oath which he sware unto your fathers, hath Jehovah
brought you out with a mighty hand, and redeemed you out of the house of
bondage, from the hand of Pharaoh king of Egypt.

<span id="an_7:9">7:9</span> Know therefore that Jehovah thy God, he is
God, the faithful God, who keepeth covenant and lovingkindness with them
that love him and keep his commandments to a thousand generations,

<span id="an_7:10">7:10</span> and repayeth them that hate him to their
face, to destroy them: he will not be slack to him that hateth him, he
will repay him to his face.

<span id="an_7:11">7:11</span> Thou shalt therefore keep the
commandment, and the statutes, and the ordinances, which I command thee
this day, to do them.

<span id="an_7:12">7:12</span> And it shall come to pass, because ye
hearken to these ordinances, and keep and do them, that Jehovah thy God
will keep with thee the covenant and the lovingkindness which he sware
unto thy fathers:

<span id="an_7:13">7:13</span> and he will love thee, and bless thee,
and multiply thee; he will also bless the fruit of thy body and the
fruit of thy ground, thy grain and thy new wine and thine oil, the
increase of thy cattle and the young of thy flock, in the land which he
sware unto thy fathers to give thee.

<span id="an_7:14">7:14</span> Thou shalt be blessed above all peoples:
there shall not be male or female barren among you, or among your
cattle.

<span id="an_7:15">7:15</span> And Jehovah will take away from thee all
sickness; and none of the evil diseases of Egypt, which thou knowest,
will he put upon thee, but will lay them upon all them that hate thee.

<span id="an_7:16">7:16</span> And thou shalt consume all the peoples
that Jehovah thy God shall deliver unto thee; thine eye shall not pity
them: neither shalt thou serve their gods; for that will be a snare unto
thee.

<span id="an_7:17">7:17</span> If thou shalt say in thy heart, These
nations are more than I; how can I dispossess them?

<span id="an_7:18">7:18</span> thou shalt not be afraid of them: thou
shalt well remember what Jehovah thy God did unto Pharaoh, and unto all
Egypt;

<span id="an_7:19">7:19</span> the great trials which thine eyes saw,
and the signs, and the wonders, and the mighty hand, and the
outstretched arm, whereby Jehovah thy God brought thee out: so shall
Jehovah thy God do unto all the peoples of whom thou art afraid.

<span id="an_7:20">7:20</span> Moreover Jehovah thy God will send the
hornet among them, until they that are left, and hide themselves, perish
from before thee.

<span id="an_7:21">7:21</span> Thou shalt not be affrighted at them; for
Jehovah thy God is in the midst of thee, a great God and a terrible.

<span id="an_7:22">7:22</span> And Jehovah thy God will cast out those
nations before thee by little and little: thou mayest not consume them
at once, lest the beasts of the field increase upon thee.

<span id="an_7:23">7:23</span> But Jehovah thy God will deliver them up
before thee, and will discomfit them with a great discomfiture, until
they be destroyed.

<span id="an_7:24">7:24</span> And he will deliver their kings into thy
hand, and thou shalt make their name to perish from under heaven: there
shall no man be able to stand before thee, until thou have destroyed
them.

<span id="an_7:25">7:25</span> The graven images of their gods shall ye
burn with fire: thou shalt not covet the silver or the gold that is on
them, nor take it unto thee, lest thou be snared therein; for it is an
abomination to Jehovah thy God.

<span id="an_7:26">7:26</span> And thou shalt not bring an abomination
into thy house, and become a devoted thing like unto it: thou shalt
utterly detest it, and thou shalt utterly abhor it; for it is a devoted
thing.

<span id="an_8:1">8:1</span> All the commandment which I command thee
this day shall ye observe to do, that ye may live, and multiply, and go
in and possess the land which Jehovah sware unto your fathers.

<span id="an_8:2">8:2</span> And thou shalt remember all the way which
Jehovah thy God hath led thee these forty years in the wilderness, that
he might humble thee, to prove thee, to know what was in thy heart,
whether thou wouldest keep his commandments, or not.

<span id="an_8:3">8:3</span> And he humbled thee, and suffered thee to
hunger, and fed thee with manna, which thou knewest not, neither did thy
fathers know; that he might make thee know that man doth not live by
bread only, but by everything that proceedeth out of the mouth of
Jehovah doth man live.

<span id="an_8:4">8:4</span> Thy raiment waxed not old upon thee,
neither did thy foot swell, these forty years.

<span id="an_8:5">8:5</span> And thou shalt consider in thy heart, that,
as a man chasteneth his son, so Jehovah thy God chasteneth thee.

<span id="an_8:6">8:6</span> And thou shalt keep the commandments of
Jehovah thy God, to walk in his ways, and to fear him.

<span id="an_8:7">8:7</span> For Jehovah thy God bringeth thee into a
good land, a land of brooks of water, of fountains and springs, flowing
forth in valleys and hills;

<span id="an_8:8">8:8</span> a land of wheat and barley, and vines and
fig-trees and pomegranates; a land of olive-trees and honey;

<span id="an_8:9">8:9</span> a land wherein thou shalt eat bread without
scarceness, thou shalt not lack anything in it; a land whose stones are
iron, and out of whose hills thou mayest dig copper.

<span id="an_8:10">8:10</span> And thou shalt eat and be full, and thou
shalt bless Jehovah thy God for the good land which he hath given thee.

<span id="an_8:11">8:11</span> Beware lest thou forget Jehovah thy God,
in not keeping his commandments, and his ordinances, and his statutes,
which I command thee this day:

<span id="an_8:12">8:12</span> lest, when thou hast eaten and art full,
and hast built goodly houses, and dwelt therein;

<span id="an_8:13">8:13</span> and when thy herds and thy flocks
multiply, and thy silver and thy gold is multiplied, and all that thou
hast is multiplied;

<span id="an_8:14">8:14</span> then thy heart be lifted up, and thou
forget Jehovah thy God, who brought thee forth out of the land of Egypt,
out of the house of bondage;

<span id="an_8:15">8:15</span> who led thee through the great and
terrible wilderness, \[wherein were\] fiery serpents and scorpions, and
thirsty ground where was no water; who brought thee forth water out of
the rock of flint;

<span id="an_8:16">8:16</span> who fed thee in the wilderness with
manna, which thy fathers knew not; that he might humble thee, and that
he might prove thee, to do thee good at thy latter end:

<span id="an_8:17">8:17</span> and \[lest\] thou say in thy heart, My
power and the might of my hand hath gotten me this wealth.

<span id="an_8:18">8:18</span> But thou shalt remember Jehovah thy God,
for it is he that giveth thee power to get wealth; that he may establish
his covenant which he sware unto thy fathers, as at this day.

<span id="an_8:19">8:19</span> And it shall be, if thou shalt forget
Jehovah thy God, and walk after other gods, and serve them, and worship
them, I testify against you this day that ye shall surely perish.

<span id="an_8:20">8:20</span> As the nations that Jehovah maketh to
perish before you, so shall ye perish; because ye would not hearken unto
the voice of Jehovah your God.

<span id="an_9:1">9:1</span> Hear, O Israel: thou art to pass over the
Jordan this day, to go in to dispossess nations greater and mightier
than thyself, cities great and fortified up to heaven,

<span id="an_9:2">9:2</span> a people great and tall, the sons of the
Anakim, whom thou knowest, and of whom thou hast heard say, Who can
stand before the sons of Anak?

<span id="an_9:3">9:3</span> Know therefore this day, that Jehovah thy
God is he who goeth over before thee as a devouring fire; he will
destroy them, and he will bring them down before thee: so shalt thou
drive them out, and make them to perish quickly, as Jehovah hath spoken
unto thee.

<span id="an_9:4">9:4</span> Speak not thou in thy heart, after that
Jehovah thy God hath thrust them out from before thee, saying, For my
righteousness Jehovah hath brought me in to possess this land; whereas
for the wickedness of these nations Jehovah doth drive them out from
before thee.

<span id="an_9:5">9:5</span> Not for thy righteousness, or for the
uprightness of thy heart, dost thou go in to possess their land; but for
the wickedness of these nations Jehovah thy God doth drive them out from
before thee, and that he may establish the word which Jehovah sware unto
thy fathers, to Abraham, to Isaac, and to Jacob.

<span id="an_9:6">9:6</span> Know therefore, that Jehovah thy God giveth
thee not this good land to possess it for thy righteousness; for thou
art a stiffnecked people.

<span id="an_9:7">9:7</span> Remember, forget thou not, how thou
provokedst Jehovah thy God to wrath in the wilderness: from the day that
thou wentest forth out of the land of Egypt, until ye came unto this
place, ye have been rebellious against Jehovah.

<span id="an_9:8">9:8</span> Also in Horeb ye provoked Jehovah to wrath,
and Jehovah was angry with you to destroy you.

<span id="an_9:9">9:9</span> When I was gone up into the mount to
receive the tables of stone, even the tables of the covenant which
Jehovah made with you, then I abode in the mount forty days and forty
nights; I did neither eat bread nor drink water.

<span id="an_9:10">9:10</span> And Jehovah delivered unto me the two
tables of stone written with the finger of God; and on them \[was
written\] according to all the words, which Jehovah speak with you in
the mount out of the midst of the fire in the day of the assembly.

<span id="an_9:11">9:11</span> And it came to pass at the end of forty
days and forty nights, that Jehovah gave me the two tables of stone,
even the tables of the covenant.

<span id="an_9:12">9:12</span> And Jehovah said unto me, Arise, get thee
down quickly from hence; for thy people that thou hast brought forth out
of Egypt have corrupted themselves; they are quickly turned aside out of
the way which I commanded them; they have made them a molten image.

<span id="an_9:13">9:13</span> Furthermore Jehovah spake unto me,
saying, I have seen this people, and, behold, it is a stiffnecked
people:

<span id="an_9:14">9:14</span> let me alone, that I may destroy them,
and blot out their name from under heaven; and I will make of thee a
nation mightier and greater than they.

<span id="an_9:15">9:15</span> So I turned and came down from the mount,
and the mount was burning with fire: and the two tables of the covenant
were in my two hands.

<span id="an_9:16">9:16</span> And I looked, and, behold, ye had sinned
against Jehovah your God; ye had made you a molten calf: ye had turned
aside quickly out of the way which Jehovah had commanded you.

<span id="an_9:17">9:17</span> And I took hold of the two tables, and
cast them out of my two hands, and brake them before your eyes.

<span id="an_9:18">9:18</span> And I fell down before Jehovah, as at the
first, forty days and forty nights; I did neither eat bread nor drink
water; because of all your sin which ye sinned, in doing that which was
evil in the sight of Jehovah, to provoke him to anger.

<span id="an_9:19">9:19</span> For I was afraid of the anger and hot
displeasure, wherewith Jehovah was wroth against you to destroy you. But
Jehovah hearkened unto me that time also.

<span id="an_9:20">9:20</span> And Jehovah was very angry with Aaron to
destroy him: and I prayed for Aaron also at the same time.

<span id="an_9:21">9:21</span> And I took your sin, the calf which ye
had made, and burnt it with fire, and stamped it, grinding it very
small, until it was as fine as dust: and I cast the dust thereof into
the brook that descended out of the mount.

<span id="an_9:22">9:22</span> And at Taberah, and at Massah, and at
Kibroth-hattaavah, ye provoked Jehovah to wrath.

<span id="an_9:23">9:23</span> And when Jehovah sent you from
Kadesh-barnea, saying, Go up and possess the land which I have given
you; then ye rebelled against the commandment of Jehovah your God, and
ye believed him not, nor hearkened to his voice.

<span id="an_9:24">9:24</span> Ye have been rebellious against Jehovah
from the day that I knew you.

<span id="an_9:25">9:25</span> So I fell down before Jehovah the forty
days and forty nights that I fell down, because Jehovah had said he
would destroy you.

<span id="an_9:26">9:26</span> And I prayed unto Jehovah, and said, O
Lord Jehovah, destroy not thy people and thine inheritance, that thou
hast redeemed through thy greatness, that thou hast brought forth out of
Egypt with a mighty hand.

<span id="an_9:27">9:27</span> Remember thy servants, Abraham, Isaac,
and Jacob; look not unto the stubbornness of this people, nor to their
wickedness, nor to their sin,

<span id="an_9:28">9:28</span> lest the land whence thou broughtest us
out say, Because Jehovah was not able to bring them into the land which
he promised unto them, and because he hated them, he hath brought them
out to slay them in the wilderness.

<span id="an_9:29">9:29</span> Yet they are thy people and thine
inheritance, which thou broughtest out by thy great power and by thine
outstretched arm.

<span id="an_10:1">10:1</span> At that time Jehovah said unto me, Hew
thee two tables of stone like unto the first, and come up unto me into
the mount, and make thee an ark of wood.

<span id="an_10:2">10:2</span> And I will write on the tables the words
that were on the first tables which thou brakest, and thou shalt put
them in the ark.

<span id="an_10:3">10:3</span> So I made an ark of acacia wood, and
hewed two tables of stone like unto the first, and went up into the
mount, having the two tables in my hand.

<span id="an_10:4">10:4</span> And he wrote on the tables, according to
the first writing, the ten commandments, which Jehovah spake unto you in
the mount out of the midst of the fire in the day of the assembly: and
Jehovah gave them unto me.

<span id="an_10:5">10:5</span> And I turned and came down from the
mount, and put the tables in the ark which I had made; and there they
are as Jehovah commanded me.

<span id="an_10:6">10:6</span> (And the children of Israel journeyed
from Beeroth Bene-jaakan to Moserah. There Aaron died, and there he was
buried; and Eleazar his son ministered in the priest's office in his
stead.

<span id="an_10:7">10:7</span> From thence they journeyed unto Gudgodah;
and from Gudgodah to Jotbathah, a land of brooks of water.

<span id="an_10:8">10:8</span> At that time Jehovah set apart the tribe
of Levi, to bear the ark of the covenant of Jehovah, to stand before
Jehovah to minister unto him, and to bless in his name, unto this day.

<span id="an_10:9">10:9</span> Wherefore Levi hath no portion nor
inheritance with his brethren; Jehovah is his inheritance, according as
Jehovah thy God spake unto him.)

<span id="an_10:10">10:10</span> And I stayed in the mount, as at the
first time, forty days and forty nights: and Jehovah hearkened unto me
that time also; Jehovah would not destroy thee.

<span id="an_10:11">10:11</span> And Jehovah said unto me, Arise, take
thy journey before the people; and they shall go in and possess the
land, which I sware unto their fathers to give unto them.

<span id="an_10:12">10:12</span> And now, Israel, what doth Jehovah thy
God require of thee, but to fear Jehovah thy God, to walk in all his
ways, and to love him, and to serve Jehovah thy God with all thy heart
and with all thy soul,

<span id="an_10:13">10:13</span> to keep the commandments of Jehovah,
and his statutes, which I command thee this day for thy good?

<span id="an_10:14">10:14</span> Behold, unto Jehovah thy God belongeth
heaven and the heaven of heavens, the earth, with all that is therein.

<span id="an_10:15">10:15</span> Only Jehovah had a delight in thy
fathers to love them, and he chose their seed after them, even you above
all peoples, as at this day.

<span id="an_10:16">10:16</span> Circumcise therefore the foreskin of
your heart, and be no more stiffnecked.

<span id="an_10:17">10:17</span> For Jehovah your God, he is God of
gods, and Lord of lords, the great God, the mighty, and the terrible,
who regardeth not persons, nor taketh reward.

<span id="an_10:18">10:18</span> He doth execute justice for the
fatherless and widow, and loveth the sojourner, in giving him food and
raiment.

<span id="an_10:19">10:19</span> Love ye therefore the sojourner; for ye
were sojourners in the land of Egypt.

<span id="an_10:20">10:20</span> Thou shalt fear Jehovah thy God; him
shalt thou serve; and to him shalt thou cleave, and by his name shalt
thou swear.

<span id="an_10:21">10:21</span> He is thy praise, and he is thy God,
that hath done for thee these great and terrible things, which thine
eyes have seen.

<span id="an_10:22">10:22</span> Thy fathers went down into Egypt with
threescore and ten persons; and now Jehovah thy God hath made thee as
the stars of heaven for multitude.

<span id="an_11:1">11:1</span> Therefore thou shalt love Jehovah thy
God, and keep his charge, and his statutes, and his ordinances, and his
commandments, alway.

<span id="an_11:2">11:2</span> And know ye this day: for \[I speak\] not
with your children that have not known, and that have not seen the
chastisement of Jehovah your God, his greatness, his mighty hand, and
his outstretched arm,

<span id="an_11:3">11:3</span> and his signs, and his works, which he
did in the midst of Egypt unto Pharaoh the king of Egypt, and unto all
his land;

<span id="an_11:4">11:4</span> and what he did unto the army of Egypt,
unto their horses, and to their chariots; how he made the water of the
Red Sea to overflow them as they pursued after you, and how Jehovah hath
destroyed them unto this day;

<span id="an_11:5">11:5</span> and what he did unto you in the
wilderness, until ye came unto this place;

<span id="an_11:6">11:6</span> and what he did unto Dathan and Abiram,
the sons of Eliab, the son of Reuben; how the earth opened its mouth,
and swallowed them up, and their households, and their tents, and every
living thing that followed them, in the midst of all Israel:

<span id="an_11:7">11:7</span> but your eyes have seen all the great
work of Jehovah which he did.

<span id="an_11:8">11:8</span> Therefore shall ye keep all the
commandment which I command thee this day, that ye may be strong, and go
in and possess the land, whither ye go over to possess it;

<span id="an_11:9">11:9</span> and that ye may prolong your days in the
land, which Jehovah sware unto your fathers to give unto them and to
their seed, a land flowing with milk and honey.

<span id="an_11:10">11:10</span> For the land, whither thou goest in to
possess it, is not as the land of Egypt, from whence ye came out, where
thou sowedst thy seed, and wateredst it with thy foot, as a garden of
herbs;

<span id="an_11:11">11:11</span> but the land, whither ye go over to
possess it, is a land of hills and valleys, \[and\] drinketh water of
the rain of heaven,

<span id="an_11:12">11:12</span> a land which Jehovah thy God careth
for: the eyes of Jehovah thy God are always upon it, from the beginning
of the year even unto the end of the year.

<span id="an_11:13">11:13</span> And it shall come to pass, if ye shall
hearken diligently unto my commandments which I command you this day, to
love Jehovah your God, and to serve him with all your heart and with all
your soul,

<span id="an_11:14">11:14</span> that I will give the rain of your land
in its season, the former rain and the latter rain, that thou mayest
gather in thy grain, and thy new wine, and thine oil.

<span id="an_11:15">11:15</span> And I will give grass in thy fields for
thy cattle, and thou shalt eat and be full.

<span id="an_11:16">11:16</span> Take heed to yourselves, lest your
heart be deceived, and ye turn aside, and serve other gods, and worship
them;

<span id="an_11:17">11:17</span> and the anger of Jehovah be kindled
against you, and he shut up the heavens, so that there shall be no rain,
and the land shall not yield its fruit; and ye perish quickly from off
the good land which Jehovah giveth you.

<span id="an_11:18">11:18</span> Therefore shall ye lay up these my
words in your heart and in your soul; and ye shall bind them for a sign
upon your hand, and they shall be for frontlets between your eyes.

<span id="an_11:19">11:19</span> And ye shall teach them your children,
talking of them, when thou sittest in thy house, and when thou walkest
by the way, and when thou liest down, and when thou risest up.

<span id="an_11:20">11:20</span> And thou shalt write them upon the
door-posts of thy house, and upon thy gates;

<span id="an_11:21">11:21</span> that your days may be multiplied, and
the days of your children, in the land which Jehovah sware unto your
fathers to give them, as the days of the heavens above the earth.

<span id="an_11:22">11:22</span> For if ye shall diligently keep all
this commandment which I command you, to do it, to love Jehovah your
God, to walk in all his ways, and to cleave unto him;

<span id="an_11:23">11:23</span> then will Jehovah drive out all these
nations from before you, and ye shall dispossess nations greater and
mightier than yourselves.

<span id="an_11:24">11:24</span> Every place whereon the sole of your
foot shall tread shall be yours: from the wilderness, and Lebanon, from
the river, the river Euphrates, even unto the hinder sea shall be your
border.

<span id="an_11:25">11:25</span> There shall no man be able to stand
before you: Jehovah your God shall lay the fear of you and the dread of
you upon all the land that ye shall tread upon, as he hath spoken unto
you.

<span id="an_11:26">11:26</span> Behold, I set before you this day a
blessing and a curse:

<span id="an_11:27">11:27</span> the blessing, if ye shall hearken unto
the commandments of Jehovah your God, which I command you this day;

<span id="an_11:28">11:28</span> and the curse, if ye shall not hearken
unto the commandments of Jehovah your God, but turn aside out of the way
which I command you this day, to go after other gods, which ye have not
known.

<span id="an_11:29">11:29</span> And it shall come to pass, when Jehovah
thy God shall bring thee into the land whither thou goest to possess it,
that thou shalt set the blessing upon mount Gerizim, and the curse upon
mount Ebal.

<span id="an_11:30">11:30</span> Are they not beyond the Jordan, behind
the way of the going down of the sun, in the land of the Canaanites that
dwell in the Arabah, over against Gilgal, beside the oaks of Moreh?

<span id="an_11:31">11:31</span> For ye are to pass over the Jordan to
go in to possess the land which Jehovah your God giveth you, and ye
shall possess it, and dwell therein.

<span id="an_11:32">11:32</span> And ye shall observe to do all the
statutes and the ordinances which I set before you this day.

<span id="an_12:1">12:1</span> These are the statutes and the ordinances
which ye shall observe to do in the land which Jehovah, the God of thy
fathers, hath given thee to possess it, all the days that ye live upon
the earth.

<span id="an_12:2">12:2</span> Ye shall surely destroy all the places
wherein the nations that ye shall dispossess served their gods, upon the
high mountains, and upon the hills, and under every green tree:

<span id="an_12:3">12:3</span> and ye shall break down their altars, and
dash in pieces their pillars, and burn their Asherim with fire; and ye
shall hew down the graven images of their gods; and ye shall destroy
their name out of that place.

<span id="an_12:4">12:4</span> Ye shall not do so unto Jehovah your God.

<span id="an_12:5">12:5</span> But unto the place which Jehovah your God
shall choose out of all your tribes, to put his name there, even unto
his habitation shall ye seek, and thither thou shalt come;

<span id="an_12:6">12:6</span> and thither ye shall bring your
burnt-offerings, and your sacrifices, and your tithes, and the
heave-offering of your hand, and your vows, and your freewill-offerings,
and the firstlings of your herd and of your flock:

<span id="an_12:7">12:7</span> and there ye shall eat before Jehovah
your God, and ye shall rejoice in all that ye put your hand unto, ye and
your households, wherein Jehovah thy God hath blessed thee.

<span id="an_12:8">12:8</span> Ye shall not do after all the things that
we do here this day, every man whatsoever is right in his own eyes;

<span id="an_12:9">12:9</span> for ye are not as yet come to the rest
and to the inheritance, which Jehovah thy God giveth thee.

<span id="an_12:10">12:10</span> But when ye go over the Jordan, and
dwell in the land which Jehovah your God causeth you to inherit, and he
giveth you rest from all your enemies round about, so that ye dwell in
safety;

<span id="an_12:11">12:11</span> then it shall come to pass that to the
place which Jehovah your God shall choose, to cause his name to dwell
there, thither shall ye bring all that I command you: your
burnt-offerings, and your sacrifices, your tithes, and the
heave-offering of your hand, and all your choice vows which ye vow unto
Jehovah.

<span id="an_12:12">12:12</span> And ye shall rejoice before Jehovah
your God, ye, and your sons, and your daughters, and your men-servants,
and your maid-servants, and the Levite that is within your gates,
forasmuch as he hath no portion nor inheritance with you.

<span id="an_12:13">12:13</span> Take heed to thyself that thou offer
not thy burnt-offerings in every place that thou seest;

<span id="an_12:14">12:14</span> but in the place which Jehovah shall
choose in one of thy tribes, there thou shalt offer thy burnt-offerings,
and there thou shalt do all that I command thee.

<span id="an_12:15">12:15</span> Notwithstanding, thou mayest kill and
eat flesh within all thy gates, after all the desire of thy soul,
according to the blessing of Jehovah thy God which he hath given thee:
the unclean and the clean may eat thereof, as of the gazelle, and as of
the hart.

<span id="an_12:16">12:16</span> Only ye shall not eat the blood; thou
shalt pour it out upon the earth as water.

<span id="an_12:17">12:17</span> Thou mayest not eat within thy gates
the tithe of thy grain, or of thy new wine, or of thine oil, or the
firstlings of thy herd or of thy flock, nor any of thy vows which thou
vowest, nor thy freewill-offerings, nor the heave-offering of thy hand;

<span id="an_12:18">12:18</span> but thou shalt eat them before Jehovah
thy God in the place which Jehovah thy God shall choose, thou, and thy
son, and thy daughter, and thy man-servant, and thy maid-servant, and
the Levite that is within thy gates: and thou shalt rejoice before
Jehovah thy God in all that thou puttest thy hand unto.

<span id="an_12:19">12:19</span> Take heed to thyself that thou forsake
not the Levite as long as thou livest in thy land.

<span id="an_12:20">12:20</span> When Jehovah thy God shall enlarge thy
border, as he hath promised thee, and thou shalt say, I will eat flesh,
because thy soul desireth to eat flesh; thou mayest eat flesh, after all
the desire of thy soul.

<span id="an_12:21">12:21</span> If the place which Jehovah thy God
shall choose, to put his name there, be too far from thee, then thou
shalt kill of thy herd and of thy flock, which Jehovah hath given thee,
as I have commanded thee; and thou mayest eat within thy gates, after
all the desire of thy soul.

<span id="an_12:22">12:22</span> Even as the gazelle and as the hart is
eaten, so thou shalt eat thereof: the unclean and the clean may eat
thereof alike.

<span id="an_12:23">12:23</span> Only be sure that thou eat not the
blood: for the blood is the life; and thou shalt not eat the life with
the flesh.

<span id="an_12:24">12:24</span> Thou shalt not eat it; thou shalt pour
it out upon the earth as water.

<span id="an_12:25">12:25</span> Thou shalt not eat it; that it may go
well with thee, and with thy children after thee, when thou shalt do
that which is right in the eyes of Jehovah.

<span id="an_12:26">12:26</span> Only thy holy things which thou hast,
and thy vows, thou shalt take, and go unto the place which Jehovah shall
choose:

<span id="an_12:27">12:27</span> and thou shalt offer thy
burnt-offerings, the flesh and the blood, upon the altar of Jehovah thy
God; and the blood of thy sacrifices shall be poured out upon the altar
of Jehovah thy God; and thou shalt eat the flesh.

<span id="an_12:28">12:28</span> Observe and hear all these words which
I command thee, that it may go well with thee, and with thy children
after thee for ever, when thou doest that which is good and right in the
eyes of Jehovah thy God.

<span id="an_12:29">12:29</span> When Jehovah thy God shall cut off the
nations from before thee, whither thou goest in to dispossess them, and
thou dispossessest them, and dwellest in their land;

<span id="an_12:30">12:30</span> take heed to thyself that thou be not
ensnared to follow them, after that they are destroyed from before thee;
and that thou inquire not after their gods, saying, How do these nations
serve their gods? even so will I do likewise.

<span id="an_12:31">12:31</span> Thou shalt not do so unto Jehovah thy
God: for every abomination to Jehovah, which he hateth, have they done
unto their gods; for even their sons and their daughters do they burn in
the fire to their gods.

<span id="an_12:32">12:32</span> What thing soever I command you, that
shall ye observe to do: thou shalt not add thereto, nor diminish from
it.

<span id="an_13:1">13:1</span> If there arise in the midst of thee a
prophet, or a dreamer of dreams, and he give thee a sign or a wonder,

<span id="an_13:2">13:2</span> and the sign or the wonder come to pass,
whereof he spake unto thee, saying, Let us go after other gods, which
thou hast not known, and let us serve them;

<span id="an_13:3">13:3</span> thou shalt not hearken unto the words of
that prophet, or unto that dreamer of dreams: for Jehovah your God
proveth you, to know whether ye love Jehovah your God with all your
heart and with all your soul.

<span id="an_13:4">13:4</span> Ye shall walk after Jehovah your God, and
fear him, and keep his commandments, and obey his voice, and ye shall
serve him, and cleave unto him.

<span id="an_13:5">13:5</span> And that prophet, or that dreamer of
dreams, shall be put to death, because he hath spoken rebellion against
Jehovah your God, who brought you out of the land of Egypt, and redeemed
thee out of the house of bondage, to draw thee aside out of the way
which Jehovah thy God commanded thee to walk in. So shalt thou put away
the evil from the midst of thee.

<span id="an_13:6">13:6</span> If thy brother, the son of thy mother, or
thy son, or thy daughter, or the wife of thy bosom, or thy friend, that
is as thine own soul, entice thee secretly, saying, Let us go and serve
other gods, which thou hast not known, thou, nor thy fathers;

<span id="an_13:7">13:7</span> of the gods of the peoples that are round
about you, nigh unto thee, or far off from thee, from the one end of the
earth even unto the other end of the earth;

<span id="an_13:8">13:8</span> thou shalt not consent unto him, nor
hearken unto him; neither shall thine eye pity him, neither shalt thou
spare, neither shalt thou conceal him:

<span id="an_13:9">13:9</span> but thou shalt surely kill him; thy hand
shall be first upon him to put him to death, and afterwards the hand of
all the people.

<span id="an_13:10">13:10</span> And thou shalt stone him to death with
stones, because he hath sought to draw thee away from Jehovah thy God,
who brought thee out of the land of Egypt, out of the house of bondage.

<span id="an_13:11">13:11</span> And all Israel shall hear, and fear,
and shall do not more any such wickedness as this is in the midst of
thee.

<span id="an_13:12">13:12</span> If thou shalt hear tell concerning one
of thy cities, which Jehovah thy God giveth thee to dwell there, saying,

<span id="an_13:13">13:13</span> Certain base fellows are gone out from
the midst of thee, and have drawn away the inhabitants of their city,
saying, Let us go and serve other gods, which ye have not known;

<span id="an_13:14">13:14</span> then shalt thou inquire, and make
search, and ask diligently; and, behold, if it be truth, and the thing
certain, that such abomination is wrought in the midst of thee,

<span id="an_13:15">13:15</span> thou shalt surely smite the inhabitants
of that city with the edge of the sword, destroying it utterly, and all
that is therein and the cattle thereof, with the edge of the sword.

<span id="an_13:16">13:16</span> And thou shalt gather all the spoil of
it into the midst of the street thereof, and shalt burn with fire the
city, and all the spoil thereof every whit, unto Jehovah thy God: and it
shall be a heap for ever; it shall not be built again.

<span id="an_13:17">13:17</span> And there shall cleave nought of the
devoted thing to thy hand; that Jehovah may turn from the fierceness of
his anger, and show thee mercy, and have compassion upon thee, and
multiply thee, as he hath sworn unto thy fathers;

<span id="an_13:18">13:18</span> when thou shalt hearken to the voice of
Jehovah thy God, to keep all his commandments which I command thee this
day, to do that which is right in the eyes of Jehovah thy God.

<span id="an_14:1">14:1</span> Ye are the children of Jehovah your God:
ye shall not cut yourselves, nor make any baldness between your eyes for
the dead.

<span id="an_14:2">14:2</span> For thou art a holy people unto Jehovah
thy God, and Jehovah hath chosen thee to be a people for his own
possession, above all peoples that are upon the face of the earth.

<span id="an_14:3">14:3</span> Thou shalt not eat any abominable thing.

<span id="an_14:4">14:4</span> These are the beasts which ye may eat:
the ox, the sheep, and the goat,

<span id="an_14:5">14:5</span> the hart, and the gazelle, and the
roebuck, and the wild goat, and the pygarg, and the antelope, and the
chamois.

<span id="an_14:6">14:6</span> And every beast that parteth the hoof,
and hath the hoof cloven in two, \[and\] cheweth the cud, among the
beasts, that may ye eat.

<span id="an_14:7">14:7</span> Nevertheless these ye shall not eat of
them that chew the cud, or of them that have the hoof cloven: the camel,
and the hare, and the coney; because they chew the cud but part not the
hoof, they are unclean unto you.

<span id="an_14:8">14:8</span> And the swine, because he parteth the
hoof but cheweth not the cud, he is unclean unto you: of their flesh ye
shall not eat, and their carcasses ye shall not touch.

<span id="an_14:9">14:9</span> These ye may eat of all that are in the
waters: whatsoever hath fins and scales may ye eat;

<span id="an_14:10">14:10</span> and whatsoever hath not fins and scales
ye shall not eat; it is unclean unto you.

<span id="an_14:11">14:11</span> Of all clean birds ye may eat.

<span id="an_14:12">14:12</span> But these are they of which ye shall
not eat: the eagle, and the gier-eagle, and the ospray,

<span id="an_14:13">14:13</span> and the glede, and the falcon, and the
kite after its kind,

<span id="an_14:14">14:14</span> and every raven after its kind,

<span id="an_14:15">14:15</span> and the ostrich, and the night-hawk,
and the sea-mew, and the hawk after its kind,

<span id="an_14:16">14:16</span> the little owl, and the great owl, and
the horned owl,

<span id="an_14:17">14:17</span> and the pelican, and the vulture, and
the cormorant,

<span id="an_14:18">14:18</span> and the stork, and the heron after its
kind, and the hoopoe, and the bat.

<span id="an_14:19">14:19</span> And all winged creeping things are
unclean unto you: they shall not be eaten.

<span id="an_14:20">14:20</span> Of all clean birds ye may eat.

<span id="an_14:21">14:21</span> Ye shall not eat of anything that dieth
of itself: thou mayest give it unto the sojourner that is within thy
gates, that he may eat it; or thou mayest sell it unto a foreigner: for
thou art a holy people unto Jehovah thy God. Thou shalt not boil a kid
in its mother's milk.

<span id="an_14:22">14:22</span> Thou shalt surely tithe all the
increase of thy seed, that which cometh forth from the field year by
year.

<span id="an_14:23">14:23</span> And thou shalt eat before Jehovah thy
God, in the place which he shall choose, to cause his name to dwell
there, the tithe of thy grain, of thy new wine, and of thine oil, and
the firstlings of thy herd and of thy flock; that thou mayest learn to
fear Jehovah thy God always.

<span id="an_14:24">14:24</span> And if the way be too long for thee, so
that thou art not able to carry it, because the place is too far from
thee, which Jehovah thy God shall choose, to set his name there, when
Jehovah thy God shall bless thee;

<span id="an_14:25">14:25</span> then shalt thou turn it into money, and
bind up the money in thy hand, and shalt go unto the place which Jehovah
thy God shall choose:

<span id="an_14:26">14:26</span> and thou shalt bestow the money for
whatsoever thy soul desireth, for oxen, or for sheep, or for wine, or
for strong drink, or for whatsoever thy soul asketh of thee; and thou
shalt eat there before Jehovah thy God, and thou shalt rejoice, thou and
thy household.

<span id="an_14:27">14:27</span> And the Levite that is within thy
gates, thou shalt not forsake him; for he hath no portion nor
inheritance with thee.

<span id="an_14:28">14:28</span> At the end of every three years thou
shalt bring forth all the tithe of thine increase in the same year, and
shalt lay it up within thy gates:

<span id="an_14:29">14:29</span> and the Levite, because he hath no
portion nor inheritance with thee, and the sojourner, and the
fatherless, and the widow, that are within thy gates, shall come, and
shall eat and be satisfied; that Jehovah thy God may bless thee in all
the work of thy hand which thou doest.

<span id="an_15:1">15:1</span> At the end of every seven years thou
shalt make a release.

<span id="an_15:2">15:2</span> And this is the manner of the release:
every creditor shall release that which he hath lent unto his neighbor;
he shall not exact it of his neighbor and his brother; because Jehovah's
release hath been proclaimed.

<span id="an_15:3">15:3</span> Of a foreigner thou mayest exact it: but
whatsoever of thine is with thy brother thy hand shall release.

<span id="an_15:4">15:4</span> Howbeit there shall be no poor with thee;
(for Jehovah will surely bless thee in the land which Jehovah thy God
giveth thee for an inheritance to possess it;)

<span id="an_15:5">15:5</span> if only thou diligently hearken unto the
voice of Jehovah thy God, to observe to do all this commandment which I
command thee this day.

<span id="an_15:6">15:6</span> For Jehovah thy God will bless thee, as
he promised thee: and thou shalt lend unto many nations, but thou shalt
not borrow; and thou shalt rule over many nations, but they shall not
rule over thee.

<span id="an_15:7">15:7</span> If there be with thee a poor man, one of
thy brethren, within any of thy gates in thy land which Jehovah thy God
giveth thee, thou shalt not harden thy heart, nor shut thy hand from thy
poor brother;

<span id="an_15:8">15:8</span> but thou shalt surely open thy hand unto
him, and shalt surely lend him sufficient for his need \[in that\] which
he wanteth.

<span id="an_15:9">15:9</span> Beware that there be not a base thought
in thy heart, saying, The seventh year, the year of release, is at hand;
and thine eye be evil against thy poor brother, and thou give him
nought; and he cry unto Jehovah against thee, and it be sin unto thee.

<span id="an_15:10">15:10</span> Thou shalt surely give him, and thy
heart shall not be grieved when thou givest unto him; because that for
this thing Jehovah thy God will bless thee in all thy work, and in all
that thou puttest thy hand unto.

<span id="an_15:11">15:11</span> For the poor will never cease out of
the land: therefore I command thee, saying, Thou shalt surely open thy
hand unto thy brother, to thy needy, and to thy poor, in thy land.

<span id="an_15:12">15:12</span> If thy brother, a Hebrew man, or a
Hebrew woman, be sold unto thee, and serve thee six years; then in the
seventh year thou shalt let him go free from thee.

<span id="an_15:13">15:13</span> And when thou lettest him go free from
thee, thou shalt not let him go empty:

<span id="an_15:14">15:14</span> thou shalt furnish him liberally out of
thy flock, and out of thy threshing-floor, and out of thy winepress; as
Jehovah thy God hath blessed thee thou shalt give unto him.

<span id="an_15:15">15:15</span> And thou shalt remember that thou wast
a bondman in the land of Egypt, and Jehovah thy God redeemed thee:
therefore I command thee this thing to-day.

<span id="an_15:16">15:16</span> And it shall be, if he say unto thee, I
will not go out from thee; because he loveth thee and thy house, because
he is well with thee;

<span id="an_15:17">15:17</span> then thou shalt take an awl, and thrust
it through his ear unto the door, and he shall be thy servant for ever.
And also unto thy maid-servant thou shalt do likewise.

<span id="an_15:18">15:18</span> It shall not seem hard unto thee, when
thou lettest him go free from thee; for to the double of the hire of a
hireling hath he served thee six years: and Jehovah thy God will bless
thee in all that thou doest.

<span id="an_15:19">15:19</span> All the firstling males that are born
of thy herd and of thy flock thou shalt sanctify unto Jehovah thy God:
thou shalt do no work with the firstling of thy herd, nor shear the
firstling of thy flock.

<span id="an_15:20">15:20</span> Thou shalt eat it before Jehovah thy
God year by year in the place which Jehovah shall choose, thou and thy
household.

<span id="an_15:21">15:21</span> And if it have any blemish, \[as if it
be\] lame or blind, any ill blemish whatsoever, thou shalt not sacrifice
it unto Jehovah thy God.

<span id="an_15:22">15:22</span> Thou shalt eat it within thy gates: the
unclean and the clean \[shall eat it\] alike, as the gazelle, and as the
hart.

<span id="an_15:23">15:23</span> Only thou shalt not eat the blood
thereof; thou shalt pour it out upon the ground as water.

<span id="an_16:1">16:1</span> Observe the month of Abib, and keep the
passover unto Jehovah thy God; for in the month of Abib Jehovah thy God
brought thee forth out of Egypt by night.

<span id="an_16:2">16:2</span> And thou shalt sacrifice the passover
unto Jehovah thy God, of the flock and the herd, in the place which
Jehovah shall choose, to cause his name to dwell there.

<span id="an_16:3">16:3</span> Thou shalt eat no leavened bread with it;
seven days shalt thou eat unleavened bread therewith, even the bread of
affliction; for thou camest forth out of the land of Egypt in haste:
that thou mayest remember the day when thou camest forth out of the land
of Egypt all the days of thy life.

<span id="an_16:4">16:4</span> And there shall be no leaven seen with
thee in all thy borders seven days; neither shall any of the flesh,
which thou sacrificest the first day at even, remain all night until the
morning.

<span id="an_16:5">16:5</span> Thou mayest not sacrifice the passover
within any of thy gates, which Jehovah thy God giveth thee;

<span id="an_16:6">16:6</span> but at the place which Jehovah thy God
shall choose, to cause his name to dwell in, there thou shalt sacrifice
the passover at even, at the going down of the sun, at the season that
thou camest forth out of Egypt.

<span id="an_16:7">16:7</span> And thou shalt roast and eat it in the
place which Jehovah thy God shall choose: and thou shalt turn in the
morning, and go unto thy tents.

<span id="an_16:8">16:8</span> Six days thou shalt eat unleavened bread;
and on the seventh day shall be a solemn assembly to Jehovah thy God;
thou shalt do no work \[therein\].

<span id="an_16:9">16:9</span> Seven weeks shalt thou number unto thee:
from the time thou beginnest to put the sickle to the standing grain
shalt thou begin to number seven weeks.

<span id="an_16:10">16:10</span> And thou shalt keep the feast of weeks
unto Jehovah thy God with a tribute of a freewill-offering of thy hand,
which thou shalt give, according as Jehovah thy God blesseth thee:

<span id="an_16:11">16:11</span> and thou shalt rejoice before Jehovah
thy God, thou, and thy son, and thy daughter, and thy man-servant, and
thy maid-servant, and the Levite that is within thy gates, and the
sojourner, and the fatherless, and the widow, that are in the midst of
thee, in the place which Jehovah thy God shall choose, to cause his name
to dwell there.

<span id="an_16:12">16:12</span> And thou shalt remember that thou wast
a bondman in Egypt: and thou shalt observe and do these statutes.

<span id="an_16:13">16:13</span> Thou shalt keep the feast of
tabernacles seven days, after that thou hast gathered in from thy
threshing-floor and from thy winepress:

<span id="an_16:14">16:14</span> and thou shalt rejoice in thy feast,
thou, and thy son, and thy daughter, and thy man-servant, and thy
maid-servant, and the Levite, and the sojourner, and the fatherless, and
the widow, that are within thy gates.

<span id="an_16:15">16:15</span> Seven days shalt thou keep a feast unto
Jehovah thy God in the place which Jehovah shall choose; because Jehovah
thy God will bless thee in all thine increase, and in all the work of
thy hands, and thou shalt be altogether joyful.

<span id="an_16:16">16:16</span> Three times in a year shall all thy
males appear before Jehovah thy God in the place which he shall choose:
in the feast of unleavened bread, and in the feast of weeks, and in the
feast of tabernacles; and they shall not appear before Jehovah empty:

<span id="an_16:17">16:17</span> every man shall give as he is able,
according to the blessing of Jehovah thy God which he hath given thee.

<span id="an_16:18">16:18</span> Judges and officers shalt thou make
thee in all thy gates, which Jehovah thy God giveth thee, according to
thy tribes; and they shall judge the people with righteous judgment.

<span id="an_16:19">16:19</span> Thou shalt not wrest justice: thou
shalt not respect persons; neither shalt thou take a bribe; for a bribe
doth blind the eyes of the wise, and pervert the words of the righteous.

<span id="an_16:20">16:20</span> That which is altogether just shalt
thou follow, that thou mayest live, and inherit the land which Jehovah
thy God giveth thee.

<span id="an_16:21">16:21</span> Thou shalt not plant thee an Asherah of
any kind of tree beside the altar of Jehovah thy God, which thou shalt
make thee.

<span id="an_16:22">16:22</span> Neither shalt thou set thee up a
pillar; which Jehovah thy God hateth.

<span id="an_17:1">17:1</span> Thou shalt not sacrifice unto Jehovah thy
God an ox, or a sheep, wherein is a blemish, \[or\] anything evil; for
that is an abomination unto Jehovah thy God.

<span id="an_17:2">17:2</span> If there be found in the midst of thee,
within any of thy gates which Jehovah thy God giveth thee, man or woman,
that doeth that which is evil in the sight of Jehovah thy God, in
transgressing his covenant,

<span id="an_17:3">17:3</span> and hath gone and served other gods, and
worshipped them, or the sun, or the moon, or any of the host of heaven,
which I have not commanded;

<span id="an_17:4">17:4</span> and it be told thee, and thou hast heard
of it, then shalt thou inquire diligently; and, behold, if it be true,
and the thing certain, that such abomination is wrought in Israel,

<span id="an_17:5">17:5</span> then shalt thou bring forth that man or
that woman, who hath done this evil thing, unto thy gates, even the man
or the woman; and thou shalt stone them to death with stones.

<span id="an_17:6">17:6</span> At the mouth of two witnesses, or three
witnesses, shall he that is to die be put to death; at the mouth of one
witness he shall not be put to death.

<span id="an_17:7">17:7</span> The hand of the witnesses shall be first
upon him to put him to death, and afterward the hand of all the people.
So thou shalt put away the evil from the midst of thee.

<span id="an_17:8">17:8</span> If there arise a matter too hard for thee
in judgment, between blood and blood, between plea and plea, and between
stroke and stroke, being matters of controversy within thy gates; then
shalt thou arise, and get thee up unto the place which Jehovah thy God
shall choose;

<span id="an_17:9">17:9</span> and thou shalt come unto the priests the
Levites, and unto the judge that shall be in those days: and thou shalt
inquire; and they shall show thee the sentence of judgment.

<span id="an_17:10">17:10</span> And thou shalt do according to the
tenor of the sentence which they shall show thee from that place which
Jehovah shall choose; and thou shalt observe to do according to all that
they shall teach thee:

<span id="an_17:11">17:11</span> according to the tenor of the law which
they shall teach thee, and according to the judgment which they shall
tell thee, thou shalt do; thou shalt not turn aside from the sentence
which they shall show thee, to the right hand, nor to the left.

<span id="an_17:12">17:12</span> And the man that doeth presumptuously,
in not hearkening unto the priest that standeth to minister there before
Jehovah thy God, or unto the judge, even that man shall die: and thou
shalt put away the evil from Israel.

<span id="an_17:13">17:13</span> And all the people shall hear, and
fear, and do no more presumptuously.

<span id="an_17:14">17:14</span> When thou art come unto the land which
Jehovah thy God giveth thee, and shalt possess it, and shalt dwell
therein, and shalt say, I will set a king over me, like all the nations
that are round about me;

<span id="an_17:15">17:15</span> thou shalt surely set him king over
thee, whom Jehovah thy God shall choose: one from among thy brethren
shalt thou set king over thee; thou mayest not put a foreigner over
thee, who is not thy brother.

<span id="an_17:16">17:16</span> Only he shall not multiply horses to
himself, nor cause the people to return to Egypt, to the end that he may
multiply horses; forasmuch as Jehovah hath said unto you, Ye shall
henceforth return no more that way.

<span id="an_17:17">17:17</span> Neither shall he multiply wives to
himself, that his heart turn not away: neither shall he greatly multiply
to himself silver and gold.

<span id="an_17:18">17:18</span> And it shall be, when he sitteth upon
the throne of his kingdom, that he shall write him a copy of this law in
a book, out of \[that which is\] before the priests the Levites:

<span id="an_17:19">17:19</span> and it shall be with him, and he shall
read therein all the days of his life; that he may learn to fear Jehovah
his God, to keep all the words of this law and these statutes, to do
them;

<span id="an_17:20">17:20</span> that his heart be not lifted up above
his brethren, and that he turn not aside from the commandment, to the
right hand, or to the left: to the end that he may prolong his days in
his kingdom, he and his children, in the midst of Israel.

<span id="an_18:1">18:1</span> The priests the Levites, \[even\] all the
tribe of Levi, shall have no portion nor inheritance with Israel: they
shall eat the offerings of Jehovah made by fire, and his inheritance.

<span id="an_18:2">18:2</span> And they shall have no inheritance among
their brethren: Jehovah is their inheritance, as he hath spoken unto
them.

<span id="an_18:3">18:3</span> And this shall be the priests' due from
the people, from them that offer a sacrifice, whether it be ox or sheep,
that they shall give unto the priest the shoulder, and the two cheeks,
and the maw.

<span id="an_18:4">18:4</span> The first-fruits of thy grain, of thy new
wine, and of thine oil, and the first of the fleece of thy sheep, shalt
thou give him.

<span id="an_18:5">18:5</span> For Jehovah thy God hath chosen him out
of all thy tribes, to stand to minister in the name of Jehovah, him and
his sons for ever.

<span id="an_18:6">18:6</span> And if a Levite come from any of thy
gates out of all Israel, where he sojourneth, and come with all the
desire of his soul unto the place which Jehovah shall choose;

<span id="an_18:7">18:7</span> then he shall minister in the name of
Jehovah his God, as all his brethren the Levites do, who stand there
before Jehovah.

<span id="an_18:8">18:8</span> They shall have like portions to eat,
besides that which cometh of the sale of his patrimony.

<span id="an_18:9">18:9</span> When thou art come into the land which
Jehovah thy God giveth thee, thou shalt not learn to do after the
abominations of those nations.

<span id="an_18:10">18:10</span> There shall not be found with thee any
one that maketh his son or his daughter to pass through the fire, one
that useth divination, one that practiseth augury, or an enchanter, or a
sorcerer,

<span id="an_18:11">18:11</span> or a charmer, or a consulter with a
familiar spirit, or a wizard, or a necromancer.

<span id="an_18:12">18:12</span> For whosoever doeth these things is an
abomination unto Jehovah: and because of these abominations Jehovah thy
God doth drive them out from before thee.

<span id="an_18:13">18:13</span> Thou shalt be perfect with Jehovah thy
God.

<span id="an_18:14">18:14</span> For these nations, that thou shalt
dispossess, hearken unto them that practise augury, and unto diviners;
but as for thee, Jehovah thy God hath not suffered thee so to do.

<span id="an_18:15">18:15</span> Jehovah thy God will raise up unto thee
a prophet from the midst of thee, of thy brethren, like unto me; unto
him ye shall hearken;

<span id="an_18:16">18:16</span> according to all that thou desiredst of
Jehovah thy God in Horeb in the day of the assembly, saying, Let me not
hear again the voice of Jehovah my God, neither let me see this great
fire any more, that I die not.

<span id="an_18:17">18:17</span> And Jehovah said unto me, They have
well said that which they have spoken.

<span id="an_18:18">18:18</span> I will raise them up a prophet from
among their brethren, like unto thee; and I will put my words in his
mouth, and he shall speak unto them all that I shall command him.

<span id="an_18:19">18:19</span> And it shall come to pass, that
whosoever will not hearken unto my words which he shall speak in my
name, I will require it of him.

<span id="an_18:20">18:20</span> But the prophet, that shall speak a
word presumptuously in my name, which I have not commanded him to speak,
or that shall speak in the name of other gods, that same prophet shall
die.

<span id="an_18:21">18:21</span> And if thou say in thy heart, How shall
we know the word which Jehovah hath not spoken?

<span id="an_18:22">18:22</span> when a prophet speaketh in the name of
Jehovah, if the thing follow not, nor come to pass, that is the thing
which Jehovah hath not spoken: the prophet hath spoken it
presumptuously, thou shalt not be afraid of him.

<span id="an_19:1">19:1</span> When Jehovah thy God shall cut off the
nations, whose land Jehovah thy God giveth thee, and thou succeedest
them, and dwellest in their cities, and in their houses;

<span id="an_19:2">19:2</span> thou shalt set apart three cities for
thee in the midst of thy land, which Jehovah thy God giveth thee to
possess it.

<span id="an_19:3">19:3</span> Thou shalt prepare thee the way, and
divide the borders of thy land, which Jehovah thy God causeth thee to
inherit, into three parts, that every manslayer may flee thither.

<span id="an_19:4">19:4</span> And this is the case of the manslayer,
that shall flee thither and live: whoso killeth his neighbor unawares,
and hated him not in time past;

<span id="an_19:5">19:5</span> as when a man goeth into the forest with
his neighbor to hew wood, and his hand fetcheth a stroke with the axe to
cut down the tree, and the head slippeth from the helve, and lighteth
upon his neighbor, so that he dieth; he shall flee unto one of these
cities and live:

<span id="an_19:6">19:6</span> lest the avenger of blood pursue the
manslayer, while his heart is hot, and overtake him, because the way is
long, and smite him mortally; whereas he was not worthy of death,
inasmuch as he hated him not in time past.

<span id="an_19:7">19:7</span> Wherefore I command thee, saying, Thou
shalt set apart three cities for thee.

<span id="an_19:8">19:8</span> And if Jehovah thy God enlarge thy
border, as he hath sworn unto thy fathers, and give thee all the land
which he promised to give unto thy fathers;

<span id="an_19:9">19:9</span> if thou shalt keep all this commandment
to do it, which I command thee this day, to love Jehovah thy God, and to
walk ever in his ways; then shalt thou add three cities more for thee,
besides these three:

<span id="an_19:10">19:10</span> that innocent blood be not shed in the
midst of thy land, which Jehovah thy God giveth thee for an inheritance,
and so blood be upon thee.

<span id="an_19:11">19:11</span> But if any man hate his neighbor, and
lie in wait for him, and rise up against him, and smite him mortally so
that he dieth, and he flee into one of these cities;

<span id="an_19:12">19:12</span> then the elders of his city shall send
and fetch him thence, and deliver him into the hand of the avenger of
blood, that he may die.

<span id="an_19:13">19:13</span> Thine eye shall not pity him, but thou
shalt put away the innocent blood from Israel, that it may go well with
thee.

<span id="an_19:14">19:14</span> Thou shalt not remove thy neighbor's
landmark, which they of old time have set, in thine inheritance which
thou shalt inherit, in the land that Jehovah thy God giveth thee to
possess it.

<span id="an_19:15">19:15</span> One witness shall not rise up against a
man for any iniquity, or for any sin, in any sin that he sinneth: at the
mouth of two witnesses, or at the mouth of three witnesses, shall a
matter be established.

<span id="an_19:16">19:16</span> If an unrighteous witness rise up
against any man to testify against him of wrong-doing,

<span id="an_19:17">19:17</span> then both the men, between whom the
controversy is, shall stand before Jehovah, before the priests and the
judges that shall be in those days;

<span id="an_19:18">19:18</span> and the judges shall make diligent
inquisition: and, behold, if the witness be a false witness, and have
testified falsely against his brother;

<span id="an_19:19">19:19</span> then shall ye do unto him, as he had
thought to do unto his brother: so shalt thou put away the evil from the
midst of thee.

<span id="an_19:20">19:20</span> And those that remain shall hear, and
fear, and shall henceforth commit no more any such evil in the midst of
thee.

<span id="an_19:21">19:21</span> And thine eyes shall not pity; life
\[shall go\] for life, eye for eye, tooth for tooth, hand for hand, foot
for foot.

<span id="an_20:1">20:1</span> When thou goest forth to battle against
thine enemies, and seest horses, and chariots, \[and\] a people more
than thou, thou shalt not be afraid of them; for Jehovah thy God is with
thee, who brought thee up out of the land of Egypt.

<span id="an_20:2">20:2</span> And it shall be, when ye draw nigh unto
the battle, that the priest shall approach and speak unto the people,

<span id="an_20:3">20:3</span> and shall say unto them, Hear, O Israel,
ye draw nigh this day unto battle against your enemies: let not your
heart faint; fear not, nor tremble, neither be ye affrighted at them;

<span id="an_20:4">20:4</span> for Jehovah your God is he that goeth
with you, to fight for you against your enemies, to save you.

<span id="an_20:5">20:5</span> And the officers shall speak unto the
people, saying, What man is there that hath built a new house, and hath
not dedicated it? let him go and return to his house, lest he die in the
battle, and another man dedicate it.

<span id="an_20:6">20:6</span> And what man is there that hath planted a
vineyard, and hath not used the fruit thereof? let him go and return
unto his house, lest he die in the battle, and another man use the fruit
thereof.

<span id="an_20:7">20:7</span> And what man is there that hath betrothed
a wife, and hath not taken her? let him go and return unto his house,
lest he die in the battle, and another man take her.

<span id="an_20:8">20:8</span> And the officers shall speak further unto
the people, and they shall say, What man is there that is fearful and
faint-hearted? let him go and return unto his house, lest his brethren's
heart melt as his heart.

<span id="an_20:9">20:9</span> And it shall be, when the officers have
made an end of speaking unto the people, that they shall appoint
captains of hosts at the head of the people.

<span id="an_20:10">20:10</span> When thou drawest nigh unto a city to
fight against it, then proclaim peace unto it.

<span id="an_20:11">20:11</span> And it shall be, if it make thee answer
of peace, and open unto thee, then it shall be, that all the people that
are found therein shall become tributary unto thee, and shall serve
thee.

<span id="an_20:12">20:12</span> And if it will make no peace with thee,
but will make war against thee, then thou shalt besiege it:

<span id="an_20:13">20:13</span> and when Jehovah thy God delivereth it
into thy hand, thou shalt smite every male thereof with the edge of the
sword:

<span id="an_20:14">20:14</span> but the women, and the little ones, and
the cattle, and all that is in the city, even all the spoil thereof,
shalt thou take for a prey unto thyself; and thou shalt eat the spoil of
thine enemies, which Jehovah thy God hath given thee.

<span id="an_20:15">20:15</span> Thus shalt thou do unto all the cities
which are very far off from thee, which are not of the cities of these
nations.

<span id="an_20:16">20:16</span> But of the cities of these peoples,
that Jehovah thy God giveth thee for an inheritance, thou shalt save
alive nothing that breatheth;

<span id="an_20:17">20:17</span> but thou shalt utterly destroy them:
the Hittite, and the Amorite, the Canaanite, and the Perizzite, the
Hivite, and the Jebusite; as Jehovah thy God hath commanded thee;

<span id="an_20:18">20:18</span> that they teach you not to do after all
their abominations, which they have done unto their gods; so would ye
sin against Jehovah your God.

<span id="an_20:19">20:19</span> When thou shalt besiege a city a long
time, in making war against it to take it, thou shalt not destroy the
trees thereof by wielding an axe against them; for thou mayest eat of
them, and thou shalt not cut them down; for is the tree of the field
man, that it should be besieged of thee?

<span id="an_20:20">20:20</span> Only the trees of which thou knowest
that they are not trees for food, thou shalt destroy and cut them down;
and thou shalt build bulwarks against the city that maketh war with
thee, until it fall.

<span id="an_21:1">21:1</span> If one be found slain in the land which
Jehovah thy God giveth thee to possess it, lying in the field, and it be
not known who hath smitten him;

<span id="an_21:2">21:2</span> then thy elders and thy judges shall come
forth, and they shall measure unto the cities which are round about him
that is slain:

<span id="an_21:3">21:3</span> and it shall be, that the city which is
nearest unto the slain man, even the elders of that city shall take a
heifer of the herd, which hath not been wrought with, and which hath not
drawn in the yoke;

<span id="an_21:4">21:4</span> and the elders of that city shall bring
down the heifer unto a valley with running water, which is neither
plowed nor sown, and shall break the heifer's neck there in the valley.

<span id="an_21:5">21:5</span> And the priests the sons of Levi shall
come near; for them Jehovah thy God hath chosen to minister unto him,
and to bless in the name of Jehovah; and according to their word shall
every controversy and every stroke be.

<span id="an_21:6">21:6</span> And all the elders of that city, who are
nearest unto the slain man, shall wash their hands over the heifer whose
neck was broken in the valley;

<span id="an_21:7">21:7</span> and they shall answer and say, Our hands
have not shed this blood, neither have our eyes seen it.

<span id="an_21:8">21:8</span> Forgive, O Jehovah, thy people Israel,
whom thou hast redeemed, and suffer not innocent blood \[to remain\] in
the midst of thy people Israel. And the blood shall be forgiven them.

<span id="an_21:9">21:9</span> So shalt thou put away the innocent blood
from the midst of thee, when thou shalt do that which is right in the
eyes of Jehovah.

<span id="an_21:10">21:10</span> When thou goest forth to battle against
thine enemies, and Jehovah thy God delivereth them into thy hands, and
thou carriest them away captive,

<span id="an_21:11">21:11</span> and seest among the captives a
beautiful woman, and thou hast a desire unto her, and wouldest take her
to thee to wife;

<span id="an_21:12">21:12</span> then thou shalt bring her home to thy
house; and she shall shave her head, and pare her nails;

<span id="an_21:13">21:13</span> and she shall put the raiment of her
captivity from off her, and shall remain in thy house, and bewail her
father and her mother a full month: and after that thou shalt go in unto
her, and be her husband, and she shall be thy wife.

<span id="an_21:14">21:14</span> And it shall be, if thou have no
delight in her, then thou shalt let her go whither she will; but thou
shalt not sell her at all for money, thou shalt not deal with her as a
slave, because thou hast humbled her.

<span id="an_21:15">21:15</span> If a man have two wives, the one
beloved, and the other hated, and they have borne him children, both the
beloved and the hated; and if the first-born son be hers that was hated;

<span id="an_21:16">21:16</span> then it shall be, in the day that he
causeth his sons to inherit that which he hath, that he may not make the
son of the beloved the first-born before the son of the hated, who is
the first-born:

<span id="an_21:17">21:17</span> but he shall acknowledge the
first-born, the son of the hated, by giving him a double portion of all
that he hath; for he is the beginning of his strength; the right of the
first-born is his.

<span id="an_21:18">21:18</span> If a man have a stubborn and rebellious
son, that will not obey the voice of his father, or the voice of his
mother, and, though they chasten him, will not hearken unto them;

<span id="an_21:19">21:19</span> then shall his father and his mother
lay hold on him, and bring him out unto the elders of his city, and unto
the gate of his place;

<span id="an_21:20">21:20</span> and they shall say unto the elders of
his city, This our son is stubborn and rebellious, he will not obey our
voice; he is a glutton, and a drunkard.

<span id="an_21:21">21:21</span> And all the men of his city shall stone
him to death with stones: so shalt thou put away the evil from the midst
of thee; and all Israel shall hear, and fear.

<span id="an_21:22">21:22</span> And if a man have committed a sin
worthy of death, and he be put to death, and thou hang him on a tree;

<span id="an_21:23">21:23</span> his body shall not remain all night
upon the tree, but thou shalt surely bury him the same day; for he that
is hanged is accursed of God; that thou defile not thy land which
Jehovah thy God giveth thee for an inheritance.

<span id="an_22:1">22:1</span> Thou shalt not see thy brother's ox or
his sheep go astray, and hide thyself from them: thou shalt surely bring
them again unto thy brother.

<span id="an_22:2">22:2</span> And if thy brother be not nigh unto thee,
or if thou know him not, then thou shalt bring it home to thy house, and
it shall be with thee until thy brother seek after it, and thou shalt
restore it to him.

<span id="an_22:3">22:3</span> And so shalt thou do with his ass; and so
shalt thou do with his garment; and so shalt thou do with every lost
thing of thy brother's, which he hath lost, and thou hast found: thou
mayest not hide thyself.

<span id="an_22:4">22:4</span> Thou shalt not see thy brother's ass or
his ox fallen down by the way, and hide thyself from them: thou shalt
surely help him to lift them up again.

<span id="an_22:5">22:5</span> A woman shall not wear that which
pertaineth unto a man, neither shall a man put on a woman's garment; for
whosoever doeth these things is an abomination unto Jehovah thy God.

<span id="an_22:6">22:6</span> If a bird's nest chance to be before thee
in the way, in any tree or on the ground, with young ones or eggs, and
the dam sitting upon the young, or upon the eggs, thou shalt not take
the dam with the young:

<span id="an_22:7">22:7</span> thou shalt surely let the dam go, but the
young thou mayest take unto thyself; that it may be well with thee, and
that thou mayest prolong thy days.

<span id="an_22:8">22:8</span> When thou buildest a new house, then thou
shalt make a battlement for thy roof, that thou bring not blood upon thy
house, if any man fall from thence.

<span id="an_22:9">22:9</span> Thou shalt not sow thy vineyard with two
kinds of seed, lest the whole fruit be forfeited, the seed which thou
hast sown, and the increase of the vineyard.

<span id="an_22:10">22:10</span> Thou shalt not plow with an ox and an
ass together.

<span id="an_22:11">22:11</span> Thou shalt not wear a mingled stuff,
wool and linen together.

<span id="an_22:12">22:12</span> Thou shalt make thee fringes upon the
four borders of thy vesture, wherewith thou coverest thyself.

<span id="an_22:13">22:13</span> If any man take a wife, and go in unto
her, and hate her,

<span id="an_22:14">22:14</span> and lay shameful things to her charge,
and bring up an evil name upon her, and say, I took this woman, and when
I came nigh to her, I found not in her the tokens of virginity;

<span id="an_22:15">22:15</span> then shall the father of the damsel,
and her mother, take and bring forth the tokens of the damsel's
virginity unto the elders of the city in the gate;

<span id="an_22:16">22:16</span> and the damsel's father shall say unto
the elders, I gave my daughter unto this man to wife, and he hateth her;

<span id="an_22:17">22:17</span> and, lo, he hath laid shameful things
\[to her charge\], saying, I found not in thy daughter the tokens of
virginity; and yet these are the tokens of my daughter's virginity. And
they shall spread the garment before the elders of the city.

<span id="an_22:18">22:18</span> And the elders of that city shall take
the man and chastise him;

<span id="an_22:19">22:19</span> and they shall fine him a hundred
\[shekels\] of silver, and give them unto the father of the damsel,
because he hath brought up an evil name upon a virgin of Israel: and she
shall be his wife; he may not put her away all his days.

<span id="an_22:20">22:20</span> But if this thing be true, that the
tokens of virginity were not found in the damsel;

<span id="an_22:21">22:21</span> then they shall bring out the damsel to
the door of her father's house, and the men of her city shall stone her
to death with stones, because she hath wrought folly in Israel, to play
the harlot in her father's house: so shalt thou put away the evil from
the midst of thee.

<span id="an_22:22">22:22</span> If a man be found lying with a woman
married to a husband, then they shall both of them die, the man that lay
with the woman, and the woman: so shalt thou put away the evil from
Israel.

<span id="an_22:23">22:23</span> If there be a damsel that is a virgin
betrothed unto a husband, and a man find her in the city, and lie with
her;

<span id="an_22:24">22:24</span> then ye shall bring them both out unto
the gate of that city, and ye shall stone them to death with stones; the
damsel, because she cried not, being in the city; and the man, because
he hath humbled his neighbor's wife: so thou shalt put away the evil
from the midst of thee.

<span id="an_22:25">22:25</span> But if the man find the damsel that is
betrothed in the field, and the man force her, and lie with her; then
the man only that lay with her shall die:

<span id="an_22:26">22:26</span> but unto the damsel thou shalt do
nothing; there is in the damsel no sin worthy of death: for as when a
man riseth against his neighbor, and slayeth him, even so is this
matter;

<span id="an_22:27">22:27</span> for he found her in the field, the
betrothed damsel cried, and there was none to save her.

<span id="an_22:28">22:28</span> If a man find a damsel that is a
virgin, that is not betrothed, and lay hold on her, and lie with her,
and they be found;

<span id="an_22:29">22:29</span> then the man that lay with her shall
give unto the damsel's father fifty \[shekels\] of silver, and she shall
be his wife, because he hath humbled her; he may not put her away all
his days.

<span id="an_22:30">22:30</span> A man shall not take his father's wife,
and shall not uncover his father's skirt.

<span id="an_23:1">23:1</span> He that is wounded in the stones, or hath
his privy member cut off, shall not enter into the assembly of Jehovah.

<span id="an_23:2">23:2</span> A bastard shall not enter into the
assembly of Jehovah; even to the tenth generation shall none of his
enter into the assembly of Jehovah.

<span id="an_23:3">23:3</span> An Ammonite or a Moabite shall not enter
into the assembly of Jehovah; even to the tenth generation shall none
belonging to them enter into the assembly of Jehovah for ever:

<span id="an_23:4">23:4</span> because they met you not with bread and
with water in the way, when ye came forth out of Egypt, and because they
hired against thee Balaam the son of Beor from Pethor of Mesopotamia, to
curse thee.

<span id="an_23:5">23:5</span> Nevertheless Jehovah thy God would not
hearken unto Balaam; but Jehovah thy God turned the curse into a
blessing unto thee, because Jehovah thy God loved thee.

<span id="an_23:6">23:6</span> Thou shalt not seek their peace nor their
prosperity all thy days for ever.

<span id="an_23:7">23:7</span> Thou shalt not abhor an Edomite; for he
is thy brother: thou shalt not abhor an Egyptian, because thou wast a
sojourner in his land.

<span id="an_23:8">23:8</span> The children of the third generation that
are born unto them shall enter into the assembly of Jehovah.

<span id="an_23:9">23:9</span> When thou goest forth in camp against
thine enemies, then thou shalt keep thee from every evil thing.

<span id="an_23:10">23:10</span> If there be among you any man, that is
not clean by reason of that which chanceth him by night, then shall he
go abroad out of the camp, he shall not come within the camp:

<span id="an_23:11">23:11</span> but it shall be, when evening cometh
on, he shall bathe himself in water; and when the sun is down, he shall
come within the camp.

<span id="an_23:12">23:12</span> Thou shalt have a place also without
the camp, whither thou shalt go forth abroad:

<span id="an_23:13">23:13</span> and thou shalt have a paddle among thy
weapons; and it shall be, when thou sittest down abroad, thou shalt dig
therewith, and shalt turn back and cover that which cometh from thee:

<span id="an_23:14">23:14</span> for Jehovah thy God walketh in the
midst of thy camp, to deliver thee, and to give up thine enemies before
thee; therefore shall thy camp be holy, that he may not see an unclean
thing in thee, and turn away from thee.

<span id="an_23:15">23:15</span> Thou shalt not deliver unto his master
a servant that is escaped from his master unto thee:

<span id="an_23:16">23:16</span> he shall dwell with thee, in the midst
of thee, in the place which he shall choose within one of thy gates,
where it pleaseth him best: thou shalt not oppress him.

<span id="an_23:17">23:17</span> There shall be no prostitute of the
daughters of Israel, neither shall there be a sodomite of the sons of
Israel.

<span id="an_23:18">23:18</span> Thou shalt not bring the hire of a
harlot, or the wages of a dog, into the house of Jehovah thy God for any
vow: for even both these are an abomination unto Jehovah thy God.

<span id="an_23:19">23:19</span> Thou shalt not lend upon interest to
thy brother; interest of money, interest of victuals, interest of
anything that is lent upon interest:

<span id="an_23:20">23:20</span> unto a foreigner thou mayest lend upon
interest; but unto thy brother thou shalt not lend upon interest, that
Jehovah thy God may bless thee in all that thou puttest thy hand unto,
in the land whither thou goest in to possess it.

<span id="an_23:21">23:21</span> When thou shalt vow a vow unto Jehovah
thy God, thou shalt not be slack to pay it: for Jehovah thy God will
surely require it of thee; and it would be sin in thee.

<span id="an_23:22">23:22</span> But if thou shalt forbear to vow, it
shall be no sin in thee.

<span id="an_23:23">23:23</span> That which is gone out of thy lips thou
shalt observe and do; according as thou hast vowed unto Jehovah thy God,
a freewill-offering, which thou hast promised with thy mouth.

<span id="an_23:24">23:24</span> When thou comest into thy neighbor's
vineyard, then thou mayest eat of grapes thy fill at thine own pleasure;
but thou shalt not put any in thy vessel.

<span id="an_23:25">23:25</span> When thou comest into thy neighbor's
standing grain, then thou mayest pluck the ears with thy hand; but thou
shalt not move a sickle unto thy neighbor's standing grain.

<span id="an_24:1">24:1</span> When a man taketh a wife, and marrieth
her, then it shall be, if she find no favor in his eyes, because he hath
found some unseemly thing in her, that he shall write her a bill of
divorcement, and give it in her hand, and send her out of his house.

<span id="an_24:2">24:2</span> And when she is departed out of his
house, she may go and be another man's \[wife\].

<span id="an_24:3">24:3</span> And if the latter husband hate her, and
write her a bill of divorcement, and give it in her hand, and send her
out of his house; or if the latter husband die, who took her to be his
wife;

<span id="an_24:4">24:4</span> her former husband, who sent her away,
may not take her again to be his wife, after that she is defiled; for
that is abomination before Jehovah: and thou shalt not cause the land to
sin, which Jehovah thy God giveth thee for an inheritance.

<span id="an_24:5">24:5</span> When a man taketh a new wife, he shall
not go out in the host, neither shall he be charged with any business:
he shall be free at home one year, and shall cheer his wife whom he hath
taken.

<span id="an_24:6">24:6</span> No man shall take the mill or the upper
millstone to pledge; for he taketh \[a man's\] life to pledge.

<span id="an_24:7">24:7</span> If a man be found stealing any of his
brethren of the children of Israel, and he deal with him as a slave, or
sell him; then that thief shall die: so shalt thou put away the evil
from the midst of thee.

<span id="an_24:8">24:8</span> Take heed in the plague of leprosy, that
thou observe diligently, and do according to all that the priests the
Levites shall teach you: as I commanded them, so ye shall observe to do.

<span id="an_24:9">24:9</span> Remember what Jehovah thy God did unto
Miriam, by the way as ye came forth out of Egypt.

<span id="an_24:10">24:10</span> When thou dost lend thy neighbor any
manner of loan, thou shalt not go into his house to fetch his pledge.

<span id="an_24:11">24:11</span> Thou shalt stand without, and the man
to whom thou dost lend shall bring forth the pledge without unto thee.

<span id="an_24:12">24:12</span> And if he be a poor man, thou shalt not
sleep with his pledge;

<span id="an_24:13">24:13</span> thou shalt surely restore to him the
pledge when the sun goeth down, that he may sleep in his garment, and
bless thee: and it shall be righteousness unto thee before Jehovah thy
God.

<span id="an_24:14">24:14</span> Thou shalt not oppress a hired servant
that is poor and needy, whether he be of thy brethren, or of thy
sojourners that are in thy land within thy gates:

<span id="an_24:15">24:15</span> in his day thou shalt give him his
hire, neither shall the sun go down upon it; for he is poor, and setteth
his heart upon it: lest he cry against thee unto Jehovah, and it be sin
unto thee.

<span id="an_24:16">24:16</span> The fathers shall not be put to death
for the children, neither shall the children be put to death for the
fathers: every man shall be put to death for his own sin.

<span id="an_24:17">24:17</span> Thou shalt not wrest the justice
\[due\] to the sojourner, \[or\] to the fatherless, nor take the widow's
raiment to pledge;

<span id="an_24:18">24:18</span> but thou shalt remember that thou wast
a bondman in Egypt, and Jehovah thy God redeemed thee thence: therefore
I command thee to do this thing.

<span id="an_24:19">24:19</span> When thou reapest thy harvest in thy
field, and hast forgot a sheaf in the field, thou shalt not go again to
fetch it: it shall be for the sojourner, for the fatherless, and for the
widow; that Jehovah thy God may bless thee in all the work of thy hands.

<span id="an_24:20">24:20</span> When thou beatest thine olive-tree,
thou shalt not go over the boughs again: it shall be for the sojourner,
for the fatherless, and for the widow.

<span id="an_24:21">24:21</span> When thou gatherest \[the grapes of\]
thy vineyard, thou shalt not glean it after thee: it shall be for the
sojourner, for the fatherless, and for the widow.

<span id="an_24:22">24:22</span> And thou shalt remember that thou wast
a bondman in the land of Egypt: therefore I command thee to do this
thing.

<span id="an_25:1">25:1</span> If there be a controversy between men,
and they come unto judgment, and \[the judges\] judge them; then they
shall justify the righteous, and condemn the wicked;

<span id="an_25:2">25:2</span> and it shall be, if the wicked man be
worthy to be beaten, that the judge shall cause him to lie down, and to
be beaten before his face, according to his wickedness, by number.

<span id="an_25:3">25:3</span> Forty stripes he may give him, he shall
not exceed; lest, if he should exceed, and beat him above these with
many stripes, then thy brother should seem vile unto thee.

<span id="an_25:4">25:4</span> Thou shalt not muzzle the ox when he
treadeth out \[the grain\].

<span id="an_25:5">25:5</span> If brethren dwell together, and one of
them die, and have no son, the wife of the dead shall not be married
without unto a stranger: her husband's brother shall go in unto her, and
take her to him to wife, and perform the duty of a husband's brother
unto her.

<span id="an_25:6">25:6</span> And it shall be, that the first-born that
she beareth shall succeed in the name of his brother that is dead, that
his name be not blotted out of Israel.

<span id="an_25:7">25:7</span> And if the man like not to take his
brother's wife, then his brother's wife shall go up to the gate unto the
elders, and say, My husband's brother refuseth to raise up unto his
brother a name in Israel; he will not perform the duty of a husband's
brother unto me.

<span id="an_25:8">25:8</span> Then the elders of his city shall call
him, and speak unto him: and if he stand, and say, I like not to take
her;

<span id="an_25:9">25:9</span> then shall his brother's wife come unto
him in the presence of the elders, and loose his shoe from off his foot,
and spit in his face; and she shall answer and say, So shall it be done
unto the man that doth not build up his brother's house.

<span id="an_25:10">25:10</span> And his name shall be called in Israel,
The house of him that hath his shoe loosed.

<span id="an_25:11">25:11</span> When men strive together one with
another, and the wife of the one draweth near to deliver her husband out
of the hand of him that smiteth him, and putteth forth her hand, and
taketh him by the secrets;

<span id="an_25:12">25:12</span> then thou shalt cut off her hand, thine
eye shall have no pity.

<span id="an_25:13">25:13</span> Thou shalt not have in thy bag diverse
weights, a great and a small.

<span id="an_25:14">25:14</span> Thou shalt not have in thy house
diverse measures, a great and a small.

<span id="an_25:15">25:15</span> A perfect and just weight shalt thou
have; a perfect and just measure shalt thou have: that thy days may be
long in the land which Jehovah thy God giveth thee.

<span id="an_25:16">25:16</span> For all that do such things, \[even\]
all that do unrighteously, are an abomination unto Jehovah thy God.

<span id="an_25:17">25:17</span> Remember what Amalek did unto thee by
the way as ye came forth out of Egypt;

<span id="an_25:18">25:18</span> how he met thee by the way, and smote
the hindmost of thee, all that were feeble behind thee, when thou wast
faint and weary; and he feared not God.

<span id="an_25:19">25:19</span> Therefore it shall be, when Jehovah thy
God hath given thee rest from all thine enemies round about, in the land
which Jehovah thy God giveth thee for an inheritance to possess it, that
thou shalt blot out the remembrance of Amalek from under heaven; thou
shalt not forget.

<span id="an_26:1">26:1</span> And it shall be, when thou art come in
unto the land which Jehovah thy God giveth thee for an inheritance, and
possessest it, and dwellest therein,

<span id="an_26:2">26:2</span> that thou shalt take of the first of all
the fruit of the ground, which thou shalt bring in from thy land that
Jehovah thy God giveth thee; and thou shalt put it in a basket, and
shalt go unto the place which Jehovah thy God shall choose, to cause his
name to dwell there.

<span id="an_26:3">26:3</span> And thou shalt come unto the priest that
shall be in those days, and say unto him, I profess this day unto
Jehovah thy God, that I am come unto the land which Jehovah sware unto
our fathers to give us.

<span id="an_26:4">26:4</span> And the priest shall take the basket out
of thy hand, and set it down before the altar of Jehovah thy God.

<span id="an_26:5">26:5</span> And thou shalt answer and say before
Jehovah thy God, A Syrian ready to perish was my father; and he went
down into Egypt, and sojourned there, few in number; and he became there
a nation, great, mighty, and populous.

<span id="an_26:6">26:6</span> And the Egyptians dealt ill with us, and
afflicted us, and laid upon us hard bondage:

<span id="an_26:7">26:7</span> and we cried unto Jehovah, the God of our
fathers, and Jehovah heard our voice, and saw our affliction, and our
toil, and our oppression;

<span id="an_26:8">26:8</span> and Jehovah brought us forth out of Egypt
with a mighty hand, and with an outstretched arm, and with great
terribleness, and with signs, and with wonders;

<span id="an_26:9">26:9</span> and he hath brought us into this place,
and hath given us this land, a land flowing with milk and honey.

<span id="an_26:10">26:10</span> And now, behold, I have brought the
first of the fruit of the ground, which thou, O Jehovah, hast given me.
And thou shalt set it down before Jehovah thy God, and worship before
Jehovah thy God:

<span id="an_26:11">26:11</span> and thou shalt rejoice in all the good
which Jehovah thy God hath given unto thee, and unto thy house, thou,
and the Levite, and the sojourner that is in the midst of thee.

<span id="an_26:12">26:12</span> When thou hast made an end of tithing
all the tithe of thine increase in the third year, which is the year of
tithing, then thou shalt give it unto the Levite, to the sojourner, to
the fatherless, and to the widow, that they may eat within thy gates,
and be filled.

<span id="an_26:13">26:13</span> And thou shalt say before Jehovah thy
God, I have put away the hallowed things out of my house, and also have
given them unto the Levite, and unto the sojourner, to the fatherless,
and to the widow, according to all thy commandment which thou hast
commanded me: I have not transgressed any of thy commandments, neither
have I forgotten them:

<span id="an_26:14">26:14</span> I have not eaten thereof in my
mourning, neither have I put away thereof, being unclean, nor given
thereof for the dead: I have hearkened to the voice of Jehovah my God; I
have done according to all that thou hast commanded me.

<span id="an_26:15">26:15</span> Look down from thy holy habitation,
from heaven, and bless thy people Israel, and the ground which thou hast
given us, as thou swarest unto our fathers, a land flowing with milk and
honey.

<span id="an_26:16">26:16</span> This day Jehovah thy God commandeth
thee to do these statutes and ordinances: thou shalt therefore keep and
do them with all thy heart, and with all thy soul.

<span id="an_26:17">26:17</span> Thou hast avouched Jehovah this day to
be thy God, and that thou wouldest walk in his ways, and keep his
statutes, and his commandments, and his ordinances, and hearken unto his
voice:

<span id="an_26:18">26:18</span> and Jehovah hath avouched thee this day
to be a people for his own possession, as he hath promised thee, and
that thou shouldest keep all his commandments;

<span id="an_26:19">26:19</span> and to make thee high above all nations
that he hath made, in praise, and in name, and in honor; and that thou
mayest be a holy people unto Jehovah thy God, as he hath spoken.

<span id="an_27:1">27:1</span> And Moses and the elders of Israel
commanded the people, saying, Keep all the commandment which I command
you this day.

<span id="an_27:2">27:2</span> And it shall be on the day when ye shall
pass over the Jordan unto the land which Jehovah thy God giveth thee,
that thou shalt set thee up great stones, and plaster them with plaster:

<span id="an_27:3">27:3</span> and thou shalt write upon them all the
words of this law, when thou art passed over; that thou mayest go in
unto the land which Jehovah thy God giveth thee, a land flowing with
milk and honey, as Jehovah, the God of thy fathers, hath promised thee.

<span id="an_27:4">27:4</span> And it shall be, when ye are passed over
the Jordan, that ye shall set up these stones, which I command you this
day, in mount Ebal, and thou shalt plaster them with plaster.

<span id="an_27:5">27:5</span> And there shalt thou build an altar unto
Jehovah thy God, an altar of stones: thou shalt lift up no iron \[tool\]
upon them.

<span id="an_27:6">27:6</span> Thou shalt build the altar of Jehovah thy
God of unhewn stones; and thou shalt offer burnt-offerings thereon unto
Jehovah thy God:

<span id="an_27:7">27:7</span> and thou shalt sacrifice peace-offerings,
and shalt eat there; and thou shalt rejoice before Jehovah thy God.

<span id="an_27:8">27:8</span> And thou shalt write upon the stones all
the words of this law very plainly.

<span id="an_27:9">27:9</span> And Moses and the priests the Levites
spake unto all Israel, saying, Keep silence, and hearken, O Israel: this
day thou art become the people of Jehovah thy God.

<span id="an_27:10">27:10</span> Thou shalt therefore obey the voice of
Jehovah thy God, and do his commandments and his statutes, which I
command thee this day.

<span id="an_27:11">27:11</span> And Moses charged the people the same
day, saying,

<span id="an_27:12">27:12</span> These shall stand upon mount Gerizim to
bless the people, when ye are passed over the Jordan: Simeon, and Levi,
and Judah, and Issachar, and Joseph, and Benjamin.

<span id="an_27:13">27:13</span> And these shall stand upon mount Ebal
for the curse: Reuben, Gad, and Asher, and Zebulun, Dan, and Naphtali.

<span id="an_27:14">27:14</span> And the Levites shall answer, and say
unto all the men of Israel with a loud voice,

<span id="an_27:15">27:15</span> Cursed be the man that maketh a graven
or molten image, an abomination unto Jehovah, the work of the hands of
the craftsman, and setteth it up in secret. And all the people shall
answer and say, Amen.

<span id="an_27:16">27:16</span> Cursed be he that setteth light by his
father or his mother. And all the people shall say, Amen.

<span id="an_27:17">27:17</span> Cursed be he that removeth his
neighbor's landmark. And all the people shall say, Amen.

<span id="an_27:18">27:18</span> Cursed be he that maketh the blind to
wander out of the way. And all the people shall say, Amen.

<span id="an_27:19">27:19</span> Cursed be he that wresteth the justice
\[due\] to the sojourner, fatherless, and widow. And all the people
shall say, Amen.

<span id="an_27:20">27:20</span> Cursed be he that lieth with his
father's wife, because he hath uncovered his father's skirt. And all the
people shall say, Amen.

<span id="an_27:21">27:21</span> Cursed be he that lieth with any manner
of beast. And all the people shall say, Amen.

<span id="an_27:22">27:22</span> Cursed be he that lieth with his
sister, the daughter of his father, or the daughter of his mother. And
all the people shall say, Amen.

<span id="an_27:23">27:23</span> Cursed be he that lieth with his
mother-in-law. And all the people shall say, Amen.

<span id="an_27:24">27:24</span> Cursed be he that smiteth his neighbor
in secret. And all the people shall say, Amen.

<span id="an_27:25">27:25</span> Cursed be he that taketh a bribe to
slay an innocent person. And all the people shall say, Amen.

<span id="an_27:26">27:26</span> Cursed be he that confirmeth not the
words of this law to do them. And all the people shall say, Amen.

<span id="an_28:1">28:1</span> And it shall come to pass, if thou shalt
hearken diligently unto the voice of Jehovah thy God, to observe to do
all his commandments which I command thee this day, that Jehovah thy God
will set thee on high above all the nations of the earth:

<span id="an_28:2">28:2</span> and all these blessings shall come upon
thee, and overtake thee, if thou shalt hearken unto the voice of Jehovah
thy God.

<span id="an_28:3">28:3</span> Blessed shalt thou be in the city, and
blessed shalt thou be in the field.

<span id="an_28:4">28:4</span> Blessed shall be the fruit of thy body,
and the fruit of thy ground, and the fruit of thy beasts, the increase
of thy cattle, and the young of thy flock.

<span id="an_28:5">28:5</span> Blessed shall be thy basket and thy
kneading-trough.

<span id="an_28:6">28:6</span> Blessed shalt thou be when thou comest
in, and blessed shalt thou be when thou goest out.

<span id="an_28:7">28:7</span> Jehovah will cause thine enemies that
rise up against thee to be smitten before thee: they shall come out
against thee one way, and shall flee before thee seven ways.

<span id="an_28:8">28:8</span> Jehovah will command the blessing upon
thee in thy barns, and in all that thou puttest thy hand unto; and he
will bless thee in the land which Jehovah thy God giveth thee.

<span id="an_28:9">28:9</span> Jehovah will establish thee for a holy
people unto himself, as he hath sworn unto thee; if thou shalt keep the
commandments of Jehovah thy God, and walk in his ways.

<span id="an_28:10">28:10</span> And all the peoples of the earth shall
see that thou art called by the name of Jehovah; and they shall be
afraid of thee.

<span id="an_28:11">28:11</span> And Jehovah will make thee plenteous
for good, in the fruit of thy body, and in the fruit of thy cattle, and
in the fruit of thy ground, in the land which Jehovah sware unto thy
fathers to give thee.

<span id="an_28:12">28:12</span> Jehovah will open unto thee his good
treasure the heavens, to give the rain of thy land in its season, and to
bless all the work of thy hand: and thou shalt lend unto many nations,
and thou shalt not borrow.

<span id="an_28:13">28:13</span> And Jehovah will make thee the head,
and not the tail; and thou shalt be above only, and thou shalt not be
beneath; if thou shalt hearken unto the commandments of Jehovah thy God,
which I command thee this day, to observe and to do \[them\],

<span id="an_28:14">28:14</span> and shalt not turn aside from any of
the words which I command you this day, to the right hand, or to the
left, to go after other gods to serve them.

<span id="an_28:15">28:15</span> But it shall come to pass, if thou wilt
not hearken unto the voice of Jehovah thy God, to observe to do all his
commandments and his statutes which I command thee this day, that all
these curses shall come upon thee, and overtake thee.

<span id="an_28:16">28:16</span> Cursed shalt thou be in the city, and
cursed shalt thou be in the field.

<span id="an_28:17">28:17</span> Cursed shall be thy basket and thy
kneading-trough.

<span id="an_28:18">28:18</span> Cursed shall be the fruit of thy body,
and the fruit of thy ground, the increase of thy cattle, and the young
of thy flock.

<span id="an_28:19">28:19</span> Cursed shalt thou be when thou comest
in, and cursed shalt thou be when thou goest out.

<span id="an_28:20">28:20</span> Jehovah will send upon thee cursing,
discomfiture, and rebuke, in all that thou puttest thy hand unto to do,
until thou be destroyed, and until thou perish quickly; because of the
evil of thy doings, whereby thou hast forsaken me.

<span id="an_28:21">28:21</span> Jehovah will make the pestilence cleave
unto thee, until he have consumed thee from off the land, whither thou
goest in to possess it.

<span id="an_28:22">28:22</span> Jehovah will smite thee with
consumption, and with fever, and with inflammation, and with fiery heat,
and with the sword, and with blasting, and with mildew; and they shall
pursue thee until thou perish.

<span id="an_28:23">28:23</span> And thy heaven that is over thy head
shall be brass, and the earth that is under thee shall be iron.

<span id="an_28:24">28:24</span> Jehovah will make the rain of thy land
powder and dust: from heaven shall it come down upon thee, until thou be
destroyed.

<span id="an_28:25">28:25</span> Jehovah will cause thee to be smitten
before thine enemies; thou shalt go out one way against them, and shalt
flee seven ways before them: and thou shalt be tossed to and from among
all the kingdoms of the earth.

<span id="an_28:26">28:26</span> And thy dead body shall be food unto
all birds of the heavens, and unto the beasts of the earth; and there
shall be none to frighten them away.

<span id="an_28:27">28:27</span> Jehovah will smite thee with the boil
of Egypt, and with the emerods, and with the scurvy, and with the itch,
whereof thou canst not be healed.

<span id="an_28:28">28:28</span> Jehovah will smite thee with madness,
and with blindness, and with astonishment of heart;

<span id="an_28:29">28:29</span> and thou shalt grope at noonday, as the
blind gropeth in darkness, and thou shalt not prosper in thy ways: and
thou shalt be only oppressed and robbed alway, and there shall be none
to save thee.

<span id="an_28:30">28:30</span> Thou shalt betroth a wife, and another
man shall lie with her: thou shalt build a house, and thou shalt not
dwell therein: thou shalt plant a vineyard, and shalt not use the fruit
thereof.

<span id="an_28:31">28:31</span> Thine ox shall be slain before thine
eyes, and thou shalt not eat thereof: thine ass shall be violently taken
away from before thy face, and shall not be restored to thee: thy sheep
shall be given unto thine enemies, and thou shalt have none to save
thee.

<span id="an_28:32">28:32</span> Thy sons and thy daughters shall be
given unto another people; and thine eyes shall look, and fail with
longing for them all the day: and there shall be nought in the power of
thy hand.

<span id="an_28:33">28:33</span> The fruit of thy ground, and all thy
labors, shall a nation which thou knowest not eat up; and thou shalt be
only oppressed and crushed alway;

<span id="an_28:34">28:34</span> so that thou shalt be mad for the sight
of thine eyes which thou shalt see.

<span id="an_28:35">28:35</span> Jehovah will smite thee in the knees,
and in the legs, with a sore boil, whereof thou canst not be healed,
from the sole of thy foot unto the crown of thy head.

<span id="an_28:36">28:36</span> Jehovah will bring thee, and thy king
whom thou shalt set over thee, unto a nation that thou hast not known,
thou nor thy fathers; and there shalt thou serve other gods, wood and
stone.

<span id="an_28:37">28:37</span> And thou shalt become an astonishment,
a proverb, and a byword, among all the peoples whither Jehovah shall
lead thee away.

<span id="an_28:38">28:38</span> Thou shalt carry much seed out into the
field, and shalt gather little in; for the locust shall consume it.

<span id="an_28:39">28:39</span> Thou shalt plant vineyards and dress
them, but thou shalt neither drink of the wine, nor gather \[the
grapes\]; for the worm shall eat them.

<span id="an_28:40">28:40</span> Thou shalt have olive-trees throughout
all thy borders, but thou shalt not anoint thyself with the oil; for
thine olive shall cast \[its fruit\].

<span id="an_28:41">28:41</span> Thou shalt beget sons and daughters,
but they shall not be thine; for they shall go into captivity.

<span id="an_28:42">28:42</span> All thy trees and the fruit of thy
ground shall the locust possess.

<span id="an_28:43">28:43</span> The sojourner that is in the midst of
thee shall mount up above thee higher and higher; and thou shalt come
down lower and lower.

<span id="an_28:44">28:44</span> He shall lend to thee, and thou shalt
not lend to him: he shall be the head, and thou shalt be the tail.

<span id="an_28:45">28:45</span> And all these curses shall come upon
thee, and shall pursue thee, and overtake thee, till thou be destroyed;
because thou hearkenedst not unto the voice of Jehovah thy God, to keep
his commandments and his statutes which he commanded thee:

<span id="an_28:46">28:46</span> and they shall be upon thee for a sign
and for a wonder, and upon thy seed for ever.

<span id="an_28:47">28:47</span> Because thou servedst not Jehovah thy
God with joyfulness, and with gladness of heart, by reason of the
abundance of all things;

<span id="an_28:48">28:48</span> therefore shalt thou serve thine
enemies that Jehovah shall send against thee, in hunger, and in thirst,
and in nakedness, and in want of all things: and he shall put a yoke of
iron upon thy neck, until he have destroyed thee.

<span id="an_28:49">28:49</span> Jehovah will bring a nation against
thee from far, from the end of the earth, as the eagle flieth; a nation
whose tongue thou shalt not understand;

<span id="an_28:50">28:50</span> a nation of fierce countenance, that
shall not regard the person of the old, nor show favor to the young,

<span id="an_28:51">28:51</span> and shall eat the fruit of thy cattle,
and the fruit of thy ground, until thou be destroyed; that also shall
not leave thee grain, new wine, or oil, the increase of thy cattle, or
the young of thy flock, until they have caused thee to perish.

<span id="an_28:52">28:52</span> And they shall besiege thee in all thy
gates, until thy high and fortified walls come down, wherein thou
trustedst, throughout all thy land; and they shall besiege thee in all
thy gates throughout all thy land, which Jehovah thy God hath given
thee.

<span id="an_28:53">28:53</span> And thou shalt eat the fruit of thine
own body, the flesh of thy sons and of thy daughters, whom Jehovah thy
God hath given thee, in the siege and in the distress wherewith thine
enemies shall distress thee.

<span id="an_28:54">28:54</span> The man that is tender among you, and
very delicate, his eye shall be evil toward his brother, and toward the
wife of his bosom, and toward the remnant of his children whom he hath
remaining;

<span id="an_28:55">28:55</span> so that he will not give to any of them
of the flesh of his children whom he shall eat, because he hath nothing
left him, in the siege and in the distress wherewith thine enemy shall
distress thee in all thy gates.

<span id="an_28:56">28:56</span> The tender and delicate woman among
you, who would not adventure to set the sole of her foot upon the ground
for delicateness and tenderness, her eye shall be evil toward the
husband of her bosom, and toward her son, and toward her daughter,

<span id="an_28:57">28:57</span> and toward her young one that cometh
out from between her feet, and toward her children whom she shall bear;
for she shall eat them for want of all things secretly, in the siege and
in the distress wherewith thine enemy shall distress thee in thy gates.

<span id="an_28:58">28:58</span> If thou wilt not observe to do all the
words of this law that are written in this book, that thou mayest fear
this glorious and fearful name, JEHOVAH THY GOD;

<span id="an_28:59">28:59</span> then Jehovah will make thy plagues
wonderful, and the plagues of thy seed, even great plagues, and of long
continuance, and sore sicknesses, and of long continuance.

<span id="an_28:60">28:60</span> And he will bring upon thee again all
the diseases of Egypt, which thou wast afraid of; and they shall cleave
unto thee.

<span id="an_28:61">28:61</span> Also every sickness, and every plague,
which is not written in the book of this law, them will Jehovah bring
upon thee, until thou be destroyed.

<span id="an_28:62">28:62</span> And ye shall be left few in number,
whereas ye were as the stars of heaven for multitude; because thou didst
not hearken unto the voice of Jehovah thy God.

<span id="an_28:63">28:63</span> And it shall come to pass, that, as
Jehovah rejoiced over you to do you good, and to multiply you, so
Jehovah will rejoice over you to cause you to perish, and to destroy
you; and ye shall be plucked from off the land whither thou goest in to
possess it.

<span id="an_28:64">28:64</span> And Jehovah will scatter thee among all
peoples, from the one end of the earth even unto the other end of the
earth; and there thou shalt serve other gods, which thou hast not known,
thou nor thy fathers, even wood and stone.

<span id="an_28:65">28:65</span> And among these nations shalt thou find
no ease, and there shall be no rest for the sole of thy foot: but
Jehovah will give thee there a trembling heart, and failing of eyes, and
pining of soul;

<span id="an_28:66">28:66</span> and thy life shall hang in doubt before
thee; and thou shalt fear night and day, and shalt have no assurance of
thy life.

<span id="an_28:67">28:67</span> In the morning thou shalt say, Would it
were even! and at even thou shalt say, Would it were morning! for the
fear of thy heart which thou shalt fear, and for the sight of thine eyes
which thou shalt see.

<span id="an_28:68">28:68</span> And Jehovah will bring thee into Egypt
again with ships, by the way whereof I said unto thee, Thou shalt see it
no more again: and there ye shall sell yourselves unto your enemies for
bondmen and for bondwomen, and no man shall buy you.

<span id="an_29:1">29:1</span> These are the words of the covenant which
Jehovah commanded Moses to make with the children of Israel in the land
of Moab, besides the covenant which he made with them in Horeb.

<span id="an_29:2">29:2</span> And Moses called unto all Israel, and
said unto them, Ye have seen all that Jehovah did before your eyes in
the land of Egypt unto Pharaoh, and unto all his servants, and unto all
his land;

<span id="an_29:3">29:3</span> the great trials which thine eyes saw,
the signs, and those great wonders:

<span id="an_29:4">29:4</span> but Jehovah hath not given you a heart to
know, and eyes to see, and ears to hear, unto this day.

<span id="an_29:5">29:5</span> And I have led you forty years in the
wilderness: your clothes are not waxed old upon you, and thy shoe is not
waxed old upon thy foot.

<span id="an_29:6">29:6</span> Ye have not eaten bread, neither have ye
drunk wine or strong drink; that ye may know that I am Jehovah your God.

<span id="an_29:7">29:7</span> And when ye came unto this place, Sihon
the king of Heshbon, and Og the king of Bashan, came out against us unto
battle, and we smote them:

<span id="an_29:8">29:8</span> and we took their land, and gave it for
an inheritance unto the Reubenites, and to the Gadites, and to the
half-tribe of the Manassites.

<span id="an_29:9">29:9</span> Keep therefore the words of this
covenant, and do them, that ye may prosper in all that ye do.

<span id="an_29:10">29:10</span> Ye stand this day all of you before
Jehovah your God; your heads, your tribes, your elders, and your
officers, even all the men of Israel,

<span id="an_29:11">29:11</span> your little ones, your wives, and thy
sojourner that is in the midst of thy camps, from the hewer of thy wood
unto the drawer of thy water;

<span id="an_29:12">29:12</span> that thou mayest enter into the
covenant of Jehovah thy God, and into his oath, which Jehovah thy God
maketh with thee this day;

<span id="an_29:13">29:13</span> that he may establish thee this day
unto himself for a people, and that he may be unto thee a God, as he
spake unto thee, and as he sware unto thy fathers, to Abraham, to Isaac,
and to Jacob.

<span id="an_29:14">29:14</span> Neither with you only do I make this
covenant and this oath,

<span id="an_29:15">29:15</span> but with him that standeth here with us
this day before Jehovah our God, and also with him that is not here with
us this day

<span id="an_29:16">29:16</span> (for ye know how we dwelt in the land
of Egypt, and how we came through the midst of the nations through which
ye passed;

<span id="an_29:17">29:17</span> and ye have seen their abominations,
and their idols, wood and stone, silver and gold, which were among
them);

<span id="an_29:18">29:18</span> lest there should be among you man, or
woman, or family, or tribe, whose heart turneth away this day from
Jehovah our God, to go to serve the gods of those nations; lest there
should be among you a root that beareth gall and wormwood;

<span id="an_29:19">29:19</span> and it come to pass, when he heareth
the words of this curse, that he bless himself in his heart, saying, I
shall have peace, though I walk in the stubbornness of my heart, to
destroy the moist with the dry.

<span id="an_29:20">29:20</span> Jehovah will not pardon him, but then
the anger of Jehovah and his jealousy will smoke against that man, and
all the curse that is written in this book shall lie upon him, and
Jehovah will blot out his name from under heaven.

<span id="an_29:21">29:21</span> And Jehovah will set him apart unto
evil out of all the tribes of Israel, according to all the curses of the
covenant that is written in this book of the law.

<span id="an_29:22">29:22</span> And the generation to come, your
children that shall rise up after you, and the foreigner that shall come
from a far land, shall say, when they see the plagues of that land, and
the sicknesses wherewith Jehovah hath made it sick;

<span id="an_29:23">29:23</span> \[and that\] the whole land thereof is
brimstone, and salt, \[and\] a burning, \[that\] it is not sown, nor
beareth, nor any grass groweth therein, like the overthrow of Sodom and
Gomorrah, Admah and Zeboiim, which Jehovah overthrew in his anger, and
in his wrath:

<span id="an_29:24">29:24</span> even all the nations shall say,
Wherefore hath Jehovah done thus unto this land? what meaneth the heat
of this great anger?

<span id="an_29:25">29:25</span> Then men shall say, Because they
forsook the covenant of Jehovah, the God of their fathers, which he made
with them when he brought them forth out of the land of Egypt,

<span id="an_29:26">29:26</span> and went and served other gods, and
worshipped them, gods that they knew not, and that he had not given unto
them:

<span id="an_29:27">29:27</span> therefore the anger of Jehovah was
kindled against this land, to bring upon it all the curse that is
written in this book;

<span id="an_29:28">29:28</span> and Jehovah rooted them out of their
land in anger, and in wrath, and in great indignation, and cast them
into another land, as at this day.

<span id="an_29:29">29:29</span> The secret things belong unto Jehovah
our God; but the things that are revealed belong unto us and to our
children for ever, that we may do all the words of this law.

<span id="an_30:1">30:1</span> And it shall come to pass, when all these
things are come upon thee, the blessing and the curse, which I have set
before thee, and thou shalt call them to mind among all the nations,
whither Jehovah thy God hath driven thee,

<span id="an_30:2">30:2</span> and shalt return unto Jehovah thy God,
and shalt obey his voice according to all that I command thee this day,
thou and thy children, with all thy heart, and with all thy soul;

<span id="an_30:3">30:3</span> that then Jehovah thy God will turn thy
captivity, and have compassion upon thee, and will return and gather
thee from all the peoples, whither Jehovah thy God hath scattered thee.

<span id="an_30:4">30:4</span> If \[any of\] thine outcasts be in the
uttermost parts of heaven, from thence will Jehovah thy God gather thee,
and from thence will he fetch thee:

<span id="an_30:5">30:5</span> and Jehovah thy God will bring thee into
the land which thy fathers possessed, and thou shalt possess it; and he
will do thee good, and multiply thee above thy fathers.

<span id="an_30:6">30:6</span> And Jehovah thy God will circumcise thy
heart, and the heart of thy seed, to love Jehovah thy God with all thy
heart, and with all thy soul, that thou mayest live.

<span id="an_30:7">30:7</span> And Jehovah thy God will put all these
curses upon thine enemies, and on them that hate thee, that persecuted
thee.

<span id="an_30:8">30:8</span> And thou shalt return and obey the voice
of Jehovah, and do all his commandments which I command thee this day.

<span id="an_30:9">30:9</span> And Jehovah thy God will make thee
plenteous in all the work of thy hand, in the fruit of thy body, and in
the fruit of thy cattle, and in the fruit of thy ground, for good: for
Jehovah will again rejoice over thee for good, as he rejoiced over thy
fathers;

<span id="an_30:10">30:10</span> if thou shalt obey the voice of Jehovah
thy God, to keep his commandments and his statutes which are written in
this book of the law; if thou turn unto Jehovah thy God with all thy
heart, and with all thy soul.

<span id="an_30:11">30:11</span> For this commandment which I command
thee this day, it is not too hard for thee, neither is it far off.

<span id="an_30:12">30:12</span> It is not in heaven, that thou
shouldest say, Who shall go up for us to heaven, and bring it unto us,
and make us to hear it, that we may do it?

<span id="an_30:13">30:13</span> Neither is it beyond the sea, that thou
shouldest say, Who shall go over the sea for us, and bring it unto us,
and make us to hear it, that we may do it?

<span id="an_30:14">30:14</span> But the word is very nigh unto thee, in
thy mouth, and in thy heart, that thou mayest do it.

<span id="an_30:15">30:15</span> See, I have set before thee this day
life and good, and death and evil;

<span id="an_30:16">30:16</span> in that I command thee this day to love
Jehovah thy God, to walk in his ways, and to keep his commandments and
his statutes and his ordinances, that thou mayest live and multiply, and
that Jehovah thy God may bless thee in the land whither thou goest in to
possess it.

<span id="an_30:17">30:17</span> But if thy heart turn away, and thou
wilt not hear, but shalt be drawn away, and worship other gods, and
serve them;

<span id="an_30:18">30:18</span> I denounce unto you this day, that ye
shall surely perish; ye shall not prolong your days in the land, whither
thou passest over the Jordan to go in to possess it.

<span id="an_30:19">30:19</span> I call heaven and earth to witness
against you this day, that I have set before thee life and death, the
blessing and the curse: therefore choose life, that thou mayest live,
thou and thy seed;

<span id="an_30:20">30:20</span> to love Jehovah thy God, to obey his
voice, and to cleave unto him; for he is thy life, and the length of thy
days; that thou mayest dwell in the land which Jehovah sware unto thy
fathers, to Abraham, to Isaac, and to Jacob, to give them.

<span id="an_31:1">31:1</span> And Moses went and spake these words unto
all Israel.

<span id="an_31:2">31:2</span> And he said unto them, I am a hundred and
twenty years old this day; I can no more go out and come in: and Jehovah
hath said unto me, Thou shalt not go over this Jordan.

<span id="an_31:3">31:3</span> Jehovah thy God, he will go over before
thee; he will destroy these nations from before thee, and thou shalt
dispossess them: \[and\] Joshua, he shall go over before thee, as
Jehovah hath spoken.

<span id="an_31:4">31:4</span> And Jehovah will do unto them as he did
to Sihon and to Og, the kings of the Amorites, and unto their land; whom
he destroyed.

<span id="an_31:5">31:5</span> And Jehovah will deliver them up before
you, and ye shall do unto them according unto all the commandment which
I have commanded you.

<span id="an_31:6">31:6</span> Be strong and of good courage, fear not,
nor be affrighted at them: for Jehovah thy God, he it is that doth go
with thee; he will not fail thee, nor forsake thee.

<span id="an_31:7">31:7</span> And Moses called unto Joshua, and said
unto him in the sight of all Israel, Be strong and of good courage: for
thou shalt go with this people into the land which Jehovah hath sworn
unto their fathers to give them; and thou shalt cause them to inherit
it.

<span id="an_31:8">31:8</span> And Jehovah, he it is that doth go before
thee; he will be with thee, he will not fail thee, neither forsake thee:
fear not, neither be dismayed.

<span id="an_31:9">31:9</span> And Moses wrote this law, and delivered
it unto the priests the sons of Levi, that bare the ark of the covenant
of Jehovah, and unto all the elders of Israel.

<span id="an_31:10">31:10</span> And Moses commanded them, saying, At
the end of \[every\] seven years, in the set time of the year of
release, in the feast of tabernacles,

<span id="an_31:11">31:11</span> when all Israel is come to appear
before Jehovah thy God in the place which he shall choose, thou shalt
read this law before all Israel in their hearing.

<span id="an_31:12">31:12</span> Assemble the people, the men and the
women and the little ones, and thy sojourner that is within thy gates,
that they may hear, and that they may learn, and fear Jehovah your God,
and observe to do all the words of this law;

<span id="an_31:13">31:13</span> and that their children, who have not
known, may hear, and learn to fear Jehovah your God, as long as ye live
in the land whither ye go over the Jordan to possess it.

<span id="an_31:14">31:14</span> And Jehovah said unto Moses, Behold,
thy days approach that thou must die: call Joshua, and present
yourselves in the tent of meeting, that I may give him a charge. And
Moses and Joshua went, and presented themselves in the tent of meeting.

<span id="an_31:15">31:15</span> And Jehovah appeared in the Tent in a
pillar of cloud: and the pillar of cloud stood over the door of the
Tent.

<span id="an_31:16">31:16</span> And Jehovah said unto Moses, Behold,
thou shalt sleep with thy fathers; and this people will rise up, and
play the harlot after the strange gods of the land, whither they go to
be among them, and will forsake me, and break my covenant which I have
made with them.

<span id="an_31:17">31:17</span> Then my anger shall be kindled against
them in that day, and I will forsake them, and I will hide my face from
them, and they shall be devoured, and many evils and troubles shall come
upon them; so that they will say in that day, Are not these evils come
upon us because our God is not among us?

<span id="an_31:18">31:18</span> And I will surely hide my face in that
day for all the evil which they shall have wrought, in that they are
turned unto other gods.

<span id="an_31:19">31:19</span> Now therefore write ye this song for
you, and teach thou it the children of Israel: put it in their mouths,
that this song may be a witness for me against the children of Israel.

<span id="an_31:20">31:20</span> For when I shall have brought them into
the land which I sware unto their fathers, flowing with milk and honey,
and they shall have eaten and filled themselves, and waxed fat; then
will they turn unto other gods, and serve them, and despise me, and
break my covenant.

<span id="an_31:21">31:21</span> And it shall come to pass, when many
evils and troubles are come upon them, that this song shall testify
before them as a witness; for it shall not be forgotten out of the
mouths of their seed: for I know their imagination which they frame this
day, before I have brought them into the land which I sware.

<span id="an_31:22">31:22</span> So Moses wrote this song the same day,
and taught it the children of Israel.

<span id="an_31:23">31:23</span> And he gave Joshua the son of Nun a
charge, and said, Be strong and of good courage; for thou shalt bring
the children of Israel into the land which I sware unto them: and I will
be with thee.

<span id="an_31:24">31:24</span> And it came to pass, when Moses had
made an end of writing the words of this law in a book, until they were
finished,

<span id="an_31:25">31:25</span> that Moses commanded the Levites, that
bare the ark of the covenant of Jehovah, saying,

<span id="an_31:26">31:26</span> Take this book of the law, and put it
by the side of the ark of the covenant of Jehovah your God, that it may
be there for a witness against thee.

<span id="an_31:27">31:27</span> For I know thy rebellion, and thy stiff
neck: behold, while I am yet alive with you this day, ye have been
rebellious against Jehovah; and how much more after my death?

<span id="an_31:28">31:28</span> Assemble unto me all the elders of your
tribes, and your officers, that I may speak these words in their ears,
and call heaven and earth to witness against them.

<span id="an_31:29">31:29</span> For I know that after my death ye will
utterly corrupt yourselves, and turn aside from the way which I have
commanded you; and evil will befall you in the latter days; because ye
will do that which is evil in the sight of Jehovah, to provoke him to
anger through the work of your hands.

<span id="an_31:30">31:30</span> And Moses spake in the ears of all the
assembly of Israel the words of this song, until they were finished.

<span id="an_32:1">32:1</span> Give ear, ye heavens, and I will speak;
And let the earth hear the words of my mouth.

<span id="an_32:2">32:2</span> My doctrine shall drop as the rain; My
speech shall distil as the dew, As the small rain upon the tender grass,
And as the showers upon the herb.

<span id="an_32:3">32:3</span> For I will proclaim the name of Jehovah:
Ascribe ye greatness unto our God.

<span id="an_32:4">32:4</span> The Rock, his work is perfect; For all
his ways are justice: A God of faithfulness and without iniquity, Just
and right is he.

<span id="an_32:5">32:5</span> They have dealt corruptly with him,
\[they are\] not his children, \[it is\] their blemish; \[They are\] a
perverse and crooked generation.

<span id="an_32:6">32:6</span> Do ye thus requite Jehovah, O foolish
people and unwise? Is not he thy father that hath bought thee? He hath
made thee, and established thee.

<span id="an_32:7">32:7</span> Remember the days of old, Consider the
years of many generations: Ask thy father, and he will show thee; Thine
elders, and they will tell thee.

<span id="an_32:8">32:8</span> When the Most High gave to the nations
their inheritance, When he separated the children of men, He set the
bounds of the peoples According to the number of the children of Israel.

<span id="an_32:9">32:9</span> For Jehovah's portion is his people;
Jacob is the lot of his inheritance.

<span id="an_32:10">32:10</span> He found him in a desert land, And in
the waste howling wilderness; He compassed him about, he cared for him,
He kept him as the apple of his eye.

<span id="an_32:11">32:11</span> As an eagle that stirreth up her nest,
That fluttereth over her young, He spread abroad his wings, he took
them, He bare them on his pinions.

<span id="an_32:12">32:12</span> Jehovah alone did lead him, And there
was no foreign god with him.

<span id="an_32:13">32:13</span> He made him ride on the high places of
the earth, And he did eat the increase of the field; And he made him to
suck honey out of the rock, And oil out of the flinty rock;

<span id="an_32:14">32:14</span> Butter of the herd, and milk of the
flock, With fat of lambs, And rams of the breed of Bashan, and goats,
With the finest of the wheat; And of the blood of the grape thou
drankest wine.

<span id="an_32:15">32:15</span> But Jeshurun waxed fat, and kicked:
Thou art waxed fat, thou art grown thick, thou art become sleek; Then he
forsook God who made him, And lightly esteemed the Rock of his
salvation.

<span id="an_32:16">32:16</span> They moved him to jealousy with strange
\[gods\]; With abominations provoked they him to anger.

<span id="an_32:17">32:17</span> They sacrificed unto demons, \[which
were\] no God, To gods that they knew not, To new \[gods\] that came up
of late, Which your fathers dreaded not.

<span id="an_32:18">32:18</span> Of the Rock that begat thee thou art
unmindful, And hast forgotten God that gave thee birth.

<span id="an_32:19">32:19</span> And Jehovah saw \[it\], and abhorred
\[them\], Because of the provocation of his sons and his daughters.

<span id="an_32:20">32:20</span> And he said, I will hide my face from
them, I will see what their end shall be: For they are a very perverse
generation, Children in whom is no faithfulness.

<span id="an_32:21">32:21</span> They have moved me to jealousy with
that which is not God; They have provoked me to anger with their
vanities: And I will move them to jealousy with those that are not a
people; I will provoke them to anger with a foolish nation.

<span id="an_32:22">32:22</span> For a fire is kindled in mine anger,
And burneth unto the lowest Sheol, And devoureth the earth with its
increase, And setteth on fire the foundations of the mountains.

<span id="an_32:23">32:23</span> I will heap evils upon them; I will
spend mine arrows upon them:

<span id="an_32:24">32:24</span> \[They shall be\] wasted with hunger,
and devoured with burning heat And bitter destruction; And the teeth of
beasts will I send upon them, With the poison of crawling things of the
dust.

<span id="an_32:25">32:25</span> Without shall the sword bereave, And in
the chambers terror; \[It shall destroy\] both young man and virgin, The
suckling with the man of gray hairs.

<span id="an_32:26">32:26</span> I said, I would scatter them afar, I
would make the remembrance of them to cease from among men;

<span id="an_32:27">32:27</span> Were it not that I feared the
provocation of the enemy, Lest their adversaries should judge amiss,
Lest they should say, Our hand is exalted, And Jehovah hath not done all
this.

<span id="an_32:28">32:28</span> For they are a nation void of counsel,
And there is no understanding in them.

<span id="an_32:29">32:29</span> Oh that they were wise, that they
understood this, That they would consider their latter end!

<span id="an_32:30">32:30</span> How should one chase a thousand, And
two put ten thousand to flight, Except their Rock had sold them, And
Jehovah had delivered them up?

<span id="an_32:31">32:31</span> For their rock is not as our Rock, Even
our enemies themselves being judges.

<span id="an_32:32">32:32</span> For their vine is of the vine of Sodom,
And of the fields of Gomorrah: Their grapes are grapes of gall, Their
clusters are bitter:

<span id="an_32:33">32:33</span> Their wine is the poison of serpents,
And the cruel venom of asps.

<span id="an_32:34">32:34</span> Is not this laid up in store with me,
Sealed up among my treasures?

<span id="an_32:35">32:35</span> Vengeance is mine, and recompense, At
the time when their foot shall slide: For the day of their calamity is
at hand, And the things that are to come upon them shall make haste.

<span id="an_32:36">32:36</span> For Jehovah will judge his people, And
repent himself for his servants; When he seeth that \[their\] power is
gone, And there is none \[remaining\], shut up or left at large.

<span id="an_32:37">32:37</span> And he will say, Where are their gods,
The rock in which they took refuge;

<span id="an_32:38">32:38</span> Which did eat the fat of their
sacrifices, \[And\] drank the wine of their drink-offering? Let them
rise up and help you, Let them be your protection.

<span id="an_32:39">32:39</span> See now that I, even I, am he, And
there is no god with me: I kill, and I make alive; I wound, and I heal;
And there is none that can deliver out of my hand.

<span id="an_32:40">32:40</span> For I lift up my hand to heaven, And
say, As I live for ever,

<span id="an_32:41">32:41</span> If I whet my glittering sword, And my
hand take hold on judgment; I will render vengeance to mine adversaries,
And will recompense them that hate me.

<span id="an_32:42">32:42</span> I will make mine arrows drunk with
blood, And my sword shall devour flesh; With the blood of the slain and
the captives, From the head of the leaders of the enemy.

<span id="an_32:43">32:43</span> Rejoice, O ye nations, \[with\] his
people: For he will avenge the blood of his servants, And will render
vengeance to his adversaries, And will make expiation for his land, for
his people.

<span id="an_32:44">32:44</span> And Moses came and spake all the words
of this song in the ears of the people, he, and Hoshea the son of Nun.

<span id="an_32:45">32:45</span> And Moses made an end of speaking all
these words to all Israel;

<span id="an_32:46">32:46</span> And he said unto them, Set your heart
unto all the words which I testify unto you this day, which ye shall
command your children to observe to do, \[even\] all the words of this
law.

<span id="an_32:47">32:47</span> For it is no vain thing for you;
because it is your life, and through this thing ye shall prolong your
days in the land, whither ye go over the Jordan to possess it.

<span id="an_32:48">32:48</span> And Jehovah spake unto Moses that
selfsame day, saying,

<span id="an_32:49">32:49</span> Get thee up into this mountain of
Abarim, unto mount Nebo, which is in the land of Moab, that is over
against Jericho; and behold the land of Canaan, which I give unto the
children of Israel for a possession;

<span id="an_32:50">32:50</span> and die in the mount whither thou goest
up, and be gathered unto thy people, as Aaron thy brother died in mount
Hor, and was gathered unto his people:

<span id="an_32:51">32:51</span> because ye trespassed against me in the
midst of the children of Israel at the waters of Meribah of Kadesh, in
the wilderness of Zin; because ye sanctified me not in the midst of the
children of Israel.

<span id="an_32:52">32:52</span> For thou shalt see the land before
thee; but thou shalt not go thither into the land which I give the
children of Israel.

<span id="an_33:1">33:1</span> And this is the blessing, wherewith Moses
the man of God blessed the children of Israel before his death.

<span id="an_33:2">33:2</span> And he said, Jehovah came from Sinai, And
rose from Seir unto them; He shined forth from mount Paran, And he came
from the ten thousands of holy ones: At his right hand was a fiery law
for them.

<span id="an_33:3">33:3</span> Yea, he loveth the people; All his saints
are in thy hand: And they sat down at thy feet; \[Every one\] shall
receive of thy words.

<span id="an_33:4">33:4</span> Moses commanded us a law, An inheritance
for the assembly of Jacob.

<span id="an_33:5">33:5</span> And he was king in Jeshurun, When the
heads of the people were gathered, All the tribes of Israel together.

<span id="an_33:6">33:6</span> Let Reuben live, and not die; Nor let his
men be few.

<span id="an_33:7">33:7</span> And this is \[the blessing\] of Judah:
and he said, Hear, Jehovah, the voice of Judah, And bring him in unto
his people. With his hands he contended for himself; And thou shalt be a
help against his adversaries.

<span id="an_33:8">33:8</span> And of Levi he said, Thy Thummim and thy
Urim are with thy godly one, Whom thou didst prove at Massah, With whom
thou didst strive at the waters of Meribah;

<span id="an_33:9">33:9</span> Who said of his father, and of his
mother, I have not seen him; Neither did he acknowledge his brethren,
Nor knew he his own children: For they have observed thy word, And keep
thy covenant.

<span id="an_33:10">33:10</span> They shall teach Jacob thine
ordinances, And Israel thy law: They shall put incense before thee, And
whole burnt-offering upon thine altar.

<span id="an_33:11">33:11</span> Bless, Jehovah, his substance, And
accept the work of his hands: Smite through the loins of them that rise
up against him, And of them that hate him, that they rise not again.

<span id="an_33:12">33:12</span> Of Benjamin he said, The beloved of
Jehovah shall dwell in safety by him; He covereth him all the day long,
And he dwelleth between his shoulders.

<span id="an_33:13">33:13</span> And of Joseph he said, Blessed of
Jehovah be his land, For the precious things of heaven, for the dew, And
for the deep that coucheth beneath,

<span id="an_33:14">33:14</span> And for the precious things of the
fruits of the sun, And for the precious things of the growth of the
moons,

<span id="an_33:15">33:15</span> And for the chief things of the ancient
mountains, And for the precious things of the everlasting hills,

<span id="an_33:16">33:16</span> And for the precious things of the
earth and the fulness thereof, And the good will of him that dwelt in
the bush. Let \[the blessing\] come upon the head of Joseph, And upon
the crown of the head of him that was separate from his brethren.

<span id="an_33:17">33:17</span> The firstling of his herd, majesty is
his; And his horns are the horns of the wild-ox: With them he shall push
the peoples all of them, \[even\] the ends of the earth: And they are
the ten thousands of Ephraim, And they are the thousands of Manasseh.

<span id="an_33:18">33:18</span> And of Zebulun he said, Rejoice,
Zebulun, in thy going out; And, Issachar, in thy tents.

<span id="an_33:19">33:19</span> They shall call the peoples unto the
mountain; There shall they offer sacrifices of righteousness: For they
shall suck the abundance of the seas, And the hidden treasures of the
sand.

<span id="an_33:20">33:20</span> And of Gad he said, Blessed be he that
enlargeth Gad: He dwelleth as a lioness, And teareth the arm, yea, the
crown of the head.

<span id="an_33:21">33:21</span> And he provided the first part for
himself, For there was the lawgiver's portion reserved; And he came
\[with\] the heads of the people; He executed the righteousness of
Jehovah, And his ordinances with Israel.

<span id="an_33:22">33:22</span> And of Dan he said, Dan is a lion's
whelp, That leapeth forth from Bashan.

<span id="an_33:23">33:23</span> And of Naphtali he said, O Naphtali,
satisfied with favor, And full with the blessing of Jehovah, Possess
thou the west and the south.

<span id="an_33:24">33:24</span> And of Asher he said, Blessed be Asher
with children; Let him be acceptable unto his brethren, And let him dip
his foot in oil.

<span id="an_33:25">33:25</span> Thy bars shall be iron and brass; And
as thy days, so shall thy strength be.

<span id="an_33:26">33:26</span> There is none like unto God, O
Jeshurun, Who rideth upon the heavens for thy help, And in his
excellency on the skies.

<span id="an_33:27">33:27</span> The eternal God is \[thy\]
dwelling-place, And underneath are the everlasting arms. And he thrust
out the enemy from before thee, And said, Destroy.

<span id="an_33:28">33:28</span> And Israel dwelleth in safety, The
fountain of Jacob alone, In a land of grain and new wine; Yea, his
heavens drop down dew.

<span id="an_33:29">33:29</span> Happy art thou, O Israel: Who is like
unto thee, a people saved by Jehovah, The shield of thy help, And the
sword of thy excellency! And thine enemies shall submit themselves unto
thee; And thou shalt tread upon their high places.

<span id="an_34:1">34:1</span> And Moses went up from the plains of Moab
unto mount Nebo, to the top of Pisgah, that is over against Jericho. And
Jehovah showed him all the land of Gilead, unto Dan,

<span id="an_34:2">34:2</span> and all Naphtali, and the land of Ephraim
and Manasseh, and all the land of Judah, unto the hinder sea,

<span id="an_34:3">34:3</span> and the South, and the Plain of the
valley of Jericho the city of palm-trees, unto Zoar.

<span id="an_34:4">34:4</span> And Jehovah said unto him, This is the
land which I sware unto Abraham, unto Isaac, and unto Jacob, saying, I
will give it unto thy seed: I have caused thee to see it with thine
eyes, but thou shalt not go over thither.

<span id="an_34:5">34:5</span> So Moses the servant of Jehovah died
there in the land of Moab, according to the word of Jehovah.

<span id="an_34:6">34:6</span> And he buried him in the valley in the
land of Moab over against Beth-peor: but no man knoweth of his sepulchre
unto this day.

<span id="an_34:7">34:7</span> And Moses was a hundred and twenty years
old when he died: his eye was not dim, nor his natural force abated.

<span id="an_34:8">34:8</span> And the children of Israel wept for Moses
in the plains of Moab thirty days: so the days of weeping in the
mourning for Moses were ended.

<span id="an_34:9">34:9</span> And Joshua the son of Nun was full of the
spirit of wisdom; for Moses had laid his hands upon him: and the
children of Israel hearkened unto him, and did as Jehovah commanded
Moses.

<span id="an_34:10">34:10</span> And there hath not arisen a prophet
since in Israel like unto Moses, whom Jehovah knew face to face,

<span id="an_34:11">34:11</span> in all the signs and the wonders, which
Jehovah sent him to do in the land of Egypt, to Pharaoh, and to all his
servants, and to all his land,

<span id="an_34:12">34:12</span> and in all the mighty hand, and in all
the great terror, which Moses wrought in the sight of all Israel.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Joshua](jos.md)
