[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index)  [English
Bibles](../eb)  [Index](index)  [Previous](pro)  [Next](sol) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### American Standard Version: Ecclesiastes

<span id="an_1:1">1:1</span> The words of the Preacher, the son of
David, king in Jerusalem.

<span id="an_1:2">1:2</span> Vanity of vanities, saith the Preacher;
vanity of vanities, all is vanity.

<span id="an_1:3">1:3</span> What profit hath man of all his labor
wherein he laboreth under the sun?

<span id="an_1:4">1:4</span> One generation goeth, and another
generation cometh; but the earth abideth for ever.

<span id="an_1:5">1:5</span> The sun also ariseth, and the sun goeth
down, and hasteth to its place where it ariseth.

<span id="an_1:6">1:6</span> The wind goeth toward the south, and
turneth about unto the north; it turneth about continually in its
course, and the wind returneth again to its circuits.

<span id="an_1:7">1:7</span> All the rivers run into the sea, yet the
sea is not full; unto the place whither the rivers go, thither they go
again.

<span id="an_1:8">1:8</span> All things are full of weariness; man
cannot utter \[it\]: the eye is not satisfied with seeing, nor the ear
filled with hearing.

<span id="an_1:9">1:9</span> That which hath been is that which shall
be; and that which hath been done is that which shall be done: and there
is no new thing under the sun.

<span id="an_1:10">1:10</span> Is there a thing whereof it may be said,
See, this is new? it hath been long ago, in the ages which were before
us.

<span id="an_1:11">1:11</span> There is no remembrance of the former
\[generations\]; neither shall there be any remembrance of the latter
\[generations\] that are to come, among those that shall come after.

<span id="an_1:12">1:12</span> I the Preacher was king over Israel in
Jerusalem.

<span id="an_1:13">1:13</span> And I applied my heart to seek and to
search out by wisdom concerning all that is done under heaven: it is a
sore travail that God hath given to the sons of men to be exercised
therewith.

<span id="an_1:14">1:14</span> I have seen all the works that are done
under the sun; and, behold, all is vanity and a striving after wind.

<span id="an_1:15">1:15</span> That which is crooked cannot be made
straight; and that which is wanting cannot be numbered.

<span id="an_1:16">1:16</span> I communed with mine own hear, saying,
Lo, I have gotten me great wisdom above all that were before me in
Jerusalem; yea, my heart hath had great experience of wisdom and
knowledge.

<span id="an_1:17">1:17</span> And I applied my heart to know wisdom,
and to know madness and folly: I perceived that this also was a striving
after wind.

<span id="an_1:18">1:18</span> For in much wisdom is much grief; and he
that increaseth knowledge increaseth sorrow.

<span id="an_2:1">2:1</span> I said in my heart, Come now, I will prove
thee with mirth; therefore enjoy pleasure: and, behold, this also was
vanity.

<span id="an_2:2">2:2</span> I said of laughter, It is mad; and of
mirth, What doeth it?

<span id="an_2:3">2:3</span> I searched in my heart how to cheer my
flesh with wine, my heart yet guiding \[me\] with wisdom, and how to lay
hold on folly, till I might see what it was good for the sons of men
that they should do under heaven all the days of their life.

<span id="an_2:4">2:4</span> I made me great works; I builded me houses;
I planted me vineyards;

<span id="an_2:5">2:5</span> I made me gardens and parks, and I planted
trees in them of all kinds of fruit;

<span id="an_2:6">2:6</span> I made me pools of water, to water
therefrom the forest where trees were reared;

<span id="an_2:7">2:7</span> I bought men-servants and maid-servants,
and had servants born in my house; also I had great possessions of herds
and flocks, above all that were before me in Jerusalem;

<span id="an_2:8">2:8</span> I gathered me also silver and gold, and the
treasure of kings and of the provinces; I gat me men-singers and
women-singers, and the delights of the sons of men, musical instruments,
and that of all sorts.

<span id="an_2:9">2:9</span> So I was great, and increased more than all
that were before me in Jerusalem: also my wisdom remained with me.

<span id="an_2:10">2:10</span> And whatsoever mine eyes desired I kept
not from them; I withheld not my heart from any joy; for my heart
rejoiced because of all my labor; and this was my portion from all my
labor.

<span id="an_2:11">2:11</span> Then I looked on all the works that my
hands had wrought, and on the labor that I had labored to do; and,
behold, all was vanity and a striving after wind, and there was no
profit under the sun.

<span id="an_2:12">2:12</span> And I turned myself to behold wisdom, and
madness, and folly: for what \[can\] the man \[do\] that cometh after
the king? \[even\] that which hath been done long ago.

<span id="an_2:13">2:13</span> Then I saw that wisdom excelleth folly,
as far as light excelleth darkness.

<span id="an_2:14">2:14</span> The wise man's eyes are in his head, and
the fool walketh in darkness: and yet I perceived that one event
happeneth to them all.

<span id="an_2:15">2:15</span> Then said I in my heart, As it happeneth
to the fool, so will it happen even to me; and why was I then more wise?
Then said I in my heart, that this also is vanity.

<span id="an_2:16">2:16</span> For of the wise man, even as of the fool,
there is no remembrance for ever; seeing that in the days to come all
will have been long forgotten. And how doth the wise man die even as the
fool!

<span id="an_2:17">2:17</span> So I hated life, because the work that is
wrought under the sun was grievous unto me; for all is vanity and a
striving after wind.

<span id="an_2:18">2:18</span> And I hated all my labor wherein I
labored under the sun, seeing that I must leave it unto the man that
shall be after me.

<span id="an_2:19">2:19</span> And who knoweth whether he will be a wise
man or a fool? yet will he have rule over all my labor wherein I have
labored, and wherein I have showed myself wise under the sun. This also
is vanity.

<span id="an_2:20">2:20</span> Therefore I turned about to cause my
heart to despair concerning all the labor wherein I had labored under
the sun.

<span id="an_2:21">2:21</span> For there is a man whose labor is with
wisdom, and with knowledge, and with skilfulness; yet to a man that hath
not labored therein shall he leave it for his portion. This also is
vanity and a great evil.

<span id="an_2:22">2:22</span> For what hath a man of all his labor, and
of the striving of his heart, wherein he laboreth under the sun?

<span id="an_2:23">2:23</span> For all his days are \[but\] sorrows, and
his travail is grief; yea, even in the night his heart taketh no rest.
This also is vanity.

<span id="an_2:24">2:24</span> There is nothing better for a man
\[than\] that he should eat and drink, and make his soul enjoy good in
his labor. This also I saw, that it is from the hand of God.

<span id="an_2:25">2:25</span> For who can eat, or who can have
enjoyment, more than I?

<span id="an_2:26">2:26</span> For to the man that pleaseth him \[God\]
giveth wisdom, and knowledge, and joy; but to the sinner he giveth
travail, to gather and to heap up, that he may give to him that pleaseth
God. This also is vanity and a striving after wind.

<span id="an_3:1">3:1</span> For everything there is a season, and a
time for very purpose under heaven:

<span id="an_3:2">3:2</span> a time to be born, and a time to die; a
time to plant, and a time to pluck up that which is planted;

<span id="an_3:3">3:3</span> a time to kill, and a time to heal; a time
to break down, and a time to build up;

<span id="an_3:4">3:4</span> a time to weep, and a time to laugh; a time
to mourn, and a time to dance;

<span id="an_3:5">3:5</span> a time to cast away stones, and a time to
gather stones together; a time to embrace, and a time to refrain from
embracing;

<span id="an_3:6">3:6</span> a time to seek, and a time to lose; a time
to keep, and a time to cast away;

<span id="an_3:7">3:7</span> a time to rend, and a time to sew; a time
to keep silence, and a time to speak;

<span id="an_3:8">3:8</span> a time to love, and a time to hate; a time
for war, and a time for peace.

<span id="an_3:9">3:9</span> What profit hath he that worketh in that
wherein he laboreth?

<span id="an_3:10">3:10</span> I have seen the travail which God hath
given to the sons of men to be exercised therewith.

<span id="an_3:11">3:11</span> He hath made everything beautiful in its
time: also he hath set eternity in their heart, yet so that man cannot
find out the work that God hath done from the beginning even to the end.

<span id="an_3:12">3:12</span> I know that there is nothing better for
them, than to rejoice, and to do good so long as they live.

<span id="an_3:13">3:13</span> And also that every man should eat and
drink, and enjoy good in all his labor, is the gift of God.

<span id="an_3:14">3:14</span> I know that, whatsoever God doeth, it
shall be for ever: nothing can be put to it, nor anything taken from it;
and God hath done it, that men should fear before him.

<span id="an_3:15">3:15</span> That which is hath been long ago; and
that which is to be hath long ago been: and God seeketh again that which
is passed away.

<span id="an_3:16">3:16</span> And moreover I saw under the sun, in the
place of justice, that wickedness was there; and in the place of
righteousness, that wickedness was there.

<span id="an_3:17">3:17</span> I said in my heart, God will judge the
righteous and the wicked; for there is a time there for every purpose
and for every work.

<span id="an_3:18">3:18</span> I said in my heart, \[It is\] because of
the sons of men, that God may prove them, and that they may see that
they themselves are \[but as\] beasts.

<span id="an_3:19">3:19</span> For that which befalleth the sons of men
befalleth beasts; even one thing befalleth them: as the one dieth, so
dieth the other; yea, they have all one breath; and man hath no
preeminence above the beasts: for all is vanity.

<span id="an_3:20">3:20</span> All go unto one place; all are of the
dust, and all turn to dust again.

<span id="an_3:21">3:21</span> Who knoweth the spirit of man, whether it
goeth upward, and the spirit of the beast, whether it goeth downward to
the earth?

<span id="an_3:22">3:22</span> Wherefore I saw that there is nothing
better, than that a man should rejoice in his works; for that is his
portion: for who shall bring him \[back\] to see what shall be after
him?

<span id="an_4:1">4:1</span> Then I returned and saw all the oppressions
that are done under the sun: and, behold, the tears of such as were
oppressed, and they had no comforter; and on the side of their
oppressors there was power; but they had no comforter.

<span id="an_4:2">4:2</span> Wherefore I praised the dead that have been
long dead more than the living that are yet alive;

<span id="an_4:3">4:3</span> yea, better than them both \[did I esteem\]
him that hath not yet been, who hath not seen the evil work that is done
under the sun.

<span id="an_4:4">4:4</span> Then I saw all labor and every skilful
work, that for this a man is envied of his neighbor. This also is vanity
and a striving after wind.

<span id="an_4:5">4:5</span> The fool foldeth his hands together, and
eateth his own flesh.

<span id="an_4:6">4:6</span> Better is a handful, with quietness, than
two handfuls with labor and striving after wind.

<span id="an_4:7">4:7</span> Then I returned and saw vanity under the
sun.

<span id="an_4:8">4:8</span> There is one that is alone, and he hath not
a second; yea, he hath neither son nor brother; yet is there no end of
all his labor, neither are his eyes satisfied with riches. For whom
then, \[saith he\], do I labor, and deprive my soul of good? This also
is vanity, yea, it is a sore travail.

<span id="an_4:9">4:9</span> Two are better than one, because they have
a good reward for their labor.

<span id="an_4:10">4:10</span> For if they fall, the one will lift up
his fellow; but woe to him that is alone when he falleth, and hath not
another to lift him up.

<span id="an_4:11">4:11</span> Again, if two lie together, then they
have warmth; but how can one be warm \[alone\]?

<span id="an_4:12">4:12</span> And if a man prevail against him that is
alone, two shall withstand him; and a threefold cord is not quickly
broken.

<span id="an_4:13">4:13</span> Better is a poor and wise youth than an
old and foolish king, who knoweth not how to receive admonition any
more.

<span id="an_4:14">4:14</span> For out of prison he came forth to be
king; yea, even in his kingdom he was born poor.

<span id="an_4:15">4:15</span> I saw all the living that walk under the
sun, that they were with the youth, the second, that stood up in his
stead.

<span id="an_4:16">4:16</span> There was no end of all the people, even
of all them over whom he was: yet they that come after shall not rejoice
in him. Surely this also is vanity and a striving after wind.

<span id="an_5:1">5:1</span> Keep thy foot when thou goest to the house
of God; for to draw nigh to hear is better than to give the sacrifice of
fools: for they know not that they do evil.

<span id="an_5:2">5:2</span> Be not rash with thy mouth, and let not thy
heart be hasty to utter anything before God; for God is in heaven, and
thou upon earth: therefore let thy words be few.

<span id="an_5:3">5:3</span> For a dream cometh with a multitude of
business, and a fool's voice with a multitude of words.

<span id="an_5:4">5:4</span> When thou vowest a vow unto God, defer not
to pay it; for he hath no pleasure in fools: pay that which thou vowest.

<span id="an_5:5">5:5</span> Better is it that thou shouldest not vow,
than that thou shouldest vow and not pay.

<span id="an_5:6">5:6</span> Suffer not thy mouth to cause thy flesh to
sin; neither say thou before the angel, that is was an error: wherefore
should God be angry at thy voice, and destroy the work of thy hands?

<span id="an_5:7">5:7</span> For in the multitude of dreams there are
vanities, and in many words: but fear thou God.

<span id="an_5:8">5:8</span> If thou seest the oppression of the poor,
and the violent taking away of justice and righteousness in a province,
marvel not at the matter: for one higher than the high regardeth; and
there are higher than they.

<span id="an_5:9">5:9</span> Moreover the profit of the earth is for
all: the king \[himself\] is served by the field.

<span id="an_5:10">5:10</span> He that loveth silver shall not be
satisfied with silver; nor he that loveth abundance, with increase: this
also is vanity.

<span id="an_5:11">5:11</span> When goods increase, they are increased
that eat them; and what advantage is there to the owner thereof, save
the beholding \[of them\] with his eyes?

<span id="an_5:12">5:12</span> The sleep of a laboring man is sweet,
whether he eat little or much; but the fulness of the rich will not
suffer him to sleep.

<span id="an_5:13">5:13</span> There is a grievous evil which I have
seen under the sun, \[namely\], riches kept by the owner thereof to his
hurt:

<span id="an_5:14">5:14</span> and those riches perish by evil
adventure; and if he hath begotten a son, there is nothing in his hand.

<span id="an_5:15">5:15</span> As he came forth from his mother's womb,
naked shall he go again as he came, and shall take nothing for his
labor, which he may carry away in his hand.

<span id="an_5:16">5:16</span> And this also is a grievous evil, that in
all points as he came, so shall he go: and what profit hath he that he
laboreth for the wind?

<span id="an_5:17">5:17</span> All his days also he eateth in darkness,
and he is sore vexed, and hath sickness and wrath.

<span id="an_5:18">5:18</span> Behold, that which I have seen to be good
and to be comely is for one to eat and to drink, and to enjoy good in
all his labor, wherein he laboreth under the sun, all the days of his
life which God hath given him: for this is his portion.

<span id="an_5:19">5:19</span> Every man also to whom God hath given
riches and wealth, and hath given him power to eat thereof, and to take
his portion, and to rejoice in his labor-this is the gift of God.

<span id="an_5:20">5:20</span> For he shall not much remember the days
of his life; because God answereth \[him\] in the joy of his heart.

<span id="an_6:1">6:1</span> There is an evil which I have seen under
the sun, and it is heavy upon men:

<span id="an_6:2">6:2</span> a man to whom God giveth riches, wealth,
and honor, so that he lacketh nothing for his soul of all that he
desireth, yet God giveth him not power to eat thereof, but an alien
eateth it; this is vanity, and it is an evil disease.

<span id="an_6:3">6:3</span> If a man beget a hundred children, and live
many years, so that the days of his years are many, but his soul be not
filled with good, and moreover he have no burial; I say, that an
untimely birth is better than he:

<span id="an_6:4">6:4</span> for it cometh in vanity, and departeth in
darkness, and the name thereof is covered with darkness;

<span id="an_6:5">6:5</span> moreover it hath not seen the sun nor known
it; this hath rest rather than the other:

<span id="an_6:6">6:6</span> yea, though he live a thousand years twice
told, and yet enjoy no good, do not all go to one place?

<span id="an_6:7">6:7</span> All the labor of man is for his mouth, and
yet the appetite is not filled.

<span id="an_6:8">6:8</span> For what advantage hath the wise more than
the fool? \[or\] what hath the poor man, that knoweth how to walk before
the living?

<span id="an_6:9">6:9</span> Better is the sight of the eyes than the
wandering of the desire: this also is vanity and a striving after wind.

<span id="an_6:10">6:10</span> Whatsoever hath been, the name thereof
was given long ago; and it is know what man is; neither can he contend
with him that is mightier than he.

<span id="an_6:11">6:11</span> Seeing there are many things that
increase vanity, what is man the better?

<span id="an_6:12">6:12</span> For who knoweth what is good for man in
\[his\] life, all the days of his vain life which he spendeth as a
shadow? for who can tell a man what shall be after him under the sun?

<span id="an_7:1">7:1</span> A \[good\] name is better than precious
oil; and the day of death, than the day of one's birth.

<span id="an_7:2">7:2</span> It is better to go to the house of mourning
than to go to the house of feasting: for that is the end of all men; and
the living will lay it to his heart.

<span id="an_7:3">7:3</span> Sorrow is better than laughter; for by the
sadness of the countenance the heart is made glad.

<span id="an_7:4">7:4</span> The heart of the wise is in the house of
mourning; but the heart of fools is in the house of mirth.

<span id="an_7:5">7:5</span> It is better to hear the rebuke of the
wise, than for a man to hear the song of fools.

<span id="an_7:6">7:6</span> For as the crackling of thorns under a pot,
so is the laughter of the fool: this also is vanity.

<span id="an_7:7">7:7</span> Surely extortion maketh the wise man
foolish; and a bribe destroyeth the understanding.

<span id="an_7:8">7:8</span> Better is the end of a thing than the
beginning thereof; \[and\] the patient in spirit is better than the
proud in spirit.

<span id="an_7:9">7:9</span> Be not hasty in thy spirit to be angry; for
anger resteth in the bosom of fools.

<span id="an_7:10">7:10</span> Say not thou, What is the cause that the
former days were better than these? for thou dost not inquire wisely
concerning this.

<span id="an_7:11">7:11</span> Wisdom is as good as an inheritance; yea,
more excellent is it for them that see the sun.

<span id="an_7:12">7:12</span> For wisdom is a defence, even as money is
a defence; but the excellency of knowledge is, that wisdom preserveth
the life of him that hath it.

<span id="an_7:13">7:13</span> Consider the work of God: for who can
make that straight, which he hath made crooked?

<span id="an_7:14">7:14</span> In the day of prosperity be joyful, and
in the day of adversity consider; yea, God hath made the one side by
side with the other, to the end that man should not find out anything
\[that shall be\] after him.

<span id="an_7:15">7:15</span> All this have I seen in my days of
vanity: there is a righteous man that perisheth in his righteousness,
and there is a wicked man that prolongeth \[his life\] in his
evil-doing.

<span id="an_7:16">7:16</span> Be not righteous overmuch; neither make
thyself overwise: why shouldest thou destroy thyself?

<span id="an_7:17">7:17</span> Be not overmuch wicked, neither be thou
foolish: why shouldest thou die before thy time?

<span id="an_7:18">7:18</span> It is good that thou shouldest take hold
of this; yea, also from that withdraw not thy hand: for he that feareth
God shall come forth from them all.

<span id="an_7:19">7:19</span> Wisdom is a strength to the wise man more
than ten rulers that are in a city.

<span id="an_7:20">7:20</span> Surely there is not a righteous man upon
earth, that doeth good, and sinneth not.

<span id="an_7:21">7:21</span> Also take not heed unto all words that
are spoken, lest thou hear thy servant curse thee;

<span id="an_7:22">7:22</span> for oftentimes also thine own heart
knoweth that thou thyself likewise hast cursed others.

<span id="an_7:23">7:23</span> All this have I proved in wisdom: I said,
I will be wise; but it was far from me.

<span id="an_7:24">7:24</span> That which is, is far off and exceeding
deep; who can find it out?

<span id="an_7:25">7:25</span> I turned about, and my heart \[was set\]
to know and to search out, and to seek wisdom and the reason \[of
things\], and to know that wickedness is folly, and that foolishness is
madness.

<span id="an_7:26">7:26</span> And I find more bitter than death the
woman whose heart is snares and nets, \[and\] whose hands are bands:
whoso pleaseth God shall escape from her; but the sinner shall be taken
by her.

<span id="an_7:27">7:27</span> Behold, this have I found, saith the
Preacher, \[laying\] one thing to another, to find out the account;

<span id="an_7:28">7:28</span> which my soul still seeketh, but I have
not found: one man among a thousand have I found; but a woman among all
those have I not found.

<span id="an_7:29">7:29</span> Behold, this only have I found: that God
made man upright; but they have sought out many inventions.

<span id="an_8:1">8:1</span> Who is as the wise man? and who knoweth the
interpretation of a thing? A man's wisdom maketh his face to shine, and
the hardness of his face is changed.

<span id="an_8:2">8:2</span> I \[counsel thee\], Keep the king's
command, and that in regard of the oath of God.

<span id="an_8:3">8:3</span> Be not hasty to go out of his presence;
persist not in an evil thing: for he doeth whatsoever pleaseth him.

<span id="an_8:4">8:4</span> For the king's word \[hath\] power; and who
may say unto him, What doest thou?

<span id="an_8:5">8:5</span> Whoso keepeth the commandment shall know no
evil thing; and a wise man's heart discerneth time and judgment:

<span id="an_8:6">8:6</span> for to every purpose there is a time and
judgment; because the misery of man is great upon him:

<span id="an_8:7">8:7</span> for he knoweth not that which shall be; for
who can tell him how it shall be?

<span id="an_8:8">8:8</span> There is no man that hath power over the
spirit to retain the spirit; neither hath he power over the day of
death; and there is no discharge in war: neither shall wickedness
deliver him that is given to it.

<span id="an_8:9">8:9</span> All this have I seen, and applied my heart
unto every work that is done under the sun: \[there is\] a time wherein
one man hath power over another to his hurt.

<span id="an_8:10">8:10</span> So I saw the wicked buried, and they came
\[to the grave\]; and they that had done right went away from the holy
place, and were forgotten in the city: this also is vanity.

<span id="an_8:11">8:11</span> Because sentence against an evil work is
not executed speedily, therefore the heart of the sons of men is fully
set in them to do evil.

<span id="an_8:12">8:12</span> Though a sinner do evil a hundred times,
and prolong his \[days\], yet surely I know that it shall be well with
them that fear God, that fear before him:

<span id="an_8:13">8:13</span> but it shall not be well with the wicked,
neither shall he prolong \[his\] days, \[which are\] as a shadow;
because he feareth not before God.

<span id="an_8:14">8:14</span> There is a vanity which is done upon the
earth, that there are righteous men unto whom it happeneth according to
the work of the wicked; again, there are wicked men to whom it happeneth
according to the work of the righteous: I said that this also is vanity.

<span id="an_8:15">8:15</span> Then I commended mirth, because a man
hath no better thing under the sun, than to eat, and to drink, and to be
joyful: for that shall abide with him in his labor \[all\] the days of
his life which God hath given him under the sun.

<span id="an_8:16">8:16</span> When I applied my heart to know wisdom,
and to see the business that is done upon the earth (for also there is
that neither day nor night seeth sleep with his eyes),

<span id="an_8:17">8:17</span> then I beheld all the work of God, that
man cannot find out the work that is done under the sun: because however
much a man labor to seek it out, yet he shall not find it; yea moreover,
though a wise man think to know it, yet shall he not be able to find it.

<span id="an_9:1">9:1</span> For all this I laid to my heart, even to
explore all this: that the righteous, and the wise, and their works, are
in the hand of God; whether it be love or hatred, man knoweth it not;
all is before them.

<span id="an_9:2">9:2</span> All things come alike to all: there is one
event to the righteous and to the wicked; to the good and to the clean
and to the unclean; to him that sacrificeth and to him that sacrificeth
not; as is the good, so is the sinner; \[and\] he that sweareth, as he
that feareth an oath.

<span id="an_9:3">9:3</span> This is an evil in all that is done under
the sun, that there is one event unto all: yea also, the heart of the
sons of men is full of evil, and madness is in their heart while they
live, and after that \[they go\] to the dead.

<span id="an_9:4">9:4</span> For to him that is joined with all the
living there is hope; for a living dog is better than a dead lion.

<span id="an_9:5">9:5</span> For the living know that they shall die:
but the dead know not anything, neither have they any more a reward; for
the memory of them is forgotten.

<span id="an_9:6">9:6</span> As well their love, as their hatred and
their envy, is perished long ago; neither have they any more a portion
for ever in anything that is done under the sun.

<span id="an_9:7">9:7</span> Go thy way, eat thy bread with joy, and
drink thy wine with a merry heart; for God hath already accepted thy
works.

<span id="an_9:8">9:8</span> Let thy garments be always white; and let
not thy head lack oil.

<span id="an_9:9">9:9</span> Live joyfully with the wife whom thou
lovest all the days of thy life of vanity, which he hath given thee
under the sun, all thy days of vanity: for that is thy portion in life,
and in thy labor wherein thou laborest under the sun.

<span id="an_9:10">9:10</span> Whatsoever thy hand findeth to do, do
\[it\] with thy might; for there is no work, nor device, nor knowledge,
nor wisdom, in Sheol, whither thou goest.

<span id="an_9:11">9:11</span> I returned, and saw under the sun, that
the race is not to the swift, nor the battle to the strong, neither yet
bread to the wise, nor yet riches to men of understanding, nor yet favor
to men of skill; but time and chance happeneth to them all.

<span id="an_9:12">9:12</span> For man also knoweth not his time: as the
fishes that are taken in an evil net, and as the birds that are caught
in the snare, even so are the sons of men snared in an evil time, when
it falleth suddenly upon them.

<span id="an_9:13">9:13</span> I have also seen wisdom under the sun on
this wise, and it seemed great unto me:

<span id="an_9:14">9:14</span> There was a little city, and few men
within it; and there came a great king against it, and besieged it, and
built great bulwarks against it.

<span id="an_9:15">9:15</span> Now there was found in it a poor wise
man, and he by his wisdom delivered the city; yet no man remembered that
same poor man.

<span id="an_9:16">9:16</span> Then said I, Wisdom is better than
strength: nevertheless the poor man's wisdom is despised, and his words
are not heard.

<span id="an_9:17">9:17</span> The words of the wise heard in quiet are
better than the cry of him that ruleth among fools.

<span id="an_9:18">9:18</span> Wisdom is better than weapons of war; but
one sinner destroyeth much good.

<span id="an_10:1">10:1</span> Dead flies cause the oil of the perfumer
to send forth an evil odor; \[so\] doth a little folly outweigh wisdom
and honor.

<span id="an_10:2">10:2</span> A wise man's heart is at his right hand;
but a fool's heart at his left.

<span id="an_10:3">10:3</span> Yea also, when the fool walketh by the
way, his understanding faileth him, and he saith to every one \[that\]
he is a fool.

<span id="an_10:4">10:4</span> If the spirit of the ruler rise up
against thee, leave not thy place; for gentleness allayeth great
offences.

<span id="an_10:5">10:5</span> There is an evil which I have seen under
the sun, as it were an error which proceedeth from the ruler:

<span id="an_10:6">10:6</span> folly is set in great dignity, and the
rich sit in a low place.

<span id="an_10:7">10:7</span> I have seen servants upon horses, and
princes walking like servants upon the earth.

<span id="an_10:8">10:8</span> He that diggeth a pit shall fall into it;
and whoso breaketh through a wall, a serpent shall bite him.

<span id="an_10:9">10:9</span> Whoso heweth out stones shall be hurt
therewith; \[and\] he that cleaveth wood is endangered thereby.

<span id="an_10:10">10:10</span> If the iron be blunt, and one do not
whet the edge, then must he put to more strength: but wisdom is
profitable to direct.

<span id="an_10:11">10:11</span> If the serpent bite before it is
charmed, then is there no advantage in the charmer.

<span id="an_10:12">10:12</span> The words of a wise man's mouth are
gracious; but the lips of a fool will swallow up himself.

<span id="an_10:13">10:13</span> The beginning of the words of his mouth
is foolishness; and the end of his talk is mischievous madness.

<span id="an_10:14">10:14</span> A fool also multiplieth words: \[yet\]
man knoweth not what shall be; and that which shall be after him, who
can tell him?

<span id="an_10:15">10:15</span> The labor of fools wearieth every one
of them; for he knoweth not how to go to the city.

<span id="an_10:16">10:16</span> Woe to thee, O land, when thy king is a
child, and thy princes eat in the morning!

<span id="an_10:17">10:17</span> Happy art thou, O land, when thy king
is the son of nobles, and thy princes eat in due season, for strength,
and not for drunkenness!

<span id="an_10:18">10:18</span> By slothfulness the roof sinketh in;
and through idleness of the hands the house leaketh.

<span id="an_10:19">10:19</span> A feast is made for laughter, and wine
maketh glad the life; and money answereth all things.

<span id="an_10:20">10:20</span> Revile not the king, no, not in thy
thought; and revile not the rich in thy bedchamber: for a bird of the
heavens shall carry the voice, and that which hath wings shall tell the
matter.

<span id="an_11:1">11:1</span> Cast thy bread upon the waters; for thou
shalt find it after many days.

<span id="an_11:2">11:2</span> Give a portion to seven, yea, even unto
eight; for thou knowest not what evil shall be upon the earth.

<span id="an_11:3">11:3</span> If the clouds be full of rain, they empty
themselves upon the earth; and if a tree fall toward the south, or
toward the north, in the place where the tree falleth, there shall it
be.

<span id="an_11:4">11:4</span> He that observeth the wind shall not sow;
and he that regardeth the clouds shall not reap.

<span id="an_11:5">11:5</span> As thou knowest not what is the way of
the wind, \[nor\] how the bones \[do grow\] in the womb of her that is
with child; even so thou knowest not the work of God who doeth all.

<span id="an_11:6">11:6</span> In the morning sow thy seed, and in the
evening withhold not thy hand; for thou knowest not which shall prosper,
whether this or that, or whether they both shall be alike good.

<span id="an_11:7">11:7</span> Truly the light is sweet, and a pleasant
thing it is for the eyes to behold the sun.

<span id="an_11:8">11:8</span> Yea, if a man live many years, let him
rejoice in them all; but let him remember the days of darkness, for they
shall be many. All that cometh is vanity.

<span id="an_11:9">11:9</span> Rejoice, O young man, in thy youth, and
let thy heart cheer thee in the days of thy youth, and walk in the ways
of thy heart, and in the sight of thine eyes; but know thou, that for
all these things God will bring thee into judgment.

<span id="an_11:10">11:10</span> Therefore remove sorrow from thy heart,
and put away evil from thy flesh; for youth and the dawn of life are
vanity.

<span id="an_12:1">12:1</span> Remember also thy Creator in the days of
thy youth, before the evil days come, and the years draw nigh, when thou
shalt say, I have no pleasure in them;

<span id="an_12:2">12:2</span> before the sun, and the light, and the
moon, and the stars, are darkened, and the clouds return after the rain;

<span id="an_12:3">12:3</span> in the day when the keepers of the house
shall tremble, and the strong men shall bow themselves, and the grinders
cease because they are few, and those that look out of the windows shall
be darkened,

<span id="an_12:4">12:4</span> and the doors shall be shut in the
street; when the sound of the grinding is low, and one shall rise up at
the voice of a bird, and all the daughters of music shall be brought
low;

<span id="an_12:5">12:5</span> yea, they shall be afraid of \[that which
is\] high, and terrors \[shall be\] in the way; and the almond-tree
shall blossom, and the grasshopper shall be a burden, and desire shall
fail; because man goeth to his everlasting home, and the mourners go
about the streets:

<span id="an_12:6">12:6</span> before the silver cord is loosed, or the
golden bowl is broken, or the pitcher is broken at the fountain, or the
wheel broken at the cistern,

<span id="an_12:7">12:7</span> and the dust returneth to the earth as it
was, and the spirit returneth unto God who gave it.

<span id="an_12:8">12:8</span> Vanity of vanities, saith the Preacher;
all is vanity.

<span id="an_12:9">12:9</span> And further, because the Preacher was
wise, he still taught the people knowledge; yea, he pondered, and sought
out, \[and\] set in order many proverbs.

<span id="an_12:10">12:10</span> The Preacher sought to find out
acceptable words, and that which was written uprightly, \[even\] words
of truth.

<span id="an_12:11">12:11</span> The words of the wise are as goads; and
as nails well fastened are \[the words of\] the masters of assemblies,
\[which\] are given from one shepherd.

<span id="an_12:12">12:12</span> And furthermore, my son, be admonished:
of making many books there is no end; and much study is a weariness of
the flesh.

<span id="an_12:13">12:13</span> \[This is\] the end of the matter; all
hath been heard: fear God, and keep his commandments; for this is the
whole \[duty\] of man.

<span id="an_12:14">12:14</span> For God will bring every work into
judgment, with every hidden thing, whether it be good, or whether it be
evil.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Song of Solomon](sol)
