[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index.md)  [English
Bibles](../eb)  [Index](index)  [Previous](gal)  [Next](phi.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### American Standard Version: Ephesians

<span id="an_1:1">1:1</span> Paul, an apostle of Christ Jesus through
the will of God, to the saints that are at Ephesus, and the faithful in
Christ Jesus:

<span id="an_1:2">1:2</span> Grace to you and peace from God our Father
and the Lord Jesus Christ.

<span id="an_1:3">1:3</span> Blessed \[be\] the God and Father of our
Lord Jesus Christ, who hath blessed us with every spiritual blessing in
the heavenly \[places\] in Christ:

<span id="an_1:4">1:4</span> even as he chose us in him before the
foundation of the world, that we should be holy and without blemish
before him in love:

<span id="an_1:5">1:5</span> having foreordained us unto adoption as
sons through Jesus Christ unto himself, according to the good pleasure
of his will,

<span id="an_1:6">1:6</span> to the praise of the glory of his grace,
which he freely bestowed on us in the Beloved:

<span id="an_1:7">1:7</span> in whom we have our redemption through his
blood, the forgiveness of our trespasses, according to the riches of his
grace,

<span id="an_1:8">1:8</span> which he made to abound toward us in all
wisdom and prudence,

<span id="an_1:9">1:9</span> making known unto us the mystery of his
will, according to his good pleasure which he purposed in him

<span id="an_1:10">1:10</span> unto a dispensation of the fulness of the
times, to sum up all things in Christ, the things in the heavens, and
the things upon the earth; in him, \[I say,\]

<span id="an_1:11">1:11</span> in whom also we were made a heritage,
having been foreordained according to the purpose of him who worketh all
things after the counsel of his will;

<span id="an_1:12">1:12</span> to the end that we should be unto the
praise of his glory, we who had before hoped in Christ:

<span id="an_1:13">1:13</span> in whom ye also, having heard the word of
the truth, the gospel of your salvation,-- in whom, having also
believed, ye were sealed with the Holy Spirit of promise,

<span id="an_1:14">1:14</span> which is an earnest of our inheritance,
unto the redemption of \[God's\] own possession, unto the praise of his
glory.

<span id="an_1:15">1:15</span> For this cause I also, having heard of
the faith in the Lord Jesus which is among you, and the love which \[ye
show\] toward all the saints,

<span id="an_1:16">1:16</span> cease not to give thanks for you, making
mention \[of you\] in my prayers;

<span id="an_1:17">1:17</span> that the God of our Lord Jesus Christ,
the Father of glory, may give unto you a spirit of wisdom and revelation
in the knowledge of him;

<span id="an_1:18">1:18</span> having the eyes of your heart
enlightened, that ye may know what is the hope of his calling, what the
riches of the glory of his inheritance in the saints,

<span id="an_1:19">1:19</span> and what the exceeding greatness of his
power to us-ward who believe, according to that working of the strength
of his might

<span id="an_1:20">1:20</span> which he wrought in Christ, when he
raised him from the dead, and made him to sit at his right hand in the
heavenly \[places\],

<span id="an_1:21">1:21</span> far above all rule, and authority, and
power, and dominion, and every name that is named, not only in this
world, but also in that which is to come:

<span id="an_1:22">1:22</span> and he put all things in subjection under
his feet, and gave him to be head over all things to the church,

<span id="an_1:23">1:23</span> which is his body, the fulness of him
that filleth all in all.

<span id="an_2:1">2:1</span> And you \[did he make alive,\] when ye were
dead through your trespasses and sins,

<span id="an_2:2">2:2</span> wherein ye once walked according to the
course of this world, according to the prince of the powers of the air,
of the spirit that now worketh in the sons of disobedience;

<span id="an_2:3">2:3</span> among whom we also all once lived in the
lust of our flesh, doing the desires of the flesh and of the mind, and
were by nature children of wrath, even as the rest:--

<span id="an_2:4">2:4</span> but God, being rich in mercy, for his great
love wherewith he loved us,

<span id="an_2:5">2:5</span> even when we were dead through our
trespasses, made us alive together with Christ (by grace have ye been
saved),

<span id="an_2:6">2:6</span> and raised us up with him, and made us to
sit with him in the heavenly \[places\], in Christ Jesus:

<span id="an_2:7">2:7</span> that in the ages to come he might show the
exceeding riches of his grace in kindness toward us in Christ Jesus:

<span id="an_2:8">2:8</span> for by grace have ye been saved through
faith; and that not of yourselves, \[it is\] the gift of God;

<span id="an_2:9">2:9</span> not of works, that no man should glory.

<span id="an_2:10">2:10</span> For we are his workmanship, created in
Christ Jesus for good works, which God afore prepared that we should
walk in them.

<span id="an_2:11">2:11</span> Wherefore remember, that once ye, the
Gentiles in the flesh, who are called Uncircumcision by that which is
called Circumcision, in the flesh, made by hands;

<span id="an_2:12">2:12</span> that ye were at that time separate from
Christ, alienated from the commonwealth of Israel, and strangers from
the covenants of the promise, having no hope and without God in the
world.

<span id="an_2:13">2:13</span> But now in Christ Jesus ye that once were
far off are made nigh in the blood of Christ.

<span id="an_2:14">2:14</span> For he is our peace, who made both one,
and brake down the middle wall of partition,

<span id="an_2:15">2:15</span> having abolished in the flesh the enmity,
\[even\] the law of commandments \[contained\] in ordinances; that he
might create in himself of the two one new man, \[so\] making peace;

<span id="an_2:16">2:16</span> and might reconcile them both in one body
unto God through the cross, having slain the enmity thereby:

<span id="an_2:17">2:17</span> and he came and preached peace to you
that were far off, and peace to them that were nigh:

<span id="an_2:18">2:18</span> for through him we both have our access
in one Spirit unto the Father.

<span id="an_2:19">2:19</span> So then ye are no more strangers and
sojourners, but ye are fellow-citizens with the saints, and of the
household of God,

<span id="an_2:20">2:20</span> being built upon the foundation of the
apostles and prophets, Christ Jesus himself being the chief corner
stone;

<span id="an_2:21">2:21</span> in whom each several building, fitly
framed together, groweth into a holy temple in the Lord;

<span id="an_2:22">2:22</span> in whom ye also are builded together for
a habitation of God in the Spirit.

<span id="an_3:1">3:1</span> For this cause I Paul, the prisoner of
Christ Jesus in behalf of you Gentiles,--

<span id="an_3:2">3:2</span> if so be that ye have heard of the
dispensation of that grace of God which was given me to you-ward;

<span id="an_3:3">3:3</span> how that by revelation was made known unto
me the mystery, as I wrote before in few words,

<span id="an_3:4">3:4</span> whereby, when ye read, ye can perceive my
understanding in the mystery of Christ;

<span id="an_3:5">3:5</span> which in other generation was not made
known unto the sons of men, as it hath now been revealed unto his holy
apostles and prophets in the Spirit;

<span id="an_3:6">3:6</span> \[to wit\], that the Gentiles are
fellow-heirs, and fellow-members of the body, and fellow-partakers of
the promise in Christ Jesus through the gospel,

<span id="an_3:7">3:7</span> whereof I was made a minister, according to
the gift of that grace of God which was given me according to the
working of his power.

<span id="an_3:8">3:8</span> Unto me, who am less than the least of all
saints, was this grace given, to preach unto the Gentiles the
unsearchable riches of Christ;

<span id="an_3:9">3:9</span> and to make all men see what is the
dispensation of the mystery which for ages hath been hid in God who
created all things;

<span id="an_3:10">3:10</span> to the intent that now unto the
principalities and the powers in the heavenly \[places\] might be made
known through the church the manifold wisdom of God,

<span id="an_3:11">3:11</span> according to the eternal purpose which he
purposed in Christ Jesus our Lord:

<span id="an_3:12">3:12</span> in whom we have boldness and access in
confidence through our faith in him.

<span id="an_3:13">3:13</span> Wherefore I ask that ye may not faint at
my tribulations for you, which are your glory.

<span id="an_3:14">3:14</span> For this cause I bow my knees unto the
Father,

<span id="an_3:15">3:15</span> from whom every family in heaven and on
earth is named,

<span id="an_3:16">3:16</span> that he would grant you, according to the
riches of his glory, that ye may be strengthened with power through his
Spirit in the inward man;

<span id="an_3:17">3:17</span> that Christ may dwell in your hearts
through faith; to the end that ye, being rooted and grounded in love,

<span id="an_3:18">3:18</span> may be strong to apprehend with all the
saints what is the breadth and length and height and depth,

<span id="an_3:19">3:19</span> and to know the love of Christ which
passeth knowledge, that ye may be filled unto all the fulness of God.

<span id="an_3:20">3:20</span> Now unto him that is able to do exceeding
abundantly above all that we ask or think, according to the power that
worketh in us,

<span id="an_3:21">3:21</span> unto him \[be\] the glory in the church
and in Christ Jesus unto all generations for ever and ever. Amen.

<span id="an_4:1">4:1</span> I therefore, the prisoner in the Lord,
beseech you to walk worthily of the calling wherewith ye were called,

<span id="an_4:2">4:2</span> with all lowliness and meekness, with
longsuffering, forbearing one another in love;

<span id="an_4:3">4:3</span> giving diligence to keep the unity of the
Spirit in the bond of peace.

<span id="an_4:4">4:4</span> \[There is\] one body, and one Spirit, even
as also ye were called in one hope of your calling;

<span id="an_4:5">4:5</span> one Lord, one faith, one baptism,

<span id="an_4:6">4:6</span> one God and Father of all, who is over all,
and through all, and in all.

<span id="an_4:7">4:7</span> But unto each one of us was the grace given
according to the measure of the gift of Christ.

<span id="an_4:8">4:8</span> Wherefore he saith, When he ascended on
high, he led captivity captive, And gave gifts unto men.

<span id="an_4:9">4:9</span> (Now this, He ascended, what is it but that
he also descended into the lower parts of the earth?

<span id="an_4:10">4:10</span> He that descended is the same also that
ascended far above all the heavens, that he might fill all things.)

<span id="an_4:11">4:11</span> And he gave some \[to be\] apostles; and
some, prophets; and some, evangelists; and some, pastors and teachers;

<span id="an_4:12">4:12</span> for the perfecting of the saints, unto
the work of ministering, unto the building up of the body of Christ:

<span id="an_4:13">4:13</span> till we all attain unto the unity of the
faith, and of the knowledge of the Son of God, unto a fullgrown man,
unto the measure of the stature of the fulness of Christ:

<span id="an_4:14">4:14</span> that we may be no longer children, tossed
to and fro and carried about with every wind of doctrine, by the sleight
of men, in craftiness, after the wiles of error;

<span id="an_4:15">4:15</span> but speaking truth in love, we may grow
up in all things into him, who is the head, \[even\] Christ;

<span id="an_4:16">4:16</span> from whom all the body fitly framed and
knit together through that which every joint supplieth, according to the
working in \[due\] measure of each several part, maketh the increase of
the body unto the building up of itself in love.

<span id="an_4:17">4:17</span> This I say therefore, and testify in the
Lord, that ye no longer walk as the Gentiles also walk, in the vanity of
their mind,

<span id="an_4:18">4:18</span> being darkened in their understanding,
alienated from the life of God, because of the ignorance that is in
them, because of the hardening of their heart;

<span id="an_4:19">4:19</span> who being past feeling gave themselves up
to lasciviousness, to work all uncleanness with greediness.

<span id="an_4:20">4:20</span> But ye did not so learn Christ;

<span id="an_4:21">4:21</span> if so be that ye heard him, and were
taught in him, even as truth is in Jesus:

<span id="an_4:22">4:22</span> that ye put away, as concerning your
former manner of life, the old man, that waxeth corrupt after the lusts
of deceit;

<span id="an_4:23">4:23</span> and that ye be renewed in the spirit of
your mind,

<span id="an_4:24">4:24</span> and put on the new man, that after God
hath been created in righteousness and holiness of truth.

<span id="an_4:25">4:25</span> Wherefore, putting away falsehood, speak
ye truth each one with his neighbor: for we are members one of another.

<span id="an_4:26">4:26</span> Be ye angry, and sin not: let not the sun
go down upon your wrath:

<span id="an_4:27">4:27</span> neither give place to the devil.

<span id="an_4:28">4:28</span> Let him that stole steal no more: but
rather let him labor, working with his hands the thing that is good,
that he may have whereof to give to him that hath need.

<span id="an_4:29">4:29</span> Let no corrupt speech proceed out of your
mouth, but such as is good for edifying as the need may be, that it may
give grace to them that hear.

<span id="an_4:30">4:30</span> And grieve not the Holy Spirit of God, in
whom ye were sealed unto the day of redemption.

<span id="an_4:31">4:31</span> Let all bitterness, and wrath, and anger,
and clamor, and railing, be put away from you, with all malice:

<span id="an_4:32">4:32</span> and be ye kind one to another,
tenderhearted, forgiving each other, even as God also in Christ forgave
you.

<span id="an_5:1">5:1</span> Be ye therefore imitators of God, as
beloved children;

<span id="an_5:2">5:2</span> and walk in love, even as Christ also loved
you, and gave himself up for us, an offering and a sacrifice to God for
an odor of a sweet smell.

<span id="an_5:3">5:3</span> But fornication, and all uncleanness, or
covetousness, let it not even be named among you, as becometh saints;

<span id="an_5:4">5:4</span> nor filthiness, nor foolish talking, or
jesting, which are not befitting: but rather giving of thanks.

<span id="an_5:5">5:5</span> For this ye know of a surety, that no
fornicator, nor unclean person, nor covetous man, who is an idolater,
hath any inheritance in the kingdom of Christ and God.

<span id="an_5:6">5:6</span> Let no man deceive you with empty words:
for because of these things cometh the wrath of God upon the sons of
disobedience.

<span id="an_5:7">5:7</span> Be not ye therefore partakers with them;

<span id="an_5:8">5:8</span> For ye were once darkness, but are now
light in the Lord: walk as children of light

<span id="an_5:9">5:9</span> (for the fruit of the light is in all
goodness and righteousness and truth),

<span id="an_5:10">5:10</span> proving what is well-pleasing unto the
Lord;

<span id="an_5:11">5:11</span> and have no fellowship with the
unfruitful works of darkness, but rather even reprove them;

<span id="an_5:12">5:12</span> for the things which are done by them in
secret it is a shame even to speak of.

<span id="an_5:13">5:13</span> But all things when they are reproved are
made manifest by the light: for everything that is made manifest is
light.

<span id="an_5:14">5:14</span> Wherefore \[he\] saith, Awake, thou that
sleepest, and arise from the dead, and Christ shall shine upon thee.

<span id="an_5:15">5:15</span> Look therefore carefully how ye walk, not
as unwise, but as wise;

<span id="an_5:16">5:16</span> redeeming the time, because the days are
evil.

<span id="an_5:17">5:17</span> Wherefore be ye not foolish, but
understand what the will of the Lord is.

<span id="an_5:18">5:18</span> And be not drunken with wine, wherein is
riot, but be filled with the Spirit;

<span id="an_5:19">5:19</span> speaking one to another in psalms and
hymns and spiritual songs, singing and making melody with your heart to
the Lord;

<span id="an_5:20">5:20</span> giving thanks always for all things in
the name of our Lord Jesus Christ to God, even the Father;

<span id="an_5:21">5:21</span> subjecting yourselves one to another in
the fear of Christ.

<span id="an_5:22">5:22</span> Wives, \[be in subjection\] unto your own
husbands, as unto the Lord.

<span id="an_5:23">5:23</span> For the husband is the head of the wife,
and Christ also is the head of the church, \[being\] himself the saviour
of the body.

<span id="an_5:24">5:24</span> But as the church is subject to Christ,
so \[let\] the wives also \[be\] to their husbands in everything.

<span id="an_5:25">5:25</span> Husbands, love your wives, even as Christ
also loved the church, and gave himself up for it;

<span id="an_5:26">5:26</span> that he might sanctify it, having
cleansed it by the washing of water with the word,

<span id="an_5:27">5:27</span> that he might present the church to
himself a glorious \[church\], not having spot or wrinkle or any such
thing; but that it should be holy and without blemish.

<span id="an_5:28">5:28</span> Even so ought husbands also to love their
own wives as their own bodies. He that loveth his own wife loveth
himself:

<span id="an_5:29">5:29</span> for no man ever hated his own flesh; but
nourisheth and cherisheth it, even as Christ also the church;

<span id="an_5:30">5:30</span> because we are members of his body.

<span id="an_5:31">5:31</span> For this cause shall a man leave his
father and mother, and shall cleave to his wife; and the two shall
become one flesh.

<span id="an_5:32">5:32</span> This mystery is great: but I speak in
regard of Christ and of the church.

<span id="an_5:33">5:33</span> Nevertheless do ye also severally love
each one his own wife even as himself; and \[let\] the wife \[see\] that
she fear her husband.

<span id="an_6:1">6:1</span> Children, obey your parents in the Lord:
for this is right.

<span id="an_6:2">6:2</span> Honor thy father and mother (which is the
first commandment with promise),

<span id="an_6:3">6:3</span> that it may be well with thee, and thou
mayest live long on the earth.

<span id="an_6:4">6:4</span> And, ye fathers, provoke not your children
to wrath: but nurture them in the chastening and admonition of the Lord.

<span id="an_6:5">6:5</span> Servants, be obedient unto them that
according to the flesh are your masters, with fear and trembling, in
singleness of your heart, as unto Christ;

<span id="an_6:6">6:6</span> not in the way of eyeservice, as
men-pleasers; but as servants of Christ, doing the will of God from the
heart;

<span id="an_6:7">6:7</span> with good will doing service, as unto the
Lord, and not unto men:

<span id="an_6:8">6:8</span> knowing that whatsoever good thing each one
doeth, the same shall he receive again from the Lord, whether \[he be\]
bond or free.

<span id="an_6:9">6:9</span> And, ye masters, do the same things unto
them, and forbear threatening: knowing that he who is both their Master
and yours is in heaven, and there is no respect of persons with him.

<span id="an_6:10">6:10</span> Finally, be strong in the Lord, and in
the strength of his might.

<span id="an_6:11">6:11</span> Put on the whole armor of God, that ye
may be able to stand against the wiles of the devil.

<span id="an_6:12">6:12</span> For our wrestling is not against flesh
and blood, but against the principalities, against the powers, against
the world-rulers of this darkness, against the spiritual \[hosts\] of
wickedness in the heavenly \[places\].

<span id="an_6:13">6:13</span> Wherefore take up the whole armor of God,
that ye may be able to withstand in the evil day, and, having done all,
to stand.

<span id="an_6:14">6:14</span> Stand therefore, having girded your loins
with truth, and having put on the breastplate of righteousness,

<span id="an_6:15">6:15</span> and having shod your feet with the
preparation of the gospel of peace;

<span id="an_6:16">6:16</span> withal taking up the shield of faith,
wherewith ye shall be able to quench all the fiery darts of the evil
\[one\].

<span id="an_6:17">6:17</span> And take the helmet of salvation, and the
sword of the Spirit, which is the word of God:

<span id="an_6:18">6:18</span> with all prayer and supplication praying
at all seasons in the Spirit, and watching thereunto in all perseverance
and supplication for all the saints,

<span id="an_6:19">6:19</span> And on my behalf, that utterance may be
given unto me in opening my mouth, to make known with boldness the
mystery of the gospel,

<span id="an_6:20">6:20</span> for which I am an ambassador in chains;
that in it I may speak boldly, as I ought to speak.

<span id="an_6:21">6:21</span> But that ye also may know my affairs, how
I do, Tychicus, the beloved brother and faithful minister in the Lord,
shall make known to you all things:

<span id="an_6:22">6:22</span> whom I have sent unto you for this very
purpose, that ye may know our state, and that he may comfort your
hearts.

<span id="an_6:23">6:23</span> Peace be to the brethren, and love with
faith, from God the Father and the Lord Jesus Christ.

<span id="an_6:24">6:24</span> Grace be with all them that love our Lord
Jesus Christ with \[a love\] incorruptible.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Philippians](phi.md)
