[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index.md)  [English
Bibles](../eb)  [Index](index)  [Previous](gen)  [Next](lev.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### American Standard Version: Exodus

<span id="an_1:1">1:1</span> Now these are the names of the sons of
Israel, who came into Egypt (every man and his household came with
Jacob):

<span id="an_1:2">1:2</span> Reuben, Simeon, Levi, and Judah,

<span id="an_1:3">1:3</span> Issachar, Zebulun, and Benjamin,

<span id="an_1:4">1:4</span> Dan and Naphtali, Gad and Asher.

<span id="an_1:5">1:5</span> And all the souls that came out of the
loins of Jacob were seventy souls: and Joseph was in Egypt already.

<span id="an_1:6">1:6</span> And Joseph died, and all his brethren, and
all that generation.

<span id="an_1:7">1:7</span> And the children of Israel were fruitful,
and increased abundantly, and multiplied, and waxed exceeding mighty;
and the land was filled with them.

<span id="an_1:8">1:8</span> Now there arose a new king over Egypt, who
knew not Joseph.

<span id="an_1:9">1:9</span> And he said unto his people, Behold, the
people of the children of Israel are more and mightier than we:

<span id="an_1:10">1:10</span> come, let us deal wisely with them, lest
they multiply, and it come to pass, that, when there falleth out any
war, they also join themselves unto our enemies, and fight against us,
and get them up out of the land.

<span id="an_1:11">1:11</span> Therefore they did set over them
taskmasters to afflict them with their burdens. And they built for
Pharaoh store-cities, Pithom and Raamses.

<span id="an_1:12">1:12</span> But the more they afflicted them, the
more they multiplied and the more they spread abroad. And they were
grieved because of the children of Israel.

<span id="an_1:13">1:13</span> And the Egyptians made the children of
Israel to serve with rigor:

<span id="an_1:14">1:14</span> and they made their lives bitter with
hard service, in mortar and in brick, and in all manner of service in
the field, all their service, wherein they made them serve with rigor.

<span id="an_1:15">1:15</span> And the king of Egypt spake to the Hebrew
midwives, of whom the name of the one was Shiphrah, and the name of the
other Puah:

<span id="an_1:16">1:16</span> and he said, When ye do the office of a
midwife to the Hebrew women, and see them upon the birth-stool; if it be
a son, then ye shall kill him; but if it be a daughter, then she shall
live.

<span id="an_1:17">1:17</span> But the midwives feared God, and did not
as the king of Egypt commanded them, but saved the men-children alive.

<span id="an_1:18">1:18</span> And the king of Egypt called for the
midwives, and said unto them, Why have ye done this thing, and have
saved the men-children alive?

<span id="an_1:19">1:19</span> And the midwives said unto Pharaoh,
Because the Hebrew women are not as the Egyptian women; for they are
lively, and are delivered ere the midwife come unto them.

<span id="an_1:20">1:20</span> And God dealt well with the midwives: and
the people multiplied, and waxed very mighty.

<span id="an_1:21">1:21</span> And it came to pass, because the midwives
feared God, that he made them households.

<span id="an_1:22">1:22</span> And Pharaoh charged all his people,
saying, Every son that is born ye shall cast into the river, and every
daughter ye shall save alive.

<span id="an_2:1">2:1</span> And there went a man of the house of Levi,
and took to wife a daughter of Levi.

<span id="an_2:2">2:2</span> And the woman conceived, and bare a son:
and when she saw him that he was a goodly child, she hid him three
months.

<span id="an_2:3">2:3</span> And when she could not longer hide him, she
took for him an ark of bulrushes, and daubed it with slime and with
pitch; and she put the child therein, and laid it in the flags by the
river's brink.

<span id="an_2:4">2:4</span> And his sister stood afar off, to know what
would be done to him.

<span id="an_2:5">2:5</span> And the daughter of Pharaoh came down to
bathe at the river; and her maidens walked along by the river-side; and
she saw the ark among the flags, and sent her handmaid to fetch it.

<span id="an_2:6">2:6</span> And she opened it, and saw the child: and,
behold, the babe wept. And she had compassion on him, and said, This is
one of the Hebrews' children.

<span id="an_2:7">2:7</span> Then said his sister to Pharaoh's daughter,
Shall I go and call thee a nurse of the Hebrew women, that she may nurse
the child for thee?

<span id="an_2:8">2:8</span> And Pharaoh's daughter said to her, Go. And
the maiden went and called the child's mother.

<span id="an_2:9">2:9</span> And Pharaoh's daughter said unto her, Take
this child away, and nurse it for me, and I will give thee thy wages.
And the woman took the child, and nursed it.

<span id="an_2:10">2:10</span> And the child grew, and she brought him
unto Pharaoh's daughter, and he became her son. And she called his name
Moses, and said, Because I drew him out of the water.

<span id="an_2:11">2:11</span> And it came to pass in those days, when
Moses was grown up, that he went out unto his brethren, and looked on
their burdens: and he saw an Egyptian smiting a Hebrew, one of his
brethren.

<span id="an_2:12">2:12</span> And he looked this way and that way, and
when he saw that there was no man, he smote the Egyptian, and hid him in
the sand.

<span id="an_2:13">2:13</span> And he went out the second day, and,
behold, two men of the Hebrews were striving together: and he said to
him that did the wrong, Wherefore smitest thou thy fellow?

<span id="an_2:14">2:14</span> And he said, Who made thee a prince and a
judge over us? Thinkest thou to kill me, as thou killedst the Egyptian?
And Moses feared, and said, Surely the thing is known.

<span id="an_2:15">2:15</span> Now when Pharaoh heard this thing, he
sought to slay Moses. But Moses fled from the face of Pharaoh, and dwelt
in the land of Midian: and he sat down by a well.

<span id="an_2:16">2:16</span> Now the priest of Midian had seven
daughters: and they came and drew water, and filled the troughs to water
their father's flock.

<span id="an_2:17">2:17</span> And the shepherds came and drove them
away; but Moses stood up and helped them, and watered their flock.

<span id="an_2:18">2:18</span> And when they came to Reuel their father,
he said, How is it that ye are come so soon to-day?

<span id="an_2:19">2:19</span> And they said, An Egyptian delivered us
out of the hand of the shepherds, and moreover he drew water for us, and
watered the flock.

<span id="an_2:20">2:20</span> And he said unto his daughters, And where
is he? Why is it that ye have left the man? Call him, that he may eat
bread.

<span id="an_2:21">2:21</span> And Moses was content to dwell with the
man: and he gave Moses Zipporah his daughter.

<span id="an_2:22">2:22</span> And she bare a son, and he called his
name Gershom; for he said, I have been a sojourner in a foreign land.

<span id="an_2:23">2:23</span> And it came to pass in the course of
those many days, that the king of Egypt died: and the children of Israel
sighed by reason of the bondage, and they cried, and their cry came up
unto God by reason of the bondage.

<span id="an_2:24">2:24</span> And God heard their groaning, and God
remembered his covenant with Abraham, with Isaac, and with Jacob.

<span id="an_2:25">2:25</span> And God saw the children of Israel, and
God took knowledge \[of them\].

<span id="an_3:1">3:1</span> Now Moses was keeping the flock of Jethro
his father-in-law, the priest of Midian: and he led the flock to the
back of the wilderness, and came to the mountain of God, unto Horeb.

<span id="an_3:2">3:2</span> And the angel of Jehovah appeared unto him
in a flame of fire out of the midst of a bush: and he looked, and,
behold, the bush burned with fire, and the bush was not consumed.

<span id="an_3:3">3:3</span> And Moses said, I will turn aside now, and
see this great sight, why the bush is not burnt.

<span id="an_3:4">3:4</span> And when Jehovah saw that he turned aside
to see, God called unto him out of the midst of the bush, and said,
Moses, Moses. And he said, Here am I.

<span id="an_3:5">3:5</span> And he said, Draw not nigh hither: put off
thy shoes from off thy feet, for the place whereon thou standest is holy
ground.

<span id="an_3:6">3:6</span> Moreover he said, I am the God of thy
father, the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob. And
Moses hid his face; for he was afraid to look upon God.

<span id="an_3:7">3:7</span> And Jehovah said, I have surely seen the
affliction of my people that are in Egypt, and have heard their cry by
reason of their taskmasters; for I know their sorrows;

<span id="an_3:8">3:8</span> and I am come down to deliver them out of
the hand of the Egyptians, and to bring them up out of that land unto a
good land and a large, unto a land flowing with milk and honey; unto the
place of the Canaanite, and the Hittite, and the Amorite, and the
Perizzite, and the Hivite, and the Jebusite.

<span id="an_3:9">3:9</span> And now, behold, the cry of the children of
Israel is come unto me: moreover I have seen the oppression wherewith
the Egyptians oppress them.

<span id="an_3:10">3:10</span> Come now therefore, and I will send thee
unto Pharaoh, that thou mayest bring forth my people the children of
Israel out of Egypt.

<span id="an_3:11">3:11</span> And Moses said unto God, Who am I, that I
should go unto Pharaoh, and that I should bring forth the children of
Israel out of Egypt?

<span id="an_3:12">3:12</span> And he said, Certainly I will be with
thee; and this shall be the token unto thee, that I have sent thee: when
thou hast brought forth the people out of Egypt, ye shall serve God upon
this mountain.

<span id="an_3:13">3:13</span> And Moses said unto God, Behold, when I
come unto the children of Israel, and shall say unto them, The God of
your fathers hath sent me unto you; and they shall say to me, What is
his name? What shall I say unto them?

<span id="an_3:14">3:14</span> And God said unto Moses, I AM THAT I AM:
and he said, Thus shalt thou say unto the children of Israel, I AM hath
sent me unto you.

<span id="an_3:15">3:15</span> And God said moreover unto Moses, Thus
shalt thou say unto the children of Israel, Jehovah, the God of your
fathers, the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob,
hath sent me unto you: this is my name forever, and this is my memorial
unto all generations.

<span id="an_3:16">3:16</span> Go, and gather the elders of Israel
together, and say unto them, Jehovah, the God of your fathers, the God
of Abraham, of Isaac, and of Jacob, hath appeared unto me, saying, I
have surely visited you, and \[seen\] that which is done to you in
Egypt:

<span id="an_3:17">3:17</span> and I have said, I will bring you up out
of the affliction of Egypt unto the land of the Canaanite, and the
Hittite, and the Amorite, and the Perizzite, and the Hivite, and the
Jebusite, unto a land flowing with milk and honey.

<span id="an_3:18">3:18</span> And they shall hearken to thy voice: and
thou shalt come, thou and the elders of Israel, unto the king of Egypt,
and ye shall say unto him, Jehovah, the God of the Hebrews, hath met
with us: and now let us go, we pray thee, three days' journey into the
wilderness, that we may sacrifice to Jehovah our God.

<span id="an_3:19">3:19</span> And I know that the king of Egypt will
not give you leave to go, no, not by a mighty hand.

<span id="an_3:20">3:20</span> And I will put forth my hand, and smite
Egypt with all my wonders which I will do in the midst thereof: and
after that he will let you go.

<span id="an_3:21">3:21</span> And I will give this people favor in the
sight of the Egyptians: and it shall come to pass, that, when ye go, ye
shall not go empty.

<span id="an_3:22">3:22</span> But every woman shall ask of her
neighbor, and of her that sojourneth in her house, jewels of silver, and
jewels of gold, and raiment: and ye shall put them upon your sons, and
upon your daughters; and ye shall despoil the Egyptians.

<span id="an_4:1">4:1</span> And Moses answered and said, But, behold,
they will not believe me, nor hearken unto my voice; for they will say,
Jehovah hath not appeared unto thee.

<span id="an_4:2">4:2</span> And Jehovah said unto him, What is that in
thy hand? And he said, A rod.

<span id="an_4:3">4:3</span> And he said, Cast in on the ground. And he
cast it on the ground, and it became a serpent; and Moses fled from
before it.

<span id="an_4:4">4:4</span> And Jehovah said unto Moses, Put forth thy
hand, and take it by the tail: (and he put forth his hand, and laid hold
of it, and it became a rod in his hand:)

<span id="an_4:5">4:5</span> That they may believe that Jehovah, the God
of their fathers, the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of
Jacob, hath appeared unto thee.

<span id="an_4:6">4:6</span> And Jehovah said furthermore unto him, Put
now thy hand into thy bosom. And he put his hand into his bosom: and
when he took it out, behold, his hand was leprous, as \[white as\] snow.

<span id="an_4:7">4:7</span> And he said, Put thy hand into thy bosom
again. (And he put his hand into his bosom again; and when he took it
out of his bosom, behold, it was turned again as his \[other\] flesh.)

<span id="an_4:8">4:8</span> And it shall come to pass, if they will not
believe thee, neither hearken to the voice of the first sign, that they
will believe the voice of the latter sign.

<span id="an_4:9">4:9</span> And it shall come to pass, if they will not
believe even these two signs, neither hearken unto thy voice, that thou
shalt take of the water of the river, and pour it upon the dry land: and
the water which thou takest out of the river shall become blood upon the
dry land.

<span id="an_4:10">4:10</span> And Moses said unto Jehovah, Oh, Lord, I
am not eloquent, neither heretofore, nor since thou hast spoken unto thy
servant; for I am slow of speech, and of a slow tongue.

<span id="an_4:11">4:11</span> And Jehovah said unto him, Who hath made
man's mouth? Or who maketh \[a man\] dumb, or deaf, or seeing, or blind?
Is it not I, Jehovah?

<span id="an_4:12">4:12</span> Now therefore go, and I will be with thy
mouth, and teach thee what thou shalt speak.

<span id="an_4:13">4:13</span> And he said, Oh, Lord, send, I pray thee,
by the hand of him whom thou wilt send.

<span id="an_4:14">4:14</span> And the anger of Jehovah was kindled
against Moses, and he said, Is there not Aaron thy brother the Levite? I
know that he can speak well. And also, behold, he cometh forth to meet
thee: and when he seeth thee, he will be glad in his heart.

<span id="an_4:15">4:15</span> And thou shalt speak unto him, and put
the words in his mouth: and I will be with thy mouth, and with his
mouth, and will teach you what ye shall do.

<span id="an_4:16">4:16</span> And he shall be thy spokesman unto the
people; and it shall come to pass, that he shall be to thee a mouth, and
thou shalt be to him as God.

<span id="an_4:17">4:17</span> And thou shalt take in thy hand this rod,
wherewith thou shalt do the signs.

<span id="an_4:18">4:18</span> And Moses went and returned to Jethro his
father-in-law, and said unto him, Let me go, I pray thee, and return
unto my brethren that are in Egypt, and see whether they be yet alive.
And Jethro said to Moses, Go in peace.

<span id="an_4:19">4:19</span> And Jehovah said unto Moses in Midian,
Go, return into Egypt; for all the men are dead that sought thy life.

<span id="an_4:20">4:20</span> And Moses took his wife and his sons, and
set them upon an ass, and he returned to the land of Egypt: and Moses
took the rod of God in his hand.

<span id="an_4:21">4:21</span> And Jehovah said unto Moses, When thou
goest back into Egypt, see that thou do before Pharaoh all the wonders
which I have put in thy hand: but I will harden his heart and he will
not let the people go.

<span id="an_4:22">4:22</span> And thou shalt say unto Pharaoh, Thus
saith Jehovah, Israel is my son, my first-born:

<span id="an_4:23">4:23</span> and I have said unto thee, Let my son go,
that he may serve me; and thou hast refused to let him go: behold, I
will slay thy son, thy first-born.

<span id="an_4:24">4:24</span> And it came to pass on the way at the
lodging-place, that Jehovah met him, and sought to kill him.

<span id="an_4:25">4:25</span> Then Zipporah took a flint, and cut off
the foreskin of her son, and cast it at his feet; and she said, Surely a
bridegroom of blood art thou to me.

<span id="an_4:26">4:26</span> So he let him alone. Then she said, A
bridegroom of blood \[art thou\], because of the circumcision.

<span id="an_4:27">4:27</span> And Jehovah said to Aaron, Go into the
wilderness to meet Moses. And he went, and met him in the mountain of
God, and kissed him.

<span id="an_4:28">4:28</span> And Moses told Aaron all the words of
Jehovah wherewith he had sent him, and all the signs wherewith he had
charged him.

<span id="an_4:29">4:29</span> And Moses and Aaron went and gathered
together all the elders of the children of Israel:

<span id="an_4:30">4:30</span> and Aaron spake all the words which
Jehovah had spoken unto Moses, and did the signs in the sight of the
people.

<span id="an_4:31">4:31</span> And the people believed: and when they
heard that Jehovah had visited the children of Israel, and that he had
seen their affliction, then they bowed their heads and worshipped.

<span id="an_5:1">5:1</span> And afterward Moses and Aaron came, and
said unto Pharaoh, Thus saith Jehovah, the God of Israel, Let my people
go, that they may hold a feast unto me in the wilderness.

<span id="an_5:2">5:2</span> And Pharaoh said, Who is Jehovah, that I
should hearken unto his voice to let Israel go? I know not Jehovah, and
moreover I will not let Israel go.

<span id="an_5:3">5:3</span> And they said, The God of the Hebrews hath
met with us: let us go, we pray thee, three days' journey into the
wilderness, and sacrifice unto Jehovah our God, lest he fall upon us
with pestilence, or with the sword.

<span id="an_5:4">5:4</span> And the king of Egypt said unto them,
Wherefore do ye, Moses and Aaron, loose the people from their works? get
you unto your burdens.

<span id="an_5:5">5:5</span> And Pharaoh said, Behold, the people of the
land are now many, and ye make them rest from their burdens.

<span id="an_5:6">5:6</span> And the same day Pharaoh commanded the
taskmasters of the people, and their officers, saying,

<span id="an_5:7">5:7</span> Ye shall no more give the people straw to
make brick, as heretofore: let them go and gather straw for themselves.

<span id="an_5:8">5:8</span> And the number of the bricks, which they
did make heretofore, ye shall lay upon them; ye shall not diminish aught
thereof: for they are idle; therefore they cry, saying, Let us go and
sacrifice to our God.

<span id="an_5:9">5:9</span> Let heavier work be laid upon the men, that
they may labor therein; and let them not regard lying words.

<span id="an_5:10">5:10</span> And the taskmasters of the people went
out, and their officers, and they spake to the people, saying, Thus
saith Pharaoh, I will not give you straw.

<span id="an_5:11">5:11</span> Go yourselves, get you straw where ye can
find it: for nought of your work shall be diminished.

<span id="an_5:12">5:12</span> So the people were scattered abroad
throughout all the land of Egypt to gather stubble for straw.

<span id="an_5:13">5:13</span> And the taskmasters were urgent saying,
Fulfil your works, \[your\] daily tasks, as when there was straw.

<span id="an_5:14">5:14</span> And the officers of the children of
Israel, whom Pharaoh's taskmasters had set over them, were beaten, and
demanded, Wherefore have ye not fulfilled your task both yesterday and
to-day, in making brick as heretofore?

<span id="an_5:15">5:15</span> Then the officers of the children of
Israel came and cried unto Pharaoh, saying, Wherefore dealest thou thus
with thy servants?

<span id="an_5:16">5:16</span> There is no straw given unto thy
servants, and they say to us, Make brick: and, behold, thy servants are
beaten; but the fault it in thine own people.

<span id="an_5:17">5:17</span> But he said, Ye are idle, ye are idle:
therefore ye say, Let us go and sacrifice to Jehovah.

<span id="an_5:18">5:18</span> Go therefore now, and work; for there
shall no straw be given you, yet shall ye deliver the number of bricks.

<span id="an_5:19">5:19</span> And the officers of the children of
Israel did see that they were in evil case, when it was said, Ye shall
not diminish aught from your bricks, \[your\] daily tasks.

<span id="an_5:20">5:20</span> And they met Moses and Aaron, who stood
in the way, as they came forth from Pharaoh:

<span id="an_5:21">5:21</span> and they said unto them, Jehovah look
upon you, and judge: because ye have made our savor to be abhorred in
the eyes of Pharaoh, and in the eyes of his servants, to put a sword in
their hand to slay us.

<span id="an_5:22">5:22</span> And Moses returned unto Jehovah, and
said, Lord, wherefore hast thou dealt ill with this people? why is it
that thou hast sent me?

<span id="an_5:23">5:23</span> For since I came to Pharaoh to speak in
thy name, he hath dealt ill with this people; neither hast thou
delivered thy people at all.

<span id="an_6:1">6:1</span> And Jehovah said unto Moses, Now shalt thou
see what I will do to Pharaoh: for by a strong hand shall he let them
go, and by a strong hand shall he drive them out of his land.

<span id="an_6:2">6:2</span> And God spake unto Moses, and said unto
him, I am Jehovah:

<span id="an_6:3">6:3</span> and I appeared unto Abraham, unto Isaac,
and unto Jacob, as God Almighty; but by my name Jehovah I was not known
to them.

<span id="an_6:4">6:4</span> And I have also established my covenant
with them, to give them the land of Canaan, the land of their
sojournings, wherein they sojourned.

<span id="an_6:5">6:5</span> And moreover I have heard the groaning of
the children of Israel, whom the Egyptians keep in bondage; and I have
remembered my covenant.

<span id="an_6:6">6:6</span> Wherefore say unto the children of Israel,
I am Jehovah, and I will bring you out from under the burdens of the
Egyptians, and I will rid you out of their bondage, and I will redeem
you with an outstretched arm, and with great judgments:

<span id="an_6:7">6:7</span> and I will take you to me for a people, and
I will be to you a God; and ye shall know that I am Jehovah your God,
who bringeth you out from under the burdens of the Egyptians.

<span id="an_6:8">6:8</span> And I will bring you in unto the land which
I sware to give to Abraham, to Isaac, and to Jacob; and I will give it
you for a heritage: I am Jehovah.

<span id="an_6:9">6:9</span> And Moses spake so unto the children of
Israel: but they hearkened not unto Moses for anguish of spirit, and for
cruel bondage.

<span id="an_6:10">6:10</span> And Jehovah spake unto Moses, saying,

<span id="an_6:11">6:11</span> Go in, speak unto Pharaoh king of Egypt,
that he let the children of Israel go out of his land.

<span id="an_6:12">6:12</span> And Moses spake before Jehovah, saying,
Behold, the children of Israel have not hearkened unto me; how then
shall Pharaoh hear me, who am of uncircumcised lips?

<span id="an_6:13">6:13</span> And Jehovah spake unto Moses and unto
Aaron, and gave them a charge unto the children of Israel, and unto
Pharaoh king of Egypt, to bring the children of Israel out of the land
of Egypt.

<span id="an_6:14">6:14</span> These are the heads of their fathers'
houses. The sons of Reuben the first-born of Israel: Hanoch, and Pallu,
Hezron, and Carmi; these are the families of Reuben.

<span id="an_6:15">6:15</span> And the sons of Simeon: Jemuel, and
Jamin, and Ohad, and Jachin, and Zohar, and Shaul the son of a
Canaanitish woman; these are the families of Simeon.

<span id="an_6:16">6:16</span> And these are the names of the sons of
Levi according to their generations: Gershon, and Kohath, and Merari;
and the years of the life of Levi were a hundred thirty and seven years.

<span id="an_6:17">6:17</span> The sons of Gershon: Libni and Shimei,
according to their families.

<span id="an_6:18">6:18</span> And the sons of Kohath: Amram, and Izhar,
and Hebron, and Uzziel; and the years of the life of Kohath were a
hundred thirty and three years.

<span id="an_6:19">6:19</span> And the sons of Merari: Mahli and Mushi.
These are the families of the Levites according to their generations.

<span id="an_6:20">6:20</span> And Amram took him Jochebed his father's
sister to wife; and she bare him Aaron and Moses: and the years of the
life of Amram were a hundred and thirty and seven years.

<span id="an_6:21">6:21</span> And the sons of Izhar: Korah, and Nepheg,
and Zichri.

<span id="an_6:22">6:22</span> And the sons of Uzziel: Mishael, and
Elzaphan, and Sithri.

<span id="an_6:23">6:23</span> And Aaron took him Elisheba, the daughter
of Amminadab, the sister of Nahshon, to wife; and she bare him Nadab and
Abihu, Eleazar and Ithamar.

<span id="an_6:24">6:24</span> And the sons of Korah: Assir, and
Elkanah, and Abiasaph; these are the families of the Korahites.

<span id="an_6:25">6:25</span> And Eleazar Aaron's son took him one of
the daughters of Putiel to wife; and she bare him Phinehas. These are
the heads of the fathers' \[houses\] of the Levites according to their
families.

<span id="an_6:26">6:26</span> These are that Aaron and Moses, to whom
Jehovah said, Bring out the children of Israel from the land of Egypt
according to their hosts.

<span id="an_6:27">6:27</span> These are they that spake to Pharaoh king
of Egypt, to bring out the children of Israel from Egypt: these are that
Moses and Aaron.

<span id="an_6:28">6:28</span> And it came to pass on the day when
Jehovah spake unto Moses in the land of Egypt,

<span id="an_6:29">6:29</span> that Jehovah spake unto Moses, saying, I
am Jehovah: speak thou unto Pharaoh king of Egypt all that I speak unto
thee.

<span id="an_6:30">6:30</span> And Moses said before Jehovah, Behold, I
am of uncircumcised lips, and how shall Pharaoh hearken unto me?

<span id="an_7:1">7:1</span> And Jehovah said unto Moses, See, I have
made thee as God to Pharaoh; and Aaron thy brother shall be thy prophet.

<span id="an_7:2">7:2</span> Thou shalt speak all that I command thee;
and Aaron thy brother shall speak unto Pharaoh, that he let the children
of Israel go out of his land.

<span id="an_7:3">7:3</span> And I will harden Pharaoh's heart, and
multiply my signs and my wonders in the land of Egypt.

<span id="an_7:4">7:4</span> But Pharaoh will not hearken unto you, and
I will lay my hand upon Egypt, and bring forth my hosts, my people the
children of Israel, out of the land of Egypt by great judgments.

<span id="an_7:5">7:5</span> And the Egyptians shall know that I am
Jehovah, when I stretch forth my hand upon Egypt, and bring out the
children of Israel from among them.

<span id="an_7:6">7:6</span> And Moses and Aaron did so; as Jehovah
commanded them, so did they.

<span id="an_7:7">7:7</span> And Moses was fourscore years old, and
Aaron fourscore and three years old, when they spake unto Pharaoh.

<span id="an_7:8">7:8</span> And Jehovah spake unto Moses and unto
Aaron, saying,

<span id="an_7:9">7:9</span> When Pharaoh shall speak unto you, saying,
Show a wonder for you; then thou shalt say unto Aaron, Take thy rod, and
cast it down before Pharaoh, that it become a serpent.

<span id="an_7:10">7:10</span> And Moses and Aaron went in unto Pharaoh,
and they did so, as Jehovah had commanded: and Aaron cast down his rod
before Pharaoh and before his servants, and it became a serpent.

<span id="an_7:11">7:11</span> Then Pharaoh also called for the wise men
and the sorcerers: and they also, the magicians of Egypt, did in like
manner with their enchantments.

<span id="an_7:12">7:12</span> For they cast down every man his rod, and
they became serpents: but Aaron's rod swallowed up their rods.

<span id="an_7:13">7:13</span> And Pharaoh's heart was hardened, and he
hearkened not unto them; as Jehovah had spoken.

<span id="an_7:14">7:14</span> And Jehovah said unto Moses, Pharaoh's
heart is stubborn, he refuseth to let the people go.

<span id="an_7:15">7:15</span> Get thee unto Pharaoh in the morning; lo,
he goeth out unto the water; and thou shalt stand by the river's brink
to meet him; and the rod which was turned to a serpent shalt thou take
in thy hand.

<span id="an_7:16">7:16</span> And thou shalt say unto him, Jehovah, the
God of the Hebrews, hath sent me unto thee, saying, Let my people go,
that they may serve me in the wilderness: and, behold, hitherto thou
hast not hearkened.

<span id="an_7:17">7:17</span> Thus saith Jehovah, In this thou shalt
know that I am Jehovah: behold, I will smite with the rod that is in my
hand upon the waters which are in the river, and they shall be turned to
blood.

<span id="an_7:18">7:18</span> And the fish that are in the river shall
die, and the river shall become foul; and the Egyptians shall loathe to
drink water from the river.

<span id="an_7:19">7:19</span> And Jehovah said unto Moses, Say unto
Aaron, Take thy rod, and stretch out thy hand over the waters of Egypt,
over their rivers, over their streams, and over their pools, and over
all their ponds of water, that they may become blood; and there shall be
blood throughout all the land of Egypt, both in vessels of wood and in
vessels of stone.

<span id="an_7:20">7:20</span> And Moses and Aaron did so, as Jehovah
commanded; and he lifted up the rod, and smote the waters that were in
the river, in the sight of Pharaoh, and in the sight of his servants;
and all the waters that were in the river were turned to blood.

<span id="an_7:21">7:21</span> And the fish that were in the river died;
and the river became foul, and the Egyptians could not drink water from
the river; and the blood was throughout all the land of Egypt.

<span id="an_7:22">7:22</span> And the magicians of Egypt did in like
manner with their enchantments: and Pharaoh's heart was hardened, and he
hearkened not unto them; as Jehovah had spoken.

<span id="an_7:23">7:23</span> And Pharaoh turned and went into his
house, neither did he lay even this to heart.

<span id="an_7:24">7:24</span> And all the Egyptians digged round about
the river for water to drink; for they could not drink of the water of
the river.

<span id="an_7:25">7:25</span> And seven days were fulfilled, after that
Jehovah had smitten the river.

<span id="an_8:1">8:1</span> And Jehovah spake unto Moses, Go in unto
Pharaoh, and say unto him, Thus saith Jehovah, Let my people go, that
they may serve me.

<span id="an_8:2">8:2</span> And if thou refuse to let them go, behold,
I will smite all thy borders with frogs:

<span id="an_8:3">8:3</span> and the river shall swarm with frogs, which
shall go up and come into thy house, and into thy bedchamber, and upon
thy bed, and into the house of thy servants, and upon thy people, and
into thine ovens, and into thy kneading-troughs:

<span id="an_8:4">8:4</span> and the frogs shall come up both upon thee,
and upon thy people, and upon all thy servants.

<span id="an_8:5">8:5</span> And Jehovah said unto Moses, Say unto
Aaron, Stretch forth thy hand with thy rod over the rivers, over the
streams, and over the pools, and cause frogs to come up upon the land of
Egypt.

<span id="an_8:6">8:6</span> And Aaron stretched out his hand over the
waters of Egypt; and the frogs came up, and covered the land of Egypt.

<span id="an_8:7">8:7</span> And the magicians did in like manner with
their enchantments, and brought up frogs upon the land of Egypt.

<span id="an_8:8">8:8</span> Then Pharaoh called for Moses and Aaron,
and said, Entreat Jehovah, that he take away the frogs from me, and from
my people; and I will let the people go, that they may sacrifice unto
Jehovah.

<span id="an_8:9">8:9</span> And Moses said unto Pharaoh, Have thou this
glory over me: against what time shall I entreat for thee, and for thy
servants, and for thy people, that the frogs be destroyed from thee and
thy houses, and remain in the river only?

<span id="an_8:10">8:10</span> And he said, Against to-morrow. And he
said, Be it according to thy word; that thou mayest know that there is
none like unto Jehovah our God.

<span id="an_8:11">8:11</span> And the frogs shall depart from thee, and
from thy houses, and from thy servants, and from thy people; they shall
remain in the river only.

<span id="an_8:12">8:12</span> And Moses and Aaron went out from
Pharaoh: and Moses cried unto Jehovah concerning the frogs which he had
brought upon Pharaoh.

<span id="an_8:13">8:13</span> And Jehovah did according to the word of
Moses; and the frogs died out of the houses, out of the courts, and out
of the fields.

<span id="an_8:14">8:14</span> And they gathered them together in heaps;
and the land stank.

<span id="an_8:15">8:15</span> But when Pharaoh saw that there was
respite, he hardened his heart, and hearkened not unto them, as Jehovah
had spoken.

<span id="an_8:16">8:16</span> And Jehovah said unto Moses, Say unto
Aaron, Stretch out thy rod, and smite the dust of the earth, that is may
become lice throughout all the land of Egypt.

<span id="an_8:17">8:17</span> And they did so; and Aaron stretched out
his hand with his rod, and smote the dust of the earth, and there were
lice upon man, and upon beast; all the dust of the earth became lice
throughout all the land of Egypt.

<span id="an_8:18">8:18</span> And the magicians did so with their
enchantments to bring forth lice, but they could not: and there were
lice upon man, and upon beast.

<span id="an_8:19">8:19</span> Then the magicians said unto Pharaoh,
This is the finger of God: and Pharaoh's heart was hardened, and he
hearkened not unto them; as Jehovah had spoken.

<span id="an_8:20">8:20</span> And Jehovah said unto Moses, Rise up
early in the morning, and stand before Pharaoh; lo, he cometh forth to
the water; and say unto him, Thus saith Jehovah, Let my people go, that
they may serve me.

<span id="an_8:21">8:21</span> Else, if thou wilt not let my people go,
behold, I will send swarms of flies upon thee, and upon they servants,
and upon thy people, and into thy houses: and the houses of the
Egyptians shall be full of swarms of flies, and also the ground whereon
they are.

<span id="an_8:22">8:22</span> And I will set apart in that day the land
of Goshen, in which my people dwell, that no swarms of flies shall be
there; to the end thou mayest know that I am Jehovah in the midst of the
earth.

<span id="an_8:23">8:23</span> And I will put a division between my
people and thy people: by to-morrow shall this sign be.

<span id="an_8:24">8:24</span> And Jehovah did so; and there came
grievous swarms of flies into the house of Pharaoh, and into his
servants' houses: and in all the land of Egypt the land was corrupted by
reason of the swarms of flies.

<span id="an_8:25">8:25</span> And Pharaoh called for Moses and for
Aaron, and said, Go ye, sacrifice to your God in the land.

<span id="an_8:26">8:26</span> And Moses said, It is not meet so to do;
for we shall sacrifice the abomination of the Egyptians to Jehovah our
God: lo, shall we sacrifice the abomination of the Egyptians before
their eyes, and will they not stone us?

<span id="an_8:27">8:27</span> We will go three days' journey into the
wilderness, and sacrifice to Jehovah our God, as he shall command us.

<span id="an_8:28">8:28</span> And Pharaoh said, I will let you go, that
ye may sacrifice to Jehovah your God in the wilderness; only ye shall
not go very far away: entreat for me.

<span id="an_8:29">8:29</span> And Moses said, Behold, I go out from
thee, and I will entreat Jehovah that the swarms of flies may depart
from Pharaoh, from his servants, and from his people, to-morrow: only
let not Pharaoh deal deceitfully any more in not letting the people go
to sacrifice to Jehovah.

<span id="an_8:30">8:30</span> And Moses went out from Pharaoh, and
entreated Jehovah.

<span id="an_8:31">8:31</span> And Jehovah did according to the word of
Moses; and he removed the swarms of flies from Pharaoh, from his
servants, and from his people; there remained not one.

<span id="an_8:32">8:32</span> And Pharaoh hardened his heart this time
also, and he did not let the people go.

<span id="an_9:1">9:1</span> Then Jehovah said unto Moses, Go in unto
Pharaoh, and tell him, Thus saith Jehovah, the God of the Hebrews, Let
my people go, that they may serve me.

<span id="an_9:2">9:2</span> For if thou refuse to let them go, and wilt
hold them still,

<span id="an_9:3">9:3</span> behold, the hand of Jehovah is upon thy
cattle which are in the field, upon the horses, upon the asses, upon the
camels, upon the herds, and upon the flocks: \[there shall be\] a very
grievous murrain.

<span id="an_9:4">9:4</span> And Jehovah shall make a distinction
between the cattle of Israel and the cattle of Egypt; and there shall
nothing die of all that belongeth to the children of Israel.

<span id="an_9:5">9:5</span> And Jehovah appointed a set time, saying,
To-morrow Jehovah shall do this thing in the land.

<span id="an_9:6">9:6</span> And Jehovah did that thing on the morrow;
and all the cattle of Egypt died; but of the cattle of the children of
Israel died not one.

<span id="an_9:7">9:7</span> And Pharaoh sent, and, behold, there was
not so much as one of the cattle of the Israelites dead. But the heart
of Pharaoh was stubborn, and he did not let the people go.

<span id="an_9:8">9:8</span> And Jehovah said unto Moses and unto Aaron,
Take to you handfuls of ashes of the furnace, and let Moses sprinkle it
toward heaven in the sight of Pharaoh.

<span id="an_9:9">9:9</span> And it shall become small dust over all the
land of Egypt, and shall be a boil breaking forth with blains upon man
and upon beast, throughout all the land of Egypt.

<span id="an_9:10">9:10</span> And they took ashes of the furnace, and
stood before Pharaoh; and Moses sprinkled it up toward heaven; and it
became a boil breaking forth with blains upon man and upon beast.

<span id="an_9:11">9:11</span> And the magicians could not stand before
Moses because of the boils; for the boils were upon the magicians, and
upon all the Egyptians.

<span id="an_9:12">9:12</span> And Jehovah hardened the heart of
Pharaoh, and he hearkened not unto them, as Jehovah had spoken unto
Moses.

<span id="an_9:13">9:13</span> And Jehovah said unto Moses, Rise up
early in the morning, and stand before Pharaoh, and say unto him, Thus
saith Jehovah, the God of the Hebrews, Let my people go, that they may
serve me.

<span id="an_9:14">9:14</span> For I will this time send all my plagues
upon thy heart, and upon thy servants, and upon thy people; that thou
mayest know that there is none like me in all the earth.

<span id="an_9:15">9:15</span> For now I had put forth my hand, and
smitten thee and thy people with pestilence, and thou hadst been cut off
from the earth:

<span id="an_9:16">9:16</span> but in very deed for this cause have I
made thee to stand, to show thee my power, and that my name may be
declared throughout all the earth.

<span id="an_9:17">9:17</span> As yet exaltest thou thyself against my
people, that thou wilt not let them go?

<span id="an_9:18">9:18</span> Behold, to-morrow about this time I will
cause it to rain a very grievous hail, such as hath not been in Egypt
since the day it was founded even until now.

<span id="an_9:19">9:19</span> Now therefore send, hasten in thy cattle
and all that thou hast in the field; \[for\] every man and beast that
shall be found in the field, and shall not be brought home, the hail
shall come down upon them, and they shall die.

<span id="an_9:20">9:20</span> He that feared the word of Jehovah among
the servants of Pharaoh made his servants and his cattle flee into the
houses.

<span id="an_9:21">9:21</span> And he that regarded not the word of
Jehovah left his servants and his cattle in the field.

<span id="an_9:22">9:22</span> And Jehovah said unto Moses, Stretch
forth thy hand toward heaven, that there may be hail in all the land of
Egypt, upon man, and upon beast, and upon every herb of the field,
throughout the land of Egypt.

<span id="an_9:23">9:23</span> And Moses stretched forth his rod toward
heaven: and Jehovah sent thunder and hail, and fire ran down unto the
earth; and Jehovah rained hail upon the land of Egypt.

<span id="an_9:24">9:24</span> So there was hail, and fire mingled with
the hail, very grievous, such as had not been in all the land of Egypt
since it became a nation.

<span id="an_9:25">9:25</span> And the hail smote throughout all the
land of Egypt all that was in the field, both man and beast; and the
hail smote every herb of the field, and brake every tree of the field.

<span id="an_9:26">9:26</span> Only in the land of Goshen, where the
children of Israel were, was there no hail.

<span id="an_9:27">9:27</span> And Pharaoh sent, and called for Moses
and Aaron, and said unto them, I have sinned this time: Jehovah is
righteous, and I and my people are wicked.

<span id="an_9:28">9:28</span> Entreat Jehovah; for there hath been
enough of \[these\] mighty thunderings and hail; and I will let you go,
and ye shall stay no longer.

<span id="an_9:29">9:29</span> And Moses said unto him, As soon as I am
gone out of the city, I will spread abroad my hands unto Jehovah; the
thunders shall cease, neither shall there be any more hail; that thou
mayest know that the earth is Jehovah's.

<span id="an_9:30">9:30</span> But as for thee and thy servants, I know
that ye will not yet fear Jehovah God.

<span id="an_9:31">9:31</span> And the flax and the barley were smitten:
for the barley was in the ear, and the flax was in bloom.

<span id="an_9:32">9:32</span> But the wheat and the spelt were not
smitten: for they were not grown up.

<span id="an_9:33">9:33</span> And Moses went out of the city from
Pharaoh, and spread abroad his hands unto Jehovah: and the thunders and
hail ceased, and the rain was not poured upon the earth.

<span id="an_9:34">9:34</span> And when Pharaoh saw that the rain and
the hail and the thunders were ceased, he sinned yet more, and hardened
his heart, he and his servants.

<span id="an_9:35">9:35</span> And the heart of Pharaoh was hardened,
and he did not let the children of Israel go, as Jehovah had spoken by
Moses.

<span id="an_10:1">10:1</span> And Jehovah said unto Moses, Go in unto
Pharaoh: for I have hardened his heart, and the heart of his servants,
that I may show these my signs in the midst of them,

<span id="an_10:2">10:2</span> and that thou mayest tell in the ears of
thy son, and of thy son's son, what things I have wrought upon Egypt,
and my signs which I have done among them; that ye may know that I am
Jehovah.

<span id="an_10:3">10:3</span> And Moses and Aaron went in unto Pharaoh,
and said unto him, Thus saith Jehovah, the God of the Hebrews, How long
wilt thou refuse to humble thyself before me? let my people go, that
they may serve me.

<span id="an_10:4">10:4</span> Else, if thou refuse to let my people go,
behold, to-morrow will I bring locusts into thy border:

<span id="an_10:5">10:5</span> and they shall cover the face of the
earth, so that one shall not be able to see the earth: and they shall
eat the residue of that which is escaped, which remaineth unto you from
the hail, and shall eat every tree which groweth for you out of the
field:

<span id="an_10:6">10:6</span> and thy houses shall be filled, and the
houses of all thy servants, and the houses of all the Egyptians; as
neither thy fathers nor thy fathers' fathers have seen, since the day
that they were upon the earth unto this day. And he turned, and went out
from Pharaoh.

<span id="an_10:7">10:7</span> And Pharaoh's servants said unto him, How
long shall this man be a snare unto us? let the men go, that they may
serve Jehovah their God: knowest thou not yet that Egypt is destroyed?

<span id="an_10:8">10:8</span> And Moses and Aaron were brought again
unto Pharaoh: and he said unto them, Go, serve Jehovah your God; but who
are they that shall go?

<span id="an_10:9">10:9</span> And Moses said, We will go with our young
and with our old; with our sons and with our daughters, with our flocks
and with our herds will we go; for we must hold a feast unto Jehovah.

<span id="an_10:10">10:10</span> And he said unto them, So be Jehovah
with you, as I will let you go, and your little ones: look to it; for
evil is before you.

<span id="an_10:11">10:11</span> Not so: go now ye that are men, and
serve Jehovah; for that is what ye desire. And they were driven out from
Pharaoh's presence.

<span id="an_10:12">10:12</span> And Jehovah said unto Moses, Stretch
out thy hand over the land of Egypt for the locusts, that they may come
up upon the land of Egypt, and eat every herb of the land, even all that
the hail hath left.

<span id="an_10:13">10:13</span> And Moses stretched forth his rod over
the land of Egypt, and Jehovah brought an east wind upon the land all
that day, and all the night; and when it was morning, the east wind
brought the locusts.

<span id="an_10:14">10:14</span> And the locusts went up over all the
land of Egypt, and rested in all the borders of Egypt; very grievous
were they; before them there were no such locusts as they, neither after
them shall be such.

<span id="an_10:15">10:15</span> For they covered the face of the whole
earth, so that the land was darkened; and they did eat every herb of the
land, and all the fruit of the trees which the hail had left: and there
remained not any green thing, either tree or herb of the field, through
all the land of Egypt.

<span id="an_10:16">10:16</span> Then Pharaoh called for Moses and Aaron
in haste; and he said, I have sinned against Jehovah your God, and
against you.

<span id="an_10:17">10:17</span> Now therefore forgive, I pray thee, my
sin only this once, and entreat Jehovah your God, that he may take away
from me this death only.

<span id="an_10:18">10:18</span> And he went out from Pharaoh, and
entreated Jehovah.

<span id="an_10:19">10:19</span> And Jehovah turned an exceeding strong
west wind, which took up the locusts, and drove them into the Red Sea;
there remained not one locust in all the border of Egypt.

<span id="an_10:20">10:20</span> But Jehovah hardened Pharaoh's heart,
and he did not let the children of Israel go.

<span id="an_10:21">10:21</span> And Jehovah said unto Moses, Stretch
out thy hand toward heaven, that there may be darkness over the land of
Egypt, even darkness which may be felt.

<span id="an_10:22">10:22</span> And Moses stretched forth his hand
toward heaven; and there was a thick darkness in all the land of Egypt
three days;

<span id="an_10:23">10:23</span> they saw not one another, neither rose
any one from his place for three days: but all the children of Israel
had light in their dwellings.

<span id="an_10:24">10:24</span> And Pharaoh called unto Moses, and
said, Go ye, serve Jehovah; only let your flocks and your herds be
stayed: let your little ones also go with you.

<span id="an_10:25">10:25</span> And Moses said, Thou must also give
into our hand sacrifices and burnt-offerings, that we may sacrifice unto
Jehovah our God.

<span id="an_10:26">10:26</span> Our cattle also shall go with us; there
shall not a hoof be left behind: for thereof must we take to serve
Jehovah our God; and we know not with what we must serve Jehovah, until
we come thither.

<span id="an_10:27">10:27</span> But Jehovah hardened Pharaoh's heart,
and he would not let them go.

<span id="an_10:28">10:28</span> And Pharaoh said unto him, Get thee
from me, take heed to thyself, see my face no more; for in the day thou
seest my face thou shalt die.

<span id="an_10:29">10:29</span> And Moses said, Thou hast spoken well.
I will see thy face again no more.

<span id="an_11:1">11:1</span> And Jehovah said unto Moses, Yet one
plague more will I bring upon Pharaoh, and upon Egypt; afterwards he
will let you go hence: when he shall let you go, he shall surely thrust
you out hence altogether.

<span id="an_11:2">11:2</span> Speak now in the ears of the people, and
let them ask every man of his neighbor, and every woman of her neighbor,
jewels of silver, and jewels of gold.

<span id="an_11:3">11:3</span> And Jehovah gave the people favor in the
sight of the Egyptians. Moreover the man Moses was very great in the
land of Egypt, in the sight of Pharaoh's servants, and in the sight of
the people.

<span id="an_11:4">11:4</span> And Moses said, Thus saith Jehovah, About
midnight will I go out into the midst of Egypt:

<span id="an_11:5">11:5</span> and all the first-born in the land of
Egypt shall die, from the first-born of Pharaoh that sitteth upon his
throne, even unto the first-born of the maid-servant that is behind the
mill; and all the first-born of cattle.

<span id="an_11:6">11:6</span> And there shall be a great cry throughout
all the land of Egypt, such as there hath not been, nor shall be any
more.

<span id="an_11:7">11:7</span> But against any of the children of Israel
shall not a dog move his tongue, against man or beast: that ye may know
how that Jehovah doth make a distinction between the Egyptians and
Israel.

<span id="an_11:8">11:8</span> And all these thy servants shall come
down unto me, and bow down themselves unto me, saying, Get thee out, and
all the people that follow thee: and after that I will go out. And he
went out from Pharaoh in hot anger.

<span id="an_11:9">11:9</span> And Jehovah said unto Moses, Pharaoh will
not hearken unto you; that my wonders may be multiplied in the land of
Egypt.

<span id="an_11:10">11:10</span> And Moses and Aaron did all these
wonders before Pharaoh: and Jehovah hardened Pharaoh's heart, and he did
not let the children of Israel go out of his land.

<span id="an_12:1">12:1</span> And Jehovah spake unto Moses and Aaron in
the land of Egypt, saying,

<span id="an_12:2">12:2</span> This month shall be unto you the
beginning of months: it shall be the first month of the year to you.

<span id="an_12:3">12:3</span> Speak ye unto all the congregation of
Israel, saying, In the tenth \[day\] of this month they shall take to
them every man a lamb, according to their fathers' houses, a lamb for a
household:

<span id="an_12:4">12:4</span> and if the household be too little for a
lamb, then shall he and his neighbor next unto his house take one
according to the number of the souls; according to every man's eating ye
shall make your count for the lamb.

<span id="an_12:5">12:5</span> Your lamb shall be without blemish, a
male a year old: ye shall take it from the sheep, or from the goats:

<span id="an_12:6">12:6</span> and ye shall keep it until the fourteenth
day of the same month; and the whole assembly of the congregation of
Israel shall kill it at even.

<span id="an_12:7">12:7</span> And they shall take of the blood, and put
it on the two side-posts and on the lintel, upon the houses wherein they
shall eat it.

<span id="an_12:8">12:8</span> And they shall eat the flesh in that
night, roast with fire, and unleavened bread; with bitter herbs they
shall eat it.

<span id="an_12:9">12:9</span> Eat not of it raw, nor boiled at all with
water, but roast with fire; its head with its legs and with the inwards
thereof.

<span id="an_12:10">12:10</span> And ye shall let nothing of it remain
until the morning; but that which remaineth of it until the morning ye
shall burn with fire.

<span id="an_12:11">12:11</span> And thus shall ye eat it: with your
loins girded, your shoes on your feet, and your staff in your hand; and
ye shall eat it in haste: it is Jehovah's passover.

<span id="an_12:12">12:12</span> For I will go through the land of Egypt
in that night, and will smite all the first-born in the land of Egypt,
both man and beast; and against all the gods of Egypt I will execute
judgments: I am Jehovah.

<span id="an_12:13">12:13</span> And the blood shall be to you for a
token upon the houses where ye are: and when I see the blood, I will
pass over you, and there shall no plague be upon you to destroy you,
when I smite the land of Egypt.

<span id="an_12:14">12:14</span> And this day shall be unto you for a
memorial, and ye shall keep it a feast to Jehovah: throughout your
generations ye shall keep it a feast by an ordinance for ever.

<span id="an_12:15">12:15</span> Seven days shall ye eat unleavened
bread; even the first day ye shall put away leaven out of your houses:
for whosoever eateth leavened bread from the first day until the seventh
day, that soul shall be cut off from Israel.

<span id="an_12:16">12:16</span> And in the first day there shall be to
you a holy convocation, and in the seventh day a holy convocation; no
manner of work shall be done in them, save that which every man must
eat, that only may be done by you.

<span id="an_12:17">12:17</span> And ye shall observe the \[feast of\]
unleavened bread; for in this selfsame day have I brought your hosts out
of the land of Egypt: therefore shall ye observe this day throughout
your generations by an ordinance for ever.

<span id="an_12:18">12:18</span> In the first \[month\], on the
fourteenth day of the month at even, ye shall eat unleavened bread,
until the one and twentieth day of the month at even.

<span id="an_12:19">12:19</span> Seven days shall there be no leaven
found in your houses: for whosoever eateth that which is leavened, that
soul shall be cut off from the congregation of Israel, whether he be a
sojourner, or one that is born in the land.

<span id="an_12:20">12:20</span> Ye shall eat nothing leavened; in all
your habitations shall ye eat unleavened bread.

<span id="an_12:21">12:21</span> Then Moses called for all the elders of
Israel, and said unto them, Draw out, and take you lambs according to
your families, and kill the passover.

<span id="an_12:22">12:22</span> And ye shall take a bunch of hyssop,
and dip it in the blood that is in the basin, and strike the lintel and
the two side-posts with the blood that is in the basin; and none of you
shall go out of the door of his house until the morning.

<span id="an_12:23">12:23</span> For Jehovah will pass through to smite
the Egyptians; and when he seeth the blood upon the lintel, and on the
two side-posts, Jehovah will pass over the door, and will not suffer the
destroyer to come in unto your houses to smite you.

<span id="an_12:24">12:24</span> And ye shall observe this thing for an
ordinance to thee and to thy sons for ever.

<span id="an_12:25">12:25</span> And it shall come to pass, when ye are
come to the land which Jehovah will give you, according as he hath
promised, that ye shall keep this service.

<span id="an_12:26">12:26</span> And it shall come to pass, when your
children shall say unto you, What mean ye by this service?

<span id="an_12:27">12:27</span> that ye shall say, It is the sacrifice
of Jehovah's passover, who passed over the houses of the children of
Israel in Egypt, when he smote the Egyptians, and delivered our houses.
And the people bowed the head and worshipped.

<span id="an_12:28">12:28</span> And the children of Israel went and did
so; as Jehovah had commanded Moses and Aaron, so did they.

<span id="an_12:29">12:29</span> And it came to pass at midnight, that
Jehovah smote all the first-born in the land of Egypt, from the
first-born of Pharaoh that sat on his throne unto the first-born of the
captive that was in the dungeon; and all the first-born of cattle.

<span id="an_12:30">12:30</span> And Pharaoh rose up in the night, he,
and all his servants, and all the Egyptians; and there was a great cry
in Egypt, for there was not a house where there was not one dead.

<span id="an_12:31">12:31</span> And he called for Moses and Aaron by
night, and said, Rise up, get you forth from among my people, both ye
and the children of Israel; and go, serve Jehovah, as ye have said.

<span id="an_12:32">12:32</span> Take both your flocks and your herds,
as ye have said, and be gone; and bless me also.

<span id="an_12:33">12:33</span> And the Egyptians were urgent upon the
people, to send them out of the land in haste; for they said, We are all
dead men.

<span id="an_12:34">12:34</span> And the people took their dough before
it was leavened, their kneading-troughs being bound up in their clothes
upon their shoulders.

<span id="an_12:35">12:35</span> And the children of Israel did
according to the word of Moses; and they asked of the Egyptians jewels
of silver, and jewels of gold, and raiment.

<span id="an_12:36">12:36</span> And Jehovah gave the people favor in
the sight of the Egyptians, so that they let them have what they asked.
And they despoiled the Egyptians.

<span id="an_12:37">12:37</span> And the children of Israel journeyed
from Rameses to Succoth, about six hundred thousand on foot that were
men, besides children.

<span id="an_12:38">12:38</span> And a mixed multitude went up also with
them; and flocks, and herds, even very much cattle.

<span id="an_12:39">12:39</span> And they baked unleavened cakes of the
dough which they brought forth out of Egypt; for it was not leavened,
because they were thrust out of Egypt, and could not tarry, neither had
they prepared for themselves any victuals.

<span id="an_12:40">12:40</span> Now the time that the children of
Israel dwelt in Egypt was four hundred and thirty years.

<span id="an_12:41">12:41</span> And it came to pass at the end of four
hundred and thirty years, even the selfsame day it came to pass, that
all the hosts of Jehovah went out from the land of Egypt.

<span id="an_12:42">12:42</span> It is a night to be much observed unto
Jehovah for bringing them out from the land of Egypt: this is that night
of Jehovah, to be much observed of all the children of Israel throughout
their generations.

<span id="an_12:43">12:43</span> And Jehovah said unto Moses and Aaron,
This is the ordinance of the passover: there shall no foreigner eat
thereof;

<span id="an_12:44">12:44</span> but every man's servant that is bought
for money, when thou hast circumcised him, then shall he eat thereof.

<span id="an_12:45">12:45</span> A sojourner and a hired servant shall
not eat thereof.

<span id="an_12:46">12:46</span> In one house shall it be eaten; thou
shalt not carry forth aught of the flesh abroad out of the house;
neither shall ye break a bone thereof.

<span id="an_12:47">12:47</span> All the congregation of Israel shall
keep it.

<span id="an_12:48">12:48</span> And when a stranger shall sojourn with
thee, and will keep the passover to Jehovah, let all his males be
circumcised, and then let him come near and keep it; and he shall be as
one that is born in the land: but no uncircumcised person shall eat
thereof.

<span id="an_12:49">12:49</span> One law shall be to him that is
home-born, and unto the stranger that sojourneth among you.

<span id="an_12:50">12:50</span> Thus did all the children of Israel; as
Jehovah commanded Moses and Aaron, so did they.

<span id="an_12:51">12:51</span> And it came to pass the selfsame day,
that Jehovah did bring the children of Israel out of the land of Egypt
by their hosts.

<span id="an_13:1">13:1</span> And Jehovah spake unto Moses, saying,

<span id="an_13:2">13:2</span> Sanctify unto me all the first-born,
whatsoever openeth the womb among the children of Israel, both of man
and of beast: it is mine.

<span id="an_13:3">13:3</span> And Moses said unto the people, Remember
this day, in which ye came out from Egypt, out of the house of bondage;
for by strength of hand Jehovah brought you out from this place: there
shall no leavened bread be eaten.

<span id="an_13:4">13:4</span> This day ye go forth in the month Abib.

<span id="an_13:5">13:5</span> And it shall be, when Jehovah shall bring
thee into the land of the Canaanite, and the Hittite, and the Amorite,
and the Hivite, and the Jebusite, which he sware unto thy fathers to
give thee, a land flowing with milk and honey, that thou shalt keep this
service in this month.

<span id="an_13:6">13:6</span> Seven days thou shalt eat unleavened
bread, and in the seventh day shall be a feast to Jehovah.

<span id="an_13:7">13:7</span> Unleavened bread shall be eaten
throughout the seven days; and there shall no leavened bread be seen
with thee, neither shall there be leaven seen with thee, in all thy
borders.

<span id="an_13:8">13:8</span> And thou shalt tell thy son in that day,
saying, It is because of that which Jehovah did for me when I came forth
out of Egypt.

<span id="an_13:9">13:9</span> And it shall be for a sign unto thee upon
thy hand, and for a memorial between thine eyes, that the law of Jehovah
may be in thy mouth: for with a strong hand hath Jehovah brought thee
out of Egypt.

<span id="an_13:10">13:10</span> Thou shalt therefore keep this
ordinance in its season from year to year.

<span id="an_13:11">13:11</span> And it shall be, when Jehovah shall
bring thee into the land of the Canaanite, as he sware unto thee and to
thy fathers, and shall give it thee,

<span id="an_13:12">13:12</span> that thou shalt set apart unto Jehovah
all that openeth the womb, and every firstling which thou hast that
cometh of a beast; the males shall be Jehovah's.

<span id="an_13:13">13:13</span> And every firstling of an ass thou
shalt redeem with a lamb; and if thou wilt not redeem it, then thou
shalt break its neck: and all the first-born of man among thy sons shalt
thou redeem.

<span id="an_13:14">13:14</span> And it shall be, when thy son asketh
thee in time to come, saying, What is this? that thou shalt say unto
him, By strength of hand Jehovah brought us out from Egypt, from the
house of bondage:

<span id="an_13:15">13:15</span> and it came to pass, when Pharaoh would
hardly let us go, that Jehovah slew all the first-born in the land of
Egypt, both the first-born of man, and the first-born of beast:
therefore I sacrifice to Jehovah all that openeth the womb, being males;
but all the first-born of my sons I redeem.

<span id="an_13:16">13:16</span> And it shall be for a sign upon thy
hand, and for frontlets between thine eyes: for by strength of hand
Jehovah brought us forth out of Egypt.

<span id="an_13:17">13:17</span> And it came to pass, when Pharaoh had
let the people go, that God led them not by the way of the land of the
Philistines, although that was near; for God said, Lest peradventure the
people repent when they see war, and they return to Egypt:

<span id="an_13:18">13:18</span> but God led the people about, by the
way of the wilderness by the Red Sea: and the children of Israel went up
armed out of the land of Egypt.

<span id="an_13:19">13:19</span> And Moses took the bones of Joseph with
him: for he had straitly sworn the children of Israel, saying, God will
surely visit you; and ye shall carry up my bones away hence with you.

<span id="an_13:20">13:20</span> And they took their journey from
Succoth, and encamped in Etham, in the edge of the wilderness.

<span id="an_13:21">13:21</span> And Jehovah went before them by day in
a pillar of cloud, to lead them the way, and by night in a pillar of
fire, to give them light, that they might go by day and by night:

<span id="an_13:22">13:22</span> the pillar of cloud by day, and the
pillar of fire by night, departed not from before the people.

<span id="an_14:1">14:1</span> And Jehovah spake unto Moses, saying,

<span id="an_14:2">14:2</span> Speak unto the children of Israel, that
they turn back and encamp before Pihahiroth, between Migdol and the sea,
before Baal-zephon: over against it shall ye encamp by the sea.

<span id="an_14:3">14:3</span> And Pharaoh will say of the children of
Israel, They are entangled in the land, the wilderness hath shut them
in.

<span id="an_14:4">14:4</span> And I will harden Pharaoh's heart, and he
shall follow after them; and I will get me honor upon Pharaoh, and upon
all his host: and the Egyptians shall know that I am Jehovah. And they
did so.

<span id="an_14:5">14:5</span> And it was told the king of Egypt that
the people were fled: and the heart of Pharaoh and of his servants was
changed towards the people, and they said, What is this we have done,
that we have let Israel go from serving us?

<span id="an_14:6">14:6</span> And he made ready his chariot, and took
his people with him:

<span id="an_14:7">14:7</span> and he took six hundred chosen chariots,
and all the chariots of Egypt, and captains over all of them.

<span id="an_14:8">14:8</span> And Jehovah hardened the heart of Pharaoh
king of Egypt, and he pursued after the children of Israel: for the
children of Israel went out with a high hand.

<span id="an_14:9">14:9</span> And the Egyptians pursued after them, all
the horses \[and\] chariots of Pharaoh, and his horsemen, and his army,
and overtook them encamping by the sea, beside Pihahiroth, before
Baal-zephon.

<span id="an_14:10">14:10</span> And when Pharaoh drew nigh, the
children of Israel lifted up their eyes, and, behold, the Egyptians were
marching after them; and they were sore afraid: and the children of
Israel cried out unto Jehovah.

<span id="an_14:11">14:11</span> And they said unto Moses, Because there
were no graves in Egypt, hast thou taken us away to die in the
wilderness? wherefore hast thou dealt thus with us, to bring us forth
out of Egypt?

<span id="an_14:12">14:12</span> Is not this the word that we spake unto
thee in Egypt, saying, Let us alone, that we may serve the Egyptians?
For it were better for us to serve the Egyptians, than that we should
die in the wilderness.

<span id="an_14:13">14:13</span> And Moses said unto the people, Fear ye
not, stand still, and see the salvation of Jehovah, which he will work
for you to-day: for the Egyptians whom ye have seen to-day, ye shall see
them again no more for ever.

<span id="an_14:14">14:14</span> Jehovah will fight for you, and ye
shall hold your peace.

<span id="an_14:15">14:15</span> And Jehovah said unto Moses, Wherefore
criest thou unto me? speak unto the children of Israel, that they go
forward.

<span id="an_14:16">14:16</span> And lift thou up thy rod, and stretch
out thy hand over the sea, and divide it: and the children of Israel
shall go into the midst of the sea on dry ground.

<span id="an_14:17">14:17</span> And I, behold, I will harden the hearts
of the Egyptians, and they shall go in after them: and I will get me
honor upon Pharaoh, and upon all his host, upon his chariots, and upon
his horsemen.

<span id="an_14:18">14:18</span> And the Egyptians shall know that I am
Jehovah, when I have gotten me honor upon Pharaoh, upon his chariots,
and upon his horsemen.

<span id="an_14:19">14:19</span> And the angel of God, who went before
the camp of Israel, removed and went behind them; and the pillar of
cloud removed from before them, and stood behind them:

<span id="an_14:20">14:20</span> and it came between the camp of Egypt
and the camp of Israel; and there was the cloud and the darkness, yet
gave it light by night: and the one came not near the other all the
night.

<span id="an_14:21">14:21</span> And Moses stretched out his hand over
the sea; and Jehovah caused the sea to go \[back\] by a strong east wind
all the night, and made the sea dry land, and the waters were divided.

<span id="an_14:22">14:22</span> And the children of Israel went into
the midst of the sea upon the dry ground: and the waters were a wall
unto them on their right hand, and on their left.

<span id="an_14:23">14:23</span> And the Egyptians pursued, and went in
after them into the midst of the sea, all Pharaoh's horses, his
chariots, and his horsemen.

<span id="an_14:24">14:24</span> And it came to pass in the morning
watch, that Jehovah looked forth upon the host of the Egyptians through
the pillar of fire and of cloud, and discomfited the host of the
Egyptians.

<span id="an_14:25">14:25</span> And he took off their chariot wheels,
and they drove them heavily; so that the Egyptians said, Let us flee
from the face of Israel; for Jehovah fighteth for them against the
Egyptians.

<span id="an_14:26">14:26</span> And Jehovah said unto Moses, Stretch
out thy hand over the sea, that the waters may come again upon the
Egyptians, upon their chariots, and upon their horsemen.

<span id="an_14:27">14:27</span> And Moses stretched forth his hand over
the sea, and the sea returned to its strength when the morning appeared;
and the Egyptians fled against it; and Jehovah overthrew the Egyptians
in the midst of the sea.

<span id="an_14:28">14:28</span> And the waters returned, and covered
the chariots, and the horsemen, even all the host of Pharaoh that went
in after them into the sea; there remained not so much as one of them.

<span id="an_14:29">14:29</span> But the children of Israel walked upon
dry land in the midst of the sea; and the waters were a wall unto them
on their right hand, and on their left.

<span id="an_14:30">14:30</span> Thus Jehovah saved Israel that day out
of the hand of the Egyptians; and Israel saw the Egyptians dead upon the
sea-shore.

<span id="an_14:31">14:31</span> And Israel saw the great work which
Jehovah did upon the Egyptians, and the people feared Jehovah: and they
believed in Jehovah, and in his servant Moses.

<span id="an_15:1">15:1</span> Then sang Moses and the children of
Israel this song unto Jehovah, and spake, saying, I will sing unto
Jehovah, for he hath triumphed gloriously: The horse and his rider hath
he thrown into the sea.

<span id="an_15:2">15:2</span> Jehovah is my strength and song, And he
is become my salvation: This is my God, and I will praise him; My
father's God, and I will exalt him.

<span id="an_15:3">15:3</span> Jehovah is a man of war: Jehovah is his
name.

<span id="an_15:4">15:4</span> Pharaoh's chariots and his host hath he
cast into the sea; And his chosen captains are sunk in the Red Sea.

<span id="an_15:5">15:5</span> The deeps cover them: They went down into
the depths like a stone.

<span id="an_15:6">15:6</span> Thy right hand, O Jehovah, is glorious in
power, Thy right hand, O Jehovah, dasheth in pieces the enemy.

<span id="an_15:7">15:7</span> And in the greatness of thine excellency
thou overthrowest them that rise up against thee: Thou sendest forth thy
wrath, it consumeth them as stubble.

<span id="an_15:8">15:8</span> And with the blast of thy nostrils the
waters were piled up, The floods stood upright as a heap; The deeps were
congealed in the heart of the sea.

<span id="an_15:9">15:9</span> The enemy said, I will pursue, I will
overtake, I will divide the spoil; My desire shall be satisfied upon
them; I will draw my sword, my hand shall destroy them.

<span id="an_15:10">15:10</span> Thou didst blow with thy wind, the sea
covered them: They sank as lead in the mighty waters.

<span id="an_15:11">15:11</span> Who is like unto thee, O Jehovah, among
the gods? Who is like thee, glorious in holiness, Fearful in praises,
doing wonders?

<span id="an_15:12">15:12</span> Thou stretchedst out thy right hand,
The earth swallowed them.

<span id="an_15:13">15:13</span> Thou in thy lovingkindness hast led the
people that thou hast redeemed: Thou hast guided them in thy strength to
thy holy habitation.

<span id="an_15:14">15:14</span> The peoples have heard, they tremble:
Pangs have taken hold on the inhabitants of Philistia.

<span id="an_15:15">15:15</span> Then were the chiefs of Edom dismayed;
The mighty men of Moab, trembling taketh hold upon them: All the
inhabitants of Canaan are melted away.

<span id="an_15:16">15:16</span> Terror and dread falleth upon them; By
the greatness of thine arm they are as still as a stone; Till thy people
pass over, O Jehovah, Till the people pass over that thou hast
purchased.

<span id="an_15:17">15:17</span> Thou wilt bring them in, and plant them
in the mountain of thine inheritance, The place, O Jehovah, which thou
hast made for thee to dwell in, The sanctuary, O Lord, which thy hands
have established.

<span id="an_15:18">15:18</span> Jehovah shall reign for ever and ever.

<span id="an_15:19">15:19</span> For the horses of Pharaoh went in with
his chariots and with his horsemen into the sea, and Jehovah brought
back the waters of the sea upon them; but the children of Israel walked
on dry land in the midst of the sea.

<span id="an_15:20">15:20</span> And Miriam the prophetess, the sister
of Aaron, took a timbrel in her hand; and all the women went out after
her with timbrels and with dances.

<span id="an_15:21">15:21</span> And Miriam answered them, Sing ye to
Jehovah, for he hath triumphed gloriously; The horse and his rider hath
he thrown into the sea.

<span id="an_15:22">15:22</span> And Moses led Israel onward from the
Red Sea, and they went out into the wilderness of Shur; and they went
three days in the wilderness, and found no water.

<span id="an_15:23">15:23</span> And when they came to Marah, they could
not drink of the waters of Marah, for they were bitter: therefore the
name of it was called Marah.

<span id="an_15:24">15:24</span> And the people murmured against Moses,
saying, What shall we drink?

<span id="an_15:25">15:25</span> An he cried unto Jehovah; And Jehovah
showed him a tree, and he cast it into the waters, and the waters were
made sweet. There he made for them a statute and an ordinance, and there
he proved them;

<span id="an_15:26">15:26</span> and he said, If thou wilt diligently
hearken to the voice of Jehovah thy God, and wilt do that which is right
in his eyes, and wilt give ear to his commandments, and keep all his
statutes, I will put none of the diseases upon thee, which I have put
upon the Egyptians: for I am Jehovah that healeth thee.

<span id="an_15:27">15:27</span> And they came to Elim, where were
twelve springs of water, and threescore and ten palm-trees: and they
encamped there by the waters.

<span id="an_16:1">16:1</span> And they took their journey from Elim,
and all the congregation of the children of Israel came unto the
wilderness of Sin, which is between Elim and Sinai, on the fifteenth day
of the second month after their departing out of the land of Egypt.

<span id="an_16:2">16:2</span> And the whole congregation of the
children of Israel murmured against Moses and against Aaron in the
wilderness:

<span id="an_16:3">16:3</span> and the children of Israel said unto
them, Would that we had died by the hand of Jehovah in the land of
Egypt, when we sat by the flesh-pots, when we did eat bread to the full;
for ye have brought us forth into this wilderness, to kill this whole
assembly with hunger.

<span id="an_16:4">16:4</span> Then said Jehovah unto Moses, Behold, I
will rain bread from heaven for you; and the people shall go out and
gather a day's portion every day, that I may prove them, whether they
will walk in my law, or not.

<span id="an_16:5">16:5</span> And it shall come to pass on the sixth
day, that they shall prepare that which they bring in, and it shall be
twice as much as they gather daily.

<span id="an_16:6">16:6</span> And Moses and Aaron said unto all the
children of Israel, At even, then ye shall know that Jehovah hath
brought you out from the land of Egypt;

<span id="an_16:7">16:7</span> and in the morning, then ye shall see the
glory of Jehovah; for that he heareth your murmurings against Jehovah:
and what are we, that ye murmur against us?

<span id="an_16:8">16:8</span> And Moses said, \[This shall be\], when
Jehovah shall give you in the evening flesh to eat, and in the morning
bread to the full; for that Jehovah heareth your murmurings which ye
murmur against him: and what are we? your murmurings are not against us,
but against Jehovah.

<span id="an_16:9">16:9</span> And Moses said unto Aaron, Say unto all
the congregation of the children of Israel, Come near before Jehovah;
for he hath heard your murmurings.

<span id="an_16:10">16:10</span> And it came to pass, as Aaron spake
unto the whole congregation of the children of Israel, that they looked
toward the wilderness, and, behold, the glory of Jehovah appeared in the
cloud.

<span id="an_16:11">16:11</span> And Jehovah spake unto Moses, saying,

<span id="an_16:12">16:12</span> I have heard the murmurings of the
children of Israel: speak unto them, saying, At even ye shall eat flesh,
and in the morning ye shall be filled with bread: and ye shall know that
I am Jehovah your God.

<span id="an_16:13">16:13</span> And it came to pass at even, that the
quails came up, and covered the camp: and in the morning the dew lay
round about the camp.

<span id="an_16:14">16:14</span> And when the dew that lay was gone up,
behold, upon the face of the wilderness a small round thing, small as
the hoar-frost on the ground.

<span id="an_16:15">16:15</span> And when the children of Israel saw it,
they said one to another, What is it? For they knew not what it was. And
Moses said unto them, It is the bread which Jehovah hath given you to
eat.

<span id="an_16:16">16:16</span> This is the thing which Jehovah hath
commanded, Gather ye of it every man according to his eating; an omer a
head, according to the number of your persons, shall ye take it, every
man for them that are in his tent.

<span id="an_16:17">16:17</span> And the children of Israel did so, and
gathered some more, some less.

<span id="an_16:18">16:18</span> And when they measured it with an omer,
he that gathered much had nothing over, and he that gathered little had
no lack; they gathered every man according to his eating.

<span id="an_16:19">16:19</span> And Moses said unto them, Let no man
leave of it till the morning.

<span id="an_16:20">16:20</span> Notwithstanding they hearkened not unto
Moses; but some of them left of it until the morning, and it bred worms,
and became foul: and Moses was wroth with them.

<span id="an_16:21">16:21</span> And they gathered it morning by
morning, every man according to his eating: and when the sun waxed hot,
it melted.

<span id="an_16:22">16:22</span> And it came to pass, that on the sixth
day they gathered twice as much bread, two omers for each one: and all
the rulers of the congregation came and told Moses.

<span id="an_16:23">16:23</span> And he said unto them, This is that
which Jehovah hath spoken, Tomorrow is a solemn rest, a holy sabbath
unto Jehovah: bake that which ye will bake, and boil that which ye will
boil; and all that remaineth over lay up for you to be kept until the
morning.

<span id="an_16:24">16:24</span> And they laid it up till the morning,
as Moses bade: and it did not become foul, neither was there any worm
therein.

<span id="an_16:25">16:25</span> And Moses said, Eat that to-day; for
to-day is a sabbath unto Jehovah: to-day ye shall not find it in the
field.

<span id="an_16:26">16:26</span> Six days ye shall gather it; but on the
seventh day is the sabbath, in it there shall be none.

<span id="an_16:27">16:27</span> And it came to pass on the seventh day,
that there went out some of the people to gather, and they found none.

<span id="an_16:28">16:28</span> And Jehovah said unto Moses, How long
refuse ye to keep my commandments and my laws?

<span id="an_16:29">16:29</span> See, for that Jehovah hath given you
the sabbath, therefore he giveth you on the sixth day the bread of two
days; abide ye every man in his place, let no man go out of his place on
the seventh day.

<span id="an_16:30">16:30</span> So the people rested on the seventh
day.

<span id="an_16:31">16:31</span> And the house of Israel called the name
thereof Manna: and it was like coriander seed, white; and the taste of
it was like wafers \[made\] with honey.

<span id="an_16:32">16:32</span> And Moses said, This is the thing which
Jehovah hath commanded, Let an omerful of it be kept throughout your
generations, that they may see the bread wherewith I fed you in the
wilderness, when I brought you forth from the land of Egypt.

<span id="an_16:33">16:33</span> And Moses said unto Aaron, Take a pot,
and put an omerful of manna therein, and lay it up before Jehovah, to be
kept throughout your generations.

<span id="an_16:34">16:34</span> As Jehovah commanded Moses, so Aaron
laid it up before the Testimony, to be kept.

<span id="an_16:35">16:35</span> And the children of Israel did eat the
manna forty years, until they came to a land inhabited; they did eat the
manna, until they came unto the borders of the land of Canaan.

<span id="an_16:36">16:36</span> Now an omer is the tenth part of an
ephah.

<span id="an_17:1">17:1</span> And all the congregation of the children
of Israel journeyed from the wilderness of Sin, by their journeys,
according to the commandment of Jehovah, and encamped in Rephidim: and
there was no water for the people to drink.

<span id="an_17:2">17:2</span> Wherefore the people stove with Moses,
and said, Give us water that we may drink. And Moses said unto them, Why
strive ye with me? Wherefore do ye tempt Jehovah?

<span id="an_17:3">17:3</span> And the people thirsted there for water;
and the people murmured against Moses, and said, Wherefore hast thou
brought us up out of Egypt, to kill us and our children and our cattle
with thirst?

<span id="an_17:4">17:4</span> And Moses cried unto Jehovah, saying,
What shall I do unto this people? They are almost ready to stone me.

<span id="an_17:5">17:5</span> And Jehovah said unto Moses, Pass on
before the people, and take with thee of the elders of Israel; and they
rod, wherewith thou smotest the river, take in thy hand, and go.

<span id="an_17:6">17:6</span> Behold, I will stand before thee there
upon the rock in Horeb; and thou shalt smite the rock, and there shall
come water out of it, that the people may drink. And Moses did so in the
sight of the elders of Israel.

<span id="an_17:7">17:7</span> And he called the name of the place
Massah, and Meribah, because of the striving of the children of Israel,
and because they tempted Jehovah, saying, Is Jehovah among us, or not?

<span id="an_17:8">17:8</span> Then came Amalek, and fought with Israel
in Rephidim.

<span id="an_17:9">17:9</span> And Moses said unto Joshua, Choose us out
men, and go out, fight with Amalek: to-morrow I will stand on the top of
the hill with the rod of God in my hand.

<span id="an_17:10">17:10</span> So Joshua did as Moses had said to him,
and fought with Amalek: and Moses, Aaron, and Hur went up to the top of
the hill.

<span id="an_17:11">17:11</span> And it came to pass, when Moses held up
his hand, that Israel prevailed; and when he let down his hand, Amalek
prevailed.

<span id="an_17:12">17:12</span> But Moses' hands were heavy; and they
took a stone, and put it under him, and he sat thereon; and Aaron and
Hur stayed up his hands, the one on the one side, and the other on the
other side; And his hands were steady until the going down of the sun.

<span id="an_17:13">17:13</span> And Joshua discomfited Amalek and his
people with the edge of the sword.

<span id="an_17:14">17:14</span> And Jehovah said unto Moses, Write this
for a memorial in a book, and rehearse it in the ears of Joshua: that I
will utterly blot out the remembrance of Amalek from under heaven.

<span id="an_17:15">17:15</span> And Moses built an altar, and called
the name of it Jehovah-nissi;

<span id="an_17:16">17:16</span> And he said, Jehovah hath sworn:
Jehovah will have war with Amalek from generation to generation.

<span id="an_18:1">18:1</span> Now Jethro, the priest of Midian, Moses'
father-in-law, heard of all that God had done for Moses, and for Israel
his people, how that Jehovah had brought Israel out of Egypt.

<span id="an_18:2">18:2</span> And Jethro, Moses' father-in-law, took
Zipporah, Moses' wife, after he had sent her away,

<span id="an_18:3">18:3</span> and her two sons; of whom the name of the
one was Gershom; for he said, I have been a sojourner in a foreign land:

<span id="an_18:4">18:4</span> and the name of the other was Eliezer;
for \[he said\], The God of my father was my help, and delivered me from
the sword of Pharaoh.

<span id="an_18:5">18:5</span> And Jethro, Moses' father-in-law, came
with his sons and his wife unto Moses into the wilderness where he was
encamped, at the mount of God:

<span id="an_18:6">18:6</span> and he said unto Moses, I, thy
father-in-law Jethro, am come unto thee, and thy wife, and her two sons
with her.

<span id="an_18:7">18:7</span> And Moses went out to meet his
father-in-law, and did obeisance, and kissed him: and they asked each
other of their welfare; and they came into the tent.

<span id="an_18:8">18:8</span> And Moses told his father-in-law all that
Jehovah had done unto Pharaoh and to the Egyptians for Israel's sake,
all the travail that had come upon them by the way, and how Jehovah
delivered them.

<span id="an_18:9">18:9</span> And Jethro rejoiced for all the goodness
which Jehovah had done to Israel, in that he had delivered them out of
the hand of the Egyptians.

<span id="an_18:10">18:10</span> And Jethro said, Blessed be Jehovah,
who hath delivered you out of the hand of the Egyptians, and out of the
hand of Pharaoh; who hath delivered the people from under the hand of
the Egyptians.

<span id="an_18:11">18:11</span> Now I know that Jehovah is greater than
all gods; yea, in the thing wherein they dealt proudly against them.

<span id="an_18:12">18:12</span> And Jethro, Moses' father-in-law, took
a burnt-offering and sacrifices for God: and Aaron came, and all the
elders of Israel, to eat bread with Moses' father-in-law before God.

<span id="an_18:13">18:13</span> And it came to pass on the morrow, that
Moses sat to judge the people: and the people stood about Moses from the
morning unto the evening.

<span id="an_18:14">18:14</span> And when Moses' father-in-law saw all
that he did to the people, he said, What is this thing that thou doest
to the people? why sittest thou thyself alone, and all the people stand
about thee from morning unto even?

<span id="an_18:15">18:15</span> And Moses said unto his father-in-law,
Because the people come unto me to inquire of God:

<span id="an_18:16">18:16</span> when they have a matter, they come unto
me; and I judge between a man and his neighbor, and I make them know the
statutes of God, and his laws.

<span id="an_18:17">18:17</span> And Moses' father-in-law said unto him,
The thing that thou doest is not good.

<span id="an_18:18">18:18</span> Thou wilt surely wear away, both thou,
and this people that is with thee: for the thing is too heavy for thee;
thou art not able to perform it thyself alone.

<span id="an_18:19">18:19</span> Hearken now unto my voice, I will give
thee counsel, and God be with thee: be thou for the people to God-ward,
and bring thou the causes unto God:

<span id="an_18:20">18:20</span> and thou shalt teach them the statutes
and the laws, and shalt show them the way wherein they must walk, and
the work that they must do.

<span id="an_18:21">18:21</span> Moreover thou shalt provide out of all
the people able men, such as fear God, men of truth, hating unjust gain;
and place such over them, to be rulers of thousands, rulers of hundreds,
rulers of fifties, and rulers of tens:

<span id="an_18:22">18:22</span> and let them judge the people at all
seasons: and it shall be, that every great matter they shall bring unto
thee, but every small matter they shall judge themselves: so shall it be
easier for thyself, and they shall bear \[the burden\] with thee.

<span id="an_18:23">18:23</span> If thou shalt do this thing, and God
command thee so, then thou shalt be able to endure, and all this people
also shall go to their place in peace.

<span id="an_18:24">18:24</span> So Moses hearkened to the voice of his
father-in-law, and did all that he had said.

<span id="an_18:25">18:25</span> And Moses chose able men out of all
Israel, and made them heads over the people, rulers of thousands, rulers
of hundreds, rulers of fifties, and rulers of tens.

<span id="an_18:26">18:26</span> And they judged the people at all
seasons: the hard causes they brought unto Moses, but every small matter
they judged themselves.

<span id="an_18:27">18:27</span> And Moses let his father-in-law depart;
and he went his way into his own land.

<span id="an_19:1">19:1</span> In the third month after the children of
Israel were gone forth out of the land of Egypt, the same day came they
into the wilderness of Sinai.

<span id="an_19:2">19:2</span> And when they were departed from
Rephidim, and were come to the wilderness of Sinai, they encamped in the
wilderness; and there Israel encamped before the mount.

<span id="an_19:3">19:3</span> And Moses went up unto God, and Jehovah
called unto him out of the mountain, saying, Thus shalt thou say to the
house of Jacob, and tell the children of Israel:

<span id="an_19:4">19:4</span> Ye have seen what I did unto the
Egyptians, and how I bare you on eagles' wings, and brought you unto
myself.

<span id="an_19:5">19:5</span> Now therefore, if ye will obey my voice
indeed, and keep my covenant, then ye shall be mine own possession from
among all peoples: for all the earth is mine:

<span id="an_19:6">19:6</span> and ye shall be unto me a kingdom of
priests, and a holy nation. These are the words which thou shalt speak
unto the children of Israel.

<span id="an_19:7">19:7</span> And Moses came and called for the elders
of the people, and set before them all these words which Jehovah
commanded him.

<span id="an_19:8">19:8</span> And all the people answered together, and
said, All that Jehovah hath spoken we will do. And Moses reported the
words of the people unto Jehovah.

<span id="an_19:9">19:9</span> And Jehovah said unto Moses, Lo, I come
unto thee in a thick cloud, that the people may hear when I speak with
thee, and may also believe thee for ever. And Moses told the words of
the people unto Jehovah.

<span id="an_19:10">19:10</span> And Jehovah said unto Moses, Go unto
the people, and sanctify them to-day and to-morrow, and let them wash
their garments,

<span id="an_19:11">19:11</span> and be ready against the third day; for
the third day Jehovah will come down in the sight of all the people upon
mount Sinai.

<span id="an_19:12">19:12</span> And thou shalt set bounds unto the
people round about, saying, Take heed to yourselves, that ye go not up
into the mount, or touch the border of it: whosoever toucheth the mount
shall be surely put to death:

<span id="an_19:13">19:13</span> no hand shall touch him, but he shall
surely be stoned, or shot through; whether it be beast or man, he shall
not live: when the trumpet soundeth long, they shall come up to the
mount.

<span id="an_19:14">19:14</span> And Moses went down from the mount unto
the people, and sanctified the people; and they washed their garments.

<span id="an_19:15">19:15</span> And he said unto the people, Be ready
against the third day: come not near a woman.

<span id="an_19:16">19:16</span> And it came to pass on the third day,
when it was morning, that there were thunders and lightnings, and a
thick cloud upon the mount, and the voice of a trumpet exceeding loud;
and all the people that were in the camp trembled.

<span id="an_19:17">19:17</span> And Moses brought forth the people out
of the camp to meet God; and they stood at the nether part of the mount.

<span id="an_19:18">19:18</span> And mount Sinai, the whole of it,
smoked, because Jehovah descended upon it in fire; and the smoke thereof
ascended as the smoke of a furnace, and the whole mount quaked greatly.

<span id="an_19:19">19:19</span> And when the voice of the trumpet waxed
louder and louder, Moses spake, and God answered him by a voice.

<span id="an_19:20">19:20</span> And Jehovah came down upon mount Sinai,
to the top of the mount: and Jehovah called Moses to the top of the
mount; and Moses went up.

<span id="an_19:21">19:21</span> And Jehovah said unto Moses, Go down,
charge the people, lest they break through unto Jehovah to gaze, and
many of them perish.

<span id="an_19:22">19:22</span> And let the priests also, that come
near to Jehovah, sanctify themselves, lest Jehovah break forth upon
them.

<span id="an_19:23">19:23</span> And Moses said unto Jehovah, The people
cannot come up to mount Sinai: for thou didst charge us, saying, Set
bounds about the mount, and sanctify it.

<span id="an_19:24">19:24</span> And Jehovah said unto him, Go, get thee
down; and thou shalt come up, thou, and Aaron with thee: but let not the
priests and the people break through to come up unto Jehovah, lest he
break forth upon them.

<span id="an_19:25">19:25</span> So Moses went down unto the people, and
told them.

<span id="an_20:1">20:1</span> And God spake all these words, saying,

<span id="an_20:2">20:2</span> I am Jehovah thy God, who brought thee
out of the land of Egypt, out of the house of bondage.

<span id="an_20:3">20:3</span> Thou shalt have no other gods before me.

<span id="an_20:4">20:4</span> Thou shalt not make unto thee a graven
image, nor any likeness \[of any thing\] that is in heaven above, or
that is in the earth beneath, or that is in the water under the earth.

<span id="an_20:5">20:5</span> Thou shalt not bow down thyself unto
them, nor serve them, for I Jehovah thy God am a jealous God, visiting
the iniquity of the fathers upon the children, upon the third and upon
the fourth generation of them that hate me,

<span id="an_20:6">20:6</span> and showing lovingkindness unto thousands
of them that love me and keep my commandments.

<span id="an_20:7">20:7</span> Thou shalt not take the name of Jehovah
thy God in vain; for Jehovah will not hold him guiltless that taketh his
name in vain.

<span id="an_20:8">20:8</span> Remember the sabbath day, to keep it
holy.

<span id="an_20:9">20:9</span> Six days shalt thou labor, and do all thy
work;

<span id="an_20:10">20:10</span> but the seventh day is a sabbath unto
Jehovah thy God: \[in it\] thou shalt not do any work, thou, nor thy
son, nor thy daughter, thy man-servant, nor thy maid-servant, nor thy
cattle, nor thy stranger that is within thy gates:

<span id="an_20:11">20:11</span> for in six days Jehovah made heaven and
earth, the sea, and all that in them is, and rested the seventh day:
wherefore Jehovah blessed the sabbath day, and hallowed it.

<span id="an_20:12">20:12</span> Honor thy father and thy mother, that
thy days may be long in the land which Jehovah thy God giveth thee.

<span id="an_20:13">20:13</span> Thou shalt not kill.

<span id="an_20:14">20:14</span> Thou shalt not commit adultery.

<span id="an_20:15">20:15</span> Thou shalt not steal.

<span id="an_20:16">20:16</span> Thou shalt not bear false witness
against thy neighbor.

<span id="an_20:17">20:17</span> Thou shalt not covet thy neighbor's
house, thou shalt not covet thy neighbor's wife, nor his man-servant,
nor his maid-servant, nor his ox, nor his ass, nor anything that is thy
neighbor's.

<span id="an_20:18">20:18</span> And all the people perceived the
thunderings, and the lightnings, and the voice of the trumpet, and the
mountain smoking: and when the people saw it, they trembled, and stood
afar off.

<span id="an_20:19">20:19</span> And they said unto Moses, Speak thou
with us, and we will hear; but let not God speak with us, lest we die.

<span id="an_20:20">20:20</span> And Moses said unto the people, Fear
not: for God is come to prove you, and that his fear may be before you,
that ye sin not.

<span id="an_20:21">20:21</span> And the people stood afar off, and
Moses drew near unto the thick darkness where God was.

<span id="an_20:22">20:22</span> And Jehovah said unto Moses, Thus thou
shalt say unto the children of Israel, Ye yourselves have seen that I
have talked with you from heaven.

<span id="an_20:23">20:23</span> Ye shall not make \[other gods\] with
me; gods of silver, or gods of gold, ye shall not make unto you.

<span id="an_20:24">20:24</span> An altar of earth thou shalt make unto
me, and shalt sacrifice thereon thy burnt-offerings, and thy
peace-offerings, thy sheep, and thine oxen: in every place where I
record my name I will come unto thee and I will bless thee.

<span id="an_20:25">20:25</span> And if thou make me an altar of stone,
thou shalt not build it of hewn stones; for if thou lift up thy tool
upon it, thou hast polluted it.

<span id="an_20:26">20:26</span> Neither shalt thou go up by steps unto
mine altar, that thy nakedness be not uncovered thereon.

<span id="an_21:1">21:1</span> Now these are the ordinances which thou
shalt set before them.

<span id="an_21:2">21:2</span> If thou buy a Hebrew servant, six years
he shall serve: and in the seventh he shall go out free for nothing.

<span id="an_21:3">21:3</span> If he come in by himself, he shall go out
by himself: if he be married, then his wife shall go out with him.

<span id="an_21:4">21:4</span> If his master give him a wife and she
bear him sons or daughters; the wife and her children shall be her
master's, and he shall go out by himself.

<span id="an_21:5">21:5</span> But if the servant shall plainly say, I
love my master, my wife, and my children; I will not go out free:

<span id="an_21:6">21:6</span> then his master shall bring him unto God,
and shall bring him to the door, or unto the door-post; and his master
shall bore his ear through with an awl; and he shall serve him for ever.

<span id="an_21:7">21:7</span> And if a man sell his daughter to be a
maid-servant, she shall not go out as the men-servants do.

<span id="an_21:8">21:8</span> If she please not her master, who hath
espoused her to himself, then shall he let her be redeemed: to sell her
unto a foreign people he shall have no power, seeing he hath dealt
deceitfully with her.

<span id="an_21:9">21:9</span> And if he espouse her unto his son, he
shall deal with her after the manner of daughters.

<span id="an_21:10">21:10</span> If he take him another \[wife\]; her
food, her raiment, and her duty of marriage, shall he not diminish.

<span id="an_21:11">21:11</span> And if he do not these three things
unto her, then shall she go out for nothing, without money.

<span id="an_21:12">21:12</span> He that smiteth a man, so that he
dieth, shall surely be put to death.

<span id="an_21:13">21:13</span> And if a man lie not in wait, but God
deliver \[him\] into his hand; then I will appoint thee a place whither
he shall flee.

<span id="an_21:14">21:14</span> And if a man come presumptuously upon
his neighbor, to slay him with guile; thou shalt take him from mine
altar, that he may die.

<span id="an_21:15">21:15</span> And he that smiteth his father, or his
mother, shall be surely put to death.

<span id="an_21:16">21:16</span> And he that stealeth a man, and selleth
him, or if he be found in his hand, he shall surely be put to death.

<span id="an_21:17">21:17</span> And he that curseth his father or his
mother, shall surely be put to death.

<span id="an_21:18">21:18</span> And if men contend, and one smite the
other with a stone, or with his fist, and he die not, but keep his bed;

<span id="an_21:19">21:19</span> if he rise again, and walk abroad upon
his staff, then shall he that smote him be quit: only he shall pay for
the loss of his time, and shall cause him to be thoroughly healed.

<span id="an_21:20">21:20</span> And if a man smite his servant, or his
maid, with a rod, and he die under his hand; he shall surely be
punished.

<span id="an_21:21">21:21</span> Notwithstanding, if he continue a day
or two, he shall not be punished: for he is his money.

<span id="an_21:22">21:22</span> And if men strive together, and hurt a
woman with child, so that her fruit depart, and yet no harm follow; he
shall be surely fined, according as the woman's husband shall lay upon
him; and he shall pay as the judges determine.

<span id="an_21:23">21:23</span> But if any harm follow, then thou shalt
give life for life,

<span id="an_21:24">21:24</span> eye for eye, tooth for tooth, hand for
hand, foot for foot,

<span id="an_21:25">21:25</span> burning for burning, wound for wound,
stripe for stripe.

<span id="an_21:26">21:26</span> And if a man smite the eye of his
servant, or the eye of his maid, and destroy it; he shall let him go
free for his eye's sake.

<span id="an_21:27">21:27</span> And if he smite out his man-servant's
tooth, or his maid-servant's tooth, he shall let him go free for his
tooth's sake.

<span id="an_21:28">21:28</span> And if an ox gore a man or a woman to
death, the ox shall be surely stoned, and its flesh shall not be eaten;
but the owner of the ox shall be quit.

<span id="an_21:29">21:29</span> But if the ox was wont to gore in time
past, and it hath been testified to its owner, and he hath not kept it
in, but it hath killed a man or a woman, the ox shall be stoned, and its
owner also shall be put to death.

<span id="an_21:30">21:30</span> If there be laid on him a ransom, then
he shall give for the redemption of his life whatsoever is laid upon
him.

<span id="an_21:31">21:31</span> Whether it have gored a son, or have
gored a daughter, according to this judgment shall it be done unto him.

<span id="an_21:32">21:32</span> If the ox gore a man-servant or a
maid-servant, there shall be given unto their master thirty shekels of
silver, and the ox shall be stoned.

<span id="an_21:33">21:33</span> And if a man shall open a pit, or if a
man shall dig a pit and not cover it, and an ox or an ass fall therein,

<span id="an_21:34">21:34</span> the owner of the pit shall make it
good; he shall give money unto the owner thereof, and the dead \[beast\]
shall be his.

<span id="an_21:35">21:35</span> And if one man's ox hurt another's, so
that it dieth, then they shall sell the live ox, and divide the price of
it: and the dead also they shall divide.

<span id="an_21:36">21:36</span> Or if it be known that the ox was wont
to gore in time past, and its owner hath not kept it in, he shall surely
pay ox for ox, and the dead \[beast\] shall be his own.

<span id="an_22:1">22:1</span> If a man shall steal an ox, or a sheep,
and kill it, or sell it; he shall pay five oxen for an ox, and four
sheep for a sheep.

<span id="an_22:2">22:2</span> If the thief be found breaking in, and be
smitten so that he dieth, there shall be no bloodguiltiness for him.

<span id="an_22:3">22:3</span> If the sun be risen upon him, there shall
be bloodguiltiness for him; he shall make restitution: if he have
nothing, then he shall be sold for his theft.

<span id="an_22:4">22:4</span> If the theft be found in his hand alive,
whether it be ox, or ass, or sheep, he shall pay double.

<span id="an_22:5">22:5</span> If a man shall cause a field or vineyard
to be eaten, and shall let his beast loose, and it feed in another man's
field; of the best of his own field, and of the best of his own
vineyard, shall he make restitution.

<span id="an_22:6">22:6</span> If fire break out, and catch in thorns,
so that the shocks of grain, or the standing grain, or the field are
consumed; he that kindled the fire shall surely make restitution.

<span id="an_22:7">22:7</span> If a man shall deliver unto his neighbor
money or stuff to keep, and it be stolen out of the man's house; if the
thief be found, he shall pay double.

<span id="an_22:8">22:8</span> If the thief be not found, then the
master of the house shall come near unto God, \[to see\] whether he have
not put his hand unto his neighbor's goods.

<span id="an_22:9">22:9</span> For every matter of trespass, whether it
be for ox, for ass, for sheep, for raiment, \[or\] for any manner of
lost thing, whereof one saith, This is it, the cause of both parties
shall come before God; he whom God shall condemn shall pay double unto
his neighbor.

<span id="an_22:10">22:10</span> If a man deliver unto his neighbor an
ass, or an ox, or a sheep, or any beast, to keep; and it die, or be
hurt, or driven away, no man seeing it:

<span id="an_22:11">22:11</span> the oath of Jehovah shall be between
them both, whether he hath not put his hand unto his neighbor's goods;
and the owner thereof shall accept it, and he shall not make
restitution.

<span id="an_22:12">22:12</span> But if it be stolen from him, he shall
make restitution unto the owner thereof.

<span id="an_22:13">22:13</span> If it be torn in pieces, let him bring
it for witness: he shall not make good that which was torn.

<span id="an_22:14">22:14</span> And if a man borrow aught of his
neighbor, and it be hurt, or die, the owner thereof not being with it,
he shall surely make restitution.

<span id="an_22:15">22:15</span> If the owner thereof be with it, he
shall not make it good: if it be a hired thing, it came for its hire.

<span id="an_22:16">22:16</span> And if a man entice a virgin that is
not betrothed, and lie with her, he shall surely pay a dowry for her to
be his wife.

<span id="an_22:17">22:17</span> If her father utterly refuse to give
her unto him, he shall pay money according to the dowry of virgins.

<span id="an_22:18">22:18</span> Thou shalt not suffer a sorceress to
live.

<span id="an_22:19">22:19</span> Whosoever lieth with a beast shall
surely be put to death.

<span id="an_22:20">22:20</span> He that sacrificeth unto any god, save
unto Jehovah only, shall be utterly destroyed.

<span id="an_22:21">22:21</span> And a sojourner shalt thou not wrong,
neither shalt thou oppress him: for ye were sojourners in the land of
Egypt.

<span id="an_22:22">22:22</span> Ye shall not afflict any widow, or
fatherless child.

<span id="an_22:23">22:23</span> If thou afflict them at all, and they
cry at all unto me, I will surely hear their cry;

<span id="an_22:24">22:24</span> and my wrath shall wax hot, and I will
kill you with the sword; and your wives shall be widows, and your
children fatherless.

<span id="an_22:25">22:25</span> If thou lend money to any of my people
with thee that is poor, thou shalt not be to him as a creditor; neither
shall ye lay upon him interest.

<span id="an_22:26">22:26</span> If thou at all take thy neighbor's
garment to pledge, thou shalt restore it unto him before the sun goeth
down:

<span id="an_22:27">22:27</span> for that is his only covering, it is
his garment for his skin: wherein shall he sleep? And it shall come to
pass, when he crieth unto me, that I will hear; for I am gracious.

<span id="an_22:28">22:28</span> Thou shalt not revile God, nor curse a
ruler of thy people.

<span id="an_22:29">22:29</span> Thou shalt not delay to offer of thy
harvest, and of the outflow of thy presses. The first-born of thy sons
shalt thou give unto me.

<span id="an_22:30">22:30</span> Likewise shalt thou do with thine oxen,
\[and\] with thy sheep: seven days it shall be with its dam; on the
eighth day thou shalt give it me.

<span id="an_22:31">22:31</span> And ye shall be holy men unto me:
therefore ye shall not eat any flesh that is torn of beasts in the
field; ye shall cast it to the dogs.

<span id="an_23:1">23:1</span> Thou shalt not take up a false report:
put not thy hand with the wicked to be an unrighteous witness.

<span id="an_23:2">23:2</span> Thou shalt not follow a multitude to do
evil; neither shalt thou speak in a cause to turn aside after a
multitude to wrest \[justice\]:

<span id="an_23:3">23:3</span> neither shalt thou favor a poor man in
his cause.

<span id="an_23:4">23:4</span> If thou meet thine enemy's ox or his ass
going astray, thou shalt surely bring it back to him again.

<span id="an_23:5">23:5</span> If thou see the ass of him that hateth
thee lying under his burden, thou shalt forbear to leave him, thou shalt
surely release \[it\] with him.

<span id="an_23:6">23:6</span> Thou shalt not wrest the justice \[due\]
to thy poor in his cause.

<span id="an_23:7">23:7</span> Keep thee far from a false matter; and
the innocent and righteous slay thou not: for I will not justify the
wicked.

<span id="an_23:8">23:8</span> And thou shalt take no bribe: for a bribe
blindeth them that have sight, and perverteth the words of the
righteous.

<span id="an_23:9">23:9</span> And a sojourner shalt thou not oppress:
for ye know the heart of a sojourner, seeing ye were sojourners in the
land of Egypt.

<span id="an_23:10">23:10</span> And six years thou shalt sow thy land,
and shalt gather in the increase thereof:

<span id="an_23:11">23:11</span> but the seventh year thou shalt let it
rest and lie fallow; that the poor of thy people may eat: and what they
leave the beast of the field shall eat. In like manner thou shalt deal
with thy vineyard, \[and\] with thy oliveyard.

<span id="an_23:12">23:12</span> Six days thou shalt do thy work, and on
the seventh day thou shalt rest; that thine ox and thine ass may have
rest, and the son of thy handmaid, and the sojourner, may be refreshed.

<span id="an_23:13">23:13</span> And in all things that I have said unto
you take ye heed: and make no mention of the name of other gods, neither
let it be heard out of thy mouth.

<span id="an_23:14">23:14</span> Three times thou shalt keep a feast
unto me in the year.

<span id="an_23:15">23:15</span> The feast of unleavened bread shalt
thou keep: seven days thou shalt eat unleavened bread, as I commanded
thee, at the time appointed in the month Abib (for in it thou camest out
from Egypt); and none shall appear before me empty:

<span id="an_23:16">23:16</span> and the feast of harvest, the
first-fruits of thy labors, which thou sowest in the field: and the
feast of ingathering, at the end of the year, when thou gatherest in thy
labors out of the field.

<span id="an_23:17">23:17</span> Three times in the year all thy males
shall appear before the Lord Jehovah.

<span id="an_23:18">23:18</span> Thou shalt not offer the blood of my
sacrifice with leavened bread; neither shall the fat of my feast remain
all night until the morning.

<span id="an_23:19">23:19</span> The first of the first-fruits of thy
ground thou shalt bring into the house of Jehovah thy God. Thou shalt
not boil a kid in it mother's milk.

<span id="an_23:20">23:20</span> Behold, I send an angel before thee, to
keep thee by the way, and to bring thee into the place which I have
prepared.

<span id="an_23:21">23:21</span> Take ye heed before him, and hearken
unto his voice; provoke him not; for he will not pardon your
transgression: for my name is in him.

<span id="an_23:22">23:22</span> But if thou shalt indeed hearken unto
his voice, and do all that I speak; then I will be an enemy unto thine
enemies, and an adversary unto thine adversaries.

<span id="an_23:23">23:23</span> For mine angel shall go before thee,
and bring thee in unto the Amorite, and the Hittite, and the Perizzite,
and the Canaanite, the Hivite, and the Jebusite: and I will cut them
off.

<span id="an_23:24">23:24</span> Thou shalt not bow down to their gods,
nor serve them, nor do after their works; but thou shalt utterly
overthrow them, and break in pieces their pillars.

<span id="an_23:25">23:25</span> And ye shall serve Jehovah your God,
and he will bless thy bread, and thy water; and I will take sickness
away from the midst of thee.

<span id="an_23:26">23:26</span> There shall none cast her young, nor be
barren, in thy land: the number of thy days I will fulfil.

<span id="an_23:27">23:27</span> I will send my terror before thee, and
will discomfit all the people to whom thou shalt come, and I will make
all thine enemies turn their backs unto thee.

<span id="an_23:28">23:28</span> And I will send the hornet before thee,
which shall drive out the Hivite, the Canaanite, and the Hittite, from
before thee.

<span id="an_23:29">23:29</span> I will not drive them out from before
thee in one year, lest the land become desolate, and the beasts of the
field multiply against thee.

<span id="an_23:30">23:30</span> By little and little I will drive them
out from before thee, until thou be increased, and inherit the land.

<span id="an_23:31">23:31</span> And I will set thy border from the Red
Sea even unto the sea of the Philistines, and from the wilderness unto
the River: for I will deliver the inhabitants of the land into your
hand: and thou shalt drive them out before thee.

<span id="an_23:32">23:32</span> Thou shalt make no covenant with them,
nor with their gods.

<span id="an_23:33">23:33</span> They shall not dwell in thy land, lest
they make thee sin against me; for if thou serve their gods, it will
surely be a snare unto thee.

<span id="an_24:1">24:1</span> And he said unto Moses, Come up unto
Jehovah, thou, and Aaron, Nadab, and Abihu, and seventy of the elders of
Israel; and worship ye afar off:

<span id="an_24:2">24:2</span> and Moses alone shall come near unto
Jehovah; but they shall not come near; neither shall the people go up
with him.

<span id="an_24:3">24:3</span> And Moses came and told the people all
the words of Jehovah, and all the ordinances: and all the people
answered with one voice, and said, All the words which Jehovah hath
spoken will we do.

<span id="an_24:4">24:4</span> And Moses wrote all the words of Jehovah,
and rose up early in the morning, and builded an altar under the mount,
and twelve pillars, according to the twelve tribes of Israel.

<span id="an_24:5">24:5</span> And he sent young men of the children of
Israel, who offered burnt-offerings, and sacrificed peace-offerings of
oxen unto Jehovah.

<span id="an_24:6">24:6</span> And Moses took half of the blood, and put
it in basins; and half of the blood he sprinkled on the altar.

<span id="an_24:7">24:7</span> And he took the book of the covenant, and
read in the audience of the people: and they said, All that Jehovah hath
spoken will we do, and be obedient.

<span id="an_24:8">24:8</span> And Moses took the blood, and sprinkled
it on the people, and said, Behold the blood of the covenant, which
Jehovah hath made with you concerning all these words.

<span id="an_24:9">24:9</span> Then went up Moses, and Aaron, Nadab, and
Abihu, and seventy of the elders of Israel.

<span id="an_24:10">24:10</span> And they saw the God of Israel; and
there was under his feet as it were a paved work of sapphire stone, and
as it were the very heaven for clearness.

<span id="an_24:11">24:11</span> And upon the nobles of the children of
Israel he laid not his hand: and they beheld God, and did eat and drink.

<span id="an_24:12">24:12</span> And Jehovah said unto Moses, Come up to
me into the mount, and be there: and I will give thee the tables of
stone, and the law and the commandment, which I have written, that thou
mayest teach them.

<span id="an_24:13">24:13</span> And Moses rose up, and Joshua his
minister: and Moses went up into the mount of God.

<span id="an_24:14">24:14</span> And he said unto the elders, Tarry ye
here for us, until we come again unto you: and, behold, Aaron and Hur
are with you: whosoever hath a cause, let him come near unto them.

<span id="an_24:15">24:15</span> And Moses went up into the mount, and
the cloud covered the mount.

<span id="an_24:16">24:16</span> And the glory of Jehovah abode upon
mount Sinai, and the cloud covered it six days: and the seventh day he
called unto Moses out of the midst of the cloud.

<span id="an_24:17">24:17</span> And the appearance of the glory of
Jehovah was like devouring fire on the top of the mount in the eyes of
the children of Israel.

<span id="an_24:18">24:18</span> And Moses entered into the midst of the
cloud, and went up into the mount: and Moses was in the mount forty days
and forty nights.

<span id="an_25:1">25:1</span> And Jehovah spake unto Moses, saying,

<span id="an_25:2">25:2</span> Speak unto the children of Israel, that
they take for me an offering: of every man whose heart maketh him
willing ye shall take my offering.

<span id="an_25:3">25:3</span> And this is the offering which ye shall
take of them: gold, and silver, and brass,

<span id="an_25:4">25:4</span> and blue, and purple, and scarlet, and
fine linen, and goats' \[hair\],

<span id="an_25:5">25:5</span> and rams' skins dyed red, and sealskins,
and acacia wood,

<span id="an_25:6">25:6</span> oil for the light, spices for the
anointing oil, and for the sweet incense,

<span id="an_25:7">25:7</span> onyx stones, and stones to be set, for
the ephod, and for the breastplate.

<span id="an_25:8">25:8</span> And let them make me a sanctuary, that I
may dwell among them.

<span id="an_25:9">25:9</span> According to all that I show thee, the
pattern of the tabernacle, and the pattern of all the furniture thereof,
even so shall ye make it.

<span id="an_25:10">25:10</span> And they shall make an ark of acacia
wood: two cubits and a half shall be the length thereof, and a cubit and
a half the breadth thereof, and a cubit and a half the height thereof.

<span id="an_25:11">25:11</span> And thou shalt overlay it with pure
gold, within and without shalt thou overlay it, and shalt make upon it a
crown of gold round about.

<span id="an_25:12">25:12</span> And thou shalt cast four rings of gold
for it, and put them in the four feet thereof; and two rings shall be on
the one side of it, and two rings on the other side of it.

<span id="an_25:13">25:13</span> And thou shalt make staves of acacia
wood, and overlay them with gold.

<span id="an_25:14">25:14</span> And thou shalt put the staves into the
rings on the sides of the ark, wherewith to bear the ark.

<span id="an_25:15">25:15</span> The staves shall be in the rings of the
ark: they shall not be taken from it.

<span id="an_25:16">25:16</span> And thou shalt put into the ark the
testimony which I shall give thee.

<span id="an_25:17">25:17</span> And thou shalt make a mercy-seat of
pure gold: two cubits and a half \[shall be\] the length thereof, and a
cubit and a half the breadth thereof.

<span id="an_25:18">25:18</span> And thou shalt make two cherubim of
gold; of beaten work shalt thou make them, at the two ends of the
mercy-seat.

<span id="an_25:19">25:19</span> And make one cherub at the one end, and
one cherub at the other end: of one piece with the mercy-seat shall ye
make the cherubim on the two ends thereof.

<span id="an_25:20">25:20</span> And the cherubim shall spread out their
wings on high, covering the mercy-seat with their wings, with their
faces one to another; toward the mercy-seat shall the faces of the
cherubim be.

<span id="an_25:21">25:21</span> And thou shalt put the mercy-seat above
upon the ark; and in the ark thou shalt put the testimony that I shall
give thee.

<span id="an_25:22">25:22</span> And there I will meet with thee, and I
will commune with thee from above the mercy-seat, from between the two
cherubim which are upon the ark of the testimony, of all things which I
will give thee in commandment unto the children of Israel.

<span id="an_25:23">25:23</span> And thou shalt make a table of acacia
wood: two cubits \[shall be\] the length thereof, and a cubit the
breadth thereof, and a cubit and a half the height thereof.

<span id="an_25:24">25:24</span> And thou shalt overlay it with pure
gold, and make thereto a crown of gold round about.

<span id="an_25:25">25:25</span> And thou shalt make unto it a border of
a handbreadth round about; and thou shalt make a golden crown to the
border thereof round about.

<span id="an_25:26">25:26</span> And thou shalt make for it four rings
of gold, and put the rings in the four corners that are on the four feet
thereof.

<span id="an_25:27">25:27</span> Close by the border shall the rings be,
for places for the staves to bear the table.

<span id="an_25:28">25:28</span> And thou shalt make the staves of
acacia wood, and overlay them with gold, that the table may be borne
with them.

<span id="an_25:29">25:29</span> And thou shalt make the dishes thereof,
and the spoons thereof, and the flagons thereof, and the bowls thereof,
wherewith to pour out: of pure gold shalt thou make them.

<span id="an_25:30">25:30</span> And thou shalt set upon the table
showbread before me alway.

<span id="an_25:31">25:31</span> And thou shalt make a candlestick of
pure gold: of beaten work shall the candlestick be made, even its base,
and its shaft; its cups, its knops, and its flowers, shall be of one
piece with it.

<span id="an_25:32">25:32</span> And there shall be six branches going
out of the sides thereof; three branches of the candlestick out of the
one side thereof, and three branches of the candlestick out of the other
side thereof:

<span id="an_25:33">25:33</span> three cups made like almond-blossoms in
one branch, a knop and a flower; and three cups made like
almond-blossoms in the other branch, a knop and a flower: so for the six
branches going out of the candlestick:

<span id="an_25:34">25:34</span> and in the candlestick four cups made
like almond-blossoms, the knops thereof, and the flowers thereof;

<span id="an_25:35">25:35</span> and a knop under two branches of one
piece with it, and a knop under two branches of one piece with it, and a
knop under two branches of one piece with it, for the six branches going
out of the candlestick.

<span id="an_25:36">25:36</span> Their knops and their branches shall be
of one piece with it; the whole of it one beaten work of pure gold.

<span id="an_25:37">25:37</span> And thou shalt make the lamps thereof,
seven: and they shall light the lamps thereof, to give light over
against it.

<span id="an_25:38">25:38</span> And the snuffers thereof, and the
snuffdishes thereof, shall be of pure gold.

<span id="an_25:39">25:39</span> Of a talent of pure gold shall it be
made, with all these vessels.

<span id="an_25:40">25:40</span> And see that thou make them after their
pattern, which hath been showed thee in the mount.

<span id="an_26:1">26:1</span> Moreover thou shalt make the tabernacle
with ten curtains; of fine twined linen, and blue, and purple, and
scarlet, with cherubim the work of the skilful workman shalt thou make
them.

<span id="an_26:2">26:2</span> The length of each curtain shall be eight
and twenty cubits, and the breadth of each curtain four cubits: all the
curtains shall have one measure.

<span id="an_26:3">26:3</span> Five curtains shall be coupled together
one to another; and \[the other\] five curtains shall be coupled one to
another.

<span id="an_26:4">26:4</span> And thou shalt make loops of blue upon
the edge of the one curtain from the selvedge in the coupling; and
likewise shalt thou make in the edge of the curtain that is outmost in
the second coupling.

<span id="an_26:5">26:5</span> Fifty loops shalt thou make in the one
curtain, and fifty loops shalt thou make in the edge of the curtain that
is in the second coupling; the loops shall be opposite one to another.

<span id="an_26:6">26:6</span> And thou shalt make fifty clasps of gold,
and couple the curtains one to another with the clasps: and the
tabernacle shall be one \[whole\].

<span id="an_26:7">26:7</span> And thou shalt make curtains of goats'
\[hair\] for a tent over the tabernacle: eleven curtains shalt thou make
them.

<span id="an_26:8">26:8</span> The length of each curtain shall be
thirty cubits, and the breadth of each curtain four cubits: the eleven
curtains shall have one measure.

<span id="an_26:9">26:9</span> And thou shalt couple five curtains by
themselves, and six curtains by themselves, and shalt double over the
sixth curtain in the forefront of the tent.

<span id="an_26:10">26:10</span> And thou shalt make fifty loops on the
edge of the one curtain that is outmost in the coupling, and fifty loops
upon the edge of the curtain which is \[outmost in\] the second
coupling.

<span id="an_26:11">26:11</span> And thou shalt make fifty clasps of
brass, and put the clasps into the loops, and couple the tent together,
that it may be one.

<span id="an_26:12">26:12</span> And the overhanging part that remaineth
of the curtains of the tent, the half curtain that remaineth, shall hang
over the back of the tabernacle.

<span id="an_26:13">26:13</span> And the cubit on the one side, and the
cubit on the other side, of that which remaineth in the length of the
curtains of the tent, shall hang over the sides of the tabernacle on
this side and on that side, to cover it.

<span id="an_26:14">26:14</span> And thou shalt make a covering for the
tent of rams' skins dyed red, and a covering of sealskins above.

<span id="an_26:15">26:15</span> And thou shalt make the boards for the
tabernacle of acacia wood, standing up.

<span id="an_26:16">26:16</span> Ten cubits shall be the length of a
board, and a cubit and a half the breadth of each board.

<span id="an_26:17">26:17</span> Two tenons shall there be in each
board, joined one to another: thus shalt thou make for all the boards of
the tabernacle.

<span id="an_26:18">26:18</span> And thou shalt make the boards for the
tabernacle, twenty boards for the south side southward.

<span id="an_26:19">26:19</span> And thou shalt make forty sockets of
silver under the twenty boards; two sockets under one board for its two
tenons, and two sockets under another board for its two tenons.

<span id="an_26:20">26:20</span> And for the second side of the
tabernacle, on the north side, twenty boards,

<span id="an_26:21">26:21</span> and their forty sockets of silver; two
sockets under one board, and two sockets under another board.

<span id="an_26:22">26:22</span> And for the hinder part of the
tabernacle westward thou shalt make six boards.

<span id="an_26:23">26:23</span> And two boards shalt thou make for the
corners of the tabernacle in the hinder part.

<span id="an_26:24">26:24</span> And they shall be double beneath, and
in like manner they shall be entire unto the top thereof unto one ring:
thus shall it be for them both; they shall be for the two corners.

<span id="an_26:25">26:25</span> And there shall be eight boards, and
their sockets of silver, sixteen sockets; two sockets under one board,
and two sockets under another board.

<span id="an_26:26">26:26</span> And thou shalt make bars of acacia
wood: five for the boards of the one side of the tabernacle,

<span id="an_26:27">26:27</span> and five bars for the boards of the
other side of the tabernacle, and five bars for the boards of the side
of the tabernacle, for the hinder part westward.

<span id="an_26:28">26:28</span> And the middle bar in the midst of the
boards shall pass through from end to end.

<span id="an_26:29">26:29</span> And thou shalt overlay the boards with
gold, and make their rings of gold for places for the bars: and thou
shalt overlay the bars with gold.

<span id="an_26:30">26:30</span> And thou shalt rear up the tabernacle
according to the fashion thereof which hath been showed thee in the
mount.

<span id="an_26:31">26:31</span> And thou shalt make a veil of blue, and
purple, and scarlet, and fine twined linen: with cherubim the work of
the skilful workman shall it be made.

<span id="an_26:32">26:32</span> And thou shalt hang it upon four
pillars of acacia overlaid with gold; their hooks \[shall be\] of gold,
upon four sockets of silver.

<span id="an_26:33">26:33</span> And thou shalt hang up the veil under
the clasps, and shalt bring in thither within the veil the ark of the
testimony: and the veil shall separate unto you between the holy place
and the most holy.

<span id="an_26:34">26:34</span> And thou shalt put the mercy-seat upon
the ark of the testimony in the most holy place.

<span id="an_26:35">26:35</span> And thou shalt set the table without
the veil, and the candlestick over against the table on the side of the
tabernacle toward the south: and thou shalt put the table on the north
side.

<span id="an_26:36">26:36</span> And thou shalt make a screen for the
door of the Tent, of blue, and purple, and scarlet, and fine twined
linen, the work of the embroiderer.

<span id="an_26:37">26:37</span> And thou shalt make for the screen five
pillars of acacia, and overlay them with gold: their hooks shall be of
gold: and thou shalt cast five sockets of brass for them.

<span id="an_27:1">27:1</span> And thou shalt make the altar of acacia
wood, five cubits long, and five cubits broad; the altar shall be
foursquare: and the height thereof shall be three cubits.

<span id="an_27:2">27:2</span> And thou shalt make the horns of it upon
the four corners thereof; the horns thereof shall be of one piece with
it: and thou shalt overlay it with brass.

<span id="an_27:3">27:3</span> And thou shalt make its pots to take away
its ashes, and its shovels, and its basins, and its flesh-hooks, and its
firepans: all the vessels thereof thou shalt make of brass.

<span id="an_27:4">27:4</span> And thou shalt make for it a grating of
network of brass: and upon the net shalt thou make four brazen rings in
the four corners thereof.

<span id="an_27:5">27:5</span> And thou shalt put it under the ledge
round the altar beneath, that the net may reach halfway up the altar.

<span id="an_27:6">27:6</span> And thou shalt make staves for the altar,
staves of acacia wood, and overlay them with brass.

<span id="an_27:7">27:7</span> And the staves thereof shall be put into
the rings, and the staves shall be upon the two sides of the altar, in
bearing it.

<span id="an_27:8">27:8</span> Hollow with planks shalt thou make it: as
it hath been showed thee in the mount, so shall they make it.

<span id="an_27:9">27:9</span> And thou shalt make the court of the
tabernacle: for the south side southward there shall be hangings for the
court of fine twined linen a hundred cubits long for one side:

<span id="an_27:10">27:10</span> and the pillars thereof shall be
twenty, and their sockets twenty, of brass; the hooks of the pillars and
their fillets \[shall be\] of silver.

<span id="an_27:11">27:11</span> And likewise for the north side in
length there shall be hangings a hundred cubits long, and the pillars
thereof twenty, and their sockets twenty, of brass; the hooks of the
pillars, and their fillets, of silver.

<span id="an_27:12">27:12</span> And for the breadth of the court on the
west side shall be hangings of fifty cubits; their pillars ten, and
their sockets ten.

<span id="an_27:13">27:13</span> And the breadth of the court on the
east side eastward shall be fifty cubits.

<span id="an_27:14">27:14</span> The hangings for the one side \[of the
gate\] shall be fifteen cubits; their pillars three, and their sockets
three.

<span id="an_27:15">27:15</span> And for the other side shall be
hangings of fifteen cubits; their pillars three, and their sockets
three.

<span id="an_27:16">27:16</span> And for the gate of the court shall be
a screen of twenty cubits, of blue, and purple, and scarlet, and fine
twined linen, the work of the embroiderer; their pillars four, and their
sockets four.

<span id="an_27:17">27:17</span> All the pillars of the court round
about shall be filleted with silver; their hooks of silver, and their
sockets of brass.

<span id="an_27:18">27:18</span> The length of the court shall be a
hundred cubits, and the breadth fifty every where, and the height five
cubits, of fine twined linen, and their sockets of brass.

<span id="an_27:19">27:19</span> All the instruments of the tabernacle
in all the service thereof, and all the pins thereof, and all the pins
of the court, shall be of brass.

<span id="an_27:20">27:20</span> And thou shalt command the children of
Israel, that they bring unto thee pure olive oil beaten for the light,
to cause a lamp to burn continually.

<span id="an_27:21">27:21</span> In the tent of meeting, without the
veil which is before the testimony, Aaron and his sons shall keep it in
order from evening to morning before Jehovah: it shall be a statue for
ever throughout their generations on the behalf of the children of
Israel.

<span id="an_28:1">28:1</span> And bring thou near unto thee Aaron thy
brother, and his sons with him, from among the children of Israel, that
he may minister unto me in the priest's office, even Aaron, Nadab and
Abihu, Eleazar and Ithamar, Aaron's sons.

<span id="an_28:2">28:2</span> And thou shalt make holy garments for
Aaron thy brother, for glory and for beauty.

<span id="an_28:3">28:3</span> And thou shalt speak unto all that are
wise-hearted, whom I have filled with the spirit of wisdom, that they
make Aaron's garments to sanctify him, that he may minister unto me in
the priest's office.

<span id="an_28:4">28:4</span> And these are the garments which they
shall make: a breastplate, and an ephod, and a robe, and a coat of
checker work, a mitre, and a girdle: and they shall make holy garments
for Aaron thy brother, and his sons, that he may minister unto me in the
priest's office.

<span id="an_28:5">28:5</span> And they shall take the gold, and the
blue, and the purple, and the scarlet, and the fine linen.

<span id="an_28:6">28:6</span> And they shall make the ephod of gold, of
blue, and purple, scarlet, and fine twined linen, the work of the
skilful workman.

<span id="an_28:7">28:7</span> It shall have two shoulder-pieces joined
to the two ends thereof, that it may be joined together.

<span id="an_28:8">28:8</span> And the skilfully woven band, which is
upon it, wherewith to gird it on, shall be like the work thereof \[and\]
of the same piece; of gold, of blue, and purple, and scarlet, and fine
twined linen.

<span id="an_28:9">28:9</span> And thou shalt take two onyx stones, and
grave on them the names of the children of Israel:

<span id="an_28:10">28:10</span> six of their names on the one stone,
and the names of the six that remain on the other stone, according to
their birth.

<span id="an_28:11">28:11</span> With the work of an engraver in stone,
like the engravings of a signet, shalt thou engrave the two stones,
according to the names of the children of Israel: thou shalt make them
to be inclosed in settings of gold.

<span id="an_28:12">28:12</span> And thou shalt put the two stones upon
the shoulder-pieces of the ephod, to be stones of memorial for the
children of Israel: and Aaron shall bear their names before Jehovah upon
his two shoulders for a memorial.

<span id="an_28:13">28:13</span> And thou shalt make settings of gold,

<span id="an_28:14">28:14</span> and two chains of pure gold; like cords
shalt thou make them, of wreathen work: and thou shalt put the wreathen
chains on the settings.

<span id="an_28:15">28:15</span> And thou shalt make a breastplate of
judgment, the work of the skilful workman; like the work of the ephod
thou shalt make it; of gold, of blue, and purple, and scarlet, and fine
twined linen, shalt thou make it.

<span id="an_28:16">28:16</span> Foursquare it shall be \[and\] double;
a span shall be the length thereof, and a span the breadth thereof.

<span id="an_28:17">28:17</span> And thou shalt set in it settings of
stones, four rows of stones: a row of sardius, topaz, and carbuncle
shall be the first row;

<span id="an_28:18">28:18</span> and the second row an emerald, a
sapphire, and a diamond;

<span id="an_28:19">28:19</span> and the third row a jacinth, an agate,
and an amethyst;

<span id="an_28:20">28:20</span> and the fourth row a beryl, and an
onyx, and a jasper: they shall be inclosed in gold in their settings.

<span id="an_28:21">28:21</span> And the stones shall be according to
the names of the children of Israel, twelve, according to their names;
like the engravings of a signet, every one according to his name, they
shall be for the twelve tribes.

<span id="an_28:22">28:22</span> And thou shalt make upon the
breastplate chains like cords, of wreathen work of pure gold.

<span id="an_28:23">28:23</span> And thou shalt make upon the
breastplate two rings of gold, and shalt put the two rings on the two
ends of the breastplate.

<span id="an_28:24">28:24</span> And thou shalt put the two wreathen
chains of gold in the two rings at the ends of the breastplate.

<span id="an_28:25">28:25</span> And the \[other\] two ends of the two
wreathen chains thou shalt put on the two settings, and put them on the
shoulder-pieces of the ephod in the forepart thereof.

<span id="an_28:26">28:26</span> And thou shalt make two rings of gold,
and thou shalt put them upon the two ends of the breastplate, upon the
edge thereof, which is toward the side of the ephod inward.

<span id="an_28:27">28:27</span> And thou shalt make two rings of gold,
and shalt put them on the two shoulder-pieces of the ephod underneath,
in the forepart thereof, close by the coupling thereof, above the
skilfully woven band of the ephod.

<span id="an_28:28">28:28</span> And they shall bind the breastplate by
the rings thereof unto the rings of the ephod with a lace of blue, that
it may be upon the skilfully woven band of the ephod, and that the
breastplate be not loosed from the ephod.

<span id="an_28:29">28:29</span> And Aaron shall bear the names of the
children of Israel in the breastplate of judgment upon his heart, when
he goeth in unto the holy place, for a memorial before Jehovah
continually.

<span id="an_28:30">28:30</span> And thou shalt put in the breastplate
of judgment the Urim and the Thummim; and they shall be upon Aaron's
heart, when he goeth in before Jehovah: and Aaron shall bear the
judgment of the children of Israel upon his heart before Jehovah
continually.

<span id="an_28:31">28:31</span> And thou shalt make the robe of the
ephod all of blue.

<span id="an_28:32">28:32</span> And it shall have a hole for the head
in the midst thereof: it shall have a binding of woven work round about
the hole of it, as it were the hole of a coat of mail, that it be not
rent.

<span id="an_28:33">28:33</span> And upon the skirts of it thou shalt
make pomegranates of blue, and of purple, and of scarlet, round about
the skirts thereof; and bells of gold between them round about:

<span id="an_28:34">28:34</span> a golden bell and a pomegranate, a
golden bell and a pomegranate, upon the skirts of the robe round about.

<span id="an_28:35">28:35</span> And it shall be upon Aaron to minister:
and the sound thereof shall be heard when he goeth in unto the holy
place before Jehovah, and when he cometh out, that he die not.

<span id="an_28:36">28:36</span> And thou shalt make a plate of pure
gold, and grave upon it, like the engravings of a signet, HOLY TO
JEHOVAH.

<span id="an_28:37">28:37</span> And thou shalt put it on a lace of
blue, and it shall be upon the mitre; upon the forefront of the mitre it
shall be.

<span id="an_28:38">28:38</span> And it shall be upon Aaron's forehead,
and Aaron shall bear the iniquity of the holy things, which the children
of Israel shall hallow in all their holy gifts; and it shall be always
upon his forehead, that they may be accepted before Jehovah.

<span id="an_28:39">28:39</span> And thou shalt weave the coat in
checker work of fine linen, and thou shalt make a mitre of fine linen,
and thou shalt make a girdle, the work of the embroiderer.

<span id="an_28:40">28:40</span> And for Aaron's sons thou shalt make
coats, and thou shalt make for them girdles, and head-tires shalt thou
make for them, for glory and for beauty.

<span id="an_28:41">28:41</span> And thou shalt put them upon Aaron thy
brother, and upon his sons with him, and shalt anoint them, and
consecrate them, and sanctify them, that they may minister unto me in
the priest's office.

<span id="an_28:42">28:42</span> And thou shalt make them linen breeches
to cover the flesh of their nakedness; from the loins even unto the
thighs they shall reach:

<span id="an_28:43">28:43</span> And they shall be upon Aaron, and upon
his sons, when they go in unto the tent of meeting, or when they come
near unto the altar to minister in the holy place; that they bear not
iniquity, and die: it shall be a statute for ever unto him and unto his
seed after him.

<span id="an_29:1">29:1</span> And this is the thing that thou shalt do
unto them to hallow them, to minister unto me in the priest's office:
take one young bullock and two rams without blemish,

<span id="an_29:2">29:2</span> and unleavened bread, and cakes
unleavened mingled with oil, and wafers unleavened anointed with oil: of
fine wheaten flour shalt thou make them.

<span id="an_29:3">29:3</span> And thou shalt put them into one basket,
and bring them in the basket, with the bullock and the two rams.

<span id="an_29:4">29:4</span> And Aaron and his sons thou shalt bring
unto the door of the tent of meeting, and shalt wash them with water.

<span id="an_29:5">29:5</span> And thou shalt take the garments, and put
upon Aaron the coat, and the robe of the ephod, and the ephod, and the
breastplate, and gird him with the skilfully woven band of the ephod;

<span id="an_29:6">29:6</span> and thou shalt set the mitre upon his
head, and put the holy crown upon the mitre.

<span id="an_29:7">29:7</span> Then shalt thou take the anointing oil,
and pour it upon his head, and anoint him.

<span id="an_29:8">29:8</span> And thou shalt bring his sons, and put
coats upon them.

<span id="an_29:9">29:9</span> And thou shalt gird them with girdles,
Aaron and his sons, and bind head-tires on them: and they shall have the
priesthood by a perpetual statute: and thou shalt consecrate Aaron and
his sons.

<span id="an_29:10">29:10</span> And thou shalt bring the bullock before
the tent of meeting: and Aaron and his sons shall lay their hands upon
the head of the bullock.

<span id="an_29:11">29:11</span> And thou shalt kill the bullock before
Jehovah, at the door of the tent of meeting.

<span id="an_29:12">29:12</span> And thou shalt take of the blood of the
bullock, and put it upon the horns of the altar with thy finger; and
thou shalt pour out all the blood at the base of the altar.

<span id="an_29:13">29:13</span> And thou shalt take all the fat that
covereth the inwards, and the caul upon the liver, and the two kidneys,
and the fat that is upon them, and burn them upon the altar.

<span id="an_29:14">29:14</span> But the flesh of the bullock, and its
skin, and it dung, shalt thou burn with fire without the camp: it is a
sin-offering.

<span id="an_29:15">29:15</span> Thou shalt also take the one ram; and
Aaron and his sons shall lay their hands upon the head of the ram.

<span id="an_29:16">29:16</span> And thou shalt slay the ram, and thou
shalt take its blood, and sprinkle it round about upon the altar.

<span id="an_29:17">29:17</span> And thou shalt cut the ram into its
pieces, and wash its inwards, and its legs, and put them with its
pieces, and with its head.

<span id="an_29:18">29:18</span> And thou shalt burn the whole ram upon
the altar: it is a burnt-offering unto Jehovah; it is a sweet savor, an
offering made by fire unto Jehovah.

<span id="an_29:19">29:19</span> And thou shalt take the other ram; and
Aaron and his sons shall lay their hands upon the head of the ram.

<span id="an_29:20">29:20</span> Then shalt thou kill the ram, and take
of its blood, and put it upon the tip of the right ear of Aaron, and
upon the tip of the right ear of his sons, and upon the thumb of their
right hand, and upon the great toe of their right foot, and sprinkle the
blood upon the altar round about.

<span id="an_29:21">29:21</span> And thou shalt take of the blood that
is upon the altar, and of the anointing oil, and sprinkle it upon Aaron,
and upon his garments, and upon his sons, and upon the garments of his
sons with him: and he shall be hallowed, and his garments, and his sons,
and his sons' garments with him.

<span id="an_29:22">29:22</span> Also thou shalt take of the ram the
fat, and the fat tail, and the fat that covereth the inwards, and the
caul of the liver, and the two kidneys, and the fat that is upon them,
and the right thigh (for it is a ram of consecration),

<span id="an_29:23">29:23</span> and one loaf of bread, and one cake of
oiled bread, and one wafer, out of the basket of unleavened bread that
is before Jehovah.

<span id="an_29:24">29:24</span> And thou shalt put the whole upon the
hands of Aaron, and upon the hands of his sons, and shalt wave them for
a wave-offering before Jehovah.

<span id="an_29:25">29:25</span> And thou shalt take them from their
hands, and burn them on the altar upon the burnt-offering, for a sweet
savor before Jehovah: it is an offering made by fire unto Jehovah.

<span id="an_29:26">29:26</span> And thou shalt take the breast of
Aaron's ram of consecration, and wave it for a wave-offering before
Jehovah: and it shall be thy portion.

<span id="an_29:27">29:27</span> And thou shalt sanctify the breast of
the wave-offering, and the thigh of the heave-offering, which is waved,
and which is heaved up, of the ram of consecration, even of that which
is for Aaron, and of that which is for his sons:

<span id="an_29:28">29:28</span> and it shall be for Aaron and his sons
as \[their\] portion for ever from the children of Israel; for it is a
heave-offering: and it shall be a heave-offering from the children of
Israel of the sacrifices of their peace-offerings, even their
heave-offering unto Jehovah.

<span id="an_29:29">29:29</span> And the holy garments of Aaron shall be
for his sons after him, to be anointed in them, and to be consecrated in
them.

<span id="an_29:30">29:30</span> Seven days shall the son that is priest
in his stead put them on, when he cometh into the tent of meeting to
minister in the holy place.

<span id="an_29:31">29:31</span> And thou shalt take the ram of
consecration, and boil its flesh in a holy place.

<span id="an_29:32">29:32</span> And Aaron and his sons shall eat the
flesh of the ram, and the bread that is in the basket, at the door of
the tent of meeting.

<span id="an_29:33">29:33</span> And they shall eat those things
wherewith atonement was made, to consecrate \[and\] to sanctify them:
but a stranger shall not eat thereof, because they are holy.

<span id="an_29:34">29:34</span> And if aught of the flesh of the
consecration, or of the bread, remain unto the morning, then thou shalt
burn the remainder with fire: it shall not be eaten, because it is holy.

<span id="an_29:35">29:35</span> And thus shalt thou do unto Aaron, and
to his sons, according to all that I have commanded thee: seven days
shalt thou consecrate them.

<span id="an_29:36">29:36</span> And every day shalt thou offer the
bullock of sin-offering for atonement: and thou shalt cleanse the altar,
when thou makest atonement for it; and thou shalt anoint it, to sanctify
it.

<span id="an_29:37">29:37</span> Seven days thou shalt make atonement
for the altar, and sanctify it: and the altar shall be most holy;
whatsoever toucheth the altar shall be holy.

<span id="an_29:38">29:38</span> Now this is that which thou shalt offer
upon the altar: two lambs a year old day by day continually.

<span id="an_29:39">29:39</span> The one lamb thou shalt offer in the
morning; and the other lamb thou shalt offer at even:

<span id="an_29:40">29:40</span> and with the one lamb a tenth part \[of
an ephah\] of fine flour mingled with the fourth part of a hin of beaten
oil, and the fourth part of a hin of wine for a drink-offering.

<span id="an_29:41">29:41</span> And the other lamb thou shalt offer at
even, and shalt do thereto according to the meal-offering of the
morning, and according to the drink-offering thereof, for a sweet savor,
an offering made by fire unto Jehovah.

<span id="an_29:42">29:42</span> It shall be a continual burnt-offering
throughout your generations at the door of the tent of meeting before
Jehovah, where I will meet with you, to speak there unto thee.

<span id="an_29:43">29:43</span> And there I will meet with the children
of Israel; and \[the Tent\] shall be sanctified by my glory.

<span id="an_29:44">29:44</span> And I will sanctify the tent of
meeting, and the altar: Aaron also and his sons will I sanctify, to
minister to me in the priest's office.

<span id="an_29:45">29:45</span> And I will dwell among the children of
Israel, and will be their God.

<span id="an_29:46">29:46</span> And they shall know that I am Jehovah
their God, that brought them forth out of the land of Egypt, that I
might dwell among them: I am Jehovah their God.

<span id="an_30:1">30:1</span> And thou shalt make an altar to burn
incense upon: of acacia wood shalt thou make it.

<span id="an_30:2">30:2</span> A cubit shall be the length thereof, and
a cubit the breadth thereof; foursquare shall it be; and two cubits
shall be the height thereof: the horns thereof shall be of one piece
with it.

<span id="an_30:3">30:3</span> And thou shalt overlay it with pure gold,
the top thereof, and the sides thereof round about, and the horns
thereof; and thou shalt make unto it a crown of gold round about.

<span id="an_30:4">30:4</span> And two golden rings shalt thou make for
it under the crown thereof; upon the two ribs thereof, upon the two
sides of it shalt thou make them; and they shall be for places for
staves wherewith to bear it.

<span id="an_30:5">30:5</span> And thou shalt make the staves of acacia
wood, and overlay them with gold.

<span id="an_30:6">30:6</span> And thou shalt put it before the veil
that is by the ark of the testimony, before the mercy-seat that is over
the testimony, where I will meet with thee.

<span id="an_30:7">30:7</span> And Aaron shall burn thereon incense of
sweet spices: every morning, when he dresseth the lamps, he shall burn
it.

<span id="an_30:8">30:8</span> And when Aaron lighteth the lamps at
even, he shall burn it, a perpetual incense before Jehovah throughout
your generations.

<span id="an_30:9">30:9</span> Ye shall offer no strange incense
thereon, nor burnt-offering, nor meal-offering; and ye shall pour no
drink-offering thereon.

<span id="an_30:10">30:10</span> And Aaron shall make atonement upon the
horns of it once in the year; with the blood of the sin-offering of
atonement once in the year shall he make atonement for it throughout
your generations: it is most holy unto Jehovah.

<span id="an_30:11">30:11</span> And Jehovah spake unto Moses, saying,

<span id="an_30:12">30:12</span> When thou takest the sum of the
children of Israel, according to those that are numbered of them, then
shall they give every man a ransom for his soul unto Jehovah, when thou
numberest them; that there be no plague among them, when thou numberest
them.

<span id="an_30:13">30:13</span> This they shall give, every one that
passeth over unto them that are numbered, half a shekel after the shekel
of the sanctuary; (the shekel is twenty gerahs;) half a shekel for an
offering to Jehovah.

<span id="an_30:14">30:14</span> Every one that passeth over unto them
that are numbered, from twenty years old and upward, shall give the
offering of Jehovah.

<span id="an_30:15">30:15</span> The rich shall not give more, and the
poor shall not give less, than the half shekel, when they give the
offering of Jehovah, to make atonement for your souls.

<span id="an_30:16">30:16</span> And thou shalt take the atonement money
from the children of Israel, and shalt appoint it for the service of the
tent of meeting; that it may be a memorial for the children of Israel
before Jehovah, to make atonement for your souls.

<span id="an_30:17">30:17</span> And Jehovah spake unto Moses, saying,

<span id="an_30:18">30:18</span> Thou shalt also make a laver of brass,
and the base thereof of brass, whereat to wash. And thou shalt put it
between the tent of meeting and the altar, and thou shalt put water
therein.

<span id="an_30:19">30:19</span> And Aaron and his sons shall wash their
hands and their feet thereat:

<span id="an_30:20">30:20</span> when they go into the tent of meeting,
they shall wash with water, that they die not; or when they come near to
the altar to minister, to burn an offering made by fire unto Jehovah.

<span id="an_30:21">30:21</span> So they shall wash their hands and
their feet, that they die not: and it shall be a statute for ever to
them, even to him and to his seed throughout their generations.

<span id="an_30:22">30:22</span> Moreover Jehovah spake unto Moses,
saying,

<span id="an_30:23">30:23</span> Take thou also unto thee the chief
spices: of flowing myrrh five hundred \[shekels\], and of sweet cinnamon
half so much, even two hundred and fifty, and of sweet calamus two
hundred and fifty,

<span id="an_30:24">30:24</span> and of cassia five hundred, after the
shekel of the sanctuary, and of olive oil a hin.

<span id="an_30:25">30:25</span> And thou shalt make it a holy anointing
oil, a perfume compounded after the art of the perfumer: it shall be a
holy anointing oil.

<span id="an_30:26">30:26</span> And thou shalt anoint therewith the
tent of meeting, and the ark of the testimony,

<span id="an_30:27">30:27</span> and the table and all the vessels
thereof, and the candlestick and the vessels thereof, and the altar of
incense,

<span id="an_30:28">30:28</span> and the altar of burnt-offering with
all the vessels thereof, and the laver and the base thereof.

<span id="an_30:29">30:29</span> And thou shalt sanctify them, that they
may be most holy: whatsoever toucheth them shall be holy.

<span id="an_30:30">30:30</span> And thou shalt anoint Aaron and his
sons, and sanctify them, that they may minister unto me in the priest's
office.

<span id="an_30:31">30:31</span> And thou shalt speak unto the children
of Israel, saying, This shall be a holy anointing oil unto me throughout
your generations.

<span id="an_30:32">30:32</span> Upon the flesh of man shall it not be
poured, neither shall ye make any like it, according to the composition
thereof: it is holy, \[and\] it shall be holy unto you.

<span id="an_30:33">30:33</span> Whosoever compoundeth any like it, or
whosoever putteth any of it upon a stranger, he shall be cut off from
his people.

<span id="an_30:34">30:34</span> And Jehovah said unto Moses, Take unto
thee sweet spices, stacte, and onycha, and galbanum; sweet spices with
pure frankincense: of each shall there be a like weight;

<span id="an_30:35">30:35</span> and thou shalt make of it incense, a
perfume after the art of the perfumer, seasoned with salt, pure \[and\]
holy:

<span id="an_30:36">30:36</span> and thou shalt beat some of it very
small, and put of it before the testimony in the tent of meeting, where
I will meet with thee: it shall be unto you most holy.

<span id="an_30:37">30:37</span> And the incense which thou shalt make,
according to the composition thereof ye shall not make for yourselves:
it shall be unto thee holy for Jehovah.

<span id="an_30:38">30:38</span> Whosoever shall make like unto that, to
smell thereof, he shall be cut off from his people.

<span id="an_31:1">31:1</span> And Jehovah spake unto Moses, saying,

<span id="an_31:2">31:2</span> See, I have called by name Bezalel the
son of Uri, the son of Hur, of the tribe of Judah:

<span id="an_31:3">31:3</span> and I have filled him with the Spirit of
God, in wisdom, and in understanding, and in knowledge, and in all
manner of workmanship,

<span id="an_31:4">31:4</span> to devise skilful works, to work in gold,
and in silver, and in brass,

<span id="an_31:5">31:5</span> and in cutting of stones for setting, and
in carving of wood, to work in all manner of workmanship.

<span id="an_31:6">31:6</span> And I, behold, I have appointed with him
Oholiab, the son of Ahisamach, of the tribe of Dan; and in the heart of
all that are wise-hearted I have put wisdom, that they may make all that
I have commanded thee:

<span id="an_31:7">31:7</span> the tent of meeting, and the ark of the
testimony, and the mercy-seat that is thereupon, and all the furniture
of the Tent,

<span id="an_31:8">31:8</span> and the table and its vessels, and the
pure candlestick with all its vessels, and the altar of incense,

<span id="an_31:9">31:9</span> and the altar of burnt-offering with all
its vessels, and the laver and its base,

<span id="an_31:10">31:10</span> and the finely wrought garments, and
the holy garments for Aaron the priest, and the garments of his sons, to
minister in the priest's office,

<span id="an_31:11">31:11</span> and the anointing oil, and the incense
of sweet spices for the holy place: according to all that I have
commanded thee shall they do.

<span id="an_31:12">31:12</span> And Jehovah spake unto Moses, saying,

<span id="an_31:13">31:13</span> Speak thou also unto the children of
Israel, saying, Verily ye shall keep my sabbaths: for it is a sign
between me and you throughout your generations; that ye may know that I
am Jehovah who sanctifieth you.

<span id="an_31:14">31:14</span> Ye shall keep the sabbath therefore;
for it is holy unto you: every one that profaneth it shall surely be put
to death; for whosoever doeth any work therein, that soul shall be cut
off from among his people.

<span id="an_31:15">31:15</span> Six days shall work be done, but on the
seventh day is a sabbath of solemn rest, holy to Jehovah: whosoever
doeth any work on the sabbath day, he shall surely be put to death.

<span id="an_31:16">31:16</span> Wherefore the children of Israel shall
keep the sabbath, to observe the sabbath throughout their generations,
for a perpetual covenant.

<span id="an_31:17">31:17</span> It is a sign between me and the
children of Israel for ever: for in six days Jehovah made heaven and
earth, and on the seventh day he rested, and was refreshed.

<span id="an_31:18">31:18</span> And he gave unto Moses, when he had
made an end of communing with him upon mount Sinai, the two tables of
the testimony, tables of stone, written with the finger of God.

<span id="an_32:1">32:1</span> And when the people saw that Moses
delayed to come down from the mount, the people gathered themselves
together unto Aaron, and said unto him, Up, make us gods, which shall go
before us; for as for this Moses, the man that brought us up out of the
land of Egypt, we know not what is become of him.

<span id="an_32:2">32:2</span> And Aaron said unto them, Break off the
golden rings, which are in the ears of your wives, of your sons, and of
your daughters, and bring them unto me.

<span id="an_32:3">32:3</span> And all the people brake off the golden
rings which were in their ears, and brought them unto Aaron.

<span id="an_32:4">32:4</span> And he received it at their hand, and
fashioned it with a graving tool, and made it a molten calf: and they
said, These are thy gods, O Israel, which brought thee up out of the
land of Egypt.

<span id="an_32:5">32:5</span> And when Aaron saw \[this\], he built an
altar before it; and Aaron made proclamation, and said, To-morrow shall
be a feast to Jehovah.

<span id="an_32:6">32:6</span> And they rose up early on the morrow, and
offered burnt-offerings, and brought peace-offerings; and the people sat
down to eat and to drink, and rose up to play.

<span id="an_32:7">32:7</span> And Jehovah spake unto Moses, Go, get
thee down; for thy people, that thou broughtest up out of the land of
Egypt, have corrupted themselves:

<span id="an_32:8">32:8</span> they have turned aside quickly out of the
way which I commanded them: they have made them a molten calf, and have
worshipped it, and have sacrificed unto it, and said, These are thy
gods, O Israel, which brought thee up out of the land of Egypt.

<span id="an_32:9">32:9</span> And Jehovah said unto Moses, I have seen
this people, and, behold, it is a stiffnecked people:

<span id="an_32:10">32:10</span> now therefore let me alone, that my
wrath may wax hot against them, and that I may consume them: and I will
make of thee a great nation.

<span id="an_32:11">32:11</span> And Moses besought Jehovah his God, and
said, Jehovah, why doth thy wrath wax hot against thy people, that thou
hast brought forth out of the land of Egypt with great power and with a
mighty hand?

<span id="an_32:12">32:12</span> Wherefore should the Egyptians speak,
saying, For evil did he bring them forth, to slay them in the mountains,
and to consume them from the face of the earth? Turn from thy fierce
wrath, and repent of this evil against thy people.

<span id="an_32:13">32:13</span> Remember Abraham, Isaac, and Israel,
thy servants, to whom thou swarest by thine own self, and saidst unto
them, I will multiply your seed as the stars of heaven, and all this
land that I have spoken of will I give unto your seed, and they shall
inherit it for ever.

<span id="an_32:14">32:14</span> And Jehovah repented of the evil which
he said he would do unto his people.

<span id="an_32:15">32:15</span> And Moses turned, and went down from
the mount, with the two tables of the testimony in his hand; tables that
were written on both their sides; on the one side and on the other were
they written.

<span id="an_32:16">32:16</span> And the tables were the work of God,
and the writing was the writing of God, graven upon the tables.

<span id="an_32:17">32:17</span> And when Joshua heard the noise of the
people as they shouted, he said unto Moses, There is a noise of war in
the camp.

<span id="an_32:18">32:18</span> And he said, It is not the voice of
them that shout for mastery, neither is it the voice of them that cry
for being overcome; but the noise of them that sing do I hear.

<span id="an_32:19">32:19</span> And it came to pass, as soon as he came
nigh unto the camp, that he saw the calf and the dancing: and Moses'
anger waxed hot, and he cast the tables out of his hands, and brake them
beneath the mount.

<span id="an_32:20">32:20</span> And he took the calf which they had
made, and burnt it with fire, and ground it to powder, and strewed it
upon the water, and made the children of Israel drink of it.

<span id="an_32:21">32:21</span> And Moses said unto Aaron, What did
this people unto thee, that thou hast brought a great sin upon them?

<span id="an_32:22">32:22</span> And Aaron said, Let not the anger of my
lord wax hot: thou knowest the people, that they are \[set\] on evil.

<span id="an_32:23">32:23</span> For they said unto me, Make us gods,
which shall go before us; for as for this Moses, the man that brought us
up out of the land of Egypt, we know not what is become of him.

<span id="an_32:24">32:24</span> And I said unto them, Whosoever hath
any gold, let them break it off: so they gave it me; and I cast it into
the fire, and there came out this calf.

<span id="an_32:25">32:25</span> And when Moses saw that the people were
broken loose, (for Aaron had let them loose for a derision among their
enemies,)

<span id="an_32:26">32:26</span> then Moses stood in the gate of the
camp, and said, Whoso is on Jehovah's side, \[let him come\] unto me.
And all the sons of Levi gathered themselves together unto him.

<span id="an_32:27">32:27</span> And he said unto them, Thus saith
Jehovah, the God of Israel, Put ye every man his sword upon his thigh,
and go to and fro from gate to gate throughout the camp, and slay every
man his brother, and every man his companion, and every man his
neighbor.

<span id="an_32:28">32:28</span> And the sons of Levi did according to
the word of Moses: and there fell of the people that day about three
thousand men.

<span id="an_32:29">32:29</span> And Moses said, Consecrate yourselves
to-day to Jehovah, yea, every man against his son, and against his
brother; that he may bestow upon you a blessing this day.

<span id="an_32:30">32:30</span> And it came to pass on the morrow, that
Moses said unto the people, Ye have sinned a great sin: and now I will
go up unto Jehovah; peradventure I shall make atonement for your sin.

<span id="an_32:31">32:31</span> And Moses returned unto Jehovah, and
said, Oh, this people have sinned a great sin, and have made them gods
of gold.

<span id="an_32:32">32:32</span> Yet now, if thou wilt forgive their
sin-; and if not, blot me, I pray thee, out of thy book which thou hast
written.

<span id="an_32:33">32:33</span> And Jehovah said unto Moses, Whosoever
hath sinned against me, him will I blot out of my book.

<span id="an_32:34">32:34</span> And now go, lead the people unto \[the
place\] of which I have spoken unto thee: behold, mine angel shall go
before thee; nevertheless in the day when I visit, I will visit their
sin upon them.

<span id="an_32:35">32:35</span> And Jehovah smote the people, because
they made the calf, which Aaron made.

<span id="an_33:1">33:1</span> And Jehovah spake unto Moses, Depart, go
up hence, thou and the people that thou hast brought up out of the land
of Egypt, unto the land of which I sware unto Abraham, to Isaac, and to
Jacob, saying, Unto thy seed will I give it:

<span id="an_33:2">33:2</span> and I will send an angel before thee; and
I will drive out the Canaanite, the Amorite, and the Hittite, and the
Perizzite, the Hivite, and the Jebusite:

<span id="an_33:3">33:3</span> unto a land flowing with milk and honey:
for I will not go up in the midst of thee, for thou art a stiffnecked
people, lest I consume thee in the way.

<span id="an_33:4">33:4</span> And when the people heard these evil
tidings, they mourned: and no man did put on him his ornaments.

<span id="an_33:5">33:5</span> And Jehovah said unto Moses, Say unto the
children of Israel, Ye are a stiffnecked people; if I go up into the
midst of thee for one moment, I shall consume thee: therefore now put
off thy ornaments from thee, that I may know what to do unto thee.

<span id="an_33:6">33:6</span> And the children of Israel stripped
themselves of their ornaments from mount Horeb onward.

<span id="an_33:7">33:7</span> Now Moses used to take the tent and to
pitch it without the camp, afar off from the camp; and he called it, The
tent of meeting. And it came to pass, that every one that sought Jehovah
went out unto the tent of meeting, which was without the camp.

<span id="an_33:8">33:8</span> And it came to pass, when Moses went out
unto the Tent, that all the people rose up, and stood, every man at his
tent door, and looked after Moses, until he was gone into the Tent.

<span id="an_33:9">33:9</span> And it came to pass, when Moses entered
into the Tent, the pillar of cloud descended, and stood at the door of
the Tent: and \[Jehovah\] spake with Moses.

<span id="an_33:10">33:10</span> And all the people saw the pillar of
cloud stand at the door of the Tent: and all the people rose up and
worshipped, every man at his tent door.

<span id="an_33:11">33:11</span> And Jehovah spake unto Moses face to
face, as a man speaketh unto his friend. And he turned again into the
camp: but his minister Joshua, the son of Nun, a young man, departed not
out of the Tent.

<span id="an_33:12">33:12</span> And Moses said unto Jehovah, See, thou
sayest unto me, Bring up this people: and thou hast not let me know whom
thou wilt send with me. Yet thou hast said, I know thee by name, and
thou hast also found favor in my sight.

<span id="an_33:13">33:13</span> Now therefore, I pray thee, if I have
found favor in thy sight, show me now thy ways, that I may know thee, to
the end that I may find favor in thy sight: and consider that this
nation is thy people.

<span id="an_33:14">33:14</span> And he said, My presence shall go
\[with thee\], and I will give thee rest.

<span id="an_33:15">33:15</span> And he said unto him, If thy presence
go not \[with me\], carry us not up hence.

<span id="an_33:16">33:16</span> For wherein now shall it be known that
I have found favor in thy sight, I and thy people? is it not in that
thou goest with us, so that we are separated, I and thy people, from all
the people that are upon the face of the earth?

<span id="an_33:17">33:17</span> And Jehovah said unto Moses, I will do
this thing also that thou hast spoken; for thou hast found favor in my
sight, and I know thee by name.

<span id="an_33:18">33:18</span> And he said, Show me, I pray thee, thy
glory.

<span id="an_33:19">33:19</span> And he said, I will make all my
goodness pass before thee, and will proclaim the name of Jehovah before
thee; and I will be gracious to whom I will be gracious, and will show
mercy on whom I will show mercy.

<span id="an_33:20">33:20</span> And he said, Thou canst not see my
face; for man shall not see me and live.

<span id="an_33:21">33:21</span> and Jehovah said, Behold, there is a
place by me, and thou shalt stand upon the rock:

<span id="an_33:22">33:22</span> and it shall come to pass, while my
glory passeth by, that I will put thee in a cleft of the rock, and will
cover thee with my hand until I have passed by:

<span id="an_33:23">33:23</span> and I will take away my hand, and thou
shalt see my back; but my face shall not be seen.

<span id="an_34:1">34:1</span> And Jehovah said unto Moses, Hew thee two
tables of stone like unto the first: and I will write upon the tables
the words that were on the first tables, which thou brakest.

<span id="an_34:2">34:2</span> And be ready by the morning, and come up
in the morning unto mount Sinai, and present thyself there to me on the
top of the mount.

<span id="an_34:3">34:3</span> And no man shall come up with thee;
neither let any man be seen throughout all the mount; neither let the
flocks nor herds feed before that mount.

<span id="an_34:4">34:4</span> And he hewed two tables of stone like
unto the first; and Moses rose up early in the morning, and went up unto
mount Sinai, as Jehovah had commanded him, and took in his hand two
tables of stone.

<span id="an_34:5">34:5</span> And Jehovah descended in the cloud, and
stood with him there, and proclaimed the name of Jehovah.

<span id="an_34:6">34:6</span> And Jehovah passed by before him, and
proclaimed, Jehovah, Jehovah, a God merciful and gracious, slow to
anger, and abundant in lovingkindness and truth,

<span id="an_34:7">34:7</span> keeping lovingkindness for thousands,
forgiving iniquity and transgression and sin; and that will by no means
clear \[the guilty\], visiting the iniquity of the fathers upon the
children, and upon the children's children, upon the third and upon the
fourth generation.

<span id="an_34:8">34:8</span> And Moses made haste, and bowed his head
toward the earth, and worshipped.

<span id="an_34:9">34:9</span> And he said, If now I have found favor in
thy sight, O Lord, let the Lord, I pray thee, go in the midst of us; for
it is a stiffnecked people; and pardon our iniquity and our sin, and
take us for thine inheritance.

<span id="an_34:10">34:10</span> And he said, Behold, I make a covenant:
before all thy people I will do marvels, such as have not been wrought
in all the earth, nor in any nation; and all the people among which thou
art shall see the work of Jehovah; for it is a terrible thing that I do
with thee.

<span id="an_34:11">34:11</span> Observe thou that which I command thee
this day: behold, I drive out before thee the Amorite, and the
Canaanite, and the Hittite, and the Perizzite, and the Hivite, and the
Jebusite.

<span id="an_34:12">34:12</span> Take heed to thyself, lest thou make a
covenant with the inhabitants of the land whither thou goest, lest it be
for a snare in the midst of thee:

<span id="an_34:13">34:13</span> but ye shall break down their altars,
and dash in pieces their pillars, and ye shall cut down their Asherim;

<span id="an_34:14">34:14</span> for thou shalt worship no other god:
for Jehovah, whose name is Jealous, is a jealous God:

<span id="an_34:15">34:15</span> lest thou make a covenant with the
inhabitants of the land, and they play the harlot after their gods, and
sacrifice unto their gods, and one call thee and thou eat of his
sacrifice;

<span id="an_34:16">34:16</span> and thou take of their daughters unto
thy sons, and their daughters play the harlot after their gods, and make
thy sons play the harlot after their gods.

<span id="an_34:17">34:17</span> Thou shalt make thee no molten gods.

<span id="an_34:18">34:18</span> The feast of unleavened bread shalt
thou keep. Seven days thou shalt eat unleavened bread, as I commanded
thee, at the time appointed in the month Abib; for in the month Abib
thou camest out from Egypt.

<span id="an_34:19">34:19</span> All that openeth the womb is mine; and
all thy cattle that is male, the firstlings of cow and sheep.

<span id="an_34:20">34:20</span> And the firstling of an ass thou shalt
redeem with a lamb: and if thou wilt not redeem it, then thou shalt
break its neck. All the first-born of thy sons thou shalt redeem. And
none shall appear before me empty.

<span id="an_34:21">34:21</span> Six days thou shalt work, but on the
seventh day thou shalt rest: in plowing time and in harvest thou shalt
rest.

<span id="an_34:22">34:22</span> And thou shalt observe the feast of
weeks, \[even\] of the first-fruits of wheat harvest, and the feast of
ingathering at the year's end.

<span id="an_34:23">34:23</span> Three times in the year shall all thy
males appear before the Lord Jehovah, the God of Israel.

<span id="an_34:24">34:24</span> For I will cast out nations before
thee, and enlarge thy borders: neither shall any man desire thy land,
when thou goest up to appear before Jehovah thy God three times in the
year.

<span id="an_34:25">34:25</span> Thou shalt not offer the blood of my
sacrifice with leavened bread; neither shall the sacrifice of the feast
of the passover be left unto the morning.

<span id="an_34:26">34:26</span> The first of the first-fruits of thy
ground thou shalt bring unto the house of Jehovah thy God. Thou shalt
not boil a kid in its mother's milk.

<span id="an_34:27">34:27</span> And Jehovah said unto Moses, Write thou
these words: for after the tenor of these words I have made a covenant
with thee and with Israel.

<span id="an_34:28">34:28</span> And he was there with Jehovah forty
days and forty nights; he did neither eat bread, nor drink water. And he
wrote upon the tables the words of the covenant, the ten commandments.

<span id="an_34:29">34:29</span> And it came to pass, when Moses came
down from mount Sinai with the two tables of the testimony in Moses'
hand, when he came down from the mount, that Moses knew not that the
skin of his face shone by reason of his speaking with him.

<span id="an_34:30">34:30</span> And when Aaron and all the children of
Israel saw Moses, behold, the skin of his face shone; and they were
afraid to come nigh him.

<span id="an_34:31">34:31</span> And Moses called unto them; and Aaron
and all the rulers of the congregation returned unto him: and Moses
spake to them.

<span id="an_34:32">34:32</span> And afterward all the children of
Israel came nigh: and he gave them in commandment all that Jehovah had
spoken with him in mount Sinai.

<span id="an_34:33">34:33</span> And when Moses had done speaking with
them, he put a veil on his face.

<span id="an_34:34">34:34</span> But when Moses went in before Jehovah
to speak with him, he took the veil off, until he came out; and he came
out, and spake unto the children of Israel that which he was commanded.

<span id="an_34:35">34:35</span> And the children of Israel saw the face
of Moses, that the skin of Moses' face shone: and Moses put the veil
upon his face again, until he went in to speak with him.

<span id="an_35:1">35:1</span> And Moses assembled all the congregation
of the children of Israel, and said unto them, These are the words which
Jehovah hath commanded, that ye should do them.

<span id="an_35:2">35:2</span> Six days shall work be done; but on the
seventh day there shall be to you a holy day, a sabbath of solemn rest
to Jehovah: whosoever doeth any work therein shall be put to death.

<span id="an_35:3">35:3</span> Ye shall kindle no fire throughout your
habitations upon the sabbath day.

<span id="an_35:4">35:4</span> And Moses spake unto all the congregation
of the children of Israel, saying, This is the thing which Jehovah
commanded, saying,

<span id="an_35:5">35:5</span> Take ye from among you an offering unto
Jehovah; whosoever is of a willing heart, let him bring it, Jehovah's
offering: gold, and silver, and brass,

<span id="an_35:6">35:6</span> and blue, and purple, and scarlet, and
fine linen, and goats' \[hair\],

<span id="an_35:7">35:7</span> and rams' skins dyed red, and sealskins,
and acacia wood,

<span id="an_35:8">35:8</span> and oil for the light, and spices for the
anointing oil, and for the sweet incense,

<span id="an_35:9">35:9</span> and onyx stones, and stones to be set,
for the ephod, and for the breastplate.

<span id="an_35:10">35:10</span> And let every wise-hearted man among
you come, and make all that Jehovah hath commanded:

<span id="an_35:11">35:11</span> the tabernacle, its tent, and its
covering, its clasps, and its boards, its bars, its pillars, and its
sockets;

<span id="an_35:12">35:12</span> the ark, and the staves thereof, the
mercy-seat, and the veil of the screen;

<span id="an_35:13">35:13</span> the table, and its staves, and all its
vessels, and the showbread;

<span id="an_35:14">35:14</span> the candlestick also for the light, and
its vessels, and its lamps, and the oil for the light;

<span id="an_35:15">35:15</span> and the altar of incense, and its
staves, and the anointing oil, and the sweet incense, and the screen for
the door, at the door of the tabernacle;

<span id="an_35:16">35:16</span> the altar of burnt-offering, with its
grating of brass, it staves, and all its vessels, the laver and its
base;

<span id="an_35:17">35:17</span> the hangings of the court, the pillars
thereof, and their sockets, and the screen for the gate of the court;

<span id="an_35:18">35:18</span> the pins of the tabernacle, and the
pins of the court, and their cords;

<span id="an_35:19">35:19</span> the finely wrought garments, for
ministering in the holy place, the holy garments for Aaron the priest,
and the garments of his sons, to minister in the priest's office.

<span id="an_35:20">35:20</span> And all the congregation of the
children of Israel departed from the presence of Moses.

<span id="an_35:21">35:21</span> And they came, every one whose heart
stirred him up, and every one whom his spirit made willing, \[and\]
brought Jehovah's offering, for the work of the tent of meeting, and for
all the service thereof, and for the holy garments.

<span id="an_35:22">35:22</span> And they came, both men and women, as
many as were willing-hearted, \[and\] brought brooches, and ear-rings,
and signet-rings, and armlets, all jewels of gold; even every man that
offered an offering of gold unto Jehovah.

<span id="an_35:23">35:23</span> And every man, with whom was found
blue, and purple, and scarlet, and fine linen, and goats' \[hair\], and
rams' skins dyed red, and sealskins, brought them.

<span id="an_35:24">35:24</span> Every one that did offer an offering of
silver and brass brought Jehovah's offering; and every man, with whom
was found acacia wood for any work of the service, brought it.

<span id="an_35:25">35:25</span> And all the women that were
wise-hearted did spin with their hands, and brought that which they had
spun, the blue, and the purple, the scarlet, and the fine linen.

<span id="an_35:26">35:26</span> And all the women whose heart stirred
them up in wisdom spun the goats' \[hair\].

<span id="an_35:27">35:27</span> And the rulers brought the onyx stones,
and the stones to be set, for the ephod, and for the breastplate;

<span id="an_35:28">35:28</span> and the spice, and the oil; for the
light, and for the anointing oil, and for the sweet incense.

<span id="an_35:29">35:29</span> The children of Israel brought a
freewill-offering unto Jehovah; every man and woman, whose heart made
them willing to bring for all the work, which Jehovah had commanded to
be made by Moses.

<span id="an_35:30">35:30</span> And Moses said unto the children of
Israel, See, Jehovah hath called by name Bezalel the son of Uri, the son
of Hur, of the tribe of Judah.

<span id="an_35:31">35:31</span> And he hath filled him with the Spirit
of God, in wisdom, in understanding, and in knowledge, and in all manner
of workmanship;

<span id="an_35:32">35:32</span> and to devise skilful works, to work in
gold, and in silver, and in brass,

<span id="an_35:33">35:33</span> and in cutting of stones for setting,
and in carving of wood, to work in all manner of skilful workmanship.

<span id="an_35:34">35:34</span> And he hath put in his heart that he
may teach, both he, and Oholiab, the son of Ahisamach, of the tribe of
Dan.

<span id="an_35:35">35:35</span> Them hath he filled with wisdom of
heart, to work all manner of workmanship, of the engraver, and of the
skilful workman, and of the embroiderer, in blue, and in purple, in
scarlet, and in fine linen, and of the weaver, even of them that do any
workmanship, and of those that devise skilful works.

<span id="an_36:1">36:1</span> And Bezalel and Oholiab shall work, and
every wise-hearted man, in whom Jehovah hath put wisdom and
understanding to know how to work all the work for the service of the
sanctuary, according to all that Jehovah hath commanded.

<span id="an_36:2">36:2</span> And Moses called Bezalel and Oholiab, and
every wise-hearted man, in whose heart Jehovah had put wisdom, even
every one whose heart stirred him up to come unto the work to do it:

<span id="an_36:3">36:3</span> and they received of Moses all the
offering which the children of Israel had brought for the work of the
service of the sanctuary, wherewith to make it. And they brought yet
unto him freewill-offerings every morning.

<span id="an_36:4">36:4</span> And all the wise men, that wrought all
the work of the sanctuary, came every man from his work which they
wrought.

<span id="an_36:5">36:5</span> And they spake unto Moses, saying, The
people bring much more than enough for the service of the work which
Jehovah commanded to make.

<span id="an_36:6">36:6</span> And Moses gave commandment, and they
caused it to be proclaimed throughout the camp, saying, Let neither man
nor woman make any more work for the offering of the sanctuary. So the
people were restrained from bringing.

<span id="an_36:7">36:7</span> For the stuff they had was sufficient for
all the work to make it, and too much.

<span id="an_36:8">36:8</span> And all the wise-hearted men among them
that wrought the work made the tabernacle with ten curtains; of fine
twined linen, and blue, and purple, and scarlet, with cherubim, the work
of the skilful workman, \[Bezalel\] made them.

<span id="an_36:9">36:9</span> The length of each curtain was eight and
twenty cubits, and the breadth of each curtain four cubits: all the
curtains had one measure.

<span id="an_36:10">36:10</span> And he coupled five curtains one to
another: and \[the other\] five curtains he coupled one to another.

<span id="an_36:11">36:11</span> And he made loops of blue upon the edge
of the one curtain from the selvedge in the coupling: likewise he made
in the edge of the curtain that was outmost in the second coupling.

<span id="an_36:12">36:12</span> Fifty loops made he in the one curtain,
and fifty loops made he in the edge of the curtain that was in the
second coupling: the loops were opposite one to another.

<span id="an_36:13">36:13</span> And he made fifty clasps of gold, and
coupled the curtains one to another with the clasps: so the tabernacle
was one.

<span id="an_36:14">36:14</span> And he made curtains of goats' \[hair\]
for a tent over the tabernacle: eleven curtains he made them.

<span id="an_36:15">36:15</span> The length of each curtain was thirty
cubits, and four cubits the breadth of each curtain: the eleven curtains
had one measure.

<span id="an_36:16">36:16</span> And he coupled five curtains by
themselves, and six curtains by themselves.

<span id="an_36:17">36:17</span> And he made fifty loops on the edge of
the curtain that was outmost in the coupling, and fifty loops made he
upon the edge of the curtain which was \[outmost in\] the second
coupling.

<span id="an_36:18">36:18</span> And he made fifty clasps of brass to
couple the tent together, that it might be one.

<span id="an_36:19">36:19</span> And he made a covering for the tent of
rams' skins dyed red, and a covering of sealskins above.

<span id="an_36:20">36:20</span> And he made the boards for the
tabernacle, of acacia wood, standing up.

<span id="an_36:21">36:21</span> Ten cubits was the length of a board,
and a cubit and a half the breadth of each board.

<span id="an_36:22">36:22</span> Each board had two tenons, joined one
to another: thus did he make for all the boards of the tabernacle.

<span id="an_36:23">36:23</span> And he made the boards for the
tabernacle: twenty boards for the south side southward.

<span id="an_36:24">36:24</span> And he made forty sockets of silver
under the twenty boards; two sockets under one board for its two tenons,
and two sockets under another board for its two tenons.

<span id="an_36:25">36:25</span> And for the second side of the
tabernacle, on the north side, he made twenty boards,

<span id="an_36:26">36:26</span> and their forty sockets of silver; two
sockets under one board, and two sockets under another board.

<span id="an_36:27">36:27</span> And for the hinder part of the
tabernacle westward he made six boards.

<span id="an_36:28">36:28</span> And two boards made he for the corners
of the tabernacle in the hinder part.

<span id="an_36:29">36:29</span> And they were double beneath; and in
like manner they were entire unto the top thereof unto one ring: thus he
did to both of them in the two corners.

<span id="an_36:30">36:30</span> And there were eight boards, and their
sockets of silver, sixteen sockets; under every board two sockets.

<span id="an_36:31">36:31</span> And he made bars of acacia wood; five
for the boards of the one side of the tabernacle,

<span id="an_36:32">36:32</span> and five bars for the boards of the
other side of the tabernacle, and five bars for the boards of the
tabernacle for the hinder part westward.

<span id="an_36:33">36:33</span> And he made the middle bar to pass
through in the midst of the boards from the one end to the other.

<span id="an_36:34">36:34</span> And he overlaid the boards with gold,
and made their rings of gold for places for the bars, and overlaid the
bars with gold.

<span id="an_36:35">36:35</span> And he made the veil of blue, and
purple, and scarlet, and fine twined linen: with cherubim, the work of
the skilful workman, made he it.

<span id="an_36:36">36:36</span> And he made thereunto four pillars of
acacia, and overlaid them with gold: their hooks were of gold; And he
cast for them four sockets of silver.

<span id="an_36:37">36:37</span> And he made a screen for the door of
the Tent, of blue, and purple, and scarlet, and fine twined linen, the
work of the embroiderer;

<span id="an_36:38">36:38</span> and the five pillars of it with their
hooks: and he overlaid their capitals and their fillets with gold; and
their five sockets were of brass.

<span id="an_37:1">37:1</span> And Bezalel made the ark of acacia wood:
two cubits and a half was the length of it, and a cubit and a half the
breadth of it, and a cubit and a half the height of it:

<span id="an_37:2">37:2</span> and he overlaid it with pure gold within
and without, and made a crown of gold to it round about.

<span id="an_37:3">37:3</span> And he cast for it four rings of gold, in
the four feet thereof; even two rings on the one side of it, and two
rings on the other side of it.

<span id="an_37:4">37:4</span> And he made staves of acacia wood, and
overlaid them with gold.

<span id="an_37:5">37:5</span> And he put the staves into the rings on
the sides of the ark, to bear the ark.

<span id="an_37:6">37:6</span> And he made a mercy-seat of pure gold:
two cubits and a half \[was\] the length thereof, and a cubit and a half
the breadth thereof.

<span id="an_37:7">37:7</span> And he made two cherubim of gold; of
beaten work made he them, at the two ends of the mercy-seat;

<span id="an_37:8">37:8</span> one cherub at the one end, and one cherub
at the other end: of one piece with the mercy-seat made he the cherubim
at the two ends thereof.

<span id="an_37:9">37:9</span> And the cherubim spread out their wings
on high, covering the mercy-seat with their wings, with their faces one
to another; toward the mercy-seat were the faces of the cherubim.

<span id="an_37:10">37:10</span> And he made the table of acacia wood:
two cubits \[was\] the length thereof, and a cubit the breadth thereof,
and a cubit and a half the height thereof:

<span id="an_37:11">37:11</span> and he overlaid it with pure gold, and
made thereto a crown of gold round about.

<span id="an_37:12">37:12</span> And he made unto it a border of a
handbreadth round about, and made a golden crown to the border thereof
round about.

<span id="an_37:13">37:13</span> And he cast for it four rings of gold,
and put the rings in the four corners that were on the four feet
thereof.

<span id="an_37:14">37:14</span> Close by the border were the rings, the
places for the staves to bear the table.

<span id="an_37:15">37:15</span> And he made the staves of acacia wood,
and overlaid them with gold, to bear the table.

<span id="an_37:16">37:16</span> And he made the vessels which were upon
the table, the dishes thereof, and the spoons thereof, and the bowls
thereof, and the flagons thereof, wherewith to pour out, of pure gold.

<span id="an_37:17">37:17</span> And he made the candlestick of pure
gold: of beaten work made he the candlestick, even its base, and its
shaft; its cups, it knops, and its flowers, were of one piece with it:

<span id="an_37:18">37:18</span> and there were six branches going out
of the sides thereof; three branches of the candlestick out of the one
side thereof, and three branches of the candlestick out of the other
side thereof:

<span id="an_37:19">37:19</span> three cups made like almond-blossoms in
one branch, a knop and a flower, and three cups made like
almond-blossoms in the other branch, a knop and a flower: so for the six
branches going out of the candlestick.

<span id="an_37:20">37:20</span> And in the candlestick were four cups
made like almond-blossoms, the knops thereof, and the flowers thereof;

<span id="an_37:21">37:21</span> and a knop under two branches of one
piece with it, and a knop under two branches of one piece with it, and a
knop under two branches of one piece with it, for the six branches going
out of it.

<span id="an_37:22">37:22</span> Their knops and their branches were of
one piece with it: the whole of it was one beaten work of pure gold.

<span id="an_37:23">37:23</span> And he made the lamps thereof, seven,
and the snuffers thereof, and the snuffdishes thereof, of pure gold.

<span id="an_37:24">37:24</span> Of a talent of pure gold made he it,
and all the vessels thereof.

<span id="an_37:25">37:25</span> And he made the altar of incense of
acacia wood: a cubit was the length thereof, and a cubit the breadth
thereof, foursquare; and two cubits was the height thereof; the horns
thereof were of one piece with it.

<span id="an_37:26">37:26</span> And he overlaid it with pure gold, the
top thereof, and the sides thereof round about, and the horns of it: and
he made unto it a crown of gold round about.

<span id="an_37:27">37:27</span> And he made for it two golden rings
under the crown thereof, upon the two ribs thereof, upon the two sides
of it, for places for staves wherewith to bear it.

<span id="an_37:28">37:28</span> And he made the staves of acacia wood,
and overlaid them with gold.

<span id="an_37:29">37:29</span> And he made the holy anointing oil, and
the pure incense of sweet spices, after the art of the perfumer.

<span id="an_38:1">38:1</span> And he made the altar of burnt-offering
of acacia wood: five cubits was the length thereof, and five cubits the
breadth thereof, foursquare; and three cubits the height thereof.

<span id="an_38:2">38:2</span> And he made the horns thereof upon the
four corners of it; the horns thereof were of one piece with it: and he
overlaid it with brass.

<span id="an_38:3">38:3</span> And he made all the vessels of the altar,
the pots, and the shovels, and the basins, the flesh-hooks, and the
firepans: all the vessels thereof made he of brass.

<span id="an_38:4">38:4</span> And he made for the altar a grating of
network of brass, under the ledge round it beneath, reaching halfway up.

<span id="an_38:5">38:5</span> And he cast four rings for the four ends
of the grating of brass, to be places for the staves.

<span id="an_38:6">38:6</span> And he made the staves of acacia wood,
and overlaid them with brass.

<span id="an_38:7">38:7</span> And he put the staves into the rings on
the sides of the altar, wherewith to bear it; he made it hollow with
planks.

<span id="an_38:8">38:8</span> And he made the laver of brass, and the
base thereof of brass, of the mirrors of the ministering women that
ministered at the door of the tent of meeting.

<span id="an_38:9">38:9</span> And he made the court: for the south side
southward the hangings of the court were of fine twined linen, a hundred
cubits;

<span id="an_38:10">38:10</span> their pillars were twenty, and their
sockets twenty, of brass; the hooks of the pillars and their fillets
were of silver.

<span id="an_38:11">38:11</span> And for the north side a hundred
cubits, their pillars twenty, and their sockets twenty, of brass; the
hooks of the pillars, and their fillets, of silver.

<span id="an_38:12">38:12</span> And for the west side were hangings of
fifty cubits, their pillars ten, and their sockets ten; the hooks of the
pillars, and their fillets, of silver.

<span id="an_38:13">38:13</span> And for the east side eastward fifty
cubits.

<span id="an_38:14">38:14</span> The hangings for the one side \[of the
gate\] were fifteen cubits; their pillars three, and their sockets
three;

<span id="an_38:15">38:15</span> and so for the other side: on this hand
and that hand by the gate of the court were hangings of fifteen cubits;
their pillars three, and their sockets three.

<span id="an_38:16">38:16</span> All the hangings of the court round
about were of fine twined linen.

<span id="an_38:17">38:17</span> And the sockets for the pillars were of
brass; the hooks of the pillars, and their fillets, of silver; and the
overlaying of their capitals, of silver; and all the pillars of the
court were filleted with silver.

<span id="an_38:18">38:18</span> And the screen for the gate of the
court was the work of the embroiderer, of blue, and purple, and scarlet,
and fine twined linen: and twenty cubits was the length, and the height
in the breadth was five cubits, answerable to the hangings of the court.

<span id="an_38:19">38:19</span> And their pillars were four, and their
sockets four, of brass; their hooks of silver, and the overlaying of
their capitals, and their fillets, of silver.

<span id="an_38:20">38:20</span> And all the pins of the tabernacle, and
of the court round about, were of brass.

<span id="an_38:21">38:21</span> This is the sum of \[the things for\]
the tabernacle, even the tabernacle of the testimony, as they were
counted, according to the commandment of Moses, for the service of the
Levites, by the hand of Ithamar, the son of Aaron the priest.

<span id="an_38:22">38:22</span> And Bezalel the son of Uri, the son of
Hur, of the tribe of Judah, made all that Jehovah commanded Moses.

<span id="an_38:23">38:23</span> And with him was Oholiab, the son of
Ahisamach, of the tribe of Dan, an engraver, and a skilful workman, and
an embroiderer in blue, and in purple, and in scarlet, and in fine
linen.

<span id="an_38:24">38:24</span> All the gold that was used for the work
in all the work of the sanctuary, even the gold of the offering, was
twenty and nine talents, and seven hundred and thirty shekels, after the
shekel of the sanctuary.

<span id="an_38:25">38:25</span> And the silver of them that were
numbered of the congregation was a hundred talents, and a thousand seven
hundred and threescore and fifteen shekels, after the shekel of the
sanctuary:

<span id="an_38:26">38:26</span> a beka a head, \[that is\], half a
shekel, after the shekel of the sanctuary, for every one that passed
over to them that were numbered, from twenty years old and upward, for
six hundred thousand and three thousand and five hundred and fifty men.

<span id="an_38:27">38:27</span> And the hundred talents of silver were
for casting the sockets of the sanctuary, and the sockets of the veil; a
hundred sockets for the hundred talents, a talent for a socket.

<span id="an_38:28">38:28</span> And of the thousand seven hundred
seventy and five \[shekels\] he made hooks for the pillars, and overlaid
their capitals, and made fillets for them.

<span id="an_38:29">38:29</span> And the brass of the offering was
seventy talents, and two thousand and four hundred shekels.

<span id="an_38:30">38:30</span> And therewith he made the sockets to
the door of the tent of meeting, and the brazen altar, and the brazen
grating for it, and all the vessels of the altar,

<span id="an_38:31">38:31</span> and the sockets of the court round
about, and the sockets of the gate of the court, and all the pins of the
tabernacle, and all the pins of the court round about.

<span id="an_39:1">39:1</span> And of the blue, and purple, and scarlet,
they made finely wrought garments, for ministering in the holy place,
and made the holy garments for Aaron; as Jehovah commanded Moses.

<span id="an_39:2">39:2</span> And he made the ephod of gold, blue, and
purple, and scarlet, and fine twined linen.

<span id="an_39:3">39:3</span> And they did beat the gold into thin
plates, and cut it into wires, to work it in the blue, and in the
purple, and in the scarlet, and in the fine linen, the work of the
skilful workman.

<span id="an_39:4">39:4</span> They made shoulder-pieces for it, joined
together; at the two ends was it joined together.

<span id="an_39:5">39:5</span> And the skilfully woven band, that was
upon it, wherewith to gird it on, was of the same piece \[and\] like the
work thereof; of gold, of blue, and purple, and scarlet, and fine twined
linen; as Jehovah commanded Moses.

<span id="an_39:6">39:6</span> And they wrought the onyx stones,
inclosed in settings of gold, graven with the engravings of a signet,
according to the names of the children of Israel.

<span id="an_39:7">39:7</span> And he put them on the shoulder-pieces of
the ephod, to be stones of memorial for the children of Israel; as
Jehovah commanded Moses.

<span id="an_39:8">39:8</span> And he made the breastplate, the work of
the skilful workman, like the work of the ephod; of gold, of blue, and
purple, and scarlet, and fine twined linen.

<span id="an_39:9">39:9</span> It was foursquare; they made the
breastplate double: a span was the length thereof, and a span the
breadth thereof, being double.

<span id="an_39:10">39:10</span> And they set in it four rows of stones.
A row of sardius, topaz, and carbuncle was the first row;

<span id="an_39:11">39:11</span> and the second row, an emerald, a
sapphire, and a diamond;

<span id="an_39:12">39:12</span> and the third row, a jacinth, an agate,
and an amethyst;

<span id="an_39:13">39:13</span> and the fourth row, a beryl, an onyx,
and a jaspar: they were inclosed in inclosings of gold in their
settings.

<span id="an_39:14">39:14</span> And the stones were according to the
names of the children of Israel, twelve, according to their names; like
the engravings of a signet, every one according to his name, for the
twelve tribes.

<span id="an_39:15">39:15</span> And they made upon the breastplate
chains like cords, of wreathen work of pure gold.

<span id="an_39:16">39:16</span> And they made two settings of gold, and
two gold rings, and put the two rings on the two ends of the
breastplate.

<span id="an_39:17">39:17</span> And they put the two wreathen chains of
gold in the two rings at the ends of the breastplate.

<span id="an_39:18">39:18</span> And the \[other\] two ends of the two
wreathen chains they put on the two settings, and put them on the
shoulder-pieces of the ephod, in the forepart thereof.

<span id="an_39:19">39:19</span> And they made two rings of gold, and
put them upon the two ends of the breastplate, upon the edge thereof,
which was toward the side of the ephod inward.

<span id="an_39:20">39:20</span> And they made two rings of gold, and
put them on the two shoulder-pieces of the ephod underneath, in the
forepart thereof, close by the coupling thereof, above the skilfully
woven band of the ephod.

<span id="an_39:21">39:21</span> And they did bind the breastplate by
the rings thereof unto the rings of the ephod with a lace of blue, that
it might be upon the skilfully woven band of the ephod, and that the
breastplate might not be loosed from the ephod; as Jehovah commanded
Moses.

<span id="an_39:22">39:22</span> And he made the robe of the ephod of
woven work, all of blue.

<span id="an_39:23">39:23</span> And the hole of the robe in the midst
thereof, as the hole of a coat of mail, with a binding round about the
hole of it, that it should not be rent.

<span id="an_39:24">39:24</span> And they made upon the skirts of the
robe pomegranates of blue, and purple, and scarlet, \[and\] twined
\[linen\].

<span id="an_39:25">39:25</span> And they made bells of pure gold, and
put the bells between the pomegranates upon the skirts of the robe round
about, between the pomegranates;

<span id="an_39:26">39:26</span> a bell and a pomegranate, a bell and a
pomegranate, upon the skirts of the robe round about, to minister in; as
Jehovah commanded Moses.

<span id="an_39:27">39:27</span> And they made the coats of fine linen
of woven work for Aaron, and for his sons,

<span id="an_39:28">39:28</span> and the mitre of fine linen, and the
goodly head-tires of fine linen, and the linen breeches of fine twined
linen,

<span id="an_39:29">39:29</span> and the girdle of fine twined linen,
and blue, and purple, and scarlet, the work of the embroiderer; as
Jehovah commanded Moses.

<span id="an_39:30">39:30</span> And they made the plate of the holy
crown of pure gold, and wrote upon it a writing, like the engravings of
a signet, HOLY TO JEHOVAH.

<span id="an_39:31">39:31</span> And they tied unto it a lace of blue,
to fasten it upon the mitre above; as Jehovah commanded Moses.

<span id="an_39:32">39:32</span> Thus was finished all the work of the
tabernacle of the tent of meeting: and the children of Israel did
according to all that Jehovah commanded Moses; so did they.

<span id="an_39:33">39:33</span> And they brought the tabernacle unto
Moses, the Tent, and all its furniture, its clasps, its boards, it bars,
and its pillars, and it sockets;

<span id="an_39:34">39:34</span> and the covering of rams' skins dyed
red, and the covering of sealskins, and the veil of the screen;

<span id="an_39:35">39:35</span> the ark of the testimony, and the
staves thereof, and the mercy-seat;

<span id="an_39:36">39:36</span> the table, all the vessels thereof, and
the showbread;

<span id="an_39:37">39:37</span> the pure candlestick, the lamps
thereof, even the lamps to be set in order, and all the vessels thereof,
and the oil for the light;

<span id="an_39:38">39:38</span> and the golden altar, and the anointing
oil, and the sweet incense, and the screen for the door of the Tent;

<span id="an_39:39">39:39</span> the brazen altar, and its grating of
brass, its staves, and all its vessels, the laver and its base;

<span id="an_39:40">39:40</span> the hangings of the court, its pillars,
and its sockets, and the screen for the gate of the court, the cords
thereof, and the pins thereof, and all the instruments of the service of
the tabernacle, for the tent of meeting;

<span id="an_39:41">39:41</span> the finely wrought garments for
ministering in the holy place, and the holy garments for Aaron the
priest, and the garments of his sons, to minister in the priest's
office.

<span id="an_39:42">39:42</span> According to all that Jehovah commanded
Moses, so the children of Israel did all the work.

<span id="an_39:43">39:43</span> And Moses saw all the work, and,
behold, they had done it; as Jehovah had commanded, even so had they
done it: and Moses blessed them.

<span id="an_40:1">40:1</span> And Jehovah spake unto Moses, saying,

<span id="an_40:2">40:2</span> On the first day of the first month shalt
thou rear up the tabernacle of the tent of meeting.

<span id="an_40:3">40:3</span> And thou shalt put therein the ark of the
testimony, and thou shalt screen the ark with the veil.

<span id="an_40:4">40:4</span> And thou shalt bring in the table, and
set in order the things that are upon it; and thou shalt bring in the
candlestick, and light the lamps thereof.

<span id="an_40:5">40:5</span> And thou shalt set the golden altar for
incense before the ark of the testimony, and put the screen of the door
to the tabernacle.

<span id="an_40:6">40:6</span> And thou shalt set the altar of
burnt-offering before the door of the tabernacle of the tent of meeting.

<span id="an_40:7">40:7</span> And thou shalt set the laver between the
tent of meeting and the altar, and shalt put water therein.

<span id="an_40:8">40:8</span> And thou shalt set up the court round
about, and hang up the screen of the gate of the court.

<span id="an_40:9">40:9</span> And thou shalt take the anointing oil,
and anoint the tabernacle, and all that is therein, and shalt hallow it,
and all the furniture thereof: and it shall be holy.

<span id="an_40:10">40:10</span> And thou shalt anoint the altar of
burnt-offering, and all its vessels, and sanctify the altar: and the
altar shall be most holy.

<span id="an_40:11">40:11</span> And thou shalt anoint the laver and its
base, and sanctify it.

<span id="an_40:12">40:12</span> And thou shalt bring Aaron and his sons
unto the door of the tent of meeting, and shalt wash them with water.

<span id="an_40:13">40:13</span> And thou shalt put upon Aaron the holy
garments; and thou shalt anoint him, and sanctify him, that he may
minister unto me in the priest's office.

<span id="an_40:14">40:14</span> And thou shalt bring his sons, and put
coats upon them;

<span id="an_40:15">40:15</span> and thou shalt anoint them, as thou
didst anoint their father, that they may minister unto me in the
priest's office: and their anointing shall be to them for an everlasting
priesthood throughout their generations.

<span id="an_40:16">40:16</span> Thus did Moses: according to all that
Jehovah commanded him, so did he.

<span id="an_40:17">40:17</span> And it came to pass in the first month
in the second year, on the first day of the month, that the tabernacle
was reared up.

<span id="an_40:18">40:18</span> And Moses reared up the tabernacle, and
laid its sockets, and set up the boards thereof, and put in the bars
thereof, and reared up its pillars.

<span id="an_40:19">40:19</span> And he spread the tent over the
tabernacle, and put the covering of the tent above upon it; as Jehovah
commanded Moses.

<span id="an_40:20">40:20</span> And he took and put the testimony into
the ark, and set the staves on the ark, and put the mercy-seat above
upon the ark:

<span id="an_40:21">40:21</span> and he brought the ark into the
tabernacle, and set up the veil of the screen, and screened the ark of
the testimony; as Jehovah commanded Moses.

<span id="an_40:22">40:22</span> And he put the table in the tent of
meeting, upon the side of the tabernacle northward, without the veil.

<span id="an_40:23">40:23</span> And he set the bread in order upon it
before Jehovah; as Jehovah commanded Moses.

<span id="an_40:24">40:24</span> And he put the candlestick in the tent
of meeting, over against the table, on the side of the tabernacle
southward.

<span id="an_40:25">40:25</span> And he lighted the lamps before
Jehovah; as Jehovah commanded Moses.

<span id="an_40:26">40:26</span> And he put the golden altar in the tent
of meeting before the veil:

<span id="an_40:27">40:27</span> and he burnt thereon incense of sweet
spices; as Jehovah commanded Moses.

<span id="an_40:28">40:28</span> And he put the screen of the door to
the tabernacle.

<span id="an_40:29">40:29</span> And he set the altar of burnt-offering
at the door of the tabernacle of the tent of meeting, and offered upon
it the burnt-offering and the meal-offering; as Jehovah commanded Moses.

<span id="an_40:30">40:30</span> And he set the laver between the tent
of meeting and the altar, and put water therein, wherewith to wash.

<span id="an_40:31">40:31</span> And Moses and Aaron and his sons washed
their hands and their feet thereat;

<span id="an_40:32">40:32</span> when they went into the tent of
meeting, and when they came near unto the altar, they washed; as Jehovah
commanded Moses.

<span id="an_40:33">40:33</span> And he reared up the court round about
the tabernacle and the altar, and set up the screen of the gate of the
court. So Moses finished the work.

<span id="an_40:34">40:34</span> Then the cloud covered the tent of
meeting, and the glory of Jehovah filled the tabernacle.

<span id="an_40:35">40:35</span> And Moses was not able to enter into
the tent of meeting, because the cloud abode thereon, and the glory of
Jehovah filled the tabernacle.

<span id="an_40:36">40:36</span> And when the cloud was taken up from
over the tabernacle, the children of Israel went onward, throughout all
their journeys:

<span id="an_40:37">40:37</span> but if the cloud was not taken up, then
they journeyed not till the day that it was taken up.

<span id="an_40:38">40:38</span> For the cloud of Jehovah was upon the
tabernacle by day, and there was fire therein by night, in the sight of
all the house of Israel, throughout all their journeys.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Leviticus](lev.md)
