[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index)  [English
Bibles](../eb)  [Index](index)  [Previous](lam)  [Next](dan) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### American Standard Version: Ezekiel

<span id="an_1:1">1:1</span> Now it came to pass in the thirtieth year,
in the fourth \[month\], in the fifth \[day\] of the month, as I was
among the captives by the river Chebar, that the heavens were opened,
and I saw visions of God.

<span id="an_1:2">1:2</span> In the fifth \[day\] of the month, which
was the fifth year of king Jehoiachin's captivity,

<span id="an_1:3">1:3</span> the word of Jehovah came expressly unto
Ezekiel the priest, the son of Buzi, in the land of the Chaldeans by the
river Chebar; and the hand of Jehovah was there upon him.

<span id="an_1:4">1:4</span> And I looked, and, behold, a stormy wind
came out of the north, a great cloud, with a fire infolding itself, and
a brightness round about it, and out of the midst thereof as it were
glowing metal, out of the midst of the fire.

<span id="an_1:5">1:5</span> And out of the midst thereof came the
likeness of four living creatures. And this was their appearance: they
had the likeness of a man.

<span id="an_1:6">1:6</span> And every one had four faces, and every one
of them had four wings.

<span id="an_1:7">1:7</span> And their feet were straight feet; and the
sole of their feet was like the sole of a calf's foot; and they sparkled
like burnished brass.

<span id="an_1:8">1:8</span> And they had the hands of a man under their
wings on their four sides; and they four had their faces and their wings
\[thus\]:

<span id="an_1:9">1:9</span> their wings were joined one to another;
they turned not when they went; they went every one straight forward.

<span id="an_1:10">1:10</span> As for the likeness of their faces, they
had the face of a man; and they four had the face of a lion on the right
side; and they four had the face of an ox on the left side; they four
had also the face of an eagle.

<span id="an_1:11">1:11</span> And their faces and their wings were
separate above; two \[wings\] of every one were joined one to another,
and two covered their bodies.

<span id="an_1:12">1:12</span> And they went every one straight forward:
whither the spirit was to go, they went; they turned not when they went.

<span id="an_1:13">1:13</span> As for the likeness of the living
creatures, their appearance was like burning coals of fire, like the
appearance of torches: \[the fire\] went up and down among the living
creatures; and the fire was bright, and out of the fire went forth
lightning.

<span id="an_1:14">1:14</span> And the living creatures ran and returned
as the appearance of a flash of lightning.

<span id="an_1:15">1:15</span> Now as I beheld the living creatures,
behold, one wheel upon the earth beside the living creatures, for each
of the four faces thereof.

<span id="an_1:16">1:16</span> The appearance of the wheels and their
work was like unto a beryl: and they four had one likeness; and their
appearance and their work was as it were a wheel within a wheel.

<span id="an_1:17">1:17</span> When they went, they went in their four
directions: they turned not when they went.

<span id="an_1:18">1:18</span> As for their rims, they were high and
dreadful; and they four had their rims full of eyes round about.

<span id="an_1:19">1:19</span> And when the living creatures went, the
wheels went beside them; and when the living creatures were lifted up
from the earth, the wheels were lifted up.

<span id="an_1:20">1:20</span> Whithersoever the spirit was to go, they
went; thither was the spirit to go: and the wheels were lifted up beside
them; for the spirit of the living creature was in the wheels.

<span id="an_1:21">1:21</span> When those went, these went; and when
those stood, these stood; and when those were lifted up from the earth,
the wheels were lifted up beside them: for the spirit of the living
creature was in the wheels.

<span id="an_1:22">1:22</span> And over the head of the living creature
there was the likeness of a firmament, like the terrible crystal to look
upon, stretched forth over their heads above.

<span id="an_1:23">1:23</span> And under the firmament were their wings
straight, the one toward the other: every one had two which covered on
this side, and every one had two which covered on that side, their
bodies.

<span id="an_1:24">1:24</span> And when they went, I heard the noise of
their wings like the noise of great waters, like the voice of the
Almighty, a noise of tumult like the noise of a host: when they stood,
they let down their wings.

<span id="an_1:25">1:25</span> And there was a voice above the firmament
that was over their heads: when they stood, they let down their wings.

<span id="an_1:26">1:26</span> And above the firmament that was over
their heads was the likeness of a throne, as the appearance of a
sapphire stone; and upon the likeness of the throne was a likeness as
the appearance of a man upon it above.

<span id="an_1:27">1:27</span> And I saw as it were glowing metal, as
the appearance of fire within it round about, from the appearance of his
loins and upward; and from the appearance of his loins and downward I
saw as it were the appearance of fire, and there was brightness round
about him.

<span id="an_1:28">1:28</span> As the appearance of the bow that is in
the cloud in the day of rain, so was the appearance of the brightness
round about. This was the appearance of the likeness of the glory of
Jehovah. And when I saw it, I fell upon my face, and I heard a voice of
one that spake.

<span id="an_2:1">2:1</span> And he said unto me, Son of man, stand upon
thy feet, and I will speak with thee.

<span id="an_2:2">2:2</span> And the Spirit entered into me when he
spake unto me, and set me upon my feet; and I heard him that spake unto
me.

<span id="an_2:3">2:3</span> And he said unto me, Son of man, I send
thee to the children of Israel, to nations that are rebellious, which
have rebelled against me: they and their fathers have transgressed
against me even unto this very day.

<span id="an_2:4">2:4</span> And the children are impudent and
stiffhearted: I do sent thee unto them; and thou shalt say unto them,
Thus saith the Lord Jehovah.

<span id="an_2:5">2:5</span> And they, whether they will hear, or
whether they will forbear, (for they are a rebellious house,) yet shall
know that there hath been a prophet among them.

<span id="an_2:6">2:6</span> And thou, son of man, be not afraid of
them, neither be afraid of their words, though briers and thorns are
with thee, and thou dost dwell among scorpions: be not afraid of their
words, nor be dismayed at their looks, though they are a rebellious
house.

<span id="an_2:7">2:7</span> And thou shalt speak my words unto them,
whether they will hear, or whether they will forbear; for they are most
rebellious.

<span id="an_2:8">2:8</span> But thou, son of man, hear what I say unto
thee; be not thou rebellious like that rebellious house: open thy mouth,
and eat that which I give thee.

<span id="an_2:9">2:9</span> And when I looked, behold, a hand was put
forth unto me; and, lo, a roll of a book was therein;

<span id="an_2:10">2:10</span> And he spread it before me: and it was
written within and without; and there were written therein lamentations,
and mourning, and woe.

<span id="an_3:1">3:1</span> And he said unto me, Son of man, eat that
which thou findest; eat this roll, and go, speak unto the house of
Israel.

<span id="an_3:2">3:2</span> So I opened my mouth, and he caused me to
eat the roll.

<span id="an_3:3">3:3</span> And he said unto me, Son of man, cause thy
belly to eat, and fill thy bowels with this roll that I give thee. Then
did I eat it; and it was in my mouth as honey for sweetness.

<span id="an_3:4">3:4</span> And he said unto me, Son of man, go, get
thee unto the house of Israel, and speak with my words unto them.

<span id="an_3:5">3:5</span> For thou art not sent to a people of a
strange speech and of a hard language, but to the house of Israel;

<span id="an_3:6">3:6</span> not to many peoples of a strange speech and
of a hard language, whose words thou canst not understand. Surely, if I
sent thee to them, they would hearken unto thee.

<span id="an_3:7">3:7</span> But the house of Israel will not hearken
unto thee; for they will not hearken unto me: for all the house of
Israel are of hard forehead and of a stiff heart.

<span id="an_3:8">3:8</span> Behold, I have made thy face hard against
their faces, and thy forehead hard against their foreheads.

<span id="an_3:9">3:9</span> As an adamant harder than flint have I made
thy forehead: fear them not, neither be dismayed at their looks, though
they are a rebellious house.

<span id="an_3:10">3:10</span> Moreover he said unto me, Son of man, all
my words that I shall speak unto thee receive in thy heart, and hear
with thine ears.

<span id="an_3:11">3:11</span> And go, get thee to them of the
captivity, unto the children of thy people, and speak unto them, and
tell them, Thus saith the Lord Jehovah; whether they will hear, or
whether they will forbear.

<span id="an_3:12">3:12</span> Then the Spirit lifted me up, and I heard
behind me the voice of a great rushing, \[saying\], Blessed be the glory
of Jehovah from his place.

<span id="an_3:13">3:13</span> And \[I heard\] the noise of the wings of
the living creatures as they touched one another, and the noise of the
wheels beside them, even the noise of a great rushing.

<span id="an_3:14">3:14</span> So the Spirit lifted me up, and took me
away; and I went in bitterness, in the heat of my spirit; and the hand
of Jehovah was strong upon me.

<span id="an_3:15">3:15</span> Then I came to them of the captivity at
Tel-abib, that dwelt by the river Chebar, and to where they dwelt; and I
sat there overwhelmed among them seven days.

<span id="an_3:16">3:16</span> And it came to pass at the end of seven
days, that the word of Jehovah came unto me, saying,

<span id="an_3:17">3:17</span> Son of man, I have made thee a watchman
unto the house of Israel: therefore hear the word at my mouth, and give
them warning from me.

<span id="an_3:18">3:18</span> When I say unto the wicked, Thou shalt
surely die; and thou givest him not warning, nor speakest to warn the
wicked from his wicked way, to save his life; the same wicked man shall
die in his iniquity; but his blood will I require at thy hand.

<span id="an_3:19">3:19</span> Yet if thou warn the wicked, and he turn
not from his wickedness, nor from his wicked way, he shall die in his
iniquity; but thou hast delivered thy soul.

<span id="an_3:20">3:20</span> Again, when a righteous man doth turn
from his righteousness, and commit iniquity, and I lay a stumblingblock
before him, he shall die: because thou hast not given him warning, he
shall die in his sin, and his righteous deeds which he hath done shall
not be remembered; but his blood will I require at thy hand.

<span id="an_3:21">3:21</span> Nevertheless if thou warn the righteous
man, that the righteous sin not, and he doth not sin, he shall surely
live, because he took warning; and thou hast delivered thy soul.

<span id="an_3:22">3:22</span> And the hand of Jehovah was there upon
me; and he said unto me, Arise, go forth into the plain, and I will
there talk with thee.

<span id="an_3:23">3:23</span> Then I arose, and went forth into the
plain: and, behold, the glory of Jehovah stood there, as the glory which
I saw by the river Chebar; and I fell on my face.

<span id="an_3:24">3:24</span> Then the Spirit entered into me, and set
me upon my feet; and he spake with me, and said unto me, Go, shut
thyself within thy house.

<span id="an_3:25">3:25</span> But thou, son of man, behold, they shall
lay bands upon thee, and shall bind thee with them, and thou shalt not
go out among them:

<span id="an_3:26">3:26</span> and I will make thy tongue cleave to the
roof of thy mouth, that thou shalt be dumb, and shalt not be to them a
reprover; for they are a rebellious house.

<span id="an_3:27">3:27</span> But when I speak with thee, I will open
thy mouth, and thou shalt say unto them, Thus saith the Lord Jehovah: He
that heareth, let him hear; and he that forbeareth, let him forbear: for
they are a rebellious house.

<span id="an_4:1">4:1</span> Thou also, son of man, take thee a tile,
and lay it before thee, and portray upon it a city, even Jerusalem:

<span id="an_4:2">4:2</span> and lay siege against it, and build forts
against it, and cast up a mound against it; set camps also against it,
and plant battering rams against it round about.

<span id="an_4:3">4:3</span> And take thou unto thee an iron pan, and
set it for a wall of iron between thee and the city: and set thy face
toward it, and it shall be besieged, and thou shalt lay siege against
it. This shall be a sign to the house of Israel.

<span id="an_4:4">4:4</span> Moreover lie thou upon thy left side, and
lay the iniquity of the house of Israel upon it; \[according to\] the
number of the days that thou shalt lie upon it, thou shalt bear their
iniquity.

<span id="an_4:5">4:5</span> For I have appointed the years of their
iniquity to be unto thee a number of days, even three hundred and ninety
days: so shalt thou bear the iniquity of the house of Israel.

<span id="an_4:6">4:6</span> And again, when thou hast accomplished
these, thou shalt lie on thy right side, and shalt bear the iniquity of
the house of Judah: forty days, each day for a year, have I appointed it
unto thee.

<span id="an_4:7">4:7</span> And thou shalt set thy face toward the
siege of Jerusalem, with thine arm uncovered; and thou shalt prophesy
against it.

<span id="an_4:8">4:8</span> And, behold, I lay bands upon thee, and
thou shalt not turn thee from one side to the other, till thou hast
accomplished the days of thy siege.

<span id="an_4:9">4:9</span> Take thou also unto thee wheat, and barley,
and beans, and lentils, and millet, and spelt, and put them in one
vessel, and make thee bread thereof; \[according to\] the number of the
days that thou shalt lie upon thy side, even three hundred and ninety
days, shalt thou eat thereof.

<span id="an_4:10">4:10</span> And thy food which thou shalt eat shall
be by weight, twenty shekels a day: from time to time shalt thou eat it.

<span id="an_4:11">4:11</span> And thou shalt drink water by measure,
the sixth part of a hin: from time to time shalt thou drink.

<span id="an_4:12">4:12</span> And thou shalt eat it as barley cakes,
and thou shalt bake it in their sight with dung that cometh out of man.

<span id="an_4:13">4:13</span> And Jehovah said, Even thus shall the
children of Israel eat their bread unclean, among the nations whither I
will drive them.

<span id="an_4:14">4:14</span> Then said I, Ah Lord Jehovah! behold, my
soul hath not been polluted; for from my youth up even till now have I
not eaten of that which dieth of itself, or is torn of beasts; neither
came there abominable flesh into my mouth.

<span id="an_4:15">4:15</span> Then he said unto me, See, I have given
thee cow's dung for man's dung, and thou shalt prepare thy bread
thereon.

<span id="an_4:16">4:16</span> Moreover he said unto me, Son of man,
behold, I will break the staff of bread in Jerusalem: and they shall eat
bread by weight, and with fearfulness; and they shall drink water by
measure, and in dismay:

<span id="an_4:17">4:17</span> that they may want bread and water, and
be dismayed one with another, and pine away in their iniquity.

<span id="an_5:1">5:1</span> And thou, son of man, take thee a sharp
sword; \[as\] a barber's razor shalt thou take it unto thee, and shalt
cause it to pass upon thy head and upon thy beard: then take thee
balances to weigh, and divide the hair.

<span id="an_5:2">5:2</span> A third part shalt thou burn in the fire in
the midst of the city, when the days of the siege are fulfilled; and
thou shalt take a third part, and smite with the sword round about it;
and a third part thou shalt scatter to the wind, and I will draw out a
sword after them.

<span id="an_5:3">5:3</span> And thou shalt take thereof a few in
number, and bind them in thy skirts.

<span id="an_5:4">5:4</span> And of these again shalt thou take, and
cast them into the midst of the fire, and burn them in the fire;
therefrom shall a fire come forth into all the house of Israel.

<span id="an_5:5">5:5</span> Thus saith the Lord Jehovah: This is
Jerusalem; I have set her in the midst of the nations, and countries are
round about her.

<span id="an_5:6">5:6</span> And she hath rebelled against mine
ordinances in doing wickedness more than the nations, and against my
statutes more than the countries that are round about her; for they have
rejected mine ordinances, and as for my statutes, they have not walked
in them.

<span id="an_5:7">5:7</span> Therefore thus saith the Lord Jehovah:
Because ye are turbulent more than the nations that are round about you,
and have not walked in my statutes, neither have kept mine ordinances,
neither have done after the ordinances of the nations that are round
about you;

<span id="an_5:8">5:8</span> therefore thus saith the Lord Jehovah:
Behold, I, even I, am against thee; and I will execute judgments in the
midst of thee in the sight of the nations.

<span id="an_5:9">5:9</span> And I will do in thee that which I have not
done, and whereunto I will not do any more the like, because of all
thine abominations.

<span id="an_5:10">5:10</span> Therefore the fathers shall eat the sons
in the midst of thee, and the sons shall eat their fathers; and I will
execute judgments on thee; and the whole remnant of thee will I scatter
unto all the winds.

<span id="an_5:11">5:11</span> Wherefore, as I live, saith the Lord
Jehovah, surely, because thou hast defiled my sanctuary with all thy
detestable things, and with all thine abominations, therefore will I
also diminish \[thee\]; neither shall mine eye spare, and I also will
have no pity.

<span id="an_5:12">5:12</span> A third part of thee shall die with the
pestilence, and with famine shall they be consumed in the midst of thee;
and a third part shall fall by the sword round about thee; and a third
part I will scatter unto all the winds, and will draw out a sword after
them.

<span id="an_5:13">5:13</span> Thus shall mine anger be accomplished,
and I will cause my wrath toward them to rest, and I shall be comforted;
and they shall know that I, Jehovah, have spoken in my zeal, when I have
accomplished my wrath upon them.

<span id="an_5:14">5:14</span> Moreover I will make thee a desolation
and a reproach among the nations that are round about thee, in the sight
of all that pass by.

<span id="an_5:15">5:15</span> So it shall be a reproach and a taunt, an
instruction and an astonishment, unto the nations that are round about
thee, when I shall execute judgments on thee in anger and in wrath, and
in wrathful rebukes; (I, Jehovah, have spoken it;)

<span id="an_5:16">5:16</span> when I shall send upon them the evil
arrows of famine, that are for destruction, which I will send to destroy
you: and I will increase the famine upon you, and will break your staff
of bread;

<span id="an_5:17">5:17</span> and I will send upon you famine and evil
beasts, and they shall bereave thee; and pestilence and blood shall pass
through thee; and I will bring the sword upon thee: I, Jehovah, have
spoken it.

<span id="an_6:1">6:1</span> And the word of Jehovah came unto me,
saying,

<span id="an_6:2">6:2</span> Son of man, set thy face toward the
mountains of Israel, and prophesy unto them,

<span id="an_6:3">6:3</span> and say, Ye mountains of Israel, hear the
word of the Lord Jehovah: Thus saith the Lord Jehovah to the mountains
and to the hills, to the watercourses and to the valleys: Behold, I,
even I, will bring a sword upon you, and I will destroy your high
places.

<span id="an_6:4">6:4</span> And your altars shall become desolate, and
your sun-images shall be broken; and I will cast down your slain men
before your idols.

<span id="an_6:5">6:5</span> And I will lay the dead bodies of the
children of Israel before their idols; and I will scatter your bones
round about your altars.

<span id="an_6:6">6:6</span> In all your dwelling-places the cities
shall be laid waste, and the high places shall be desolate; that your
altars may be laid waste and made desolate, and your idols may be broken
and cease, and your sun-images may be hewn down, and your works may be
abolished.

<span id="an_6:7">6:7</span> And the slain shall fall in the midst of
you, and ye shall know that I am Jehovah.

<span id="an_6:8">6:8</span> Yet will I leave a remnant, in that ye
shall have some that escape the sword among the nations, when ye shall
be scattered through the countries.

<span id="an_6:9">6:9</span> And those of you that escape shall remember
me among the nations whither they shall be carried captive, how that I
have been broken with their lewd heart, which hath departed from me, and
with they eyes, which play the harlot after their idols: and they shall
loathe themselves in their own sight for the evils which they have
committed in all their abominations.

<span id="an_6:10">6:10</span> And they shall know that I am Jehovah: I
have not said in vain that I would do this evil unto them.

<span id="an_6:11">6:11</span> Thus saith the Lord Jehovah: Smite with
thy hand, and stamp with thy foot, and say, Alas! because of all the
evil abominations of the house of Israel; for they shall fall by the
sword, by the famine, and by the pestilence.

<span id="an_6:12">6:12</span> He that is far off shall die of the
pestilence; and he that is near shall fall by the sword; and he that
remaineth and is besieged shall die by the famine: thus will I
accomplish my wrath upon them.

<span id="an_6:13">6:13</span> And ye shall know that I am Jehovah, when
their slain men shall be among their idols round about their altars,
upon every high hill, on all the tops of the mountains, and under every
green tree, and under every thick oak, the places where they offered
sweet savor to all their idols.

<span id="an_6:14">6:14</span> And I will stretch out my hand upon them,
and make the land desolate and waste, from the wilderness toward Diblah,
throughout all their habitations: and they shall know that I am Jehovah.

<span id="an_7:1">7:1</span> Moreover the word of Jehovah came unto me,
saying,

<span id="an_7:2">7:2</span> And thou, son of man, thus saith the Lord
Jehovah unto the land of Israel, An end: the end is come upon the four
corners of the land.

<span id="an_7:3">7:3</span> Now is the end upon thee, and I will send
mine anger upon thee, and will judge thee according to thy ways; and I
will bring upon thee all thine abominations.

<span id="an_7:4">7:4</span> And mine eye shall not spare thee, neither
will I have pity; but I will bring thy ways upon thee, and thine
abominations shall be in the midst of thee: and ye shall know that I am
Jehovah.

<span id="an_7:5">7:5</span> Thus saith the Lord Jehovah: An evil, an
only evil; behold, it cometh.

<span id="an_7:6">7:6</span> An end is come, the end is come; it awaketh
against thee; behold, it cometh.

<span id="an_7:7">7:7</span> Thy doom is come unto thee, O inhabitant of
the land: the time is come, the day is near, \[a day of\] tumult, and
not \[of\] joyful shouting, upon the mountains.

<span id="an_7:8">7:8</span> Now will I shortly pour out my wrath upon
thee, and accomplish mine anger against thee, and will judge thee
according to thy ways; and I will bring upon thee all thine
abominations.

<span id="an_7:9">7:9</span> And mine eye shall not spare, neither will
I have pity: I will bring upon thee according to thy ways; and thine
abominations shall be in the midst of thee; and ye shall know that I,
Jehovah, do smite.

<span id="an_7:10">7:10</span> Behold, the day, behold, it cometh: thy
doom is gone forth; the rod hath blossomed, pride hath budded.

<span id="an_7:11">7:11</span> Violence is risen up into a rod of
wickedness; none of them \[shall remain\], nor of their multitude, nor
of their wealth: neither shall there be eminency among them.

<span id="an_7:12">7:12</span> The time is come, the day draweth near:
let not the buyer rejoice, nor the seller mourn; for wrath is upon all
the multitude thereof.

<span id="an_7:13">7:13</span> For the seller shall not return to that
which is sold, although they be yet alive: for the vision is touching
the whole multitude thereof, none shall return; neither shall any
strengthen himself in the iniquity of his life.

<span id="an_7:14">7:14</span> They have blown the trumpet, and have
made all ready; but none goeth to the battle; for my wrath is upon all
the multitude thereof.

<span id="an_7:15">7:15</span> The sword is without, and the pestilence
and the famine within: he that is in the field shall die with the sword:
and he that is in the city, famine and pestilence shall devour him.

<span id="an_7:16">7:16</span> But those of them that escape shall
escape, and shall be on the mountains like doves of the valleys, all of
them moaning, every one in his iniquity.

<span id="an_7:17">7:17</span> All hands shall be feeble, and all knees
shall be weak as water.

<span id="an_7:18">7:18</span> They shall also gird themselves with
sackcloth, and horror shall cover them; and shame shall be upon all
faces, and baldness upon all their heads.

<span id="an_7:19">7:19</span> They shall cast their silver in the
streets, and their gold shall be as an unclean thing; their silver and
their gold shall not be able to deliver them in the day of the wrath of
Jehovah: they shall not satisfy their souls, neither fill their bowels;
because it hath been the stumblingblock of their iniquity.

<span id="an_7:20">7:20</span> As for the beauty of his ornament, he set
it in majesty; but they made the images of their abominations \[and\]
their detestable things therein: therefore have I made it unto them as
an unclean thing.

<span id="an_7:21">7:21</span> And I will give it into the hands of the
strangers for a prey, and to the wicked of the earth for a spoil; and
they shall profane it.

<span id="an_7:22">7:22</span> My face will I turn also from them, and
they shall profane my secret \[place\]; and robbers shall enter into it,
and profane it.

<span id="an_7:23">7:23</span> Make the chain; for the land is full of
bloody crimes, and the city is full of violence.

<span id="an_7:24">7:24</span> Wherefore I will bring the worst of the
nations, and they shall possess their houses: I will also make the pride
of the strong to cease; and their holy places shall be profaned.

<span id="an_7:25">7:25</span> Destruction cometh; and they shall seek
peace, and there shall be none.

<span id="an_7:26">7:26</span> Mischief shall come upon mischief, and
rumor shall be upon rumor; and they shall seek a vision of the prophet;
but the law shall perish from the priest, and counsel from the elders.

<span id="an_7:27">7:27</span> The king shall mourn, and the prince
shall be clothed with desolation, and the hands of the people of the
land shall be troubled: I will do unto them after their way, and
according to their deserts will I judge them; and they shall know that I
am Jehovah.

<span id="an_8:1">8:1</span> And it came to pass in the sixth year, in
the sixth \[month\], in the fifth \[day\] of the month, as I sat in my
house, and the elders of Judah sat before me, that the hand of the Lord
Jehovah fell there upon me.

<span id="an_8:2">8:2</span> Then I beheld, and, lo, a likeness as the
appearance of fire; from the appearance of his loins and downward, fire;
and from his loins and upward, as the appearance of brightness, as it
were glowing metal.

<span id="an_8:3">8:3</span> And he put forth the form of a hand, and
took me by a lock of my head; and the Spirit lifted me up between earth
and heaven, and brought me in the visions of God to Jerusalem, to the
door of the gate of the inner \[court\] that looketh toward the north;
where was the seat of the image of jealousy, which provoketh to
jealousy.

<span id="an_8:4">8:4</span> And, behold, the glory of the God of Israel
was there, according to the appearance that I saw in the plain.

<span id="an_8:5">8:5</span> Then said he unto me, Son of man, lift up
thine eyes now the way toward the north. So I lifted up mine eyes the
way toward the north, and behold, northward of the gate of the altar
this image of jealousy in the entry.

<span id="an_8:6">8:6</span> And he said unto me, Son of man, seest thou
what they do? even the great abominations that the house of Israel do
commit here, that I should go far off from my sanctuary? but thou shalt
again see yet other great abominations.

<span id="an_8:7">8:7</span> And he brought me to the door of the court;
and when I looked, behold, a hole in the wall.

<span id="an_8:8">8:8</span> Then said he unto me, Son of man, dig now
in the wall: and when I had digged in the wall, behold, a door.

<span id="an_8:9">8:9</span> And he said unto me, Go in, and see the
wicked abominations that they do here.

<span id="an_8:10">8:10</span> So I went in and saw; and behold, every
form of creeping things, and abominable beasts, and all the idols of the
house of Israel, portrayed upon the wall round about.

<span id="an_8:11">8:11</span> And there stood before them seventy men
of the elders of the house of Israel; and in the midst of them stood
Jaazaniah the son of Shaphan, every man with his censer in his hand; and
the odor of the cloud of incense went up.

<span id="an_8:12">8:12</span> Then said he unto me, Son of man, hast
thou seen what the elders of the house of Israel do in the dark, every
man in his chambers of imagery? for they say, Jehovah seeth us not;
Jehovah hath forsaken the land.

<span id="an_8:13">8:13</span> He said also unto me, Thou shalt again
see yet other great abominations which they do.

<span id="an_8:14">8:14</span> Then he brought me to the door of the
gate of Jehovah's house which was toward the north; and behold, there
sat the women weeping for Tammuz.

<span id="an_8:15">8:15</span> Then said he unto me, Hast thou seen
\[this\], O son of man? thou shalt again see yet greater abominations
than these.

<span id="an_8:16">8:16</span> And he brought me into the inner court of
Jehovah's house; and behold, at the door of the temple of Jehovah,
between the porch and the altar, were about five and twenty men, with
their backs toward the temple of Jehovah, and their faces toward the
east; and they were worshipping the sun toward the east.

<span id="an_8:17">8:17</span> Then he said unto me, Hast thou seen
\[this\], O son of man? Is it a light thing to the house of Judah that
they commit the abominations which they commit here? for they have
filled the land with violence, and have turned again to provoke me to
anger: and, lo, they put the branch to their nose.

<span id="an_8:18">8:18</span> Therefore will I also deal in wrath; mine
eye shall not spare, neither will I have pity; and though they cry in
mine ears with a loud voice, yet will I not hear them.

<span id="an_9:1">9:1</span> Then he cried in mine ears with a loud
voice, saying, Cause ye them that have charge over the city to draw
near, every man with his destroying weapon in his hand.

<span id="an_9:2">9:2</span> And behold, six men came from the way of
the upper gate, which lieth toward the north, every man with his
slaughter weapon in his hand; and one man in the midst of them clothed
in linen, with a writer's inkhorn by his side. And they went in, and
stood beside the brazen altar.

<span id="an_9:3">9:3</span> And the glory of the God of Israel was gone
up from the cherub, whereupon it was, to the threshold of the house: and
he called to the man clothed in linen, who had the writer's inkhorn by
his side.

<span id="an_9:4">9:4</span> And Jehovah said unto him, Go through the
midst of the city, through the midst of Jerusalem, and set a mark upon
the foreheads of the men that sigh and that cry over all the
abominations that are done in the midst thereof.

<span id="an_9:5">9:5</span> And to the others he said in my hearing, Go
ye through the city after him, and smite: let not your eye spare,
neither have ye pity;

<span id="an_9:6">9:6</span> slay utterly the old man, the young man and
the virgin, and little children and women; but come not near any man
upon whom is the mark: and begin at my sanctuary. Then they began at the
old men that were before the house.

<span id="an_9:7">9:7</span> And he said unto them, Defile the house,
and fill the courts with the slain: go ye forth. And they went forth,
and smote in the city.

<span id="an_9:8">9:8</span> And it came to pass, while they were
smiting, and I was left, that I fell upon my face, and cried, and said,
Ah Lord Jehovah! wilt thou destroy all the residue of Israel in thy
pouring out of thy wrath upon Jerusalem?

<span id="an_9:9">9:9</span> Then said he unto me, The iniquity of the
house of Israel and Judah is exceeding great, and the land is full of
blood, and the city full of wrestling \[of judgment\]: for they say,
Jehovah hath forsaken the land, and Jehovah seeth not.

<span id="an_9:10">9:10</span> And as for me also, mine eye shall not
spare, neither will I have pity, but I will bring their way upon their
head.

<span id="an_9:11">9:11</span> And behold, the man clothed in linen, who
had the inkhorn by his side, reported the matter, saying, I have done as
thou hast commanded me.

<span id="an_10:1">10:1</span> Then I looked, and behold, in the
firmament that was over the head of the cherubim there appeared above
them as it were a sapphire stone, as the appearance of the likeness of a
throne.

<span id="an_10:2">10:2</span> And he spake unto the man clothed in
linen, and said, Go in between the whirling \[wheels\], even under the
cherub, and fill both thy hands with coals of fire from between the
cherubim, and scatter them over the city. And he went in in my sight.

<span id="an_10:3">10:3</span> Now the cherubim stood on the right side
of the house, when the man went in; and the cloud filled the inner
court.

<span id="an_10:4">10:4</span> And the glory of Jehovah mounted up from
the cherub, \[and stood\] over the threshold of the house; and the house
was filled with the cloud, and the court was full of the brightness of
Jehovah's glory.

<span id="an_10:5">10:5</span> And the sound of the wings of the
cherubim was heard even to the outer court, as the voice of God Almighty
when he speaketh.

<span id="an_10:6">10:6</span> And it came to pass, when he commanded
the man clothed in linen, saying, Take fire from between the whirling
wheels, from between the cherubim, that he went in, and stood beside a
wheel.

<span id="an_10:7">10:7</span> And the cherub stretched forth his hand
from between the cherubim unto the fire that was between the cherubim,
and took \[thereof\], and put it into the hands of him that was clothed
in linen, who took it and went out.

<span id="an_10:8">10:8</span> And there appeared in the cherubim the
form of a man's hand under their wings.

<span id="an_10:9">10:9</span> And I looked, and behold, four wheels
beside the cherubim, one wheel beside one cherub, and another wheel
beside another cherub; and the appearance of the wheels was like unto a
beryl stone.

<span id="an_10:10">10:10</span> And as for their appearance, they four
had one likeness, as if a wheel have been within a wheel.

<span id="an_10:11">10:11</span> When they went, they went in their four
directions: they turned not as they went, but to the place whither the
head looked they followed it; they turned not as they went.

<span id="an_10:12">10:12</span> And their whole body, and their backs,
and their hands, and their wings, and the wheels, were full of eyes
round about, \[even\] the wheels that they four had.

<span id="an_10:13">10:13</span> As for the wheels, they were called in
my hearing, the whirling \[wheels\].

<span id="an_10:14">10:14</span> And every one had four faces: the first
face was the face of the cherub, and the second face was the face of a
man, and the third face the face of a lion, and the fourth the face of
an eagle.

<span id="an_10:15">10:15</span> And the cherubim mounted up: this is
the living creature that I saw by the river Chebar.

<span id="an_10:16">10:16</span> And when the cherubim went, the wheels
went beside them; and when the cherubim lifted up their wings to mount
up from the earth, the wheels also turned not from beside them.

<span id="an_10:17">10:17</span> When they stood, these stood; and when
they mounted up, these mounted up with them: for the spirit of the
living creature was in them.

<span id="an_10:18">10:18</span> And the glory of Jehovah went forth
from over the threshold of the house, and stood over the cherubim.

<span id="an_10:19">10:19</span> And the cherubim lifted up their wings,
and mounted up from the earth in my sight when they went forth, and the
wheels beside them: and they stood at the door of the east gate of
Jehovah's house; and the glory of the God of Israel was over them above.

<span id="an_10:20">10:20</span> This is the living creature that I saw
under the God of Israel by the river Chebar; and I knew that they were
cherubim.

<span id="an_10:21">10:21</span> Every one had four faces, and every one
four wings; and the likeness of the hands of a man was under their
wings.

<span id="an_10:22">10:22</span> And as for the likeness of their faces,
they were the faces which I saw by the river Chebar, their appearances
and themselves; they went every one straight forward.

<span id="an_11:1">11:1</span> Moreover the Spirit lifted me up, and
brought me unto the east gate of Jehovah's house, which looketh
eastward: and behold, at the door of the gate five and twenty men; and I
saw in the midst of them Jaazaniah the son of Azzur, and Pelatiah the
son of Benaiah, princes of the people.

<span id="an_11:2">11:2</span> And he said unto me, Son of man, these
are the men that devise iniquity, and that give wicked counsel in this
city;

<span id="an_11:3">11:3</span> that say, \[The time\] is not near to
build houses: this \[city\] is the caldron, and we are the flesh.

<span id="an_11:4">11:4</span> Therefore prophesy against them,
prophesy, O son of man.

<span id="an_11:5">11:5</span> And the Spirit of Jehovah fell upon me,
and he said unto me, Speak, Thus saith Jehovah: Thus have ye said, O
house of Israel; for I know the things that come into your mind.

<span id="an_11:6">11:6</span> Ye have multiplied your slain in this
city, and ye have filled the streets thereof with the slain.

<span id="an_11:7">11:7</span> Therefore thus saith the Lord Jehovah:
Your slain whom ye have laid in the midst of it, they are the flesh, and
this \[city\] is the caldron; but ye shall be brought forth out of the
midst of it.

<span id="an_11:8">11:8</span> Ye have feared the sword; and I will
bring the sword upon you, saith the Lord Jehovah.

<span id="an_11:9">11:9</span> And I will bring you forth out of the
midst thereof, and deliver you into the hands of strangers, and will
execute judgments among you.

<span id="an_11:10">11:10</span> Ye shall fall by the sword; I will
judge you in the border of Israel; and ye shall know that I am Jehovah.

<span id="an_11:11">11:11</span> This \[city\] shall not be your
caldron, neither shall ye be the flesh in the midst thereof; I will
judge you in the border of Israel;

<span id="an_11:12">11:12</span> and ye shall know that I am Jehovah:
for ye have not walked in my statutes, neither have ye executed mine
ordinances, but have done after the ordinances of the nations that are
round about you.

<span id="an_11:13">11:13</span> And it came to pass, when I prophesied,
that Pelatiah the son of Benaiah died. Then fell I down upon my face,
and cried with a loud voice, and said, Ah Lord Jehovah! wilt thou make a
full end of the remnant of Israel?

<span id="an_11:14">11:14</span> And the word of Jehovah came unto me,
saying,

<span id="an_11:15">11:15</span> Son of man, thy brethren, even thy
brethren, the men of thy kindred, and all the house of Israel, all of
them, \[are they\] unto whom the inhabitants of Jerusalem have said, Get
you far from Jehovah; unto us is this land given for a possession.

<span id="an_11:16">11:16</span> Therefore say, Thus saith the Lord
Jehovah: Whereas I have removed them far off among the nations, and
whereas I have scattered them among the countries, yet will I be to them
a sanctuary for a little while in the countries where they are come.

<span id="an_11:17">11:17</span> Therefore say, Thus saith the Lord
Jehovah: I will gather you from the peoples, and assemble you out of the
countries where ye have been scattered, and I will give you the land of
Israel.

<span id="an_11:18">11:18</span> And they shall come thither, and they
shall take away all the detestable things thereof and all the
abominations thereof from thence.

<span id="an_11:19">11:19</span> And I will give them one heart, and I
will put a new spirit within you; and I will take the stony heart out of
their flesh, and will give them a heart of flesh;

<span id="an_11:20">11:20</span> that they may walk in my statutes, and
keep mine ordinances, and do them: and they shall be my people, and I
will be their God.

<span id="an_11:21">11:21</span> But as for them whose heart walketh
after the heart of their detestable things and their abominations, I
will bring their way upon their own heads, saith the Lord Jehovah.

<span id="an_11:22">11:22</span> Then did the cherubim lift up their
wings, and the wheels were beside them; and the glory of the God of
Israel was over them above.

<span id="an_11:23">11:23</span> And the glory of Jehovah went up from
the midst of the city, and stood upon the mountain which is on the east
side of the city.

<span id="an_11:24">11:24</span> And the Spirit lifted me up, and
brought me in the vision by the Spirit of God into Chaldea, to them of
the captivity. So the vision that I had seen went up from me.

<span id="an_11:25">11:25</span> Then I spake unto them of the captivity
all the things that Jehovah had showed me.

<span id="an_12:1">12:1</span> The word of Jehovah also came unto me,
saying,

<span id="an_12:2">12:2</span> Son of man, thou dwellest in the midst of
the rebellious house, that have eyes to see, and see not, that have ears
to hear, and hear not; for they are a rebellious house.

<span id="an_12:3">12:3</span> Therefore, thou son of man, prepare thee
stuff for removing, and remove by day in their sight; and thou shalt
remove from thy place to another place in their sight: it may be they
will consider, though they are a rebellious house.

<span id="an_12:4">12:4</span> And thou shalt bring forth thy stuff by
day in their sight, as stuff for removing; and thou shalt go forth
thyself at even in their sight, as when men go forth into exile.

<span id="an_12:5">12:5</span> Dig thou through the wall in their sight,
and carry out thereby.

<span id="an_12:6">12:6</span> In their sight shalt thou bear it upon
thy shoulder, and carry it forth in the dark; thou shalt cover thy face,
that thou see not the land: for I have set thee for a sign unto the
house of Israel.

<span id="an_12:7">12:7</span> And I did so as I was commanded: I
brought forth my stuff by day, as stuff for removing, and in the even I
digged through the wall with my hand; I brought it forth in the dark,
and bare it upon my shoulder in their sight.

<span id="an_12:8">12:8</span> And in the morning came the word of
Jehovah unto me, saying,

<span id="an_12:9">12:9</span> Son of man, hath not the house of Israel,
the rebellious house, said unto thee, What doest thou?

<span id="an_12:10">12:10</span> Say thou unto them, Thus saith the Lord
Jehovah: This burden \[concerneth\] the prince in Jerusalem, and all the
house of Israel among whom they are.

<span id="an_12:11">12:11</span> Say, I am your sign: like as I have
done, so shall it be done unto them; they shall go into exile, into
captivity.

<span id="an_12:12">12:12</span> And the prince that is among them shall
bear upon his shoulder in the dark, and shall go forth: they shall dig
through the wall to carry out thereby: he shall cover his face, because
he shall not see the land with his eyes.

<span id="an_12:13">12:13</span> My net also will I spread upon him, and
he shall be taken in my snare; and I will bring him to Babylon to the
land of the Chaldeans; yet shall he not see it, though he shall die
there.

<span id="an_12:14">12:14</span> And I will scatter toward every wind
all that are round about him to help him, and all his bands; and I will
draw out the sword after them.

<span id="an_12:15">12:15</span> And they shall know that I am Jehovah,
when I shall disperse them among the nations, and scatter them through
the countries.

<span id="an_12:16">12:16</span> But I will leave a few men of them from
the sword, from the famine, and from the pestilence; that they may
declare all their abominations among the nations whither they come; and
they shall know that I am Jehovah.

<span id="an_12:17">12:17</span> Moreover the word of Jehovah came to
me, saying,

<span id="an_12:18">12:18</span> Son of man, eat thy bread with quaking,
and drink thy water with trembling and with fearfulness;

<span id="an_12:19">12:19</span> and say unto the people of the land,
Thus saith the Lord Jehovah concerning the inhabitants of Jerusalem, and
the land of Israel: They shall eat their bread with fearfulness, and
drink their water in dismay, that her land may be desolate, \[and
despoiled\] of all that is therein, because of the violence of all them
that dwell therein.

<span id="an_12:20">12:20</span> And the cities that are inhabited shall
be laid waste, and the land shall be a desolation; and ye shall know
that I am Jehovah.

<span id="an_12:21">12:21</span> And the word of Jehovah came unto me,
saying,

<span id="an_12:22">12:22</span> Son of man, what is this proverb that
ye have in the land of Israel, saying, The days are prolonged, and every
vision faileth?

<span id="an_12:23">12:23</span> Tell them therefore, Thus saith the
Lord Jehovah: I will make this proverb to cease, and they shall no more
use it as a proverb in Israel; but say unto them, The days are at hand,
and the fulfilment of every vision.

<span id="an_12:24">12:24</span> For there shall be no more any false
vision nor flattering divination within the house of Israel.

<span id="an_12:25">12:25</span> For I am Jehovah; I will speak, and the
word that I shall speak shall be performed; it shall be no more
deferred: for in your days, O rebellious house, will I speak the word,
and will perform it, saith the Lord Jehovah.

<span id="an_12:26">12:26</span> Again the word of Jehovah came to me,
saying,

<span id="an_12:27">12:27</span> Son of man, behold, they of the house
of Israel say, The vision that he seeth is for many day to come, and he
prophesieth of times that are far off.

<span id="an_12:28">12:28</span> Therefore say unto them, Thus saith the
Lord Jehovah: There shall none of my words be deferred any more, but the
word which I shall speak shall be performed, saith the Lord Jehovah.

<span id="an_13:1">13:1</span> And the word of Jehovah came unto me,
saying,

<span id="an_13:2">13:2</span> Son of man, prophesy against the prophets
of Israel that prophesy, and say thou unto them that prophesy out of
their own heart, Hear ye the word of Jehovah:

<span id="an_13:3">13:3</span> Thus saith the Lord Jehovah, Woe unto the
foolish prophets, that follow their own spirit, and have seen nothing!

<span id="an_13:4">13:4</span> O Israel, thy prophets have been like
foxes in the waste places.

<span id="an_13:5">13:5</span> Ye have not gone up into the gaps,
neither built up the wall for the house of Israel, to stand in the
battle in the day of Jehovah.

<span id="an_13:6">13:6</span> They have seen falsehood and lying
divination, that say, Jehovah saith; but Jehovah hath not sent them: and
they have made men to hope that the word would be confirmed.

<span id="an_13:7">13:7</span> Have ye not seen a false vision, and have
ye not spoken a lying divination, in that ye say, Jehovah saith; albeit
I have not spoken?

<span id="an_13:8">13:8</span> Therefore thus saith the Lord Jehovah:
Because ye have spoken falsehood, and seen lies, therefore, behold, I am
against you, saith the Lord Jehovah.

<span id="an_13:9">13:9</span> And my hand shall be against the prophets
that see false visions, and that divine lies: they shall not be in the
council of my people, neither shall they be written in the writing of
the house of Israel, neither shall they enter into the land of Israel;
and ye shall know that I am the Lord Jehovah.

<span id="an_13:10">13:10</span> Because, even because they have seduced
my people, saying, Peace; and there is no peace; and when one buildeth
up a wall, behold, they daub it with untempered \[mortar\]:

<span id="an_13:11">13:11</span> say unto them that daub it with
untempered \[mortar\], that it shall fall: there shall be an overflowing
shower; and ye, O great hailstones, shall fall; and a stormy wind shall
rend it.

<span id="an_13:12">13:12</span> Lo, when the wall is fallen, shall it
not be said unto you, Where is the daubing wherewith ye have daubed it?

<span id="an_13:13">13:13</span> Therefore thus saith the Lord Jehovah:
I will even rend it with a stormy wind in my wrath; and there shall be
an overflowing shower in mine anger, and great hailstones in wrath to
consume it.

<span id="an_13:14">13:14</span> So will I break down the wall that ye
have daubed with untempered \[mortar\], and bring it down to the ground,
so that the foundation thereof shall be uncovered; and it shall fall,
and ye shall be consumed in the midst thereof: and ye shall know that I
am Jehovah.

<span id="an_13:15">13:15</span> Thus will I accomplish my wrath upon
the wall, and upon them that have daubed it with untempered \[mortar\];
and I will say unto you, The wall is no more, neither they that daubed
it;

<span id="an_13:16">13:16</span> \[to wit\], the prophets of Israel that
prophesy concerning Jerusalem, and that see visions of peace for her,
and there is no peace, saith the Lord Jehovah.

<span id="an_13:17">13:17</span> And thou, son of man, set thy face
against the daughters of thy people, that prophesy out of their own
heart; and prophesy thou against them,

<span id="an_13:18">13:18</span> and say, Thus saith the Lord Jehovah:
Woe to the women that sew pillows upon all elbows, and make kerchiefs
for the head of \[persons of\] every stature to hunt souls! Will ye hunt
the souls of my people, and save souls alive for yourselves?

<span id="an_13:19">13:19</span> And ye have profaned me among my people
for handfuls of barley and for pieces of bread, to slay the souls that
should not die, and to save the souls alive that should not live, by
your lying to my people that hearken unto lies.

<span id="an_13:20">13:20</span> Wherefore thus saith the Lord Jehovah:
Behold, I am against your pillows, wherewith ye there hunt the souls to
make \[them\] fly, and I will tear them from your arms; and I will let
the souls go, even the souls that ye hunt to make \[them\] fly.

<span id="an_13:21">13:21</span> Your kerchiefs also will I tear, and
deliver my people out of your hand, and they shall be no more in your
hand to be hunted; and ye shall know that I am Jehovah.

<span id="an_13:22">13:22</span> Because with lies ye have grieved the
heart of the righteous, whom I have not made sad; and strengthened the
hands of the wicked, that he should not return from his wicked way, and
be saved alive:

<span id="an_13:23">13:23</span> Therefore ye shall no more see false
visions, nor divine divinations: and I will deliver my people out of
your hand; and ye shall know that I am Jehovah.

<span id="an_14:1">14:1</span> Then came certain of the elders of Israel
unto me, and sat before me.

<span id="an_14:2">14:2</span> And the word of Jehovah came unto me,
saying,

<span id="an_14:3">14:3</span> Son of man, these men have taken their
idols into their heart, and put the stumblingblock of their iniquity
before their face: should I be inquired of at all by them?

<span id="an_14:4">14:4</span> Therefore speak unto them, and say unto
them, Thus saith the Lord Jehovah: Every man of the house of Israel that
taketh his idols into his heart, and putteth the stumblingblock of his
iniquity before his face, and cometh to the prophet; I Jehovah will
answer him therein according to the multitude of his idols;

<span id="an_14:5">14:5</span> that I may take the house of Israel in
their own heart, because they are all estranged from me through their
idols.

<span id="an_14:6">14:6</span> Therefore say unto the house of Israel,
Thus saith the Lord Jehovah: Return ye, and turn yourselves from your
idols; and turn away your faces from all your abominations.

<span id="an_14:7">14:7</span> For every one of the house of Israel, or
of the strangers that sojourn in Israel, that separateth himself from
me, and taketh his idols into his heart, and putteth the stumblingblock
of his iniquity before his face, and cometh to the prophet to inquire
for himself of me; I Jehovah will answer him by myself:

<span id="an_14:8">14:8</span> and I will set my face against that man,
and will make him an astonishment, for a sign and a proverb, and I will
cut him off from the midst of my people; and ye shall know that I am
Jehovah.

<span id="an_14:9">14:9</span> And if the prophet be deceived and speak
a word, I, Jehovah, have deceived that prophet, and I will stretch out
my hand upon him, and will destroy him from the midst of my people
Israel.

<span id="an_14:10">14:10</span> And they shall bear their iniquity: the
iniquity of the prophet shall be even as the iniquity of him that
seeketh \[unto him\];

<span id="an_14:11">14:11</span> that the house of Israel may go no more
astray from me, neither defile themselves any more with all their
transgressions; but that they may be my people, and I may be their God,
saith the Lord Jehovah.

<span id="an_14:12">14:12</span> And the word of Jehovah came unto me,
saying,

<span id="an_14:13">14:13</span> Son of man, when a land sinneth against
me by committing a trespass, and I stretch out my hand upon it, and
break the staff of the bread thereof, and send famine upon it, and cut
off from it man and beast;

<span id="an_14:14">14:14</span> though these three men, Noah, Daniel,
and Job, were in it, they should deliver but their own souls by their
righteousness, saith the Lord Jehovah.

<span id="an_14:15">14:15</span> If I cause evil beasts to pass through
the land, and they ravage it, and it be made desolate, so that no man
may pass through because of the beasts;

<span id="an_14:16">14:16</span> though these three men were in it, as I
live, saith the Lord Jehovah, they should deliver neither sons nor
daughters; they only should be delivered, but the land should be
desolate.

<span id="an_14:17">14:17</span> Or if I bring a sword upon that land,
and say, Sword, go through the land; so that I cut off from it man and
beast;

<span id="an_14:18">14:18</span> though these three men were in it, as I
live, saith the Lord Jehovah, they should deliver neither sons nor
daughters, but they only should be delivered themselves.

<span id="an_14:19">14:19</span> Or if I send a pestilence into that
land, and pour out my wrath upon it in blood, to cut off from it man and
beast;

<span id="an_14:20">14:20</span> though Noah, Daniel, and Job, were in
it, as I live, saith the Lord Jehovah, they should deliver neither son
nor daughter; they should but deliver their own souls by their
righteousness.

<span id="an_14:21">14:21</span> For thus saith the Lord Jehovah: How
much more when I send my four sore judgments upon Jerusalem, the sword,
and the famine, and the evil beasts, and the pestilence, to cut off from
it man and beast!

<span id="an_14:22">14:22</span> Yet, behold, therein shall be left a
remnant that shall be carried forth, both sons and daughters: behold,
they shall come forth unto you, and ye shall see their way and their
doings; and ye shall be comforted concerning the evil that I have
brought upon Jerusalem, even concerning all that I have brought upon it.

<span id="an_14:23">14:23</span> And they shall comfort you, when ye see
their way and their doings; and ye shall know that I have not done
without cause all that I have done in it, saith the Lord Jehovah.

<span id="an_15:1">15:1</span> And the word of Jehovah came unto me,
saying,

<span id="an_15:2">15:2</span> Son of man, what is the vine-tree more
than any tree, the vine-branch which is among the trees of the forest?

<span id="an_15:3">15:3</span> Shall wood be taken thereof to make any
work? or will men take a pin of it to hang any vessel thereon?

<span id="an_15:4">15:4</span> Behold, it is cast into the fire for
fuel; the fire hath devoured both the ends of it, and the midst of it is
burned: is it profitable for any work?

<span id="an_15:5">15:5</span> Behold, when it was whole, it was meet
for no work: how much less, when the fire hath devoured it, and it is
burned, shall it yet be meet for any work!

<span id="an_15:6">15:6</span> Therefore thus saith the Lord Jehovah: As
the vine-tree among the trees of the forest, which I have given to the
fire for fuel, so will I give the inhabitants of Jerusalem.

<span id="an_15:7">15:7</span> And I will set my face against them; they
shall go forth from the fire, but the fire shall devour them; and ye
shall know that I am Jehovah, when I set my face against them.

<span id="an_15:8">15:8</span> And I will make the land desolate,
because they have committed a trespass, saith the Lord Jehovah.

<span id="an_16:1">16:1</span> Again the word of Jehovah came unto me,
saying,

<span id="an_16:2">16:2</span> Son of man, cause Jerusalem to know her
abominations;

<span id="an_16:3">16:3</span> and say, Thus saith the Lord Jehovah unto
Jerusalem: Thy birth and thy nativity is of the land of the Canaanite;
the Amorite was thy father, and thy mother was a Hittite.

<span id="an_16:4">16:4</span> And as for thy nativity, in the day thou
wast born thy navel was not cut, neither wast thou washed in water to
cleanse thee; thou wast not salted at all, nor swaddled at all.

<span id="an_16:5">16:5</span> No eye pitied thee, to do any of these
things unto thee, to have compassion upon thee; but thou wast cast out
in the open field, for that thy person was abhorred, in the day that
thou wast born.

<span id="an_16:6">16:6</span> And when I passed by thee, and saw thee
weltering in thy blood, I said unto thee, \[Though thou art\] in thy
blood, live; yea, I said unto thee, \[Though thou art\] in thy blood,
live.

<span id="an_16:7">16:7</span> I caused thee to multiply as that which
groweth in the field, and thou didst increase and wax great, and thou
attainedst to excellent ornament; thy breasts were fashioned, and thy
hair was grown; yet thou wast naked and bare.

<span id="an_16:8">16:8</span> Now when I passed by thee, and looked
upon thee, behold, thy time was the time of love; and I spread my skirt
over thee, and covered thy nakedness: yea, I sware unto thee, and
entered into a covenant with thee, saith the Lord Jehovah, and thou
becamest mine.

<span id="an_16:9">16:9</span> Then washed I thee with water; yea, I
thoroughly washed away thy blood from thee, and I anointed thee with
oil.

<span id="an_16:10">16:10</span> I clothed thee also with broidered
work, and shod thee with sealskin, and I girded thee about with fine
linen, and covered thee with silk.

<span id="an_16:11">16:11</span> And I decked thee with ornaments, and I
put bracelets upon thy hands, and a chain on thy neck.

<span id="an_16:12">16:12</span> And I put a ring upon thy nose, and
ear-rings in thine ears, and a beautiful crown upon thy head.

<span id="an_16:13">16:13</span> Thus wast thou decked with gold and
silver; and thy raiment was of fine linen, and silk, and broidered work;
thou didst eat fine flour, and honey, and oil; and thou wast exceeding
beautiful, and thou didst prosper unto royal estate.

<span id="an_16:14">16:14</span> And thy renown went forth among the
nations for thy beauty; for it was perfect, through my majesty which I
had put upon thee, saith the Lord Jehovah.

<span id="an_16:15">16:15</span> But thou didst trust in thy beauty, and
playedst the harlot because of thy renown, and pouredst out thy
whoredoms on every one that passed by; his it was.

<span id="an_16:16">16:16</span> And thou didst take of thy garments,
and madest for thee high places decked with divers colors, and playedst
the harlot upon them: \[the like things\] shall not come, neither shall
it be \[so\].

<span id="an_16:17">16:17</span> Thou didst also take thy fair jewels of
my gold and of my silver, which I had given thee, and madest for thee
images of men, and didst play the harlot with them;

<span id="an_16:18">16:18</span> and thou tookest thy broidered
garments, and coveredst them, and didst set mine oil and mine incense
before them.

<span id="an_16:19">16:19</span> My bread also which I gave thee, fine
flour, and oil, and honey, wherewith I fed thee, thou didst even set it
before them for a sweet savor; and \[thus\] it was, saith the Lord
Jehovah.

<span id="an_16:20">16:20</span> Moreover thou hast taken thy sons and
thy daughters, whom thou hast borne unto me, and these hast thou
sacrificed unto them to be devoured. Were thy whoredoms a small matter,

<span id="an_16:21">16:21</span> that thou hast slain my children, and
delivered them up, in causing them to pass through \[the fire\] unto
them?

<span id="an_16:22">16:22</span> And in all thine abominations and thy
whoredoms thou hast not remembered the days of thy youth, when thou wast
naked and bare, and wast weltering in thy blood.

<span id="an_16:23">16:23</span> And it is come to pass after all thy
wickedness, (woe, woe unto thee! saith the Lord Jehovah,)

<span id="an_16:24">16:24</span> that thou hast built unto thee a
vaulted place, and hast made thee a lofty place in every street.

<span id="an_16:25">16:25</span> Thou hast built thy lofty place at the
head of every way, and hast made thy beauty an abomination, and hast
opened thy feet to every one that passed by, and multiplied thy
whoredom.

<span id="an_16:26">16:26</span> Thou hast also committed fornication
with the Egyptians, thy neighbors, great of flesh; and hast multiplied
thy whoredom, to provoke me to anger.

<span id="an_16:27">16:27</span> Behold therefore, I have stretched out
my hand over thee, and have diminished thine ordinary \[food\], and
delivered thee unto the will of them that hate thee, the daughters of
the Philistines, that are ashamed of thy lewd way.

<span id="an_16:28">16:28</span> Thou hast played the harlot also with
the Assyrians, because thou wast insatiable; yea, thou hast played the
harlot with them, and yet thou wast not satisfied.

<span id="an_16:29">16:29</span> Thou hast moreover multiplied thy
whoredom unto the land of traffic, unto Chaldea; and yet thou wast not
satisfied herewith.

<span id="an_16:30">16:30</span> How weak is thy heart, saith the Lord
Jehovah, seeing thou doest all these things, the work of an impudent
harlot;

<span id="an_16:31">16:31</span> in that thou buildest thy vaulted place
at the head of every way, and makest thy lofty place in every street,
and hast not been as a harlot, in that thou scornest hire.

<span id="an_16:32">16:32</span> A wife that committeth adultery! that
taketh strangers instead of her husband!

<span id="an_16:33">16:33</span> They give gifts to all harlots; but
thou givest thy gifts to all thy lovers, and bribest them, that they may
come unto thee on every side for thy whoredoms.

<span id="an_16:34">16:34</span> And thou art different from \[other\]
women in thy whoredoms, in that none followeth thee to play the harlot;
and whereas thou givest hire, and no hire is given unto thee, therefore
thou art different.

<span id="an_16:35">16:35</span> Wherefore, O harlot, hear the word of
Jehovah:

<span id="an_16:36">16:36</span> Thus saith the Lord Jehovah, Because
thy filthiness was poured out, and thy nakedness uncovered through thy
whoredoms with thy lovers; and because of all the idols of thy
abominations, and for the blood of thy children, that thou didst give
unto them;

<span id="an_16:37">16:37</span> therefore behold, I will gather all thy
lovers, with whom thou hast taken pleasure, and all them that thou hast
loved, with all them that thou hast hated; I will even gather them
against thee on every side, and will uncover thy nakedness unto them,
that they may see all thy nakedness.

<span id="an_16:38">16:38</span> And I will judge thee, as women that
break wedlock and shed blood are judged; and I will bring upon thee the
blood of wrath and jealousy.

<span id="an_16:39">16:39</span> I will also give thee into their hand,
and they shall throw down thy vaulted place, and break down thy lofty
places; and they shall strip thee of thy clothes, and take thy fair
jewels; and they shall leave thee naked and bare.

<span id="an_16:40">16:40</span> They shall also bring up a company
against thee, and they shall stone thee with stones, and thrust thee
through with their swords.

<span id="an_16:41">16:41</span> And they shall burn thy houses with
fire, and execute judgments upon thee in the sight of many women; and I
will cause thee to cease from playing the harlot, and thou shalt also
give no hire any more.

<span id="an_16:42">16:42</span> So will I cause my wrath toward thee to
rest, and my jealousy shall depart from thee, and I will be quiet, and
will be no more angry.

<span id="an_16:43">16:43</span> Because thou hast not remembered the
days of thy youth, but hast raged against me in all these things;
therefore, behold, I also will bring thy way upon thy head, saith the
Lord Jehovah: and thou shalt not commit this lewdness with all thine
abominations.

<span id="an_16:44">16:44</span> Behold, every one that useth proverbs
shall use \[this\] proverb against thee, saying, As is the mother, so is
her daughter.

<span id="an_16:45">16:45</span> Thou art the daughter of thy mother,
that loatheth her husband and her children; and thou art the sister of
thy sisters, who loathed their husbands and their children: your mother
was a Hittite, and your father an Amorite.

<span id="an_16:46">16:46</span> And thine elder sister is Samaria, that
dwelleth at thy left hand, she and her daughters; and thy younger
sister, that dwelleth at thy right hand, is Sodom and her daughters.

<span id="an_16:47">16:47</span> Yet hast thou not walked in their ways,
nor done after their abominations; but, as \[if that were\] a very
little \[thing\], thou wast more corrupt than they in all thy ways.

<span id="an_16:48">16:48</span> As I live, saith the Lord Jehovah,
Sodom thy sister hath not done, she nor her daughters, as thou hast
done, thou and thy daughters.

<span id="an_16:49">16:49</span> Behold, this was the iniquity of thy
sister Sodom: pride, fulness of bread, and prosperous ease was in her
and in her daughters; neither did she strengthen the hand of the poor
and needy.

<span id="an_16:50">16:50</span> And they were haughty, and committed
abomination before me: therefore I took them away as I saw \[good\].

<span id="an_16:51">16:51</span> Neither hath Samaria committed half of
thy sins; but thou hast multiplied thine abominations more than they,
and hast justified thy sisters by all thine abominations which thou hast
done.

<span id="an_16:52">16:52</span> Thou also, bear thou thine own shame,
in that thou hast given judgment for thy sisters; through thy sins that
thou hast committed more abominable than they, they are more righteous
that thou: yea, be thou also confounded, and bear thy shame, in that
thou hast justified thy sisters.

<span id="an_16:53">16:53</span> And I will turn again their captivity,
the captivity of Sodom and her daughters, and the captivity of Samaria
and her daughters, and the captivity of thy captives in the midst of
them;

<span id="an_16:54">16:54</span> that thou mayest bear thine own shame,
and mayest be ashamed because of all that thou hast done, in that thou
art a comfort unto them.

<span id="an_16:55">16:55</span> And thy sisters, Sodom and her
daughters, shall return to their former estate; and Samaria and her
daughters shall return to their former estate; and thou and thy
daughters shall return to your former estate.

<span id="an_16:56">16:56</span> For thy sister Sodom was not mentioned
by thy mouth in the day of thy pride,

<span id="an_16:57">16:57</span> before thy wickedness was uncovered, as
at the time of the reproach of the daughters of Syria, and of all that
are round about her, the daughters of the Philistines, that do despite
unto thee round about.

<span id="an_16:58">16:58</span> Thou hast borne thy lewdness and thine
abominations, saith Jehovah.

<span id="an_16:59">16:59</span> For thus saith the Lord Jehovah: I will
also deal with thee as thou hast done, who hast despised the oath in
breaking the covenant.

<span id="an_16:60">16:60</span> Nevertheless I will remember my
covenant with thee in the days of thy youth, and I will establish unto
thee an everlasting covenant.

<span id="an_16:61">16:61</span> Then shalt thou remember thy ways, and
be ashamed, when thou shalt receive thy sisters, thine elder \[sisters\]
and thy younger; and I will give them unto thee for daughters, but not
by thy covenant.

<span id="an_16:62">16:62</span> And I will establish my covenant with
thee; and thou shalt know that I am Jehovah;

<span id="an_16:63">16:63</span> that thou mayest remember, and be
confounded, and never open thy mouth any more, because of thy shame,
when I have forgiven thee all that thou hast done, saith the Lord
Jehovah.

<span id="an_17:1">17:1</span> And the word of Jehovah came unto me,
saying,

<span id="an_17:2">17:2</span> Son of man, put forth a riddle, and speak
a parable unto the house of Israel;

<span id="an_17:3">17:3</span> and say, Thus saith the Lord Jehovah: A
great eagle with great wings and long pinions, full of feathers, which
had divers colors, came unto Lebanon, and took the top of the cedar:

<span id="an_17:4">17:4</span> he cropped off the topmost of the young
twigs thereof, and carried it unto a land of traffic; he set it in a
city of merchants.

<span id="an_17:5">17:5</span> He took also of the seed of the land, and
planted it in a fruitful soil; he placed it beside many waters; he set
it as a willow-tree.

<span id="an_17:6">17:6</span> And it grew, and became a spreading vine
of low stature, whose branches turned toward him, and the roots thereof
were under him: so it became a vine, and brought forth branches, and
shot forth sprigs.

<span id="an_17:7">17:7</span> There was also another great eagle with
great wings and many feathers: and, behold, this vine did bend its roots
toward him, and shot forth its branches toward him, from the beds of its
plantation, that he might water it.

<span id="an_17:8">17:8</span> It was planted in a good soil by many
waters, that it might bring forth branches, and that it might bear
fruit, that it might be a goodly vine.

<span id="an_17:9">17:9</span> Say thou, Thus saith the Lord Jehovah:
Shall it prosper? shall he not pull up the roots thereof, and cut off
the fruit thereof, that it may wither; that all its fresh springing
leaves may wither? and not by a strong arm or much people can it be
raised from the roots thereof.

<span id="an_17:10">17:10</span> Yea, behold, being planted, shall it
prosper? shall it not utterly wither, when the east wind toucheth it? it
shall wither in the beds where it grew.

<span id="an_17:11">17:11</span> Moreover the word of Jehovah came unto
me, saying,

<span id="an_17:12">17:12</span> Say now to the rebellious house, Know
ye not what these things mean? tell them, Behold, the king of Babylon
came to Jerusalem, and took the king thereof, and the princes thereof,
and brought them to him to Babylon:

<span id="an_17:13">17:13</span> and he took of the seed royal, and made
a covenant with him; he also brought him under an oath, and took away
the mighty of the land;

<span id="an_17:14">17:14</span> that the kingdom might be base, that it
might not lift itself up, but that by keeping his covenant it might
stand.

<span id="an_17:15">17:15</span> But he rebelled against him in sending
his ambassadors into Egypt, that they might give him horses and much
people. Shall he prosper? shall he escape that doeth such things? shall
he break the covenant, and yet escape?

<span id="an_17:16">17:16</span> As I live, saith the Lord Jehovah,
surely in the place where the king dwelleth that made him king, whose
oath he despised, and whose covenant he brake, even with him in the
midst of Babylon he shall die.

<span id="an_17:17">17:17</span> Neither shall Pharaoh with his mighty
army and great company help him in the war, when they cast up mounds and
build forts, to cut off many persons.

<span id="an_17:18">17:18</span> For he hath despised the oath by
breaking the covenant; and behold, he had given his hand, and yet hath
done all these things; he shall not escape.

<span id="an_17:19">17:19</span> Therefore thus saith the Lord Jehovah:
As I live, surely mine oath that he hath despised, and my covenant that
he hath broken, I will even bring it upon his own head.

<span id="an_17:20">17:20</span> And I will spread my net upon him, and
he shall be taken in my snare, and I will bring him to Babylon, and will
enter into judgment with him there for his trespass that he hath
trespassed against me.

<span id="an_17:21">17:21</span> And all his fugitives in all his bands
shall fall by the sword, and they that remain shall be scattered toward
every wind: and ye shall know that I, Jehovah, have spoken it.

<span id="an_17:22">17:22</span> Thus saith the Lord Jehovah: I will
also take of the lofty top of the cedar, and will set it; I will crop
off from the topmost of its young twigs a tender one, and I will plant
it upon a high and lofty mountain:

<span id="an_17:23">17:23</span> in the mountain of the height of Israel
will I plant it; and it shall bring forth boughs, and bear fruit, and be
a goodly cedar: and under it shall dwell all birds of every wing; in the
shade of the branches thereof shall they dwell.

<span id="an_17:24">17:24</span> And all the trees of the field shall
know that I, Jehovah, have brought down the high tree, have exalted the
low tree, have dried up the green tree, and have made the dry tree to
flourish; I, Jehovah, have spoken and have done it.

<span id="an_18:1">18:1</span> The word of Jehovah came unto me again,
saying,

<span id="an_18:2">18:2</span> What mean ye, that ye use this proverb
concerning the land of Israel, saying, The fathers have eaten sour
grapes, and the children's teeth are set on edge?

<span id="an_18:3">18:3</span> As I live, saith the Lord Jehovah, ye
shall not have \[occasion\] any more to use this proverb in Israel.

<span id="an_18:4">18:4</span> Behold, all souls are mine; as the soul
of the father, so also the soul of the son is mine: the soul that
sinneth, it shall die.

<span id="an_18:5">18:5</span> But if a man be just, and do that which
is lawful and right,

<span id="an_18:6">18:6</span> and hath not eaten upon the mountains,
neither hath lifted up his eyes to the idols of the house of Israel,
neither hath defiled his neighbor's wife, neither hath come near to a
woman in her impurity,

<span id="an_18:7">18:7</span> and hath not wronged any, but hath
restored to the debtor his pledge, hath taken nought by robbery, hath
given his bread to the hungry, and hath covered the naked with a
garment;

<span id="an_18:8">18:8</span> he that hath not given forth upon
interest, neither hath taken any increase, that hath withdrawn his hand
from iniquity, hath executed true justice between man and man,

<span id="an_18:9">18:9</span> hath walked in my statutes, and hath kept
mine ordinances, to deal truly; he is just, he shall surely live, saith
the Lord Jehovah.

<span id="an_18:10">18:10</span> If he beget a son that is a robber, a
shedder of blood, and that doeth any one of these things,

<span id="an_18:11">18:11</span> and that doeth not any of those
\[duties\], but even hath eaten upon the mountains, and defiled his
neighbor's wife,

<span id="an_18:12">18:12</span> hath wronged the poor and needy, hath
taken by robbery, hath not restored the pledge, and hath lifted up his
eyes to the idols, hath committed abomination,

<span id="an_18:13">18:13</span> hath given forth upon interest, and
hath taken increase; shall he then live? he shall not live: he hath done
all these abominations; he shall surely die; his blood shall be upon
him.

<span id="an_18:14">18:14</span> Now, lo, if he beget a son, that seeth
all his father's sins, which he hath done, and feareth, and doeth not
such like;

<span id="an_18:15">18:15</span> that hath not eaten upon the mountains,
neither hath lifted up his eyes to the idols of the house of Israel,
hath not defiled his neighbor's wife,

<span id="an_18:16">18:16</span> neither hath wronged any, hath not
taken aught to pledge, neither hath taken by robbery, but hath given his
bread to the hungry, and hath covered the naked with a garment;

<span id="an_18:17">18:17</span> that hath withdrawn his hand from the
poor, that hath not received interest nor increase, hath executed mine
ordinances, hath walked in my statutes; he shall not die for the
iniquity of his father, he shall surely live.

<span id="an_18:18">18:18</span> As for his father, because he cruelly
oppressed, robbed his brother, and did that which is not good among his
people, behold, he shall die in his iniquity.

<span id="an_18:19">18:19</span> Yet say ye, Wherefore doth not the son
bear the iniquity of the father? when the son hath done that which is
lawful and right, and hath kept all my statutes, and hath done them, he
shall surely live.

<span id="an_18:20">18:20</span> The soul that sinneth, it shall die:
the son shall not bear the iniquity of the father, neither shall the
father bear the iniquity of the son; the righteousness of the righteous
shall be upon him, and the wickedness of the wicked shall be upon him.

<span id="an_18:21">18:21</span> But if the wicked turn from all his
sins that he hath committed, and keep all my statutes, and do that which
is lawful and right, he shall surely live, he shall not die.

<span id="an_18:22">18:22</span> None of his transgressions that he hath
committed shall be remembered against him: in his righteousness that he
hath done he shall live.

<span id="an_18:23">18:23</span> Have I any pleasure in the death of the
wicked? saith the Lord Jehovah; and not rather that he should return
from his way, and live?

<span id="an_18:24">18:24</span> But when the righteous turneth away
from his righteousness, and committeth iniquity, and doeth according to
all the abominations that the wicked man doeth, shall he live? None of
his righteous deeds that he hath done shall be remembered: in his
trespass that he hath trespassed, and in his sin that he hath sinned, in
them shall he die.

<span id="an_18:25">18:25</span> Yet ye say, The way of the Lord is not
equal. Hear now, O house of Israel: Is not my way equal? are not your
ways unequal?

<span id="an_18:26">18:26</span> When the righteous man turneth away
from his righteousness, and committeth iniquity, and dieth therein; in
his iniquity that he hath done shall he die.

<span id="an_18:27">18:27</span> Again, when the wicked man turneth away
from his wickedness that he hath committed, and doeth that which is
lawful and right, he shall save his soul alive.

<span id="an_18:28">18:28</span> Because he considereth, and turneth
away from all his transgressions that he hath committed, he shall surely
live, he shall not die.

<span id="an_18:29">18:29</span> Yet saith the house of Israel, The way
of the Lord is not equal. O house of Israel, are not my ways equal? are
not your ways unequal?

<span id="an_18:30">18:30</span> Therefore I will judge you, O house of
Israel, every one according to his ways, saith the Lord Jehovah. Return
ye, and turn yourselves from all your transgressions; so iniquity shall
not be your ruin.

<span id="an_18:31">18:31</span> Cast away from you all your
transgressions, wherein ye have transgressed; and make you a new heart
and a new spirit: for why will ye die, O house of Israel?

<span id="an_18:32">18:32</span> For I have no pleasure in the death of
him that dieth, saith the Lord Jehovah: wherefore turn yourselves, and
live.

<span id="an_19:1">19:1</span> Moreover, take thou up a lamentation for
the princes of Israel,

<span id="an_19:2">19:2</span> and say, What was thy mother? A lioness:
she couched among lions, in the midst of the young lions she nourished
her whelps.

<span id="an_19:3">19:3</span> And she brought up one of her whelps: he
became a young lion, and he learned to catch the prey; he devoured men.

<span id="an_19:4">19:4</span> The nations also heard of him; he was
taken in their pit; and they brought him with hooks unto the land of
Egypt.

<span id="an_19:5">19:5</span> Now when she saw that she had waited, and
her hope was lost, then she took another of her whelps, and made him a
young lion.

<span id="an_19:6">19:6</span> And he went up and down among the lions;
he became a young lion, and he learned to catch the prey; he devoured
men.

<span id="an_19:7">19:7</span> And he knew their palaces, and laid waste
their cities; and the land was desolate, and the fulness thereof,
because of the noise of his roaring.

<span id="an_19:8">19:8</span> Then the nations set against him on every
side from the provinces; and they spread their net over him; he was
taken in their pit.

<span id="an_19:9">19:9</span> And they put him in a cage with hooks,
and brought him to the king of Babylon; they brought him into
strongholds, that his voice should no more be heard upon the mountains
of Israel.

<span id="an_19:10">19:10</span> Thy mother was like a vine, in thy
blood, planted by the waters: it was fruitful and full of branches by
reason of many waters.

<span id="an_19:11">19:11</span> And it had strong rods for the sceptres
of them that bare rule, and their stature was exalted among the thick
boughs, and they were seen in their height with the multitude of their
branches.

<span id="an_19:12">19:12</span> But it was plucked up in fury, it was
cast down to the ground, and the east wind dried up its fruit: its
strong rods were broken off and withered; the fire consumed them.

<span id="an_19:13">19:13</span> And now it is planted in the
wilderness, in a dry and thirsty land.

<span id="an_19:14">19:14</span> And fire is gone out of the rods of its
branches, it hath devoured its fruit, so that there is in it no strong
rod to be a sceptre to rule. This is a lamentation, and shall be for a
lamentation.

<span id="an_20:1">20:1</span> And it came to pass in the seventh year,
in the fifth \[month\], the tenth \[day\] of the month, that certain of
the elders of Israel came to inquire of Jehovah, and sat before me.

<span id="an_20:2">20:2</span> And the word of Jehovah came unto me,
saying,

<span id="an_20:3">20:3</span> Son of man, speak unto the elders of
Israel, and say unto them, Thus saith the Lord Jehovah: Is it to inquire
of me that ye are come? As I live, saith the Lord Jehovah, I will not be
inquired of by you.

<span id="an_20:4">20:4</span> Wilt thou judge them, son of man, wilt
thou judge them? Cause them to know the abominations of their fathers;

<span id="an_20:5">20:5</span> and say unto them, Thus saith the Lord
Jehovah: In the day when I chose Israel, and sware unto the seed of the
house of Jacob, and made myself known unto them in the land of Egypt,
when I sware unto them, saying, I am Jehovah your God;

<span id="an_20:6">20:6</span> in that day I sware unto them, to bring
them forth out of the land of Egypt into a land that I had searched out
for them, flowing with milk and honey, which is the glory of all lands.

<span id="an_20:7">20:7</span> And I said unto them, Cast ye away every
man the abominations of his eyes, and defile not yourselves with the
idols of Egypt; I am Jehovah your God.

<span id="an_20:8">20:8</span> But they rebelled against me, and would
not hearken unto me; they did not every man cast away the abominations
of their eyes, neither did they forsake the idols of Egypt. Then I said
I would pour out my wrath upon them, to accomplish my anger against them
in the midst of the land of Egypt.

<span id="an_20:9">20:9</span> But I wrought for my name's sake, that it
should not be profaned in the sight of the nations, among which they
were, in whose sight I made myself known unto them, in bringing them
forth out of the land of Egypt.

<span id="an_20:10">20:10</span> So I caused them to go forth out of the
land of Egypt, and brought them into the wilderness.

<span id="an_20:11">20:11</span> And I gave them my statutes, and showed
them mine ordinances, which if a man do, he shall live in them.

<span id="an_20:12">20:12</span> Moreover also I gave them my sabbaths,
to be a sign between me and them, that they might know that I am Jehovah
that sanctifieth them.

<span id="an_20:13">20:13</span> But the house of Israel rebelled
against me in the wilderness: they walked not in my statutes, and they
rejected mine ordinances, which if a man keep, he shall live in them;
and my sabbaths they greatly profaned. Then I said I would pour out my
wrath upon them in the wilderness, to consume them.

<span id="an_20:14">20:14</span> But I wrought for my name's sake, that
it should not be profaned in the sight of the nations, in whose sight I
brought them out.

<span id="an_20:15">20:15</span> Moreover also I sware unto them in the
wilderness, that I would not bring them into the land which I had given
them, flowing with milk and honey, which is the glory of all lands;

<span id="an_20:16">20:16</span> because they rejected mine ordinances,
and walked not in my statutes, and profaned my sabbaths: for their heart
went after their idols.

<span id="an_20:17">20:17</span> Nevertheless mine eye spared them, and
I destroyed them not, neither did I make a full end of them in the
wilderness.

<span id="an_20:18">20:18</span> And I said unto their children in the
wilderness, Walk ye not in the statutes of your fathers, neither observe
their ordinances, nor defile yourselves with their idols.

<span id="an_20:19">20:19</span> I am Jehovah your God: walk in my
statutes, and keep mine ordinances, and do them;

<span id="an_20:20">20:20</span> and hallow my sabbaths; and they shall
be a sign between me and you, that ye may know that I am Jehovah your
God.

<span id="an_20:21">20:21</span> But the children rebelled against me;
they walked not in my statutes, neither kept mine ordinances to do them,
which if a man do, he shall live in them; they profaned my sabbaths.
Then I said I would pour out my wrath upon them, to accomplish my anger
against them in the wilderness.

<span id="an_20:22">20:22</span> Nevertheless I withdrew my hand, and
wrought for my name's sake, that it should not be profaned in the sight
of the nations, in whose sight I brought them forth.

<span id="an_20:23">20:23</span> Moreover I sware unto them in the
wilderness, that I would scatter them among the nations, and disperse
them through the countries;

<span id="an_20:24">20:24</span> because they had not executed mine
ordinances, but had rejected my statutes, and had profaned my sabbaths,
and their eyes were after their fathers' idols.

<span id="an_20:25">20:25</span> Moreover also I gave them statutes that
were not good, and ordinances wherein they should not live;

<span id="an_20:26">20:26</span> and I polluted them in their own gifts,
in that they caused to pass through \[the fire\] all that openeth the
womb, that I might make them desolate, to the end that they might know
that I am Jehovah.

<span id="an_20:27">20:27</span> Therefore, son of man, speak unto the
house of Israel, and say unto them, Thus saith the Lord Jehovah: In this
moreover have your fathers blasphemed me, in that they have committed a
trespass against me.

<span id="an_20:28">20:28</span> For when I had brought them into the
land, which I sware to give unto them, then they saw every high hill,
and every thick tree, and they offered there their sacrifices, and there
they presented the provocation of their offering; there also they made
their sweet savor, and they poured out there their drink-offerings.

<span id="an_20:29">20:29</span> Then I said unto them, What meaneth the
high place whereunto ye go? So the name thereof is called Bamah unto
this day.

<span id="an_20:30">20:30</span> Wherefore say unto the house of Israel,
Thus saith the Lord Jehovah: Do ye pollute yourselves after the manner
of your fathers? and play ye the harlot after their abominations?

<span id="an_20:31">20:31</span> and when ye offer your gifts, when ye
make your sons to pass through the fire, do ye pollute yourselves with
all your idols unto this day? and shall I be inquired of by you, O house
of Israel? As I live, saith the Lord Jehovah, I will not be inquired of
by you;

<span id="an_20:32">20:32</span> and that which cometh into your mind
shall not be at all, in that ye say, We will be as the nations, as the
families of the countries, to serve wood and stone.

<span id="an_20:33">20:33</span> As I live, saith the Lord Jehovah,
surely with a mighty hand, and with an outstretched arm, and with wrath
poured out, will I be king over you:

<span id="an_20:34">20:34</span> and I will bring you out from the
peoples, and will gather you out of the countries wherein ye are
scattered, with a mighty hand, and with an outstretched arm, and with
wrath poured out;

<span id="an_20:35">20:35</span> and I will bring you into the
wilderness of the peoples, and there will I enter into judgment with you
face to face.

<span id="an_20:36">20:36</span> Like as I entered into judgment with
your fathers in the wilderness of the land of Egypt, so will I enter
into judgment with you, saith the Lord Jehovah.

<span id="an_20:37">20:37</span> And I will cause you to pass under the
rod, and I will bring you into the bond of the covenant;

<span id="an_20:38">20:38</span> and I will purge out from among you the
rebels, and them that transgress against me; I will bring them forth out
of the land where they sojourn, but they shall not enter into the land
of Israel: and ye shall know that I am Jehovah.

<span id="an_20:39">20:39</span> As for you, O house of Israel, thus
saith the Lord Jehovah: Go ye, serve every one his idols, and hereafter
also, if ye will not hearken unto me; but my holy name shall ye no more
profane with your gifts, and with your idols.

<span id="an_20:40">20:40</span> For in my holy mountain, in the
mountain of the height of Israel, saith the Lord Jehovah, there shall
all the house of Israel, all of them, serve me in the land: there will I
accept them, and there will I require your offerings, and the
first-fruits of your oblations, with all your holy things.

<span id="an_20:41">20:41</span> As a sweet savor will I accept you,
when I bring you out from the peoples, and gather you out of the
countries wherein ye have been scattered; and I will be sanctified in
you in the sight of the nations.

<span id="an_20:42">20:42</span> And ye shall know that I am Jehovah,
when I shall bring you into the land of Israel, into the country which I
sware to give unto your fathers.

<span id="an_20:43">20:43</span> And there shall ye remember your ways,
and all your doings, wherein ye have polluted yourselves; and ye shall
loathe yourselves in your own sight for all your evils that ye have
committed.

<span id="an_20:44">20:44</span> And ye shall know that I am Jehovah,
when I have dealt with you for my name's sake, not according to your
evil ways, nor according to your corrupt doings, O ye house of Israel,
saith the Lord Jehovah.

<span id="an_20:45">20:45</span> And the word of Jehovah came unto me,
saying,

<span id="an_20:46">20:46</span> Son of man, set thy face toward the
south, and drop \[thy word\] toward the south, and prophesy against the
forest of the field in the South;

<span id="an_20:47">20:47</span> and say to the forest of the South,
Hear the word of Jehovah: Thus saith the Lord Jehovah, Behold, I will
kindle a fire in thee, and it shall devour every green tree in thee, and
every dry tree: the flaming flame shall not be quenched, and all faces
from the south to the north shall be burnt thereby.

<span id="an_20:48">20:48</span> And all flesh shall see that I,
Jehovah, have kindled it; it shall not be quenched.

<span id="an_20:49">20:49</span> Then said I, Ah Lord Jehovah! they say
of me, Is he not a speaker of parables?

<span id="an_21:1">21:1</span> And the word of Jehovah came unto me,
saying,

<span id="an_21:2">21:2</span> Son of man, set thy face toward
Jerusalem, and drop \[thy word\] toward the sanctuaries, and prophesy
against the land of Israel;

<span id="an_21:3">21:3</span> and say to the land of Israel, Thus saith
Jehovah: Behold, I am against thee, and will draw forth my sword out of
its sheath, and will cut off from thee the righteous and the wicked.

<span id="an_21:4">21:4</span> Seeing then that I will cut off from thee
the righteous and the wicked, therefore shall my sword go forth out of
its sheath against all flesh from the south to the north:

<span id="an_21:5">21:5</span> and all flesh shall know that I, Jehovah,
have drawn forth my sword out of its sheath; it shall not return any
more.

<span id="an_21:6">21:6</span> Sigh therefore, thou son of man; with the
breaking of thy loins and with bitterness shalt thou sigh before their
eyes.

<span id="an_21:7">21:7</span> And it shall be, when they say unto thee,
Wherefore sighest thou? that thou shalt say, Because of the tidings, for
it cometh; and every heart shall melt, and all hands shall be feeble,
and every spirit shall faint, and all knees shall be weak as water:
behold, it cometh, and it shall be done, saith the Lord Jehovah.

<span id="an_21:8">21:8</span> And the word of Jehovah came unto me,
saying,

<span id="an_21:9">21:9</span> Son of man, prophesy, and say, Thus saith
Jehovah: Say, A sword, a sword, it is sharpened, and also furbished;

<span id="an_21:10">21:10</span> it is sharpened that it may make a
slaughter; it is furbished that it may be as lightning: shall we then
make mirth? the rod of my son, it contemneth every tree.

<span id="an_21:11">21:11</span> And it is given to be furbished, that
it may be handled: the sword, it is sharpened, yea, it is furbished, to
give it into the hand of the slayer.

<span id="an_21:12">21:12</span> Cry and wail, son of man; for it is
upon my people, it is upon all the princes of Israel: they are delivered
over to the sword with my people; smite therefore upon thy thigh.

<span id="an_21:13">21:13</span> For there is a trial; and what if even
the rod that contemneth shall be no more? saith the Lord Jehovah.

<span id="an_21:14">21:14</span> Thou therefore, son of man, prophesy,
and smite thy hands together; and let the sword be doubled the third
time, the sword of the deadly wounded: it is the sword of the great one
that is deadly wounded, which entereth into their chambers.

<span id="an_21:15">21:15</span> I have set the threatening sword
against all their gates, that their heart may melt, and their stumblings
be multiplied: ah! it is made as lightning, it is pointed for slaughter.

<span id="an_21:16">21:16</span> Gather thee together, go to the right,
set thyself in array, go to the left, whithersoever thy face is set.

<span id="an_21:17">21:17</span> I will also smite my hands together,
and I will cause my wrath to rest: I, Jehovah, have spoken it.

<span id="an_21:18">21:18</span> The word of Jehovah came unto me again,
saying,

<span id="an_21:19">21:19</span> Also, thou son of man, appoint thee two
ways, that the sword of the king of Babylon may come; they twain shall
come forth out of one land: and mark out a place, mark it out at the
head of the way to the city.

<span id="an_21:20">21:20</span> Thou shalt appoint a way for the sword
to come to Rabbah of the children of Ammon, and to Judah in Jerusalem
the fortified.

<span id="an_21:21">21:21</span> For the king of Babylon stood at the
parting of the way, at the head of the two ways, to use divination: he
shook the arrows to and fro, he consulted the teraphim, he looked in the
liver.

<span id="an_21:22">21:22</span> In his right hand was the divination
\[for\] Jerusalem, to set battering rams, to open the mouth in the
slaughter, to lift up the voice with shouting, to set battering rams
against the gates, to cast up mounds, to build forts.

<span id="an_21:23">21:23</span> And it shall be unto them as a false
divination in their sight, who have sworn oaths unto them; but he
bringeth iniquity to remembrance, that they may be taken.

<span id="an_21:24">21:24</span> Therefore thus saith the Lord Jehovah:
Because ye have made your iniquity to be remembered, in that your
transgressions are uncovered, so that in all your doings your sins do
appear; because that ye are come to remembrance, ye shall be taken with
the hand.

<span id="an_21:25">21:25</span> And thou, O deadly wounded wicked one,
the prince of Israel, whose day is come, in the time of the iniquity of
the end,

<span id="an_21:26">21:26</span> thus saith the Lord Jehovah: Remove the
mitre, and take off the crown; this \[shall be\] no more the same; exalt
that which is low, and abase that which is high.

<span id="an_21:27">21:27</span> I will overturn, overturn, overturn it:
this also shall be no more, until he come whose right it is; and I will
give it \[him\].

<span id="an_21:28">21:28</span> And thou, son of man, prophesy, and
say, Thus saith the Lord Jehovah concerning the children of Ammon, and
concerning their reproach; and say thou, A sword, a sword is drawn, for
the slaughter it is furbished, to cause it to devour, that it may be as
lightning;

<span id="an_21:29">21:29</span> while they see for thee false visions,
while they divine lies unto thee, to lay thee upon the necks of the
wicked that are deadly wounded, whose day is come in the time of the
iniquity of the end.

<span id="an_21:30">21:30</span> Cause it to return into its sheath. In
the place where thou wast created, in the land of thy birth, will I
judge thee.

<span id="an_21:31">21:31</span> And I will pour out mine indignation
upon thee; I will blow upon thee with the fire of my wrath; and I will
deliver thee into the hand of brutish men, skilful to destroy.

<span id="an_21:32">21:32</span> Thou shalt be for fuel to the fire; thy
blood shall be in the midst of the land; thou shalt be no more
remembered: for I, Jehovah, have spoken it.

<span id="an_22:1">22:1</span> Moreover the word of Jehovah came unto
me, saying,

<span id="an_22:2">22:2</span> And thou, son of man, wilt thou judge,
wilt thou judge the bloody city? then cause her to know all her
abominations.

<span id="an_22:3">22:3</span> And thou shalt say, Thus saith the Lord
Jehovah: A city that sheddeth blood in the midst of her, that her time
may come, and that maketh idols against herself to defile her!

<span id="an_22:4">22:4</span> Thou art become guilty in thy blood that
thou hast shed, and art defiled in thine idols which thou hast made; and
thou hast caused thy days to draw near, and art come even unto thy
years: therefore have I made thee a reproach unto the nations, and a
mocking to all the countries.

<span id="an_22:5">22:5</span> Those that are near, and those that are
far from thee, shall mock thee, thou infamous one \[and\] full of
tumult.

<span id="an_22:6">22:6</span> Behold, the princes of Israel, every one
according to his power, have been in thee to shed blood.

<span id="an_22:7">22:7</span> In thee have they set light by father and
mother; in the midst of thee have they dealt by oppression with the
sojourner; in thee have they wronged the fatherless and the widow.

<span id="an_22:8">22:8</span> Thou hast despised my holy things, and
hast profaned my sabbaths.

<span id="an_22:9">22:9</span> Slanderous men have been in thee to shed
blood; and in thee they have eaten upon the mountains: in the midst of
thee they have committed lewdness.

<span id="an_22:10">22:10</span> In thee have they uncovered their
fathers' nakedness; in thee have they humbled her that was unclean in
her impurity.

<span id="an_22:11">22:11</span> And one hath committed abomination with
his neighbor's wife; and another hath lewdly defiled his
daughter-in-law; and another in thee hath humbled his sister, his
father's daughter.

<span id="an_22:12">22:12</span> In thee have they taken bribes to shed
blood; thou hast taken interest and increase, and thou hast greedily
gained of thy neighbors by oppression, and hast forgotten me, saith the
Lord Jehovah.

<span id="an_22:13">22:13</span> Behold, therefore, I have smitten my
hand at thy dishonest gain which thou hast made, and at thy blood which
hath been in the midst of thee.

<span id="an_22:14">22:14</span> Can thy heart endure, or can thy hands
be strong, in the days that I shall deal with thee? I, Jehovah, have
spoken it, and will do it.

<span id="an_22:15">22:15</span> And I will scatter thee among the
nations, and disperse thee through the countries; and I will consume thy
filthiness out of thee.

<span id="an_22:16">22:16</span> And thou shalt be profaned in thyself,
in the sight of the nations; and thou shalt know that I am Jehovah.

<span id="an_22:17">22:17</span> And the word of Jehovah came unto me,
saying,

<span id="an_22:18">22:18</span> Son of man, the house of Israel is
become dross unto me: all of them are brass and tin and iron and lead,
in the midst of the furnace; they are the dross of silver.

<span id="an_22:19">22:19</span> Therefore thus saith the Lord Jehovah:
Because ye are all become dross, therefore, behold, I will gather you
into the midst of Jerusalem.

<span id="an_22:20">22:20</span> As they gather silver and brass and
iron and lead and tin into the midst of the furnace, to blow the fire
upon it, to melt it; so will I gather you in mine anger and in my wrath,
and I will lay you there, and melt you.

<span id="an_22:21">22:21</span> Yea, I will gather you, and blow upon
you with the fire of my wrath, and ye shall be melted in the midst
thereof.

<span id="an_22:22">22:22</span> As silver is melted in the midst of the
furnace, so shall ye be melted in the midst thereof; and ye shall know
that I, Jehovah, have poured out my wrath upon you.

<span id="an_22:23">22:23</span> And the word of Jehovah came unto me,
saying,

<span id="an_22:24">22:24</span> Son of man, say unto her, Thou art a
land that is not cleansed, nor rained upon in the day of indignation.

<span id="an_22:25">22:25</span> There is a conspiracy of her prophets
in the midst thereof, like a roaring lion ravening the prey: they have
devoured souls; they take treasure and precious things; they have made
her widows many in the midst thereof.

<span id="an_22:26">22:26</span> Her priests have done violence to my
law, and have profaned my holy things: they have made no distinction
between the holy and the common, neither have they caused men to discern
between the unclean and the clean, and have hid their eyes from my
sabbaths, and I am profaned among them.

<span id="an_22:27">22:27</span> Her princes in the midst thereof are
like wolves ravening the prey, to shed blood, \[and\] to destroy souls,
that they may get dishonest gain.

<span id="an_22:28">22:28</span> And her prophets have daubed for them
with untempered \[mortar\], seeing false visions, and divining lies unto
them, saying, Thus saith the Lord Jehovah, when Jehovah hath not spoken.

<span id="an_22:29">22:29</span> The people of the land have used
oppression, and exercised robbery; yea, they have vexed the poor and
needy, and have oppressed the sojourner wrongfully.

<span id="an_22:30">22:30</span> And I sought for a man among them, that
should build up the wall, and stand in the gap before me for the land,
that I should not destroy it; but I found none.

<span id="an_22:31">22:31</span> Therefore have I poured out mine
indignation upon them; I have consumed them with the fire of my wrath:
their own way have I brought upon their heads, saith the Lord Jehovah.

<span id="an_23:1">23:1</span> The word of Jehovah came again unto me,
saying,

<span id="an_23:2">23:2</span> Son of man, there were two women, the
daughters of one mother:

<span id="an_23:3">23:3</span> and they played the harlot in Egypt; they
played the harlot in their youth; there were their breasts pressed, and
there was handled the bosom of their virginity.

<span id="an_23:4">23:4</span> And the names of them were Oholah the
elder, and Oholibah her sister: and they became mine, and they bare sons
and daughters. And as for their names, Samaria is Oholah, and Jerusalem
Oholibah.

<span id="an_23:5">23:5</span> And Oholah played the harlot when she was
mine; and she doted on her lovers, on the Assyrians \[her\] neighbors,

<span id="an_23:6">23:6</span> who were clothed with blue, governors and
rulers, all of them desirable young men, horsemen riding upon horses.

<span id="an_23:7">23:7</span> And she bestowed her whoredoms upon them,
the choicest men of Assyria all of them; and on whomsoever she doted,
with all their idols she defiled herself.

<span id="an_23:8">23:8</span> Neither hath she left her whoredoms since
\[the days of\] Egypt; for in her youth they lay with her, and they
handled the bosom of her virginity; and they poured out their whoredom
upon her.

<span id="an_23:9">23:9</span> Wherefore I delivered her into the hand
of her lovers, into the hand of the Assyrians, upon whom she doted.

<span id="an_23:10">23:10</span> These uncovered her nakedness; they
took her sons and her daughters; and her they slew with the sword: and
she became a byword among women; for they executed judgments upon her.

<span id="an_23:11">23:11</span> And her sister Oholibah saw this, yet
was she more corrupt in her doting than she, and in her whoredoms which
were more than the whoredoms of her sister.

<span id="an_23:12">23:12</span> She doted upon the Assyrians, governors
and rulers, \[her\] neighbors, clothed most gorgeously, horsemen riding
upon horses, all of them desirable young men.

<span id="an_23:13">23:13</span> And I saw that she was defiled; they
both took one way.

<span id="an_23:14">23:14</span> And she increased her whoredoms; for
she saw men portrayed upon the wall, the images of the Chaldeans
portrayed with vermilion,

<span id="an_23:15">23:15</span> girded with girdles upon their loins,
with flowing turbans upon their heads, all of them princes to look upon,
after the likeness of the Babylonians in Chaldea, the land of their
nativity.

<span id="an_23:16">23:16</span> And as soon as she saw them she doted
upon them, and sent messengers unto them into Chaldea.

<span id="an_23:17">23:17</span> And the Babylonians came to her into
the bed of love, and they defiled her with their whoredom, and she was
polluted with them, and her soul was alienated from them.

<span id="an_23:18">23:18</span> So she uncovered her whoredoms, and
uncovered her nakedness: then my soul was alienated from her, like as my
soul was alienated from her sister.

<span id="an_23:19">23:19</span> Yet she multiplied her whoredoms,
remembering the days of her youth, wherein she had played the harlot in
the land of Egypt.

<span id="an_23:20">23:20</span> And she doted upon their paramours,
whose flesh is as the flesh of asses, and whose issue is like the issue
of horses.

<span id="an_23:21">23:21</span> Thus thou calledst to remembrance the
lewdness of thy youth, in the handling of thy bosom by the Egyptians for
the breasts of thy youth.

<span id="an_23:22">23:22</span> Therefore, O Oholibah, thus saith the
Lord Jehovah: Behold, I will raise up thy lovers against thee, from whom
thy soul is alienated, and I will bring them against thee on every side:

<span id="an_23:23">23:23</span> the Babylonians and all the Chaldeans,
Pekod and Shoa and Koa, \[and\] all the Assyrians with them; desirable
young men, governors and rulers all of them, princes and men of renown,
all of them riding upon horses.

<span id="an_23:24">23:24</span> And they shall come against thee with
weapons, chariots, and wagons, and with a company of peoples; they shall
set themselves against thee with buckler and shield and helmet round
about; and I will commit the judgment unto them, and they shall judge
thee according to their judgments.

<span id="an_23:25">23:25</span> And I will set my jealousy against
thee, and they shall deal with thee in fury; they shall take away thy
nose and thine ears; and thy residue shall fall by the sword: they shall
take thy sons and thy daughters; and thy residue shall be devoured by
the fire.

<span id="an_23:26">23:26</span> They shall also strip thee of thy
clothes, and take away thy fair jewels.

<span id="an_23:27">23:27</span> Thus will I make thy lewdness to cease
from thee, and thy whoredom \[brought\] from the land of Egypt; so that
thou shalt not lift up thine eyes unto them, nor remember Egypt any
more.

<span id="an_23:28">23:28</span> For thus saith the Lord Jehovah:
Behold, I will deliver thee into the hand of them whom thou hatest, into
the hand of them from whom thy soul is alienated;

<span id="an_23:29">23:29</span> and they shall deal with thee in
hatred, and shall take away all thy labor, and shall leave thee naked
and bare; and the nakedness of thy whoredoms shall be uncovered, both
thy lewdness and thy whoredoms.

<span id="an_23:30">23:30</span> These things shall be done unto thee,
for that thou hast played the harlot after the nations, and because thou
art polluted with their idols.

<span id="an_23:31">23:31</span> Thou hast walked in the way of thy
sister; therefore will I give her cup into thy hand.

<span id="an_23:32">23:32</span> Thus saith the Lord Jehovah: Thou shalt
drink of thy sister's cup, which is deep and large; thou shalt be
laughed to scorn and had in derision; it containeth much.

<span id="an_23:33">23:33</span> Thou shalt be filled with drunkenness
and sorrow, with the cup of astonishment and desolation, with the cup of
thy sister Samaria.

<span id="an_23:34">23:34</span> Thou shalt even drink it and drain it
out, and thou shalt gnaw the sherds thereof, and shalt tear thy breasts;
for I have spoken it, saith the Lord Jehovah.

<span id="an_23:35">23:35</span> Therefore thus saith the Lord Jehovah:
Because thou hast forgotten me, and cast me behind thy back, therefore
bear thou also thy lewdness and thy whoredoms.

<span id="an_23:36">23:36</span> Jehovah said moreover unto me: Son of
man, wilt thou judge Oholah and Oholibah? then declare unto them their
abominations.

<span id="an_23:37">23:37</span> For they have committed adultery, and
blood is in their hands; and with their idols have they committed
adultery; and they have also caused their sons, whom they bare unto me,
to pass through \[the fire\] unto them to be devoured.

<span id="an_23:38">23:38</span> Moreover this they have done unto me:
they have defiled my sanctuary in the same day, and have profaned my
sabbaths.

<span id="an_23:39">23:39</span> For when they had slain their children
to their idols, then they came the same day into my sanctuary to profane
it; and, lo, thus have they done in the midst of my house.

<span id="an_23:40">23:40</span> And furthermore ye have sent for men
that come from far, unto whom a messenger was sent, and, lo, they came;
for whom thou didst wash thyself, paint thine eyes, and deck thyself
with ornaments,

<span id="an_23:41">23:41</span> and sit upon a stately bed, with a
table prepared before it, whereupon thou didst set mine incense and mine
oil.

<span id="an_23:42">23:42</span> And the voice of a multitude being at
ease was with her: and with men of the common sort were brought
drunkards from the wilderness; and they put bracelets upon the hands of
them \[twain\], and beautiful crowns upon their heads.

<span id="an_23:43">23:43</span> Then said I of her that was old in
adulteries, Now will they play the harlot with her, and she \[with
them\].

<span id="an_23:44">23:44</span> And they went in unto her, as they go
in unto a harlot: so went they in unto Oholah and unto Oholibah, the
lewd women.

<span id="an_23:45">23:45</span> And righteous men, they shall judge
them with the judgment of adulteresses, and with the judgment of women
that shed blood; because they are adulteresses, and blood is in their
hands.

<span id="an_23:46">23:46</span> For thus saith the Lord Jehovah: I will
bring up a company against them, and will give them to be tossed to and
fro and robbed.

<span id="an_23:47">23:47</span> And the company shall stone them with
stones, and despatch them with their swords; they shall slay their sons
and their daughters, and burn up their houses with fire.

<span id="an_23:48">23:48</span> Thus will I cause lewdness to cease out
of the land, that all women may be taught not to do after your lewdness.

<span id="an_23:49">23:49</span> And they shall recompense your lewdness
upon you, and ye shall bear the sins of your idols; and ye shall know
that I am the Lord Jehovah.

<span id="an_24:1">24:1</span> Again, in the ninth year, in the tenth
month, in the tenth \[day\] of the month, the word of Jehovah came unto
me, saying,

<span id="an_24:2">24:2</span> Son of man, write thee the name of the
day, \[even\] of this selfsame day: the king of Babylon drew close unto
Jerusalem this selfsame day.

<span id="an_24:3">24:3</span> And utter a parable unto the rebellious
house, and say unto them, Thus saith the Lord Jehovah, Set on the
caldron, set it on, and also pour water into it:

<span id="an_24:4">24:4</span> gather the pieces thereof into it, even
every good piece, the thigh, and the shoulder; fill it with the choice
bones.

<span id="an_24:5">24:5</span> Take the choice of the flock, and also a
pile \[of wood\] for the bones under \[the caldron\]; make it boil well;
yea, let the bones thereof be boiled in the midst of it.

<span id="an_24:6">24:6</span> Wherefore thus saith the Lord Jehovah:
Woe to the bloody city, to the caldron whose rust is therein, and whose
rust is not gone out of it! take out of it piece after piece; No lot is
fallen upon it.

<span id="an_24:7">24:7</span> For her blood is in the midst of her; she
set it upon the bare rock; she poured it not upon the ground, to cover
it with dust.

<span id="an_24:8">24:8</span> That it may cause wrath to come up to
take vengeance, I have set her blood upon the bare rock, that it should
not be covered.

<span id="an_24:9">24:9</span> Therefore thus saith the Lord Jehovah:
Woe to the bloody city! I also will make the pile great.

<span id="an_24:10">24:10</span> Heap on the wood, make the fire hot,
boil well the flesh, and make thick the broth, and let the bones be
burned.

<span id="an_24:11">24:11</span> Then set it empty upon the coals
thereof, that it may be hot, and the brass thereof may burn, and that
the filthiness of it may be molten in it, that the rust of it may be
consumed.

<span id="an_24:12">24:12</span> She hath wearied \[herself\] with toil;
yet her great rust goeth not forth out of her; her rust \[goeth not
forth\] by fire.

<span id="an_24:13">24:13</span> In thy filthiness is lewdness: because
I have cleansed thee and thou wast not cleansed, thou shalt not be
cleansed from thy filthiness any more, till I have caused my wrath
toward thee to rest.

<span id="an_24:14">24:14</span> I, Jehovah, have spoken it: it shall
come to pass, and I will do it: I will not go back, neither will I
spare, neither will I repent; according to thy ways, and according to
thy doings, shall they judge thee, saith the Lord Jehovah.

<span id="an_24:15">24:15</span> Also the word of Jehovah came unto me,
saying,

<span id="an_24:16">24:16</span> Son of man, behold, I take away from
thee the desire of thine eyes with a stroke: yet thou shalt neither
mourn nor weep, neither shall thy tears run down.

<span id="an_24:17">24:17</span> Sigh, but not aloud, make no mourning
for the dead; bind thy headtire upon thee, and put thy shoes upon thy
feet, and cover not thy lips, and eat not the bread of men.

<span id="an_24:18">24:18</span> So I spake unto the people in the
morning; and at even my wife died; and I did in the morning as I was
commanded.

<span id="an_24:19">24:19</span> And the people said unto me, Wilt thou
not tell us what these things are to us, that thou doest so?

<span id="an_24:20">24:20</span> Then I said unto them, The word of
Jehovah came unto me, saying,

<span id="an_24:21">24:21</span> Speak unto the house of Israel, Thus
saith the Lord Jehovah: Behold, I will profane my sanctuary, the pride
of your power, the desire of your eyes, and that which your soul
pitieth; and your sons and your daughters whom ye have left behind shall
fall by the sword.

<span id="an_24:22">24:22</span> And ye shall do as I have done: ye
shall not cover your lips, nor eat the bread of men.

<span id="an_24:23">24:23</span> And your tires shall be upon your
heads, and your shoes upon your feet: ye shall not mourn nor weep; but
ye shall pine away in your iniquities, and moan one toward another.

<span id="an_24:24">24:24</span> Thus shall Ezekiel be unto you a sign;
according to all that he hath done shall ye do: when this cometh, then
shall ye know that I am the Lord Jehovah.

<span id="an_24:25">24:25</span> And thou, son of man, shall it not be
in the day when I take from them their strength, the joy of their glory,
the desire of their eyes, and that whereupon they set their heart, their
sons and their daughters,

<span id="an_24:26">24:26</span> that in that day he that escapeth shall
come unto thee, to cause thee to hear it with thine ears?

<span id="an_24:27">24:27</span> In that day shall thy mouth be opened
to him that is escaped, and thou shalt speak, and be no more dumb: so
shalt thou be a sign unto them; and they shall know that I am Jehovah.

<span id="an_25:1">25:1</span> And the word of Jehovah came unto me,
saying,

<span id="an_25:2">25:2</span> Son of man, set thy face toward the
children of Ammon, and prophesy against them:

<span id="an_25:3">25:3</span> and say unto the children of Ammon, Hear
the word of the Lord Jehovah: Thus saith the Lord Jehovah, Because thou
saidst, Aha, against my sanctuary, when it was profaned; and against the
land of Israel, when it was made desolate; and against the house of
Judah, when they went into captivity:

<span id="an_25:4">25:4</span> therefore, behold, I will deliver thee to
the children of the east for a possession, and they shall set their
encampments in thee, and make their dwellings in thee; they shall eat
thy fruit, and they shall drink thy milk.

<span id="an_25:5">25:5</span> And I will make Rabbah a stable for
camels, and the children of Ammon a couching-place for flocks: and ye
shall know that I am Jehovah.

<span id="an_25:6">25:6</span> For thus saith the Lord Jehovah: Because
thou hast clapped thy hands, and stamped with the feet, and rejoiced
with all the despite of thy soul against the land of Israel;

<span id="an_25:7">25:7</span> therefore, behold, I have stretched out
my hand upon thee, and will deliver thee for a spoil to the nations; and
I will cut thee off from the peoples, and I will cause thee to perish
out of the countries: I will destroy thee; and thou shalt know that I am
Jehovah.

<span id="an_25:8">25:8</span> Thus saith the Lord Jehovah: Because that
Moab and Seir do say, Behold, the house of Judah is like unto all the
nations;

<span id="an_25:9">25:9</span> therefore, behold, I will open the side
of Moab from the cities, from his cities which are on his frontiers, the
glory of the country, Beth-jeshimoth, Baal-meon, and Kiriathaim,

<span id="an_25:10">25:10</span> unto the children of the east, \[to
go\] against the children of Ammon; and I will give them for a
possession, that the children of Ammon may not be remembered among the
nations.

<span id="an_25:11">25:11</span> and I will execute judgments upon Moab;
and they shall know that I am Jehovah.

<span id="an_25:12">25:12</span> Thus saith the Lord Jehovah: Because
that Edom hath dealt against the house of Judah by taking vengeance, and
hath greatly offended, and revenged himself upon them;

<span id="an_25:13">25:13</span> therefore thus saith the Lord Jehovah,
I will stretch out my hand upon Edom, and will cut off man and beast
from it; and I will make it desolate from Teman; even unto Dedan shall
they fall by the sword.

<span id="an_25:14">25:14</span> And I will lay my vengeance upon Edom
by the hand of my people Israel; and they shall do in Edom according to
mine anger and according to my wrath; and they shall know my vengeance,
saith the Lord Jehovah.

<span id="an_25:15">25:15</span> Thus saith the Lord Jehovah: Because
the Philistines have dealt by revenge, and have taken vengeance with
despite of soul to destroy with perpetual enmity;

<span id="an_25:16">25:16</span> therefore thus saith the Lord Jehovah,
Behold, I will stretch out my hand upon the Philistines, and I will cut
off the Cherethites, and destroy the remnant of the sea coast.

<span id="an_25:17">25:17</span> And I will execute great vengeance upon
them with wrathful rebukes; and they shall know that I am Jehovah, when
I shall lay my vengeance upon them.

<span id="an_26:1">26:1</span> And it came to pass in the eleventh year,
in the first \[day\] of the month, that the word of Jehovah came unto
me, saying,

<span id="an_26:2">26:2</span> Son of man, because that Tyre hath said
against Jerusalem, Aha, she is broken \[that was\] the gate of the
peoples; she is turned unto me; I shall be replenished, now that she is
laid waste:

<span id="an_26:3">26:3</span> therefore thus saith the Lord Jehovah,
Behold, I am against thee, O Tyre, and will cause many nations to come
up against thee, as the sea causeth its waves to come up.

<span id="an_26:4">26:4</span> And they shall destroy the walls of Tyre,
and break down her towers: I will also scrape her dust from her, and
make her a bare rock.

<span id="an_26:5">26:5</span> She shall be a place for the spreading of
nets in the midst of the sea; for I have spoken it, saith the Lord
Jehovah; and she shall become a spoil to the nations.

<span id="an_26:6">26:6</span> And her daughters that are in the field
shall be slain with the sword: and they shall know that I am Jehovah.

<span id="an_26:7">26:7</span> For thus saith the Lord Jehovah: Behold,
I will bring upon Tyre Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon, king of kings,
from the north, with horses, and with chariots, and with horsemen, and a
company, and much people.

<span id="an_26:8">26:8</span> He shall slay with the sword thy
daughters in the field; and he shall make forts against thee, and cast
up a mound against thee, and raise up the buckler against thee.

<span id="an_26:9">26:9</span> And he shall set his battering engines
against thy walls, and with his axes he shall break down thy towers.

<span id="an_26:10">26:10</span> By reason of the abundance of his
horses their dust shall cover thee: thy walls shall shake at the noise
of the horsemen, and of the wagons, and of the chariots, when he shall
enter into thy gates, as men enter into a city wherein is made a breach.

<span id="an_26:11">26:11</span> With the hoofs of his horses shall he
tread down all thy streets; he shall slay thy people with the sword; and
the pillars of thy strength shall go down to the ground.

<span id="an_26:12">26:12</span> And they shall make a spoil of thy
riches, and make a prey of thy merchandise; and they shall break down
thy walls, and destroy thy pleasant houses; and they shall lay thy
stones and thy timber and thy dust in the midst of the waters.

<span id="an_26:13">26:13</span> And I will cause the noise of thy songs
to cease; and the sound of thy harps shall be no more heard.

<span id="an_26:14">26:14</span> And I will make thee a bare rock; thou
shalt be a place for the spreading of nets; thou shalt be built no more:
for I Jehovah have spoken it, saith the Lord Jehovah.

<span id="an_26:15">26:15</span> Thus saith the Lord Jehovah to Tyre:
shall not the isles shake at the sound of thy fall, when the wounded
groan, when the slaughter is made in the midst of thee?

<span id="an_26:16">26:16</span> Then all the princes of the sea shall
come down from their thrones, and lay aside their robes, and strip off
their broidered garments: they shall clothe themselves with trembling;
they shall sit upon the ground, and shall tremble every moment, and be
astonished at thee.

<span id="an_26:17">26:17</span> And they shall take up a lamentation
over thee, and say to thee, How art thou destroyed, that wast inhabited
by seafaring men, the renowned city, that was strong in the sea, she and
her inhabitants, that caused their terror to be on all that dwelt there!

<span id="an_26:18">26:18</span> Now shall the isles tremble in the day
of thy fall; yea, the isles that are in the sea shall be dismayed at thy
departure.

<span id="an_26:19">26:19</span> For thus saith the Lord Jehovah: When I
shall make thee a desolate city, like the cities that are not inhabited;
when I shall bring up the deep upon thee, and the great waters shall
cover thee;

<span id="an_26:20">26:20</span> then will I bring thee down with them
that descend into the pit, to the people of old time, and will make thee
to dwell in the nether parts of the earth, in the places that are
desolate of old, with them that go down to the pit, that thou be not
inhabited; and I will set glory in the land of the living:

<span id="an_26:21">26:21</span> I will make thee a terror, and thou
shalt no more have any being; though thou be sought for, yet shalt thou
never be found again, saith the Lord Jehovah.

<span id="an_27:1">27:1</span> The word of Jehovah came again unto me,
saying,

<span id="an_27:2">27:2</span> And thou, son of man, take up a
lamentation over Tyre;

<span id="an_27:3">27:3</span> and say unto Tyre, O thou that dwellest
at the entry of the sea, that art the merchant of the peoples unto many
isles, thus saith the Lord Jehovah: Thou, O Tyre, hast said, I am
perfect in beauty.

<span id="an_27:4">27:4</span> Thy borders are in the heart of the seas;
thy builders have perfected thy beauty.

<span id="an_27:5">27:5</span> They have made all thy planks of
fir-trees from Senir; they have taken a cedar from Lebanon to make a
mast for thee.

<span id="an_27:6">27:6</span> Of the oaks of Bashan have they made
thine oars; they have made thy benches of ivory inlaid in boxwood, from
the isles of Kittim.

<span id="an_27:7">27:7</span> Of fine linen with broidered work from
Egypt was thy sail, that it might be to thee for an ensign; blue and
purple from the isles of Elishah was thine awning.

<span id="an_27:8">27:8</span> The inhabitants of Sidon and Arvad were
thy rowers: thy wise men, O Tyre, were in thee, they were thy pilots.

<span id="an_27:9">27:9</span> The old men of Gebal and the wise men
thereof were in thee thy calkers: all the ships of the sea with their
mariners were in thee to deal in thy merchandise.

<span id="an_27:10">27:10</span> Persia and Lud and Put were in thine
army, thy men of war: they hanged the shield and helmet in thee; they
set forth thy comeliness.

<span id="an_27:11">27:11</span> The men of Arvad with thine army were
upon thy walls round about, and valorous men were in thy towers; they
hanged their shields upon thy walls round about; they have perfected thy
beauty.

<span id="an_27:12">27:12</span> Tarshish was thy merchant by reason of
the multitude of all kinds of riches; with silver, iron, tin, and lead,
they traded for thy wares.

<span id="an_27:13">27:13</span> Javan, Tubal, and Meshech, they were
thy traffickers; they traded the persons of men and vessels of brass for
thy merchandise.

<span id="an_27:14">27:14</span> They of the house of Togarmah traded
for thy wares with horses and war-horses and mules.

<span id="an_27:15">27:15</span> The men of Dedan were thy traffickers;
many isles were the mart of thy hand: they brought thee in exchange
horns of ivory and ebony.

<span id="an_27:16">27:16</span> Syria was thy merchant by reason of the
multitude of thy handiworks: they traded for thy wares with emeralds,
purple, and broidered work, and fine linen, and coral, and rubies.

<span id="an_27:17">27:17</span> Judah, and the land of Israel, they
were thy traffickers: they traded for thy merchandise wheat of Minnith,
and pannag, and honey, and oil, and balm.

<span id="an_27:18">27:18</span> Damascus was thy merchant for the
multitude of thy handiworks, by reason of the multitude of all kinds of
riches, with the wine of Helbon, and white wool.

<span id="an_27:19">27:19</span> Vedan and Javan traded with yarn for
thy wares: bright iron, cassia, and calamus, were among thy merchandise.

<span id="an_27:20">27:20</span> Dedan was thy trafficker in precious
cloths for riding.

<span id="an_27:21">27:21</span> Arabia, and all the princes of Kedar,
they were the merchants of thy hand; in lambs, and rams, and goats, in
these were they thy merchants.

<span id="an_27:22">27:22</span> The traffickers of Sheba and Raamah,
they were thy traffickers; they traded for thy wares with the chief of
all spices, and with all precious stones, and gold.

<span id="an_27:23">27:23</span> Haran and Canneh and Eden, the
traffickers of Sheba, Asshur \[and\] Chilmad, were thy traffickers.

<span id="an_27:24">27:24</span> These were thy traffickers in choice
wares, in wrappings of blue and broidered work, and in chests of rich
apparel, bound with cords and made of cedar, among thy merchandise.

<span id="an_27:25">27:25</span> The ships of Tarshish were thy caravans
for thy merchandise: and thou wast replenished, and made very glorious
in the heart of the seas.

<span id="an_27:26">27:26</span> Thy rowers have brought thee into great
waters: the east wind hath broken thee in the heart of the seas.

<span id="an_27:27">27:27</span> Thy riches, and thy wares, thy
merchandise, thy mariners, and thy pilots, thy calkers, and the dealers
in thy merchandise, and all thy men of war, that are in thee, with all
thy company which is in the midst of thee, shall fall into the heart of
the seas in the day of thy ruin.

<span id="an_27:28">27:28</span> At the sound of the cry of thy pilots
the suburbs shall shake.

<span id="an_27:29">27:29</span> And all that handled the oar, the
mariners, \[and\] all the pilots of the sea, shall come down from their
ships; they shall stand upon the land,

<span id="an_27:30">27:30</span> and shall cause their voice to be heard
over thee, and shall cry bitterly, and shall cast up dust upon their
heads, they shall wallow themselves in the ashes:

<span id="an_27:31">27:31</span> and they shall make themselves bald for
thee, and gird them with sackcloth, and they shall weep for thee in
bitterness of soul with bitter mourning.

<span id="an_27:32">27:32</span> And in their wailing they shall take up
a lamentation for thee, and lament over thee, \[saying\], Who is there
like Tyre, like her that is brought to silence in the midst of the sea?

<span id="an_27:33">27:33</span> When thy wares went forth out of the
seas, thou filledst many peoples; thou didst enrich the kings of the
earth with the multitude of thy riches and of thy merchandise.

<span id="an_27:34">27:34</span> In the time that thou wast broken by
the seas in the depths of the waters, thy merchandise and all thy
company did fall in the midst of thee.

<span id="an_27:35">27:35</span> All the inhabitants of the isles are
astonished at thee, and their kings are horribly afraid; they are
troubled in their countenance.

<span id="an_27:36">27:36</span> The merchants among the peoples hiss at
thee; thou art become a terror, and thou shalt nevermore have any being.

<span id="an_28:1">28:1</span> The word of Jehovah came again unto me,
saying,

<span id="an_28:2">28:2</span> Son of man, say unto the prince of Tyre,
Thus saith the Lord Jehovah: Because thy heart is lifted up, and thou
hast said, I am a god, I sit in the seat of God, in the midst of the
seas; yet thou art man, and not God, though thou didst set thy heart as
the heart of God;-

<span id="an_28:3">28:3</span> behold, thou art wiser than Daniel; there
is no secret that is hidden from thee;

<span id="an_28:4">28:4</span> by thy wisdom and by thine understanding
thou hast gotten thee riches, and hast gotten gold and silver into thy
treasures;

<span id="an_28:5">28:5</span> by thy great wisdom \[and\] by thy
traffic hast thou increased thy riches, and thy heart is lifted up
because of thy riches;-

<span id="an_28:6">28:6</span> therefore thus saith the Lord Jehovah:
Because thou hast set thy heart as the heart of God,

<span id="an_28:7">28:7</span> therefore, behold, I will bring strangers
upon thee, the terrible of the nations; and they shall draw their swords
against the beauty of thy wisdom, and they shall defile thy brightness.

<span id="an_28:8">28:8</span> They shall bring thee down to the pit;
and thou shalt die the death of them that are slain, in the heart of the
seas.

<span id="an_28:9">28:9</span> Wilt thou yet say before him that slayeth
thee, I am God? but thou art man, and not God, in the hand of him that
woundeth thee.

<span id="an_28:10">28:10</span> Thou shalt die the death of the
uncircumcised by the hand of strangers: for I have spoken it, saith the
Lord Jehovah.

<span id="an_28:11">28:11</span> Moreover the word of Jehovah came unto
me, saying,

<span id="an_28:12">28:12</span> Son of man, take up a lamentation over
the king of Tyre, and say unto him, Thus saith the Lord Jehovah: Thou
sealest up the sum, full of wisdom, and perfect in beauty.

<span id="an_28:13">28:13</span> Thou wast in Eden, the garden of God;
every precious stone was thy covering, the sardius, the topaz, and the
diamond, the beryl, the onyx, and the jasper, the sapphire, the emerald,
and the carbuncle, and gold: the workmanship of thy tabrets and of thy
pipes was in thee; in the day that thou wast created they were prepared.

<span id="an_28:14">28:14</span> Thou wast the anointed cherub that
covereth: and I set thee, \[so that\] thou wast upon the holy mountain
of God; thou hast walked up and down in the midst of the stones of fire.

<span id="an_28:15">28:15</span> Thou wast perfect in thy ways from the
day that thou wast created, till unrighteousness was found in thee.

<span id="an_28:16">28:16</span> By the abundance of thy traffic they
filled the midst of thee with violence, and thou hast sinned: therefore
have I cast thee as profane out of the mountain of God; and I have
destroyed thee, O covering cherub, from the midst of the stones of fire.

<span id="an_28:17">28:17</span> Thy heart was lifted up because of thy
beauty; thou hast corrupted thy wisdom by reason of thy brightness: I
have cast thee to the ground; I have laid thee before kings, that they
may behold thee.

<span id="an_28:18">28:18</span> By the multitude of thine iniquities,
in the unrighteousness of thy traffic, thou hast profaned thy
sanctuaries; therefore have I brought forth a fire from the midst of
thee; it hath devoured thee, and I have turned thee to ashes upon the
earth in the sight of all them that behold thee.

<span id="an_28:19">28:19</span> All they that know thee among the
peoples shall be astonished at thee: thou art become a terror, and thou
shalt nevermore have any being.

<span id="an_28:20">28:20</span> And the word of Jehovah came unto me,
saying,

<span id="an_28:21">28:21</span> Son of man, set thy face toward Sidon,
and prophesy against it,

<span id="an_28:22">28:22</span> and say, Thus saith the Lord Jehovah:
Behold, I am against thee, O Sidon; and I will be glorified in the midst
of thee; and they shall know that I am Jehovah, when I shall have
executed judgments in her, and shall be sanctified in her.

<span id="an_28:23">28:23</span> For I will send pestilence into her,
and blood into her streets; and the wounded shall fall in the midst of
her, with the sword upon her on every side; and they shall know that I
am Jehovah.

<span id="an_28:24">28:24</span> And there shall be no more a pricking
brier unto the house of Israel, nor a hurting thorn of any that are
round about them, that did despite unto them; and they shall know that I
am the Lord Jehovah.

<span id="an_28:25">28:25</span> Thus saith the Lord Jehovah: When I
shall have gathered the house of Israel from the peoples among whom they
are scattered, and shall be sanctified in them in the sight of the
nations, then shall they dwell in their own land which I gave to my
servant Jacob.

<span id="an_28:26">28:26</span> And they shall dwell securely therein;
yea, they shall build houses, and plant vineyards, and shall dwell
securely, when I have executed judgments upon all those that do them
despite round about them; and they shall know that I am Jehovah their
God.

<span id="an_29:1">29:1</span> In the tenth year, in the tenth
\[month\], in the twelfth \[day\] of the month, the word of Jehovah came
unto me, saying,

<span id="an_29:2">29:2</span> Son of man, set thy face against Pharaoh
king of Egypt, and prophesy against him, and against all Egypt;

<span id="an_29:3">29:3</span> speak, and say, Thus saith the Lord
Jehovah: Behold, I am against thee, Pharaoh king of Egypt, the great
monster that lieth in the midst of his rivers, that hath said, My river
is mine own, and I have made it for myself.

<span id="an_29:4">29:4</span> And I will put hooks in thy jaws, and I
will cause the fish of thy rivers to stick unto thy scales; and I will
bring thee up out of the midst of thy rivers, with all the fish of thy
rivers which stick unto thy scales.

<span id="an_29:5">29:5</span> And I will cast thee forth into the
wilderness, thee and all the fish of thy rivers: thou shalt fall upon
the open field; thou shalt not be brought together, nor gathered; I have
given thee for food to the beasts of the earth and to the birds of the
heavens.

<span id="an_29:6">29:6</span> And all the inhabitants of Egypt shall
know that I am Jehovah, because they have been a staff of reed to the
house of Israel.

<span id="an_29:7">29:7</span> When they took hold of thee by thy hand,
thou didst break, and didst rend all their shoulders; and when they
leaned upon thee, thou brakest, and madest all their loins to be at a
stand.

<span id="an_29:8">29:8</span> Therefore thus saith the Lord Jehovah:
Behold, I will bring a sword upon thee, and will cut off from thee man
and beast.

<span id="an_29:9">29:9</span> And the land of Egypt shall be a
desolation and a waste; and they shall know that I am Jehovah. Because
he hath said, The river is mine, and I have made it;

<span id="an_29:10">29:10</span> therefore, behold, I am against thee,
and against thy rivers, and I will make the land of Egypt an utter waste
and desolation, from the tower of Seveneh even unto the border of
Ethiopia.

<span id="an_29:11">29:11</span> No foot of man shall pass through it,
nor foot of beast shall pass through it, neither shall it be inhabited
forty years.

<span id="an_29:12">29:12</span> And I will make the land of Egypt a
desolation in the midst of the countries that are desolate; and her
cities among the cities that are laid waste shall be a desolation forty
years; and I will scatter the Egyptians among the nations, and will
disperse them through the countries.

<span id="an_29:13">29:13</span> For thus saith the Lord Jehovah: At the
end of forty years will I gather the Egyptians from the peoples whither
they were scattered;

<span id="an_29:14">29:14</span> and I will bring back the captivity of
Egypt, and will cause them to return into the land of Pathros, into the
land of their birth; and they shall be there a base kingdom.

<span id="an_29:15">29:15</span> It shall be the basest of the kingdoms;
neither shall it any more lift itself up above the nations: and I will
diminish them, that they shall no more rule over the nations.

<span id="an_29:16">29:16</span> And it shall be no more the confidence
of the house of Israel, bringing iniquity to remembrance, when they turn
to look after them: and they shall know that I am the Lord Jehovah.

<span id="an_29:17">29:17</span> And it came to pass in the seven and
twentieth year, in the first \[month\], in the first \[day\] of the
month, the word of Jehovah came unto me, saying,

<span id="an_29:18">29:18</span> Son of man, Nebuchadrezzar king of
Babylon caused his army to serve a great service against Tyre: every
head was made bald, and every shoulder was worn; yet had he no wages,
nor his army, from Tyre, for the service that he had served against it.

<span id="an_29:19">29:19</span> Therefore thus saith the Lord Jehovah:
Behold, I will give the land of Egypt unto Nebuchadrezzar king of
Babylon; and he shall carry off her multitude, and take her spoil, and
take her prey; and it shall be the wages for his army.

<span id="an_29:20">29:20</span> I have given him the land of Egypt as
his recompense for which he served, because they wrought for me, saith
the Lord Jehovah.

<span id="an_29:21">29:21</span> In that day will I cause a horn to bud
forth unto the house of Israel, and I will give thee the opening of the
mouth in the midst of them; and they shall know that I am Jehovah.

<span id="an_30:1">30:1</span> The word of Jehovah came again unto me,
saying,

<span id="an_30:2">30:2</span> Son of man, prophesy, and say, Thus saith
the Lord Jehovah: Wail ye, Alas for the day!

<span id="an_30:3">30:3</span> For the day is near, even the day of
Jehovah is near; it shall be a day of clouds, a time of the nations.

<span id="an_30:4">30:4</span> And a sword shall come upon Egypt, and
anguish shall be in Ethiopia, when the slain shall fall in Egypt; and
they shall take away her multitude, and her foundations shall be broken
down.

<span id="an_30:5">30:5</span> Ethiopia, and Put, and Lud, and all the
mingled people, and Cub, and the children of the land that is in league,
shall fall with them by the sword.

<span id="an_30:6">30:6</span> Thus saith Jehovah: They also that uphold
Egypt shall fall; and the pride of her power shall come down: from the
tower of Seveneh shall they fall in it by the sword, saith the Lord
Jehovah.

<span id="an_30:7">30:7</span> And they shall be desolate in the midst
of the countries that are desolate; and her cities shall be in the midst
of the cities that are wasted.

<span id="an_30:8">30:8</span> And they shall know at I am Jehovah, when
I have set a fire in Egypt, and all her helpers are destroyed.

<span id="an_30:9">30:9</span> In that day shall messengers go forth
from before me in ships to make the careless Ethiopians afraid; and
there shall be anguish upon them, as in the day of Egypt; for, lo, it
cometh.

<span id="an_30:10">30:10</span> Thus saith the Lord Jehovah: I will
also make the multitude of Egypt to cease, by the hand of Nebuchadrezzar
king of Babylon.

<span id="an_30:11">30:11</span> He and his people with him, the
terrible of the nations, shall be brought in to destroy the land; and
they shall draw their swords against Egypt, and fill the land with the
slain.

<span id="an_30:12">30:12</span> And I will make the rivers dry, and
will sell the land into the hand of evil men; and I will make the land
desolate, and all that is therein, by the hand of strangers: I, Jehovah,
have spoken it.

<span id="an_30:13">30:13</span> Thus saith the Lord Jehovah: I will
also destroy the idols, and I will cause the images to cease from
Memphis; and there shall be no more a prince from the land of Egypt: and
I will put a fear in the land of Egypt.

<span id="an_30:14">30:14</span> And I will make Pathros desolate, and
will set a fire in Zoan, and will execute judgments upon No.

<span id="an_30:15">30:15</span> And I will pour my wrath upon Sin, the
stronghold of Egypt; and I will cut off the multitude of No.

<span id="an_30:16">30:16</span> And I will set a fire in Egypt: Sin
shall be in great anguish, and No shall be broken up; and Memphis
\[shall have\] adversaries in the day-time.

<span id="an_30:17">30:17</span> The young men of Aven and of Pibeseth
shall fall by the sword; and these \[cities\] shall go into captivity.

<span id="an_30:18">30:18</span> At Tehaphnehes also the day shall
withdraw itself, when I shall break there the yokes of Egypt, and the
pride of her power shall cease in her: as for her, a cloud shall cover
her, and her daughters shall go into captivity.

<span id="an_30:19">30:19</span> Thus will I execute judgments upon
Egypt; and they shall know that I am Jehovah.

<span id="an_30:20">30:20</span> And it came to pass in the eleventh
year, in the first \[month\], in the seventh \[day\] of the month, that
the word of Jehovah came unto me, saying,

<span id="an_30:21">30:21</span> Son of man, I have broken the arm of
Pharaoh king of Egypt; and, lo, it hath not been bound up, to apply
\[healing\] medicines, to put a bandage to bind it, that it be strong to
hold the sword.

<span id="an_30:22">30:22</span> Therefore thus saith the Lord Jehovah:
Behold, I am against Pharaoh king of Egypt, and will break his arms, the
strong \[arm\], and that which was broken; and I will cause the sword to
fall out of his hand.

<span id="an_30:23">30:23</span> And I will scatter the Egyptians among
the nations, and will disperse them through the countries.

<span id="an_30:24">30:24</span> And I will strengthen the arms of the
king of Babylon, and put my sword in his hand: but I will break the arms
of Pharaoh, and he shall groan before him with the groanings of a deadly
wounded man.

<span id="an_30:25">30:25</span> And I will hold up the arms of the king
of Babylon; and the arms of Pharaoh shall fall down; and they shall know
that I am Jehovah, when I shall put my sword into the hand of the king
of Babylon, and he shall stretch it out upon the land of Egypt.

<span id="an_30:26">30:26</span> And I will scatter the Egyptians among
the nations, and disperse them through the countries; and they shall
know that I am Jehovah.

<span id="an_31:1">31:1</span> And it came to pass in the eleventh year,
in the third \[month\], in the first \[day\] of the month, that the word
of Jehovah came unto me, saying,

<span id="an_31:2">31:2</span> Son of man, say unto Pharaoh king of
Egypt, and to his multitude: Whom art thou like in thy greatness?

<span id="an_31:3">31:3</span> Behold, the Assyrian was a cedar in
Lebanon with fair branches, and with a forest-like shade, and of high
stature; and its top was among the thick boughs.

<span id="an_31:4">31:4</span> The waters nourished it, the deep made it
to grow: the rivers thereof ran round about its plantation; and it sent
out its channels unto all the trees of the field.

<span id="an_31:5">31:5</span> Therefore its stature was exalted above
all the trees of the field; and its boughs were multiplied, and its
branches became long by reason of many waters, when it shot \[them\]
forth.

<span id="an_31:6">31:6</span> All the birds of the heavens made their
nests in its boughs; and under its branches did all the beasts of the
field bring forth their young; and under its shadow dwelt all great
nations.

<span id="an_31:7">31:7</span> Thus was it fair in its greatness, in the
length of its branches; for its root was by many waters.

<span id="an_31:8">31:8</span> The cedars in the garden of God could not
hide it; the fir-trees were not like its boughs, and the plane-trees
were not as its branches; nor was any tree in the garden of God like
unto it in its beauty.

<span id="an_31:9">31:9</span> I made it fair by the multitude of its
branches, so that all the trees of Eden, that were in the garden of God,
envied it.

<span id="an_31:10">31:10</span> Therefore thus said the Lord Jehovah:
Because thou art exalted in stature, and he hath set his top among the
thick boughs, and his heart is lifted up in his height;

<span id="an_31:11">31:11</span> I will even deliver him into the hand
of the mighty one of the nations; he shall surely deal with him; I have
driven him out for his wickedness.

<span id="an_31:12">31:12</span> And strangers, the terrible of the
nations, have cut him off, and have left him: upon the mountains and in
all the valleys his branches are fallen, and his boughs are broken by
all the watercourses of the land; and all the peoples of the earth are
gone down from his shadow, and have left him.

<span id="an_31:13">31:13</span> Upon his ruin all the birds of the
heavens shall dwell, and all the beasts of the field shall be upon his
branches;

<span id="an_31:14">31:14</span> to the end that none of all the trees
by the waters exalt themselves in their stature, neither set their top
among the thick boughs, nor that their mighty ones stand up on their
height, \[even\] all that drink water: for they are all delivered unto
death, to the nether parts of the earth, in the midst of the children of
men, with them that go down to the pit.

<span id="an_31:15">31:15</span> Thus saith the Lord Jehovah: In the day
when he went down to Sheol I caused a mourning: I covered the deep for
him, and I restrained the rivers thereof; and the great waters were
stayed; and I caused Lebanon to mourn for him, and all the trees of the
field fainted for him.

<span id="an_31:16">31:16</span> I made the nations to shake at the
sound of his fall, when I cast him down to Sheol with them that descend
into the pit; and all the trees of Eden, the choice and best of Lebanon,
all that drink water, were comforted in the nether parts of the earth.

<span id="an_31:17">31:17</span> They also went down into Sheol with him
unto them that are slain by the sword; yea, they that were his arm,
\[that\] dwelt under his shadow in the midst of the nations.

<span id="an_31:18">31:18</span> To whom art thou thus like in glory and
in greatness among the trees of Eden? yet shalt thou be brought down
with the trees of Eden unto the nether parts of the earth: thou shalt
lie in the midst of the uncircumcised, with them that are slain by the
sword. This is Pharaoh and all his multitude, saith the Lord Jehovah.

<span id="an_32:1">32:1</span> And it came to pass in the twelfth year,
in the twelfth month, in the first \[day\] of the month, that the word
of Jehovah came unto me, saying,

<span id="an_32:2">32:2</span> Son of man, take up a lamentation over
Pharaoh king of Egypt, and say unto him, Thou wast likened unto a young
lion of the nations: yet art thou as a monster in the seas; and thou
didst break forth with thy rivers, and troubledst the waters with thy
feet, and fouledst their rivers.

<span id="an_32:3">32:3</span> Thus saith the Lord Jehovah: I will
spread out my net upon thee with a company of many peoples; and they
shall bring thee up in my net.

<span id="an_32:4">32:4</span> And I will leave thee upon the land, I
will cast thee forth upon the open field, and will cause all the birds
of the heavens to settle upon thee, and I will satisfy the beasts of the
whole earth with thee.

<span id="an_32:5">32:5</span> And I will lay thy flesh upon the
mountains, and fill the valleys with thy height.

<span id="an_32:6">32:6</span> I will also water with thy blood the land
wherein thou swimmest, even to the mountains; and the watercourses shall
be full of thee.

<span id="an_32:7">32:7</span> And when I shall extinguish thee, I will
cover the heavens, and make the stars thereof dark; I will cover the sun
with a cloud, and the moon shall not give its light.

<span id="an_32:8">32:8</span> All the bright lights of heaven will I
make dark over thee, and set darkness upon thy land, saith the Lord
Jehovah.

<span id="an_32:9">32:9</span> I will also vex the hearts of many
peoples, when I shall bring thy destruction among the nations, into the
countries which thou hast not known.

<span id="an_32:10">32:10</span> Yea, I will make many peoples amazed at
thee, and their kings shall be horribly afraid for thee, when I shall
brandish my sword before them; and they shall tremble at every moment,
every man for his own life, in the day of thy fall.

<span id="an_32:11">32:11</span> For thus saith the Lord Jehovah: The
sword of the king of Babylon shall come upon thee.

<span id="an_32:12">32:12</span> By the swords of the mighty will I
cause thy multitude to fall; the terrible of the nations are they all:
and they shall bring to nought the pride of Egypt, and all the multitude
thereof shall be destroyed.

<span id="an_32:13">32:13</span> I will destroy also all the beasts
thereof from beside many waters; neither shall the foot of man trouble
them any more, nor the hoofs of beasts trouble them.

<span id="an_32:14">32:14</span> Then will I make their waters clear,
and cause their rivers to run like oil, saith the Lord Jehovah.

<span id="an_32:15">32:15</span> When I shall make the land of Egypt
desolate and waste, a land destitute of that whereof it was full, when I
shall smite all them that dwell therein, then shall they know that I am
Jehovah.

<span id="an_32:16">32:16</span> This is the lamentation wherewith they
shall lament; the daughters of the nations shall lament therewith; over
Egypt, and over all her multitude, shall they lament therewith, saith
the Lord Jehovah.

<span id="an_32:17">32:17</span> It came to pass also in the twelfth
year, in the fifteenth \[day\] of the month, that the word of Jehovah
came unto me, saying,

<span id="an_32:18">32:18</span> Son of man, wail for the multitude of
Egypt, and cast them down, even her, and the daughters of the famous
nations, unto the nether parts of the earth, with them that go down into
the pit.

<span id="an_32:19">32:19</span> Whom dost thou pass in beauty? go down,
and be thou laid with the uncircumcised.

<span id="an_32:20">32:20</span> They shall fall in the midst of them
that are slain by the sword: she is delivered to the sword; draw her
away and all her multitudes.

<span id="an_32:21">32:21</span> The strong among the mighty shall speak
to him out of the midst of Sheol with them that help him: they are gone
down, they lie still, even the uncircumcised, slain by the sword.

<span id="an_32:22">32:22</span> Asshur is there and all her company;
her graves are round about her; all of them slain, fallen by the sword;

<span id="an_32:23">32:23</span> whose graves are set in the uttermost
parts of the pit, and her company is round about her grave; all of them
slain, fallen by the sword, who caused terror in the land of the living.

<span id="an_32:24">32:24</span> There is Elam and all her multitude
round about her grave; all of them slain, fallen by the sword, who are
gone down uncircumcised into the nether parts of the earth, who caused
their terror in the land of the living, and have borne their shame with
them that go down to the pit.

<span id="an_32:25">32:25</span> They have set her a bed in the midst of
the slain with all her multitude; her graves are round about her; all of
them uncircumcised, slain by the sword; for their terror was caused in
the land of the living, and they have borne their shame with them that
go down to the pit: he is put in the midst of them that are slain.

<span id="an_32:26">32:26</span> There is Meshech, Tubal, and all their
multitude; their graves are round about them; all of them uncircumcised,
slain by the sword; for they caused their terror in the land of the
living.

<span id="an_32:27">32:27</span> And they shall not lie with the mighty
that are fallen of the uncircumcised, that are gone down to Sheol with
their weapons of war, and have laid their swords under their heads, and
their iniquities are upon their bones; for \[they were\] the terror of
the mighty in the land of the living.

<span id="an_32:28">32:28</span> But thou shalt be broken in the midst
of the uncircumcised, and shalt lie with them that are slain by the
sword.

<span id="an_32:29">32:29</span> There is Edom, her kings and all her
princes, who in their might are laid with them that are slain by the
sword: they shall lie with the uncircumcised, and with them that go down
to the pit.

<span id="an_32:30">32:30</span> There are the princes of the north, all
of them, and all the Sidonians, who are gone down with the slain; in the
terror which they caused by their might they are put to shame; and they
lie uncircumcised with them that are slain by the sword, and bear their
shame with them that go down to the pit.

<span id="an_32:31">32:31</span> Pharaoh shall see them, and shall be
comforted over all his multitude, even Pharaoh and all his army, slain
by the sword, saith the Lord Jehovah.

<span id="an_32:32">32:32</span> For I have put his terror in the land
of the living; and he shall be laid in the midst of the uncircumcised,
with them that are slain by the sword, even Pharaoh and all his
multitude, saith the Lord Jehovah.

<span id="an_33:1">33:1</span> And the word of Jehovah came unto me,
saying,

<span id="an_33:2">33:2</span> Son of man, speak to the children of thy
people, and say unto them, When I bring the sword upon a land, and the
people of the land take a man from among them, and set him for their
watchman;

<span id="an_33:3">33:3</span> if, when he seeth the sword come upon the
land, he blow the trumpet, and warn the people;

<span id="an_33:4">33:4</span> then whosoever heareth the sound of the
trumpet, and taketh not warning, if the sword come, and take him away,
his blood shall be upon his own head.

<span id="an_33:5">33:5</span> He heard the sound of the trumpet, and
took not warning; his blood shall be upon him; whereas if he had taken
warning, he would have delivered his soul.

<span id="an_33:6">33:6</span> But if the watchman see the sword come,
and blow not the trumpet, and the people be not warned, and the sword
come, and take any person from among them; he is taken away in his
iniquity, but his blood will I require at the watchman's hand.

<span id="an_33:7">33:7</span> So thou, son of man, I have set thee a
watchman unto the house of Israel; therefore hear the word at my mouth,
and give them warning from me.

<span id="an_33:8">33:8</span> When I say unto the wicked, O wicked man,
thou shalt surely die, and thou dost not speak to warn the wicked from
his way; that wicked man shall die in his iniquity, but his blood will I
require at thy hand.

<span id="an_33:9">33:9</span> Nevertheless, if thou warn the wicked of
his way to turn from it, and he turn not from his way; he shall die in
his iniquity, but thou hast delivered thy soul.

<span id="an_33:10">33:10</span> And thou, son of man, say unto the
house of Israel: Thus ye speak, saying, Our transgressions and our sins
are upon us, and we pine away in them; how then can we live?

<span id="an_33:11">33:11</span> Say unto them, As I live, saith the
Lord Jehovah, I have no pleasure in the death of the wicked; but that
the wicked turn from his way and live: turn ye, turn ye from your evil
ways; for why will ye die, O house of Israel?

<span id="an_33:12">33:12</span> And thou, son of man, say unto the
children of thy people, The righteousness of the righteous shall not
deliver him in the day of his transgression; and as for the wickedness
of the wicked, he shall not fall thereby in the day that he turneth from
his wickedness; neither shall he that is righteous be able to live
thereby in the day that he sinneth.

<span id="an_33:13">33:13</span> When I say to the righteous, that he
shall surely live; if he trust to his righteousness, and commit
iniquity, none of his righteous deeds shall be remembered; but in his
iniquity that he hath committed, therein shall he die.

<span id="an_33:14">33:14</span> Again, when I say unto the wicked, Thou
shalt surely die; if he turn from his sin, and do that which is lawful
and right;

<span id="an_33:15">33:15</span> if the wicked restore the pledge, give
again that which he had taken by robbery, walk in the statutes of life,
committing no iniquity; he shall surely live, he shall not die.

<span id="an_33:16">33:16</span> None of his sins that he hath committed
shall be remembered against him: he hath done that which is lawful and
right; he shall surely live.

<span id="an_33:17">33:17</span> Yet the children of thy people say, The
way of the Lord is not equal: but as for them, their way is not equal.

<span id="an_33:18">33:18</span> When the righteous turneth from his
righteousness, and committeth iniquity, he shall even die therein.

<span id="an_33:19">33:19</span> And when the wicked turneth from his
wickedness, and doeth that which is lawful and right, he shall live
thereby.

<span id="an_33:20">33:20</span> Yet ye say, The way of the Lord is not
equal. O house of Israel, I will judge you every one after his ways.

<span id="an_33:21">33:21</span> And it came to pass in the twelfth year
of our captivity, in the tenth \[month\], in the fifth \[day\] of the
month, that one that had escaped out of Jerusalem came unto me, saying,
The city is smitten.

<span id="an_33:22">33:22</span> Now the hand of Jehovah had been upon
me in the evening, before he that was escaped came; and he had opened my
mouth, until he came to me in the morning; and my mouth was opened, and
I was no more dumb.

<span id="an_33:23">33:23</span> And the word of Jehovah came unto me,
saying,

<span id="an_33:24">33:24</span> Son of man, they that inhabit those
waste places in the land of Israel speak, saying, Abraham was one, and
he inherited the land: but we are many; the land is given us for
inheritance.

<span id="an_33:25">33:25</span> Wherefore say unto them, Thus saith the
Lord Jehovah: Ye eat with the blood, and lift up your eyes unto your
idols, and shed blood: and shall ye possess the land?

<span id="an_33:26">33:26</span> Ye stand upon your sword, ye work
abomination, and ye defile every one his neighbor's wife: and shall ye
possess the land?

<span id="an_33:27">33:27</span> Thus shalt thou say unto them, Thus
saith the Lord Jehovah: As I live, surely they that are in the waste
places shall fall by the sword; and him that is in the open field will I
give to the beasts to be devoured; and they that are in the strongholds
and in the caves shall die of the pestilence.

<span id="an_33:28">33:28</span> And I will make the land a desolation
and an astonishment; and the pride of her power shall cease; and the
mountains of Israel shall be desolate, so that none shall pass through.

<span id="an_33:29">33:29</span> Then shall they know that I am Jehovah,
when I have made the land a desolation and an astonishment, because of
all their abominations which they have committed.

<span id="an_33:30">33:30</span> And as for thee, son of man, the
children of thy people talk of thee by the walls and in the doors of the
houses, and speak one to another, every one to his brother, saying,
Come, I pray you, and hear what is the word that cometh forth from
Jehovah.

<span id="an_33:31">33:31</span> And they come unto thee as the people
cometh, and they sit before thee as my people, and they hear thy words,
but do them not; for with their mouth they show much love, but their
heart goeth after their gain.

<span id="an_33:32">33:32</span> And, lo, thou art unto them as a very
lovely song of one that hath a pleasant voice, and can play well on an
instrument; for they hear thy words, but they do them not.

<span id="an_33:33">33:33</span> And when this cometh to pass, (behold,
it cometh,) then shall they know that a prophet hath been among them.

<span id="an_34:1">34:1</span> And the word of Jehovah came unto me,
saying,

<span id="an_34:2">34:2</span> Son of man, prophesy against the
shepherds of Israel, prophesy, and say unto them, even to the shepherds,
Thus saith the Lord Jehovah: Woe unto the shepherds of Israel that do
feed themselves! should not the shepherds feed the sheep?

<span id="an_34:3">34:3</span> Ye eat the fat, and ye clothe you with
the wool, ye kill the fatlings; but ye feed not the sheep.

<span id="an_34:4">34:4</span> The diseased have ye not strengthened,
neither have ye healed that which was sick, neither have ye bound up
that which was broken, neither have ye brought back that which was
driven away, neither have ye sought that which was lost; but with force
and with rigor have ye ruled over them.

<span id="an_34:5">34:5</span> And they were scattered, because there
was no shepherd; and they became food to all the beasts of the field,
and were scattered.

<span id="an_34:6">34:6</span> My sheep wandered through all the
mountains, and upon every high hill: yea, my sheep were scattered upon
all the face of the earth; and there was none that did search or seek
\[after them\].

<span id="an_34:7">34:7</span> Therefore, ye shepherds, hear the word of
Jehovah:

<span id="an_34:8">34:8</span> As I live, saith the Lord Jehovah, surely
forasmuch as my sheep became a prey, and my sheep became food to all the
beasts of the field, because there was no shepherd, neither did my
shepherds search for my sheep, but the shepherds fed themselves, and fed
not my sheep;

<span id="an_34:9">34:9</span> therefore, ye shepherds, hear the word of
Jehovah:

<span id="an_34:10">34:10</span> Thus saith the Lord Jehovah: Behold, I
am against the shepherds; and I will require my sheep at their hand, and
cause them to cease from feeding the sheep; neither shall the shepherds
feed themselves any more; and I will deliver my sheep from their mouth,
that they may not be food for them.

<span id="an_34:11">34:11</span> For thus saith the Lord Jehovah:
Behold, I myself, even I, will search for my sheep, and will seek them
out.

<span id="an_34:12">34:12</span> As a shepherd seeketh out his flock in
the day that he is among his sheep that are scattered abroad, so will I
seek out my sheep; and I will deliver them out of all places whither
they have been scattered in the cloudy and dark day.

<span id="an_34:13">34:13</span> And I will bring them out from the
peoples, and gather them from the countries, and will bring them into
their own land; and I will feed them upon the mountains of Israel, by
the watercourses, and in all the inhabited places of the country.

<span id="an_34:14">34:14</span> I will feed them with good pasture; and
upon the mountains of the height of Israel shall their fold be: there
shall they lie down in a good fold; and on fat pasture shall they feed
upon the mountains of Israel.

<span id="an_34:15">34:15</span> I myself will be the shepherd of my
sheep, and I will cause them to lie down, saith the Lord Jehovah.

<span id="an_34:16">34:16</span> I will seek that which was lost, and
will bring back that which was driven away, and will bind up that which
was broken, and will strengthen that which was sick: but the fat and the
strong I will destroy; I will feed them in justice.

<span id="an_34:17">34:17</span> And as for you, O my flock, thus saith
the Lord Jehovah: Behold, I judge between sheep and sheep, the rams and
the he-goats.

<span id="an_34:18">34:18</span> Seemeth it a small thing unto you to
have fed upon the good pasture, but ye must tread down with your feet
the residue of your pasture? and to have drunk of the clear waters, but
ye must foul the residue with your feet?

<span id="an_34:19">34:19</span> And as for my sheep, they eat that
which ye have trodden with your feet, and they drink that which ye have
fouled with your feet.

<span id="an_34:20">34:20</span> Therefore thus saith the Lord Jehovah
unto them: Behold, I, even I, will judge between the fat sheep and the
lean sheep.

<span id="an_34:21">34:21</span> Because ye thrust with side and with
shoulder, and push all the diseased with your horns, till ye have
scattered them abroad;

<span id="an_34:22">34:22</span> therefore will I save my flock, and
they shall no more be a prey; and I will judge between sheep and sheep.

<span id="an_34:23">34:23</span> And I will set up one shepherd over
them, and he shall feed them, even my servant David; he shall feed them,
and he shall be their shepherd.

<span id="an_34:24">34:24</span> And I, Jehovah, will be their God, and
my servant David prince among them; I, Jehovah, have spoken it.

<span id="an_34:25">34:25</span> And I will make with them a covenant of
peace, and will cause evil beasts to cease out of the land; and they
shall dwell securely in the wilderness, and sleep in the woods.

<span id="an_34:26">34:26</span> And I will make them and the places
round about my hill a blessing; and I will cause the shower to come down
in its season; there shall be showers of blessing.

<span id="an_34:27">34:27</span> And the tree of the field shall yield
its fruit, and the earth shall yield its increase, and they shall be
secure in their land; and they shall know that I am Jehovah, when I have
broken the bars of their yoke, and have delivered them out of the hand
of those that made bondmen of them.

<span id="an_34:28">34:28</span> And they shall no more be a prey to the
nations, neither shall the beasts of the earth devour them; but they
shall dwell securely, and none shall make them afraid.

<span id="an_34:29">34:29</span> And I will raise up unto them a
plantation for renown, and they shall be no more consumed with famine in
the land, neither bear the shame of the nations any more.

<span id="an_34:30">34:30</span> And they shall know that I, Jehovah,
their God am with them, and that they, the house of Israel, are my
people, saith the Lord Jehovah.

<span id="an_34:31">34:31</span> And ye my sheep, the sheep of my
pasture, are men, and I am your God, saith the Lord Jehovah.

<span id="an_35:1">35:1</span> Moreover the word of Jehovah came unto
me, saying,

<span id="an_35:2">35:2</span> Son of man, set thy face against mount
Seir, and prophesy against it,

<span id="an_35:3">35:3</span> and say unto it, Thus saith the Lord
Jehovah: Behold, I am against thee, O mount Seir, and I will stretch out
my hand against thee, and I will make thee a desolation and an
astonishment.

<span id="an_35:4">35:4</span> I will lay thy cities waste, and thou
shalt be desolate; and thou shalt know that I am Jehovah.

<span id="an_35:5">35:5</span> Because thou hast had a perpetual enmity,
and hast given over the children of Israel to the power of the sword in
the time of their calamity, in the time of the iniquity of the end;

<span id="an_35:6">35:6</span> therefore, as I live, saith the Lord
Jehovah, I will prepare thee unto blood, and blood shall pursue thee:
since thou hast not hated blood, therefore blood shall pursue thee.

<span id="an_35:7">35:7</span> Thus will I make mount Seir an
astonishment and a desolation; and I will cut off from it him that
passeth through and him that returneth.

<span id="an_35:8">35:8</span> And I will fill its mountains with its
slain: in thy hills and in thy valleys and in all thy watercourses shall
they fall that are slain with the sword.

<span id="an_35:9">35:9</span> I will make thee a perpetual desolation,
and thy cities shall not be inhabited; and ye shall know that I am
Jehovah.

<span id="an_35:10">35:10</span> Because thou hast said, These two
nations and these two countries shall be mine, and we will possess it;
whereas Jehovah was there:

<span id="an_35:11">35:11</span> therefore, as I live, saith the Lord
Jehovah, I will do according to thine anger, and according to thine envy
which thou hast showed out of thy hatred against them; and I will make
myself known among them, when I shall judge thee.

<span id="an_35:12">35:12</span> And thou shalt know that I, Jehovah,
have heard all thy revilings which thou hast spoken against the
mountains of Israel, saying, They are laid desolate, they are given us
to devour.

<span id="an_35:13">35:13</span> And ye have magnified yourselves
against me with your mouth, and have multiplied your words against me: I
have heard it.

<span id="an_35:14">35:14</span> Thus saith the Lord Jehovah: When the
whole earth rejoiceth, I will make thee desolate.

<span id="an_35:15">35:15</span> As thou didst rejoice over the
inheritance of the house of Israel, because it was desolate, so will I
do unto thee: thou shalt be desolate, O mount Seir, and all Edom, even
all of it; and they shall know that I am Jehovah.

<span id="an_36:1">36:1</span> And thou, son of man, prophesy unto the
mountains of Israel, and say, Ye mountains of Israel, hear the word of
Jehovah.

<span id="an_36:2">36:2</span> Thus saith the Lord Jehovah: Because the
enemy hath said against you, Aha! and, The ancient high places are ours
in possession;

<span id="an_36:3">36:3</span> therefore prophesy, and say, Thus saith
the Lord Jehovah: Because, even because they have made you desolate, and
swallowed you up on every side, that ye might be a possession unto the
residue of the nations, and ye are taken up in the lips of talkers, and
the evil report of the people;

<span id="an_36:4">36:4</span> therefore, ye mountains of Israel, hear
the word of the Lord Jehovah: Thus saith the Lord Jehovah to the
mountains and to the hills, to the watercourses and to the valleys, to
the desolate wastes and to the cities that are forsaken, which are
become a prey and derision to the residue of the nations that are round
about;

<span id="an_36:5">36:5</span> therefore thus saith the Lord Jehovah:
Surely in the fire of my jealousy have I spoken against the residue of
the nations, and against all Edom, that have appointed my land unto
themselves for a possession with the joy of all their heart, with
despite of soul, to cast it out for a prey.

<span id="an_36:6">36:6</span> Therefore prophesy concerning the land of
Israel, and say unto the mountains and to the hills, to the watercourses
and to the valleys, Thus saith the Lord Jehovah: Behold, I have spoken
in my jealousy and in my wrath, because ye have borne the shame of the
nations:

<span id="an_36:7">36:7</span> therefore thus saith the Lord Jehovah: I
have sworn, \[saying\], Surely the nations that are round about you,
they shall bear their shame.

<span id="an_36:8">36:8</span> But ye, O mountains of Israel, ye shall
shoot forth your branches, and yield your fruit to my people Israel; for
they are at hand to come.

<span id="an_36:9">36:9</span> For, behold, I am for you, and I will
turn into you, and ye shall be tilled and sown;

<span id="an_36:10">36:10</span> and I will multiply men upon you, all
the house of Israel, even all of it; and the cities shall be inhabited,
and the waste places shall be builded;

<span id="an_36:11">36:11</span> and I will multiply upon you man and
beast; and they shall increase and be fruitful; and I will cause you to
be inhabited after your former estate, and will do better \[unto you\]
than at your beginnings: and ye shall know that I am Jehovah.

<span id="an_36:12">36:12</span> Yea, I will cause men to walk upon you,
even my people Israel; and they shall possess thee, and thou shalt be
their inheritance, and thou shalt no more henceforth bereave them of
children.

<span id="an_36:13">36:13</span> Thus saith the Lord Jehovah: Because
they say unto you, Thou \[land\] art a devourer of men, and hast been a
bereaver of thy nation;

<span id="an_36:14">36:14</span> therefore thou shalt devour men no
more, neither bereave thy nation any more, saith the Lord Jehovah;

<span id="an_36:15">36:15</span> neither will I let thee hear any more
the shame of the nations, neither shalt thou bear the reproach of the
peoples any more, neither shalt thou cause thy nation to stumble any
more, saith the Lord Jehovah.

<span id="an_36:16">36:16</span> Moreover the word of Jehovah came unto
me, saying,

<span id="an_36:17">36:17</span> Son of man, when the house of Israel
dwelt in their own land, they defiled it by their way and by their
doings: their way before me was as the uncleanness of a woman in her
impurity.

<span id="an_36:18">36:18</span> Wherefore I poured out my wrath upon
them for the blood which they had poured out upon the land, and because
they had defiled it with their idols;

<span id="an_36:19">36:19</span> and I scattered them among the nations,
and they were dispersed through the countries: according to their way
and according to their doings I judged them.

<span id="an_36:20">36:20</span> And when they came unto the nations,
whither they went, they profaned my holy name; in that men said of them,
These are the people of Jehovah, and are gone forth out of his land.

<span id="an_36:21">36:21</span> But I had regard for my holy name,
which the house of Israel had profaned among the nations, whither they
went.

<span id="an_36:22">36:22</span> Therefore say unto the house of Israel,
Thus saith the Lord Jehovah: I do not \[this\] for your sake, O house of
Israel, but for my holy name, which ye have profaned among the nations,
whither ye went.

<span id="an_36:23">36:23</span> And I will sanctify my great name,
which hath been profaned among the nations, which ye have profaned in
the midst of them; and the nations shall know that I am Jehovah, saith
the Lord Jehovah, when I shall be sanctified in you before their eyes.

<span id="an_36:24">36:24</span> For I will take you from among the
nations, and gather you out of all the countries, and will bring you
into your own land.

<span id="an_36:25">36:25</span> And I will sprinkle clean water upon
you, and ye shall be clean: from all your filthiness, and from all your
idols, will I cleanse you.

<span id="an_36:26">36:26</span> A new heart also will I give you, and a
new spirit will I put within you; and I will take away the stony heart
out of your flesh, and I will give you a heart of flesh.

<span id="an_36:27">36:27</span> And I will put my Spirit within you,
and cause you to walk in my statutes, and ye shall keep mine ordinances,
and do them.

<span id="an_36:28">36:28</span> And ye shall dwell in the land that I
gave to your fathers; and ye shall be my people, and I will be your God.

<span id="an_36:29">36:29</span> And I will save you from all your
uncleannesses: and I will call for the grain, and will multiply it, and
lay no famine upon you.

<span id="an_36:30">36:30</span> And I will multiply the fruit of the
tree, and the increase of the field, that ye may receive no more the
reproach of famine among the nations.

<span id="an_36:31">36:31</span> Then shall ye remember your evil ways,
and your doings that were not good; and ye shall loathe yourselves in
your own sight for your iniquities and for your abominations.

<span id="an_36:32">36:32</span> Nor for your sake do I \[this\], saith
the Lord Jehovah, be it known unto you: be ashamed and confounded for
your ways, O house of Israel.

<span id="an_36:33">36:33</span> Thus saith the Lord Jehovah: In the day
that I cleanse you from all your iniquities, I will cause the cities to
be inhabited, and the waste places shall be builded.

<span id="an_36:34">36:34</span> And the land that was desolate shall be
tilled, whereas it was a desolation in the sight of all that passed by.

<span id="an_36:35">36:35</span> And they shall say, This land that was
desolate is become like the garden of Eden; and the waste and desolate
and ruined cities are fortified and inhabited.

<span id="an_36:36">36:36</span> Then the nations that are left round
about you shall know that I, Jehovah, have builded the ruined places,
and planted that which was desolate: I, Jehovah, have spoken it, and I
will do it.

<span id="an_36:37">36:37</span> Thus saith the Lord Jehovah: For this,
moreover, will I be inquired of by the house of Israel, to do it for
them: I will increase them with men like a flock.

<span id="an_36:38">36:38</span> As the flock for sacrifice, as the
flock of Jerusalem in her appointed feasts, so shall the waste cities be
filled with flocks of men; and they shall know that I am Jehovah.

<span id="an_37:1">37:1</span> The hand of Jehovah was upon me, and he
brought me out in the Spirit of Jehovah, and set me down in the midst of
the valley; and it was full of bones.

<span id="an_37:2">37:2</span> And he caused me to pass by them round
about: and, behold, there were very many in the open valley; and, lo,
they were very dry.

<span id="an_37:3">37:3</span> And he said unto me, Son of man, can
these bones live? And I answered, O Lord Jehovah, thou knowest.

<span id="an_37:4">37:4</span> Again he said unto me, Prophesy over
these bones, and say unto them, O ye dry bones, hear the word of
Jehovah.

<span id="an_37:5">37:5</span> Thus saith the Lord Jehovah unto these
bones: Behold, I will cause breath to enter into you, and ye shall live.

<span id="an_37:6">37:6</span> And I will lay sinews upon you, and will
bring up flesh upon you, and cover you with skin, and put breath in you,
and ye shall live; and ye shall know that I am Jehovah.

<span id="an_37:7">37:7</span> So I prophesied as I was commanded: and
as I prophesied, there was a noise, and, behold, an earthquake; and the
bones came together, bone to its bone.

<span id="an_37:8">37:8</span> And I beheld, and, lo, there were sinews
upon them, and flesh came up, and skin covered them above; but there was
no breath in them.

<span id="an_37:9">37:9</span> Then said he unto me, Prophesy unto the
wind, prophesy, son of man, and say to the wind, Thus saith the Lord
Jehovah: Come from the four winds, O breath, and breathe upon these
slain, that they may live.

<span id="an_37:10">37:10</span> So I prophesied as he commanded me, and
the breath came into them, and they lived, and stood up upon their feet,
an exceeding great army.

<span id="an_37:11">37:11</span> Then he said unto me, Son of man, these
bones are the whole house of Israel: behold, they say, Our bones are
dried up, and our hope is lost; we are clean cut off.

<span id="an_37:12">37:12</span> Therefore prophesy, and say unto them,
Thus saith the Lord Jehovah: Behold, I will open your graves, and cause
you to come up out of your graves, O my people; and I will bring you
into the land of Israel.

<span id="an_37:13">37:13</span> And ye shall know that I am Jehovah,
when I have opened your graves, and caused you to come up out of your
graves, O my people.

<span id="an_37:14">37:14</span> And I will put my Spirit in you, and ye
shall live, and I will place you in your own land: and ye shall know
that I, Jehovah, have spoken it and performed it, saith Jehovah.

<span id="an_37:15">37:15</span> The word of Jehovah came again unto me,
saying,

<span id="an_37:16">37:16</span> And thou, son of man, take thee one
stick, and write upon it, For Judah, and for the children of Israel his
companions: then take another stick, and write upon it, For Joseph, the
stick of Ephraim, and \[for\] all the house of Israel his companions:

<span id="an_37:17">37:17</span> and join them for thee one to another
into one stick, that they may become one in thy hand.

<span id="an_37:18">37:18</span> And when the children of thy people
shall speak unto thee, saying, Wilt thou not show us what thou meanest
by these?

<span id="an_37:19">37:19</span> say unto them, Thus saith the Lord
Jehovah: Behold, I will take the stick of Joseph, which is in the hand
of Ephraim, and the tribes of Israel his companions; and I will put them
with it, \[even\] with the stick of Judah, and make them one stick, and
they shall be one in my hand.

<span id="an_37:20">37:20</span> And the sticks whereon thou writest
shall be in thy hand before their eyes.

<span id="an_37:21">37:21</span> And say unto them, Thus saith the Lord
Jehovah: Behold, I will take the children of Israel from among the
nations, whither they are gone, and will gather them on every side, and
bring them into their own land:

<span id="an_37:22">37:22</span> and I will make them one nation in the
land, upon the mountains of Israel; and one king shall be king to them
all; and they shall be no more two nations, neither shall they be
divided into two kingdoms any more at all;

<span id="an_37:23">37:23</span> neither shall they defile themselves
any more with their idols, nor with their detestable things, nor with
any of their transgressions; but I will save them out of all their
dwelling-places, wherein they have sinned, and will cleanse them: so
shall they be my people, and I will be their God.

<span id="an_37:24">37:24</span> And my servant David shall be king over
them; and they all shall have one shepherd: they shall also walk in mine
ordinances, and observe my statutes, and do them.

<span id="an_37:25">37:25</span> And they shall dwell in the land that I
have given unto Jacob my servant, wherein your fathers dwelt; and they
shall dwell therein, they, and their children, and their children's
children, for ever: and David my servant shall be their prince for ever.

<span id="an_37:26">37:26</span> Moreover I will make a covenant of
peace with them; it shall be an everlasting covenant with them; and I
will place them, and multiply them, and will set my sanctuary in the
midst of them for evermore.

<span id="an_37:27">37:27</span> My tabernacle also shall be with them;
and I will be their God, and they shall be my people.

<span id="an_37:28">37:28</span> And the nations shall know that I am
Jehovah that sanctifieth Israel, when my sanctuary shall be in the midst
of them for evermore.

<span id="an_38:1">38:1</span> And the word of Jehovah came unto me,
saying,

<span id="an_38:2">38:2</span> Son of man, set thy face toward Gog, of
the land of Magog, the prince of Rosh, Meshech, and Tubal, and prophesy
against him,

<span id="an_38:3">38:3</span> and say, Thus saith the Lord Jehovah:
Behold, I am against thee, O Gog, prince of Rosh, Meshech, and Tubal:

<span id="an_38:4">38:4</span> and I will turn thee about, and put hooks
into thy jaws, and I will bring thee forth, and all thine army, horses
and horsemen, all of them clothed in full armor, a great company with
buckler and shield, all of them handling swords;

<span id="an_38:5">38:5</span> Persia, Cush, and Put with them, all of
them with shield and helmet;

<span id="an_38:6">38:6</span> Gomer, and all his hordes; the house of
Togarmah in the uttermost parts of the north, and all his hordes; even
many peoples with thee.

<span id="an_38:7">38:7</span> Be thou prepared, yea, prepare thyself,
thou, and all thy companies that are assembled unto thee, and be thou a
guard unto them.

<span id="an_38:8">38:8</span> After many days thou shalt be visited: in
the latter years thou shalt come into the land that is brought back from
the sword, that is gathered out of many peoples, upon the mountains of
Israel, which have been a continual waste; but it is brought forth out
of the peoples, and they shall dwell securely, all of them.

<span id="an_38:9">38:9</span> And thou shalt ascend, thou shalt come
like a storm, thou shalt be like a cloud to cover the land, thou, and
all thy hordes, and many peoples with thee.

<span id="an_38:10">38:10</span> Thus saith the Lord Jehovah: It shall
come to pass in that day, that things shall come into thy mind, and thou
shalt devise an evil device:

<span id="an_38:11">38:11</span> and thou shalt say, I will go up to the
land of unwalled villages; I will go to them that are at rest, that
dwell securely, all of them dwelling without walls, and having neither
bars nor gates;

<span id="an_38:12">38:12</span> to take the spoil and to take the prey;
to turn thy hand against the waste places that are \[now\] inhabited,
and against the people that are gathered out of the nations, that have
gotten cattle and goods, that dwell in the middle of the earth.

<span id="an_38:13">38:13</span> Sheba, and Dedan, and the merchants of
Tarshish, with all the young lions thereof, shall say unto thee, Art
thou come to take the spoil? hast thou assembled thy company to take the
prey? to carry away silver and gold, to take away cattle and goods, to
take great spoil?

<span id="an_38:14">38:14</span> Therefore, son of man, prophesy, and
say unto Gog, Thus saith the Lord Jehovah: In that day when my people
Israel dwelleth securely, shalt thou not know it?

<span id="an_38:15">38:15</span> And thou shalt come from thy place out
of the uttermost parts of the north, thou, and many peoples with thee,
all of them riding upon horses, a great company and a mighty army;

<span id="an_38:16">38:16</span> and thou shalt come up against my
people Israel, as a cloud to cover the land: it shall come to pass in
the latter days, that I will bring thee against my land, that the
nations may know me, when I shall be sanctified in thee, O Gog, before
their eyes.

<span id="an_38:17">38:17</span> Thus saith the Lord Jehovah: Art thou
he of whom I spake in old time by my servants the prophets of Israel,
that prophesied in those days for \[many\] years that I would bring thee
against them?

<span id="an_38:18">38:18</span> And it shall come to pass in that day,
when Gog shall come against the land of Israel, saith the Lord Jehovah,
that my wrath shall come up into my nostrils.

<span id="an_38:19">38:19</span> For in my jealousy and in the fire of
my wrath have I spoken, Surely in that day there shall be a great
shaking in the land of Israel;

<span id="an_38:20">38:20</span> so that the fishes of the sea, and the
birds of the heavens, and the beasts of the field, and all creeping
things that creep upon the earth, and all the men that are upon the face
of the earth, shall shake at my presence, and the mountains shall be
thrown down, and the steep places shall fall, and every wall shall fall
to the ground.

<span id="an_38:21">38:21</span> And I will call for a sword against him
unto all my mountains, saith the Lord Jehovah: every man's sword shall
be against his brother.

<span id="an_38:22">38:22</span> And with pestilence and with blood will
I enter into judgment with him; and I will rain upon him, and upon his
hordes, and upon the many peoples that are with him, an overflowing
shower, and great hailstones, fire, and brimstone.

<span id="an_38:23">38:23</span> And I will magnify myself, and sanctify
myself, and I will make myself known in the eyes of many nations; and
they shall know that I am Jehovah.

<span id="an_39:1">39:1</span> And thou, son of man, prophesy against
Gog, and say, Thus saith the Lord Jehovah: Behold, I am against thee, O
Gog, prince of Rosh, Meshech, and Tubal:

<span id="an_39:2">39:2</span> and I will turn thee about, and will lead
thee on, and will cause thee to come up from the uttermost parts of the
north; and I will bring thee upon the mountains of Israel;

<span id="an_39:3">39:3</span> and I will smite thy bow out of thy left
hand, and will cause thine arrows to fall out of thy right hand.

<span id="an_39:4">39:4</span> Thou shalt fall upon the mountains of
Israel, thou, and all thy hordes, and the peoples that are with thee: I
will give thee unto the ravenous birds of every sort, and to the beasts
of the field to be devoured.

<span id="an_39:5">39:5</span> Thou shalt fall upon the open field; for
I have spoken it, saith the Lord Jehovah.

<span id="an_39:6">39:6</span> And I will send a fire on Magog, and on
them that dwell securely in the isles; and they shall know that I am
Jehovah.

<span id="an_39:7">39:7</span> And my holy name will I make known in the
midst of my people Israel; neither will I suffer my holy name to be
profaned any more: and the nations shall know that I am Jehovah, the
Holy One in Israel.

<span id="an_39:8">39:8</span> Behold, it cometh, and it shall be done,
saith the Lord Jehovah; this is the day whereof I have spoken.

<span id="an_39:9">39:9</span> And they that dwell in the cities of
Israel shall go forth, and shall make fires of the weapons and burn
them, both the shields and the bucklers, the bows and the arrows, and
the handstaves, and the spears, and they shall make fires of them seven
years;

<span id="an_39:10">39:10</span> so that they shall take no wood out of
the field, neither cut down any out of the forests; for they shall make
fires of the weapons; and they shall plunder those that plundered them,
and rob those that robbed them, saith the Lord Jehovah.

<span id="an_39:11">39:11</span> And it shall come to pass in that day,
that I will give unto Gog a place for burial in Israel, the valley of
them that pass through on the east of the sea; and it shall stop them
that pass through: and there shall they bury Gog and all his multitude;
and they shall call it The valley of Hamon-gog.

<span id="an_39:12">39:12</span> And seven months shall the house of
Israel be burying them, that they may cleanse the land.

<span id="an_39:13">39:13</span> Yea, all the people of the land shall
bury them; and it shall be to them a renown in the day that I shall be
glorified, saith the Lord Jehovah.

<span id="an_39:14">39:14</span> And they shall set apart men of
continual employment, that shall pass through the land, and, with them
that pass through, those that bury them that remain upon the face of the
land, to cleanse it: after the end of seven months shall they search.

<span id="an_39:15">39:15</span> And they that pass through the land
shall pass through; and when any seeth a man's bone, then shall he set
up a sign by it, till the buriers have buried it in the valley of
Hamon-gog.

<span id="an_39:16">39:16</span> And Hamonah shall also be the name of a
city. Thus shall they cleanse the land.

<span id="an_39:17">39:17</span> And thou, son of man, thus saith the
Lord Jehovah: Speak unto the birds of every sort, and to every beast of
the field, Assemble yourselves, and come; gather yourselves on every
side to my sacrifice that I do sacrifice for you, even a great sacrifice
upon the mountains of Israel, that ye may eat flesh and drink blood.

<span id="an_39:18">39:18</span> Ye shall eat the flesh of the mighty,
and drink the blood of the princes of the earth, of rams, of lambs, and
of goats, of bullocks, all of them fatlings of Bashan.

<span id="an_39:19">39:19</span> And ye shall eat fat till ye be full,
and drink blood till ye be drunken, of my sacrifice which I have
sacrificed for you.

<span id="an_39:20">39:20</span> And ye shall be filled at my table with
horses and chariots, with mighty men, and with all men of war, saith the
Lord Jehovah.

<span id="an_39:21">39:21</span> And I will set my glory among the
nations; and all the nations shall see my judgment that I have executed,
and my hand that I have laid upon them.

<span id="an_39:22">39:22</span> So the house of Israel shall know that
I am Jehovah their God, from that day and forward.

<span id="an_39:23">39:23</span> And the nations shall know that the
house of Israel went into captivity for their iniquity; because they
trespassed against me, and I hid my face from them: so I gave them into
the hand of their adversaries, and they fell all of them by the sword.

<span id="an_39:24">39:24</span> According to their uncleanness and
according to their transgressions did I unto them; and I hid my face
from them.

<span id="an_39:25">39:25</span> Therefore thus saith the Lord Jehovah:
Now will I bring back the captivity of Jacob, and have mercy upon the
whole house of Israel; and I will be jealous for my holy name.

<span id="an_39:26">39:26</span> And they shall bear their shame, and
all their trespasses whereby they have trespassed against me, when they
shall dwell securely in their land, and none shall make them afraid;

<span id="an_39:27">39:27</span> when I have brought them back from the
peoples, and gathered them out of their enemies' lands, and am
sanctified in them in the sight of many nations.

<span id="an_39:28">39:28</span> And they shall know that I am Jehovah
their God, in that I caused them to go into captivity among the nations,
and have gathered them unto their own land; and I will leave none of
them any more there;

<span id="an_39:29">39:29</span> neither will I hide my face any more
from them; for I have poured out my Spirit upon the house of Israel,
saith the Lord Jehovah.

<span id="an_40:1">40:1</span> In the five and twentieth year of our
captivity, in the beginning of the year, in the tenth \[day\] of the
month, in the fourteenth year after that the city was smitten, in the
selfsame day, the hand of Jehovah was upon me, and he brought me
thither.

<span id="an_40:2">40:2</span> In the visions of God brought he me into
the land of Israel, and set me down upon a very high mountain, whereon
was as it were the frame of a city on the south.

<span id="an_40:3">40:3</span> And he brought me thither; and, behold,
there was a man, whose appearance was like the appearance of brass, with
a line of flax in his hand, and a measuring reed; and he stood in the
gate.

<span id="an_40:4">40:4</span> And the man said unto me, Son of man,
behold with thine eyes, and hear with thine ears, and set thy heart upon
all that I shall show thee; for, to the intent that I may show them unto
thee, art thou brought hither: declare all that thou seest to the house
of Israel.

<span id="an_40:5">40:5</span> And, behold, a wall on the outside of the
house round about, and in the man's hand a measuring reed six cubits
long, of a cubit and a handbreadth each: so he measured the thickness of
the building, one reed; and the height, one reed.

<span id="an_40:6">40:6</span> Then came he unto the gate which looketh
toward the east, and went up the steps thereof: and he measured the
threshold of the gate, one reed broad; and the other threshold, one reed
broad.

<span id="an_40:7">40:7</span> And every lodge was one reed long, and
one reed broad; and \[the space\] between the lodges was five cubits;
and the threshold of the gate by the porch of the gate toward the house
was one reed.

<span id="an_40:8">40:8</span> He measured also the porch of the gate
toward the house, one reed.

<span id="an_40:9">40:9</span> Then measured he the porch of the gate,
eight cubits; and the posts thereof, two cubits; and the porch of the
gate was toward the house.

<span id="an_40:10">40:10</span> And the lodges of the gate eastward
were three on this side, and three on that side; they three were of one
measure: and the posts had one measure on this side and on that side.

<span id="an_40:11">40:11</span> And he measured the breadth of the
opening of the gate, ten cubits; and the length of the gate, thirteen
cubits;

<span id="an_40:12">40:12</span> and a border before the lodges, one
cubit \[on this side\], and a border, one cubit on that side; and the
lodges, six cubits on this side, and six cubits on that side.

<span id="an_40:13">40:13</span> And he measured the gate from the roof
of the one lodge to the roof of the other, a breadth of five and twenty
cubits; door against door.

<span id="an_40:14">40:14</span> He made also posts, threescore cubits;
and the court \[reached\] unto the posts, round about the gate.

<span id="an_40:15">40:15</span> And \[from\] the forefront of the gate
at the entrance unto the forefront of the inner porch of the gate were
fifty cubits.

<span id="an_40:16">40:16</span> And there were closed windows to the
lodges, and to their posts within the gate round about, and likewise to
the arches; and windows were round about inward; and upon \[each\] post
were palm-trees.

<span id="an_40:17">40:17</span> Then brought he me into the outer
court; and, lo, there were chambers and a pavement, made for the court
round about: thirty chambers were upon the pavement.

<span id="an_40:18">40:18</span> And the pavement was by the side of the
gates, answerable unto the length of the gates, even the lower pavement.

<span id="an_40:19">40:19</span> Then he measured the breadth from the
forefront of the lower gate unto the forefront of the inner court
without, a hundred cubits, \[both\] on the east and on the north.

<span id="an_40:20">40:20</span> And the gate of the outer court whose
prospect is toward the north, he measured the length thereof and the
breadth thereof.

<span id="an_40:21">40:21</span> And the lodges thereof were three on
this side and three on that side; and the posts thereof and the arches
thereof were after the measure of the first gate: the length thereof was
fifty cubits, and the breadth five and twenty cubits.

<span id="an_40:22">40:22</span> And the windows thereof, and the arches
thereof, and the palm-trees thereof, were after the measure of the gate
whose prospect is toward the east; and they went up unto it by seven
steps; and the arches thereof were before them.

<span id="an_40:23">40:23</span> And there was a gate to the inner court
over against the \[other\] gate, \[both\] on the north and on the east;
and he measured from gate to gate a hundred cubits.

<span id="an_40:24">40:24</span> And he led me toward the south; and,
behold, a gate toward the south: and he measured the posts thereof and
the arches thereof according to these measures.

<span id="an_40:25">40:25</span> And there were windows in it and in the
arches thereof round about, like those windows: the length was fifty
cubits, and the breadth five and twenty cubits.

<span id="an_40:26">40:26</span> And there were seven steps to go up to
it, and the arches thereof were before them; and it had palm-trees, one
on this side, and another on that side, upon the posts thereof.

<span id="an_40:27">40:27</span> And there was a gate to the inner court
toward the south: and he measured from gate to gate toward the south a
hundred cubits.

<span id="an_40:28">40:28</span> Then he brought me to the inner court
by the south gate: and he measured the south gate according to these
measures;

<span id="an_40:29">40:29</span> and the lodges thereof, and the posts
thereof, and the arches thereof, according to these measures: and there
were windows in it and in the arches thereof round about; it was fifty
cubits long, and five and twenty cubits broad.

<span id="an_40:30">40:30</span> And there were arches round about, five
and twenty cubits long, and five cubits broad.

<span id="an_40:31">40:31</span> And the arches thereof were toward the
outer court; and palm-trees were upon the posts thereof: and the ascent
to it had eight steps.

<span id="an_40:32">40:32</span> And he brought me into the inner court
toward the east: and he measured the gate according to these measures;

<span id="an_40:33">40:33</span> and the lodges thereof, and the posts
thereof, and the arches thereof, according to these measures: and there
were windows therein and in the arches thereof round about; it was fifty
cubits long, and five and twenty cubits broad.

<span id="an_40:34">40:34</span> And the arches thereof were toward the
outer court; and palm-trees were upon the posts thereof, on this side,
and on that side: and the ascent to it had eight steps.

<span id="an_40:35">40:35</span> And he brought me to the north gate:
and he measured \[it\] according to these measures;

<span id="an_40:36">40:36</span> the lodges thereof, the posts thereof,
and the arches thereof: and there were windows therein round about; the
length was fifty cubits, and the breadth five and twenty cubits.

<span id="an_40:37">40:37</span> And the posts thereof were toward the
outer court; and palm-trees were upon the posts thereof, on this side,
and on that side: and the ascent to it had eight steps.

<span id="an_40:38">40:38</span> And a chamber with the door thereof was
by the posts at the gates; there they washed the burnt-offering.

<span id="an_40:39">40:39</span> And in the porch of the gate were two
tables on this side, and two tables on that side, to slay thereon the
burnt-offering and the sin-offering and the trespass-offering.

<span id="an_40:40">40:40</span> And on the \[one\] side without, as one
goeth up to the entry of the gate toward the north, were two tables; and
on the other side, which belonged to the porch of the gate, were two
tables.

<span id="an_40:41">40:41</span> Four tables were on this side, and four
tables on that side, by the side of the gate; eight tables, whereupon
they slew \[the sacrifices\].

<span id="an_40:42">40:42</span> And there were four tables for the
burnt-offering, of hewn stone, a cubit and a half long, and a cubit and
a half broad, and one cubit high; whereupon they laid the instruments
wherewith they slew the burnt-offering and the sacrifice.

<span id="an_40:43">40:43</span> And the hooks, a handbreadth long, were
fastened within round about: and upon the tables was the flesh of the
oblation.

<span id="an_40:44">40:44</span> And without the inner gate were
chambers for the singers in the inner court, which was at the side of
the north gate; and their prospect was toward the south; one at the side
of the east gate having the prospect toward the north.

<span id="an_40:45">40:45</span> And he said unto me, This chamber,
whose prospect is toward the south, is for the priests, the keepers of
the charge of the house;

<span id="an_40:46">40:46</span> and the chamber whose prospect is
toward the north is for the priests, the keepers of the charge of the
altar: these are the sons of Zadok, who from among the sons of Levi come
near to Jehovah to minister unto him.

<span id="an_40:47">40:47</span> And he measured the court, a hundred
cubits long, and a hundred cubits broad, foursquare; and the altar was
before the house.

<span id="an_40:48">40:48</span> Then he brought me to the porch of the
house, and measured each post of the porch, five cubits on this side,
and five cubits on that side: and the breadth of the gate was three
cubits on this side, and three cubits on that side.

<span id="an_40:49">40:49</span> The length of the porch was twenty
cubits, and the breadth eleven cubits; even by the steps whereby they
went up to it: and there were pillars by the posts, one on this side,
and another on that side.

<span id="an_41:1">41:1</span> And he brought me to the temple, and
measured the posts, six cubits broad on the one side, and six cubits
broad on the other side, which was the breadth of the tabernacle.

<span id="an_41:2">41:2</span> And the breadth of the entrance was ten
cubits; and the sides of the entrance were five cubits on the one side,
and five cubits on the other side: and he measured the length thereof,
forty cubits, and the breadth, twenty cubits.

<span id="an_41:3">41:3</span> Then went he inward, and measured each
post of the entrance, two cubits; and the entrance, six cubits; and the
breadth of the entrance, seven cubits.

<span id="an_41:4">41:4</span> And he measured the length thereof,
twenty cubits, and the breadth, twenty cubits, before the temple: and he
said unto me, This is the most holy place.

<span id="an_41:5">41:5</span> Then he measured the wall of the house,
six cubits; and the breadth of every side-chamber, four cubits, round
about the house on every side.

<span id="an_41:6">41:6</span> And the side-chambers were in three
stories, one over another, and thirty in order; and they entered into
the wall which belonged to the house for the side-chambers round about,
that they might have hold \[therein\], and not have hold in the wall of
the house.

<span id="an_41:7">41:7</span> And the side-chambers were broader as
they encompassed \[the house\] higher and higher; for the encompassing
of the house went higher and higher round about the house: therefore the
breadth of the house \[continued\] upward; and so one went up \[from\]
the lowest \[chamber\] to the highest by the middle \[chamber\].

<span id="an_41:8">41:8</span> I saw also that the house had a raised
basement round about: the foundations of the side-chambers were a full
reed of six great cubits.

<span id="an_41:9">41:9</span> The thickness of the wall, which was for
the side-chambers, on the outside, was five cubits: and that which was
left was the place of the side-chambers that belonged to the house.

<span id="an_41:10">41:10</span> And between the chambers was a breadth
of twenty cubits round about the house on every side.

<span id="an_41:11">41:11</span> And the doors of the side-chambers were
toward \[the place\] that was left, one door toward the north, and
another door toward the south: and the breadth of the place that was
left was five cubits round about.

<span id="an_41:12">41:12</span> And the building that was before the
separate place at the side toward the west was seventy cubits broad; and
the wall of the building was five cubits thick round about, and the
length thereof ninety cubits.

<span id="an_41:13">41:13</span> So he measured the house, a hundred
cubits long; and the separate place, and the building, with the walls
thereof, a hundred cubits long;

<span id="an_41:14">41:14</span> also the breadth of the face of the
house, and of the separate place toward the east, a hundred cubits.

<span id="an_41:15">41:15</span> And he measured the length of the
building before the separate place which was at the back thereof, and
the galleries thereof on the one side and on the other side, a hundred
cubits; and the inner temple, and the porches of the court;

<span id="an_41:16">41:16</span> the thresholds, and the closed windows,
and the galleries round about on their three stories, over against the
threshold, ceiled with wood round about, and \[from\] the ground up to
the windows, (now the windows were covered),

<span id="an_41:17">41:17</span> to \[the space\] above the door, even
unto the inner house, and without, and by all the wall round about
within and without, by measure.

<span id="an_41:18">41:18</span> And it was made with cherubim and
palm-trees; and a palm-tree was between cherub and cherub, and every
cherub had two faces;

<span id="an_41:19">41:19</span> so that there was the face of a man
toward the palm-tree on the one side, and the face of a young lion
toward the palm-tree on the other side. \[thus was it\] made through all
the house round about:

<span id="an_41:20">41:20</span> from the ground unto above the door
were cherubim and palm-trees made: thus was the wall of the temple.

<span id="an_41:21">41:21</span> As for the temple, the door-posts were
squared; and as for the face of the sanctuary, the appearance
\[thereof\] was as the appearance \[of the temple\].

<span id="an_41:22">41:22</span> The altar was of wood, three cubits
high, and the length thereof two cubits; and the corners thereof, and
the length thereof, and the walls thereof, were of wood: and he said
unto me, This is the table that is before Jehovah.

<span id="an_41:23">41:23</span> And the temple and the sanctuary had
two doors.

<span id="an_41:24">41:24</span> And the doors had two leaves
\[apiece\], two turning leaves: two \[leaves\] for the one door, and two
leaves for the other.

<span id="an_41:25">41:25</span> And there were made on them, on the
doors of the temple, cherubim and palm-trees, like as were made upon the
walls; and there was a threshold of wood upon the face of the porch
without.

<span id="an_41:26">41:26</span> And there were closed windows and
palm-trees on the one side and on the other side, on the sides of the
porch: thus were the side-chambers of the house, and the thresholds.

<span id="an_42:1">42:1</span> Then he brought me forth into the outer
court, the way toward the north: and he brought me into the chamber that
was over against the separate place, and which was over against the
building toward the north.

<span id="an_42:2">42:2</span> Before the length of a hundred cubits was
the north door, and the breadth was fifty cubits.

<span id="an_42:3">42:3</span> Over against the twenty \[cubits\] which
belonged to the inner court, and over against the pavement which
belonged to the outer court, was gallery against gallery in the third
story.

<span id="an_42:4">42:4</span> And before the chambers was a walk of ten
cubits' breadth inward, a way of one cubit; and their doors were toward
the north.

<span id="an_42:5">42:5</span> Now the upper chambers were shorter; for
the galleries took away from these, more than from the lower and the
middlemost, in the building.

<span id="an_42:6">42:6</span> For they were in three stories, and they
had not pillars as the pillars of the courts: therefore \[the
uppermost\] was straitened more than the lowest and the middlemost from
the ground.

<span id="an_42:7">42:7</span> And the wall that was without by the side
of the chambers, toward the outer court before the chambers, the length
thereof was fifty cubits.

<span id="an_42:8">42:8</span> For the length of the chambers that were
in the outer court was fifty cubits: and, lo, before the temple were a
hundred cubits.

<span id="an_42:9">42:9</span> And from under these chambers was the
entry on the east side, as one goeth into them from the outer court.

<span id="an_42:10">42:10</span> In the thickness of the wall of the
court toward the east, before the separate place, and before the
building, there were chambers.

<span id="an_42:11">42:11</span> And the way before them was like the
appearance of \[the way of\] the chambers which were toward the north;
according to their length so was their breadth: and all their egresses
were both according to their fashions, and according to their doors.

<span id="an_42:12">42:12</span> And according to the doors of the
chambers that were toward the south was a door at the head of the way,
even the way directly before the wall toward the east, as one entereth
into them.

<span id="an_42:13">42:13</span> Then said he unto me, The north
chambers and the south chambers, which are before the separate place,
they are the holy chambers, where the priests that are near unto Jehovah
shall eat the most holy things: there shall they lay the most holy
things, and the meal-offering, and the sin-offering, and the
trespass-offering; for the place is holy.

<span id="an_42:14">42:14</span> When the priests enter in, then shall
they not go out of the holy place into the outer court, but there they
shall lay their garments wherein they minister; for they are holy: and
they shall put on other garments, and shall approach to that which
pertaineth to the people.

<span id="an_42:15">42:15</span> Now when he had made an end of
measuring the inner house, he brought me forth by the way of the gate
whose prospect is toward the east, and measured it round about.

<span id="an_42:16">42:16</span> He measured on the east side with the
measuring reed five hundred reeds, with the measuring reed round about.

<span id="an_42:17">42:17</span> He measured on the north side five
hundred reeds with the measuring reed round about.

<span id="an_42:18">42:18</span> He measured on the south side five
hundred reeds with the measuring reed.

<span id="an_42:19">42:19</span> He turned about to the west side, and
measured five hundred reeds with the measuring reed.

<span id="an_42:20">42:20</span> He measured it on the four sides: it
had a wall round about, the length five hundred, and the breadth five
hundred, to make a separation between that which was holy and that which
was common.

<span id="an_43:1">43:1</span> Afterward he brought me to the gate, even
the gate that looketh toward the east.

<span id="an_43:2">43:2</span> And, behold, the glory of the God of
Israel came from the way of the east: and his voice was like the sound
of many waters; and the earth shined with his glory.

<span id="an_43:3">43:3</span> And it was according to the appearance of
the vision which I saw, even according to the vision that I saw when I
came to destroy the city; and the visions were like the vision that I
saw by the river Chebar; and I fell upon my face.

<span id="an_43:4">43:4</span> And the glory of Jehovah came into the
house by the way of the gate whose prospect is toward the east.

<span id="an_43:5">43:5</span> And the Spirit took me up, and brought me
into the inner court; and, behold, the glory of Jehovah filled the
house.

<span id="an_43:6">43:6</span> And I heard one speaking unto me out of
the house; and a man stood by me.

<span id="an_43:7">43:7</span> And he said unto me, Son of man, \[this
is\] the place of my throne, and the place of the soles of my feet,
where I will dwell in the midst of the children of Israel for ever. And
the house of Israel shall no more defile my holy name, neither they, nor
their kings, by their whoredom, and by the dead bodies of their kings
\[in\] their high places;

<span id="an_43:8">43:8</span> in their setting of their threshold by my
threshold, and their door-post beside my door-post, and there was
\[but\] the wall between me and them; and they have defiled my holy name
by their abominations which they have committed: wherefore I have
consumed them in mine anger.

<span id="an_43:9">43:9</span> Now let them put away their whoredom, and
the dead bodies of their kings, far from me; and I will dwell in the
midst of them for ever.

<span id="an_43:10">43:10</span> Thou, son of man, show the house to the
house of Israel, that they may be ashamed of their iniquities; and let
them measure the pattern.

<span id="an_43:11">43:11</span> And if they be ashamed of all that they
have done, make known unto them the form of the house, and the fashion
thereof, and the egresses thereof, and the entrances thereof, and all
the forms thereof, and all the ordinances thereof, and all the forms
thereof, and all the laws thereof; and write it in their sight; that
they may keep the whole form thereof, and all the ordinances thereof,
and do them.

<span id="an_43:12">43:12</span> This is the law of the house: upon the
top of the mountain the whole limit thereof round about shall be most
holy. Behold, this is the law of the house.

<span id="an_43:13">43:13</span> And these are the measures of the altar
by cubits (the cubit is a cubit and a handbreadth): the bottom shall be
a cubit, and the breadth a cubit, and the border thereof by the edge
thereof round about a span; and this shall be the base of the altar.

<span id="an_43:14">43:14</span> And from the bottom upon the ground to
the lower ledge shall be two cubits, and the breadth one cubit; and from
the lesser ledge to the greater ledge shall be four cubits, and the
breadth a cubit.

<span id="an_43:15">43:15</span> And the upper altar shall be four
cubits; and from the altar hearth and upward there shall be four horns.

<span id="an_43:16">43:16</span> And the altar hearth shall be twelve
\[cubits\] long by twelve broad, square in the four sides thereof.

<span id="an_43:17">43:17</span> And the ledge shall be fourteen
\[cubits\] long by fourteen broad in the four sides thereof; and the
border about it shall be half a cubit; and the bottom thereof shall be a
cubit round about; and the steps thereof shall look toward the east.

<span id="an_43:18">43:18</span> And he said unto me, Son of man, thus
saith the Lord Jehovah: These are the ordinances of the altar in the day
when they shall make it, to offer burnt-offerings thereon, and to
sprinkle blood thereon.

<span id="an_43:19">43:19</span> Thou shalt give to the priests the
Levites that are of the seed of Zadok, who are near unto me, to minister
unto me, saith the Lord Jehovah, a young bullock for a sin-offering.

<span id="an_43:20">43:20</span> And thou shalt take of the blood
thereof, and put it on the four horns of it, and on the four corners of
the ledge, and upon the border round about: thus shalt thou cleanse it
and make atonement for it.

<span id="an_43:21">43:21</span> Thou shalt also take the bullock of the
sin-offering, and it shall be burnt in the appointed place of the house,
without the sanctuary.

<span id="an_43:22">43:22</span> And on the second day thou shalt offer
a he-goat without blemish for a sin-offering; and they shall cleanse the
altar, as they did cleanse it with the bullock.

<span id="an_43:23">43:23</span> When thou hast made an end of cleansing
it, thou shalt offer a young bullock without blemish, and a ram out of
the flock without blemish.

<span id="an_43:24">43:24</span> And thou shalt bring them near before
Jehovah, and the priests shall cast salt upon them, and they shall offer
them up for a burnt-offering unto Jehovah.

<span id="an_43:25">43:25</span> Seven days shalt thou prepare every day
a goat for a sin-offering: they shall also prepare a young bullock, and
a ram out of the flock, without blemish.

<span id="an_43:26">43:26</span> Seven days shall they make atonement
for the altar and purify it; so shall they consecrate it.

<span id="an_43:27">43:27</span> And when they have accomplished the
days, it shall be that upon the eighth day, and forward, the priests
shall make your burnt-offerings upon the altar, and your
peace-offerings; and I will accept you, saith the Lord Jehovah.

<span id="an_44:1">44:1</span> Then he brought me back by the way of the
outer gate of the sanctuary, which looketh toward the east; and it was
shut.

<span id="an_44:2">44:2</span> And Jehovah said unto me, This gate shall
be shut; it shall not be opened, neither shall any man enter in by it;
for Jehovah, the God of Israel, hath entered in by it; therefore it
shall be shut.

<span id="an_44:3">44:3</span> As for the prince, he shall sit therein
as prince to eat bread before Jehovah; he shall enter by the way of the
porch of the gate, and shall go out by the way of the same.

<span id="an_44:4">44:4</span> Then he brought me by the way of the
north gate before the house; and I looked, and, behold, the glory of
Jehovah filled the house of Jehovah: and I fell upon my face.

<span id="an_44:5">44:5</span> And Jehovah said unto me, Son of man,
mark well, and behold with thine eyes, and hear with thine ears all that
I say unto thee concerning all the ordinances of the house of Jehovah,
and all the laws thereof; and mark well the entrance of the house, with
every egress of the sanctuary.

<span id="an_44:6">44:6</span> And thou shalt say to the rebellious,
even to the house of Israel, Thus saith the Lord Jehovah: O ye house of
Israel, let it suffice you of all your abominations,

<span id="an_44:7">44:7</span> in that ye have brought in foreigners,
uncircumcised in heart and uncircumcised in flesh, to be in my
sanctuary, to profane it, even my house, when ye offer my bread, the fat
and the blood, and they have broken my covenant, \[to add\] unto all
your abominations.

<span id="an_44:8">44:8</span> And ye have not kept the charge of my
holy things; but ye have set keepers of my charge in my sanctuary for
yourselves.

<span id="an_44:9">44:9</span> Thus saith the Lord Jehovah, No
foreigner, uncircumcised in heart and uncircumcised in flesh, shall
enter into my sanctuary, of any foreigners that are among the children
of Israel.

<span id="an_44:10">44:10</span> But the Levites that went far from me,
when Israel went astray, that went astray from me after their idols,
they shall bear their iniquity.

<span id="an_44:11">44:11</span> Yet they shall be ministers in my
sanctuary, having oversight at the gates of the house, and ministering
in the house: they shall slay the burnt-offering and the sacrifice for
the people, and they shall stand before them to minister unto them.

<span id="an_44:12">44:12</span> Because they ministered unto them
before their idols, and became a stumblingblock of iniquity unto the
house of Israel; therefore have I lifted up my hand against them, saith
the Lord Jehovah, and they shall bear their iniquity.

<span id="an_44:13">44:13</span> And they shall not come near unto me,
to execute the office of priest unto me, nor to come near to any of my
holy things, unto the things that are most holy; but they shall bear
their shame, and their abominations which they have committed.

<span id="an_44:14">44:14</span> Yet will I make them keepers of the
charge of the house, for all the service thereof, and for all that shall
be done therein.

<span id="an_44:15">44:15</span> But the priests the Levites, the sons
of Zadok, that kept the charge of my sanctuary when the children of
Israel went astray from me, they shall come near to me to minister unto
me; and they shall stand before me to offer unto me the fat and the
blood, saith the Lord Jehovah:

<span id="an_44:16">44:16</span> they shall enter into my sanctuary, and
they shall come near to my table, to minister unto me, and they shall
keep my charge.

<span id="an_44:17">44:17</span> And it shall be that, when they enter
in at the gates of the inner court, they shall be clothed with linen
garments; and no wool shall come upon them, while they minister in the
gates of the inner court, and within.

<span id="an_44:18">44:18</span> They shall have linen tires upon their
heads, and shall have linen breeches upon their loins; they shall not
gird themselves with \[anything that causeth\] sweat.

<span id="an_44:19">44:19</span> And when they go forth into the outer
court, even into the outer court to the people, they shall put off their
garments wherein they minister, and lay them in the holy chambers; and
they shall put on other garments, that they sanctify not the people with
their garments.

<span id="an_44:20">44:20</span> Neither shall they shave their heads,
nor suffer their locks to grow long; they shall only cut off the hair of
their heads.

<span id="an_44:21">44:21</span> Neither shall any of the priests drink
wine, when they enter into the inner court.

<span id="an_44:22">44:22</span> Neither shall they take for their wives
a widow, nor her that is put away; but they shall take virgins of the
seed of the house of Israel, or a widow that is the widow of a priest.

<span id="an_44:23">44:23</span> And they shall teach my people the
difference between the holy and the common, and cause them to discern
between the unclean and the clean.

<span id="an_44:24">44:24</span> And in a controversy they shall stand
to judge; according to mine ordinances shall they judge it: and they
shall keep my laws and my statutes in all my appointed feasts; and they
shall hallow my sabbaths.

<span id="an_44:25">44:25</span> And they shall go in to no dead person
to defile themselves; but for father, or for mother, or for son, or for
daughter, for brother, or for sister that hath had no husband, they may
defile themselves.

<span id="an_44:26">44:26</span> And after he is cleansed, they shall
reckon unto him seven days.

<span id="an_44:27">44:27</span> And in the day that he goeth into the
sanctuary, into the inner court, to minister in the sanctuary, he shall
offer his sin-offering, saith the Lord Jehovah.

<span id="an_44:28">44:28</span> And they shall have an inheritance: I
am their inheritance; and ye shall give them no possession in Israel; I
am their possession.

<span id="an_44:29">44:29</span> They shall eat the meal-offering, and
the sin-offering, and the trespass-offering; and every devoted thing in
Israel shall be theirs.

<span id="an_44:30">44:30</span> And the first of all the first-fruits
of every thing, and every oblation of everything, of all your oblations,
shall be for the priest: ye shall also give unto the priests the first
of your dough, to cause a blessing to rest on thy house.

<span id="an_44:31">44:31</span> The priests shall not eat of anything
that dieth of itself, or is torn, whether it be bird or beast.

<span id="an_45:1">45:1</span> Moreover, when ye shall divide by lot the
land for inheritance, ye shall offer an oblation unto Jehovah, a holy
portion of the land; the length shall be the length of five and twenty
thousand \[reeds\], and the breadth shall be ten thousand: it shall be
holy in all the border thereof round about.

<span id="an_45:2">45:2</span> Of this there shall be for the holy place
five hundred \[in length\] by five hundred \[in breadth\], square round
about; and fifty cubits for the suburbs thereof round about.

<span id="an_45:3">45:3</span> And of this measure shalt thou measure a
length of five and twenty thousand, and a breadth of ten thousand: and
in it shall be the sanctuary, which is most holy.

<span id="an_45:4">45:4</span> It is a holy portion of the land; it
shall be for the priests, the ministers of the sanctuary, that come near
to minister unto Jehovah; and it shall be a place for their houses, and
a holy place for the sanctuary.

<span id="an_45:5">45:5</span> And five and twenty thousand in length,
and ten thousand in breadth, shall be unto the Levites, the ministers of
the house, for a possession unto themselves, \[for\] twenty chambers.

<span id="an_45:6">45:6</span> And ye shall appoint the possession of
the city five thousand broad, and five and twenty thousand long, side by
side with the oblation of the holy portion: it shall be for the whole
house of Israel.

<span id="an_45:7">45:7</span> And \[whatsoever is\] for the prince
\[shall be\] on the one side and on the other side of the holy oblation
and of the possession of the city, in front of the holy oblation and in
front of the possession of the city, on the west side westward, and on
the east side eastward; and in length answerable unto one of the
portions, from the west border unto the east border.

<span id="an_45:8">45:8</span> In the land it shall be to him for a
possession in Israel: and my princes shall no more oppress my people;
but they shall give the land to the house of Israel according to their
tribes.

<span id="an_45:9">45:9</span> Thus saith the Lord Jehovah: Let it
suffice you, O princes of Israel: remove violence and spoil, and execute
justice and righteousness; take away your exactions from my people,
saith the Lord Jehovah.

<span id="an_45:10">45:10</span> Ye shall have just balances, and a just
ephah, and a just bath.

<span id="an_45:11">45:11</span> The ephah and the bath shall be of one
measure, that the bath may contain the tenth part of a homer, and the
ephah the tenth part of a homer: the measure thereof shall be after the
homer.

<span id="an_45:12">45:12</span> And the shekel shall be twenty gerahs;
twenty shekels, five and twenty shekels, fifteen shekels, shall be your
maneh.

<span id="an_45:13">45:13</span> This is the oblation that ye shall
offer: the sixth part of an ephah from a homer of wheat; and ye shall
give the sixth part of an ephah from a homer of barley;

<span id="an_45:14">45:14</span> and the set portion of oil, of the bath
of oil, the tenth part of a bath out of the cor, \[which is\] ten baths,
even a homer; (for ten baths are a homer;)

<span id="an_45:15">45:15</span> and one lamb of the flock, out of two
hundred, from the well-watered pastures of Israel; -for a meal-offering,
and for a burnt-offering, and for peace-offerings, to make atonement for
them, saith the Lord Jehovah.

<span id="an_45:16">45:16</span> All the people of the land shall give
unto this oblation for the prince in Israel.

<span id="an_45:17">45:17</span> And it shall be the prince's part to
give the burnt-offerings, and the meal-offerings, and the
drink-offerings, in the feasts, and on the new moons, and on the
sabbaths, in all the appointed feasts of the house of Israel: he shall
prepare the sin-offering, and the meal-offering, and the burnt-offering,
and the peace-offerings, to make atonement for the house of Israel.

<span id="an_45:18">45:18</span> Thus saith the Lord Jehovah: In the
first \[month\], in the first \[day\] of the month, thou shalt take a
young bullock without blemish; and thou shalt cleanse the sanctuary.

<span id="an_45:19">45:19</span> And the priest shall take of the blood
of the sin-offering, and put it upon the door-posts of the house, and
upon the four corners of the ledge of the altar, and upon the posts of
the gate of the inner court.

<span id="an_45:20">45:20</span> And so thou shalt do on the seventh
\[day\] of the month for every one that erreth, and for him that is
simple: so shall ye make atonement for the house.

<span id="an_45:21">45:21</span> In the first \[month\], in the
fourteenth day of the month, ye shall have the passover, a feast of
seven days; unleavened bread shall be eaten.

<span id="an_45:22">45:22</span> And upon that day shall the prince
prepare for himself and for all the people of the land a bullock for a
sin-offering.

<span id="an_45:23">45:23</span> And the seven days of the feast he
shall prepare a burnt-offering to Jehovah, seven bullocks and seven rams
without blemish daily the seven days; and a he-goat daily for a
sin-offering.

<span id="an_45:24">45:24</span> And he shall prepare a meal-offering,
an ephah for a bullock, and an ephah for a ram, and a hin of oil to an
ephah.

<span id="an_45:25">45:25</span> In the seventh \[month\], in the
fifteenth day of the month, in the feast, shall he do the like the seven
days; according to the sin-offering, according to the burnt-offering,
and according to the meal-offering, and according to the oil.

<span id="an_46:1">46:1</span> Thus saith the Lord Jehovah: The gate of
the inner court that looketh toward the east shall be shut the six
working days; but on the sabbath day it shall be opened, and on the day
of the new moon it shall be opened.

<span id="an_46:2">46:2</span> And the prince shall enter by the way of
the porch of the gate without, and shall stand by the post of the gate;
and the priests shall prepare his burnt-offering and his
peace-offerings, and he shall worship at the threshold of the gate: then
he shall go forth; but the gate shall not be shut until the evening.

<span id="an_46:3">46:3</span> And the people of the land shall worship
at the door of that gate before Jehovah on the sabbaths and on the new
moons.

<span id="an_46:4">46:4</span> And the burnt-offering that the prince
shall offer unto Jehovah shall be on the sabbath day six lambs without
blemish and a ram without blemish;

<span id="an_46:5">46:5</span> and the meal-offering shall be an ephah
for the ram, and the meal-offering for the lambs as he is able to give,
and a hin of oil to an ephah.

<span id="an_46:6">46:6</span> And on the day of the new moon it shall
be a young bullock without blemish, and six lambs, and a ram; they shall
be without blemish:

<span id="an_46:7">46:7</span> and he shall prepare a meal-offering, an
ephah for the bullock, and an ephah for the ram, and for the lambs
according as he is able, and a hin of oil to an ephah.

<span id="an_46:8">46:8</span> And when the prince shall enter, he shall
go in by the way of the porch of the gate, and he shall go forth by the
way thereof.

<span id="an_46:9">46:9</span> But when the people of the land shall
come before Jehovah in the appointed feasts, he that entereth by the way
of the north gate to worship shall go forth by the way of the south
gate; and he that entereth by the way of the south gate shall go forth
by the way of the north gate: he shall not return by the way of the gate
whereby he came in, but shall go forth straight before him.

<span id="an_46:10">46:10</span> And the prince, when they go in, shall
go in in the midst of them; and when they go forth, they shall go forth
\[together\].

<span id="an_46:11">46:11</span> And in the feasts and in the
solemnities the meal-offering shall be an ephah for a bullock, and an
ephah for a ram, and for the lambs as he is able to give, and a hin of
oil to an ephah.

<span id="an_46:12">46:12</span> And when the prince shall prepare a
freewill-offering, a burnt-offering or peace-offerings as a
freewill-offering unto Jehovah, one shall open for him the gate that
looketh toward the east; and he shall prepare his burnt-offering and his
peace-offerings, as he doth on the sabbath day: then he shall go forth;
and after his going forth one shall shut the gate.

<span id="an_46:13">46:13</span> And thou shalt prepare a lamb a year
old without blemish for a burnt-offering unto Jehovah daily: morning by
morning shalt thou prepare it.

<span id="an_46:14">46:14</span> And thou shalt prepare a meal-offering
with it morning by morning, the sixth part of an ephah, and the third
part of a hin of oil, to moisten the fine flour; a meal-offering unto
Jehovah continually by a perpetual ordinance.

<span id="an_46:15">46:15</span> Thus shall they prepare the lamb, and
the meal-offering, and the oil, morning by morning, for a continual
burnt-offering.

<span id="an_46:16">46:16</span> Thus saith the Lord Jehovah: If the
prince give a gift unto any of his sons, it is his inheritance, it shall
belong to his sons; it is their possession by inheritance.

<span id="an_46:17">46:17</span> But if he give of his inheritance a
gift to one of his servants, it shall be his to the year of liberty;
then it shall return to the prince; but as for his inheritance, it shall
be for his sons.

<span id="an_46:18">46:18</span> Moreover the prince shall not take of
the people's inheritance, to thrust them out of their possession; he
shall give inheritance to his sons out of his own possession, that my
people be not scattered every man from his possession.

<span id="an_46:19">46:19</span> Then he brought me through the entry,
which was at the side of the gate, into the holy chambers for the
priests, which looked toward the north: and, behold, there was a place
on the hinder part westward.

<span id="an_46:20">46:20</span> And he said unto me, This is the place
where the priests shall boil the trespass-offering and the sin-offering,
\[and\] where they shall bake the meal-offering; that they bring them
not forth into the outer court, to sanctify the people.

<span id="an_46:21">46:21</span> Then he brought me forth into the outer
court, and caused me to pass by the four corners of the court; and,
behold, in every corner of the court there was a court.

<span id="an_46:22">46:22</span> In the four corners of the court there
were courts inclosed, forty \[cubits\] long and thirty broad: these four
in the corners were of one measure.

<span id="an_46:23">46:23</span> And there was a wall round about in
them, round about the four, and boiling-places were made under the walls
round about.

<span id="an_46:24">46:24</span> Then said he unto me, These are the
boiling-houses, where the ministers of the house shall boil the
sacrifice of the people.

<span id="an_47:1">47:1</span> And he brought me back unto the door of
the house; and, behold, waters issued out from under the threshold of
the house eastward; (for the forefront of the house was toward the
east;) and the waters came down from under, from the right side of the
house, on the south of the altar.

<span id="an_47:2">47:2</span> Then he brought me out by the way of the
gate northward, and led me round by the way without unto the outer gate,
by the way of \[the gate\] that looketh toward the east; and, behold,
there ran out waters on the right side.

<span id="an_47:3">47:3</span> When the man went forth eastward with the
line in his hand, he measured a thousand cubits, and he caused me to
pass through the waters, waters that were to the ankles.

<span id="an_47:4">47:4</span> Again he measured a thousand, and caused
me to pass through the waters, waters that were to the knees. Again he
measured a thousand, and caused me to pass through \[the waters\],
waters that were to the loins.

<span id="an_47:5">47:5</span> Afterward he measured a thousand; \[and
it was\] a river that I could not pass through; for the waters were
risen, waters to swim in, a river that could not be passed through.

<span id="an_47:6">47:6</span> And he said unto me, Son of man, hast
thou seen \[this\]? Then he brought me, and caused me to return to the
bank of the river.

<span id="an_47:7">47:7</span> Now when I had returned, behold, upon the
bank of the river were very many trees on the one side and on the other.

<span id="an_47:8">47:8</span> Then said he unto me, These waters issue
forth toward the eastern region, and shall go down into the Arabah; and
they shall go toward the sea; into the sea \[shall the waters go\] which
were made to issue forth; and the waters shall be healed.

<span id="an_47:9">47:9</span> And it shall come to pass, that every
living creature which swarmeth, in every place whither the rivers come,
shall live; and there shall be a very great multitude of fish; for these
waters are come thither, and \[the waters of the sea\] shall be healed,
and everything shall live whithersoever the river cometh.

<span id="an_47:10">47:10</span> And it shall come to pass, that fishers
shall stand by it: from En-gedi even unto En-eglaim shall be a place for
the spreading of nets; their fish shall be after their kinds, as the
fish of the great sea, exceeding many.

<span id="an_47:11">47:11</span> But the miry places thereof, and the
marshes thereof, shall not be healed; they shall be given up to salt.

<span id="an_47:12">47:12</span> And by the river upon the bank thereof,
on this side and on that side, shall grow every tree for food, whose
leaf shall not whither, neither shall the fruit thereof fail: it shall
bring forth new fruit every month, because the waters thereof issue out
of the sanctuary; and the fruit thereof shall be for food, and the leaf
thereof for healing.

<span id="an_47:13">47:13</span> Thus saith the Lord Jehovah: This shall
be the border, whereby ye shall divide the land for inheritance
according to the twelve tribes of Israel: Joseph \[shall have two\]
portions.

<span id="an_47:14">47:14</span> And ye shall inherit it, one as well as
another; for I sware to give it unto your fathers: and this land shall
fall unto you for inheritance.

<span id="an_47:15">47:15</span> And this shall be the border of the
land: On the north side, from the great sea, by the way of Hethlon, unto
the entrance of Zedad;

<span id="an_47:16">47:16</span> Hamath, Berothah, Sibraim, which is
between the border of Damascus and the border of Hamath; Hazer-hatticon,
which is by the border of Hauran.

<span id="an_47:17">47:17</span> And the border from the sea, shall be
Hazar-enon at the border of Damascus; and on the north northward is the
border of Hamath. This is the north side.

<span id="an_47:18">47:18</span> And the east side, between Hauran and
Damascus and Gilead, and the land of Israel, shall be the Jordan; from
the \[north\] border unto the east sea shall ye measure. This is the
east side.

<span id="an_47:19">47:19</span> And the south side southward shall be
from Tamar as far as the waters of Meriboth-kadesh, to the brook \[of
Egypt\], unto the great sea. This is the south side southward.

<span id="an_47:20">47:20</span> And the west side shall be the great
sea, from the \[south\] border as far as over against the entrance of
Hamath. This is the west side.

<span id="an_47:21">47:21</span> So shall ye divide this land unto you
according to the tribes of Israel.

<span id="an_47:22">47:22</span> And it shall come to pass, that ye
shall divide it by lot for an inheritance unto you and to the strangers
that sojourn among you, who shall beget children among you; and they
shall be unto you as the home-born among the children of Israel; they
shall have inheritance with you among the tribes of Israel.

<span id="an_47:23">47:23</span> And it shall come to pass, that in what
tribe the stranger sojourneth, there shall ye give him his inheritance,
saith the Lord Jehovah.

<span id="an_48:1">48:1</span> Now these are the names of the tribes:
From the north end, beside the way of Hethlon to the entrance of Hamath,
Hazar-enan at the border of Damascus, northward beside Hamath, (and they
shall have their sides east \[and\] west,) Dan, one \[portion\].

<span id="an_48:2">48:2</span> And by the border of Dan, from the east
side unto the west side, Asher, one \[portion\].

<span id="an_48:3">48:3</span> And by the border of Asher, from the east
side even unto the west side, Naphtali, one \[portion\].

<span id="an_48:4">48:4</span> And by the border of Naphtali, from the
east side unto the west side, Manasseh, one \[portion\].

<span id="an_48:5">48:5</span> And by the border of Manasseh, from the
east side unto the west side, Ephraim, one \[portion\].

<span id="an_48:6">48:6</span> And by the border of Ephraim, from the
east side even unto the west side, Reuben, one \[portion\].

<span id="an_48:7">48:7</span> And by the border of Reuben, from the
east side unto the west side, Judah, one \[portion\].

<span id="an_48:8">48:8</span> And by the border of Judah, from the east
side unto the west side, shall be the oblation which ye shall offer,
five and twenty thousand \[reeds\] in breadth, and in length as one of
the portions, from the east side unto the west side: and the sanctuary
shall be in the midst of it.

<span id="an_48:9">48:9</span> The oblation that ye shall offer unto
Jehovah shall be five and twenty thousand \[reeds\] in length, and ten
thousand in breadth.

<span id="an_48:10">48:10</span> And for these, even for the priests,
shall be the holy oblation: toward the north five and twenty thousand
\[in length\], and toward the west ten thousand in breadth, and toward
the east ten thousand in breadth, and toward the south five and twenty
thousand in length: and the sanctuary of Jehovah shall be in the midst
thereof.

<span id="an_48:11">48:11</span> \[It shall be\] for the priests that
are sanctified of the sons of Zadok, that have kept my charge, that went
not astray when the children of Israel went astray, as the Levites went
astray.

<span id="an_48:12">48:12</span> And it shall be unto them an oblation
from the oblation of the land, a thing most holy, by the border of the
Levites.

<span id="an_48:13">48:13</span> And answerable unto the border of the
priests, the Levites shall have five and twenty thousand in length, and
ten thousand in breadth: all the length shall be five and twenty
thousand, and the breadth ten thousand.

<span id="an_48:14">48:14</span> And they shall sell none of it, nor
exchange it, nor shall the first-fruits of the land be alienated; for it
is holy unto Jehovah.

<span id="an_48:15">48:15</span> And the five thousand that are left in
the breadth, in front of the five and twenty thousand, shall be for
common use, for the city, for dwelling and for suburbs; and the city
shall be in the midst thereof.

<span id="an_48:16">48:16</span> And these shall be the measures
thereof: the north side four thousand and five hundred, and the south
side four thousand and five hundred, and on the east side four thousand
and five hundred, and the west side four thousand and five hundred.

<span id="an_48:17">48:17</span> And the city shall have suburbs: toward
the north two hundred and fifty, and toward the south two hundred and
fifty, and toward the east two hundred and fifty, and toward the west
two hundred and fifty.

<span id="an_48:18">48:18</span> And the residue in the length,
answerable unto the holy oblation, shall be ten thousand eastward, and
ten thousand westward; and it shall be answerable unto the holy
oblation; and the increase thereof shall be for food unto them that
labor in the city.

<span id="an_48:19">48:19</span> And they that labor in the city, out of
all the tribes of Israel, shall till it.

<span id="an_48:20">48:20</span> All the oblation shall be five and
twenty thousand by five and twenty thousand: ye shall offer the holy
oblation four-square, with the possession of the city.

<span id="an_48:21">48:21</span> And the residue shall be for the
prince, on the one side and on the other of the holy oblation and of the
possession of the city; in front of the five and twenty thousand of the
oblation toward the east border, and westward in front of the five and
twenty thousand toward the west border, answerable unto the portions, it
shall be for the prince: and the holy oblation and the sanctuary of the
house shall be in the midst thereof.

<span id="an_48:22">48:22</span> Moreover from the possession of the
Levites, and from the possession of the city, being in the midst of that
which is the prince's, between the border of Judah and the border of
Benjamin, it shall be for the prince.

<span id="an_48:23">48:23</span> And as for the rest of the tribes: from
the east side unto the west side, Benjamin, one \[portion\].

<span id="an_48:24">48:24</span> And by the border of Benjamin, from the
east side unto the west side, Simeon, one \[portion\].

<span id="an_48:25">48:25</span> And by the border of Simeon, from the
east side unto the west side, Issachar, one \[portion\].

<span id="an_48:26">48:26</span> And by the border of Issachar, from the
east side unto the west side, Zebulun, one \[portion\].

<span id="an_48:27">48:27</span> And by the border of Zebulun, from the
east side unto the west side, Gad, one \[portion\].

<span id="an_48:28">48:28</span> And by the border of Gad, at the south
side southward, the border shall be even from Tamar unto the waters of
Meribath-kadesh, to the brook \[of Egypt\], unto the great sea.

<span id="an_48:29">48:29</span> This is the land which ye shall divide
by lot unto the tribes of Israel for inheritance, and these are their
several portions, saith the Lord Jehovah.

<span id="an_48:30">48:30</span> And these are the egresses of the city:
On the north side four thousand and five hundred \[reeds\] by measure;

<span id="an_48:31">48:31</span> and the gates of the city shall be
after the names of the tribes of Israel, three gates northward: the gate
of Reuben, one; the gate of Judah, one; the gate of Levi, one.

<span id="an_48:32">48:32</span> And at the east side four thousand and
five hundred \[reeds\], and three gates: even the gate of Joseph, one;
the gate of Benjamin, one; the gate of Dan, one.

<span id="an_48:33">48:33</span> And at the south side four thousand and
five hundred \[reeds\] by measure, and three gates: the gate of Simeon,
one; the gate of Issachar, one; the gate of Zebulun, one.

<span id="an_48:34">48:34</span> At the west side four thousand and five
hundred \[reeds\], with their three gates: the gate of Gad, one; the
gate of Asher, one; the gate of Naphtali, one.

<span id="an_48:35">48:35</span> It shall be eighteen thousand \[reeds\]
round about: and the name of the city from that day shall be, Jehovah is
there.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Daniel](dan)
