[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index)  [English
Bibles](../eb)  [Index](index)  [Next](exo) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### American Standard Version: Genesis

<span id="an_1:1">1:1</span> In the beginning God created the heavens
and the earth.

<span id="an_1:2">1:2</span> And the earth was waste and void; and
darkness was upon the face of the deep: and the Spirit of God moved upon
the face of the waters

<span id="an_1:3">1:3</span> And God said, Let there be light: and there
was light.

<span id="an_1:4">1:4</span> And God saw the light, that it was good:
and God divided the light from the darkness.

<span id="an_1:5">1:5</span> And God called the light Day, and the
darkness he called Night. And there was evening and there was morning,
one day.

<span id="an_1:6">1:6</span> And God said, Let there be a firmament in
the midst of the waters, and let it divide the waters from the waters.

<span id="an_1:7">1:7</span> And God made the firmament, and divided the
waters which were under the firmament from the waters which were above
the firmament: and it was so.

<span id="an_1:8">1:8</span> And God called the firmament Heaven. And
there was evening and there was morning, a second day.

<span id="an_1:9">1:9</span> And God said, Let the waters under the
heavens be gathered together unto one place, and let the dry land
appear: and it was so.

<span id="an_1:10">1:10</span> And God called the dry land Earth; and
the gathering together of the waters called he Seas: and God saw that it
was good.

<span id="an_1:11">1:11</span> And God said, Let the earth put forth
grass, herbs yielding seed, \[and\] fruit-trees bearing fruit after
their kind, wherein is the seed thereof, upon the earth: and it was so.

<span id="an_1:12">1:12</span> And the earth brought forth grass, herbs
yielding seed after their kind, and trees bearing fruit, wherein is the
seed thereof, after their kind: and God saw that it was good.

<span id="an_1:13">1:13</span> And there was evening and there was
morning, a third day.

<span id="an_1:14">1:14</span> And God said, Let there be lights in the
firmament of heaven to divide the day from the night; and let them be
for signs, and for seasons, and for days and years:

<span id="an_1:15">1:15</span> and let them be for lights in the
firmament of heaven to give light upon the earth: and it was so.

<span id="an_1:16">1:16</span> And God made the two great lights; the
greater light to rule the day, and the lesser light to rule the night:
\[he made\] the stars also.

<span id="an_1:17">1:17</span> And God set them in the firmament of
heaven to give light upon the earth,

<span id="an_1:18">1:18</span> and to rule over the day and over the
night, and to divide the light from the darkness: and God saw that it
was good.

<span id="an_1:19">1:19</span> And there was evening and there was
morning, a fourth day.

<span id="an_1:20">1:20</span> And God said, Let the waters swarm with
swarms of living creatures, and let birds fly above the earth in the
open firmament of heaven.

<span id="an_1:21">1:21</span> And God created the great sea-monsters,
and every living creature that moveth, wherewith the waters swarmed,
after their kind, and every winged bird after its kind: and God saw that
it was good.

<span id="an_1:22">1:22</span> And God blessed them, saying, Be
fruitful, and multiply, and fill the waters in the seas, and let birds
multiply on the earth.

<span id="an_1:23">1:23</span> And there was evening and there was
morning, a fifth day.

<span id="an_1:24">1:24</span> And God said, Let the earth bring forth
living creatures after their kind, cattle, and creeping things, and
beasts of the earth after their kind: and it was so.

<span id="an_1:25">1:25</span> And God made the beasts of the earth
after their kind, and the cattle after their kind, and everything that
creepeth upon the ground after its kind: and God saw that it was good.

<span id="an_1:26">1:26</span> And God said, Let us make man in our
image, after our likeness: and let them have dominion over the fish of
the sea, and over the birds of the heavens, and over the cattle, and
over all the earth, and over every creeping thing that creepeth upon the
earth.

<span id="an_1:27">1:27</span> And God created man in his own image, in
the image of God created he him; male and female created he them.

<span id="an_1:28">1:28</span> And God blessed them: and God said unto
them, Be fruitful, and multiply, and replenish the earth, and subdue it;
and have dominion over the fish of the sea, and over the birds of the
heavens, and over every living thing that moveth upon the earth.

<span id="an_1:29">1:29</span> And God said, Behold, I have given you
every herb yielding seed, which is upon the face of all the earth, and
every tree, in which is the fruit of a tree yielding seed; to you it
shall be for food:

<span id="an_1:30">1:30</span> and to every beast of the earth, and to
every bird of the heavens, and to everything that creepeth upon the
earth, wherein there is life, \[I have given\] every green herb for
food: and it was so.

<span id="an_1:31">1:31</span> And God saw everything that he had made,
and, behold, it was very good. And there was evening and there was
morning, the sixth day.

<span id="an_2:1">2:1</span> And the heavens and the earth were
finished, and all the host of them.

<span id="an_2:2">2:2</span> And on the seventh day God finished his
work which he had made; and he rested on the seventh day from all his
work which he had made.

<span id="an_2:3">2:3</span> And God blessed the seventh day, and
hallowed it; because that in it he rested from all his work which God
had created and made.

<span id="an_2:4">2:4</span> These are the generations of the heavens
and of the earth when they were created, in the day that Jehovah God
made earth and heaven.

<span id="an_2:5">2:5</span> And no plant of the field was yet in the
earth, and no herb of the field had yet sprung up; for Jehovah God had
not caused it to rain upon the earth: and there was not a man to till
the ground;

<span id="an_2:6">2:6</span> but there went up a mist from the earth,
and watered the whole face of the ground.

<span id="an_2:7">2:7</span> And Jehovah God formed man of the dust of
the ground, and breathed into his nostrils the breath of life; and man
became a living soul.

<span id="an_2:8">2:8</span> And Jehovah God planted a garden eastward,
in Eden; and there he put the man whom he had formed.

<span id="an_2:9">2:9</span> And out of the ground made Jehovah God to
grow every tree that is pleasant to the sight, and good for food; the
tree of life also in the midst of the garden, and the tree of the
knowledge of good and evil.

<span id="an_2:10">2:10</span> And a river went out of Eden to water the
garden; and from thence it was parted, and became four heads.

<span id="an_2:11">2:11</span> The name of the first is Pishon: that is
it which compasseth the whole land of Havilah, where there is gold;

<span id="an_2:12">2:12</span> and the gold of that land is good: there
is bdellium and the onyx stone.

<span id="an_2:13">2:13</span> And the name of the second river is
Gihon: the same is it that compasseth the whole land of Cush.

<span id="an_2:14">2:14</span> And the name of the third river is
Hiddekel: that is it which goeth in front of Assyria. And the fourth
river is the Euphrates.

<span id="an_2:15">2:15</span> And Jehovah God took the man, and put him
into the garden of Eden to dress it and to keep it.

<span id="an_2:16">2:16</span> And Jehovah God commanded the man,
saying, Of every tree of the garden thou mayest freely eat:

<span id="an_2:17">2:17</span> but of the tree of the knowledge of good
and evil, thou shalt not eat of it: for in the day that thou eatest
thereof thou shalt surely die.

<span id="an_2:18">2:18</span> And Jehovah God said, It is not good that
the man should be alone; I will make him a help meet for him.

<span id="an_2:19">2:19</span> And out of the ground Jehovah God formed
every beast of the field, and every bird of the heavens; and brought
them unto the man to see what he would call them: and whatsoever the man
called every living creature, that was the name thereof.

<span id="an_2:20">2:20</span> And the man gave names to all cattle, and
to the birds of the heavens, and to every beast of the field; but for
man there was not found a help meet for him.

<span id="an_2:21">2:21</span> And Jehovah God caused a deep sleep to
fall upon the man, and he slept; and he took one of his ribs, and closed
up the flesh instead thereof:

<span id="an_2:22">2:22</span> and the rib, which Jehovah God had taken
from the man, made he a woman, and brought her unto the man.

<span id="an_2:23">2:23</span> And the man said, This is now bone of my
bones, and flesh of my flesh: she shall be called Woman, because she was
taken out of Man.

<span id="an_2:24">2:24</span> Therefore shall a man leave his father
and his mother, and shall cleave unto his wife: and they shall be one
flesh.

<span id="an_2:25">2:25</span> And they were both naked, the man and his
wife, and were not ashamed.

<span id="an_3:1">3:1</span> Now the serpent was more subtle than any
beast of the field which Jehovah God had made. And he said unto the
woman, Yea, hath God said, Ye shall not eat of any tree of the garden?

<span id="an_3:2">3:2</span> And the woman said unto the serpent, Of the
fruit of the trees of the garden we may eat:

<span id="an_3:3">3:3</span> but of the fruit of the tree which is in
the midst of the garden, God hath said, Ye shall not eat of it, neither
shall ye touch it, lest ye die.

<span id="an_3:4">3:4</span> And the serpent said unto the woman, Ye
shall not surely die:

<span id="an_3:5">3:5</span> for God doth know that in the day ye eat
thereof, then your eyes shall be opened, and ye shall be as God, knowing
good and evil.

<span id="an_3:6">3:6</span> And when the woman saw that the tree was
good for food, and that it was a delight to the eyes, and that the tree
was to be desired to make one wise, she took of the fruit thereof, and
did eat; and she gave also unto her husband with her, and he did eat.

<span id="an_3:7">3:7</span> And the eyes of them both were opened, and
they knew that they were naked; and they sewed fig-leaves together, and
made themselves aprons.

<span id="an_3:8">3:8</span> And they heard the voice of Jehovah God
walking in the garden in the cool of the day: and the man and his wife
hid themselves from the presence of Jehovah God amongst the trees of the
garden.

<span id="an_3:9">3:9</span> And Jehovah God called unto the man, and
said unto him, Where art thou?

<span id="an_3:10">3:10</span> And he said, I heard thy voice in the
garden, and I was afraid, because I was naked; and I hid myself.

<span id="an_3:11">3:11</span> And he said, Who told thee that thou wast
naked? Hast thou eaten of the tree, whereof I commanded thee that thou
shouldest not eat?

<span id="an_3:12">3:12</span> And the man said, The woman whom thou
gavest to be with me, she gave me of the tree, and I did eat.

<span id="an_3:13">3:13</span> And Jehovah God said unto the woman, What
is this thou hast done? And the woman said, The serpent beguiled me, and
I did eat.

<span id="an_3:14">3:14</span> And Jehovah God said unto the serpent,
Because thou hast done this, cursed art thou above all cattle, and above
every beast of the field; upon thy belly shalt thou go, and dust shalt
thou eat all the days of thy life:

<span id="an_3:15">3:15</span> and I will put enmity between thee and
the woman, and between thy seed and her seed: he shall bruise thy head,
and thou shalt bruise his heel.

<span id="an_3:16">3:16</span> Unto the woman he said, I will greatly
multiply thy pain and thy conception; in pain thou shalt bring forth
children; and thy desire shall be to thy husband, and he shall rule over
thee.

<span id="an_3:17">3:17</span> And unto Adam he said, Because thou hast
hearkened unto the voice of thy wife, and hast eaten of the tree, of
which I commanded thee, saying, Thou shalt not eat of it: cursed is the
ground for thy sake; in toil shalt thou eat of it all the days of thy
life;

<span id="an_3:18">3:18</span> thorns also and thistles shall it bring
forth to thee; and thou shalt eat the herb of the field;

<span id="an_3:19">3:19</span> in the sweat of thy face shalt thou eat
bread, till thou return unto the ground; for out of it wast thou taken:
for dust thou art, and unto dust shalt thou return.

<span id="an_3:20">3:20</span> And the man called his wife's name Eve;
because she was the mother of all living.

<span id="an_3:21">3:21</span> And Jehovah God made for Adam and for his
wife coats of skins, and clothed them.

<span id="an_3:22">3:22</span> And Jehovah God said, Behold, the man is
become as one of us, to know good and evil; and now, lest he put forth
his hand, and take also of the tree of life, and eat, and live for ever-

<span id="an_3:23">3:23</span> therefore Jehovah God sent him forth from
the garden of Eden, to till the ground from whence he was taken.

<span id="an_3:24">3:24</span> So he drove out the man; and he placed at
the east of the garden of Eden the Cherubim, and the flame of a sword
which turned every way, to keep the way of the tree of life.

<span id="an_4:1">4:1</span> And the man knew Eve his wife; and she
conceived, and bare Cain, and said, I have gotten a man with \[the help
of\] Jehovah.

<span id="an_4:2">4:2</span> And again she bare his brother Abel. And
Abel was a keeper of sheep, but Cain was a tiller of the ground.

<span id="an_4:3">4:3</span> And in process of time it came to pass,
that Cain brought of the fruit of the ground an offering unto Jehovah.

<span id="an_4:4">4:4</span> And Abel, he also brought of the firstlings
of his flock and of the fat thereof. And Jehovah had respect unto Abel
and to his offering:

<span id="an_4:5">4:5</span> but unto Cain and to his offering he had
not respect. And Cain was very wroth, and his countenance fell.

<span id="an_4:6">4:6</span> And Jehovah said unto Cain, Why art thou
wroth? and why is thy countenance fallen?

<span id="an_4:7">4:7</span> If thou doest well, shall it not be lifted
up? and if thou doest not well, sin coucheth at the door: and unto thee
shall be its desire, but do thou rule over it.

<span id="an_4:8">4:8</span> And Cain told Abel his brother. And it came
to pass, when they were in the field, that Cain rose up against Abel his
brother, and slew him.

<span id="an_4:9">4:9</span> And Jehovah said unto Cain, Where is Abel
thy brother? And he said, I know not: am I my brother's keeper?

<span id="an_4:10">4:10</span> And he said, What hast thou done? the
voice of thy brother's blood crieth unto me from the ground.

<span id="an_4:11">4:11</span> And now cursed art thou from the ground,
which hath opened its mouth to receive thy brother's blood from thy
hand;

<span id="an_4:12">4:12</span> when thou tillest the ground, it shall
not henceforth yield unto thee its strength; a fugitive and a wanderer
shalt thou be in the earth.

<span id="an_4:13">4:13</span> And Cain said unto Jehovah, My punishment
is greater than I can bear.

<span id="an_4:14">4:14</span> Behold, thou hast driven me out this day
from the face of the ground; and from thy face shall I be hid; and I
shall be a fugitive and a wanderer in the earth; and it will come to
pass, that whosoever findeth me will slay me.

<span id="an_4:15">4:15</span> And Jehovah said unto him, Therefore
whosoever slayeth Cain, vengeance shall be taken on him sevenfold. And
Jehovah appointed a sign for Cain, lest any finding him should smite
him.

<span id="an_4:16">4:16</span> And Cain went out from the presence of
Jehovah, and dwelt in the land of Nod, on the east of Eden.

<span id="an_4:17">4:17</span> And Cain knew his wife; and she
conceived, and bare Enoch: and he builded a city, and called the name of
the city, after the name of his son, Enoch.

<span id="an_4:18">4:18</span> And unto Enoch was born Irad: and Irad
begat Mehujael: and Mehujael begat Methushael; and Methushael begat
Lamech.

<span id="an_4:19">4:19</span> And Lamech took unto him two wives: the
name of the one was Adah, and the name of the other Zillah.

<span id="an_4:20">4:20</span> And Adah bare Jabal: he was the father of
such as dwell in tents and \[have\] cattle.

<span id="an_4:21">4:21</span> And his brother's name was Jubal: he was
the father of all such as handle the harp and pipe.

<span id="an_4:22">4:22</span> And Zillah, she also bare Tubal-cain, the
forger of every cutting instrument of brass and iron: and the sister of
Tubal-cain was Naamah.

<span id="an_4:23">4:23</span> And Lamech said unto his wives: Adah and
Zillah, hear my voice; Ye wives of Lamech, hearken unto my speech: For I
have slain a man for wounding me, And a young man for bruising me:

<span id="an_4:24">4:24</span> If Cain shall be avenged sevenfold, Truly
Lamech seventy and sevenfold.

<span id="an_4:25">4:25</span> And Adam knew his wife again; and she
bare a son, and called his name Seth. For, \[said she\], God hath
appointed me another seed instead of Abel; for Cain slew him.

<span id="an_4:26">4:26</span> And to Seth, to him also there was born a
son; and he called his name Enosh. Then began men to call upon the name
of Jehovah.

<span id="an_5:1">5:1</span> This is the book of the generations of
Adam. In the day that God created man, in the likeness of God made he
him;

<span id="an_5:2">5:2</span> male and female created he them, and
blessed them, and called their name Adam, in the day when they were
created.

<span id="an_5:3">5:3</span> And Adam lived a hundred and thirty years,
and begat \[a son\] in his own likeness, after his image; and called his
name Seth:

<span id="an_5:4">5:4</span> and the days of Adam after he begat Seth
were eight hundred years: and he begat sons and daughters.

<span id="an_5:5">5:5</span> And all the days that Adam lived were nine
hundred and thirty years: and he died.

<span id="an_5:6">5:6</span> And Seth lived a hundred and five years,
and begat Enosh:

<span id="an_5:7">5:7</span> and Seth lived after he begat Enosh eight
hundred and seven years, and begat sons and daughters:

<span id="an_5:8">5:8</span> and all the days of Seth were nine hundred
and twelve years: and he died.

<span id="an_5:9">5:9</span> And Enosh lived ninety years, and begat
Kenan.

<span id="an_5:10">5:10</span> and Enosh lived after he begat Kenan
eight hundred and fifteen years, and begat sons and daughters:

<span id="an_5:11">5:11</span> and all the days of Enosh were nine
hundred and five years: and he died.

<span id="an_5:12">5:12</span> And Kenan lived seventy years, and begat
Mahalalel:

<span id="an_5:13">5:13</span> and Kenan lived after he begat Mahalalel
eight hundred and forty years, and begat sons and daughters:

<span id="an_5:14">5:14</span> and all the days of Kenan were nine
hundred and ten years: and he died.

<span id="an_5:15">5:15</span> And Mahalalel lived sixty and five years,
and begat Jared:

<span id="an_5:16">5:16</span> And Mahalalel lived after he begat Jared
eight hundred and thirty years, and begat sons and daughters:

<span id="an_5:17">5:17</span> and all the days of Mahalalel were eight
hundred ninety and five years: and he died.

<span id="an_5:18">5:18</span> And Jared lived a hundred sixty and two
years, and begat Enoch:

<span id="an_5:19">5:19</span> and Jared lived after he begat Enoch
eight hundred years, and begat sons and daughters:

<span id="an_5:20">5:20</span> And all the days of Jared were nine
hundred sixty and two years: and he died.

<span id="an_5:21">5:21</span> And Enoch lived sixty and five years, and
begat Methuselah:

<span id="an_5:22">5:22</span> and Enoch walked with God after he begat
Methuselah three hundred years, and begat sons and daughters:

<span id="an_5:23">5:23</span> and all the days of Enoch were three
hundred sixty and five years:

<span id="an_5:24">5:24</span> and Enoch walked with God: and he was
not; for God took him.

<span id="an_5:25">5:25</span> And Methuselah lived a hundred eighty and
seven years, and begat Lamech:

<span id="an_5:26">5:26</span> and Methuselah lived after he begat
Lamech seven hundred eighty and two years, and begat sons and daughters.

<span id="an_5:27">5:27</span> And all the days of Methuselah were nine
hundred sixty and nine years: and he died.

<span id="an_5:28">5:28</span> And Lamech lived a hundred eighty and two
years, and begat a son:

<span id="an_5:29">5:29</span> and he called his name Noah, saying, This
same shall comfort us in our work and in the toil of our hands, \[which
cometh\] because of the ground which Jehovah hath cursed.

<span id="an_5:30">5:30</span> And Lamech lived after he begat Noah five
hundred ninety and five years, and begat sons and daughters:

<span id="an_5:31">5:31</span> And all the days of Lamech were seven
hundred seventy and seven years: and he died.

<span id="an_5:32">5:32</span> And Noah was five hundred years old: And
Noah begat Shem, Ham, and Japheth.

<span id="an_6:1">6:1</span> And it came to pass, when men began to
multiply on the face of the ground, and daughters were born unto them,

<span id="an_6:2">6:2</span> that the sons of God saw the daughters of
men that they were fair; and they took them wives of all that they
chose.

<span id="an_6:3">6:3</span> And Jehovah said, My spirit shall not
strive with man for ever, for that he also is flesh: yet shall his days
be a hundred and twenty years.

<span id="an_6:4">6:4</span> The Nephilim were in the earth in those
days, and also after that, when the sons of God came unto the daughters
of men, and they bare children to them: the same were the mighty men
that were of old, the men of renown.

<span id="an_6:5">6:5</span> And Jehovah saw that the wickedness of man
was great in the earth, and that every imagination of the thoughts of
his heart was only evil continually.

<span id="an_6:6">6:6</span> And it repented Jehovah that he had made
man on the earth, and it grieved him at his heart.

<span id="an_6:7">6:7</span> And Jehovah said, I will destroy man whom I
have created from the face of the ground; both man, and beast, and
creeping things, and birds of the heavens; for it repenteth me that I
have made them.

<span id="an_6:8">6:8</span> But Noah found favor in the eyes of
Jehovah.

<span id="an_6:9">6:9</span> These are the generations of Noah. Noah was
a righteous man, \[and\] perfect in his generations: Noah walked with
God.

<span id="an_6:10">6:10</span> And Noah begat three sons, Shem, Ham, and
Japheth.

<span id="an_6:11">6:11</span> And the earth was corrupt before God, and
the earth was filled with violence.

<span id="an_6:12">6:12</span> And God saw the earth, and, behold, it
was corrupt; for all flesh had corrupted their way upon the earth.

<span id="an_6:13">6:13</span> And God said unto Noah, The end of all
flesh is come before me; for the earth is filled with violence through
them; and, behold, I will destroy them with the earth.

<span id="an_6:14">6:14</span> Make thee an ark of gopher wood; rooms
shalt thou make in the ark, and shalt pitch it within and without with
pitch.

<span id="an_6:15">6:15</span> And this is how thou shalt make it: the
length of the ark three hundred cubits, the breadth of it fifty cubits,
and the height of it thirty cubits.

<span id="an_6:16">6:16</span> A light shalt thou make to the ark, and
to a cubit shalt thou finish it upward; and the door of the ark shalt
thou set in the side thereof; with lower, second, and third stories
shalt thou make it.

<span id="an_6:17">6:17</span> And I, behold, I do bring the flood of
waters upon this earth, to destroy all flesh, wherein is the breath of
life, from under heaven; everything that is in the earth shall die.

<span id="an_6:18">6:18</span> But I will establish my covenant with
thee; and thou shalt come into the ark, thou, and thy sons, and thy
wife, and thy sons' wives with thee.

<span id="an_6:19">6:19</span> And of every living thing of all flesh,
two of every sort shalt thou bring into the ark, to keep them alive with
thee; they shall be male and female.

<span id="an_6:20">6:20</span> Of the birds after their kind, and of the
cattle after their kind, of every creeping thing of the ground after its
kind, two of every sort shall come unto thee, to keep them alive.

<span id="an_6:21">6:21</span> And take thou unto thee of all food that
is eaten, and gather it to thee; and it shall be for food for thee, and
for them.

<span id="an_6:22">6:22</span> Thus did Noah; according to all that God
commanded him, so did he.

<span id="an_7:1">7:1</span> And Jehovah said unto Noah, Come thou and
all thy house into the ark; for thee have I seen righteous before me in
this generation.

<span id="an_7:2">7:2</span> Of every clean beast thou shalt take to
thee seven and seven, the male and his female; and of the beasts that
are not clean two, the male and his female:

<span id="an_7:3">7:3</span> of the birds also of the heavens, seven and
seven, male and female, to keep seed alive upon the face of all the
earth.

<span id="an_7:4">7:4</span> For yet seven days, and I will cause it to
rain upon the earth forty days and forty nights; and every living thing
that I have made will I destroy from off the face of the ground.

<span id="an_7:5">7:5</span> And Noah did according unto all that
Jehovah commanded him.

<span id="an_7:6">7:6</span> And Noah was six hundred years old when the
flood of waters was upon the earth.

<span id="an_7:7">7:7</span> And Noah went in, and his sons, and his
wife, and his sons' wives with him, into the ark, because of the waters
of the flood.

<span id="an_7:8">7:8</span> Of clean beasts, and of beasts that are not
clean, and of birds, and of everything that creepeth upon the ground,

<span id="an_7:9">7:9</span> there went in two and two unto Noah into
the ark, male and female, as God commanded Noah.

<span id="an_7:10">7:10</span> And it came to pass after the seven days,
that the waters of the flood were upon the earth.

<span id="an_7:11">7:11</span> In the six hundredth year of Noah's life,
in the second month, on the seventeenth day of the month, on the same
day were all the fountains of the great deep broken up, and the windows
of heaven were opened.

<span id="an_7:12">7:12</span> And the rain was upon the earth forty
days and forty nights.

<span id="an_7:13">7:13</span> In the selfsame day entered Noah, and
Shem, and Ham, and Japheth, the sons of Noah, and Noah's wife, and the
three wives of his sons with them, into the ark;

<span id="an_7:14">7:14</span> they, and every beast after its kind, and
all the cattle after their kind, and every creeping thing that creepeth
upon the earth after its kind, and every bird after its kind, every bird
of every sort.

<span id="an_7:15">7:15</span> And they went in unto Noah into the ark,
two and two of all flesh wherein is the breath of life.

<span id="an_7:16">7:16</span> And they that went in, went in male and
female of all flesh, as God commanded him: and Jehovah shut him in.

<span id="an_7:17">7:17</span> And the flood was forty days upon the
earth; and the waters increased, and bare up the ark, and it was lifted
up above the earth.

<span id="an_7:18">7:18</span> And the waters prevailed, and increased
greatly upon the earth; and the ark went upon the face of the waters.

<span id="an_7:19">7:19</span> And the waters prevailed exceedingly upon
the earth; and all the high mountains that were under the whole heaven
were covered.

<span id="an_7:20">7:20</span> Fifteen cubits upward did the waters
prevail; and the mountains were covered.

<span id="an_7:21">7:21</span> And all flesh died that moved upon the
earth, both birds, and cattle, and beasts, and every creeping thing that
creepeth upon the earth, and every man:

<span id="an_7:22">7:22</span> all in whose nostrils was the breath of
the spirit of life, of all that was on the dry land, died.

<span id="an_7:23">7:23</span> And every living thing was destroyed that
was upon the face of the ground, both man, and cattle, and creeping
things, and birds of the heavens; and they were destroyed from the
earth: and Noah only was left, and they that were with him in the ark.

<span id="an_7:24">7:24</span> And the waters prevailed upon the earth a
hundred and fifty days.

<span id="an_8:1">8:1</span> And God remembered Noah, and all the
beasts, and all the cattle that were with him in the ark: and God made a
wind to pass over the earth, and the waters assuaged;

<span id="an_8:2">8:2</span> the fountains also of the deep and the
windows of heaven were stopped, and the rain from heaven was restrained;

<span id="an_8:3">8:3</span> and the waters returned from off the earth
continually: and after the end of a hundred and fifty days the waters
decreased.

<span id="an_8:4">8:4</span> And the ark rested in the seventh month, on
the seventeenth day of the month, upon the mountains of Ararat.

<span id="an_8:5">8:5</span> And the waters decreased continually until
the tenth month: in the tenth month, on the first day of the month, were
the tops of the mountains seen.

<span id="an_8:6">8:6</span> And it came to pass at the end of forty
days, that Noah opened the window of the ark which he had made:

<span id="an_8:7">8:7</span> and he sent forth a raven, and it went
forth to and fro, until the waters were dried up from off the earth.

<span id="an_8:8">8:8</span> And he sent forth a dove from him, to see
if the waters were abated from off the face of the ground;

<span id="an_8:9">8:9</span> but the dove found no rest for the sole of
her foot, and she returned unto him to the ark; for the waters were on
the face of the whole earth: and he put forth his hand, and took her,
and brought her in unto him into the ark.

<span id="an_8:10">8:10</span> And he stayed yet other seven days; and
again he sent forth the dove out of the ark;

<span id="an_8:11">8:11</span> and the dove came in to him at eventide;
and, lo, in her mouth an olive-leaf plucked off: so Noah knew that the
waters were abated from off the earth.

<span id="an_8:12">8:12</span> And he stayed yet other seven days, and
sent forth the dove; and she returned not again unto him any more.

<span id="an_8:13">8:13</span> And it came to pass in the six hundred
and first year, in the first month, the first day of the month, the
waters were dried up from off the earth: and Noah removed the covering
of the ark, and looked, and, behold, the face of the ground was dried.

<span id="an_8:14">8:14</span> And in the second month, on the seven and
twentieth day of the month, was the earth dry.

<span id="an_8:15">8:15</span> And God spake unto Noah, saying,

<span id="an_8:16">8:16</span> Go forth from the ark, thou, and thy
wife, and thy sons, and thy sons' wives with thee.

<span id="an_8:17">8:17</span> Bring forth with thee every living thing
that is with thee of all flesh, both birds, and cattle, and every
creeping thing that creepeth upon the earth; that they may breed
abundantly in the earth, and be fruitful, and multiply upon the earth.

<span id="an_8:18">8:18</span> And Noah went forth, and his sons, and
his wife, and his sons' wives with him:

<span id="an_8:19">8:19</span> every beast, every creeping thing, and
every bird, whatsoever moveth upon the earth, after their families, went
forth out of the ark.

<span id="an_8:20">8:20</span> And Noah builded an altar unto Jehovah,
and took of every clean beast, and of every clean bird, and offered
burnt-offerings on the altar.

<span id="an_8:21">8:21</span> And Jehovah smelled the sweet savor; and
Jehovah said in his heart, I will not again curse the ground any more
for man's sake, for that the imagination of man's heart is evil from his
youth; neither will I again smite any more everything living, as I have
done.

<span id="an_8:22">8:22</span> While the earth remaineth, seedtime and
harvest, and cold and heat, and summer and winter, and day and night
shall not cease.

<span id="an_9:1">9:1</span> And God blessed Noah and his sons, and said
unto them, Be fruitful, and multiply, and replenish the earth.

<span id="an_9:2">9:2</span> And the fear of you and the dread of you
shall be upon every beast of the earth, and upon every bird of the
heavens; With all wherewith the ground teemeth, and all the fishes of
the sea, into your hand are they delivered.

<span id="an_9:3">9:3</span> Every moving thing that liveth shall be
food for you; As the green herb have I given you all.

<span id="an_9:4">9:4</span> But flesh with the life thereof, \[which
is\] the blood thereof, shall ye not eat.

<span id="an_9:5">9:5</span> And surely your blood, \[the blood\] of
your lives, will I require; At the hand of every beast will I require
it. And at the hand of man, even at the hand of every man's brother,
will I require the life of man.

<span id="an_9:6">9:6</span> Whoso sheddeth man's blood, by man shall
his blood be shed: For in the image of God made he man.

<span id="an_9:7">9:7</span> And you, be ye fruitful, and multiply;
Bring forth abundantly in the earth, and multiply therein.

<span id="an_9:8">9:8</span> And God spake unto Noah, and to his sons
with him, saying,

<span id="an_9:9">9:9</span> And I, behold, I establish my covenant with
you, and with your seed after you;

<span id="an_9:10">9:10</span> and with every living creature that is
with you, the birds, the cattle, and every beast of the earth with you.
Of all that go out of the ark, even every beast of the earth.

<span id="an_9:11">9:11</span> And I will establish my covenant with
you; neither shall all flesh be cut off any more by the waters of the
flood; neither shall there any more be a flood to destroy the earth.

<span id="an_9:12">9:12</span> And God said, This is the token of the
covenant which I make between me and you and every living creature that
is with you, for perpetual generations:

<span id="an_9:13">9:13</span> I do set my bow in the cloud, and it
shall be for a token of a covenant between me and the earth.

<span id="an_9:14">9:14</span> And it shall come to pass, when I bring a
cloud over the earth, that the bow shall be seen in the cloud,

<span id="an_9:15">9:15</span> and I will remember my covenant, which is
between me and you and every living creature of all flesh; and the
waters shall no more become a flood to destroy all flesh.

<span id="an_9:16">9:16</span> And the bow shall be in the cloud; and I
will look upon it, that I may remember the everlasting covenant between
God and every living creature of all flesh that is upon the earth.

<span id="an_9:17">9:17</span> And God said unto Noah, This is the token
of the covenant which I have established between me and all flesh that
is upon the earth.

<span id="an_9:18">9:18</span> And the sons of Noah, that went forth
from the ark, were Shem, and Ham, and Japheth: and Ham is the father of
Canaan.

<span id="an_9:19">9:19</span> These three were the sons of Noah: and of
these was the whole earth overspread.

<span id="an_9:20">9:20</span> And Noah began to be a husbandman, and
planted a vineyard:

<span id="an_9:21">9:21</span> and he drank of the wine, and was
drunken. And he was uncovered within his tent.

<span id="an_9:22">9:22</span> And Ham, the father of Canaan, saw the
nakedness of his father, and told his two brethren without.

<span id="an_9:23">9:23</span> And Shem and Japheth took a garment, and
laid it upon both their shoulders, and went backward, and covered the
nakedness of their father. And their faces were backward, and they saw
not their father's nakedness.

<span id="an_9:24">9:24</span> And Noah awoke from his wine, and knew
what his youngest son had done unto him.

<span id="an_9:25">9:25</span> And he said, Cursed be Canaan; A servant
of servants shall he be unto his brethren.

<span id="an_9:26">9:26</span> And he said, Blessed be Jehovah, the God
of Shem; And let Canaan be his servant.

<span id="an_9:27">9:27</span> God enlarge Japheth, And let him dwell in
the tents of Shem; And let Canaan be his servant.

<span id="an_9:28">9:28</span> And Noah lived after the flood three
hundred and fifty years.

<span id="an_9:29">9:29</span> And all the days of Noah were nine
hundred and fifty years: And he died.

<span id="an_10:1">10:1</span> Now these are the generations of the sons
of Noah, \[namely\], of Shem, Ham, and Japheth: and unto them were sons
born after the flood.

<span id="an_10:2">10:2</span> The sons of Japheth: Gomer, and Magog,
and Madai, and Javan, and Tubal, and Meshech, and Tiras.

<span id="an_10:3">10:3</span> And the sons of Gomer: Ashkenaz, and
Riphath, and Togarmah.

<span id="an_10:4">10:4</span> And the sons of Javan: Elishah, and
Tarshish, Kittim, and Dodanim.

<span id="an_10:5">10:5</span> Of these were the isles of the nations
divided in their lands, every one after his tongue, after their
families, in their nations.

<span id="an_10:6">10:6</span> And the sons of Ham: Cush, and Mizraim,
and Put, and Canaan.

<span id="an_10:7">10:7</span> And the sons of Cush: Seba, and Havilah,
and Sabtah, and Raamah, and Sabteca; and the sons of Raamah: Sheba, and
Dedan.

<span id="an_10:8">10:8</span> And Cush begat Nimrod: he began to be a
mighty one in the earth.

<span id="an_10:9">10:9</span> He was a mighty hunter before Jehovah:
wherefore it is said, Like Nimrod a mighty hunter before Jehovah.

<span id="an_10:10">10:10</span> And the beginning of his kingdom was
Babel, and Erech, and Accad, and Calneh, in the land of Shinar.

<span id="an_10:11">10:11</span> Out of that land he went forth into
Assyria, and builded Nineveh, and Rehoboth-ir, and Calah,

<span id="an_10:12">10:12</span> and Resen between Nineveh and Calah
(the same is the great city).

<span id="an_10:13">10:13</span> And Mizraim begat Ludim, and Anamim,
and Lehabim, and Naphtuhim,

<span id="an_10:14">10:14</span> and Pathrusim, and Casluhim (whence
went forth the Philistines), and Caphtorim.

<span id="an_10:15">10:15</span> And Canaan begat Sidon his first-born,
and Heth,

<span id="an_10:16">10:16</span> and the Jebusite, and the Amorite, and
the Girgashite,

<span id="an_10:17">10:17</span> and the Hivite, and the Arkite, and the
Sinite,

<span id="an_10:18">10:18</span> and the Arvadite, and the Zemarite, and
the Hamathite: and afterward were the families of the Canaanite spread
abroad.

<span id="an_10:19">10:19</span> And the border of the Canaanite was
from Sidon, as thou goest toward Gerar, unto Gaza; as thou goest toward
Sodom and Gomorrah and Admah and Zeboiim, unto Lasha.

<span id="an_10:20">10:20</span> These are the sons of Ham, after their
families, after their tongues, in their lands, in their nations.

<span id="an_10:21">10:21</span> And unto Shem, the father of all the
children of Eber, the elder brother of Japheth, to him also were
children born.

<span id="an_10:22">10:22</span> The sons of Shem: Elam, and Asshur, and
Arpachshad, and Lud, and Aram.

<span id="an_10:23">10:23</span> And the sons of Aram: Uz, and Hul, and
Gether, and Mash.

<span id="an_10:24">10:24</span> And Arpachshad begat Shelah; and Shelah
begat Eber.

<span id="an_10:25">10:25</span> And unto Eber were born two sons: The
name of the one was Peleg. For in his days was the earth divided. And
his brother's name was Joktan.

<span id="an_10:26">10:26</span> And Joktan begat Almodad, and Sheleph,
and Hazarmaveth, and Jerah,

<span id="an_10:27">10:27</span> and Hadoram, and Uzal, and Diklah,

<span id="an_10:28">10:28</span> and Obal, and Abimael, and Sheba,

<span id="an_10:29">10:29</span> and Ophir, and Havilah, and Jobab: all
these were the sons of Joktan.

<span id="an_10:30">10:30</span> And their dwelling was from Mesha, as
thou goest toward Sephar, the mountain of the east.

<span id="an_10:31">10:31</span> These are the sons of Shem, after their
families, after their tongues, in their lands, after their nations.

<span id="an_10:32">10:32</span> These are the families of the sons of
Noah, after their generations, in their nations: and of these were the
nations divided in the earth after the flood.

<span id="an_11:1">11:1</span> And the whole earth was of one language
and of one speech.

<span id="an_11:2">11:2</span> And it came to pass, as they journeyed
east, that they found a plain in the land of Shinar; and they dwelt
there.

<span id="an_11:3">11:3</span> And they said one to another, Come, let
us make brick, and burn them thoroughly. And they had brick for stone,
and slime had they for mortar.

<span id="an_11:4">11:4</span> And they said, Come, let us build us a
city, and a tower, whose top \[may reach\] unto heaven, and let us make
us a name; lest we be scattered abroad upon the face of the whole earth.

<span id="an_11:5">11:5</span> And Jehovah came down to see the city and
the tower, which the children of men builded.

<span id="an_11:6">11:6</span> And Jehovah said, Behold, they are one
people, and they have all one language; and this is what they begin to
do: and now nothing will be withholden from them, which they purpose to
do.

<span id="an_11:7">11:7</span> Come, let us go down, and there confound
their language, that they may not understand one another's speech.

<span id="an_11:8">11:8</span> So Jehovah scattered them abroad from
thence upon the face of all the earth: and they left off building the
city.

<span id="an_11:9">11:9</span> Therefore was the name of it called
Babel; because Jehovah did there confound the language of all the earth:
and from thence did Jehovah scatter them abroad upon the face of all the
earth.

<span id="an_11:10">11:10</span> These are the generations of Shem. Shem
was a hundred years old, and begat Arpachshad two years after the flood.

<span id="an_11:11">11:11</span> and Shem lived after he begat
Arpachshad five hundred years, and begat sons and daughters.

<span id="an_11:12">11:12</span> And Arpachshad lived five and thirty
years, and begat Shelah.

<span id="an_11:13">11:13</span> and Arpachshad lived after he begat
Shelah four hundred and three years, and begat sons and daughters.

<span id="an_11:14">11:14</span> And Shelah lived thirty years, and
begat Eber:

<span id="an_11:15">11:15</span> and Shelah lived after he begat Eber
four hundred and three years, and begat sons and daughters.

<span id="an_11:16">11:16</span> And Eber lived four and thirty years,
and begat Peleg:

<span id="an_11:17">11:17</span> and Eber lived after he begat Peleg
four hundred and thirty years, and begat sons and daughters.

<span id="an_11:18">11:18</span> And Peleg lived thirty years, and begat
Reu:

<span id="an_11:19">11:19</span> and Peleg lived after he begat Reu two
hundred and nine years, and begat sons and daughters.

<span id="an_11:20">11:20</span> And Reu lived two and thirty years, and
begat Serug:

<span id="an_11:21">11:21</span> and Reu lived after he begat Serug two
hundred and seven years, and begat sons and daughters.

<span id="an_11:22">11:22</span> And Serug lived thirty years, and begat
Nahor:

<span id="an_11:23">11:23</span> and Serug lived after he begat Nahor
two hundred years, and begat sons and daughters.

<span id="an_11:24">11:24</span> And Nahor lived nine and twenty years,
and begat Terah:

<span id="an_11:25">11:25</span> and Nahor lived after he begat Terah a
hundred and nineteen years, and begat sons and daughters.

<span id="an_11:26">11:26</span> And Terah lived seventy years, and
begat Abram, Nahor, and Haran.

<span id="an_11:27">11:27</span> Now these are the generations of Terah.
Terah begat Abram, Nahor, and Haran. And Haran begat Lot.

<span id="an_11:28">11:28</span> And Haran died before his father Terah
in the land of his nativity, in Ur of the Chaldees.

<span id="an_11:29">11:29</span> And Abram and Nahor took them wives:
The name of Abram's wife was Sarai; and the name of Nahor's wife,
Milcah, the daughter of Haran, the father of Milcah, and the father of
Iscah.

<span id="an_11:30">11:30</span> And Sarai was barren; She had no child.

<span id="an_11:31">11:31</span> And Terah took Abram his son, and Lot
the son of Haran, his son's son, and Sarai his daughter-in-law, his son
Abram's wife; and they went forth with them from Ur of the Chaldees, to
go into the land of Canaan; and they came unto Haran, and dwelt there.

<span id="an_11:32">11:32</span> And the days of Terah were two hundred
and five years: and Terah died in Haran.

<span id="an_12:1">12:1</span> Now Jehovah said unto Abram, Get thee out
of thy country, and from thy kindred, and from thy father's house, unto
the land that I will show thee:

<span id="an_12:2">12:2</span> and I will make of thee a great nation,
and I will bless thee, and make they name great; and be thou a blessing;

<span id="an_12:3">12:3</span> and I will bless them that bless thee,
and him that curseth thee will I curse: and in thee shall all the
families of the earth be blessed.

<span id="an_12:4">12:4</span> So Abram went, as Jehovah had spoken unto
him; and Lot went with him: and Abram was seventy and five years old
when he departed out of Haran.

<span id="an_12:5">12:5</span> And Abram took Sarai his wife, and Lot
his brother's son, and all their substance that they had gathered, and
the souls that they had gotten in Haran; and they went forth to go into
the land of Canaan; and into the land of Canaan they came.

<span id="an_12:6">12:6</span> And Abram passed through the land unto
the place of Shechem, unto the oak of Moreh. And the Canaanite was then
in the land.

<span id="an_12:7">12:7</span> And Jehovah appeared unto Abram, and
said, Unto thy seed will I give this land: and there builded he an altar
unto Jehovah, who appeared unto him.

<span id="an_12:8">12:8</span> And he removed from thence unto the
mountain on the east of Beth-el, and pitched his tent, having Beth-el on
the west, and Ai on the east: and there he builded an altar unto
Jehovah, and called upon the name of Jehovah.

<span id="an_12:9">12:9</span> And Abram journeyed, going on still
toward the South.

<span id="an_12:10">12:10</span> And there was a famine in the land: and
Abram went down into Egypt to sojourn there; for the famine was sore in
the land.

<span id="an_12:11">12:11</span> And it came to pass, when he was come
near to enter into Egypt, that he said unto Sarai his wife, Behold now,
I know that thou art a fair woman to look upon:

<span id="an_12:12">12:12</span> and it will come to pass, when the
Egyptians shall see thee, that they will say, This is his wife: and they
will kill me, but they will save thee alive.

<span id="an_12:13">12:13</span> Say, I pray thee, thou art my sister;
that it may be well with me for thy sake, and that my soul may live
because of thee.

<span id="an_12:14">12:14</span> And it came to pass, that, when Abram
was come into Egypt, the Egyptians beheld the woman that she was very
fair.

<span id="an_12:15">12:15</span> And the princes of Pharaoh saw her, and
praised her to Pharaoh: and the woman was taken into Pharaoh's house.

<span id="an_12:16">12:16</span> And he dealt well with Abram for her
sake: and he had sheep, and oxen, and he-asses, and men-servants, and
maid-servants, and she-asses, and camels.

<span id="an_12:17">12:17</span> And Jehovah plagued Pharaoh and his
house with great plagues because of Sarai, Abram's wife.

<span id="an_12:18">12:18</span> And Pharaoh called Abram, and said,
What is this that thou hast done unto me? why didst thou not tell me
that she was thy wife?

<span id="an_12:19">12:19</span> why saidst thou, She is my sister, so
that I took her to be my wife? now therefore behold thy wife, take her,
and go thy way.

<span id="an_12:20">12:20</span> And Pharaoh gave men charge concerning
him: and they brought him on the way, and his wife, and all that he had.

<span id="an_13:1">13:1</span> And Abram went up out of Egypt, he, and
his wife, and all that he had, and Lot with him, into the South.

<span id="an_13:2">13:2</span> And Abram was very rich in cattle, in
silver, and in gold.

<span id="an_13:3">13:3</span> And he went on his journeys from the
South even to Beth-el, unto the place where his tent had been at the
beginning, between Beth-el and Ai,

<span id="an_13:4">13:4</span> unto the place of the altar, which he had
made there at the first: and there Abram called on the name of Jehovah.

<span id="an_13:5">13:5</span> And Lot also, who went with Abram, had
flocks, and herds, and tents.

<span id="an_13:6">13:6</span> And the land was not able to bear them,
that they might dwell together: for their substance was great, so that
they could not dwell together.

<span id="an_13:7">13:7</span> And there was a strife between the
herdsmen of Abram's cattle and the herdsmen of Lot's cattle: and the
Canaanite and the Perizzite dwelt then in the land.

<span id="an_13:8">13:8</span> And Abram said unto Lot, Let there be no
strife, I pray thee, between me and thee, and between my herdsmen and
thy herdsmen; for we are brethren.

<span id="an_13:9">13:9</span> Is not the whole land before thee?
separate thyself, I pray thee, from me. If \[thou wilt take\] the left
hand, then I will go to the right. Or if \[thou take\] the right hand,
then I will go to the left.

<span id="an_13:10">13:10</span> And Lot lifted up his eyes, and beheld
all the Plain of the Jordan, that it was well watered every where,
before Jehovah destroyed Sodom and Gomorrah, like the garden of Jehovah,
like the land of Egypt, as thou goest unto Zoar.

<span id="an_13:11">13:11</span> So Lot chose him all the Plain of the
Jordan; and Lot journeyed east: and they separated themselves the one
from the other.

<span id="an_13:12">13:12</span> Abram dwelt in the land of Canaan, and
Lot dwelt in the cities of the Plain, and moved his tent as far as
Sodom.

<span id="an_13:13">13:13</span> Now the men of Sodom were wicked and
sinners against Jehovah exceedingly.

<span id="an_13:14">13:14</span> And Jehovah said unto Abram, after that
Lot was separated from him, Lift up now thine eyes, and look from the
place where thou art, northward and southward and eastward and westward:

<span id="an_13:15">13:15</span> for all the land which thou seest, to
thee will I give it, and to thy seed for ever.

<span id="an_13:16">13:16</span> And I will make thy seed as the dust of
the earth: So that if a man can number the dust of the earth, then may
thy seed also be numbered.

<span id="an_13:17">13:17</span> Arise, walk through the land in the
length of it and in the breadth of it; for unto thee will I give it.

<span id="an_13:18">13:18</span> And Abram moved his tent, and came and
dwelt by the oaks of Mamre, which are in Hebron, and built there an
altar unto Jehovah.

<span id="an_14:1">14:1</span> And it came to pass in the days of
Amraphel king of Shinar, Arioch king of Ellasar, Chedorlaomer king of
Elam, and Tidal king of Goiim,

<span id="an_14:2">14:2</span> that they made war with Bera king of
Sodom, and with Birsha king of Gomorrah, Shinab king of Admah, and
Shemeber king of Zeboiim, and the king of Bela (the same is Zoar).

<span id="an_14:3">14:3</span> All these joined together in the vale of
Siddim (the same is the Salt Sea).

<span id="an_14:4">14:4</span> Twelve years they served Chedorlaomer,
and in the thirteenth year they rebelled.

<span id="an_14:5">14:5</span> And in the fourteenth year came
Chedorlaomer, and the kings that were with him, and smote the Rephaim in
Ashteroth-karnaim, and the Zuzim in Ham, and the Emim in
Shaveh-kiriathaim,

<span id="an_14:6">14:6</span> and the Horites in their mount Seir, unto
Elparan, which is by the wilderness.

<span id="an_14:7">14:7</span> And they returned, and came to En-mishpat
(the same is Kadesh), and smote all the country of the Amalekites, and
also the Amorites, that dwelt in Hazazon-tamar.

<span id="an_14:8">14:8</span> And there went out the king of Sodom, and
the king of Gomorrah, and the king of Admah, and the king of Zeboiim,
and the king of Bela (the same is Zoar); and they set the battle in
array against them in the vale of Siddim;

<span id="an_14:9">14:9</span> against Chedorlaomer king of Elam, and
Tidal king of Goiim, and Amraphel king of Shinar, and Arioch king of
Ellasar; four kings against the five.

<span id="an_14:10">14:10</span> Now the vale of Siddim was full of
slime pits; and the kings of Sodom and Gomorrah fled, and they fell
there, and they that remained fled to the mountain.

<span id="an_14:11">14:11</span> And they took all the goods of Sodom
and Gomorrah, and all their victuals, and went their way.

<span id="an_14:12">14:12</span> And they took Lot, Abram's brother's
son, who dwelt in Sodom, and his goods, and departed.

<span id="an_14:13">14:13</span> And there came one that had escaped,
and told Abram the Hebrew: now he dwelt by the oaks of Mamre, the
Amorite, brother of Eshcol, and brother of Aner; and these were
confederate with Abram.

<span id="an_14:14">14:14</span> And when Abram heard that his brother
was taken captive, he led forth his trained men, born in his house,
three hundred and eighteen, and pursued as far as Dan.

<span id="an_14:15">14:15</span> And he divided himself against them by
night, he and his servants, and smote them, and pursued them unto Hobah,
which is on the left hand of Damascus.

<span id="an_14:16">14:16</span> And he brought back all the goods, and
also brought back his brother Lot, and his goods, and the women also,
and the people.

<span id="an_14:17">14:17</span> And the king of Sodom went out to meet
him, after his return from the slaughter of Chedorlaomer and the kings
that were with him, at the vale of Shaveh (the same is the King's Vale).

<span id="an_14:18">14:18</span> And Melchizedek king of Salem brought
forth bread and wine: and he was priest of God Most High.

<span id="an_14:19">14:19</span> And he blessed him, and said, Blessed
be Abram of God Most High, possessor of heaven and earth:

<span id="an_14:20">14:20</span> and blessed be God Most High, who hath
delivered thine enemies into thy hand. And he gave him a tenth of all.

<span id="an_14:21">14:21</span> And the king of Sodom said unto Abram,
Give me the persons, and take the goods to thyself.

<span id="an_14:22">14:22</span> And Abram said to the king of Sodom, I
have lifted up my hand unto Jehovah, God Most High, possessor of heaven
and earth,

<span id="an_14:23">14:23</span> that I will not take a thread nor a
shoe-latchet nor aught that is thine, lest thou shouldest say, I have
made Abram rich:

<span id="an_14:24">14:24</span> save only that which the young men have
eaten, and the portion of the men that went with me, Aner, Eshcol, and
Mamre. Let them take their portion.

<span id="an_15:1">15:1</span> After these things the word of Jehovah
came unto Abram in a vision, saying, Fear not, Abram: I am thy shield,
\[and\] thy exceeding great reward.

<span id="an_15:2">15:2</span> And Abram said, O Lord Jehovah, what wilt
thou give me, seeing I go childless, and he that shall be possessor of
my house is Eliezer of Damascus?

<span id="an_15:3">15:3</span> And Abram said, Behold, to me thou hast
given no seed: and, lo, one born in my house is mine heir.

<span id="an_15:4">15:4</span> And, behold, the word of Jehovah came
unto him, saying, This man shall not be thine heir; But he that shall
come forth out of thine own bowels shall be thine heir.

<span id="an_15:5">15:5</span> And he brought him forth abroad, and
said, Look now toward heaven, and number the stars, if thou be able to
number them: and he said unto him, So shall thy seed be.

<span id="an_15:6">15:6</span> And he believed in Jehovah; and he
reckoned it to him for righteousness.

<span id="an_15:7">15:7</span> And he said unto him, I am Jehovah that
brought thee out of Ur of the Chaldees, to give thee this land to
inherit it.

<span id="an_15:8">15:8</span> And he said, O Lord Jehovah, whereby
shall I know that I shall inherit it?

<span id="an_15:9">15:9</span> And he said unto him, Take me a heifer
three years old, and a she-goat three years old, and a ram three years
old, and a turtle-dove, and a young pigeon.

<span id="an_15:10">15:10</span> And he took him all these, and divided
them in the midst, and laid each half over against the other: but the
birds divided he not.

<span id="an_15:11">15:11</span> And the birds of prey came down upon
the carcasses, and Abram drove them away.

<span id="an_15:12">15:12</span> And when the sun was going down, a deep
sleep fell upon Abram; and, lo, a horror of great darkness fell upon
him.

<span id="an_15:13">15:13</span> And he said unto Abram, Know of a
surety that thy seed shall be sojourners in a land that is not theirs,
and shall serve them; and they shall afflict them four hundred years;

<span id="an_15:14">15:14</span> and also that nation, whom they shall
serve, will I judge: and afterward shall they come out with great
substance.

<span id="an_15:15">15:15</span> But thou shalt go to thy fathers in
peace; thou shalt be buried in a good old age.

<span id="an_15:16">15:16</span> And in the fourth generation they shall
come hither again; for the iniquity of the Amorite is not yet full.

<span id="an_15:17">15:17</span> And it came to pass, that, when the sun
went down, and it was dark, behold, a smoking furnace, and a flaming
torch that passed between these pieces.

<span id="an_15:18">15:18</span> In that day Jehovah made a covenant
with Abram, saying, Unto thy seed have I given this land, from the river
of Egypt unto the great river, the river Euphrates:

<span id="an_15:19">15:19</span> the Kenite, and the Kenizzite, and the
Kadmonite,

<span id="an_15:20">15:20</span> and the Hittite, and the Perizzite, and
the Rephaim,

<span id="an_15:21">15:21</span> and the Amorite, and the Canaanite, and
the Girgashite, and the Jebusite.

<span id="an_16:1">16:1</span> Now Sarai, Abram's wife, bare him no
children: and she had a handmaid, an Egyptian, whose name was Hagar.

<span id="an_16:2">16:2</span> And Sarai said unto Abram, Behold now,
Jehovah hath restrained me from bearing; go in, I pray thee, unto my
handmaid; it may be that I shall obtain children by her. And Abram
hearkened to the voice of Sarai.

<span id="an_16:3">16:3</span> And Sarai, Abram's wife, took Hagar the
Egyptian, her handmaid, after Abram had dwelt ten years in the land of
Canaan, and gave her to Abram her husband to be his wife.

<span id="an_16:4">16:4</span> And he went in unto Hagar, and she
conceived: and when she saw that she had conceived, her mistress was
despised in her eyes.

<span id="an_16:5">16:5</span> And Sarai said unto Abram, My wrong be
upon thee: I gave my handmaid into they bosom; and when she saw that she
had conceived, I was despised in her eyes: Jehovah judge between me and
thee.

<span id="an_16:6">16:6</span> But Abram said unto Sarai, Behold, thy
maid is in thy hand; do to her that which is good in thine eyes. And
Sarai dealt hardly with her, and she fled from her face.

<span id="an_16:7">16:7</span> And the angel of Jehovah found her by a
fountain of water in the wilderness, by the fountain in the way to Shur.

<span id="an_16:8">16:8</span> And he said, Hagar, Sarai's handmaid,
whence camest thou? and whither goest thou? And she said, I am fleeing
from the face of my mistress Sarai.

<span id="an_16:9">16:9</span> And the angel of Jehovah said unto her,
Return to thy mistress, and submit thyself under her hands.

<span id="an_16:10">16:10</span> And the angel of Jehovah said unto her,
I will greatly multiply thy seed, that it shall not be numbered for
multitude.

<span id="an_16:11">16:11</span> And the angel of Jehovah said unto her,
Behold, thou art with child, and shalt bear a son; and thou shalt call
his name Ishmael, because Jehovah hath heard thy affliction.

<span id="an_16:12">16:12</span> And he shall be \[as\] a wild ass among
men; his hand \[shall be\] against every man, and every man's hand
against him; and he shall dwell over against all his brethren.

<span id="an_16:13">16:13</span> And she called the name of Jehovah that
spake unto her, Thou art a God that seeth: for she said, Have I even
here looked after him that seeth me?

<span id="an_16:14">16:14</span> Wherefore the well was called
Beer-lahai-roi; behold, it is between Kadesh and Bered.

<span id="an_16:15">16:15</span> And Hagar bare Abram a son: and Abram
called the name of his son, whom Hagar bare, Ishmael.

<span id="an_16:16">16:16</span> And Abram was fourscore and six years
old, when Hagar bare Ishmael to Abram.

<span id="an_17:1">17:1</span> And when Abram was ninety years old and
nine, Jehovah appeared to Abram, and said unto him, I am God Almighty;
walk before me, and be thou perfect.

<span id="an_17:2">17:2</span> And I will make my covenant between me
and thee, and will multiply thee exceedingly.

<span id="an_17:3">17:3</span> And Abram fell on his face: and God
talked with him, saying,

<span id="an_17:4">17:4</span> As for me, behold, my covenant is with
thee, and thou shalt be the father of a multitude of nations.

<span id="an_17:5">17:5</span> Neither shall thy name any more be called
Abram, but thy name shall be Abraham; for the father of a multitude of
nations have I made thee.

<span id="an_17:6">17:6</span> And I will make thee exceeding fruitful,
and I will make nations of thee, and kings shall come out of thee.

<span id="an_17:7">17:7</span> And I will establish my covenant between
me and thee and thy seed after thee throughout their generations for an
everlasting covenant, to be a God unto thee and to thy seed after thee.

<span id="an_17:8">17:8</span> And I will give unto thee, and to thy
seed after thee, the land of thy sojournings, all the land of Canaan,
for an everlasting possession; and I will be their God.

<span id="an_17:9">17:9</span> And God said unto Abraham, And as for
thee, thou shalt keep my covenant, thou, and thy seed after thee
throughout their generations.

<span id="an_17:10">17:10</span> This is my covenant, which ye shall
keep, between me and you and thy seed after thee: every male among you
shall be circumcised.

<span id="an_17:11">17:11</span> And ye shall be circumcised in the
flesh of your foreskin; and it shall be a token of a covenant betwixt me
and you.

<span id="an_17:12">17:12</span> And he that is eight days old shall be
circumcised among you, every male throughout your generations, he that
is born in the house, or bought with money of any foreigner that is not
of thy seed.

<span id="an_17:13">17:13</span> He that is born in thy house, and he
that is bought with thy money, must needs be circumcised: and my
covenant shall be in your flesh for an everlasting covenant.

<span id="an_17:14">17:14</span> And the uncircumcised male who is not
circumcised in the flesh of his foreskin, that soul shall be cut off
from his people; he hath broken my covenant.

<span id="an_17:15">17:15</span> And God said unto Abraham, As for Sarai
thy wife, thou shalt not call her name Sarai, but Sarah shall her name
be.

<span id="an_17:16">17:16</span> And I will bless her, and moreover I
will give thee a son of her: yea, I will bless her, and she shall be \[a
mother of\] nations; kings of peoples shall be of her.

<span id="an_17:17">17:17</span> Then Abraham fell upon his face, and
laughed, and said in his heart, Shall a child be born unto him that is a
hundred years old? and shall Sarah, that is ninety years old, bear?

<span id="an_17:18">17:18</span> And Abraham said unto God, Oh that
Ishmael might live before thee!

<span id="an_17:19">17:19</span> And God said, Nay, but Sarah thy wife
shall bear thee a son; and thou shalt call his name Isaac: and I will
establish my covenant with him for an everlasting covenant for his seed
after him.

<span id="an_17:20">17:20</span> And as for Ishmael, I have heard thee:
behold, I have blessed him, and will make him fruitful, and will
multiply him exceedingly; twelve princes shall he beget, and I will make
him a great nation.

<span id="an_17:21">17:21</span> But my covenant will I establish with
Isaac, whom Sarah shall bear unto thee at this set time in the next
year.

<span id="an_17:22">17:22</span> And he left off talking with him, and
God went up from Abraham.

<span id="an_17:23">17:23</span> And Abraham took Ishmael his son, and
all that were born in his house, and all that were bought with his
money, every male among the men of Abraham's house, and circumcised the
flesh of their foreskin in the selfsame day, as God had said unto him.

<span id="an_17:24">17:24</span> And Abraham was ninety years old and
nine, when he was circumcised in the flesh of his foreskin.

<span id="an_17:25">17:25</span> And Ishmael his son was thirteen years
old, when he was circumcised in the flesh of his foreskin.

<span id="an_17:26">17:26</span> In the selfsame day was Abraham
circumcised, and Ishmael his son.

<span id="an_17:27">17:27</span> And all the men of his house, those
born in the house, and those bought with money of a foreigner, were
circumcised with him.

<span id="an_18:1">18:1</span> And Jehovah appeared unto him by the oaks
of Mamre, as he sat in the tent door in the heat of the day;

<span id="an_18:2">18:2</span> and he lifted up his eyes and looked,
and, lo, three men stood over against him: and when he saw them, he ran
to meet them from the tent door, and bowed himself to the earth,

<span id="an_18:3">18:3</span> and said, My lord, if now I have found
favor in thy sight, pass not away, I pray thee, from thy servant:

<span id="an_18:4">18:4</span> let now a little water be fetched, and
wash your feet, and rest yourselves under the tree:

<span id="an_18:5">18:5</span> and I will fetch a morsel of bread, and
strengthen ye your heart; after that ye shall pass on: forasmuch as ye
are come to your servant. And they said, So do, as thou hast said.

<span id="an_18:6">18:6</span> And Abraham hastened into the tent unto
Sarah, and said, Make ready quickly three measures of fine meal, knead
it, and make cakes.

<span id="an_18:7">18:7</span> And Abraham ran unto the herd, and
fetched a calf tender and good, and gave it unto the servant; and he
hasted to dress it.

<span id="an_18:8">18:8</span> And he took butter, and milk, and the
calf which he had dressed, and set it before them; and he stood by them
under the tree, and they did eat.

<span id="an_18:9">18:9</span> And they said unto him, Where is Sarah
thy wife? And he said, Behold, in the tent.

<span id="an_18:10">18:10</span> And he said, I will certainly return
unto thee when the season cometh round; and, lo, Sarah thy wife shall
have a son. And Sarah heard in the tent door, which was behind him.

<span id="an_18:11">18:11</span> Now Abraham and Sarah were old, \[and\]
well stricken in age; it had ceased to be with Sarah after the manner of
women.

<span id="an_18:12">18:12</span> And Sarah laughed within herself,
saying, After I am waxed old shall I have pleasure, my lord being old
also?

<span id="an_18:13">18:13</span> And Jehovah said unto Abraham,
Wherefore did Sarah laugh, saying, Shall I of a surety bear a child, who
am old?

<span id="an_18:14">18:14</span> Is anything too hard for Jehovah? At
the set time I will return unto thee, when the season cometh round, and
Sarah shall have a son.

<span id="an_18:15">18:15</span> Then Sarah denied, saying, I laughed
not; for she was afraid. And he said, Nay; but thou didst laugh.

<span id="an_18:16">18:16</span> And the men rose up from thence, and
looked toward Sodom: and Abraham went with them to bring them on the
way.

<span id="an_18:17">18:17</span> And Jehovah said, Shall I hide from
Abraham that which I do;

<span id="an_18:18">18:18</span> seeing that Abraham had surely become a
great and mighty nation, and all the nations of the earth shall be
blessed in him?

<span id="an_18:19">18:19</span> For I have known him, to the end that
he may command his children and his household after him, that they may
keep the way of Jehovah, to do righteousness and justice; to the end
that Jehovah may bring upon Abraham that which he hath spoken of him.

<span id="an_18:20">18:20</span> And Jehovah said, Because the cry of
Sodom and Gomorrah is great, and because their sin is very grievous;

<span id="an_18:21">18:21</span> I will go down now, and see whether
they have done altogether according to the cry of it, which is come unto
me; and if not, I will know.

<span id="an_18:22">18:22</span> And the men turned from thence, and
went toward Sodom: but Abraham stood yet before Jehovah.

<span id="an_18:23">18:23</span> And Abraham drew near, and said, Wilt
thou consume the righteous with the wicked?

<span id="an_18:24">18:24</span> Peradventure there are fifty righteous
within the city: wilt thou consume and not spare the place for the fifty
righteous that are therein?

<span id="an_18:25">18:25</span> That be far from thee to do after this
manner, to slay the righteous with the wicked, that so the righteous
should be as the wicked; that be far from thee: shall not the Judge of
all the earth do right?

<span id="an_18:26">18:26</span> And Jehovah said, If I find in Sodom
fifty righteous within the city, then I will spare all the place for
their sake.

<span id="an_18:27">18:27</span> And Abraham answered and said, Behold
now, I have taken upon me to speak unto the Lord, who am but dust and
ashes:

<span id="an_18:28">18:28</span> peradventure there shall lack five of
the fifty righteous: wilt thou destroy all the city for lack of five?
And he said, I will not destroy it, if I find there forty and five.

<span id="an_18:29">18:29</span> And he spake unto him yet again, and
said, Peradventure there shall be forty found there. And he said, I will
not do it for the forty's sake.

<span id="an_18:30">18:30</span> And he said, Oh let not the Lord be
angry, and I will speak: peradventure there shall thirty be found there.
And he said, I will not do it, if I find thirty there.

<span id="an_18:31">18:31</span> And he said, Behold now, I have taken
upon me to speak unto the Lord: peradventure there shall be twenty found
there. And he said, I will not destroy it for the twenty's sake.

<span id="an_18:32">18:32</span> And he said, Oh let not the Lord be
angry, and I will speak yet but this once: peradventure ten shall be
found there. And he said, I will not destroy it for the ten's sake.

<span id="an_18:33">18:33</span> And Jehovah went his way, as soon as he
had left off communing with Abraham: and Abraham returned unto his
place.

<span id="an_19:1">19:1</span> And the two angels came to Sodom at even;
and Lot sat in the gate of Sodom: and Lot saw them, and rose up to meet
them; and he bowed himself with his face to the earth;

<span id="an_19:2">19:2</span> and he said, Behold now, my lords, turn
aside, I pray you, into your servant's house, and tarry all night, and
wash your feet, and ye shall rise up early, and go on your way. And they
said, Nay; but we will abide in the street all night.

<span id="an_19:3">19:3</span> And he urged them greatly; and they
turned in unto him, and entered into his house; and he made them a
feast, and did bake unleavened bread, and they did eat.

<span id="an_19:4">19:4</span> But before they lay down, the men of the
city, \[even\] the men of Sodom, compassed the house round, both young
and old, all the people from every quarter;

<span id="an_19:5">19:5</span> and they called unto Lot, and said unto
him, Where are the men that came in to thee this night? bring them out
unto us, that we may know them.

<span id="an_19:6">19:6</span> And Lot went out unto them to the door,
and shut the door after him.

<span id="an_19:7">19:7</span> And he said, I pray you, my brethren, do
not so wickedly.

<span id="an_19:8">19:8</span> Behold now, I have two daughters that
have not known man; let me, I pray you, bring them out unto you, and do
ye to them as is good in your eyes: only unto these men do nothing,
forasmuch as they are come under the shadow of my roof.

<span id="an_19:9">19:9</span> And they said, Stand back. And they said,
This one fellow came in to sojourn, and he will needs be a judge: now
will we deal worse with thee, than with them. And they pressed sore upon
the man, even Lot, and drew near to break the door.

<span id="an_19:10">19:10</span> But the men put forth their hand, and
brought Lot into the house to them, and shut to the door.

<span id="an_19:11">19:11</span> And they smote the men that were at the
door of the house with blindness, both small and great, so that they
wearied themselves to find the door.

<span id="an_19:12">19:12</span> And the men said unto Lot, Hast thou
here any besides? son-in-law, and thy sons, and thy daughters, and
whomsoever thou hast in the city, bring them out of the place:

<span id="an_19:13">19:13</span> for we will destroy this place, because
the cry of them is waxed great before Jehovah: and Jehovah hath sent us
to destroy it.

<span id="an_19:14">19:14</span> And Lot went out, and spake unto his
sons-in-law, who married his daughters, and said, Up, get you out of
this place; for Jehovah will destroy the city. But he seemed unto his
sons-in-law as one that mocked.

<span id="an_19:15">19:15</span> And when the morning arose, then the
angels hastened Lot, saying, Arise, take thy wife, and thy two daughters
that are here, lest thou be consumed in the iniquity of the city.

<span id="an_19:16">19:16</span> But he lingered; and the men laid hold
upon his hand, and upon the hand of his wife, and upon the hand of his
two daughters, Jehovah being merciful unto him; and they brought him
forth, and set him without the city.

<span id="an_19:17">19:17</span> And it came to pass, when they had
brought them forth abroad, that he said, Escape for thy life; look not
behind thee, neither stay thou in all the Plain; escape to the mountain,
lest thou be consumed.

<span id="an_19:18">19:18</span> And Lot said unto them, Oh, not so, my
lord:

<span id="an_19:19">19:19</span> behold now, thy servant hath found
favor in thy sight, and thou hast magnified thy lovingkindness, which
thou hast showed unto me in saving my life; and I cannot escape to the
mountain, lest evil overtake me, and I die:

<span id="an_19:20">19:20</span> behold now, this city is near to flee
unto, and it is a little one. Oh let me escape thither (is it not a
little one?), and my soul shall live.

<span id="an_19:21">19:21</span> And he said unto him, See, I have
accepted thee concerning this thing also, that I will not overthrow the
city of which thou hast spoken.

<span id="an_19:22">19:22</span> Haste thee, escape thither; for I
cannot do anything till thou be come thither. Therefore the name of the
city was called Zoar.

<span id="an_19:23">19:23</span> The sun was risen upon the earth when
Lot came unto Zoar.

<span id="an_19:24">19:24</span> Then Jehovah rained upon Sodom and upon
Gomorrah brimstone and fire from Jehovah out of heaven;

<span id="an_19:25">19:25</span> and he overthrew those cities, and all
the Plain, and all the inhabitants of the cities, and that which grew
upon the ground.

<span id="an_19:26">19:26</span> But his wife looked back from behind
him, and she became a pillar of salt.

<span id="an_19:27">19:27</span> And Abraham gat up early in the morning
to the place where he had stood before Jehovah:

<span id="an_19:28">19:28</span> and he looked toward Sodom and
Gomorrah, and toward all the land of the Plain, and beheld, and, lo, the
smoke of the land went up as the smoke of a furnace.

<span id="an_19:29">19:29</span> And it came to pass, when God destroyed
the cities of the Plain, that God remembered Abraham, and sent Lot out
of the midst of the overthrow, when he overthrew the cities in which Lot
dwelt.

<span id="an_19:30">19:30</span> And Lot went up out of Zoar, and dwelt
in the mountain, and his two daughters with him; for he feared to dwell
in Zoar: and he dwelt in a cave, he and his two daughters.

<span id="an_19:31">19:31</span> And the first-born said unto the
younger, Our father is old, and there is not a man in the earth to come
in unto us after the manner of all the earth:

<span id="an_19:32">19:32</span> come, let us make our father drink
wine, and we will lie with him, that we may preserve seed of our father.

<span id="an_19:33">19:33</span> And they made their father drink wine
that night: and the first-born went in, and lay with her father; and he
knew not when she lay down, nor when she arose.

<span id="an_19:34">19:34</span> And it came to pass on the morrow, that
the first-born said unto the younger, Behold, I lay yesternight with my
father: let us make him drink wine this night also; and go thou in, and
lie with him, that we may preserve seed of our father.

<span id="an_19:35">19:35</span> And they made their father drink wine
that night also: and the younger arose, and lay with him; and he knew
not when she lay down, nor when she arose.

<span id="an_19:36">19:36</span> Thus were both the daughters of Lot
with child by their father.

<span id="an_19:37">19:37</span> And the first-born bare a son, and
called his name Moab: the same is the father of the Moabites unto this
day.

<span id="an_19:38">19:38</span> And the younger, she also bare a son,
and called his name Ben-ammi: the same is the father of the children of
Ammon unto this day.

<span id="an_20:1">20:1</span> And Abraham journeyed from thence toward
the land of the South, and dwelt between Kadesh and Shur. And he
sojourned in Gerar.

<span id="an_20:2">20:2</span> And Abraham said of Sarah his wife, She
is my sister. And Abimelech king of Gerar sent, and took Sarah.

<span id="an_20:3">20:3</span> But God came to Abimelech in a dream of
the night, and said to him, Behold, thou art but a dead man, because of
the woman whom thou hast taken. For she is a man's wife.

<span id="an_20:4">20:4</span> Now Abimelech had not come near her. And
he said, Lord, wilt thou slay even a righteous nation?

<span id="an_20:5">20:5</span> Said he not himself unto me, She is my
sister? And she, even she herself said, He is my brother. In the
integrity of my heart and the innocency of my hands have I done this.

<span id="an_20:6">20:6</span> And God said unto him in the dream, Yea,
I know that in the integrity of thy heart thou has done this, and I also
withheld thee from sinning against me. Therefore suffered I thee not to
touch her.

<span id="an_20:7">20:7</span> Now therefore restore the man's wife. For
he is a prophet, and he shall pray for thee, and thou shalt live. And if
thou restore her not, know thou that thou shalt surely die, thou, and
all that are thine.

<span id="an_20:8">20:8</span> And Abimelech rose early in the morning,
and called all his servants, and told all these things in their ear. And
the men were sore afraid.

<span id="an_20:9">20:9</span> Then Abimelech called Abraham, and said
unto him, What hast thou done unto us? And wherein have I sinned against
thee, that thou hast brought on me and on my kingdom a great sin? Thou
hast done deeds unto me that ought not to be done.

<span id="an_20:10">20:10</span> And Abimelech said unto Abraham, What
sawest thou, that thou hast done this thing?

<span id="an_20:11">20:11</span> And Abraham said, Because I thought,
Surely the fear of God is not in this place. And they will slay me for
my wife's sake.

<span id="an_20:12">20:12</span> And moreover she is indeed my sister,
the daughter of my father, but not the daughter of my mother; and she
became my wife:

<span id="an_20:13">20:13</span> and it came to pass, when God caused me
to wander from my father's house, that I said unto her, This is thy
kindness which thou shalt show unto me. At every place whither we shall
come, say of me, He is my brother.

<span id="an_20:14">20:14</span> And Abimelech took sheep and oxen, and
men-servants and women-servants, and gave them unto Abraham, and
restored him Sarah his wife.

<span id="an_20:15">20:15</span> And Abimelech said, Behold, my land is
before thee. Dwell where it pleaseth thee.

<span id="an_20:16">20:16</span> And unto Sarah he said, Behold, I have
given thy brother a thousand pieces of silver. Behold, it is for thee a
covering of the eyes to all that are with thee. And in respect of all
thou art righted.

<span id="an_20:17">20:17</span> And Abraham prayed unto God. And God
healed Abimelech, and his wife, and his maid-servants. And they bare
children.

<span id="an_20:18">20:18</span> For Jehovah had fast closed up all the
wombs of the house of Abimelech, because of Sarah, Abraham's wife.

<span id="an_21:1">21:1</span> And Jehovah visited Sarah as he had said,
and Jehovah did unto Sarah as he had spoken.

<span id="an_21:2">21:2</span> And Sarah conceived, and bare Abraham a
son in his old age, at the set time of which God had spoken to him.

<span id="an_21:3">21:3</span> And Abraham called the name of his son
that was born unto him, whom Sarah bare to him, Isaac.

<span id="an_21:4">21:4</span> And Abraham circumcised his son Isaac
when he was eight days old, as God had commanded him.

<span id="an_21:5">21:5</span> And Abraham was a hundred years old, when
his son Isaac was born unto him.

<span id="an_21:6">21:6</span> And Sarah said, God hath made me to
laugh. Every one that heareth will laugh with me.

<span id="an_21:7">21:7</span> And she said, Who would have said unto
Abraham, that Sarah should give children suck? For I have borne him a
son in his old age.

<span id="an_21:8">21:8</span> And the child grew, and was weaned. And
Abraham made a great feast on the day that Isaac was weaned.

<span id="an_21:9">21:9</span> And Sarah saw the son of Hagar the
Egyptian, whom she had borne unto Abraham, mocking.

<span id="an_21:10">21:10</span> Wherefore she said unto Abraham, Cast
out this handmaid and her son. For the son of this handmaid shall not be
heir with my son, even with Isaac.

<span id="an_21:11">21:11</span> And the thing was very grievous in
Abraham's sight on account of his son.

<span id="an_21:12">21:12</span> And God said unto Abraham, Let it not
be grievous in thy sight because of the lad, and because of thy
handmaid. In all that Sarah saith unto thee, hearken unto her voice. For
in Isaac shall thy seed be called.

<span id="an_21:13">21:13</span> And also of the son of the handmaid
will I make a nation, because he is thy seed.

<span id="an_21:14">21:14</span> And Abraham rose up early in the
morning, and took bread and a bottle of water, and gave it unto Hagar,
putting it on her shoulder, and \[gave her\] the child, and sent her
away. And she departed, and wandered in the wilderness of Beer-sheba.

<span id="an_21:15">21:15</span> And the water in the bottle was spent,
and she cast the child under one of the shrubs.

<span id="an_21:16">21:16</span> And she went, and sat her down over
against him a good way off, as it were a bowshot. For she said, Let me
not look upon the death of the child. And she sat over against him, and
lifted up her voice, and wept.

<span id="an_21:17">21:17</span> And God heard the voice of the lad. And
the angel of God called to Hagar out of heaven, and said unto her, What
aileth thee, Hagar? Fear not. For God hath heard the voice of the lad
where he is.

<span id="an_21:18">21:18</span> Arise, lift up the lad, and hold him in
thy hand. For I will make him a great nation.

<span id="an_21:19">21:19</span> And God opened her eyes, and she saw a
well of water. And she went, and filled the bottle with water, and gave
the lad drink.

<span id="an_21:20">21:20</span> And God was with the lad, and he grew.
And he dwelt in the wilderness, and became, as he grew up, an archer.

<span id="an_21:21">21:21</span> And he dwelt in the wilderness of
Paran. And his mother took him a wife out of the land of Egypt.

<span id="an_21:22">21:22</span> And it came to pass at that time, that
Abimelech and Phicol the captain of his host spake unto Abraham, saying,
God is with thee in all that thou doest.

<span id="an_21:23">21:23</span> Now therefore swear unto me here by God
that thou wilt not deal falsely with me, nor with my son, nor with my
son's son. But according to the kindness that I have done unto thee,
thou shalt do unto me, and to the land wherein thou hast sojourned.

<span id="an_21:24">21:24</span> And Abraham said, I will swear.

<span id="an_21:25">21:25</span> And Abraham reproved Abimelech because
of the well of water, which Abimelech's servants had violently taken
away.

<span id="an_21:26">21:26</span> And Abimelech said, I know not who hath
done this thing. Neither didst thou tell me, neither yet heard I of it,
but to-day.

<span id="an_21:27">21:27</span> And Abraham took sheep and oxen, and
gave them unto Abimelech. And they two made a covenant.

<span id="an_21:28">21:28</span> And Abraham set seven ewe lambs of the
flock by themselves.

<span id="an_21:29">21:29</span> And Abimelech said unto Abraham, What
mean these seven ewe lambs which thou hast set by themselves?

<span id="an_21:30">21:30</span> And he said, These seven ewe lambs
shalt thou take of my hand, that it may be a witness unto me, that I
have digged this well.

<span id="an_21:31">21:31</span> Wherefore he called that place
Beer-sheba. Because there they sware both of them.

<span id="an_21:32">21:32</span> So they made a covenant at Beer-sheba.
And Abimelech rose up, and Phicol the captain of his host, and they
returned into the land of the Philistines.

<span id="an_21:33">21:33</span> And \[Abraham\] planted a tamarisk tree
in Beer-sheba, and called there on the name of Jehovah, the Everlasting
God.

<span id="an_21:34">21:34</span> And Abraham sojourned in the land of
the Philistines many days.

<span id="an_22:1">22:1</span> And it came to pass after these things,
that God did prove Abraham, and said unto him, Abraham. And he said,
Here am I.

<span id="an_22:2">22:2</span> And he said, Take now thy son, thine only
son, whom thou lovest, even Isaac, and get thee into the land of Moriah.
And offer him there for a burnt-offering upon one of the mountains which
I will tell thee of.

<span id="an_22:3">22:3</span> And Abraham rose early in the morning,
and saddled his ass, and took two of his young men with him, and Isaac
his son. And he clave the wood for the burnt-offering, and rose up, and
went unto the place of which God had told him.

<span id="an_22:4">22:4</span> On the third day Abraham lifted up his
eyes, and saw the place afar off.

<span id="an_22:5">22:5</span> And Abraham said unto his young men,
Abide ye here with the ass, and I and the lad will go yonder; and we
will worship, and come again to you.

<span id="an_22:6">22:6</span> And Abraham took the wood of the
burnt-offering, and laid it upon Isaac his son. And he took in his hand
the fire and the knife. And they went both of them together.

<span id="an_22:7">22:7</span> And Isaac spake unto Abraham his father,
and said, My father. And he said, Here am I, my son. And he said,
Behold, the fire and the wood. But where is the lamb for a
burnt-offering?

<span id="an_22:8">22:8</span> And Abraham said, God will provide
himself the lamb for a burnt-offering, my son. So they went both of them
together.

<span id="an_22:9">22:9</span> And they came to the place which God had
told him of. And Abraham built the altar there, and laid the wood in
order, and bound Isaac his son, and laid him on the altar, upon the
wood.

<span id="an_22:10">22:10</span> And Abraham stretched forth his hand,
and took the knife to slay his son.

<span id="an_22:11">22:11</span> And the angel of Jehovah called unto
him out of heaven, and said, Abraham, Abraham. And he said, Here I am.

<span id="an_22:12">22:12</span> And he said, Lay not thy hand upon the
lad, neither do thou anything unto him. For now I know that thou fearest
God, seeing thou hast not withheld thy son, thine only son, from me.

<span id="an_22:13">22:13</span> And Abraham lifted up his eyes, and
looked, and behold, behind \[him\] a ram caught in the thicket by his
horns. And Abraham went and took the ram, and offered him up for a
burnt-offering in the stead of his son.

<span id="an_22:14">22:14</span> And Abraham called the name of that
place Jehovah-jireh. As it is said to this day, In the mount of Jehovah
it shall be provided.

<span id="an_22:15">22:15</span> And the angel of Jehovah called unto
Abraham a second time out of heaven,

<span id="an_22:16">22:16</span> and said, By myself have I sworn, saith
Jehovah, because thou hast done this thing, and hast not withheld thy
son, thine only son,

<span id="an_22:17">22:17</span> that in blessing I will bless thee, and
in multiplying I will multiply thy seed as the stars of the heavens, and
as the sand which is upon the seashore. And thy seed shall possess the
gate of his enemies.

<span id="an_22:18">22:18</span> And in thy seed shall all the nations
of the earth be blessed. Because thou hast obeyed my voice.

<span id="an_22:19">22:19</span> So Abraham returned unto his young men,
and they rose up and went together to Beer-sheba. And Abraham dwelt at
Beer-sheba.

<span id="an_22:20">22:20</span> And it came to pass after these things,
that it was told Abraham, saying, Behold, Milcah, she also hath borne
children unto they brother Nahor.

<span id="an_22:21">22:21</span> Uz his first-born, and Buz his brother,
and Kemuel the father of Aram.

<span id="an_22:22">22:22</span> And Chesed, and Hazo, and Pildash, and
Jidlaph, and Bethuel.

<span id="an_22:23">22:23</span> And Bethuel begat Rebekah. These eight
did Milcah bear to Nahor, Abraham's brother.

<span id="an_22:24">22:24</span> And his concubine, whose name was
Reumah, she also bare Tebah, and Gaham, and Tahash, and Maacah.

<span id="an_23:1">23:1</span> And the life of Sarah was a hundred and
seven and twenty years. These were the years of the life of Sarah.

<span id="an_23:2">23:2</span> And Sarah died in Kiriath-arba (the same
is Hebron), in the land of Canaan. And Abraham came to mourn for Sarah,
and to weep for her.

<span id="an_23:3">23:3</span> And Abraham rose up from before his dead,
and spake unto the children of Heth, saying,

<span id="an_23:4">23:4</span> I am a stranger and a sojourner with you.
Give me a possession of a burying-place with you, that I may bury my
dead out of my sight.

<span id="an_23:5">23:5</span> And the children of Heth answered
Abraham, saying unto him,

<span id="an_23:6">23:6</span> Hear us, my lord. Thou art a prince of
God among us. In the choice of our sepulchres bury thy dead. None of us
shall withhold from thee his sepulchre, but that thou mayest bury thy
dead.

<span id="an_23:7">23:7</span> And Abraham rose up, and bowed himself to
the people of the land, even to the children of Heth.

<span id="an_23:8">23:8</span> And he communed with them, saying, If it
be your mind that I should bury my dead out of my sight, hear me, and
entreat for me to Ephron the son of Zohar,

<span id="an_23:9">23:9</span> that he may give me the cave of
Machpelah, which he hath, which is in the end of his field. For the full
price let him give it to me in the midst of you for a possession of a
burying-place.

<span id="an_23:10">23:10</span> Now Ephron was sitting in the midst of
the children of Heth. And Ephron the Hittite answered Abraham in the
audience of the children of Heth, even of all that went in at the gate
of his city, saying,

<span id="an_23:11">23:11</span> Nay, my lord, hear me. The field give I
thee, and the cave that is therein, I give it thee. In the presence of
the children of my people give I it thee. Bury thy dead.

<span id="an_23:12">23:12</span> And Abraham bowed himself down before
the people of the land.

<span id="an_23:13">23:13</span> And he spake unto Ephron in the
audience of the people of the land, saying, But if thou wilt, I pray
thee, hear me. I will give the price of the field. Take it of me, and I
will bury my dead there.

<span id="an_23:14">23:14</span> And Ephron answered Abraham, saying
unto him,

<span id="an_23:15">23:15</span> My lord, hearken unto me. A piece of
land worth four hundred shekels of silver, what is that betwixt me and
thee? Bury therefore thy dead.

<span id="an_23:16">23:16</span> And Abraham hearkened unto Ephron. And
Abraham weighed to Ephron the silver which he had named in the audience
of the children of Heth, four hundred shekels of silver, current
\[money\] with the merchant.

<span id="an_23:17">23:17</span> So the field of Ephron, which was in
Machpelah, which was before Mamre, the field, and the cave which was
therein, and all the trees that were in the field, that were in all the
border thereof round about, were made sure

<span id="an_23:18">23:18</span> unto Abraham for a possession in the
presence of the children of Heth, before all that went in at the gate of
his city.

<span id="an_23:19">23:19</span> And after this, Abraham buried Sarah
his wife in the cave of the field of Machpelah before Mamre (the same is
Hebron), in the land of Canaan.

<span id="an_23:20">23:20</span> And the field, and the cave that is
therein, were made sure unto Abraham for a possession of a burying-place
by the children of Heth.

<span id="an_24:1">24:1</span> And Abraham was old, \[and\] well
stricken in age. And Jehovah had blessed Abraham in all things.

<span id="an_24:2">24:2</span> And Abraham said unto his servant, the
elder of his house, that ruled over all that he had, Put, I pray thee,
thy hand under my thigh.

<span id="an_24:3">24:3</span> And I will make thee swear by Jehovah,
the God of heaven and the God of the earth, that thou wilt not take a
wife for my son of the daughters of the Canaanites, among whom I dwell.

<span id="an_24:4">24:4</span> But thou shalt go unto my country, and to
my kindred, and take a wife for my son Isaac.

<span id="an_24:5">24:5</span> And the servant said unto him,
Peradventure the woman will not be willing to follow me unto this land.
Must I needs bring thy son again unto the land from whence thou camest?

<span id="an_24:6">24:6</span> And Abraham said unto him, Beware thou
that thou bring not my son thither again.

<span id="an_24:7">24:7</span> Jehovah, the God of heaven, who took me
from my father's house, and from the land of my nativity, and who spake
unto me, and who sware unto me, saying, Unto thy seed will I give this
land. He will send his angel before thee, and thou shalt take a wife for
my son from thence.

<span id="an_24:8">24:8</span> And if the woman be not willing to follow
thee, then thou shalt be clear from this my oath. Only thou shalt not
bring my son thither again.

<span id="an_24:9">24:9</span> And the servant put his hand under the
thigh of Abraham his master, and sware to him concerning this matter.

<span id="an_24:10">24:10</span> And the servant took ten camels, of the
camels of his master, and departed, having all goodly things of his
master's in his hand. And he arose, and went to Mesopotamia, unto the
city of Nahor.

<span id="an_24:11">24:11</span> And he made the camels to kneel down
without the city by the well of water at the time of evening, the time
that women go out to draw water.

<span id="an_24:12">24:12</span> And he said, O Jehovah, the God of my
master Abraham, send me, I pray thee, good speed this day, and show
kindness unto my master Abraham.

<span id="an_24:13">24:13</span> Behold, I am standing by the fountain
of water. And the daughters of the men of the city are coming out to
draw water.

<span id="an_24:14">24:14</span> And let it come to pass, that the
damsel to whom I shall say, Let down thy pitcher, I pray thee, that I
may drink. And she shall say, Drink, and I will give thy camels drink
also. Let the same be she that thou hast appointed for thy servant
Isaac. And thereby shall I know that thou hast showed kindness unto my
master.

<span id="an_24:15">24:15</span> And it came to pass, before he had done
speaking, that, behold, Rebekah came out, who was born to Bethuel the
son of Milcah, the wife of Nahor, Abraham's brother, with her pitcher
upon her shoulder.

<span id="an_24:16">24:16</span> And the damsel was very fair to look
upon, a virgin, neither had any man known her. And she went down to the
fountain, and filled her pitcher, and came up.

<span id="an_24:17">24:17</span> And the servant ran to meet her, and
said, Give me to drink, I pray thee, a little water from thy pitcher.

<span id="an_24:18">24:18</span> And she said, Drink, my lord. And she
hasted, and let down her pitcher upon her hand, and gave him drink.

<span id="an_24:19">24:19</span> And when she had done giving him drink,
she said, I will draw for thy camels also, until they have done
drinking.

<span id="an_24:20">24:20</span> And she hasted, and emptied her pitcher
into the trough, and ran again unto the well to draw, and drew for all
his camels.

<span id="an_24:21">24:21</span> And the man looked stedfastly on her,
holding his peace, to know whether Jehovah had made his journey
prosperous or not.

<span id="an_24:22">24:22</span> And it came to pass, as the camels had
done drinking, that the man took a golden ring of half a shekel weight,
and two bracelets for her hands of ten shekels weight of gold,

<span id="an_24:23">24:23</span> and said, Whose daughter art thou? Tell
me, I pray thee. Is there room in thy father's house for us to lodge in?

<span id="an_24:24">24:24</span> And she said unto him, I am the
daughter of Bethuel the son of Milcah, whom she bare unto Nahor.

<span id="an_24:25">24:25</span> She said moreover unto him, We have
both straw and provender enough, and room to lodge in.

<span id="an_24:26">24:26</span> And the man bowed his head, and
worshipped Jehovah.

<span id="an_24:27">24:27</span> And he said, Blessed be Jehovah, the
God of my master Abraham, who hath not forsaken his lovingkindness and
his truth toward my master. As for me, Jehovah hath led me in the way to
the house of my master's brethren.

<span id="an_24:28">24:28</span> And the damsel ran, and told her
mother's house according to these words.

<span id="an_24:29">24:29</span> And Rebekah had a brother, and his name
was Laban: and Laban ran out unto the man, unto the fountain.

<span id="an_24:30">24:30</span> And it came to pass, when he saw the
ring, and the bracelets upon his sister's hands, and when he heard the
words of Rebekah his sister, saying, Thus spake the man unto me. That he
came unto the man. And, behold, he was standing by the camels at the
fountain.

<span id="an_24:31">24:31</span> And he said, Come in, thou blessed of
Jehovah. Wherefore standest thou without? For I have prepared the house,
and room for the camels.

<span id="an_24:32">24:32</span> And the man came into the house, and he
ungirded the camels. And he gave straw and provender for the camels, and
water to wash his feet and the feet of the men that were with him.

<span id="an_24:33">24:33</span> And there was set food before him to
eat. But he said, I will not eat, until I have told mine errand. And he
said, Speak on.

<span id="an_24:34">24:34</span> And he said, I am Abraham's servant.

<span id="an_24:35">24:35</span> And Jehovah hath blessed my master
greatly. And he is become great. And he hath given him flocks and herds,
and silver and gold, and men-servants and maid-servants, and camels and
asses.

<span id="an_24:36">24:36</span> And Sarah my master's wife bare a son
to my master when she was old. And unto him hath he given all that he
hath.

<span id="an_24:37">24:37</span> And my master made me swear, saying,
Thou shalt not take a wife for my son of the daughters of the
Canaanites, in whose land I dwell.

<span id="an_24:38">24:38</span> But thou shalt go unto my father's
house, and to my kindred, and take a wife for my son.

<span id="an_24:39">24:39</span> And I said unto my master, Peradventure
the woman will not follow me.

<span id="an_24:40">24:40</span> And he said unto me, Jehovah, before
whom I walk, will send his angel with thee, and prosper thy way. And
thou shalt take a wife for my son of my kindred, and of my father's
house.

<span id="an_24:41">24:41</span> Then shalt thou be clear from my oath,
when thou comest to my kindred. And if they give her not to thee, thou
shalt be clear from my oath.

<span id="an_24:42">24:42</span> And I came this day unto the fountain,
and said, O Jehovah, the God of my master Abraham, if now thou do
prosper my way which I go.

<span id="an_24:43">24:43</span> Behold, I am standing by the fountain
of water. And let it come to pass, that the maiden that cometh forth to
draw, to whom I shall say, Give me, I pray thee, a little water from thy
pitcher to drink.

<span id="an_24:44">24:44</span> And she shall say to me, Both drink
thou, and I will also draw for thy camels. Let the same be the woman
whom Jehovah hath appointed for my master's son.

<span id="an_24:45">24:45</span> And before I had done speaking in my
heart, behold, Rebekah came forth with her pitcher on her shoulder. And
she went down unto the fountain, and drew. And I said unto her, Let me
drink, I pray thee.

<span id="an_24:46">24:46</span> And she made haste, and let down her
pitcher from her shoulder, and said, Drink, and I will give thy camels
drink also. So I drank, and she made the camels drink also.

<span id="an_24:47">24:47</span> And I asked her, and said, Whose
daughter art thou? And she said, The daughter of Bethuel, Nahor's son,
whom Milcah bare unto him. And I put the ring upon her nose, and the
bracelets upon her hands.

<span id="an_24:48">24:48</span> And I bowed my head, and worshipped
Jehovah, and blessed Jehovah, the God of my master Abraham, who had led
me in the right way to take my master's brother's daughter for his son.

<span id="an_24:49">24:49</span> And now if ye will deal kindly and
truly with my master, tell me. And if not, tell me. That I may turn to
the right hand, or to the left.

<span id="an_24:50">24:50</span> Then Laban and Bethuel answered and
said, The thing proceedeth from Jehovah. We cannot speak unto thee bad
or good.

<span id="an_24:51">24:51</span> Behold, Rebekah is before thee, take
her, and go, and let her be thy master's son's wife, as Jehovah hath
spoken.

<span id="an_24:52">24:52</span> And it came to pass, that, when
Abraham's servant heard their words, he bowed himself down to the earth
unto Jehovah.

<span id="an_24:53">24:53</span> And the servant brought forth jewels of
silver, and jewels of gold, and raiment, and gave them to Rebekah. He
gave also to her brother and to her mother precious things.

<span id="an_24:54">24:54</span> And they did eat and drink, he and the
men that were with him, and tarried all night. And they rose up in the
morning, and he said, Send me away unto my master.

<span id="an_24:55">24:55</span> And her brother and her mother said,
Let the damsel abide with us \[a few\] days, at the least ten. After
that she shall go.

<span id="an_24:56">24:56</span> And he said unto them, Hinder me not,
seeing Jehovah hath prospered my way. Send me away that I may go to my
master.

<span id="an_24:57">24:57</span> And they said, We will call the damsel,
and inquire at her mouth.

<span id="an_24:58">24:58</span> And they called Rebekah, and said unto
her, Wilt thou go with this man? And she said, I will go.

<span id="an_24:59">24:59</span> And they sent away Rebekah their
sister, and her nurse, and Abraham's servant, and his men.

<span id="an_24:60">24:60</span> And they blessed Rebekah, and said unto
her, Our sister, be thou \[the mother\] of thousands of ten thousands,
and let thy seed possess the gate of those that hate them.

<span id="an_24:61">24:61</span> And Rebekah arose, and her damsels, and
they rode upon the camels, and followed the man. And the servant took
Rebekah, and went his way.

<span id="an_24:62">24:62</span> And Isaac came from the way of
Beer-lahai-roi. For he dwelt in the land of the South.

<span id="an_24:63">24:63</span> And Isaac went out to meditate in the
field at the eventide. And he lifted up his eyes, and saw, and, behold,
there were camels coming.

<span id="an_24:64">24:64</span> And Rebekah lifted up her eyes, and
when she saw Isaac, she alighted from the camel.

<span id="an_24:65">24:65</span> And she said unto the servant, What man
is this that walketh in the field to meet us? And the servant said, It
is my master. And she took her veil, and covered herself.

<span id="an_24:66">24:66</span> And the servant told Isaac all the
things that he had done.

<span id="an_24:67">24:67</span> And Isaac brought her into his mother
Sarah's tent, and took Rebekah, and she became his wife. And he loved
her. And Isaac was comforted after his mother's death.

<span id="an_25:1">25:1</span> And Abraham took another wife, and her
name was Keturah.

<span id="an_25:2">25:2</span> And she bare him Zimran, and Jokshan, and
Medan, and Midian, and Ishbak, and Shuah.

<span id="an_25:3">25:3</span> And Jokshan begat Sheba, and Dedan. And
the sons of Dedan were Asshurim, and Letushim, and Leummim.

<span id="an_25:4">25:4</span> And the sons of Midian: Ephah, and Epher,
and Hanoch, and Abida, and Eldaah. All these were the children of
Keturah.

<span id="an_25:5">25:5</span> And Abraham gave all that he had unto
Isaac.

<span id="an_25:6">25:6</span> But unto the sons of the concubines, that
Abraham had, Abraham gave gifts. And he sent them away from Isaac his
son, while he yet lived, eastward, unto the east country.

<span id="an_25:7">25:7</span> And these are the days of the years of
Abraham's life which he lived, a hundred threescore and fifteen years.

<span id="an_25:8">25:8</span> And Abraham gave up the ghost, and died
in a good old age, an old man, and full \[of years\], and was gathered
to his people.

<span id="an_25:9">25:9</span> And Isaac and Ishmael his sons buried him
in the cave of Machpelah, in the field of Ephron the son of Zohar the
Hittite, which is before Mamre.

<span id="an_25:10">25:10</span> The field which Abraham purchased of
the children of Heth. There was Abraham buried, and Sarah his wife.

<span id="an_25:11">25:11</span> And it came to pass after the death of
Abraham, that God blessed Isaac his son. And Isaac dwelt by
Beer-lahai-roi.

<span id="an_25:12">25:12</span> Now these are the generations of
Ishmael, Abraham's son, whom Hagar the Egyptian, Sarah's handmaid, bare
unto Abraham.

<span id="an_25:13">25:13</span> And these are the names of the sons of
Ishmael, by their names, according to their generations: the first-born
of Ishmael, Nebaioth, and Kedar, and Adbeel, and Mibsam,

<span id="an_25:14">25:14</span> and Mishma, and Dumah, and Massa,

<span id="an_25:15">25:15</span> Hadad, and Tema, Jetur, Naphish, and
Kedemah.

<span id="an_25:16">25:16</span> These are the sons of Ishmael, and
these are their names, by their villages, and by their encampments.
Twelve princes according to their nations.

<span id="an_25:17">25:17</span> And these are the years of the life of
Ishmael, a hundred and thirty and seven years. And he gave up the ghost
and died, and was gathered unto his people.

<span id="an_25:18">25:18</span> And they dwelt from Havilah unto Shur
that is before Egypt, as thou goest toward Assyria. He abode over
against all his brethren.

<span id="an_25:19">25:19</span> And these are the generations of Isaac,
Abraham's son. Abraham begat Isaac.

<span id="an_25:20">25:20</span> And Isaac was forty years old when he
took Rebekah, the daughter of Bethuel the Syrian of Paddan-aram, the
sister of Laban the Syrian, to be his wife.

<span id="an_25:21">25:21</span> And Isaac entreated Jehovah for his
wife, because she was barren. And Jehovah was entreated of him, and
Rebekah his wife conceived.

<span id="an_25:22">25:22</span> And the children struggled together
within her. And she said, If it be so, wherefore do I live? And she went
to inquire of Jehovah.

<span id="an_25:23">25:23</span> And Jehovah said unto her, Two nations
are in thy womb, And two peoples shall be separated from thy bowels. And
the one people shall be stronger than the other people. And the elder
shall serve the younger.

<span id="an_25:24">25:24</span> And when her days to be delivered were
fulfilled, behold, there were twins in her womb.

<span id="an_25:25">25:25</span> And the first came forth red, all over
like a hairy garment. And they called his name Esau.

<span id="an_25:26">25:26</span> And after that came forth his brother,
and his hand had hold on Esau's heel. And his name was called Jacob. And
Isaac was threescore years old when she bare them.

<span id="an_25:27">25:27</span> And the boys grew. And Esau was a
skilful hunter, a man of the field. And Jacob was a quiet man, dwelling
in tents.

<span id="an_25:28">25:28</span> Now Isaac loved Esau, because he did
eat of his venison. And Rebekah loved Jacob.

<span id="an_25:29">25:29</span> And Jacob boiled pottage. And Esau came
in from the field, and he was faint.

<span id="an_25:30">25:30</span> And Esau said to Jacob, Feed me, I pray
thee, with that same red \[pottage\]. For I am faint. Therefore was his
name called Edom.

<span id="an_25:31">25:31</span> And Jacob said, Sell me first thy
birthright.

<span id="an_25:32">25:32</span> And Esau said, Behold, I am about to
die. And what profit shall the birthright do to me?

<span id="an_25:33">25:33</span> And Jacob said, Swear to me first. And
he sware unto him. And he sold his birthright unto Jacob.

<span id="an_25:34">25:34</span> And Jacob gave Esau bread and pottage
of lentils. And he did eat and drink, and rose up, and went his way. So
Esau despised his birthright.

<span id="an_26:1">26:1</span> And there was a famine in the land,
besides the first famine that was in the days of Abraham. And Isaac went
unto Abimelech king of the Philistines, unto Gerar.

<span id="an_26:2">26:2</span> And Jehovah appeared unto him, and said,
Go not down into Egypt. Dwell in the land which I shall tell thee of.

<span id="an_26:3">26:3</span> Sojourn in this land, and I will be with
thee, and will bless thee. For unto thee, and unto thy seed, I will give
all these lands, and I will establish the oath which I sware unto
Abraham thy father.

<span id="an_26:4">26:4</span> And I will multiply thy seed as the stars
of heaven, and will give unto thy seed all these lands. And in thy seed
shall all the nations of the earth be blessed.

<span id="an_26:5">26:5</span> Because that Abraham obeyed my voice, and
kept my charge, my commandments, my statutes, and my laws.

<span id="an_26:6">26:6</span> And Isaac dwelt in Gerar.

<span id="an_26:7">26:7</span> And the men of the place asked him of his
wife. And he said, She is my sister. For he feared to say, My wife.
Lest, \[said he\], the men of the place should kill me for Rebekah.
Because she was fair to look upon.

<span id="an_26:8">26:8</span> And it came to pass, when he had been
there a long time, that Abimelech king of the Philistines looked out at
a window, and saw, and, behold, Isaac was sporting with Rebekah his
wife.

<span id="an_26:9">26:9</span> And Abimelech called Isaac, and said,
Behold, of a surety she is thy wife. And how saidst thou, She is my
sister? And Isaac said unto him, Because I said, Lest I die because of
her.

<span id="an_26:10">26:10</span> And Abimelech said, What is this thou
hast done unto us? One of the people might easily have lain with thy
wife, and thou wouldest have brought guiltiness upon us.

<span id="an_26:11">26:11</span> And Abimelech charged all the people,
saying, He that toucheth this man or his wife shall surely be put to
death.

<span id="an_26:12">26:12</span> And Isaac sowed in that land, and found
in the same year a hundredfold. And Jehovah blessed him.

<span id="an_26:13">26:13</span> And the man waxed great, and grew more
and more until he became very great.

<span id="an_26:14">26:14</span> And he had possessions of flocks, and
possessions of herds, and a great household. And the Philistines envied
him.

<span id="an_26:15">26:15</span> Now all the wells which his father's
servants had digged in the days of Abraham his father, the Philistines
had stopped, and filled with earth.

<span id="an_26:16">26:16</span> And Abimelech said unto Isaac, Go from
us. For thou art much mightier than we.

<span id="an_26:17">26:17</span> And Isaac departed thence, and encamped
in the valley of Gerar, and dwelt there.

<span id="an_26:18">26:18</span> And Isaac digged again the wells of
water, which they had digged in the days of Abraham his father. For the
Philistines had stopped them after the death of Abraham. And he called
their names after the names by which his father had called them.

<span id="an_26:19">26:19</span> And Isaac's servants digged in the
valley, and found there a well of springing water.

<span id="an_26:20">26:20</span> And the herdsmen of Gerar strove with
Isaac's herdsmen, saying, The water is ours. And he called the name of
the well Esek, because they contended with him.

<span id="an_26:21">26:21</span> And they digged another well, and they
strove for that also. And he called the name of it Sitnah.

<span id="an_26:22">26:22</span> And he removed from thence, and digged
another well. And for that they strove not. And he called the name of it
Rehoboth. And he said, For now Jehovah hath made room for us, and we
shall be fruitful in the land.

<span id="an_26:23">26:23</span> And he went up from thence to
Beer-sheba.

<span id="an_26:24">26:24</span> And Jehovah appeared unto him the same
night, and said, I am the God of Abraham thy father. Fear not, for I am
with thee, and will bless thee, and multiply thy seed for my servant
Abraham's sake.

<span id="an_26:25">26:25</span> And he builded an altar there, and
called upon the name of Jehovah, and pitched his tent there. And there
Isaac's servants digged a well.

<span id="an_26:26">26:26</span> Then Abimelech went to him from Gerar,
and Ahuzzath his friend, and Phicol the captain of his host.

<span id="an_26:27">26:27</span> And Isaac said unto them, Wherefore are
ye come unto me, seeing ye hate me, and have sent me away from you?

<span id="an_26:28">26:28</span> And they said, We saw plainly that
Jehovah was with thee. And we said, Let there now be an oath betwixt us,
even betwixt us and thee, and let us make a covenant with thee,

<span id="an_26:29">26:29</span> that thou wilt do us no hurt, as we
have not touched thee, and as we have done unto thee nothing but good,
and have sent thee away in peace. Thou art now the blessed of Jehovah.

<span id="an_26:30">26:30</span> And he made them a feast, and they did
eat and drink.

<span id="an_26:31">26:31</span> And they rose up betimes in the
morning, and sware one to another. And Isaac sent them away, and they
departed from him in peace.

<span id="an_26:32">26:32</span> And it came to pass the same day, that
Isaac's servants came, and told him concerning the well which they had
digged, and said unto him, We have found water.

<span id="an_26:33">26:33</span> And he called it Shibah. Therefore the
name of the city is Beer-sheba unto this day.

<span id="an_26:34">26:34</span> And when Esau was forty years old he
took to wife Judith the daughter of Beeri the Hittite, and Basemath the
daughter of Elon the Hittite.

<span id="an_26:35">26:35</span> And they were a grief of mind unto
Isaac and to Rebekah.

<span id="an_27:1">27:1</span> And it came to pass, that when Isaac was
old, and his eyes were dim, so that he could not see, he called Esau his
elder son, and said unto him, My son. And he said unto him, Here am I.

<span id="an_27:2">27:2</span> And he said, Behold now, I am old, I know
not the day of my death.

<span id="an_27:3">27:3</span> Now therefore take, I pray thee, thy
weapons, thy quiver and thy bow, and go out to the field, and take me
venison.

<span id="an_27:4">27:4</span> And make me savory food, such as I love,
and bring it to me, that I may eat. That my soul may bless thee before I
die.

<span id="an_27:5">27:5</span> And Rebekah heard when Isaac spake to
Esau his son. And Esau went to the field to hunt for venison, and to
bring it.

<span id="an_27:6">27:6</span> And Rebekah spake unto Jacob her son,
saying, Behold, I heard thy father speak unto Esau thy brother, saying,

<span id="an_27:7">27:7</span> Bring me venison, and make me savory
food, that I may eat, and bless thee before Jehovah before my death.

<span id="an_27:8">27:8</span> Now therefore, my son, obey my voice
according to that which I command thee.

<span id="an_27:9">27:9</span> Go now to the flock, and fetch me from
thence two good kids of the goats. And I will make them savory food for
thy father, such as he loveth.

<span id="an_27:10">27:10</span> And thou shalt bring it to thy father,
that he may eat, so that he may bless thee before his death.

<span id="an_27:11">27:11</span> And Jacob said to Rebekah his mother,
Behold, Esau my brother is a hairy man, and I am a smooth man.

<span id="an_27:12">27:12</span> My father peradventure will feel me,
and I shall seem to him as a deceiver. And I shall bring a curse upon
me, and not a blessing.

<span id="an_27:13">27:13</span> And his mother said unto him, Upon me
be thy curse, my son. Only obey my voice, and go fetch me them.

<span id="an_27:14">27:14</span> And he went, and fetched, and brought
them to his mother. And his mother made savory food, such as his father
loved.

<span id="an_27:15">27:15</span> And Rebekah took the goodly garments of
Esau her elder son, which were with her in the house, and put them upon
Jacob her younger son.

<span id="an_27:16">27:16</span> And she put the skins of the kids of
the goats upon his hands, and upon the smooth of his neck.

<span id="an_27:17">27:17</span> And she gave the savory food and the
bread, which she had prepared, into the hand of her son Jacob.

<span id="an_27:18">27:18</span> And he came unto his father, and said,
My father. And he said, Here am I. Who art thou, my son?

<span id="an_27:19">27:19</span> And Jacob said unto his father, I am
Esau thy first-born; I have done according as thou badest me: arise, I
pray thee, sit and eat of my venison, that thy soul may bless me.

<span id="an_27:20">27:20</span> And Isaac said unto his son, How is it
that thou hast found it so quickly, my son? And he said, Because Jehovah
thy God sent me good speed.

<span id="an_27:21">27:21</span> And Isaac said unto Jacob, Come near, I
pray thee, that I may feel thee, my son, whether thou be my very son
Esau or not.

<span id="an_27:22">27:22</span> And Jacob went near unto Isaac his
father. And he felt him, and said, The voice is Jacob's voice, but the
hands are the hands of Esau.

<span id="an_27:23">27:23</span> And he discerned him not, because his
hands were hairy, as his brother Esau's hands. So he blessed him.

<span id="an_27:24">27:24</span> And he said, Art thou my very son Esau?
And he said, I am.

<span id="an_27:25">27:25</span> And he said, Bring it near to me, and I
will eat of my son's venison, that my soul may bless thee. And he
brought it near to him, and he did eat. And he brought him wine, and he
drank.

<span id="an_27:26">27:26</span> And his father Isaac said unto him,
Come near now, and kiss me, my son.

<span id="an_27:27">27:27</span> And he came near, and kissed him. And
he smelled the smell of his raiment, and blessed him, and said, See, the
smell of my son Is as the smell of a field which Jehovah hath blessed.

<span id="an_27:28">27:28</span> And God five thee of the dew of heaven,
And of the fatness of the earth, And plenty of grain and new wine.

<span id="an_27:29">27:29</span> Let peoples serve thee, And nations bow
down to thee. Be lord over thy brethren, And let thy mother's sons bow
down to thee. Cursed be every one that curseth thee, And blessed be
every one that blesseth thee.

<span id="an_27:30">27:30</span> And it came to pass, as soon as Isaac
had made an end of blessing Jacob, and Jacob was yet scarce gone out
from the presence of Isaac his father, that Esau his brother came in
from his hunting.

<span id="an_27:31">27:31</span> And he also made savory food, and
brought it unto his father. And he said unto his father, Let my father
arise, and eat of his son's venison, that thy soul may bless me.

<span id="an_27:32">27:32</span> And Isaac his father said unto him, Who
art thou? And he said, I am thy son, thy first-born, Esau.

<span id="an_27:33">27:33</span> And Isaac trembled very exceedingly,
and said, Who then is he that hath taken venison, and brought it me, and
I have eaten of all before thou camest, and have blessed him? Yea,
\[and\] he shall be blessed.

<span id="an_27:34">27:34</span> When Esau heard the words of his
father, he cried with an exceeding great and bitter cry, and said unto
his father, Bless me, even me also, O my father.

<span id="an_27:35">27:35</span> And he said, Thy brother came with
guile, and hath taken away thy blessing.

<span id="an_27:36">27:36</span> And he said, Is not he rightly name
Jacob? for he hath supplanted me these two time. He took away my
birthright. And, behold, now he hath taken away my blessing. And he
said, Hast thou not reserved a blessing for me?

<span id="an_27:37">27:37</span> And Isaac answered and said unto Esau,
Behold, I have made him thy lord, and all his brethren have I given to
him for servants. And with grain and new wine have I sustained him. And
what then shall I do for thee, my son?

<span id="an_27:38">27:38</span> And Esau said unto his father, Hast
thou but one blessing, my father? Bless me, even me also, O my father.
And Esau lifted up his voice, and wept.

<span id="an_27:39">27:39</span> And Isaac his father answered and said
unto him, Behold, of the fatness of the earth shall be thy dwelling, And
of the dew of heaven from above.

<span id="an_27:40">27:40</span> And by thy sword shalt thou live, and
thou shalt serve thy brother. And it shall come to pass, when thou shalt
break loose, That thou shalt shake his yoke from off thy neck.

<span id="an_27:41">27:41</span> And Esau hated Jacob because of the
blessing wherewith his father blessed him. And Esau said in his heart,
The days of mourning for my father are at hand. Then will I slay my
brother Jacob.

<span id="an_27:42">27:42</span> And the words of Esau her elder son
were told to Rebekah. And she sent and called Jacob her younger son, and
said unto him, Behold, thy brother Esau, as touching thee, doth comfort
himself, \[purposing\] to kill thee.

<span id="an_27:43">27:43</span> Now therefore, my son, obey my voice.
And arise, flee thou to Laban my brother to Haran.

<span id="an_27:44">27:44</span> And tarry with him a few days, until
thy brother's fury turn away.

<span id="an_27:45">27:45</span> Until thy brother's anger turn away
from thee, and he forget that which thou hast done to him. Then I will
send, and fetch thee from thence. Why should I be bereaved of you both
in one day?

<span id="an_27:46">27:46</span> And Rebekah said to Isaac, I am weary
of my life because of the daughters of Heth. If Jacob take a wife of the
daughters of Heth, such as these, of the daughters of the land, what
good shall my life do me?

<span id="an_28:1">28:1</span> And Isaac called Jacob, and blessed him,
and charged him, and said unto him, Thou shalt not take a wife of the
daughters of Canaan.

<span id="an_28:2">28:2</span> Arise, go to Paddan-aram, to the house of
Bethuel thy mother's father. And take thee a wife from thence of the
daughters of Laban thy mother's brother.

<span id="an_28:3">28:3</span> And God Almighty bless thee, and make
thee fruitful, and multiply thee, that thou mayest be a company of
peoples.

<span id="an_28:4">28:4</span> And give thee the blessing of Abraham, to
thee, and to thy seed with thee. That thou mayest inherit the land of
thy sojournings, which God gave unto Abraham.

<span id="an_28:5">28:5</span> And Isaac sent away Jacob. And he went to
Paddan-aram unto Laban, son of Bethuel the Syrian, the brother of
Rebekah, Jacob's and Esau's mother.

<span id="an_28:6">28:6</span> Now Esau saw that Isaac had blessed Jacob
and sent him away to Paddan-aram, to take him a wife from thence. And
that as he blessed him he gave him a charge, saying, Thou shalt not take
a wife of the daughters of Canaan.

<span id="an_28:7">28:7</span> And that Jacob obeyed his father and his
mother, and was gone to Paddan-aram.

<span id="an_28:8">28:8</span> And Esau saw that the daughters of Canaan
pleased not Isaac his father.

<span id="an_28:9">28:9</span> And Esau went unto Ishmael, and took,
besides the wives that he had, Mahalath the daughter of Ishmael
Abraham's son, the sister of Nebaioth, to be his wife.

<span id="an_28:10">28:10</span> And Jacob went out from Beer-sheba, and
went toward Haran.

<span id="an_28:11">28:11</span> And he lighted upon a certain place,
and tarried there all night, because the sun was set. And he took one of
the stones of the place, and put it under his head, and lay down in that
place to sleep.

<span id="an_28:12">28:12</span> And he dreamed. And behold, a ladder
set up on the earth, and the top of it reached to heaven. And behold,
the angels of God ascending and descending on it.

<span id="an_28:13">28:13</span> And, behold, Jehovah stood above it,
and said, I am Jehovah, the God of Abraham thy father, and the God of
Isaac. The land whereon thou liest, to thee will I give it, and to thy
seed.

<span id="an_28:14">28:14</span> And thy seed shall be as the dust of
the earth, and thou shalt spread abroad to the west, and to the east,
and to the north, and to the south. And in thee and in thy seed shall
all the families of the earth be blessed.

<span id="an_28:15">28:15</span> And, behold, I am with thee, and will
keep thee, whithersoever thou goest, and will bring thee again into this
land. For I will not leave thee, until I have done that which I have
spoken to thee of.

<span id="an_28:16">28:16</span> And Jacob awaked out of his sleep, and
he said, Surely Jehovah is in this place. And I knew it not.

<span id="an_28:17">28:17</span> And he was afraid, and said, How
dreadful is this place! This is none other than the house of God, and
this is the gate of heaven.

<span id="an_28:18">28:18</span> And Jacob rose up early in the morning,
and took the stone that he had put under his head, and set it up for a
pillar, and poured oil upon the top of it.

<span id="an_28:19">28:19</span> And he called the name of that place
Beth-el. But the name of the city was Luz at the first.

<span id="an_28:20">28:20</span> And Jacob vowed a vow, saying, If God
will be with me, and will keep me in this way that I go, and will give
me bread to eat, and raiment to put on,

<span id="an_28:21">28:21</span> so that I come again to my father's
house in peace, and Jehovah will be my God,

<span id="an_28:22">28:22</span> then this stone, which I have set up
for a pillar, shall be God's house. And of all that thou shalt give me I
will surely give the tenth unto thee.

<span id="an_29:1">29:1</span> Then Jacob went on his journey, and came
to the land of the children of the east.

<span id="an_29:2">29:2</span> And he looked, and behold, a well in the
field, and, lo, three flocks of sheep lying there by it. For out of that
well they watered the flocks. And the stone upon the well's mouth was
great.

<span id="an_29:3">29:3</span> And thither were all the flocks gathered.
And they rolled the stone from the well's mouth, and watered the sheep,
and put the stone again upon the well's mouth in its place.

<span id="an_29:4">29:4</span> And Jacob said unto them, My brethren,
whence are ye? And they said, Of Haran are we.

<span id="an_29:5">29:5</span> And he said unto them, Know ye Laban the
son of Nahor? And they said, We know him.

<span id="an_29:6">29:6</span> And he said unto them, Is it well with
him? And they said, It is well. And, behold, Rachel his daughter cometh
with the sheep.

<span id="an_29:7">29:7</span> And he said, Lo, it is yet high day,
neither is it time that the cattle should be gathered together. Water ye
the sheep, and go and feed them.

<span id="an_29:8">29:8</span> And they said, We cannot, until all the
flocks be gathered together, and they roll the stone from the well's
mouth. Then we water the sheep.

<span id="an_29:9">29:9</span> While he was yet speaking with them,
Rachel came with her father's sheep. For she kept them.

<span id="an_29:10">29:10</span> And it came to pass, when Jacob saw
Rachel the daughter of Laban his mother's brother, and the sheep of
Laban his mother's brother, that Jacob went near, and rolled the stone
from the well's mouth, and watered the flock of Laban his mother's
brother.

<span id="an_29:11">29:11</span> And Jacob kissed Rachel, and lifted up
his voice, and wept.

<span id="an_29:12">29:12</span> And Jacob told Rachel that he was her
father's brother, and that he was Rebekah's son. And she ran and told
her father.

<span id="an_29:13">29:13</span> And it came to pass, when Laban heard
the tidings of Jacob his sister's son, that he ran to meet him, and
embraced him, and kissed him, and brought him to his house. And he told
Laban all these things.

<span id="an_29:14">29:14</span> And Laban said to him, Surely thou art
my bone and my flesh. And he abode with him the space of a month.

<span id="an_29:15">29:15</span> And Laban said unto Jacob, Because thou
art my brother, shouldest thou therefore serve me for nought? Tell me,
what shall thy wages be?

<span id="an_29:16">29:16</span> And Laban had two daughters. The name
of the elder was Leah, and the name of the younger was Rachel.

<span id="an_29:17">29:17</span> And Leah's eyes were tender. But Rachel
was beautiful and well favored.

<span id="an_29:18">29:18</span> And Jacob loved Rachel. And he said, I
will serve thee seven years for Rachel thy younger daughter.

<span id="an_29:19">29:19</span> And Laban said, It is better that I
give her to thee, than that I should give her to another man. Abide with
me.

<span id="an_29:20">29:20</span> And Jacob served seven years for
Rachel. And they seemed unto him but a few days, for the love he had to
her.

<span id="an_29:21">29:21</span> And Jacob said unto Laban, Give me my
wife, for my days are fulfilled, that I may go in unto her.

<span id="an_29:22">29:22</span> And Laban gathered together all the men
of the place, and made a feast.

<span id="an_29:23">29:23</span> And it came to pass in the evening,
that he took Leah his daughter, and brought her to him. And he went in
unto her.

<span id="an_29:24">29:24</span> And Laban gave Zilpah his handmaid unto
his daughter Leah for a handmaid.

<span id="an_29:25">29:25</span> And it came to pass in the morning
that, behold, it was Leah. And he said to Laban, What is this thou hast
done unto me? Did not I serve with thee for Rachel? Wherefore then hast
thou beguiled me?

<span id="an_29:26">29:26</span> And Laban said, It is not so done in
our place, to give the younger before the first-born.

<span id="an_29:27">29:27</span> Fulfil the week of this one, and we
will give thee the other also for the service which thou shalt serve
with me yet seven other years.

<span id="an_29:28">29:28</span> And jacob did so, and fulfilled her
week. And he gave him Rachel his daughter to wife.

<span id="an_29:29">29:29</span> And Laban gave to Rachel his daughter
Bilhah his handmaid to be her handmaid.

<span id="an_29:30">29:30</span> And he went in also unto Rachel, and he
loved also Rachel more than Leah, and served with him yet seven other
years.

<span id="an_29:31">29:31</span> And Jehovah saw that Leah was hated,
and he opened her womb. But Rachel was barren.

<span id="an_29:32">29:32</span> And Leah conceived, and bare a son, and
she called his name Reuben. For she said, Because Jehovah hath looked
upon my affliction. For now my husband will love me.

<span id="an_29:33">29:33</span> And she conceived again, and bare a
son: and said, Because Jehovah hath heard that I am hated, he hath
therefore given me this \[son\] also. And she called his name Simeon.

<span id="an_29:34">29:34</span> And she conceived again, and bare a
son. And said, Now this time will my husband be joined unto me, because
I have borne him three sons. Therefore was his name called Levi.

<span id="an_29:35">29:35</span> And she conceived again, and bare a
son. And she said, This time will I praise Jehovah. Therefore she called
his name Judah. And she left off bearing.

<span id="an_30:1">30:1</span> And when Rachel saw that she bare Jacob
no children, Rachel envied her sister; and she said unto Jacob, Give me
children, or else I die.

<span id="an_30:2">30:2</span> And Jacob's anger was kindled against
Rachel: and he said, Am I in God's stead, who hath withheld from thee
the fruit of the womb?

<span id="an_30:3">30:3</span> And she said, Behold, my maid Bilhah, go
in unto her; that she may bear upon my knees, and I also may obtain
children by her.

<span id="an_30:4">30:4</span> And she gave him Bilhah her handmaid to
wife: and Jacob went in unto her.

<span id="an_30:5">30:5</span> And Bilhah conceived, and bare Jacob a
son.

<span id="an_30:6">30:6</span> And Rachel said, God hath judged me, and
hath also heard my voice, and hath given me a son: therefore called she
his name Dan.

<span id="an_30:7">30:7</span> And Bilhah Rachel's handmaid conceived
again, and bare Jacob a second son.

<span id="an_30:8">30:8</span> And Rachel said, With mighty wrestlings
have I wrestled with my sister, and have prevailed: and she called his
name Naphtali.

<span id="an_30:9">30:9</span> When Leah saw that she had left off
bearing, she took Zilpah her handmaid, and gave her to Jacob to wife.

<span id="an_30:10">30:10</span> And Zilpah Leah's handmaid bare Jacob a
son.

<span id="an_30:11">30:11</span> And Leah said, Fortunate! and she
called his name Gad.

<span id="an_30:12">30:12</span> And Zilpah Leah's handmaid bare Jacob a
second son.

<span id="an_30:13">30:13</span> And Leah said, Happy am I! for the
daughters will call me happy: and she called his name Asher.

<span id="an_30:14">30:14</span> And Reuben went in the days of wheat
harvest, and found mandrakes in the field, and brought them unto his
mother Leah. Then Rachel said to Leah, Give me, I pray thee, of thy
son's mandrakes.

<span id="an_30:15">30:15</span> And she said unto her, Is it a small
matter that thou hast taken away my husband? and wouldest thou take away
my son's mandrakes also? And Rachel said, Therefore he shall lie with
thee to-night for thy son's mandrakes.

<span id="an_30:16">30:16</span> And Jacob came from the field in the
evening, and Leah went out to meet him, and said, Thou must come in unto
me; for I have surely hired thee with my son's mandrakes. And he lay
with her that night.

<span id="an_30:17">30:17</span> And God hearkened unto Leah, and she
conceived, and bare Jacob a fifth son.

<span id="an_30:18">30:18</span> And Leah said, God hath given me my
hire, because I gave my handmaid to my husband: and she called his name
Issachar.

<span id="an_30:19">30:19</span> And Leah conceived again, and bare a
sixth son to Jacob.

<span id="an_30:20">30:20</span> And Leah said, God hath endowed me with
a good dowry; now will my husband dwell with me, because I have borne
him six sons: and she called his name Zebulun.

<span id="an_30:21">30:21</span> And afterwards she bare a daughter, and
called her name Dinah.

<span id="an_30:22">30:22</span> And God remembered Rachel, and God
hearkened to her, and opened her womb.

<span id="an_30:23">30:23</span> And she conceived, and bare a son: and
said, God hath taken away my reproach:

<span id="an_30:24">30:24</span> and she called his name Joseph, saying,
Jehovah add to me another son.

<span id="an_30:25">30:25</span> And it came to pass, when Rachel had
borne Joseph, that Jacob said unto Laban, Send me away, that I may go
unto mine own place, and to my country.

<span id="an_30:26">30:26</span> Give me my wives and my children for
whom I have served thee, and let me go: for thou knowest my service
wherewith I have served thee.

<span id="an_30:27">30:27</span> And Laban said unto him, If now I have
found favor in thine eyes, \[tarry\]: \[for\] I have divined that
Jehovah hath blessed me for thy sake.

<span id="an_30:28">30:28</span> And he said, Appoint me thy wages, and
I will give it.

<span id="an_30:29">30:29</span> And he said unto him, Thou knowest how
I have served thee, and how thy cattle have fared with me.

<span id="an_30:30">30:30</span> For it was little which thou hadst
before I came, and it hath increased unto a multitude; and Jehovah hath
blessed thee whithersoever I turned: and now when shall I provide for
mine own house also?

<span id="an_30:31">30:31</span> And he said, What shall I give thee?
And Jacob said, Thou shalt not give me aught: if thou wilt do this thing
for me, I will again feed thy flock and keep it.

<span id="an_30:32">30:32</span> I will pass through all thy flock
to-day, removing from thence every speckled and spotted one, and every
black one among the sheep, and the spotted and speckled among the goats:
and \[of such\] shall be my hire.

<span id="an_30:33">30:33</span> So shall my righteousness answer for me
hereafter, when thou shalt come concerning my hire that is before thee:
every one that is not speckled and spotted among the goats, and black
among the sheep, that \[if found\] with me, shall be counted stolen.

<span id="an_30:34">30:34</span> And Laban said, Behold, I would it
might be according to thy word.

<span id="an_30:35">30:35</span> And he removed that day the he-goats
that were ringstreaked and spotted, and all the she-goats that were
speckled and spotted, every one that had white in it, and all the black
ones among the sheep, and gave them into the hand of his sons;

<span id="an_30:36">30:36</span> and he set three days' journey betwixt
himself and Jacob: and Jacob fed the rest of Laban's flocks.

<span id="an_30:37">30:37</span> And Jacob took him rods of fresh
poplar, and of the almond and of the plane-tree. And peeled white
streaks in them, and made the white appear which was in the rods.

<span id="an_30:38">30:38</span> And he set the rods which he had peeled
over against the flocks in the gutters in the watering-troughs where the
flocks came to drink; and they conceived when they came to drink.

<span id="an_30:39">30:39</span> And the flocks conceived before the
rods, and the flocks brought forth ringstreaked, speckled, and spotted.

<span id="an_30:40">30:40</span> And Jacob separated the lambs, and set
the faces of the flocks toward the ringstreaked and all the black in the
flock of Laban: and he put his own droves apart, and put them not unto
Laban's flock.

<span id="an_30:41">30:41</span> And it came to pass, whensoever the
stronger of the flock did conceive, that Jacob laid the rods before the
eyes of the flock in the gutters, that they might conceive among the
rods;

<span id="an_30:42">30:42</span> but when the flock were feeble, he put
them not in: so the feebler were Laban's, and the stronger Jacob's.

<span id="an_30:43">30:43</span> And the man increased exceedingly, and
had large flocks, and maid-servants and men-servants, and camels and
asses.

<span id="an_31:1">31:1</span> And he heard the words of Laban's sons,
saying, Jacob hath taken away all that was our father's; and of that
which was our father's hath he gotten all this glory.

<span id="an_31:2">31:2</span> And Jacob beheld the countenance of
Laban, and, behold, it was not toward him as beforetime.

<span id="an_31:3">31:3</span> And Jehovah said unto Jacob, Return unto
the land of thy fathers, and to thy kindred; and I will be with thee.

<span id="an_31:4">31:4</span> And Jacob sent and called Rachel and Leah
to the field unto his flock,

<span id="an_31:5">31:5</span> and said unto them, I see your father's
countenance, that it is not toward me as beforetime; but the God of my
father hath been with me.

<span id="an_31:6">31:6</span> And ye know that will all my power I have
served your father.

<span id="an_31:7">31:7</span> And your father hath deceived me, and
changed my wages ten times; but God suffered him not to hurt me.

<span id="an_31:8">31:8</span> If he said thus, The speckled shall be
thy wages; then all the flock bare speckled: and if he said thus, The
ringstreaked shall be thy wages; then bare all the flock ringstreaked.

<span id="an_31:9">31:9</span> Thus God hath taken away the cattle of
your father, and given them to me.

<span id="an_31:10">31:10</span> And it came to pass at the time that
the flock conceive, that I lifted up mine eyes, and saw in a dream, and,
behold, the he-goats which leaped upon the flock were ringstreaked,
speckled, and grizzled.

<span id="an_31:11">31:11</span> And the angel of God said unto me in
the dream, Jacob: and I said, Here am I.

<span id="an_31:12">31:12</span> And he said, Lift up now thine eyes,
and see, all the he-goats which leap upon the flock are ringstreaked,
speckled, and grizzled: for I have seen all that Laban doeth unto thee.

<span id="an_31:13">31:13</span> I am the God of Beth-el, where thou
anointedst a pillar, where thou vowedst a vow unto me: now arise, get
thee out from this land, and return unto the land of thy nativity.

<span id="an_31:14">31:14</span> And Rachel and Leah answered and said
unto him, Is there yet any portion or inheritance for us in our father's
house?

<span id="an_31:15">31:15</span> Are we not accounted by him as
foreigners? for he hath sold us, and hath also quite devoured our money.

<span id="an_31:16">31:16</span> For all the riches which God hath taken
away from our father, that is ours and our children's: now then,
whatsoever God hath said unto thee, do.

<span id="an_31:17">31:17</span> Then Jacob rose up, and set his sons
and his wives upon the camels;

<span id="an_31:18">31:18</span> and he carried away all his cattle, and
all his substance which he had gathered, the cattle of his getting,
which he had gathered in Paddan-aram, to go to Isaac his father unto the
land of Canaan.

<span id="an_31:19">31:19</span> Now Laban was gone to shear his sheep:
and Rachel stole the teraphim that were her father's.

<span id="an_31:20">31:20</span> And Jacob stole away unawares to Laban
the Syrian, in that he told him not that he fled.

<span id="an_31:21">31:21</span> So he fled with all that he had; and he
rose up, and passed over the River, and set his face toward the mountain
of Gilead.

<span id="an_31:22">31:22</span> And it was told Laban on the third day
that Jacob was fled.

<span id="an_31:23">31:23</span> And he took his brethren with him, and
pursued after him seven days' journey; and he overtook him in the
mountain of Gilead.

<span id="an_31:24">31:24</span> And God came to Laban the Syrian in a
dream of the night, and said unto him, Take heed to thyself that thou
speak not to Jacob either good or bad.

<span id="an_31:25">31:25</span> And Laban came up with Jacob. Now Jacob
had pitched his tent in the mountain: and Laban with his brethren
encamped in the mountain of Gilead.

<span id="an_31:26">31:26</span> And Laban said to Jacob, What hast thou
done, that thou hast stolen away unawares to me, and carried away my
daughters as captives of the sword?

<span id="an_31:27">31:27</span> Wherefore didst thou flee secretly, and
steal away from me, and didst not tell me, that I might have sent thee
away with mirth and with songs, with tabret and with harp;

<span id="an_31:28">31:28</span> and didst not suffer me to kiss my sons
and my daughters? now hast thou done foolishly.

<span id="an_31:29">31:29</span> It is in the power of my hand to do you
hurt: but the God of your father spake unto me yesternight, saying, Take
heed to thyself that thou speak not to Jacob either good or bad.

<span id="an_31:30">31:30</span> And now, \[though\] thou wouldest needs
be gone, because thou sore longedst after thy father's house, \[yet\]
wherefore hast thou stolen my gods?

<span id="an_31:31">31:31</span> And Jacob answered and said to Laban,
Because I was afraid: for I said, Lest thou shouldest take thy daughters
from me by force.

<span id="an_31:32">31:32</span> With whomsoever thou findest thy gods,
he shall not live: before our brethren discern thou what is thine with
me, and take it to thee. For Jacob knew not that Rachel had stolen them.

<span id="an_31:33">31:33</span> And Laban went into Jacob's tent, and
into Leah's tent, and into the tent of the two maid-servants; but he
found them not. And he went out of Leah's tent, and entered into
Rachel's tent.

<span id="an_31:34">31:34</span> Now Rachel had taken the teraphim, and
put them in the camel's saddle, and sat upon them. And Laban felt about
all the tent, but found them not.

<span id="an_31:35">31:35</span> And she said to her father, Let not my
lord be angry that I cannot rise up before thee; for the manner of women
is upon me. And he searched, but found not the teraphim.

<span id="an_31:36">31:36</span> And Jacob was wroth, and chode with
Laban: and Jacob answered and said to Laban, What is my trespass? what
is my sin, that thou hast hotly pursued after me?

<span id="an_31:37">31:37</span> Whereas thou hast felt about all my
stuff, what hast thou found of all thy household stuff? Set it here
before my brethren and thy brethren, that they may judge betwixt us two.

<span id="an_31:38">31:38</span> These twenty years have I been with
thee; thy ewes and thy she-goats have not cast their young, and the rams
of thy flocks have I not eaten.

<span id="an_31:39">31:39</span> That which was torn of beasts I brought
not unto thee; I bare the loss of it; of my hand didst thou require it,
whether stolen by day or stolen by night.

<span id="an_31:40">31:40</span> Thus I was; in the day the drought
consumed me, and the frost by night; and my sleep fled from mine eyes.

<span id="an_31:41">31:41</span> These twenty years have I been in thy
house; I served thee fourteen years for thy two daughters, and six years
for thy flock: and thou hast changed my wages ten times.

<span id="an_31:42">31:42</span> Except the God of my father, the God of
Abraham, and the Fear of Isaac, had been with me, surely now hadst thou
sent me away empty. God hath seen mine affliction and the labor of my
hands, and rebuked thee yesternight.

<span id="an_31:43">31:43</span> And Laban answered and said unto Jacob,
The daughters are my daughters, and the children are my children, and
the flocks are my flocks, and all that thou seest is mine: and what can
I do this day unto these my daughters, or unto their children whom they
have borne?

<span id="an_31:44">31:44</span> And now come, let us make a covenant, I
and thou; and let it be for a witness between me and thee.

<span id="an_31:45">31:45</span> And Jacob took a stone, and set it up
for a pillar.

<span id="an_31:46">31:46</span> And Jacob said unto his brethren,
Gather stones; and they took stones, and made a heap: and they did eat
there by the heap.

<span id="an_31:47">31:47</span> And Laban called it Jegar-saha-dutha:
but Jacob called it Galeed.

<span id="an_31:48">31:48</span> And Laban said, This heap is witness
between me and thee this day. Therefore was the name of it called
Galeed:

<span id="an_31:49">31:49</span> and Mizpah, for he said, Jehovah watch
between me and thee, when we are absent one from another.

<span id="an_31:50">31:50</span> If thou shalt afflict my daughters, and
if thou shalt take wives besides my daughters, no man is with us; see,
God is witness betwixt me and thee.

<span id="an_31:51">31:51</span> And Laban said to Jacob, Behold this
heap, and behold the pillar, which I have set betwixt me and thee.

<span id="an_31:52">31:52</span> This heap be witness, and the pillar be
witness, that I will not pass over this heap to thee, and that thou
shalt not pass over this heap and this pillar unto me, for harm.

<span id="an_31:53">31:53</span> The God of Abraham, and the God of
Nahor, the God of their father, judge betwixt us. And Jacob sware by the
Fear of his father Isaac.

<span id="an_31:54">31:54</span> And Jacob offered a sacrifice in the
mountain, and called his brethren to eat bread: and they did eat bread,
and tarried all night in the mountain.

<span id="an_31:55">31:55</span> And early in the morning Laban rose up,
and kissed his sons and his daughters, and blessed them: and Laban
departed and returned unto his place.

<span id="an_32:1">32:1</span> And Jacob went on his way, and the angels
of God met him.

<span id="an_32:2">32:2</span> And Jacob said when he saw them, This is
God's host: and he called the name of that place Mahanaim.

<span id="an_32:3">32:3</span> And Jacob sent messengers before him to
Esau his brother unto the land of Seir, the field of Edom.

<span id="an_32:4">32:4</span> And he commanded them, saying, Thus shall
ye say unto my lord Esau: Thus saith thy servant Jacob, I have sojourned
with Laban, and stayed until now:

<span id="an_32:5">32:5</span> and I have oxen, and asses, \[and\]
flocks, and men-servants, and maid-servants: and I have sent to tell my
lord, that I may find favor in thy sight.

<span id="an_32:6">32:6</span> And the messengers returned to Jacob,
saying, We came to thy brother Esau, and moreover he cometh to meet
thee, and four hundred men with him.

<span id="an_32:7">32:7</span> Then Jacob was greatly afraid and was
distressed: and he divided the people that were with him, and the
flocks, and the herds, and the camels, into two companies;

<span id="an_32:8">32:8</span> and he said, If Esau come to the one
company, and smite it, then the company which is left shall escape.

<span id="an_32:9">32:9</span> And Jacob said, O God of my father
Abraham, and God of my father Isaac, O Jehovah, who saidst unto me,
Return unto thy country, and to thy kindred, and I will do thee good:

<span id="an_32:10">32:10</span> I am not worthy of the least of all the
lovingkindnesses, and of all the truth, which thou hast showed unto thy
servant; for with my staff I passed over this Jordan; and now I am
become two companies.

<span id="an_32:11">32:11</span> Deliver me, I pray thee, from the hand
of my brother, from the hand of Esau: for I fear him, lest he come and
smite me, the mother with the children.

<span id="an_32:12">32:12</span> And thou saidst, I will surely do thee
good, and make thy seed as the sand of the sea, which cannot be numbered
for multitude.

<span id="an_32:13">32:13</span> And he lodged there that night, and
took of that which he had with him a present for Esau his brother:

<span id="an_32:14">32:14</span> two hundred she-goats and twenty
he-goats, two hundred ewes and twenty rams,

<span id="an_32:15">32:15</span> thirty milch camels and their colts,
forty cows and ten bulls, twenty she-asses and ten foals.

<span id="an_32:16">32:16</span> And he delivered them into the hand of
his servants, every drove by itself, and said unto his servants, Pass
over before me, and put a space betwixt drove and drove.

<span id="an_32:17">32:17</span> And he commanded the foremost, saying,
When Esau my brother meeteth thee, and asketh thee, saying, Whose art
thou? and whither goest thou? and whose are these before thee?

<span id="an_32:18">32:18</span> then thou shalt say \[They are\] thy
servant Jacob's; it is a present sent unto my lord Esau: and, behold, he
also is behind us.

<span id="an_32:19">32:19</span> And he commanded also the second, and
the third, and all that followed the droves, saying, On this manner
shall ye speak unto Esau, when ye find him;

<span id="an_32:20">32:20</span> and ye shall say, Moreover, behold, thy
servant Jacob is behind us. For he said, I will appease him with the
present that goeth before me, and afterward I will see his face;
peradventure he will accept me.

<span id="an_32:21">32:21</span> So the present passed over before him:
and he himself lodged that night in the company.

<span id="an_32:22">32:22</span> And he rose up that night, and took his
two wives, and his two handmaids, and his eleven children, and passed
over the ford of the Jabbok.

<span id="an_32:23">32:23</span> And he took them, and sent them over
the stream, and sent over that which he had.

<span id="an_32:24">32:24</span> And Jacob was left alone; and there
wrestled a man with him until the breaking of the day.

<span id="an_32:25">32:25</span> And when he saw that he prevailed not
against him, he touched the hollow of his thigh; and the hollow of
Jacob's thigh was strained, as he wrestled with him.

<span id="an_32:26">32:26</span> And he said, Let me go, for the day
breaketh. And he said, I will not let thee go, except thou bless me.

<span id="an_32:27">32:27</span> And he said unto him, What is thy name?
And he said, Jacob.

<span id="an_32:28">32:28</span> And he said, Thy name shall be called
no more Jacob, but Israel: for thou hast striven with God and with men,
and hast prevailed.

<span id="an_32:29">32:29</span> And Jacob asked him, and said, Tell me,
I pray thee, thy name. And he said, Wherefore is it that thou dost ask
after my name? And he blessed him there.

<span id="an_32:30">32:30</span> And Jacob called the name of the place
Peniel: for, \[said he\], I have seen God face to face, and my life is
preserved.

<span id="an_32:31">32:31</span> And the sun rose upon him as he passed
over Penuel, and he limped upon his thigh.

<span id="an_32:32">32:32</span> Therefore the children of Israel eat
not the sinew of the hip which is upon the hollow of the thigh, unto
this day: because he touched the hollow of Jacob's thigh in the sinew of
the hip.

<span id="an_33:1">33:1</span> And Jacob lifted up his eyes, and looked,
and, behold, Esau was coming, and with him four hundred men. And he
divided the children unto Leah, and unto Rachel, and unto the two
handmaids.

<span id="an_33:2">33:2</span> And he put the handmaids and their
children foremost, and Leah and her children after, and Rachel and
Joseph hindermost.

<span id="an_33:3">33:3</span> And he himself passed over before them,
and bowed himself to the ground seven times, until he came near to his
brother.

<span id="an_33:4">33:4</span> And Esau ran to meet him, and embraced
him, and fell on his neck, and kissed him: and they wept.

<span id="an_33:5">33:5</span> And he lifted up his eyes, and saw the
women and the children; and said, Who are these with thee? And he said,
The children whom God hath graciously given thy servant.

<span id="an_33:6">33:6</span> Then the handmaids came near, they and
their children, and they bowed themselves.

<span id="an_33:7">33:7</span> And Leah also and her children came near,
and bowed themselves: and after came Joseph near and Rachel, and they
bowed themselves.

<span id="an_33:8">33:8</span> And he said, What meanest thou by all
this company which I met? And he said, To find favor in the sight of my
lord.

<span id="an_33:9">33:9</span> And Esau said, I have enough, my brother;
let that which thou hast be thine.

<span id="an_33:10">33:10</span> And Jacob said, Nay, I pray thee, if
now I have found favor in thy sight, then receive my present at my hand;
forasmuch as I have seen thy face, as one seeth the face of God, and
thou wast pleased with me.

<span id="an_33:11">33:11</span> Take, I pray thee, my gift that is
brought to thee; because God hath dealt graciously with me, and because
I have enough. And he urged him, and he took it.

<span id="an_33:12">33:12</span> And he said, Let us take our journey,
and let us go, and I will go before thee.

<span id="an_33:13">33:13</span> And he said unto him, My lord knoweth
that the children are tender, and that the flocks and herds with me have
their young: and if they overdrive them one day, all the flocks will
die.

<span id="an_33:14">33:14</span> Let my lord, I pray thee, pass over
before his servant: and I will lead on gently, according to the pace of
the cattle that are before me and according to the pace of the children,
until I come unto my lord unto Seir.

<span id="an_33:15">33:15</span> And Esau said, Let me now leave with
thee some of the folk that are with me. And he said, What needeth it?
let me find favor in the sight of my lord.

<span id="an_33:16">33:16</span> So Esau returned that day on his way
unto Seir.

<span id="an_33:17">33:17</span> And Jacob journeyed to Succoth, and
built him a house, and made booths for his cattle: therefore the name of
the place is called Succoth.

<span id="an_33:18">33:18</span> And Jacob came in peace to the city of
Shechem, which is in the land of Canaan, when he came from Paddan-aram;
and encamped before the city.

<span id="an_33:19">33:19</span> And he bought the parcel of ground,
where he had spread his tent, at the hand of the children of Hamor,
Shechem's father, for a hundred pieces of money.

<span id="an_33:20">33:20</span> And he erected there an altar, and
called it El-elohe-israel.

<span id="an_34:1">34:1</span> And Dinah the daughter of Leah, whom she
bare unto Jacob, went out to see the daughters of the land.

<span id="an_34:2">34:2</span> And Shechem the son of Hamor the Hivite,
the prince of the land, saw her; And he took her, and lay with her, and
humbled her.

<span id="an_34:3">34:3</span> And his soul clave unto Dinah the
daughter of Jacob, and he loved the damsel, and spake kindly unto the
damsel.

<span id="an_34:4">34:4</span> And Shechem spake unto his father Hamor,
saying, Get me this damsel to wife.

<span id="an_34:5">34:5</span> Now Jacob heard that he had defiled Dinah
his daughter; and his sons were with his cattle in the field: and Jacob
held his peace until they came.

<span id="an_34:6">34:6</span> And Hamor the father of Shechem went out
unto Jacob to commune with him.

<span id="an_34:7">34:7</span> And the sons of Jacob came in from the
field when they heard it: and the men were grieved, and they were very
wroth, because he had wrought folly in Israel in lying with Jacob's
daughter; which thing ought not to be done.

<span id="an_34:8">34:8</span> And Hamor communed with them, saying, The
soul of my son Shechem longeth for your daughter: I pray you, give her
unto him to wife.

<span id="an_34:9">34:9</span> And make ye marriages with us; give your
daughters unto us, and take our daughters unto you.

<span id="an_34:10">34:10</span> And ye shall dwell with us: and the
land shall be before you; dwell and trade ye therein, and get you
possessions therein.

<span id="an_34:11">34:11</span> And Shechem said unto her father and
unto her brethren, Let me find favor in your eyes, and what ye shall say
unto me I will give.

<span id="an_34:12">34:12</span> Ask me never so much dowry and gift,
and I will give according as ye shall say unto me: but give me the
damsel to wife.

<span id="an_34:13">34:13</span> And the sons of Jacob answered Shechem
and Hamor his father with guile, and spake, because he had defiled Dinah
their sister,

<span id="an_34:14">34:14</span> and said unto them, We cannot do this
thing, to give our sister to one that is uncircumcised; for that were a
reproach unto us.

<span id="an_34:15">34:15</span> Only on this condition will we consent
unto you: if ye will be as we are, that every male of you be
circumcised;

<span id="an_34:16">34:16</span> then will we give our daughters unto
you, and we will take your daughters to us, and we will dwell with you,
and we will become one people.

<span id="an_34:17">34:17</span> But if ye will not hearken unto us, to
be circumcised; then will we take our daughter, and we will be gone.

<span id="an_34:18">34:18</span> And their words pleased Hamor, and
Shechem Hamor's son.

<span id="an_34:19">34:19</span> And the young man deferred not to do
the thing, because he had delight in Jacob's daughter: and he was
honored above all the house of his father.

<span id="an_34:20">34:20</span> And Hamor and Shechem his son came unto
the gate of their city, and communed with the men of their city, saying,

<span id="an_34:21">34:21</span> These men are peaceable with us;
therefore let them dwell in the land, and trade therein; for, behold,
the land is large enough for them; let us take their daughters to us for
wives, and let us give them our daughters.

<span id="an_34:22">34:22</span> Only on this condition will the men
consent unto us to dwell with us, to become one people, if every male
among us be circumcised, as they are circumcised.

<span id="an_34:23">34:23</span> Shall not their cattle and their
substance and all their beasts be ours? only let us consent unto them,
and they will dwell with us.

<span id="an_34:24">34:24</span> And unto Hamor and unto Shechem his son
hearkened all that went out of the gate of his city; and every male was
circumcised, all that went out of the gate of his city.

<span id="an_34:25">34:25</span> And it came to pass on the third day,
when they were sore, that two of the sons of Jacob, Simeon and Levi,
Dinah's brethren, took each man his sword, and came upon the city
unawares, and slew all the males.

<span id="an_34:26">34:26</span> And they slew Hamor and Shechem his son
with the edge of the sword, and took Dinah out of Shechem's house, and
went forth.

<span id="an_34:27">34:27</span> The sons of Jacob came upon the slain,
and plundered the city, because they had defiled their sister.

<span id="an_34:28">34:28</span> They took their flocks and their herds
and their asses, and that which was in the city, and that which was in
the field;

<span id="an_34:29">34:29</span> and all their wealth, and all their
little ones and their wives, took they captive and made a prey, even all
that was in the house.

<span id="an_34:30">34:30</span> And Jacob said to Simeon and Levi, Ye
have troubled me, to make me odious to the inhabitants of the land,
among the Canaanites and the Perizzites: and, I being few in number,
they will gather themselves together against me and smite me; and I
shall be destroyed, I and my house.

<span id="an_34:31">34:31</span> And they said, Should he deal with our
sister as with a harlot?

<span id="an_35:1">35:1</span> And God said unto Jacob, Arise, go up to
Beth-el, and dwell there: and make there an altar unto God, who appeared
unto thee when thou fleddest from the face of Esau thy brother.

<span id="an_35:2">35:2</span> Then Jacob said unto his household, and
to all that were with him, Put away the foreign gods that are among you,
and purify yourselves, and change your garments:

<span id="an_35:3">35:3</span> and let us arise, and go up to Beth-el;
and I will make there an altar unto God, who answered me in the day of
my distress, and was with me in the way which I went.

<span id="an_35:4">35:4</span> And they gave unto Jacob all the foreign
gods which were in their hand, and the rings which were in their ears;
and Jacob hid them under the oak which was by Shechem.

<span id="an_35:5">35:5</span> And they journeyed: and a terror of God
was upon the cities that were round about them, and they did not pursue
after the sons of Jacob.

<span id="an_35:6">35:6</span> So Jacob came to Luz, which is in the
land of Canaan (the same is Beth-el), he and all the people that were
with him.

<span id="an_35:7">35:7</span> And he built there an altar, and called
the place El-beth-el; because there God was revealed unto him, when he
fled from the face of his brother.

<span id="an_35:8">35:8</span> And Deborah Rebekah's nurse died, and she
was buried below Beth-el under the oak: and the name of it was called
Allon-bacuth.

<span id="an_35:9">35:9</span> And God appeared unto Jacob again, when
he came from Paddan-aram, and blessed him.

<span id="an_35:10">35:10</span> And God said unto him, Thy name is
Jacob: thy name shall not be called any more Jacob, but Israel shall be
thy name: and he called his name Israel.

<span id="an_35:11">35:11</span> And God said unto him, I am God
Almighty: be fruitful and multiply; a nation and a company of nations
shall be of thee, and kings shall come out of thy loins;

<span id="an_35:12">35:12</span> and the land which I gave unto Abraham
and Isaac, to thee I will give it, and to thy seed after thee will I
give the land.

<span id="an_35:13">35:13</span> And God went up from him in the place
where he spake with him.

<span id="an_35:14">35:14</span> And Jacob set up a pillar in the place
where he spake with him, a pillar of stone: and he poured out a
drink-offering thereon, and poured oil thereon.

<span id="an_35:15">35:15</span> And Jacob called the name of the place
where God spake with him, Beth-el.

<span id="an_35:16">35:16</span> And they journeyed from Beth-el; and
there was still some distance to come to Ephrath: and Rachel travailed,
and she had hard labor.

<span id="an_35:17">35:17</span> And it came to pass, when she was in
hard labor, that the midwife said unto her, Fear not; for now thou shalt
have another son.

<span id="an_35:18">35:18</span> And it came to pass, as her soul was
departing (for she died), that she called his name Ben-oni: but his
father called him Benjamin.

<span id="an_35:19">35:19</span> And Rachel died, and was buried in the
way to Ephrath (the same is Beth-lehem).

<span id="an_35:20">35:20</span> And Jacob set up a pillar upon her
grave: the same is the Pillar of Rachel's grave unto this day.

<span id="an_35:21">35:21</span> And Israel journeyed, and spread his
tent beyond the tower of Eder.

<span id="an_35:22">35:22</span> And it came to pass, while Israel dwelt
in that land, that Reuben went and lay with Bilhah his father's
concubine: and Israel heard of it. Now the sons of Jacob were twelve:

<span id="an_35:23">35:23</span> The sons of Leah: Reuben, Jacob's
first-born, and Simeon, and Levi, and Judah, and Issachar, and Zebulun;

<span id="an_35:24">35:24</span> the sons of Rachel: Joseph and
Benjamin;

<span id="an_35:25">35:25</span> and the sons of Bilhah, Rachel's
handmaid: Dan and Naphtali;

<span id="an_35:26">35:26</span> and the sons of Zilpah, Leah's
handmaid: Gad and Asher: these are the sons of Jacob, that were born to
him in Paddan-aram.

<span id="an_35:27">35:27</span> And Jacob came unto Isaac his father to
Mamre, to Kiriath-arba (the same is Hebron), where Abraham and Isaac
sojourned.

<span id="an_35:28">35:28</span> And the days of Isaac were a hundred
and fourscore years.

<span id="an_35:29">35:29</span> And Isaac gave up the ghost, and died,
and was gathered unto his people, old and full of days: and Esau and
Jacob his sons buried him.

<span id="an_36:1">36:1</span> Now these are the generations of Esau
(the same is Edom).

<span id="an_36:2">36:2</span> Esau took his wives of the daughters of
Canaan: Adah the daughter of Elon the Hittite, and Oholibamah the
daughter of Anah, the daughter of Zibeon the Hivite,

<span id="an_36:3">36:3</span> and Basemath Ishmael's daughter, sister
of Nebaioth.

<span id="an_36:4">36:4</span> And Adah bare to Esau Eliphaz; and
Basemath bare Reuel;

<span id="an_36:5">36:5</span> and Oholibamah bare Jeush, and Jalam, and
Korah: these are the sons of Esau, that were born unto him in the land
of Canaan.

<span id="an_36:6">36:6</span> And Esau took his wives, and his sons,
and his daughters, and all the souls of his house, and his cattle, and
all his beasts, and all his possessions, which he had gather in the land
of Canaan; and went into a land away from his brother Jacob.

<span id="an_36:7">36:7</span> For their substance was too great for
them to dwell together; and the land of their sojournings could not bear
them because of their cattle.

<span id="an_36:8">36:8</span> And Esau dwelt in mount Seir: Esau is
Edom.

<span id="an_36:9">36:9</span> And these are the generations of Esau the
father of the Edomites in mount Seir:

<span id="an_36:10">36:10</span> these are the names of Esau's sons:
Eliphaz the son of Adah the wife of Esau, Reuel the son of Basemath the
wife of Esau.

<span id="an_36:11">36:11</span> And the sons of Eliphaz were Teman,
Omar, Zepho, and Gatam, and Kenaz.

<span id="an_36:12">36:12</span> And Timna was concubine to Eliphaz
Esau's son; and she bare to Eliphaz Amalek: these are the sons of Adah,
Esau's wife.

<span id="an_36:13">36:13</span> And these are the sons of Reuel:
Nahath, and Zerah, Shammah, and Mizzah: these were the sons of Basemath,
Esau's wife.

<span id="an_36:14">36:14</span> And these were the sons of Oholibamah
the daughter of Anah, the daughter of Zibeon, Esau's wife: and she bare
to Esau Jeush, and Jalam, and Korah.

<span id="an_36:15">36:15</span> These are the chiefs of the sons of
Esau: the sons of Eliphaz the first-born of Esau: chief Teman, chief
Omar, chief Zepho, chief Kenaz,

<span id="an_36:16">36:16</span> chief Korah, chief Gatam, chief Amalek:
these are the chiefs that came of Eliphaz in the land of Edom; these are
the sons of Adah.

<span id="an_36:17">36:17</span> And these are the sons of Reuel, Esau's
son: chief Nahath, chief Zerah, chief Shammah, chief Mizzah: these are
the chiefs that came of Reuel in the land of Edom; these are the sons of
Basemath, Esau's wife.

<span id="an_36:18">36:18</span> And these are the sons of Oholibamah,
Esau's wife: chief Jeush, chief Jalam, chief Korah: these are the chiefs
that came of Oholibamah the daughter of Anah, Esau's wife.

<span id="an_36:19">36:19</span> These are the sons of Esau, and these
are their chiefs: the same is Edom.

<span id="an_36:20">36:20</span> These are the sons of Seir the Horite,
the inhabitants of the land: Lotan and Shobal and Zibeon and Anah,

<span id="an_36:21">36:21</span> and Dishon and Ezer and Dishan: these
are the chiefs that came of the Horites, the children of Seir in the
land of Edom.

<span id="an_36:22">36:22</span> And the children of Lotan were Hori and
Heman. And Lotan's sister was Timna.

<span id="an_36:23">36:23</span> And these are the children of Shobal:
Alvan and Manahath and Ebal, Shepho and Onam.

<span id="an_36:24">36:24</span> And these are the children of Zibeon:
Aiah and Anah; this is Anah who found the hot springs in the wilderness,
as he fed the asses of Zibeon his father.

<span id="an_36:25">36:25</span> And these are the children of Anah:
Dishon and Oholibamah the daughter of Anah.

<span id="an_36:26">36:26</span> And these are the children of Dishon:
Hemdan and Eshban and Ithran and Cheran.

<span id="an_36:27">36:27</span> These are the children of Ezer: Bilhan
and Zaavan and Akan.

<span id="an_36:28">36:28</span> These are the children of Dishan: Uz
and Aran.

<span id="an_36:29">36:29</span> These are the chiefs that came of the
Horites: chief Lotan, chief Shobal, chief Zibeon, chief Anah,

<span id="an_36:30">36:30</span> chief Dishon, chief Ezer, chief Dishan:
these are the chiefs that came of the Horites, according to their chiefs
in the land of Seir.

<span id="an_36:31">36:31</span> And these are the kings that reigned in
the land of Edom, before there reigned any king over the children of
Israel.

<span id="an_36:32">36:32</span> And Bela the son of Beor reigned in
Edom; and the name of his city was Dinhabah.

<span id="an_36:33">36:33</span> And Bela died, and Jobab the son of
Zerah of Bozrah reigned in his stead.

<span id="an_36:34">36:34</span> And Jobab died, and Husham of the land
of the Temanites reigned in his stead.

<span id="an_36:35">36:35</span> And Husham died, and Hadad the son of
Bedad, who smote Midian in the field of Moab, reigned in his stead: and
the name of his city was Avith.

<span id="an_36:36">36:36</span> And Hadad died, and Samlah of Masrekah
reigned in his stead.

<span id="an_36:37">36:37</span> And Samlah died, and Shaul of Rehoboth
by the River reigned in his stead.

<span id="an_36:38">36:38</span> And Shaul died, and Baal-hanan the son
of Achbor reigned in his stead.

<span id="an_36:39">36:39</span> And Baal-hanan the son of Achbor died,
and Hadar reigned in his stead: and the name of his city was Pau; and
his wife's name was Mehetabel, the daughter of Matred, the daughter of
Me-zahab.

<span id="an_36:40">36:40</span> And these are the names of the chiefs
that came of Esau, according to their families, after their places, by
their names: chief Timna, chief Alvah, chief Jetheth,

<span id="an_36:41">36:41</span> chief Oholibamah, chief Elah, chief
Pinon,

<span id="an_36:42">36:42</span> chief Kenaz, chief Teman, chief Mibzar,

<span id="an_36:43">36:43</span> chief Magdiel, chief Iram: these are
the chiefs of Edom, according to their habitations in the land of their
possession. This is Esau, the father of the Edomites.

<span id="an_37:1">37:1</span> And Jacob dwelt in the land of his
father's sojournings, in the land of Canaan.

<span id="an_37:2">37:2</span> These are the generations of Jacob.
Joseph, being seventeen years old, was feeding the flock with his
brethren; and he was a lad with the sons of Bilhah, and with the sons of
Zilpah, his father's wives: and Joseph brought the evil report of them
unto their father.

<span id="an_37:3">37:3</span> Now Israel loved Joseph more than all his
children, because he was the son of his old age: and he made him a coat
of many colors.

<span id="an_37:4">37:4</span> And his brethren saw that their father
loved him more than all his brethren; and they hated him, and could not
speak peaceably unto him.

<span id="an_37:5">37:5</span> And Joseph dreamed a dream, and he told
it to his brethren: and they hated him yet the more.

<span id="an_37:6">37:6</span> And he said unto them, Hear, I pray you,
this dream which I have dreamed:

<span id="an_37:7">37:7</span> for, behold, we were binding sheaves in
the field, and, lo, my sheaf arose, and also stood upright; and, behold,
your sheaves came round about, and made obeisance to my sheaf.

<span id="an_37:8">37:8</span> And his brethren said to him, Shalt thou
indeed reign over us? Or shalt thou indeed have dominion over us? And
they hated him yet the more for his dreams, and for his words.

<span id="an_37:9">37:9</span> And he dreamed yet another dream, and
told it to his brethren, and said, Behold, I have dreamed yet a dream:
and, behold, the sun and the moon and eleven stars made obeisance to me.

<span id="an_37:10">37:10</span> And he told it to his father, and to
his brethren; and his father rebuked him, and said unto him, What is
this dream that thou hast dreamed? Shall I and thy mother and thy
brethren indeed come to bow down ourselves to thee to the earth?

<span id="an_37:11">37:11</span> And his brethren envied him; but his
father kept the saying in mind.

<span id="an_37:12">37:12</span> And his brethren went to feed their
father's flock in Shechem.

<span id="an_37:13">37:13</span> And Israel said unto Joseph, Are not
thy brethren feeding the flock in Shechem? Come, and I will send thee
unto them. And he said to him, Here am I.

<span id="an_37:14">37:14</span> And he said to him, Go now, see whether
it is well with thy brethren, and well with the flock; and bring me word
again. So he sent him out of the vale of Hebron, and he came to Shechem.

<span id="an_37:15">37:15</span> And a certain man found him, and,
behold, he was wandering in the field: and the man asked him, saying,
What seekest thou?

<span id="an_37:16">37:16</span> And he said, I am seeking my brethren:
tell me, I pray thee, where they are feeding \[the flock\].

<span id="an_37:17">37:17</span> And the man said, They are departed
hence; for I heard them say, Let us go to Dothan. And Joseph went after
his brethren, and found them in Dothan.

<span id="an_37:18">37:18</span> And they saw him afar off, and before
he came near unto them, they conspired against him to slay him.

<span id="an_37:19">37:19</span> And they said one to another, Behold,
this dreamer cometh.

<span id="an_37:20">37:20</span> Come now therefore, and let us slay
him, and cast him into one of the pits, and we will say, And evil beast
hath devoured him: and we shall see what will become of his dreams.

<span id="an_37:21">37:21</span> And Reuben heard it, and delivered him
out of their hand, and said, Let us not take his life.

<span id="an_37:22">37:22</span> And Reuben said unto them, Shed no
blood; cast him into this pit that is in the wilderness, but lay no hand
upon him: that he might deliver him out of their hand, to restore him to
his father.

<span id="an_37:23">37:23</span> And it came to pass, when Joseph was
come unto his brethren, that they stripped Joseph of his coat, the coat
of many colors that was on him;

<span id="an_37:24">37:24</span> and they took him, and cast him into
the pit: and the pit was empty, there was no water in it.

<span id="an_37:25">37:25</span> And they sat down to eat bread: and
they lifted up their eyes and looked, and, behold, a caravan of
Ishmaelites was coming from Gilead, with their camels bearing spicery
and balm and myrrh, going to carry it down to Egypt.

<span id="an_37:26">37:26</span> And Judah said unto his brethren, What
profit is it if we slay our brother and conceal his blood?

<span id="an_37:27">37:27</span> Come, and let us sell him to the
Ishmaelites, and let not our hand be upon him; for he is our brother,
our flesh. And his brethren hearkened unto him.

<span id="an_37:28">37:28</span> And there passed by Midianites,
merchantmen; and they drew and lifted up Joseph out of the pit, and sold
Joseph to the Ishmaelites for twenty pieces of silver. And they brought
Joseph into Egypt.

<span id="an_37:29">37:29</span> And Reuben returned unto the pit; and,
behold, Joseph was not in the pit; and he rent his clothes.

<span id="an_37:30">37:30</span> And he returned unto his brethren, and
said, The child is not; and I, whither shall I go?

<span id="an_37:31">37:31</span> And they took Joseph's coat, and killed
a he-goat, and dipped the coat in the blood;

<span id="an_37:32">37:32</span> and they sent the coat of many colors,
and they brought it to their father, and said, This have we found: know
now whether it is thy son's coat or not.

<span id="an_37:33">37:33</span> And he knew it, and said, It is my
son's coat: an evil beast hath devoured him; Joseph is without doubt
torn in pieces.

<span id="an_37:34">37:34</span> And Jacob rent his garments, and put
sackcloth upon his loins, and mourned for his son many days.

<span id="an_37:35">37:35</span> And all his sons and all his daughters
rose up to comfort him; but he refused to be comforted; and he said, For
I will go down to Sheol to my son mourning. And his father wept for him.

<span id="an_37:36">37:36</span> And the Midianites sold him into Egypt
unto Potiphar, an officer of Pharaoh's, the captain of the guard.

<span id="an_38:1">38:1</span> And it came to pass at that time, that
Judah went down from his brethren, and turned in to a certain
Adullamite, whose name was Hirah.

<span id="an_38:2">38:2</span> And Judah saw there a daughter of a
certain Canaanite whose name was Shua. And he took her, and went in unto
her.

<span id="an_38:3">38:3</span> And she conceived, and bare a son; and he
called his name Er.

<span id="an_38:4">38:4</span> And she conceived again, and bare a son;
and she called his name Onan.

<span id="an_38:5">38:5</span> And she yet again bare a son, and called
his name Shelah: and he was at Chezib, when she bare him.

<span id="an_38:6">38:6</span> And Judah took a wife for Er his
first-born, and her name was Tamar.

<span id="an_38:7">38:7</span> And Er, Judah's first-born, was wicked in
the sight of Jehovah. And Jehovah slew him.

<span id="an_38:8">38:8</span> And Judah said unto Onan, Go in unto thy
brother's wife, and perform the duty of a husband's brother unto her,
and raise up seed to thy brother.

<span id="an_38:9">38:9</span> And Onan knew that the seed would not be
his; and it came to pass, when he went in unto his brother's wife, that
he spilled it on the ground, lest he should give seed to his brother.

<span id="an_38:10">38:10</span> And the thing which he did was evil in
the sight of Jehovah: and he slew him also.

<span id="an_38:11">38:11</span> Then said Judah to Tamar his
daughter-in-law, Remain a widow in thy father's house, till Shelah my
son be grown up; for he said, Lest he also die, like his brethren. And
Tamar went and dwelt in her father's house.

<span id="an_38:12">38:12</span> And in process of time Shua's daughter,
the wife of Judah, died; and Judah was comforted, and went up unto his
sheep-shearers to Timnah, he and his friend Hirah the Adullamite.

<span id="an_38:13">38:13</span> And it was told Tamar, saying, Behold,
thy father-in-law goeth up to Timnah to shear his sheep.

<span id="an_38:14">38:14</span> And she put off from her the garments
of her widowhood, and covered herself with her veil, and wrapped
herself, and sat in the gate of Enaim, which is by the way to Timnah;
for she saw that Shelah was grown up, and she was not given unto him to
wife.

<span id="an_38:15">38:15</span> When Judah saw her, he thought her to
be a harlot; for she had covered her face.

<span id="an_38:16">38:16</span> And he turned unto her by the way, and
said, Come, I pray thee, let me come in unto thee: for he knew not that
she was his daughter-in-law. And she said, What wilt thou give me, that
thou mayest come in unto me?

<span id="an_38:17">38:17</span> And he said, I will send thee a kid of
the goats from the flock. And she said, Wilt thou give me a pledge, till
thou send it?

<span id="an_38:18">38:18</span> And he said, What pledge shall I give
thee? And she said, Thy signet and thy cord, and thy staff that is in
thy hand. And he gave them to her, and came in unto her, and she
conceived by him.

<span id="an_38:19">38:19</span> And she arose, and went away, and put
off her veil from her, and put on the garments of her widowhood.

<span id="an_38:20">38:20</span> And Judah sent the kid of the goats by
the hand of his friend the Adullamite, to receive the pledge from the
woman's hand: but he found her not.

<span id="an_38:21">38:21</span> Then he asked the men of her place,
saying, Where is the prostitute, that was at Enaim by the wayside? And
they said, There hath been no prostitute here.

<span id="an_38:22">38:22</span> And he returned to Judah, and said, I
have not found her; and also the men of the place said, There hath been
no prostitute here.

<span id="an_38:23">38:23</span> And Judah said, Let her take it to her,
lest we be put to shame: behold, I sent this kid, and thou hast not
found her.

<span id="an_38:24">38:24</span> And it came to pass about three months
after, that it was told Judah, saying, Tamar thy daughter-in-law hath
played the harlot; and moreover, behold, she is with child by whoredom.
And Judah said, Bring her forth, and let her be burnt.

<span id="an_38:25">38:25</span> When she was brought forth, she sent to
her father-in-law, saying, By the man, whose these are, am I with child:
and she said, Discern, I pray thee, whose are these, the signet, and the
cords, and the staff.

<span id="an_38:26">38:26</span> And Judah acknowledged them, and said,
She is more righteous than I; forasmuch as I gave her not to Shelah my
son. And he knew her again no more.

<span id="an_38:27">38:27</span> And it came to pass in the time of her
travail, that, behold, twins were in her womb.

<span id="an_38:28">38:28</span> And it came to pass, when she
travailed, that one put out a hand: and the midwife took and bound upon
his hand a scarlet thread, saying, This came out first.

<span id="an_38:29">38:29</span> And it came to pass, as he drew back
his hand, that, behold, his brother came out: and she said, Wherefore
hast thou made a breach for thyself? Therefore his name was called
Perez.

<span id="an_38:30">38:30</span> And afterward came out his brother,
that had the scarlet thread upon his hand: and his name was called
Zerah.

<span id="an_39:1">39:1</span> And Joseph was brought down to Egypt; and
Potiphar, an officer of Pharaoh's, the captain of the guard, an
Egyptian, bought him of the hand of the Ishmaelites, that had brought
him down thither.

<span id="an_39:2">39:2</span> And Jehovah was with Joseph, and he was a
prosperous man; and he was in the house of his master the Egyptian.

<span id="an_39:3">39:3</span> And his master saw that Jehovah was with
him, and that Jehovah made all that he did to prosper in his hand.

<span id="an_39:4">39:4</span> And Joseph found favor in his sight, and
he ministered unto him: and he made him overseer over his house, and all
that he had he put into his hand.

<span id="an_39:5">39:5</span> And it came to pass from the time that he
made him overseer in his house, and over all that he had, that Jehovah
blessed the Egyptian's house for Joseph's sake; and the blessing of
Jehovah was upon all that he had, in the house and in the field.

<span id="an_39:6">39:6</span> And he left all that he had in Joseph's
hand; and he knew not aught \[that was\] with him, save the bread which
he did eat. And Joseph was comely, and well-favored.

<span id="an_39:7">39:7</span> And it came to pass after these things,
that his master's wife cast her eyes upon Joseph; and she said, Lie with
me.

<span id="an_39:8">39:8</span> But he refused, and said unto his
master's wife, Behold, my master knoweth not what is with me in the
house, and he hath put all that he hath into my hand:

<span id="an_39:9">39:9</span> he is not greater in this house than I;
neither hath he kept back anything from me but thee, because thou art
his wife: how then can I do this great wickedness, and sin against God?

<span id="an_39:10">39:10</span> And it came to pass, as she spake to
Joseph day by day, that he hearkened not unto her, to lie by her, \[or\]
to be with her.

<span id="an_39:11">39:11</span> And it came to pass about this time,
that he went into the house to do his work; and there was none of the
men of the house there within.

<span id="an_39:12">39:12</span> And she caught him by his garment,
saying, Lie with me: and he left his garment in her hand, and fled, and
got him out.

<span id="an_39:13">39:13</span> And it came to pass, when she saw that
he had left his garment in her hand, and was fled forth,

<span id="an_39:14">39:14</span> that she called unto the men of her
house, and spake unto them, saying, See, he hath brought in a Hebrew
unto us to mock us: he came in unto me to lie with me, and I cried with
a loud voice:

<span id="an_39:15">39:15</span> and it came to pass, when he heard that
I lifted up my voice and cried, that he left his garment by me, and
fled, and got him out.

<span id="an_39:16">39:16</span> And she laid up his garment by her,
until his master came home.

<span id="an_39:17">39:17</span> And she spake unto him according to
these words, saying, The Hebrew servant, whom thou hast brought unto us,
came in unto me to mock me:

<span id="an_39:18">39:18</span> and it came to pass, as I lifted up my
voice and cried, that he left his garment by me, and fled out.

<span id="an_39:19">39:19</span> And it came to pass, when his master
heard the words of his wife, which she spake unto him, saying, After
this manner did thy servant to me; that his wrath was kindled.

<span id="an_39:20">39:20</span> And Joseph's master took him, and put
him into the prison, the place where the king's prisoners were bound:
and he was there in the prison.

<span id="an_39:21">39:21</span> But Jehovah was with Joseph, and showed
kindness unto him, and gave him favor in the sight of the keeper of the
prison.

<span id="an_39:22">39:22</span> And the keeper of the prison committed
to Joseph's hand all the prisoners that were in the prison; and
whatsoever they did there, he was the doer of it.

<span id="an_39:23">39:23</span> The keeper of the prison looked not to
anything that was under his hand, because Jehovah was with him; and that
which he did, Jehovah made it prosper.

<span id="an_40:1">40:1</span> And it came to pass after these things,
that the butler of the king of Egypt and his baker offended their lord
the king of Egypt.

<span id="an_40:2">40:2</span> And Pharaoh was wroth against his two
officers, against the chief of the butlers, and against the chief of the
bakers.

<span id="an_40:3">40:3</span> And he put them in ward in the house of
the captain of the guard, into the prison, the place where Joseph was
bound.

<span id="an_40:4">40:4</span> And the captain of the guard charged
Joseph with them, and he ministered unto them: and they continued a
season in ward.

<span id="an_40:5">40:5</span> And they dreamed a dream both of them,
each man his dream, in one night, each man according to the
interpretation of his dream, the butler and the baker of the king of
Egypt, who were bound in the prison.

<span id="an_40:6">40:6</span> And Joseph came in unto them in the
morning, and saw them, and, behold, they were sad.

<span id="an_40:7">40:7</span> And he asked Pharaoh's officers that were
with him in ward in his master's house, saying, Wherefore look ye so sad
to-day?

<span id="an_40:8">40:8</span> And they said unto him, We have dreamed a
dream, and there is none that can interpret it. And Joseph said unto
them, Do not interpretations belong to God? tell it me, I pray you.

<span id="an_40:9">40:9</span> And the chief butler told his dream to
Joseph, and said to him, In my dream, behold, a vine was before me;

<span id="an_40:10">40:10</span> and in the vine were three branches:
and it was as though it budded, \[and\] its blossoms shot forth; \[and\]
the clusters thereof brought forth ripe grapes:

<span id="an_40:11">40:11</span> and Pharaoh's cup was in my hand; and I
took the grapes, and pressed them into Pharaoh's cup, and I gave the cup
into Pharaoh's hand.

<span id="an_40:12">40:12</span> And Joseph said unto him, This is the
interpretation of it: the three branches are three days;

<span id="an_40:13">40:13</span> within yet three days shall Pharaoh
lift up thy head, and restore thee unto thine office: and thou shalt
give Pharaoh's cup into his hand, after the former manner when thou wast
his butler.

<span id="an_40:14">40:14</span> But have me in thy remembrance when it
shall be well with thee, and show kindness, I pray thee, unto me, and
make mention of me unto Pharaoh, and bring me out of this house:

<span id="an_40:15">40:15</span> for indeed I was stolen away out of the
land of the Hebrews: and here also have I done nothing that they should
put me into the dungeon.

<span id="an_40:16">40:16</span> When the chief baker saw that the
interpretation was good, he said unto Joseph, I also was in my dream,
and, behold, three baskets of white bread were on my head:

<span id="an_40:17">40:17</span> and in the uppermost basket there was
of all manner of baked food for Pharaoh; and the birds did eat them out
of the basket upon my head.

<span id="an_40:18">40:18</span> And Joseph answered and said, This is
the interpretation thereof: the three baskets are three days;

<span id="an_40:19">40:19</span> within yet three days shall Pharaoh
lift up thy head from off thee, and shall hang thee on a tree; and the
birds shall eat thy flesh from off thee.

<span id="an_40:20">40:20</span> And it came to pass the third day,
which was Pharaoh's birthday, that he made a feast unto all his
servants: and he lifted up the head of the chief butler and the head of
the chief baker among his servants.

<span id="an_40:21">40:21</span> And he restored the chief butler unto
his butlership again; and he gave the cup into Pharaoh's hand:

<span id="an_40:22">40:22</span> but he hanged the chief baker: as
Joseph had interpreted to them.

<span id="an_40:23">40:23</span> Yet did not the chief butler remember
Joseph, but forgat him.

<span id="an_41:1">41:1</span> And it came to pass at the end of two
full years, that Pharaoh dreamed: and, behold, he stood by the river.

<span id="an_41:2">41:2</span> And, behold, there came up out of the
river seven kine, well-favored and fat-fleshed; and they fed in the
reed-grass.

<span id="an_41:3">41:3</span> And, behold, seven other kine came up
after them out of the river, ill-favored and lean-fleshed, and stood by
the other kine upon the brink of the river.

<span id="an_41:4">41:4</span> And the ill-favored and lean-fleshed kine
did eat up the seven well-favored and fat kine. So Pharaoh awoke.

<span id="an_41:5">41:5</span> And he slept and dreamed a second time:
and, behold, seven ears of grain came up upon one stalk, rank and good.

<span id="an_41:6">41:6</span> And, behold, seven ears, thin and blasted
with the east wind, sprung up after them.

<span id="an_41:7">41:7</span> And the thin ears swallowed up the seven
rank and full ears. And Pharaoh awoke, and, behold, it was a dream.

<span id="an_41:8">41:8</span> And it came to pass in the morning that
his spirit was troubled; and he sent and called for all the magicians of
Egypt, and all the wise men thereof: and Pharaoh told them his dream;
but there was none that could interpret them unto Pharaoh.

<span id="an_41:9">41:9</span> Then spake the chief butler unto Pharaoh,
saying, I do remember my faults this day:

<span id="an_41:10">41:10</span> Pharaoh was wroth with his servants,
and put me in ward in the house of the captain of the guard, me and the
chief baker:

<span id="an_41:11">41:11</span> and we dreamed a dream in one night, I
and he; we dreamed each man according to the interpretation of his
dream.

<span id="an_41:12">41:12</span> And there was with us there a young
man, a Hebrew, servant to the captain of the guard; and we told him, and
he interpreted to us our dreams; to each man according to his dream he
did interpret.

<span id="an_41:13">41:13</span> And it came to pass, as he interpreted
to us, so it was; me he restored unto mine office, and him he hanged.

<span id="an_41:14">41:14</span> Then Pharaoh sent and called Joseph,
and they brought him hastily out of the dungeon: and he shaved himself,
and changed his raiment, and came in unto Pharaoh.

<span id="an_41:15">41:15</span> And Pharaoh said unto Joseph, I have
dreamed a dream, and there is none that can interpret it: and I have
heard say of thee, that when thou hearest a dream thou canst interpret
it.

<span id="an_41:16">41:16</span> And Joseph answered Pharaoh, saying, It
is not in me: God will give Pharaoh an answer of peace.

<span id="an_41:17">41:17</span> And Pharaoh spake unto Joseph, In my
dream, behold, I stood upon the brink of the river:

<span id="an_41:18">41:18</span> and, behold, there came up out of the
river seven kine, fat-fleshed and well-favored: and they fed in the
reed-grass:

<span id="an_41:19">41:19</span> and, behold, seven other kine came up
after them, poor and very ill-favored and lean-fleshed, such as I never
saw in all the land of Egypt for badness:

<span id="an_41:20">41:20</span> and the lean and ill-favored kine did
eat up the first seven fat kine:

<span id="an_41:21">41:21</span> and when they had eaten them up, it
could not be known that they had eaten them; but they were still
ill-favored, as at the beginning. So I awoke.

<span id="an_41:22">41:22</span> And I saw in my dream, and, behold,
seven ears came up upon one stalk, full and good:

<span id="an_41:23">41:23</span> and, behold, seven ears, withered,
thin, \[and\] blasted with the east wind, sprung up after them:

<span id="an_41:24">41:24</span> and the thin ears swallowed up the
seven good ears: and I told it unto the magicians; but there was none
that could declare it to me.

<span id="an_41:25">41:25</span> And Joseph said unto Pharaoh, The dream
of Pharaoh is one: what God is about to do he hath declared unto
Pharaoh.

<span id="an_41:26">41:26</span> The seven good kine are seven years;
and the seven good ears are seven years: the dream is one.

<span id="an_41:27">41:27</span> And the seven lean and ill-favored kine
that came up after them are seven years, and also the seven empty ears
blasted with the east wind; they shall be seven years of famine.

<span id="an_41:28">41:28</span> That is the thing which I spake unto
Pharaoh: what God is about to do he hath showed unto Pharaoh.

<span id="an_41:29">41:29</span> Behold, there come seven years of great
plenty throughout all the land of Egypt:

<span id="an_41:30">41:30</span> and there shall arise after them seven
years of famine; and all the plenty shall be forgotten in the land of
Egypt; and the famine shall consume the land;

<span id="an_41:31">41:31</span> and the plenty shall not be known in
the land by reason of that famine which followeth; for it shall be very
grievous.

<span id="an_41:32">41:32</span> And for that the dream was doubled unto
Pharaoh, it is because the thing is established by God, and God will
shortly bring it to pass.

<span id="an_41:33">41:33</span> Now therefore let Pharaoh look out a
man discreet and wise, and set him over the land of Egypt.

<span id="an_41:34">41:34</span> Let Pharaoh do \[this\], and let him
appoint overseers over the land, and take up the fifth part of the land
of Egypt in the seven plenteous years.

<span id="an_41:35">41:35</span> And let them gather all the food of
these good years that come, and lay up grain under the hand of Pharaoh
for food in the cities, and let them keep it.

<span id="an_41:36">41:36</span> And the food shall be for a store to
the land against the seven years of famine, which shall be in the land
of Egypt; that the land perish not through the famine.

<span id="an_41:37">41:37</span> And the thing was good in the eyes of
Pharaoh, and in the eyes of all his servants.

<span id="an_41:38">41:38</span> And Pharaoh said unto his servants, Can
we find such a one as this, a man in whom the spirit of God is?

<span id="an_41:39">41:39</span> And Pharaoh said unto Joseph, Forasmuch
as God hath showed thee all of this, there is none so discreet and wise
as thou:

<span id="an_41:40">41:40</span> thou shalt be over my house, and
according unto thy word shall all my people be ruled: only in the throne
will I be greater than thou.

<span id="an_41:41">41:41</span> And Pharaoh said unto Joseph, See, I
have set thee over all the land of Egypt.

<span id="an_41:42">41:42</span> And Pharaoh took off his signet ring
from his hand, and put it upon Joseph's hand, and arrayed him in
vestures of fine linen, and put a gold chain about his neck;

<span id="an_41:43">41:43</span> and he made him to ride in the second
chariot which he had; and they cried before him, Bow the knee: and he
set him over all the land of Egypt.

<span id="an_41:44">41:44</span> And Pharaoh said unto Joseph, I am
Pharaoh, and without thee shall no man lift up his hand or his foot in
all the land of Egypt.

<span id="an_41:45">41:45</span> And Pharaoh called Joseph's name
Zaphenath-paneah; and he gave him to wife Asenath, the daughter of
Poti-phera priest of On. And Joseph went out over the land of Egypt.

<span id="an_41:46">41:46</span> And Joseph was thirty years old when he
stood before Pharaoh king of Egypt. And Joseph went out from the
presence of Pharaoh, and went throughout all the land of Egypt.

<span id="an_41:47">41:47</span> And in the seven plenteous years the
earth brought forth by handfuls.

<span id="an_41:48">41:48</span> And he gathered up all the food of the
seven years which were in the land of Egypt, and laid up the food in the
cities: the food of the field, which was round about every city, laid he
up in the same.

<span id="an_41:49">41:49</span> And Joseph laid up grain as the sand of
the sea, very much, until he left off numbering; for it was without
number.

<span id="an_41:50">41:50</span> And unto Joseph were born two sons
before the year of famine came, whom Asenath, the daughter of Potiphera
priest of On, bare unto him.

<span id="an_41:51">41:51</span> And Joseph called the name of the
first-born Manasseh: For, \[said he\], God hath made me forget all my
toil, and all my father's house.

<span id="an_41:52">41:52</span> And the name of the second called he
Ephraim: For God hath made me fruitful in the land of my affliction.

<span id="an_41:53">41:53</span> And the seven years of plenty, that was
in the land of Egypt, came to an end.

<span id="an_41:54">41:54</span> And the seven years of famine began to
come, according as Joseph had said: and there was famine in all lands;
but in all the land of Egypt there was bread.

<span id="an_41:55">41:55</span> And when all the land of Egypt was
famished, the people cried to Pharaoh for bread: and Pharaoh said unto
all the Egyptians, Go unto Joseph; what he saith to you, do.

<span id="an_41:56">41:56</span> And the famine was over all the face of
the earth: and Joseph opened all the store-houses, and sold unto the
Egyptians; and the famine was sore in the land of Egypt.

<span id="an_41:57">41:57</span> And all countries came into Egypt to
Joseph to buy grain, because the famine was sore in all the earth.

<span id="an_42:1">42:1</span> Now Jacob saw that there was grain in
Egypt, and Jacob said unto his sons, Why do ye look one upon another?

<span id="an_42:2">42:2</span> And he said, Behold, I have heard that
there is grain in Egypt: get you down thither, and buy for us from
thence; that we may live, and not die.

<span id="an_42:3">42:3</span> And Joseph's ten brethren went down to
buy grain from Egypt.

<span id="an_42:4">42:4</span> But Benjamin, Joseph's brother, Jacob
sent not with his brethren; for he said, Lest Peradventure harm befall
him.

<span id="an_42:5">42:5</span> And the sons of Israel came to buy among
those that came: for the famine was in the land of Canaan.

<span id="an_42:6">42:6</span> And Joseph was the governor over the
land; he it was that sold to all the people of the land. And Joseph's
brethren came, and bowed down themselves to him with their faces to the
earth.

<span id="an_42:7">42:7</span> And Joseph saw his brethren, and he knew
them, but made himself strange unto them, and spake roughly with them;
and he said unto them. Whence come ye? And they said, From the land of
Canaan to buy food.

<span id="an_42:8">42:8</span> And Joseph knew his brethren, but they
knew not him.

<span id="an_42:9">42:9</span> And Joseph remembered the dreams which he
dreamed of them, and said unto them, Ye are spies; to see the nakedness
of the land ye are come.

<span id="an_42:10">42:10</span> And they said unto him, Nay, my lord,
but to buy food are thy servants come.

<span id="an_42:11">42:11</span> We are all one man's sons; we are true
men, thy servants are no spies.

<span id="an_42:12">42:12</span> And he said unto them, Nay, but to see
the nakedness of the land ye are come.

<span id="an_42:13">42:13</span> And they said, We thy servants are
twelve brethren, the sons of one man in the land of Canaan; and, behold,
the youngest is this day with our father, and one is not.

<span id="an_42:14">42:14</span> And Joseph said unto them, That is it
that I spake unto you, saying, Ye are spies:

<span id="an_42:15">42:15</span> hereby ye shall be proved: by the life
of Pharaoh ye shall not go forth hence, except your youngest brother
come hither.

<span id="an_42:16">42:16</span> Send one of you, and let him fetch your
brother, and ye shall be bound, that your words may be proved, whether
there be truth in you: or else by the life of Pharaoh surely ye are
spies.

<span id="an_42:17">42:17</span> And he put them all together into ward
three days.

<span id="an_42:18">42:18</span> And Joseph said unto them the third
day, This do, and live: for I fear God:

<span id="an_42:19">42:19</span> if ye be true men, let one of your
brethren be bound in your prison-house; but go ye, carry grain for the
famine of your houses:

<span id="an_42:20">42:20</span> and bring your youngest brother unto
me; so shall your words be verified, and ye shall not die. And they did
so.

<span id="an_42:21">42:21</span> And they said one to another, We are
verily guilty concerning our brother, in that we saw the distress of his
soul, when he besought us, and we would not hear; therefore is this
distress come upon us.

<span id="an_42:22">42:22</span> And Reuben answered them, saying, Spake
I not unto you, saying, Do not sin against the child; and ye would not
hear? therefore also, behold, his blood is required.

<span id="an_42:23">42:23</span> And they knew not that Joseph
understood them; for there was an interpreter between them.

<span id="an_42:24">42:24</span> And he turned himself about from them,
and wept; and he returned to them, and spake to them, and took Simeon
from among them, and bound him before their eyes.

<span id="an_42:25">42:25</span> Then Joseph commanded to fill their
vessels with grain, and to restore every man's money into his sack, and
to give them provisions for the way: and thus was it done unto them.

<span id="an_42:26">42:26</span> And they laded their asses with their
grain, and departed thence.

<span id="an_42:27">42:27</span> And as one of them opened his sack to
give his ass provender in the lodging-place, he espied his money; and,
behold, it was in the mouth of his sack.

<span id="an_42:28">42:28</span> And he said unto his brethren, My money
is restored; and, lo, it is even in my sack: and their heart failed
them, and they turned trembling one to another, saying, What is this
that God hath done unto us?

<span id="an_42:29">42:29</span> And they came unto Jacob their father
unto the land of Canaan, and told him all that had befallen them,
saying,

<span id="an_42:30">42:30</span> The man, the lord of the land, spake
roughly with us, and took us for spies of the country.

<span id="an_42:31">42:31</span> And we said unto him, We are true men;
and we are no spies:

<span id="an_42:32">42:32</span> we are twelve brethren, sons of our
father; one is not, and the youngest is this day with our father in the
land of Canaan.

<span id="an_42:33">42:33</span> And the man, the lord of the land, said
unto us, Hereby shall I know that ye are true men: leave one of your
brethren with me, and take \[grain for\] the famine of your houses, and
go your way;

<span id="an_42:34">42:34</span> and bring your youngest brother unto
me: then shall I know that ye are no spies, but that ye are true men: so
will I deliver you your brother, and ye shall traffic in the land.

<span id="an_42:35">42:35</span> And it came to pass as they emptied
their sacks, that, behold, every man's bundle of money was in his sack:
and when they and their father saw their bundles of money, they were
afraid.

<span id="an_42:36">42:36</span> And Jacob their father said unto them,
Me have ye bereaved of my children: Joseph is not, and Simeon is not,
and ye will take Benjamin away: all these things are against me.

<span id="an_42:37">42:37</span> And Reuben spake unto his father,
saying, Slay my two sons, if I bring him not to thee: deliver him into
my hand, and I will bring him to thee again.

<span id="an_42:38">42:38</span> And he said, My son shall not go down
with you; for his brother is dead, and he only is left: if harm befall
him by the way in which ye go, then will ye bring down my gray hairs
with sorrow to Sheol.

<span id="an_43:1">43:1</span> And the famine was sore in the land.

<span id="an_43:2">43:2</span> And it came to pass, when they had eaten
up the grain which they had brought out of Egypt, their father said unto
them, Go again, buy us a little food.

<span id="an_43:3">43:3</span> And Judah spake unto him, saying, The man
did solemnly protest unto us, saying, Ye shall not see my face, except
your brother be with you.

<span id="an_43:4">43:4</span> If thou wilt send our brother with us, we
will go down and buy thee food:

<span id="an_43:5">43:5</span> but if thou wilt not send him, we will
not go down; for the man said unto us, Ye shall not see my face, except
your brother be with you.

<span id="an_43:6">43:6</span> And Israel said, Wherefore dealt ye so
ill with me, as to tell the man whether ye had yet a brother?

<span id="an_43:7">43:7</span> And they said, The man asked straitly
concerning ourselves, and concerning our kindred, saying, Is your father
yet alive? have ye \[another\] brother? and we told him according to the
tenor of these words: could we in any wise know that he would say, Bring
your brother down?

<span id="an_43:8">43:8</span> And Judah said unto Israel his father,
Send the lad with me, and we will arise and go; that we may live, and
not die, both we, and thou, and also our little ones.

<span id="an_43:9">43:9</span> I will be surety for him; of my hand
shalt thou require him: if I bring him not unto thee, and set him before
thee, then let me bear the blame for ever:

<span id="an_43:10">43:10</span> for except we had lingered, surely we
had now returned a second time.

<span id="an_43:11">43:11</span> And their father Israel said unto them,
If it be so now, do this: take of the choice fruits of the land in your
vessels, and carry down the man a present, a little balm, and a little
honey, spicery and myrrh, nuts, and almonds;

<span id="an_43:12">43:12</span> and take double money in your hand; and
the money that was returned in the mouth of your sacks carry again in
your hand; peradventure it was an oversight:

<span id="an_43:13">43:13</span> take also your brother, and arise, go
again unto the man:

<span id="an_43:14">43:14</span> and God Almighty give you mercy before
the man, that he may release unto you your other brother and Benjamin.
And if I be bereaved of my children, I am bereaved.

<span id="an_43:15">43:15</span> And the men took that present, and they
took double money in their hand, and Benjamin; and rose up, and went
down to Egypt, and stood before Joseph.

<span id="an_43:16">43:16</span> And when Joseph saw Benjamin with them,
he said to the steward of his house, Bring the men into the house, and
slay, and make ready; for the men shall dine with me at noon.

<span id="an_43:17">43:17</span> And the man did as Joseph bade; and the
man brought the men to Joseph's house.

<span id="an_43:18">43:18</span> And the men were afraid, because they
were brought to Joseph's house; and they said, Because of the money that
was returned in our sacks at the first time are we brought in; that he
may seek occasion against us, and fall upon us, and take us for bondmen,
and our asses.

<span id="an_43:19">43:19</span> And they came near to the steward of
Joseph's house, and they spake unto him at the door of the house,

<span id="an_43:20">43:20</span> and said, Oh, my lord, we came indeed
down at the first time to buy food:

<span id="an_43:21">43:21</span> and it came to pass, when we came to
the lodging-place, that we opened our sacks, and, behold, every man's
money was in the mouth of his sack, our money in full weight: and we
have brought it again in our hand.

<span id="an_43:22">43:22</span> And other money have we brought down in
our hand to buy food: we know not who put our money in our sacks.

<span id="an_43:23">43:23</span> And he said, Peace be to you, fear not:
your God, and the God of your father, hath given you treasure in your
sacks: I had your money. And he brought Simeon out unto them.

<span id="an_43:24">43:24</span> And the man brought the men into
Joseph's house, and gave them water, and they washed their feet. And he
gave their asses provender.

<span id="an_43:25">43:25</span> And they made ready the present against
Joseph's coming at noon: for they heard that they should eat bread
there.

<span id="an_43:26">43:26</span> And when Joseph came home, they brought
him the present which was in their hand into the house, and bowed down
themselves to him to the earth.

<span id="an_43:27">43:27</span> And he asked them of their welfare, and
said, Is your father well, the old man of whom ye spake? Is he yet
alive?

<span id="an_43:28">43:28</span> And they said, Thy servant our father
is well, he is yet alive. And they bowed the head, and made obeisance.

<span id="an_43:29">43:29</span> And he lifted up his eyes, and saw
Benjamin his brother, his mother's son, and said, Is this your youngest
brother, of whom ye spake unto me? And he said, God be gracious unto
thee, my son.

<span id="an_43:30">43:30</span> And Joseph made haste; for his heart
yearned over his brother: and he sought where to weep; and he entered
into his chamber, and wept there.

<span id="an_43:31">43:31</span> And he washed his face, and came out;
and he refrained himself, and said, Set on bread.

<span id="an_43:32">43:32</span> And they set on for him by himself, and
for them by themselves, and for the Egyptians, that did eat with him, by
themselves: because the Egyptians might not eat bread with the Hebrews;
for that is an abomination unto the Egyptians.

<span id="an_43:33">43:33</span> And they sat before him, the first-born
according to his birthright, and the youngest according to his youth:
and the men marvelled one with another.

<span id="an_43:34">43:34</span> And he took \[and sent\] messes unto
them from before him: but Benjamin's mess was five times so much as any
of theirs. And they drank, and were merry with him.

<span id="an_44:1">44:1</span> And he commanded the steward of his
house, saying, Fill the men's sacks with food, as much as they can
carry, and put every man's money in his sack's mouth.

<span id="an_44:2">44:2</span> And put my cup, the silver cup, in the
sack's mouth of the youngest, and his grain money. And he did according
to the word that Joseph had spoken.

<span id="an_44:3">44:3</span> As soon as the morning was light, the men
were sent away, they and their asses.

<span id="an_44:4">44:4</span> \[And\] when they were gone out of the
city, and were not yet far off, Joseph said unto his steward, Up, follow
after the men; and when thou dost overtake them, say unto them,
Wherefore have ye rewarded evil for good?

<span id="an_44:5">44:5</span> Is not this that in which my lord
drinketh, and whereby he indeed divineth? ye have done evil in so doing.

<span id="an_44:6">44:6</span> And he overtook them, and he spake unto
them these words.

<span id="an_44:7">44:7</span> And they said unto him, Wherefore
speaketh my lord such words as these? Far be it from thy servants that
they should do such a thing.

<span id="an_44:8">44:8</span> Behold, the money, which we found in our
sacks' mouths, we brought again unto thee out of the land of Canaan: how
then should we steal out of thy lord's house silver or gold?

<span id="an_44:9">44:9</span> With whomsoever of thy servants it be
found, let him die, and we also will be my lord's bondmen.

<span id="an_44:10">44:10</span> And he said, Now also let it be
according unto your words: he with whom it is found shall be my bondman;
and ye shall be blameless.

<span id="an_44:11">44:11</span> Then they hasted, and took down every
man his sack to the ground, and opened every man his sack.

<span id="an_44:12">44:12</span> And he searched, \[and\] began at the
eldest, and left off at the youngest: and the cup was found in
Benjamin's sack.

<span id="an_44:13">44:13</span> Then they rent their clothes, and laded
every man his ass, and returned to the city.

<span id="an_44:14">44:14</span> And Judah and his brethren came to
Joseph's house; and he was yet there: and they fell before him on the
ground.

<span id="an_44:15">44:15</span> And Joseph said unto them, What deed is
this that ye have done? know ye not that such a man as I can indeed
divine?

<span id="an_44:16">44:16</span> And Judah said, What shall we say unto
my lord? what shall we speak? or how shall we clear ourselves? God hath
found out the iniquity of thy servants: behold, we are my lord's
bondmen, both we, and he also in whose hand the cup is found.

<span id="an_44:17">44:17</span> And he said, Far be it from me that I
should do so: the man in whose hand the cup is found, he shall be my
bondman; but as for you, get you up in peace unto your father.

<span id="an_44:18">44:18</span> Then Judah came near unto him, and
said, Oh, my lord, let thy servant, I pray thee, speak a word in my
lord's ears, and let not thine anger burn against thy servant; for thou
art even as Pharaoh.

<span id="an_44:19">44:19</span> My lord asked his servants, saying,
Have ye a father, or a brother?

<span id="an_44:20">44:20</span> And we said unto my lord, We have a
father, an old man, and a child of his old age, a little one; and his
brother is dead, and he alone is left of his mother; and his father
loveth him.

<span id="an_44:21">44:21</span> And thou saidst unto thy servants,
Bring him down unto me, that I may set mine eyes upon him.

<span id="an_44:22">44:22</span> And we said unto my lord, The lad
cannot leave his father: for if he should leave his father, his father
would die.

<span id="an_44:23">44:23</span> And thou saidst unto thy servants,
Except your youngest brother come down with you, ye shall see my face no
more.

<span id="an_44:24">44:24</span> And it came to pass when we came up
unto thy servant my father, we told him the words of my lord.

<span id="an_44:25">44:25</span> And our father said, Go again, buy us a
little food.

<span id="an_44:26">44:26</span> And we said, We cannot go down: if our
youngest brother be with us, then will we go down: for we may not see
the man's face, expect our youngest brother be with us.

<span id="an_44:27">44:27</span> And thy servant my father said unto us,
Ye know that my wife bare me two sons:

<span id="an_44:28">44:28</span> and the one went out from me, and I
said, Surely he is torn in pieces; and I have not seen him since:

<span id="an_44:29">44:29</span> and if ye take this one also from me,
and harm befall him, ye will bring down my gray hairs with sorrow to
Sheol.

<span id="an_44:30">44:30</span> Now therefore when I come to thy
servant my father, and the lad is not with us; seeing that his life is
bound up in the lad's life;

<span id="an_44:31">44:31</span> it will come to pass, when he seeth
that the lad is not \[with us\], that he will die: and thy servants will
bring down the gray hairs of thy servant our father with sorrow to
Sheol.

<span id="an_44:32">44:32</span> For thy servant became surety for the
lad unto my father, saying, If I bring him not unto thee, then shall I
bear the blame to my father for ever.

<span id="an_44:33">44:33</span> Now therefore, let thy servant, I pray
thee, abide instead of the lad a bondman to my lord; and let the lad go
up with his brethren.

<span id="an_44:34">44:34</span> For how shall I go up to my father, if
the lad be not with me? lest I see the evil that shall come on my
father.

<span id="an_45:1">45:1</span> Then Joseph could not refrain himself
before all them that stood before him; and he cried, Cause every man to
go out from me. And there stood no man with him, while Joseph made
himself known unto his brethren.

<span id="an_45:2">45:2</span> And he wept aloud: and the Egyptians
heard, and the house of Pharaoh heard.

<span id="an_45:3">45:3</span> And Joseph said unto his brethren, I am
Joseph; doth my father yet live? And his brethren could not answer him;
for they were troubled at his presence.

<span id="an_45:4">45:4</span> And Joseph said unto his brethren, Come
near to me, I pray you. And they came near. And he said, I am Joseph
your brother, whom ye sold into Egypt.

<span id="an_45:5">45:5</span> And now be not grieved, nor angry with
yourselves, that ye sold me hither: for God did send me before you to
preserve life.

<span id="an_45:6">45:6</span> For these two years hath the famine been
in the land: and there are yet five years, in which there shall be
neither plowing nor harvest.

<span id="an_45:7">45:7</span> And God sent me before you to preserve
you a remnant in the earth, and to save you alive by a great
deliverance.

<span id="an_45:8">45:8</span> So now it was not you that sent me
hither, but God: and he hath made me a father to Pharaoh, and lord of
all his house, and ruler over all the land of Egypt.

<span id="an_45:9">45:9</span> Haste ye, and go up to my father, and say
unto him, Thus saith thy son Joseph, God hath made me lord of all Egypt:
come down unto me, tarry not;

<span id="an_45:10">45:10</span> and thou shalt dwell in the land of
Goshen, and thou shalt be near unto me, thou, and thy children, and thy
children's children, and thy flocks, and thy herds, and all that thou
hast:

<span id="an_45:11">45:11</span> and there will I nourish thee; for
there are yet five years of famine; lest thou come to poverty, thou, and
thy household, and all that thou hast.

<span id="an_45:12">45:12</span> And, behold, your eyes see, and the
eyes of my brother Benjamin, that it is my mouth that speaketh unto you.

<span id="an_45:13">45:13</span> And ye shall tell my father of all my
glory in Egypt, and of all that ye have seen: and ye shall haste and
bring down my father hither.

<span id="an_45:14">45:14</span> And he fell upon his brother Benjamin's
neck, and wept; and Benjamin wept upon his neck.

<span id="an_45:15">45:15</span> And he kissed all his brethren, and
wept upon them: and after that his brethren talked with him.

<span id="an_45:16">45:16</span> And the report thereof was heard in
Pharaoh's house, saying, Joseph's brethren are come: and it pleased
Pharaoh well, and his servants.

<span id="an_45:17">45:17</span> And Pharaoh said unto Joseph, Say unto
thy brethren, This do ye: lade your beasts, and go, get you unto the
land of Canaan;

<span id="an_45:18">45:18</span> and take your father and your
households, and come unto me: and I will give you the good of the land
of Egypt, and ye shall eat the fat of the land.

<span id="an_45:19">45:19</span> Now thou art commanded, this do ye:
take you wagons out of the land of Egypt for your little ones, and for
your wives, and bring your father, and come.

<span id="an_45:20">45:20</span> Also regard not your stuff; for the
good of all the land of Egypt is yours.

<span id="an_45:21">45:21</span> And the sons of Israel did so: and
Joseph gave them wagons, according to the commandment of Pharaoh, and
gave them provision for the way.

<span id="an_45:22">45:22</span> To all of them he gave each man changes
of raiment; but to Benjamin he gave three hundred pieces of silver, and
five changes of raiment.

<span id="an_45:23">45:23</span> And to his father he sent after this
manner: ten asses laden with the good things of Egypt, and ten she-asses
laden with grain and bread and provision for his father by the way.

<span id="an_45:24">45:24</span> So he sent his brethren away, and they
departed: and he said unto them, See that ye fall not out by the way.

<span id="an_45:25">45:25</span> And they went up out of Egypt, and came
into the land of Canaan unto Jacob their father.

<span id="an_45:26">45:26</span> And they told him, saying, Joseph is
yet alive, and he is ruler over all the land of Egypt. And his heart
fainted, for he believed them not.

<span id="an_45:27">45:27</span> And they told him all the words of
Joseph, which he had said unto them: and when he saw the wagons which
Joseph had sent to carry him, the spirit of Jacob their father revived:

<span id="an_45:28">45:28</span> and Israel said, It is enough; Joseph
my son is yet alive: I will go and see him before I die.

<span id="an_46:1">46:1</span> And Israel took his journey with all that
he had, and came to Beer-sheba, and offered sacrifices unto the God of
his father Isaac.

<span id="an_46:2">46:2</span> And God spake unto Israel in the visions
of the night, and said, Jacob, Jacob. And he said, Here am I.

<span id="an_46:3">46:3</span> And he said, I am God, the God of thy
father: fear not to go down into Egypt; for I will there make of thee a
great nation:

<span id="an_46:4">46:4</span> I will go down with thee into Egypt; and
I will also surely bring thee up again: and Joseph shall put his hand
upon thine eyes.

<span id="an_46:5">46:5</span> And Jacob rose up from Beer-sheba: and
the sons of Israel carried Jacob their father, and their little ones,
and their wives, in the wagons which Pharaoh had sent to carry him.

<span id="an_46:6">46:6</span> And they took their cattle, and their
goods, which they had gotten in the land of Canaan, and came into Egypt,
Jacob, and all his seed with him:

<span id="an_46:7">46:7</span> his sons, and his sons' sons with him,
his daughters, and his sons's daughters, and all his seed brought he
with him into Egypt.

<span id="an_46:8">46:8</span> And these are the names of the children
of Israel, who came into Egypt, Jacob and his sons: Reuben, Jacob's
first-born.

<span id="an_46:9">46:9</span> And the sons of Reuben: Hanoch, and
Pallu, and Hezron, and Carmi.

<span id="an_46:10">46:10</span> And the sons of Simeon: Jemuel, and
Jamin, and Ohad, and Jachin, and Zohar, and Shaul the son of a
Canaanitish woman.

<span id="an_46:11">46:11</span> And the sons of Levi: Gershon, Kohath,
and Merari.

<span id="an_46:12">46:12</span> And the sons of Judah: Er, and Onan,
and Shelah, and Perez, and Zerah; but Er and Onan died in the land of
Canaan. And the sons of Perez were Hezron and Hamul.

<span id="an_46:13">46:13</span> And the sons of Issachar: Tola, and
Puvah, and Iob, and Shimron.

<span id="an_46:14">46:14</span> And the sons of Zebulun: Sered, and
Elon, and Jahleel.

<span id="an_46:15">46:15</span> These are the sons of Leah, whom she
bare unto Jacob in Paddan-aram, with his daughter Dinah: all the souls
of his sons and his daughters were thirty and three.

<span id="an_46:16">46:16</span> And the sons of Gad: Ziphion, and
Haggi, Shuni, and Ezbon, Eri, and Arodi, and Areli.

<span id="an_46:17">46:17</span> And the sons of Asher: Imnah, and
Ishvah, and Ishvi, and Beriah, and Serah their sister; and the sons of
Beriah: Heber, and Malchiel.

<span id="an_46:18">46:18</span> These are the sons of Zilpah, whom
Laban gave to Leah his daughter; and these she bare unto Jacob, even
sixteen souls.

<span id="an_46:19">46:19</span> The sons of Rachel Jacob's wife: Joseph
and Benjamin.

<span id="an_46:20">46:20</span> And unto Joseph in the land of Egypt
were born Manasseh and Ephraim, whom Asenath, the daughter of Poti-phera
priest of On, bare unto him.

<span id="an_46:21">46:21</span> And the sons of Benjamin: Bela, and
Becher, and Ashbel, Gera, and Naaman, Ehi, and Rosh, Muppim, and Huppim,
and Ard.

<span id="an_46:22">46:22</span> These are the sons of Rachel, who were
born to Jacob: all the souls were fourteen.

<span id="an_46:23">46:23</span> And the sons of Dan: Hushim.

<span id="an_46:24">46:24</span> And the sons of Naphtali: Jahzeel, and
Guni, and Jezer, and Shillem.

<span id="an_46:25">46:25</span> These are the sons of Bilhah, whom
Laban gave unto Rachel his daughter, and these she bare unto Jacob: all
the souls were seven.

<span id="an_46:26">46:26</span> All the souls that came with Jacob into
Egypt, that came out of his loins, besides Jacob's sons' wives, all the
souls were threescore and six;

<span id="an_46:27">46:27</span> and the sons of Joseph, who were born
to him in Egypt, were two souls: all the souls of the house of Jacob,
that came into Egypt, were threescore and ten.

<span id="an_46:28">46:28</span> And he sent Judah before him unto
Joseph, to show the way before him unto Goshen; and they came into the
land of Goshen.

<span id="an_46:29">46:29</span> And Joseph made ready his chariot, and
went up to meet Israel his father, to Goshen; and he presented himself
unto him, and fell on his neck, and wept on his neck a good while.

<span id="an_46:30">46:30</span> And Israel said unto Joseph, Now let me
die, since I have seen thy face, that thou art yet alive.

<span id="an_46:31">46:31</span> And Joseph said unto his brethren, and
unto his father's house, I will go up, and tell Pharaoh, and will say
unto him, My brethren, and my father's house, who were in the land of
Canaan, are come unto me;

<span id="an_46:32">46:32</span> and the men are shepherds, for they
have been keepers of cattle; and they have brought their flocks, and
their herds, and all that they have.

<span id="an_46:33">46:33</span> And it shall come to pass, when Pharaoh
shall call you, and shall say, What is your occupation?

<span id="an_46:34">46:34</span> that ye shall say, Thy servants have
been keepers of cattle from our youth even until now, both we, and our
fathers: that ye may dwell in the land of Goshen; for every shepherd is
an abomination unto the Egyptians.

<span id="an_47:1">47:1</span> Then Joseph went in and told Pharaoh, and
said, My father and my brethren, and their flocks, and their herds, and
all that they have, are come out of the land of Canaan; and, behold,
they are in the land of Goshen.

<span id="an_47:2">47:2</span> And from among his brethren he took five
men, and presented them unto Pharaoh.

<span id="an_47:3">47:3</span> And Pharaoh said unto his brethren, What
is your occupation? And they said unto Pharaoh, Thy servants are
shepherds, both we, and our fathers.

<span id="an_47:4">47:4</span> And they said unto Pharaoh, To sojourn in
the land are we come; for there is no pasture for thy servants' flocks;
for the famine is sore in the land of Canaan: now therefore, we pray
thee, let thy servants dwell in the land of Goshen.

<span id="an_47:5">47:5</span> And Pharaoh spake unto Joseph, saying,
Thy father and thy brethren are come unto thee:

<span id="an_47:6">47:6</span> the land of Egypt is before thee; in the
best of the land make thy father and thy brethren to dwell; in the land
of Goshen let them dwell: and if thou knowest any able men among them,
then make them rulers over my cattle.

<span id="an_47:7">47:7</span> And Joseph brought in Jacob his father,
and set him before Pharaoh: and Jacob blessed Pharaoh.

<span id="an_47:8">47:8</span> And Pharaoh said unto Jacob, How many are
the days of the years of thy life?

<span id="an_47:9">47:9</span> And Jacob said unto Pharaoh, The days of
the years of my pilgrimage are a hundred and thirty years: few and evil
have been the days of the years of my life, and they have not attained
unto the days of the years of the life of my fathers in the days of
their pilgrimage.

<span id="an_47:10">47:10</span> And Jacob blessed Pharaoh, and went out
from the presence of Pharaoh.

<span id="an_47:11">47:11</span> And Joseph placed his father and his
brethren, and gave them a possession in the land of Egypt, in the best
of the land, in the land of Rameses, as Pharaoh had commanded.

<span id="an_47:12">47:12</span> And Joseph nourished his father, and
his brethren, and all his father's household, with bread, according to
their families.

<span id="an_47:13">47:13</span> And there was no bread in all the land;
for the famine was very sore, so that the land of Egypt and the land of
Canaan fainted by reason of the famine.

<span id="an_47:14">47:14</span> And Joseph gathered up all the money
that was found in the land of Egypt, and in the land of Canaan, for the
grain which they bought: and Joseph brought the money into Pharaoh's
house.

<span id="an_47:15">47:15</span> And when the money was all spent in the
land of Egypt, and in the land of Canaan, all the Egyptians came unto
Joseph, and said, Give us bread: for why should we die in thy presence?
for \[our\] money faileth.

<span id="an_47:16">47:16</span> And Joseph said, Give your cattle; and
I will give you for your cattle, if money fail.

<span id="an_47:17">47:17</span> And they brought their cattle unto
Joseph; and Joseph gave them bread in exchange for the horses, and for
the flocks, and for the herds, and for the asses: and he fed them with
bread in exchange for all their cattle for that year.

<span id="an_47:18">47:18</span> And when that year was ended, they came
unto him the second year, and said unto him, We will not hide from my
lord, how that our money is all spent; and the herds of cattle are my
lord's; there is nought left in the sight of my lord, but our bodies,
and our lands:

<span id="an_47:19">47:19</span> wherefore should we die before thine
eyes, both we and our land? buy us and our land for bread, and we and
our land will be servants unto Pharaoh: and give us seed, that we may
live, and not die, and that the land be not desolate.

<span id="an_47:20">47:20</span> So Joseph bought all the land of Egypt
for Pharaoh; for the Egyptians sold every man his field, because the
famine was sore upon them: and the land became Pharaoh's.

<span id="an_47:21">47:21</span> And as for the people, he removed them
to the cities from one end of the border of Egypt even to the other end
thereof.

<span id="an_47:22">47:22</span> Only the land of the priests bought he
not: for the priests had a portion from Pharaoh, and did eat their
portion which Pharaoh gave them; wherefore they sold not their land.

<span id="an_47:23">47:23</span> Then Joseph said unto the people,
Behold, I have bought you this day and your land for Pharaoh: lo, here
is seed for you, and ye shall sow the land.

<span id="an_47:24">47:24</span> And it shall come to pass at the
ingatherings, that ye shall give a fifth unto Pharaoh, and four parts
shall be your own, for seed of the field, and for your food, and for
them of your households, and for food for your little ones.

<span id="an_47:25">47:25</span> And they said, Thou hast saved our
lives: let us find favor in the sight of my lord, and we will be
Pharaoh's servants.

<span id="an_47:26">47:26</span> And Joseph made it a statute concerning
the land of Egypt unto this day, that Pharaoh should have the fifth;
only the land of the priests alone became not Pharaoh's.

<span id="an_47:27">47:27</span> And Israel dwelt in the land of Egypt,
in the land of Goshen; and they gat them possessions therein, and were
fruitful, and multiplied exceedingly.

<span id="an_47:28">47:28</span> And Jacob lived in the land of Egypt
seventeen years: so the days of Jacob, the years of his life, were a
hundred forty and seven years.

<span id="an_47:29">47:29</span> And the time drew near that Israel must
die: and he called his son Joseph, and said unto him, If now I have
found favor in thy sight, put, I pray thee, thy hand under my thigh, and
deal kindly and truly with me: bury me not, I pray thee, in Egypt;

<span id="an_47:30">47:30</span> but when I sleep with my fathers, thou
shalt carry me out of Egypt, and bury me in their burying-place. And he
said, I will do as thou hast said.

<span id="an_47:31">47:31</span> And he said, Swear unto me: and he
sware unto him. And Israel bowed himself upon the bed's head.

<span id="an_48:1">48:1</span> And it came to pass after these things,
that one said to Joseph, Behold, thy father is sick: and he took with
him his two sons, Manasseh and Ephraim.

<span id="an_48:2">48:2</span> And one told Jacob, and said, Behold, thy
son Joseph cometh unto thee: and Israel strengthened himself, and sat
upon the bed.

<span id="an_48:3">48:3</span> And Jacob said unto Joseph, God Almighty
appeared unto me at Luz in the land of Canaan, and blessed me,

<span id="an_48:4">48:4</span> and said unto me, Behold, I will make
thee fruitful, and multiply thee, and I will make of thee a company of
peoples, and will give this land to thy seed after thee for an
everlasting possession.

<span id="an_48:5">48:5</span> And now thy two sons, who were born unto
thee in the land of Egypt before I came unto thee into Egypt, are mine;
Ephraim and Manasseh, even as Reuben and Simeon, shall be mine.

<span id="an_48:6">48:6</span> And thy issue, that thou begettest after
them, shall be thine; they shall be called after the name of their
brethren in their inheritance.

<span id="an_48:7">48:7</span> And as for me, when I came from Paddan,
Rachel died by me in the land of Canaan in the way, when there was still
some distance to come unto Ephrath: and I buried her there in the way to
Ephrath (the same is Beth-lehem).

<span id="an_48:8">48:8</span> And Israel beheld Joseph's sons, and
said, Who are these?

<span id="an_48:9">48:9</span> And Joseph said unto his father, They are
my sons, whom God hath given me here. And he said, Bring them, I pray
thee, unto me, and I will bless them.

<span id="an_48:10">48:10</span> Now the eyes of Israel were dim for
age, so that he could not see. And he brought them near unto him; and he
kissed them, and embraced them.

<span id="an_48:11">48:11</span> And Israel said unto Joseph, I had not
thought to see thy face: and, lo, God hath let me see thy seed also.

<span id="an_48:12">48:12</span> And Joseph brought them out from
between his knees; and he bowed himself with his face to the earth.

<span id="an_48:13">48:13</span> And Joseph took them both, Ephraim in
his right hand toward Israel's left hand, and Manasseh in his left hand
toward Israel's right hand, and brought them near unto him.

<span id="an_48:14">48:14</span> And Israel stretched out his right
hand, and laid it upon Ephraim's head, who was the younger, and his left
hand upon Manasseh's head, guiding his hands wittingly; for Manasseh was
the first-born.

<span id="an_48:15">48:15</span> And he blessed Joseph, and said, The
God before whom my fathers Abraham and Isaac did walk, the God who hath
fed me all my life long unto this day,

<span id="an_48:16">48:16</span> the angel who hath redeemed me from all
evil, bless the lads; and let my name be named on them, and the name of
my fathers Abraham and Isaac; and let them grow into a multitude in the
midst of the earth.

<span id="an_48:17">48:17</span> And when Joseph saw that his father
laid his right hand upon the head of Ephraim, it displeased him: and he
held up his father's hand, to remove it from Ephraim's head unto
Manasseh's head.

<span id="an_48:18">48:18</span> And Joseph said unto his father, Not
so, my father; for this is the first-born; put thy right hand upon his
head.

<span id="an_48:19">48:19</span> And his father refused, and said, I
know \[it\], my son, I know \[it\]. He also shall become a people, and
he also shall be great: howbeit his younger brother shall be greater
than he, and his seed shall become a multitude of nations.

<span id="an_48:20">48:20</span> And he blessed them that day, saying,
In thee will Israel bless, saying, God make thee as Ephraim and as
Manasseh: and he set Ephraim before Manasseh.

<span id="an_48:21">48:21</span> And Israel said unto Joseph, Behold, I
die: but God will be with you, and bring you again unto the land of your
fathers.

<span id="an_48:22">48:22</span> Moreover I have given to thee one
portion above thy brethren, which I took out of the hand of the Amorite
with my sword and with my bow.

<span id="an_49:1">49:1</span> And Jacob called unto his sons, and said:
gather yourselves together, that I may tell you that which shall befall
you in the latter days.

<span id="an_49:2">49:2</span> Assemble yourselves, and hear, ye sons of
Jacob; And hearken unto Israel your father.

<span id="an_49:3">49:3</span> Reuben, thou art my first-born, my might,
and the beginning of my strength; The pre-eminence of dignity, and the
pre-eminence of power.

<span id="an_49:4">49:4</span> Boiling over as water, thou shalt not
have the pre-eminence; Because thou wentest up to thy father's bed; Then
defiledst thou it: he went up to my couch.

<span id="an_49:5">49:5</span> Simeon and Levi are brethren; Weapons of
violence are their swords.

<span id="an_49:6">49:6</span> O my soul, come not thou into their
council; Unto their assembly, my glory, be not thou united; For in their
anger they slew a man, And in their self-will they hocked an ox.

<span id="an_49:7">49:7</span> Cursed be their anger, for it was fierce;
And their wrath, for it was cruel: I will divide them in Jacob, And
scatter them in Israel.

<span id="an_49:8">49:8</span> Judah, thee shall thy brethren praise:
Thy hand shall be on the neck of thine enemies; Thy father's sons shall
bow down before thee.

<span id="an_49:9">49:9</span> Judah is a lion's whelp; From the prey,
my son, thou art gone up: He stooped down, he couched as a lion, And as
a lioness; who shall rouse him up?

<span id="an_49:10">49:10</span> The sceptre shall not depart from
Judah, Nor the ruler's staff from between his feet, Until Shiloh come:
And unto him shall the obedience of the peoples be.

<span id="an_49:11">49:11</span> Binding his foal unto the vine, And his
ass's colt unto the choice vine; He hath washed his garments in wine,
And his vesture in the blood of grapes:

<span id="an_49:12">49:12</span> His eyes shall be red with wine, And
his teeth white with milk.

<span id="an_49:13">49:13</span> Zebulun shall dwell at the haven of the
sea; And he shall be for a haven of ships; And his border shall be upon
Sidon.

<span id="an_49:14">49:14</span> Issachar is a strong ass, Couching down
between the sheepfolds:

<span id="an_49:15">49:15</span> And he saw a resting-place that it was
good, And the land that it was pleasant; And he bowed his shoulder to
bear, And became a servant under taskwork.

<span id="an_49:16">49:16</span> Dan shall judge his people, As one of
the tribes of Israel.

<span id="an_49:17">49:17</span> Dan shall be a serpent in the way, An
adder in the path, That biteth the horse's heels, So that his rider
falleth backward.

<span id="an_49:18">49:18</span> I have waited for thy salvation, O
Jehovah.

<span id="an_49:19">49:19</span> Gad, a troop shall press upon him; But
he shall press upon their heel.

<span id="an_49:20">49:20</span> Out of the Asher his bread shall be
fat, And he shall yield royal dainties.

<span id="an_49:21">49:21</span> Naphtali is a hind let loose: He giveth
goodly words.

<span id="an_49:22">49:22</span> Joseph is a fruitful bough, A fruitful
bough by a fountain; His branches run over the wall.

<span id="an_49:23">49:23</span> The archers have sorely grieved him,
And shot at him, and persecute him:

<span id="an_49:24">49:24</span> But his bow abode in strength, And the
arms of his hands were made strong, By the hands of the Mighty One of
Jacob, (From thence is the shepherd, the stone of Israel),

<span id="an_49:25">49:25</span> Even by the God of thy father, who
shall help thee, And by the Almighty, who shall bless thee, With
blessings of heaven above, Blessings of the deep that coucheth beneath,
Blessings of the breasts, and of the womb.

<span id="an_49:26">49:26</span> The blessings of thy father Have
prevailed above the blessings of my progenitors Unto the utmost bound of
the everlasting hills: They shall be on the head of Joseph, And on the
crown of the head of him that was separate from his brethren.

<span id="an_49:27">49:27</span> Benjamin is a wolf that raveneth: In
the morning she shall devour the prey, And at even he shall divide the
spoil.

<span id="an_49:28">49:28</span> All these are the twelve tribes of
Israel: and this is it that their father spake unto them and blessed
them; every one according to his blessing he blessed them.

<span id="an_49:29">49:29</span> And he charged them, and said unto
them, I am to be gathered unto my people: bury me with my fathers in the
cave that is in the field of Ephron the Hittite,

<span id="an_49:30">49:30</span> in the cave that is in the field of
Machpelah, which is before Mamre, in the land of Canaan, which Abraham
bought with the field from Ephron the Hittite for a possession of a
burying-place.

<span id="an_49:31">49:31</span> there they buried Abraham and Sarah his
wife; there they buried Isaac and Rebekah his wife; and there I buried
Leah:

<span id="an_49:32">49:32</span> the field and the cave that is therein,
which was purchased from the children of Heth.

<span id="an_49:33">49:33</span> And when Jacob made an end of charging
his sons, he gathered up his feet into the bed, and yielded up the
ghost, and was gathered unto his people.

<span id="an_50:1">50:1</span> And Joseph fell upon his father's face,
and wept upon him, and kissed him.

<span id="an_50:2">50:2</span> And Joseph commanded his servants the
physicians to embalm his father: and the physicians embalmed Israel.

<span id="an_50:3">50:3</span> And forty days were fulfilled for him;
for so are fulfilled the days of embalming: and the Egyptians wept for
him three-score and ten days.

<span id="an_50:4">50:4</span> And when the days of weeping for him were
past, Joseph spake unto the house of Pharaoh, saying, If now I have
found favor in your eyes, speak, I pray you, in the ears of Pharaoh,
saying,

<span id="an_50:5">50:5</span> My father made me swear, saying, Lo, I
die: in my grave which I have digged for me in the land of Canaan, there
shalt thou bury me. Now therefore let me go up, I pray thee, and bury my
father, and I will come again.

<span id="an_50:6">50:6</span> And Pharaoh said, Go up, and bury thy
father, according as he made thee swear.

<span id="an_50:7">50:7</span> And Joseph went up to bury his father;
and with him went up all the servants of Pharaoh, the elders of his
house, and all the elders of the land of Egypt,

<span id="an_50:8">50:8</span> and all the house of Joseph, and his
brethren, and his father's house: only their little ones, and their
flocks, and their herds, they left in the land of Goshen.

<span id="an_50:9">50:9</span> And there went up with him both chariots
and horsemen: and it was a very great company.

<span id="an_50:10">50:10</span> And they came to the threshing-floor of
Atad, which is beyond the Jordan, and there they lamented with a very
great and sore lamentation: and he made a mourning for his father seven
days.

<span id="an_50:11">50:11</span> And when the inhabitants of the land,
the Canaanites, saw the mourning in the floor of Atad, they said, This
is a grievous mourning to the Egyptians: wherefore the name of it was
called Abel-mizraim, which is beyond the Jordan.

<span id="an_50:12">50:12</span> And his sons did unto him according as
he commanded them:

<span id="an_50:13">50:13</span> for his sons carried him into the land
of Canaan, and buried him in the cave of the field of Machpelah, which
Abraham bought with the field, for a possession of a burying-place, of
Ephron the Hittite, before Mamre.

<span id="an_50:14">50:14</span> And Joseph returned into Egypt, he, and
his brethren, and all that went up with him to bury his father, after he
had buried his father.

<span id="an_50:15">50:15</span> And when Joseph's brethren saw that
their father was dead, they said, It may be that Joseph will hate us,
and will fully requite us all the evil which we did unto him.

<span id="an_50:16">50:16</span> And they sent a message unto Joseph,
saying, Thy father did command before he died, saying,

<span id="an_50:17">50:17</span> So shall ye say unto Joseph, Forgive, I
pray thee now, the transgression of thy brethren, and their sin, for
that they did unto thee evil. And now, we pray thee, forgive the
transgression of the servants of the God of thy father. And Joseph wept
when they spake unto him.

<span id="an_50:18">50:18</span> And his brethren also went and fell
down before his face; and they said, Behold, we are thy servants.

<span id="an_50:19">50:19</span> And Joseph said unto them, Fear not:
for am I in the place of God?

<span id="an_50:20">50:20</span> And as for you, ye meant evil against
me; but God meant it for good, to bring to pass, as it is this day, to
save much people alive.

<span id="an_50:21">50:21</span> Now therefore fear ye not: I will
nourish you, and your little ones. And he comforted them, and spake
kindly unto them.

<span id="an_50:22">50:22</span> And Joseph dwelt in Egypt, he, and his
father's house: and Joseph lived a hundred and ten years.

<span id="an_50:23">50:23</span> And Joseph saw Ephraim's children of
the third generation: the children also of Machir the son of Manasseh
were born upon Joseph's knees.

<span id="an_50:24">50:24</span> And Joseph said unto his brethren, I
die; but God will surely visit you, and bring you up out of this land
unto the land which he sware to Abraham, to Isaac, and to Jacob.

<span id="an_50:25">50:25</span> And Joseph took an oath of the children
of Israel, saying, God will surely visit you, and ye shall carry up my
bones from hence.

<span id="an_50:26">50:26</span> So Joseph died, being a hundred and ten
years old: and they embalmed him, and he was put in a coffin in Egypt.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Exodus](exo)
