[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index)  [English
Bibles](../eb)  [Index](index)  [Previous](nah)  [Next](zep) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### American Standard Version: Habakkuk

<span id="an_1:1">1:1</span> The burden which Habakkuk the prophet did
see.

<span id="an_1:2">1:2</span> O Jehovah, how long shall I cry, and thou
wilt not hear? I cry out unto thee of violence, and thou wilt not save.

<span id="an_1:3">1:3</span> Why dost thou show me iniquity, and look
upon perverseness? for destruction and violence are before me; and there
is strife, and contention riseth up.

<span id="an_1:4">1:4</span> Therefore the law is slacked, and justice
doth never go forth; for the wicked doth compass about the righteous;
therefore justice goeth forth perverted.

<span id="an_1:5">1:5</span> Behold ye among the nations, and look, and
wonder marvellously; for I am working a work in your days, which ye will
not believe though it be told you.

<span id="an_1:6">1:6</span> For, lo, I raise up the Chaldeans, that
bitter and hasty nation, that march through the breadth of the earth, to
possess dwelling-places that are not theirs.

<span id="an_1:7">1:7</span> They are terrible and dreadful; their
judgment and their dignity proceed from themselves.

<span id="an_1:8">1:8</span> Their horses also are swifter than
leopards, and are more fierce than the evening wolves; and their
horsemen press proudly on: yea, their horsemen come from far; they fly
as an eagle that hasteth to devour.

<span id="an_1:9">1:9</span> They come all of them for violence; the set
of their faces is forwards; and they gather captives as the sand.

<span id="an_1:10">1:10</span> Yea, he scoffeth at kings, and princes
are a derision unto him; he derideth every stronghold; for he heapeth up
dust, and taketh it.

<span id="an_1:11">1:11</span> Then shall he sweep by \[as\] a wind, and
shall pass over, and be guilty, \[even\] he whose might is his god.

<span id="an_1:12">1:12</span> Art not thou from everlasting, O Jehovah
my God, my Holy One? we shall not die. O Jehovah, thou hast ordained him
for judgment; and thou, O Rock, hast established him for correction.

<span id="an_1:13">1:13</span> Thou that art of purer eyes than to
behold evil, and that canst not look on perverseness, wherefore lookest
thou upon them that deal treacherously, and holdest thy peace when the
wicked swalloweth up the man that is more righteous than he;

<span id="an_1:14">1:14</span> and makest men as the fishes of the sea,
as the creeping things, that have no ruler over them?

<span id="an_1:15">1:15</span> He taketh up all of them with the angle,
he catcheth them in his net, and gathereth them in his drag: therefore
he rejoiceth and is glad.

<span id="an_1:16">1:16</span> Therefore he sacrificeth unto his net,
and burneth incense unto his drag; because by them his portion is fat,
and his food plenteous.

<span id="an_1:17">1:17</span> Shall he therefore empty his net, and
spare not to slay the nations continually?

<span id="an_2:1">2:1</span> I will stand upon my watch, and set me upon
the tower, and will look forth to see what he will speak with me, and
what I shall answer concerning my complaint.

<span id="an_2:2">2:2</span> And Jehovah answered me, and said, Write
the vision, and make it plain upon tablets, that he may run that readeth
it.

<span id="an_2:3">2:3</span> For the vision is yet for the appointed
time, and it hasteth toward the end, and shall not lie: though it tarry,
wait for it; because it will surely come, it will not delay.

<span id="an_2:4">2:4</span> Behold, his soul is puffed up, it is not
upright in him; but the righteous shall live by his faith.

<span id="an_2:5">2:5</span> Yea, moreover, wine is treacherous, a
haughty man, that keepeth not at home; who enlargeth his desire as
Sheol, and he is as death, and cannot be satisfied, but gathereth unto
him all nations, and heapeth unto him all peoples.

<span id="an_2:6">2:6</span> Shall not all these take up a parable
against him, and a taunting proverb against him, and say, Woe to him
that increaseth that which is not his! how long? and that ladeth himself
with pledges!

<span id="an_2:7">2:7</span> Shall they not rise up suddenly that shall
bite thee, and awake that shall vex thee, and thou shalt be for booty
unto them?

<span id="an_2:8">2:8</span> Because thou hast plundered many nations,
all the remnant of the peoples shall plunder thee, because of men's
blood, and for the violence done to the land, to the city and to all
that dwell therein.

<span id="an_2:9">2:9</span> Woe to him that getteth an evil gain for
his house, that he may set his nest on high, that he may be delivered
from the hand of evil!

<span id="an_2:10">2:10</span> Thou hast devised shame to thy house, by
cutting off many peoples, and hast sinned against thy soul.

<span id="an_2:11">2:11</span> For the stone shall cry out of the wall,
and the beam out of the timber shall answer it.

<span id="an_2:12">2:12</span> Woe to him that buildeth a town with
blood, and establisheth a city by iniquity!

<span id="an_2:13">2:13</span> Behold, is it not of Jehovah of hosts
that the peoples labor for the fire, and the nations weary themselves
for vanity?

<span id="an_2:14">2:14</span> For the earth shall be filled with the
knowledge of the glory of Jehovah, as the waters cover the sea.

<span id="an_2:15">2:15</span> Woe unto him that giveth his neighbor
drink, \[to thee\] that addest thy venom, and makest him drunken also,
that thou mayest look on their nakedness!

<span id="an_2:16">2:16</span> Thou art filled with shame, and not
glory: drink thou also, and be as one uncircumcised; the cup of
Jehovah's right hand shall come round unto thee, and foul shame shall be
upon thy glory.

<span id="an_2:17">2:17</span> For the violence done to Lebanon shall
cover thee, and the destruction of the beasts, which made them afraid;
because of men's blood, and for the violence done to the land, to the
city and to all that dwell therein.

<span id="an_2:18">2:18</span> What profiteth the graven image, that the
maker thereof hath graven it; the molten image, even the teacher of
lies, that he that fashioneth its form trusteth therein, to make dumb
idols?

<span id="an_2:19">2:19</span> Woe unto him that saith to the wood,
Awake; to the dumb stone, Arise! Shall this teach? Behold, it is
overlaid with gold and silver, and there is no breath at all in the
midst of it.

<span id="an_2:20">2:20</span> But Jehovah is in his holy temple: let
all the earth keep silence before him.

<span id="an_3:1">3:1</span> A prayer of Habakkuk the prophet, set to
Shigionoth.

<span id="an_3:2">3:2</span> O Jehovah, I have heard the report of thee,
and am afraid: O Jehovah, revive thy work in the midst of the years; In
the midst of the years make it known; In wrath remember mercy.

<span id="an_3:3">3:3</span> God came from Teman, And the Holy One from
mount Paran. Selah. His glory covered the heavens, And the earth was
full of his praise.

<span id="an_3:4">3:4</span> And \[his\] brightness was as the light; He
had rays \[coming forth\] from his hand; And there was the hiding of his
power.

<span id="an_3:5">3:5</span> Before him went the pestilence, And fiery
bolts went forth at his feet.

<span id="an_3:6">3:6</span> He stood, and measured the earth; He
beheld, and drove asunder the nations; And the eternal mountains were
scattered; The everlasting hills did bow; His goings were \[as\] of old.

<span id="an_3:7">3:7</span> I saw the tents of Cushan in affliction;
The curtains of the land of Midian did tremble.

<span id="an_3:8">3:8</span> Was Jehovah displeased with the rivers? Was
thine anger against the rivers, Or thy wrath against the sea, That thou
didst ride upon thy horses, Upon thy chariots of salvation?

<span id="an_3:9">3:9</span> Thy bow was made quite bare; The oaths to
the tribes were a \[sure\] word. Selah. Thou didst cleave the earth with
rivers.

<span id="an_3:10">3:10</span> The mountains saw thee, and were afraid;
The tempest of waters passed by; The deep uttered its voice, And lifted
up its hands on high.

<span id="an_3:11">3:11</span> The sun and moon stood still in their
habitation, At the light of thine arrows as they went, At the shining of
thy glittering spear.

<span id="an_3:12">3:12</span> Thou didst march though the land in
indignation; Thou didst thresh the nations in anger.

<span id="an_3:13">3:13</span> Thou wentest forth for the salvation of
thy people, For the salvation of thine anointed; Thou woundest the head
out of the house of the wicked man, Laying bare the foundation even unto
the neck. Selah.

<span id="an_3:14">3:14</span> Thou didst pierce with his own staves the
head of his warriors: They came as a whirlwind to scatter me; Their
rejoicing was as to devour the poor secretly.

<span id="an_3:15">3:15</span> Thou didst tread the sea with thy horses,
The heap of mighty waters.

<span id="an_3:16">3:16</span> I heard, and my body trembled, My lips
quivered at the voice; Rottenness entereth into my bones, and I tremble
in my place; Because I must wait quietly for the day of trouble, For the
coming up of the people that invadeth us.

<span id="an_3:17">3:17</span> For though the fig-tree shall not
flourish, Neither shall fruit be in the vines; The labor of the olive
shall fail, And the fields shall yield no food; The flock shall be cut
off from the fold, And there shall be no herd in the stalls:

<span id="an_3:18">3:18</span> Yet I will rejoice in Jehovah, I will joy
in the God of my salvation.

<span id="an_3:19">3:19</span> Jehovah, the Lord, is my strength; And he
maketh my feet like hinds' \[feet\], And will make me to walk upon my
high places.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Zephaniah](zep)
