[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index)  [English
Bibles](../eb)  [Index](index)  [Previous](zep)  [Next](zac) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### American Standard Version: Haggai

<span id="an_1:1">1:1</span> In the second year of Darius the king, in
the sixth month, in the first day of the month, came the word of Jehovah
by Haggai the prophet unto Zerubbabel the son of Shealtiel, governor of
Judah, and to Joshua the son of Jehozadak, the high priest, saying,

<span id="an_1:2">1:2</span> Thus speaketh Jehovah of hosts, saying,
This people say, It is not the time \[for us\] to come, the time for
Jehovah's house to be built.

<span id="an_1:3">1:3</span> Then came the word of Jehovah by Haggai the
prophet, saying,

<span id="an_1:4">1:4</span> Is it a time for you yourselves to dwell in
your ceiled houses, while this house lieth waste?

<span id="an_1:5">1:5</span> Now therefore thus saith Jehovah of hosts:
Consider your ways.

<span id="an_1:6">1:6</span> Ye have sown much, and bring in little; ye
eat, but ye have not enough; ye drink, but ye are not filled with drink;
ye clothe you, but there is none warm; and he that earneth wages earneth
wages \[to put it\] into a bag with holes.

<span id="an_1:7">1:7</span> Thus saith Jehovah of hosts: Consider your
ways.

<span id="an_1:8">1:8</span> Go up to the mountain, and bring wood, and
build the house; and I will take pleasure in it, and I will be
glorified, saith Jehovah.

<span id="an_1:9">1:9</span> Ye looked for much, and, lo, it came to
little; and when ye brought it home, I did blow upon it. Why? saith
Jehovah of hosts. Because of my house that lieth waste, while ye run
every man to his own house.

<span id="an_1:10">1:10</span> Therefore for your sake the heavens
withhold the dew, and the earth withholdeth its fruit.

<span id="an_1:11">1:11</span> And I called for a drought upon the land,
and upon the mountains, and upon the grain, and upon the new wine, and
upon the oil, and upon that which the ground bringeth forth, and upon
men, and upon cattle, and upon all the labor of the hands.

<span id="an_1:12">1:12</span> Then Zerubbabel the son of Shealtiel, and
Joshua the son of Jehozadak, the high priest, with all the remnant of
the people, obeyed the voice of Jehovah their God, and the words of
Haggai the prophet, as Jehovah their God had sent him; and the people
did fear before Jehovah.

<span id="an_1:13">1:13</span> Then spake Haggai Jehovah's messenger in
Jehovah's message unto the people, saying, I am with you, saith Jehovah.

<span id="an_1:14">1:14</span> And Jehovah stirred up the spirit of
Zerubbabel the son of Shealtiel, governor of Judah, and the spirit of
Joshua the son of Jehozadak, the high priest, and the spirit of all the
remnant of the people; and they came and did work on the house of
Jehovah of hosts, their God,

<span id="an_1:15">1:15</span> in the four and twentieth day of the
month, in the sixth \[month\], in the second year of Darius the king.

<span id="an_2:1">2:1</span> In the seventh \[month\], in the one and
twentieth \[day\] of the month, came the word of Jehovah by Haggai the
prophet, saying,

<span id="an_2:2">2:2</span> Speak now to Zerubbabel the son of
Shealtiel, governor of Judah, and to Joshua the son of Jehozadak, the
high priest, and to the remnant of the people, saying,

<span id="an_2:3">2:3</span> Who is left among you that saw this house
in its former glory? and how do ye see it now? is it not in your eyes as
nothing?

<span id="an_2:4">2:4</span> Yet now be strong, O Zerubbabel, saith
Jehovah; and be strong, O Joshua, son of Jehozadak, the high priest; and
be strong, all ye people of the land, saith Jehovah, and work: for I am
with you, saith Jehovah of hosts,

<span id="an_2:5">2:5</span> \[according to\] the word that I covenanted
with you when ye came out of Egypt, and my Spirit abode among you: fear
ye not.

<span id="an_2:6">2:6</span> For thus saith Jehovah of hosts: Yet once,
it is a little while, and I will shake the heavens, and the earth, and
the sea, and the dry land;

<span id="an_2:7">2:7</span> and I will shake all nations; and the
precious things of all nations shall come; and I will fill this house
with glory, saith Jehovah of hosts.

<span id="an_2:8">2:8</span> The silver is mine, and the gold is mine,
saith Jehovah of hosts.

<span id="an_2:9">2:9</span> The latter glory of this house shall be
greater than the former, saith Jehovah of hosts; and in this place will
I give peace, saith Jehovah of hosts.

<span id="an_2:10">2:10</span> In the four and twentieth \[day\] of the
ninth \[month\], in the second year of Darius, came the word of Jehovah
by Haggai the prophet, saying,

<span id="an_2:11">2:11</span> Thus saith Jehovah of hosts: Ask now the
priests concerning the law, saying,

<span id="an_2:12">2:12</span> If one bear holy flesh in the skirt of
his garment, and with his skirt do touch bread, or pottage, or wine, or
oil, or any food, shall it become holy? And the priests answered and
said, No.

<span id="an_2:13">2:13</span> Then said Haggai, If one that is unclean
by reason of a dead body touch any of these, shall it be unclean? And
the priests answered and said, It shall be unclean.

<span id="an_2:14">2:14</span> Then answered Haggai and said, So is this
people, and so is this nation before me, saith Jehovah; and so is every
work of their hands; and that which they offer there is unclean.

<span id="an_2:15">2:15</span> And now, I pray you, consider from this
day and backward, before a stone was laid upon a stone in the temple of
Jehovah.

<span id="an_2:16">2:16</span> Through all that time, when one came to a
heap of twenty \[measures\], there were but ten; when one came to the
winevat to draw out fifty \[vessels\], there were but twenty.

<span id="an_2:17">2:17</span> I smote you with blasting and with mildew
and with hail in all the work of your hands; yet ye \[turned\] not to
me, saith Jehovah.

<span id="an_2:18">2:18</span> Consider, I pray you, from this day and
backward, from the four and twentieth day of the ninth \[month\], since
the day that the foundation of Jehovah's temple was laid, consider it.

<span id="an_2:19">2:19</span> Is the seed yet in the barn? yea, the
vine, and the fig-tree, and the pomegranate, and the olive-tree have not
brought forth; from this day will I bless \[you\].

<span id="an_2:20">2:20</span> And the word of Jehovah came the second
time unto Haggai in the four and twentieth \[day\] of the month, saying,

<span id="an_2:21">2:21</span> Speak to Zerubbabel, governor of Judah,
saying, I will shake the heavens and the earth;

<span id="an_2:22">2:22</span> and I will overthrow the throne of
kingdoms; and I will destroy the strength of the kingdoms of the
nations; and I will overthrow the chariots, and those that ride in them;
and the horses and their riders shall come down, every one by the sword
of his brother.

<span id="an_2:23">2:23</span> In that day, saith Jehovah of hosts, will
I take thee, O Zerubbabel, my servant, the son of Shealtiel, saith
Jehovah, and will make thee as a signet; for I have chosen thee, saith
Jehovah of hosts.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Zechariah](zac)
