[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index)  [English
Bibles](../eb)  [Index](index)  [Previous](dan)  [Next](joe) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### American Standard Version: Hosea

<span id="an_1:1">1:1</span> The word of Jehovah that came unto Hosea
the son of Beeri, in the days of Uzziah, Jotham, Ahaz, and Hezekiah,
kings of Judah, and in the days of Jeroboam the son of Joash, king of
Israel.

<span id="an_1:2">1:2</span> When Jehovah spake at the first by Hosea,
Jehovah said unto Hosea, Go, take unto thee a wife of whoredom and
children of whoredom; for the land doth commit great whoredom,
\[departing\] from Jehovah.

<span id="an_1:3">1:3</span> So he went and took Gomer the daughter of
Diblaim; and she conceived, and bare him a son.

<span id="an_1:4">1:4</span> And Jehovah said unto him, Call his name
Jezreel; for yet a little while, and I will avenge the blood of Jezreel
upon the house of Jehu, and will cause the kingdom of the house of
Israel to cease.

<span id="an_1:5">1:5</span> And it shall come to pass at that day, that
I will break the bow of Israel in the valley of Jezreel.

<span id="an_1:6">1:6</span> And she conceived again, and bare a
daughter. And \[Jehovah\] said unto him, Call her name Lo-ruhamah; for I
will no more have mercy upon the house of Israel, that I should in any
wise pardon them.

<span id="an_1:7">1:7</span> But I will have mercy upon the house of
Judah, and will save them by Jehovah their God, and will not save them
by bow, nor by sword, nor by battle, by horses, nor by horsemen.

<span id="an_1:8">1:8</span> Now when she had weaned Lo-ruhamah, she
conceived, and bare a son.

<span id="an_1:9">1:9</span> And \[Jehovah\] said, Call his name
Lo-ammi; for ye are not my people, and I will not be your \[God\].

<span id="an_1:10">1:10</span> Yet the number of the children of Israel
shall be as the sand of the sea, which cannot be measured nor numbered;
and it shall come to pass that, in the place where it was said unto
them, Ye are not my people, it shall be said unto them, \[Ye are\] the
sons of the living God.

<span id="an_1:11">1:11</span> And the children of Judah and the
children of Israel shall be gathered together, and they shall appoint
themselves one head, and shall go up from the land; for great shall be
the day of Jezreel.

<span id="an_2:1">2:1</span> Say ye unto your brethren, Ammi; and to
your sisters, Ruhamah.

<span id="an_2:2">2:2</span> Contend with your mother, contend; for she
is not my wife, neither am I her husband; and let her put away her
whoredoms from her face, and her adulteries from between her breasts;

<span id="an_2:3">2:3</span> lest I strip her naked, and set her as in
the day that she was born, and make her as a wilderness, and set her
like a dry land, and slay her with thirst.

<span id="an_2:4">2:4</span> Yea, upon her children will I have no
mercy; for they are children of whoredom;

<span id="an_2:5">2:5</span> for their mother hath played the harlot;
she that conceived them hath done shamefully; for she said, I will go
after my lovers, that give me my bread and my water, my wool and my
flax, mine oil and my drink.

<span id="an_2:6">2:6</span> Therefore, behold, I will hedge up thy way
with thorns, and I will build a wall against her, that she shall not
find her paths.

<span id="an_2:7">2:7</span> And she shall follow after her lovers, but
she shall not overtake them; and she shall seek them, but shall not find
them: then shall she say, I will go and return to my first husband; for
then was it better with me than now.

<span id="an_2:8">2:8</span> For she did not know that I gave her the
grain, and the new wine, and the oil, and multiplied unto her silver and
gold, which they used for Baal.

<span id="an_2:9">2:9</span> Therefore will I take back my grain in the
time thereof, and my new wine in the season thereof, and will pluck away
my wool and my flax which should have covered her nakedness.

<span id="an_2:10">2:10</span> And now will I uncover her lewdness in
the sight of her lovers, and none shall deliver her out of my hand.

<span id="an_2:11">2:11</span> I will also cause all her mirth to cease,
her feasts, her new moons, and her sabbaths, and all her solemn
assemblies.

<span id="an_2:12">2:12</span> And I will lay waste her vines and her
fig-trees, whereof she hath said, These are my hire that my lovers have
given me; and I will make them a forest, and the beasts of the field
shall eat them.

<span id="an_2:13">2:13</span> And I will visit upon her the days of the
Baalim, unto which she burned incense, when she decked herself with her
earrings and her jewels, and went after her lovers, and forgat me, saith
Jehovah.

<span id="an_2:14">2:14</span> Therefore, behold, I will allure her, and
bring her into the wilderness, and speak comfortably unto her.

<span id="an_2:15">2:15</span> And I will give her her vineyards from
thence, and the valley of Achor for a door of hope; and she shall make
answer there, as in the days of her youth, and as in the day when she
came up out of the land of Egypt.

<span id="an_2:16">2:16</span> And it shall be at that day, saith
Jehovah, that thou shalt call me Ishi, and shalt call me no more Baali.

<span id="an_2:17">2:17</span> For I will take away the names of the
Baalim out of her mouth, and they shall no more be mentioned by their
name.

<span id="an_2:18">2:18</span> And in that day will I make a covenant
for them with the beasts of the field, and with the birds of the
heavens, and with the creeping things of the ground: and I will break
the bow and the sword and the battle out of the land, and will make them
to lie down safely.

<span id="an_2:19">2:19</span> And I will betroth thee unto me for ever;
yea, I will betroth thee unto me in righteousness, and in justice, and
in lovingkindness, and in mercies.

<span id="an_2:20">2:20</span> I will even betroth thee unto me in
faithfulness; and thou shalt know Jehovah.

<span id="an_2:21">2:21</span> And it shall come to pass in that day, I
will answer, saith Jehovah, I will answer the heavens, and they shall
answer the earth;

<span id="an_2:22">2:22</span> and the earth shall answer the grain, and
the new wine, and the oil; and they shall answer Jezreel.

<span id="an_2:23">2:23</span> And I will sow her unto me in the earth;
and I will have mercy upon her that had not obtained mercy; and I will
say to them that were not my people, Thou art my people; and they shall
say, \[Thou art\] my God.

<span id="an_3:1">3:1</span> And Jehovah said unto me, Go again, love a
woman beloved of \[her\] friend, and an adulteress, even as Jehovah
loveth the children of Israel, though they turn unto other gods, and
love cakes of raisins.

<span id="an_3:2">3:2</span> So I bought her to me for fifteen
\[pieces\] of silver, and a homer of barley, and a half-homer of barley;

<span id="an_3:3">3:3</span> and I said unto her, Thou shalt abide for
me many days; thou shalt not play the harlot, and thou shalt not be any
man's wife: so will I also be toward thee.

<span id="an_3:4">3:4</span> For the children of Israel shall abide many
days without king, and without prince, and without sacrifice, and
without pillar, and without ephod or teraphim:

<span id="an_3:5">3:5</span> afterward shall the children of Israel
return, and seek Jehovah their God, and David their king, and shall come
with fear unto Jehovah and to his goodness in the latter days.

<span id="an_4:1">4:1</span> Hear the word of Jehovah, ye children of
Israel; for Jehovah hath a controversy with the inhabitants of the land,
because there is no truth, nor goodness, nor knowledge of God in the
land.

<span id="an_4:2">4:2</span> There is nought but swearing and breaking
faith, and killing, and stealing, and committing adultery; they break
out, and blood toucheth blood.

<span id="an_4:3">4:3</span> Therefore shall the land mourn, and every
one that dwelleth therein shall languish, with the beasts of the field
and the birds of the heavens; yea, the fishes of the sea also shall be
taken away.

<span id="an_4:4">4:4</span> Yet let no man strive, neither let any man
reprove; for thy people are as they that strive with the priest.

<span id="an_4:5">4:5</span> And thou shalt stumble in the day, and the
prophet also shall stumble with thee in the night; and I will destroy
thy mother.

<span id="an_4:6">4:6</span> My people are destroyed for lack of
knowledge: because thou hast rejected knowledge, I will also reject
thee, that thou shalt be no priest to me: seeing thou hast forgotten the
law of thy God, I also will forget thy children.

<span id="an_4:7">4:7</span> As they were multiplied, so they sinned
against me: I will change their glory into shame.

<span id="an_4:8">4:8</span> They feed on the sin of my people, and set
their heart on their iniquity.

<span id="an_4:9">4:9</span> And it shall be, like people, like priest;
and I will punish them for their ways, and will requite them their
doings.

<span id="an_4:10">4:10</span> And they shall eat, and not have enough;
they shall play the harlot, and shall not increase; because they have
left off taking heed to Jehovah.

<span id="an_4:11">4:11</span> Whoredom and wine and new wine take away
the understanding.

<span id="an_4:12">4:12</span> My people ask counsel at their stock, and
their staff declareth unto them; for the spirit of whoredom hath caused
them to err, and they have played the harlot, \[departing\] from under
their God.

<span id="an_4:13">4:13</span> They sacrifice upon the tops of the
mountains, and burn incense upon the hills, under oaks and poplars and
terebinths, because the shadow thereof is good: therefore your daughters
play the harlot, and your brides commit adultery.

<span id="an_4:14">4:14</span> I will not punish your daughters when
they play the harlot, nor your brides when they commit adultery; for
\[the men\] themselves go apart with harlots, and they sacrifice with
the prostitutes; and the people that doth not understand shall be
overthrown.

<span id="an_4:15">4:15</span> Though thou, Israel, play the harlot, yet
let not Judah offend; and come not ye unto Gilgal, neither go ye up to
Beth-aven, nor swear, As Jehovah liveth.

<span id="an_4:16">4:16</span> For Israel hath behaved himself
stubbornly, like a stubborn heifer: now will Jehovah feed them as a lamb
in a large place.

<span id="an_4:17">4:17</span> Ephraim is joined to idols; let him
alone.

<span id="an_4:18">4:18</span> Their drink is become sour; they play the
harlot continually; her rulers dearly love shame.

<span id="an_4:19">4:19</span> The wind hath wrapped her up in its
wings; and they shall be put to shame because of their sacrifices.

<span id="an_5:1">5:1</span> Hear this, O ye priests, and hearken, O
house of Israel, and give ear, O house of the king; for unto you
pertaineth the judgment; for ye have been a snare at Mizpah, and a net
spread upon Tabor.

<span id="an_5:2">5:2</span> And the revolters are gone deep in making
slaughter; but I am a rebuker of them all.

<span id="an_5:3">5:3</span> I know Ephraim, and Israel is not hid from
me; for now, O Ephraim, thou hast played the harlot, Israel is defiled.

<span id="an_5:4">5:4</span> Their doings will not suffer them to turn
unto their God; for the spirit of whoredom is within them, and they know
not Jehovah.

<span id="an_5:5">5:5</span> And the pride of Israel doth testify to his
face: therefore Israel and Ephraim shall stumble in their iniquity;
Judah also shall stumble with them.

<span id="an_5:6">5:6</span> They shall go with their flocks and with
their herds to seek Jehovah; but they shall not find him: he hath
withdrawn himself from them.

<span id="an_5:7">5:7</span> They have dealt treacherously against
Jehovah; for they have borne strange children: now shall the new moon
devour them with their fields.

<span id="an_5:8">5:8</span> Blow ye the cornet in Gibeah, and the
trumpet in Ramah: sound an alarm at Beth-aven; behind thee, O Benjamin.

<span id="an_5:9">5:9</span> Ephraim shall become a desolation in the
day of rebuke: among the tribes of Israel have I made known that which
shall surely be.

<span id="an_5:10">5:10</span> The princes of Judah are like them that
remove the landmark: I will pour out my wrath upon them like water.

<span id="an_5:11">5:11</span> Ephraim is oppressed, he is crushed in
judgment; because he was content to walk after \[man's\] command.

<span id="an_5:12">5:12</span> Therefore am I unto Ephraim as a moth,
and to the house of Judah as rottenness.

<span id="an_5:13">5:13</span> When Ephraim saw his sickness, and Judah
\[saw\] his wound, then went Ephraim to Assyria, and sent to king Jareb:
but he is not able to heal you, neither will he cure you of your wound.

<span id="an_5:14">5:14</span> For I will be unto Ephraim as a lion, and
as a young lion to the house of Judah: I, even I, will tear and go away;
I will carry off, and there shall be none to deliver.

<span id="an_5:15">5:15</span> I will go and return to my place, till
they acknowledge their offence, and seek my face: in their affliction
they will seek me earnestly.

<span id="an_6:1">6:1</span> Come, and let us return unto Jehovah; for
he hath torn, and he will heal us; he hath smitten, and he will bind us
up.

<span id="an_6:2">6:2</span> After two days will he revive us: on the
third day he will raise us up, and we shall live before him.

<span id="an_6:3">6:3</span> And let us know, let us follow on to know
Jehovah: his going forth is sure as the morning; and he will come unto
us as the rain, as the latter rain that watereth the earth.

<span id="an_6:4">6:4</span> O Ephraim, what shall I do unto thee? O
Judah, what shall I do unto thee? for your goodness is as a morning
cloud, and as the dew that goeth early away.

<span id="an_6:5">6:5</span> Therefore have I hewed them by the
prophets; I have slain them by the words of my mouth: and thy judgments
are \[as\] the light that goeth forth.

<span id="an_6:6">6:6</span> For I desire goodness, and not sacrifice;
and the knowledge of God more than burnt-offerings.

<span id="an_6:7">6:7</span> But they like Adam have transgressed the
covenant: there have they dealt treacherously against me.

<span id="an_6:8">6:8</span> Gilead is a city of them that work
iniquity; it is stained with blood.

<span id="an_6:9">6:9</span> And as troops of robbers wait for a man, so
the company of priests murder in the way toward Shechem; yea, they have
committed lewdness.

<span id="an_6:10">6:10</span> In the house of Israel I have seen a
horrible thing: there whoredom is \[found\] in Ephraim, Israel is
defiled.

<span id="an_6:11">6:11</span> Also, O Judah, there is a harvest
appointed for thee, when I bring back the captivity of my people.

<span id="an_7:1">7:1</span> When I would heal Israel, then is the
iniquity of Ephraim uncovered, and the wickedness of Samaria; for they
commit falsehood, and the thief entereth in, and the troop of robbers
ravageth without.

<span id="an_7:2">7:2</span> And they consider not in their hearts that
I remember all their wickedness: now have their own doings beset them
about; they are before my face.

<span id="an_7:3">7:3</span> They make the king glad with their
wickedness, and the princes with their lies.

<span id="an_7:4">7:4</span> They are all adulterers; they are as an
oven heated by the baker; he ceaseth to stir \[the fire\], from the
kneading of the dough, until it be leavened.

<span id="an_7:5">7:5</span> On the day of our king the princes made
themselves sick with the heat of wine; he stretched out his hand with
scoffers.

<span id="an_7:6">7:6</span> For they have made ready their heart like
an oven, while they lie in wait: their baker sleepeth all the night; in
the morning it burneth as a flaming fire.

<span id="an_7:7">7:7</span> They are all hot as an oven, and devour
their judges; all their kings are fallen: there is none among them that
calleth unto me.

<span id="an_7:8">7:8</span> Ephraim, he mixeth himself among the
peoples; Ephraim is a cake not turned.

<span id="an_7:9">7:9</span> Strangers have devoured his strength, and
he knoweth \[it\] not: yea, gray hairs are here and there upon him, and
he knoweth \[it\] not.

<span id="an_7:10">7:10</span> And the pride of Israel doth testify to
his face: yet they have not returned unto Jehovah their God, nor sought
him, for all this.

<span id="an_7:11">7:11</span> And Ephraim is like a silly dove, without
understanding: they call unto Egypt, they go to Assyria.

<span id="an_7:12">7:12</span> When they shall go, I will spread my net
upon them; I will bring them down as the birds of the heavens; I will
chastise them, as their congregation hath heard.

<span id="an_7:13">7:13</span> Woe unto them! for they have wandered
from me; destruction unto them! for they have trespassed against me:
though I would redeem them, yet they have spoken lies against me.

<span id="an_7:14">7:14</span> And they have not cried unto me with
their heart, but they howl upon their beds: they assemble themselves for
grain and new wine; they rebel against me.

<span id="an_7:15">7:15</span> Though I have taught and strengthened
their arms, yet do they devise mischief against me.

<span id="an_7:16">7:16</span> They return, but not to \[him that is\]
on high; they are like a deceitful bow; their princes shall fall by the
sword for the rage of their tongue: this shall be their derision in the
land of Egypt.

<span id="an_8:1">8:1</span> \[Set\] the trumpet to thy mouth. As an
eagle \[he cometh\] against the house of Jehovah, because they have
transgressed my covenant, and trespassed against my law.

<span id="an_8:2">8:2</span> They shall cry unto me, My God, we Israel
know thee.

<span id="an_8:3">8:3</span> Israel hath cast off that which is good:
the enemy shall pursue him.

<span id="an_8:4">8:4</span> They have set up kings, but not by me; they
have made princes, and I knew it not: of their silver and their gold
have they made them idols, that they may be cut off.

<span id="an_8:5">8:5</span> He hath cast off thy calf, O Samaria; mine
anger is kindled against them: how long will it be ere they attain to
innocency?

<span id="an_8:6">8:6</span> For from Israel is even this; the workman
made it, and it is no God; yea, the calf of Samaria shall be broken in
pieces.

<span id="an_8:7">8:7</span> For they sow the wind, and they shall reap
the whirlwind: he hath no standing grain; the blade shall yield no meal;
if so be it yield, strangers shall swallow it up.

<span id="an_8:8">8:8</span> Israel is swallowed up: now are they among
the nations as a vessel wherein none delighteth.

<span id="an_8:9">8:9</span> For they are gone up to Assyria, \[like\] a
wild ass alone by himself: Ephraim hath hired lovers.

<span id="an_8:10">8:10</span> Yea, though they hire among the nations,
now will I gather them; and they begin to be diminished by reason of the
burden of the king of princes.

<span id="an_8:11">8:11</span> Because Ephraim hath multiplied altars
for sinning, altars have been unto him for sinning.

<span id="an_8:12">8:12</span> I wrote for him the ten thousand things
of my law; but they are counted as a strange thing.

<span id="an_8:13">8:13</span> As for the sacrifices of mine offerings,
they sacrifice flesh and eat it; but Jehovah accepteth them not: now
will he remember their iniquity, and visit their sins; they shall return
to Egypt.

<span id="an_8:14">8:14</span> For Israel hath forgotten his Maker, and
builded palaces; and Judah hath multiplied fortified cities: but I will
send a fire upon his cities, and it shall devour the castles thereof.

<span id="an_9:1">9:1</span> Rejoice not, O Israel, for joy, like the
peoples; for thou hast played the harlot, \[departing\] from thy God;
thou hast loved hire upon every grain-floor.

<span id="an_9:2">9:2</span> The threshing-floor and the winepress shall
not feed them, and the new wine shall fail her.

<span id="an_9:3">9:3</span> They shall not dwell in Jehovah's land; but
Ephraim shall return to Egypt, and they shall eat unclean food in
Assyria.

<span id="an_9:4">9:4</span> They shall not pour out wine-offerings to
Jehovah, neither shall they be pleasing unto him: their sacrifices shall
be unto them as the bread of mourners; all that eat thereof shall be
polluted; for their bread shall be for their appetite; it shall not come
into the house of Jehovah.

<span id="an_9:5">9:5</span> What will ye do in the day of solemn
assembly, and in the day of the feast of Jehovah?

<span id="an_9:6">9:6</span> For, lo, they are gone away from
destruction; \[yet\] Egypt shall gather them up, Memphis shall bury
them; their pleasant things of silver, nettles shall possess them;
thorns shall be in their tents.

<span id="an_9:7">9:7</span> The days of visitation are come, the days
of recompense are come; Israel shall know it: the prophet is a fool, the
man that hath the spirit is mad, for the abundance of thine iniquity,
and because the enmity is great.

<span id="an_9:8">9:8</span> Ephraim \[was\] a watchman with my God: as
for the prophet, a fowler's snare is in all his ways, \[and\] enmity in
the house of his God.

<span id="an_9:9">9:9</span> They have deeply corrupted themselves, as
in the days of Gibeah: he will remember their iniquity, he will visit
their sins.

<span id="an_9:10">9:10</span> I found Israel like grapes in the
wilderness; I saw your fathers as the first-ripe in the fig-tree at its
first season: but they came to Baal-peor, and consecrated themselves
unto the shameful thing, and became abominable like that which they
loved.

<span id="an_9:11">9:11</span> As for Ephraim, their glory shall fly
away like a bird: there shall be no birth, and none with child, and no
conception.

<span id="an_9:12">9:12</span> Though they bring up their children, yet
will I bereave them, so that not a man shall be left: yea, woe also to
them when I depart from them!

<span id="an_9:13">9:13</span> Ephraim, like as I have seen Tyre, is
planted in a pleasant place: but Ephraim shall bring out his children to
the slayer.

<span id="an_9:14">9:14</span> Give them, O Jehovah-what wilt thou give?
give them a miscarrying womb and dry breasts.

<span id="an_9:15">9:15</span> All their wickedness is in Gilgal; for
there I hated them: because of the wickedness of their doings I will
drive them out of my house; I will love them no more; all their princes
are revolters.

<span id="an_9:16">9:16</span> Ephraim is smitten, their root is dried
up, they shall bear no fruit: yea, though they bring forth, yet will I
slay the beloved fruit of their womb.

<span id="an_9:17">9:17</span> My God will cast them away, because they
did not hearken unto him; and they shall be wanderers among the nations.

<span id="an_10:1">10:1</span> Israel is a luxuriant vine, that putteth
forth his fruit: according to the abundance of his fruit he hath
multiplied his altars; according to the goodness of their land they have
made goodly pillars.

<span id="an_10:2">10:2</span> Their heart is divided; now shall they be
found guilty: he will smite their altars, he will destroy their pillars.

<span id="an_10:3">10:3</span> Surely now shall they say, We have no
king; for we fear not Jehovah; and the king, what can he do for us?

<span id="an_10:4">10:4</span> They speak \[vain\] words, swearing
falsely in making covenants: therefore judgment springeth up as hemlock
in the furrows of the field.

<span id="an_10:5">10:5</span> The inhabitants of Samaria shall be in
terror for the calves of Beth-aven; for the people thereof shall mourn
over it, and the priests thereof that rejoiced over it, for the glory
thereof, because it is departed from it.

<span id="an_10:6">10:6</span> It also shall be carried unto Assyria for
a present to king Jareb: Ephraim shall receive shame, and Israel shall
be ashamed of his own counsel.

<span id="an_10:7">10:7</span> \[As for\] Samaria, her king is cut off,
as foam upon the water.

<span id="an_10:8">10:8</span> The high places also of Aven, the sin of
Israel, shall be destroyed: the thorn and the thistle shall come up on
their altars; and they shall say to the mountains, Cover us; and to the
hills, Fall on us.

<span id="an_10:9">10:9</span> O Israel, thou hast sinned from the days
of Gibeah: there they stood; the battle against the children of iniquity
doth not overtake them in Gibeah.

<span id="an_10:10">10:10</span> When it is my desire, I will chastise
them; and the peoples shall be gathered against them, when they are
bound to their two transgressions.

<span id="an_10:11">10:11</span> And Ephraim is a heifer that is taught,
that loveth to tread out \[the grain\]; but I have passed over upon her
fair neck: I will set a rider on Ephraim; Judah shall plow, Jacob shall
break his clods.

<span id="an_10:12">10:12</span> Sow to yourselves in righteousness,
reap according to kindness; break up your fallow ground; for it is time
to seek Jehovah, till he come and rain righteousness upon you.

<span id="an_10:13">10:13</span> Ye have plowed wickedness, ye have
reaped iniquity; ye have eaten the fruit of lies; for thou didst trust
in thy way, in the multitude of thy mighty men.

<span id="an_10:14">10:14</span> Therefore shall a tumult arise among
thy people, and all thy fortresses shall be destroyed, as Shalman
destroyed Beth-arbel in the day of battle: the mother was dashed in
pieces with her children.

<span id="an_10:15">10:15</span> So shall Beth-el do unto you because of
your great wickedness: at daybreak shall the king of Israel be utterly
cut off.

<span id="an_11:1">11:1</span> When Israel was a child, then I loved
him, and called my son out of Egypt.

<span id="an_11:2">11:2</span> The more \[the prophets\] called them,
the more they went from them: they sacrificed unto the Baalim, and
burned incense to graven images.

<span id="an_11:3">11:3</span> Yet I taught Ephraim to walk; I took them
on my arms; but they knew not that I healed them.

<span id="an_11:4">11:4</span> I drew them with cords of a man, with
bands of love; and I was to them as they that lift up the yoke on their
jaws; and I laid food before them.

<span id="an_11:5">11:5</span> They shall not return into the land of
Egypt; but the Assyrian shall be their king, because they refused to
return \[to me\].

<span id="an_11:6">11:6</span> And the sword shall fall upon their
cities, and shall consume their bars, and devour \[them\], because of
their own counsels.

<span id="an_11:7">11:7</span> And my people are bent on backsliding
from me: though they call them to \[him that is\] on high, none at all
will exalt \[him\].

<span id="an_11:8">11:8</span> How shall I give thee up, Ephraim?
\[how\] shall I cast thee off, Israel? how shall I make thee as Admah?
\[how\] shall I set thee as Zeboiim? my heart is turned within me, my
compassions are kindled together.

<span id="an_11:9">11:9</span> I will not execute the fierceness of mine
anger, I will not return to destroy Ephraim: for I am God, and not man;
the Holy One in the midst of thee; and I will not come in wrath.

<span id="an_11:10">11:10</span> They shall walk after Jehovah, who will
roar like a lion; for he will roar, and the children shall come
trembling from the west.

<span id="an_11:11">11:11</span> They shall come trembling as a bird out
of Egypt, and as a dove out of the land of Assyria; and I will make them
to dwell in their houses, saith Jehovah.

<span id="an_11:12">11:12</span> Ephraim compasseth me about with
falsehood, and the house of Israel with deceit; but Judah yet ruleth
with God, and is faithful with the Holy One.

<span id="an_12:1">12:1</span> Ephraim feedeth on wind, and followeth
after the east wind: he continually multiplieth lies and desolation; and
they make a covenant with Assyria, and oil is carried into Egypt.

<span id="an_12:2">12:2</span> Jehovah hath also a controversy with
Judah, and will punish Jacob according to his ways; according to his
doings will he recompense him.

<span id="an_12:3">12:3</span> In the womb he took his brother by the
heel; and in his manhood he had power with God:

<span id="an_12:4">12:4</span> yea, he had power over the angel, and
prevailed; he wept, and made supplication unto him: he found him at
Beth-el, and there he spake with us,

<span id="an_12:5">12:5</span> even Jehovah, the God of hosts; Jehovah
is his memorial \[name\].

<span id="an_12:6">12:6</span> Therefore turn thou to thy God: keep
kindness and justice, and wait for thy God continually.

<span id="an_12:7">12:7</span> \[He is\] a trafficker, the balances of
deceit are in his hand: he loveth to oppress.

<span id="an_12:8">12:8</span> And Ephraim said, Surely I am become
rich, I have found me wealth: in all my labors they shall find in me no
iniquity that were sin.

<span id="an_12:9">12:9</span> But I am Jehovah thy God from the land of
Egypt; I will yet again make thee to dwell in tents, as in the days of
the solemn feast.

<span id="an_12:10">12:10</span> I have also spoken unto the prophets,
and I have multiplied visions; and by the ministry of the prophets have
I used similitudes.

<span id="an_12:11">12:11</span> Is Gilead iniquity? they are altogether
false; in Gilgal they sacrifice bullocks; yea, their altars are as heaps
in the furrows of the field.

<span id="an_12:12">12:12</span> And Jacob fled into the field of Aram,
and Israel served for a wife, and for a wife he kept \[sheep\].

<span id="an_12:13">12:13</span> And by a prophet Jehovah brought Israel
up out of Egypt, and by a prophet was he preserved.

<span id="an_12:14">12:14</span> Ephraim hath provoked to anger most
bitterly: therefore shall his blood be left upon him, and his reproach
shall his Lord return unto him.

<span id="an_13:1">13:1</span> When Ephraim spake, there was trembling;
he exalted himself in Israel; but when he offended in Baal, he died.

<span id="an_13:2">13:2</span> And now they sin more and more, and have
made them molten images of their silver, even idols according to their
own understanding, all of them the work of the craftsmen: they say of
them, Let the men that sacrifice kiss the calves.

<span id="an_13:3">13:3</span> Therefore they shall be as the morning
cloud, and as the dew that passeth early away, as the chaff that is
driven with the whirlwind out of the threshing-floor, and as the smoke
out of the chimney.

<span id="an_13:4">13:4</span> Yet I am Jehovah thy God from the land of
Egypt; and thou shalt know no god but me, and besides me there is no
saviour.

<span id="an_13:5">13:5</span> I did know thee in the wilderness, in the
land of great drought.

<span id="an_13:6">13:6</span> According to their pasture, so were they
filled; they were filled, and their heart was exalted: therefore have
they forgotten me.

<span id="an_13:7">13:7</span> Therefore am I unto them as a lion; as a
leopard will I watch by the way;

<span id="an_13:8">13:8</span> I will meet them as a bear that is
bereaved of her whelps, and will rend the caul of their heart; and there
will I devour them like a lioness; the wild beast shall tear them.

<span id="an_13:9">13:9</span> It is thy destruction, O Israel, that
\[thou art\] against me, against thy help.

<span id="an_13:10">13:10</span> Where now is thy king, that he may save
thee in all thy cities? and thy judges, of whom thou saidst, Give me a
king and princes?

<span id="an_13:11">13:11</span> I have given thee a king in mine anger,
and have taken him away in my wrath.

<span id="an_13:12">13:12</span> The iniquity of Ephraim is bound up;
his sin is laid up in store.

<span id="an_13:13">13:13</span> The sorrows of a travailing woman shall
come upon him: he is an unwise son; for it is time he should not tarry
in the place of the breaking forth of children.

<span id="an_13:14">13:14</span> I will ransom them from the power of
Sheol; I will redeem them from death: O death, where are thy plagues? O
Sheol, where is thy destruction? repentance shall be hid from mine eyes.

<span id="an_13:15">13:15</span> Though he be fruitful among his
brethren, an east wind shall come, the breath of Jehovah coming up from
the wilderness; and his spring shall become dry, and his fountain shall
be dried up: he shall make spoil of the treasure of all goodly vessels.

<span id="an_13:16">13:16</span> Samaria shall bear her guilt; for she
hath rebelled against her God: they shall fall by the sword; their
infants shall be dashed in pieces, and their women with child shall be
ripped up.

<span id="an_14:1">14:1</span> O Israel, return unto Jehovah thy God;
for thou hast fallen by thine iniquity.

<span id="an_14:2">14:2</span> Take with you words, and return unto
Jehovah: say unto him, Take away all iniquity, and accept that which is
good: so will we render \[as\] bullocks \[the offering of\] our lips.

<span id="an_14:3">14:3</span> Assyria shall not save us; we will not
ride upon horses; neither will we say any more to the work of our hands,
\[Ye are\] our gods; for in thee the fatherless findeth mercy.

<span id="an_14:4">14:4</span> I will heal their backsliding, I will
love them freely; for mine anger is turned away from him.

<span id="an_14:5">14:5</span> I will be as the dew unto Israel; he
shall blossom as the lily, and cast forth his roots as Lebanon.

<span id="an_14:6">14:6</span> His branches shall spread, and his beauty
shall be as the olive-tree, and his smell as Lebanon.

<span id="an_14:7">14:7</span> They that dwell under his shadow shall
return; they shall revive \[as\] the grain, and blossom as the vine: the
scent thereof shall be as the wine of Lebanon.

<span id="an_14:8">14:8</span> Ephraim \[shall say\], What have I to do
any more with idols? I have answered, and will regard him: I am like a
green fir-tree; from me is thy fruit found.

<span id="an_14:9">14:9</span> Who is wise, that he may understand these
things? prudent, that he may know them? for the ways of Jehovah are
right, and the just shall walk in them; but transgressors shall fall
therein.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Joel](joe)
