[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index.md)  [English
Bibles](../eb)  [Index](index)  [Previous](sa2)  [Next](kg2.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### American Standard Version: 1 Kings

<span id="an_1:1">1:1</span> Now king David was old and stricken in
years; and they covered him with clothes, but he gat no heat.

<span id="an_1:2">1:2</span> Wherefore his servants said unto him, Let
there be sought for my lord the king a young virgin: and let her stand
before the king, and cherish him; and let her lie in thy bosom, that my
lord the king may get heat.

<span id="an_1:3">1:3</span> So they sought for a fair damsel throughout
all the borders of Israel, and found Abishag the Shunammite, and brought
her to the king.

<span id="an_1:4">1:4</span> And the damsel was very fair; and she
cherished the king, and ministered to him; but the king knew her not.

<span id="an_1:5">1:5</span> Then Adonijah the son of Haggith exalted
himself, saying, I will be king: and he prepared him chariots and
horsemen, and fifty men to run before him.

<span id="an_1:6">1:6</span> And his father had not displeased him at
any time in saying, Why hast thou done so? and he was also a very goodly
man; and he was born after Absalom.

<span id="an_1:7">1:7</span> And he conferred with Joab the son of
Zeruiah, and with Abiathar the priest: and they following Adonijah
helped him.

<span id="an_1:8">1:8</span> But Zadok the priest, and Benaiah the son
of Jehoiada, and Nathan the prophet, and Shimei, and Rei, and the mighty
men that belonged to David, were not with Adonijah.

<span id="an_1:9">1:9</span> And Adonijah slew sheep and oxen and
fatlings by the stone of Zoheleth, which is beside En-rogel; and he
called all his brethren, the king's sons, and all the men of Judah, the
king's servants:

<span id="an_1:10">1:10</span> but Nathan the prophet, and Benaiah, and
the mighty men, and Solomon his brother, he called not.

<span id="an_1:11">1:11</span> Then Nathan spake unto Bath-sheba the
mother of Solomon, saying, Hast thou not heard that Adonijah the son of
Haggith doth reign, and David our lord knoweth it not?

<span id="an_1:12">1:12</span> Now therefore come, let me, I pray thee,
give thee counsel, that thou mayest save thine own life, and the life of
thy son Solomon.

<span id="an_1:13">1:13</span> Go and get thee in unto king David, and
say unto him, Didst not thou, my lord, O king, swear unto thy handmaid,
saying, Assuredly Solomon thy son shall reign after me, and he shall sit
upon my throne? why then doth Adonijah reign?

<span id="an_1:14">1:14</span> Behold, while thou yet talkest there with
the king, I also will come in after thee, and confirm thy words.

<span id="an_1:15">1:15</span> And Bath-sheba went in unto the king into
the chamber: and the king was very old; and Abishag the Shunammite was
ministering unto the king.

<span id="an_1:16">1:16</span> And Bath-sheba bowed, and did obeisance
unto the king. And the king said, What wouldest thou?

<span id="an_1:17">1:17</span> And she said unto him, My lord, thou
swarest by Jehovah thy God unto thy handmaid, \[saying\], Assuredly
Solomon thy son shall reign after me, and he shall sit upon my throne.

<span id="an_1:18">1:18</span> And now, behold, Adonijah reigneth; and
thou, my lord the king, knowest it not:

<span id="an_1:19">1:19</span> and he hath slain oxen and fatlings and
sheep in abundance, and hath called all the sons of the king, and
Abiathar the priest, and Joab the captain of the host; but Solomon thy
servant hath he not called.

<span id="an_1:20">1:20</span> And thou, my lord the king, the eyes of
all Israel are upon thee, that thou shouldest tell them who shall sit on
the throne of my lord the king after him.

<span id="an_1:21">1:21</span> Otherwise it will come to pass, when my
lord the king shall sleep with his fathers, that I and my son Solomon
shall be counted offenders.

<span id="an_1:22">1:22</span> And, lo, while she yet talked with the
king, Nathan the prophet came in.

<span id="an_1:23">1:23</span> And they told the king, saying, Behold,
Nathan the prophet. And when he was come in before the king, he bowed
himself before the king with his face to the ground.

<span id="an_1:24">1:24</span> And Nathan said, My lord, O king, hast
thou said, Adonijah shall reign after me, and he shall sit upon my
throne?

<span id="an_1:25">1:25</span> For he is gone down this day, and hath
slain oxen and fatlings and sheep in abundance, and hath called all the
king's sons, and the captains of the host, and Abiathar the priest; and,
behold, they are eating and drinking before him, and say, \[Long\] live
king Adonijah.

<span id="an_1:26">1:26</span> But me, even me thy servant, and Zadok
the priest, and Benaiah the son of Jehoiada, and thy servant Solomon,
hath he not called.

<span id="an_1:27">1:27</span> Is this thing done by my lord the king,
and thou hast not showed unto thy servants who should sit on the throne
of my lord the king after him?

<span id="an_1:28">1:28</span> Then king David answered and said, Call
to me Bath-sheba. And she came into the king's presence, and stood
before the king.

<span id="an_1:29">1:29</span> And the king sware, and said, As Jehovah
liveth, who hath redeemed my soul out of all adversity,

<span id="an_1:30">1:30</span> verily as I sware unto thee by Jehovah,
the God of Israel, saying, Assuredly Solomon thy son shall reign after
me, and he shall sit upon my throne in my stead; verily so will I do
this day.

<span id="an_1:31">1:31</span> Then Bath-sheba bowed with her face to
the earth, and did obeisance to the king, and said, Let my lord king
David live for ever.

<span id="an_1:32">1:32</span> And king David said, Call to me Zadok the
priest, and Nathan the prophet, and Benaiah the son of Jehoiada. And
they came before the king.

<span id="an_1:33">1:33</span> And the king said unto them, Take with
you the servants of your lord, and cause Solomon my son to ride upon
mine own mule, and bring him down to Gihon:

<span id="an_1:34">1:34</span> and let Zadok the priest and Nathan the
prophet anoint him there king over Israel; and blow ye the trumpet, and
say, \[Long\] live king Solomon.

<span id="an_1:35">1:35</span> Then ye shall come up after him, and he
shall come and sit upon my throne; for he shall be king in my stead; and
I have appointed him to be prince over Israel and over Judah.

<span id="an_1:36">1:36</span> And Benaiah the son of Jehoiada answered
the king, and said, Amen: Jehovah, the God of my lord the king, say so
\[too\].

<span id="an_1:37">1:37</span> As Jehovah hath been with my lord the
king, even so be he with Solomon, and make his throne greater than the
throne of my lord king David.

<span id="an_1:38">1:38</span> So Zadok the priest, and Nathan the
prophet, and Benaiah the son of Jehoiada, and the Cherethites and the
Pelethites, went down, and caused Solomon to ride upon king David's
mule, and brought him to Gihon.

<span id="an_1:39">1:39</span> And Zadok the priest took the horn of oil
out of the Tent, and anointed Solomon. And they blew the trumpet; and
all the people said, \[Long\] live king Solomon.

<span id="an_1:40">1:40</span> And all the people came up after him, and
the people piped with pipes, and rejoiced with great joy, so that the
earth rent with the sound of them.

<span id="an_1:41">1:41</span> And Adonijah and all the guests that were
with him heard it as they had made an end of eating. And when Joab heard
the sound of the trumpet, he said, Wherefore is this noise of the city
being in an uproar?

<span id="an_1:42">1:42</span> While he yet spake, behold, Jonathan the
son of Abiathar the priest came: and Adonijah said, Come in; for thou
art a worthy man, and bringest good tidings.

<span id="an_1:43">1:43</span> And Jonathan answered and said to
Adonijah, Verily our lord king David hath made Solomon king:

<span id="an_1:44">1:44</span> and the king hath sent with him Zadok the
priest, and Nathan the prophet, and Benaiah the son of Jehoiada, and the
Cherethites and the Pelethites; and they have caused him to ride upon
the king's mule;

<span id="an_1:45">1:45</span> and Zadok the priest and Nathan the
prophet have anointed him king in Gihon; and they are come up from
thence rejoicing, so that the city rang again. This is the noise that ye
have heard.

<span id="an_1:46">1:46</span> And also Solomon sitteth on the throne of
the kingdom.

<span id="an_1:47">1:47</span> And moreover the king's servants came to
bless our lord king David, saying, Thy God make the name of Solomon
better than thy name, and make his throne greater than thy throne: and
the king bowed himself upon the bed.

<span id="an_1:48">1:48</span> And also thus said the king, Blessed be
Jehovah, the God of Israel, who hath given one to sit on my throne this
day, mine eyes even seeing it.

<span id="an_1:49">1:49</span> And all the guests of Adonijah were
afraid, and rose up, and went every man his way.

<span id="an_1:50">1:50</span> And Adonijah feared because of Solomon;
and he arose, and went, and caught hold on the horns of the altar.

<span id="an_1:51">1:51</span> And it was told Solomon, saying, Behold,
Adonijah feareth king Solomon; for, lo, he hath laid hold on the horns
of the altar, saying, Let king Solomon swear unto me first that he will
not slay his servant with the sword.

<span id="an_1:52">1:52</span> And Solomon said, If he shall show
himself a worthy man, there shall not a hair of him fall to the earth;
but if wickedness be found in him, he shall die.

<span id="an_1:53">1:53</span> So king Solomon sent, and they brought
him down from the altar. And he came and did obeisance to king Solomon;
and Solomon said unto him, Go to thy house.

<span id="an_2:1">2:1</span> Now the days of David drew nigh that he
should die; and he charged Solomon his son, saying,

<span id="an_2:2">2:2</span> I am going the way of all the earth: be
thou strong therefore, and show thyself a man;

<span id="an_2:3">2:3</span> and keep the charge of Jehovah thy God, to
walk in his ways, to keep his statutes, \[and\] his commandments, and
his ordinances, and his testimonies, according to that which is written
in the law of Moses, that thou mayest prosper in all that thou doest,
and whithersoever thou turnest thyself.

<span id="an_2:4">2:4</span> That Jehovah may establish his word which
he spake concerning me, saying, If thy children take heed to their way,
to walk before me in truth with all their heart and with all their soul,
there shall not fail thee (said he) a man on the throne of Israel.

<span id="an_2:5">2:5</span> Moreover thou knowest also what Joab the
son of Zeruiah did unto me, even what he did to the two captains of the
hosts of Israel, unto Abner the son of Ner, and unto Amasa the son of
Jether, whom he slew, and shed the blood of war in peace, and put the
blood of war upon his girdle that was about his loins, and in his shoes
that were on his feet.

<span id="an_2:6">2:6</span> Do therefore according to thy wisdom, and
let not his hoar head go down to Sheol in peace.

<span id="an_2:7">2:7</span> But show kindness unto the sons of
Barzillai the Gileadite, and let them be of those that eat at thy table;
for so they came to me when I fled from Absalom thy brother.

<span id="an_2:8">2:8</span> And, behold, there is with thee Shimei the
son of Gera, the Benjamite, of Bahurim, who cursed me with a grievous
curse in the day when I went to Mahanaim; but he came down to meet me at
the Jordan, and I sware to him by Jehovah, saying, I will not put thee
to death with the sword.

<span id="an_2:9">2:9</span> Now therefore hold him not guiltless, for
thou art a wise man; and thou wilt know what thou oughtest to do unto
him, and thou shalt bring his hoar head down to Sheol with blood.

<span id="an_2:10">2:10</span> And David slept with his fathers, and was
buried in the city of David.

<span id="an_2:11">2:11</span> And the days that David reigned over
Israel were forty years; seven years reigned he in Hebron, and thirty
and three years reigned he in Jerusalem.

<span id="an_2:12">2:12</span> And Solomon sat upon the throne of David
his father; and his kingdom was established greatly.

<span id="an_2:13">2:13</span> Then Adonijah the son of Haggith came to
Bath-sheba the mother of Solomon. And she said, Comest thou peaceably?
And he said, Peaceably.

<span id="an_2:14">2:14</span> He said moreover, I have somewhat to say
unto thee. And she said, Say on.

<span id="an_2:15">2:15</span> And he said, Thou knowest that the
kingdom was mine, and that all Israel set their faces on me, that I
should reign: howbeit the kingdom is turned about, and is become my
brother's; for it was his from Jehovah.

<span id="an_2:16">2:16</span> And now I ask one petition of thee; deny
me not. And she said unto him, Say on.

<span id="an_2:17">2:17</span> And he said, Speak, I pray thee, unto
Solomon the king (for he will not say thee nay), that he give me Abishag
the Shunammite to wife.

<span id="an_2:18">2:18</span> And Bath-sheba said, Well; I will speak
for thee unto the king.

<span id="an_2:19">2:19</span> Bath-sheba therefore went unto king
Solomon, to speak unto him for Adonijah. And the king rose up to meet
her, and bowed himself unto her, and sat down on his throne, and caused
a throne to be set for the king's mother; and she sat on his right hand.

<span id="an_2:20">2:20</span> Then she said, I ask one small petition
of thee; deny me not. And the king said unto her, Ask on, my mother; for
I will not deny thee.

<span id="an_2:21">2:21</span> And she said, Let Abishag the Shunammite
be given to Adonijah thy brother to wife.

<span id="an_2:22">2:22</span> And king Solomon answered and said unto
his mother, And why dost thou ask Abishag the Shunammite for Adonijah?
ask for him the kingdom also; for he is mine elder brother; even for
him, and for Abiathar the priest, and for Joab the son of Zeruiah.

<span id="an_2:23">2:23</span> Then king Solomon sware by Jehovah,
saying, God do so to me, and more also, if Adonijah hath not spoken this
word against his own life.

<span id="an_2:24">2:24</span> Now therefore as Jehovah liveth, who hath
established me, and set me on the throne of David my father, and who
hath made me a house, as he promised, surely Adonijah shall be put to
death this day.

<span id="an_2:25">2:25</span> And king Solomon sent by Benaiah the son
of Jehoiada; and he fell upon him, so that he died.

<span id="an_2:26">2:26</span> And unto Abiathar the priest said the
king, Get thee to Anathoth, unto thine own fields; for thou art worthy
of death: but I will not at this time put thee to death, because thou
barest the ark of the Lord Jehovah before David my father, and because
thou wast afflicted in all wherein my father was afflicted.

<span id="an_2:27">2:27</span> So Solomon thrust out Abiathar from being
priest unto Jehovah, that he might fulfil the word of Jehovah, which he
spake concerning the house of Eli in Shiloh.

<span id="an_2:28">2:28</span> And the tidings came to Joab; for Joab
had turned after Adonijah, though he turned not after Absalom. And Joab
fled unto the Tent of Jehovah, and caught hold on the horns of the
altar.

<span id="an_2:29">2:29</span> And it was told king Solomon, Joab is
fled unto the Tent of Jehovah, and, behold, he is by the altar. Then
Solomon sent Benaiah the son of Jehoiada, saying, Go, fall upon him.

<span id="an_2:30">2:30</span> And Benaiah came to the Tent of Jehovah,
and said unto him, Thus saith the king, Come forth. And he said, Nay;
but I will die here. And Benaiah brought the king word again, saying,
Thus said Joab, and thus he answered me.

<span id="an_2:31">2:31</span> And the king said unto him, Do as he hath
said, and fall upon him, and bury him; that thou mayest take away the
blood, which Joab shed without cause, from me and from my father's
house.

<span id="an_2:32">2:32</span> And Jehovah will return his blood upon
his own head, because he fell upon two men more righteous and better
than he, and slew them with the sword, and my father David knew it not,
\[to wit\], Abner the son of Ner, captain of the host of Israel, and
Amasa the son of Jether, captain of the host of Judah.

<span id="an_2:33">2:33</span> So shall their blood return upon the head
of Joab, and upon the head of his seed for ever: but unto David, and
unto his seed, and unto his house, and unto his throne, shall there be
peace for ever from Jehovah.

<span id="an_2:34">2:34</span> Then Benaiah the son of Jehoiada went up,
and fell upon him, and slew him; and he was buried in his own house in
the wilderness.

<span id="an_2:35">2:35</span> And the king put Benaiah the son of
Jehoiada in his room over the host; and Zadok the priest did the king
put in the room of Abiathar.

<span id="an_2:36">2:36</span> And the king sent and called for Shimei,
and said unto him, Build thee a house in Jerusalem, and dwell there, and
go not forth thence any whither.

<span id="an_2:37">2:37</span> For on the day thou goest out, and
passest over the brook Kidron, know thou for certain that thou shalt
surely die: thy blood shall be upon thine own head.

<span id="an_2:38">2:38</span> And Shimei said unto the king, The saying
is good: as my lord the king hath said, so will thy servant do. And
Shimei dwelt in Jerusalem many days.

<span id="an_2:39">2:39</span> And it came to pass at the end of three
years, that two of the servants of Shimei ran away unto Achish, son of
Maacah, king of Gath. And they told Shimei, saying, Behold, thy servants
are in Gath.

<span id="an_2:40">2:40</span> And Shimei arose, and saddled his ass,
and went to Gath to Achish, to seek his servants; and Shimei went, and
brought his servants from Gath.

<span id="an_2:41">2:41</span> And it was told Solomon that Shimei had
gone from Jerusalem to Gath, and was come again.

<span id="an_2:42">2:42</span> And the king sent and called for Shimei,
and said unto him, Did I not adjure thee by Jehovah, and protest unto
thee, saying, Know for certain, that on the day thou goest out, and
walkest abroad any whither, thou shalt surely die? and thou saidst unto
me, The saying that I have heard is good.

<span id="an_2:43">2:43</span> Why then hast thou not kept the oath of
Jehovah, and the commandment that I have charged thee with?

<span id="an_2:44">2:44</span> The king said moreover to Shimei, Thou
knowest all the wickedness which thy heart is privy to, that thou didst
to David my father: therefore Jehovah shall return thy wickedness upon
thine own head.

<span id="an_2:45">2:45</span> But king Solomon shall be blessed, and
the throne of David shall be established before Jehovah for ever.

<span id="an_2:46">2:46</span> So the king commanded Benaiah the son of
Jehoiada; and he went out, and fell upon him, so that he died. And the
kingdom was established in the hand of Solomon.

<span id="an_3:1">3:1</span> And Solomon made affinity with Pharaoh king
of Egypt, and took Pharaoh's daughter, and brought her into the city of
David, until he had made an end of building his own house, and the house
of Jehovah, and the wall of Jerusalem round about.

<span id="an_3:2">3:2</span> Only the people sacrificed in the high
places, because there was no house built for the name of Jehovah until
those days.

<span id="an_3:3">3:3</span> And Solomon loved Jehovah, walking in the
statutes of David his father: only he sacrificed and burnt incense in
the high places.

<span id="an_3:4">3:4</span> And the king went to Gibeon to sacrifice
there; for that was the great high place: a thousand burnt-offerings did
Solomon offer upon that altar.

<span id="an_3:5">3:5</span> In Gibeon Jehovah appeared to Solomon in a
dream by night; and God said, Ask what I shall give thee.

<span id="an_3:6">3:6</span> And Solomon said, Thou hast showed unto thy
servant David my father great lovingkindness, according as he walked
before thee in truth, and in righteousness, and in uprightness of heart
with thee; and thou hast kept for him this great lovingkindness, that
thou hast given him a son to sit on his throne, as it is this day.

<span id="an_3:7">3:7</span> And now, O Jehovah my God, thou hast made
thy servant king instead of David my father: and I am but a little
child; I know not how to go out or come in.

<span id="an_3:8">3:8</span> And thy servant is in the midst of thy
people which thou hast chosen, a great people, that cannot be numbered
nor counted for multitude.

<span id="an_3:9">3:9</span> Give thy servant therefore an understanding
heart to judge thy people, that I may discern between good and evil; for
who is able to judge this thy great people?

<span id="an_3:10">3:10</span> And the speech pleased the Lord, that
Solomon had asked this thing.

<span id="an_3:11">3:11</span> And God said unto him, Because thou hast
asked this thing, and hast not asked for thyself long life, neither hast
asked riches for thyself, nor hast asked the life of thine enemies, but
hast asked for thyself understanding to discern justice;

<span id="an_3:12">3:12</span> behold, I have done according to thy
word: lo, I have given thee a wise and an understanding heart; so that
there hath been none like thee before thee, neither after thee shall any
arise like unto thee.

<span id="an_3:13">3:13</span> And I have also given thee that which
thou hast not asked, both riches and honor, so that there shall not be
any among the kings like unto thee, all thy days.

<span id="an_3:14">3:14</span> And if thou wilt walk in my ways, to keep
my statutes and my commandments, as thy father David did walk, then I
will lengthen thy days.

<span id="an_3:15">3:15</span> And Solomon awoke; and, behold, it was a
dream: and he came to Jerusalem, and stood before the ark of the
covenant of Jehovah, and offered up burnt-offerings, and offered
peace-offerings, and made a feast to all his servants.

<span id="an_3:16">3:16</span> Then there came two women that were
harlots, unto the king, and stood before him.

<span id="an_3:17">3:17</span> And the one woman said, Oh, my lord, I
and this woman dwell in one house; and I was delivered of a child with
her in the house.

<span id="an_3:18">3:18</span> And it came to pass the third day after I
was delivered, that this woman was delivered also; and we were together;
there was no stranger with us in the house, save we two in the house.

<span id="an_3:19">3:19</span> And this woman's child died in the night,
because she lay upon it.

<span id="an_3:20">3:20</span> And she arose at midnight, and took my
son from beside me, while thy handmaid slept, and laid it in her bosom,
and laid her dead child in my bosom.

<span id="an_3:21">3:21</span> And when I rose in the morning to give my
child suck, behold, it was dead; but when I had looked at it in the
morning, behold, it was not my son, whom I did bear.

<span id="an_3:22">3:22</span> And the other woman said, Nay; but the
living is my son, and the dead is thy son. And this said, No; but the
dead is thy son, and the living is my son. Thus they spake before the
king.

<span id="an_3:23">3:23</span> Then said the king, The one saith, This
is my son that liveth, and thy son is the dead: and the other saith,
Nay; but thy son is the dead, and my son is the living.

<span id="an_3:24">3:24</span> And the king said, Fetch me a sword. And
they brought a sword before the king.

<span id="an_3:25">3:25</span> And the king said, Divide the living
child in two, and give half to the one, and half to the other.

<span id="an_3:26">3:26</span> Then spake the woman whose the living
child was unto the king, for her heart yearned over her son, and she
said, Oh, my lord, give her the living child, and in no wise slay it.
But the other said, It shall be neither mine nor thine; divide it.

<span id="an_3:27">3:27</span> Then the king answered and said, Give her
the living child, and in no wise slay it: she is the mother thereof.

<span id="an_3:28">3:28</span> And all Israel heard of the judgment
which the king had judged; and they feared the king: for they saw that
the wisdom of God was in him, to do justice.

<span id="an_4:1">4:1</span> And king Solomon was king over all Israel.

<span id="an_4:2">4:2</span> And these were the princes whom he had:
Azariah the son of Zadok, the priest;

<span id="an_4:3">4:3</span> Elihoreph and Ahijah, the sons of Shisha,
scribes; Jehoshaphat the son of Ahilud, the recorder;

<span id="an_4:4">4:4</span> and Benaiah the son of Jehoiada was over
the host; and Zadok and Abiathar were priests;

<span id="an_4:5">4:5</span> and Azariah the son of Nathan was over the
officers; and Zabud the son of Nathan was chief minister, \[and\] the
king's friend;

<span id="an_4:6">4:6</span> and Ahishar was over the household; and
Adoniram the son of Abda was over the men subject to taskwork.

<span id="an_4:7">4:7</span> And Solomon had twelve officers over all
Israel, who provided victuals for the king and his household: each man
had to make provision for a month in the year.

<span id="an_4:8">4:8</span> And these are their names: Ben-hur, in the
hill-country of Ephraim;

<span id="an_4:9">4:9</span> Ben-deker, in Makaz, and in Shaalbim, and
Beth-shemesh, and Elon-beth-hanan;

<span id="an_4:10">4:10</span> Ben-hesed, in Arubboth (to him
\[pertained\] Socoh, and all the land of Hepher);

<span id="an_4:11">4:11</span> Ben-abinadab, in all the height of Dor
(he had Taphath the daughter of Solomon to wife);

<span id="an_4:12">4:12</span> Baana the son of Ahilud, in Taanach and
Megiddo, and all Beth-shean which is beside Zarethan, beneath Jezreel,
from Beth-shean to Abel-meholah, as far as beyond Jokmeam;

<span id="an_4:13">4:13</span> Ben-geber, in Ramoth-gilead (to him
\[pertained\] the towns of Jair the son of Manasseh, which are in
Gilead; \[even\] to him \[pertained\] the region of Argob, which is in
Bashan, threescore great cities with walls and brazen bars);

<span id="an_4:14">4:14</span> Ahinadab the son of Iddo, in Mahanaim;

<span id="an_4:15">4:15</span> Ahimaaz, in Naphtali (he also took
Basemath the daughter of Solomon to wife);

<span id="an_4:16">4:16</span> Baana the son of Hushai, in Asher and
Bealoth;

<span id="an_4:17">4:17</span> Jehoshaphat the son of Paruah, in
Issachar;

<span id="an_4:18">4:18</span> Shimei the son of Ela, in Benjamin;

<span id="an_4:19">4:19</span> Geber the son of Uri, in the land of
Gilead, the country of Sihon king of the Amorites and of Og king of
Bashan; and \[he was\] the only officer that was in the land.

<span id="an_4:20">4:20</span> Judah and Israel were many as the sand
which is by the sea in multitude, eating and drinking and making merry.

<span id="an_4:21">4:21</span> And Solomon ruled over all the kingdoms
from the River unto the land of the Philistines, and unto the border of
Egypt: they brought tribute, and served Solomon all the days of his
life.

<span id="an_4:22">4:22</span> And Solomon's provision for one day was
thirty measures of fine flour, and threescore measures of meal,

<span id="an_4:23">4:23</span> ten fat oxen, and twenty oxen out of the
pastures, and a hundred sheep, besides harts, and gazelles, and
roebucks, and fatted fowl.

<span id="an_4:24">4:24</span> For he had dominion over all \[the
region\] on this side the River, from Tiphsah even to Gaza, over all the
kings on this side the River: and he had peace on all sides round about
him.

<span id="an_4:25">4:25</span> And Judah and Israel dwelt safely, every
man under his vine and under his fig-tree, from Dan even to Beer-sheba,
all the days of Solomon.

<span id="an_4:26">4:26</span> And Solomon had forty thousand stalls of
horses for his chariots, and twelve thousand horsemen.

<span id="an_4:27">4:27</span> And those officers provided victuals for
king Solomon, and for all that came unto king Solomon's table, every man
in his month; they let nothing be lacking.

<span id="an_4:28">4:28</span> Barley also and straw for the horses and
swift steeds brought they unto the place where \[the officers\] were,
every man according to his charge.

<span id="an_4:29">4:29</span> And God gave Solomon wisdom and
understanding exceeding much, and largeness of heart, even as the sand
that is on the sea-shore.

<span id="an_4:30">4:30</span> And Solomon's wisdom excelled the wisdom
of all the children of the east, and all the wisdom of Egypt.

<span id="an_4:31">4:31</span> For he was wiser than all men; than Ethan
the Ezrahite, and Heman, and Calcol, and Darda, the sons of Mahol: and
his fame was in all the nations round about.

<span id="an_4:32">4:32</span> And he spake three thousand proverbs; and
his songs were a thousand and five.

<span id="an_4:33">4:33</span> And he spake of trees, from the cedar
that is in Lebanon even unto the hyssop that springeth out of the wall;
he spake also of beasts, and of birds, and of creeping things, and of
fishes.

<span id="an_4:34">4:34</span> And there came of all peoples to hear the
wisdom of Solomon, from all kings of the earth, who had heard of his
wisdom.

<span id="an_5:1">5:1</span> And Hiram king of Tyre sent his servants
unto Solomon; for he had heard that they had anointed him king in the
room of his father: for Hiram was ever a lover of David.

<span id="an_5:2">5:2</span> And Solomon sent to Hiram, saying,

<span id="an_5:3">5:3</span> Thou knowest how that David my father could
not build a house for the name of Jehovah his God for the wars which
were about him on every side, until Jehovah put them under the soles of
his feet.

<span id="an_5:4">5:4</span> But now Jehovah my God hath given me rest
on every side; there is neither adversary, nor evil occurrence.

<span id="an_5:5">5:5</span> And, behold, I purpose to build a house for
the name of Jehovah my God, as Jehovah spake unto David my father,
saying, Thy son, whom I will set upon thy throne in thy room, he shall
build the house for my name.

<span id="an_5:6">5:6</span> Now therefore command thou that they cut me
cedar-trees out of Lebanon; and my servants shall be with thy servants;
and I will give thee hire for thy servants according to all that thou
shalt say: for thou knowest that there is not among us any that knoweth
how to cut timber like unto the Sidonians.

<span id="an_5:7">5:7</span> And it came to pass, when Hiram heard the
words of Solomon, that he rejoiced greatly, and said, Blessed be Jehovah
this day, who hath given unto David a wise son over this great people.

<span id="an_5:8">5:8</span> And Hiram sent to Solomon, saying, I have
heard \[the message\] which thou hast sent unto me: I will do all thy
desire concerning timber of cedar, and concerning timber of fir.

<span id="an_5:9">5:9</span> My servants shall bring them down from
Lebanon unto the sea; and I will make them into rafts to go by sea unto
the place that thou shalt appoint me, and will cause them to be broken
up there, and thou shalt receive them; and thou shalt accomplish my
desire, in giving food for my household.

<span id="an_5:10">5:10</span> So Hiram gave Solomon timber of cedar and
timber of fir according to all his desire.

<span id="an_5:11">5:11</span> And Solomon gave Hiram twenty thousand
measures of wheat for food to his household, and twenty measures of pure
oil: thus gave Solomon to Hiram year by year.

<span id="an_5:12">5:12</span> And Jehovah gave Solomon wisdom, as he
promised him; and there was peace between Hiram and Solomon; and they
two made a league together.

<span id="an_5:13">5:13</span> And king Solomon raised a levy out of all
Israel; and the levy was thirty thousand men.

<span id="an_5:14">5:14</span> And he sent them to Lebanon, ten thousand
a month by courses; a month they were in Lebanon, and two months at
home; and Adoniram was over the men subject to taskwork.

<span id="an_5:15">5:15</span> And Solomon had threescore and ten
thousand that bare burdens, and fourscore thousand that were hewers in
the mountains;

<span id="an_5:16">5:16</span> besides Solomon's chief officers that
were over the work, three thousand and three hundred, who bare rule over
the people that wrought in the work.

<span id="an_5:17">5:17</span> And the king commanded, and they hewed
out great stones, costly stones, to lay the foundation of the house with
wrought stone.

<span id="an_5:18">5:18</span> And Solomon's builders and Hiram's
builders and the Gebalites did fashion them, and prepared the timber and
the stones to build the house.

<span id="an_6:1">6:1</span> And it came to pass in the four hundred and
eightieth year after the children of Israel were come out of the land of
Egypt, in the fourth year of Solomon's reign over Israel, in the month
Ziv, which is the second month, that he began to build the house of
Jehovah.

<span id="an_6:2">6:2</span> And the house which king Solomon built for
Jehovah, the length thereof was threescore cubits, and the breadth
thereof twenty \[cubits\], and the height thereof thirty cubits.

<span id="an_6:3">6:3</span> And the porch before the temple of the
house, twenty cubits was the length thereof, according to the breadth of
the house; \[and\] ten cubits was the breadth thereof before the house.

<span id="an_6:4">6:4</span> And for the house he made windows of fixed
lattice-work.

<span id="an_6:5">6:5</span> And against the wall of the house he built
stories round about, against the walls of the house round about, both of
the temple and of the oracle; and he made side-chambers round about.

<span id="an_6:6">6:6</span> The nethermost story was five cubits broad,
and the middle was six cubits broad, and the third was seven cubits
broad; for on the outside he made offsets \[in the wall\] of the house
round about, that \[the beams\] should not have hold in the walls of the
house.

<span id="an_6:7">6:7</span> And the house, when it was in building, was
built of stone made ready at the quarry; and there was neither hammer
nor axe nor any tool of iron heard in the house, while it was in
building.

<span id="an_6:8">6:8</span> The door for the middle side-chambers was
in the right side of the house: and they went up by winding stairs into
the middle \[story\], and out of the middle into the third.

<span id="an_6:9">6:9</span> So he built the house, and finished it; and
he covered the house with beams and planks of cedar.

<span id="an_6:10">6:10</span> And he built the stories against all the
house, each five cubits high: and they rested on the house with timber
of cedar.

<span id="an_6:11">6:11</span> And the word of Jehovah came to Solomon,
saying,

<span id="an_6:12">6:12</span> Concerning this house which thou art
building, if thou wilt walk in my statutes, and execute mine ordinances,
and keep all my commandments to walk in them; then will I establish my
word with thee, which I spake unto David thy father.

<span id="an_6:13">6:13</span> And I will dwell among the children of
Israel, and will not forsake my people Israel.

<span id="an_6:14">6:14</span> So Solomon built the house, and finished
it.

<span id="an_6:15">6:15</span> And he built the walls of the house
within with boards of cedar: from the floor of the house unto the walls
of the ceiling, he covered them on the inside with wood; and he covered
the floor of the house with boards of fir.

<span id="an_6:16">6:16</span> And he built twenty cubits on the hinder
part of the house with boards of cedar from the floor unto the walls
\[of the ceiling\]: he built \[them\] for it within, for an oracle, even
for the most holy place.

<span id="an_6:17">6:17</span> And the house, that is, the temple before
\[the oracle\], was forty cubits \[long\].

<span id="an_6:18">6:18</span> And there was cedar on the house within,
carved with knops and open flowers: all was cedar; there was no stone
seen.

<span id="an_6:19">6:19</span> And he prepared an oracle in the midst of
the house within, to set there the ark of the covenant of Jehovah.

<span id="an_6:20">6:20</span> And within the oracle was \[a space of\]
twenty cubits in length, and twenty cubits in breadth, and twenty cubits
in the height thereof; and he overlaid it with pure gold: and he covered
the altar with cedar.

<span id="an_6:21">6:21</span> So Solomon overlaid the house within with
pure gold: and he drew chains of gold across before the oracle; and he
overlaid it with gold.

<span id="an_6:22">6:22</span> And the whole house he overlaid with
gold, until all the house was finished: also the whole altar that
belonged to the oracle he overlaid with gold.

<span id="an_6:23">6:23</span> And in the oracle he made two cherubim of
olive-wood, each ten cubits high.

<span id="an_6:24">6:24</span> And five cubits was the one wing of the
cherub, and five cubits the other wing of the cherub: from the uttermost
part of the one wing unto the uttermost part of the other were ten
cubits.

<span id="an_6:25">6:25</span> And the other cherub was ten cubits: both
the cherubim were of one measure and one form.

<span id="an_6:26">6:26</span> The height of the one cherub was ten
cubits, and so was it of the other cherub.

<span id="an_6:27">6:27</span> And he set the cherubim within the inner
house; and the wings of the cherubim were stretched forth, so that the
wing of the one touched the one wall, and the wing of the other cherub
touched the other wall; and their wings touched one another in the midst
of the house.

<span id="an_6:28">6:28</span> And he overlaid the cherubim with gold.

<span id="an_6:29">6:29</span> And he carved all the walls of the house
round about with carved figures of cherubim and palm-trees and open
flowers, within and without.

<span id="an_6:30">6:30</span> And the floor of the house he overlaid
with gold, within and without.

<span id="an_6:31">6:31</span> And for the entrance of the oracle he
made doors of olive-wood: the lintel \[and\] door-posts were a fifth
part \[of the wall\].

<span id="an_6:32">6:32</span> So \[he made\] two doors of olive-wood;
and he carved upon them carvings of cherubim and palm-trees and open
flowers, and overlaid them with gold; and he spread the gold upon the
cherubim, and upon the palm-trees.

<span id="an_6:33">6:33</span> So also made he for the entrance of the
temple door-posts of olive-wood, out of a fourth part \[of the wall\];

<span id="an_6:34">6:34</span> and two doors of fir-wood: the two leaves
of the one door were folding, and the two leaves of the other door were
folding.

<span id="an_6:35">6:35</span> And he carved \[thereon\] cherubim and
palm-trees and open flowers; and he overlaid them with gold fitted upon
the graven work.

<span id="an_6:36">6:36</span> And he built the inner court with three
courses of hewn stone, and a course of cedar beams.

<span id="an_6:37">6:37</span> In the fourth year was the foundation of
the house of Jehovah laid, in the month Ziv.

<span id="an_6:38">6:38</span> And in the eleventh year, in the month
Bul, which is the eighth month, was the house finished throughout all
the parts thereof, and according to all the fashion of it. So was he
seven years in building it.

<span id="an_7:1">7:1</span> And Solomon was building his own house
thirteen years, and he finished all his house.

<span id="an_7:2">7:2</span> For he built the house of the forest of
Lebanon; the length thereof was a hundred cubits, and the breadth
thereof fifty cubits, and the height thereof thirty cubits, upon four
rows of cedar pillars, with cedar beams upon the pillars.

<span id="an_7:3">7:3</span> And it was covered with cedar above over
the forty and five beams, that were upon the pillars; fifteen in a row.

<span id="an_7:4">7:4</span> And there were beams in three rows, and
window was over against window in three ranks.

<span id="an_7:5">7:5</span> And all the doors and posts were made
square with beams: and window was over against window in three ranks.

<span id="an_7:6">7:6</span> And he made the porch of pillars; the
length thereof was fifty cubits, and the breadth thereof thirty cubits;
and a porch before them; and pillars and a threshold before them.

<span id="an_7:7">7:7</span> And he made the porch of the throne where
he was to judge, even the porch of judgment: and it was covered with
cedar from floor to floor.

<span id="an_7:8">7:8</span> And his house where he was to dwell, the
other court within the porch, was of the like work. He made also a house
for Pharaoh's daughter (whom Solomon had taken to wife), like unto this
porch.

<span id="an_7:9">7:9</span> All these were of costly stones, even of
hewn stone, according to measure, sawed with saws, within and without,
even from the foundation unto the coping, and so on the outside unto the
great court.

<span id="an_7:10">7:10</span> And the foundation was of costly stones,
even great stones, stones of ten cubits, and stones of eight cubits.

<span id="an_7:11">7:11</span> And above were costly stones, even hewn
stone, according to measure, and cedar-wood.

<span id="an_7:12">7:12</span> And the great court round about had three
courses of hewn stone, and a course of cedar beams; like as the inner
court of the house of Jehovah, and the porch of the house.

<span id="an_7:13">7:13</span> And king Solomon sent and fetched Hiram
out of Tyre.

<span id="an_7:14">7:14</span> He was the son of a widow of the tribe of
Naphtali, and his father was a man of Tyre, a worker in brass; and he
was filled with wisdom and understanding and skill, to work all works in
brass. And he came to king Solomon, and wrought all his work.

<span id="an_7:15">7:15</span> For he fashioned the two pillars of
brass, eighteen cubits high apiece: and a line of twelve cubits
compassed either of them about.

<span id="an_7:16">7:16</span> And he made two capitals of molten brass,
to set upon the tops of the pillars: the height of the one capital was
five cubits, and the height of the other capital was five cubits.

<span id="an_7:17">7:17</span> There were nets of checker-work, and
wreaths of chain-work, for the capitals which were upon the top of the
pillars; seven for the one capital, and seven for the other capital.

<span id="an_7:18">7:18</span> So he made the pillars; and there were
two rows round about upon the one network, to cover the capitals that
were upon the top of the pillars: and so did he for the other capital.

<span id="an_7:19">7:19</span> And the capitals that were upon the top
of the pillars in the porch were of lily-work, four cubits.

<span id="an_7:20">7:20</span> And there were capitals above also upon
the two pillars, close by the belly which was beside the network: and
the pomegranates were two hundred, in rows round about upon the other
capital.

<span id="an_7:21">7:21</span> And he set up the pillars at the porch of
the temple: and he set up the right pillar, and called the name thereof
Jachin; and he set up the left pillar, and called the name thereof Boaz.

<span id="an_7:22">7:22</span> And upon the top of the pillars was
lily-work: so was the work of the pillars finished.

<span id="an_7:23">7:23</span> And he made the molten sea of ten cubits
from brim to brim, round in compass, and the height thereof was five
cubits; and a line of thirty cubits compassed it round about.

<span id="an_7:24">7:24</span> And under the brim of it round about
there were knops which did compass it, for ten cubits, compassing the
sea round about: the knops were in two rows, cast when it was cast.

<span id="an_7:25">7:25</span> It stood upon twelve oxen, three looking
toward the north, and three looking toward the west, and three looking
toward the south, and three looking toward the east; and the sea was set
upon them above, and all their hinder parts were inward.

<span id="an_7:26">7:26</span> And it was a handbreadth thick: and the
brim thereof was wrought like the brim of a cup, like the flower of a
lily: it held two thousand baths.

<span id="an_7:27">7:27</span> And he made the ten bases of brass; four
cubits was the length of one base, and four cubits the breadth thereof,
and three cubits the height of it.

<span id="an_7:28">7:28</span> And the work of the bases was on this
manner: they had panels; and there were panels between the ledges;

<span id="an_7:29">7:29</span> and on the panels that were between the
ledges were lions, oxen, and cherubim; and upon the ledges there was a
pedestal above; and beneath the lions and oxen were wreaths of hanging
work.

<span id="an_7:30">7:30</span> And every base had four brazen wheels,
and axles of brass; and the four feet thereof had undersetters: beneath
the laver were the undersetters molten, with wreaths at the side of
each.

<span id="an_7:31">7:31</span> And the mouth of it within the capital
and above was a cubit: and the mouth thereof was round after the work of
a pedestal, a cubit and a half; and also upon the mouth of it were
gravings, and their panels were foursquare, not round.

<span id="an_7:32">7:32</span> And the four wheels were underneath the
panels; and the axletrees of the wheels were in the base: and the height
of a wheel was a cubit and half a cubit.

<span id="an_7:33">7:33</span> And the work of the wheels was like the
work of a chariot wheel: their axletrees, and their felloes, and their
spokes, and their naves, were all molten.

<span id="an_7:34">7:34</span> And there were four undersetters at the
four corners of each base: the undersetters thereof were of the base
itself.

<span id="an_7:35">7:35</span> And in the top of the base was there a
round compass half a cubit high; and on the top of the base the stays
thereof and the panels thereof were of the same.

<span id="an_7:36">7:36</span> And on the plates of the stays thereof,
and on the panels thereof, he graved cherubim, lions, and palm-trees,
according to the space of each, with wreaths round about.

<span id="an_7:37">7:37</span> After this manner he made the ten bases:
all of them had one casting, one measure, and one form.

<span id="an_7:38">7:38</span> And he made ten lavers of brass: one
laver contained forty baths; and every laver was four cubits; and upon
very one of the ten bases one laver.

<span id="an_7:39">7:39</span> And he set the bases, five on the right
side of the house, and five on the left side of the house: and he set
the sea on the right side of the house eastward, toward the south.

<span id="an_7:40">7:40</span> And Hiram made the lavers, and the
shovels, and the basins. So Hiram made an end of doing all the work that
he wrought for king Solomon in the house of Jehovah:

<span id="an_7:41">7:41</span> the two pillars, and the two bowls of the
capitals that were on the top of the pillars; and the two networks to
cover the two bowls of the capitals that were on the top of the pillars;

<span id="an_7:42">7:42</span> and the four hundred pomegranates for the
two networks; two rows of pomegranates for each network, to cover the
two bowls of the capitals that were upon the pillars;

<span id="an_7:43">7:43</span> and the ten bases, and the ten lavers on
the bases;

<span id="an_7:44">7:44</span> and the one sea, and the twelve oxen
under the sea;

<span id="an_7:45">7:45</span> and the pots, and the shovels, and the
basins: even all these vessels, which Hiram made for king Solomon, in
the house of Jehovah, were of burnished brass.

<span id="an_7:46">7:46</span> In the plain of the Jordan did the king
cast them, in the clay ground between Succoth and Zarethan.

<span id="an_7:47">7:47</span> And Solomon left all the vessels
\[unweighed\], because they were exceeding many: the weight of the brass
could not be found out.

<span id="an_7:48">7:48</span> And Solomon made all the vessels that
were in the house of Jehovah: the golden altar, and the table whereupon
the showbread was, of gold;

<span id="an_7:49">7:49</span> and the candlesticks, five on the right
side, and five on the left, before the oracle, of pure gold; and the
flowers, and the lamps, and the tongs, of gold;

<span id="an_7:50">7:50</span> and the cups, and the snuffers, and the
basins, and the spoons, and the firepans, of pure gold; and the hinges,
both for the doors of the inner house, the most holy place, and for the
doors of the house, \[to wit\], of the temple, of gold.

<span id="an_7:51">7:51</span> Thus all the work that king Solomon
wrought in the house of Jehovah was finished. And Solomon brought in the
things which David his father had dedicated, \[even\] the silver, and
the gold, and the vessels, and put them in the treasuries of the house
of Jehovah.

<span id="an_8:1">8:1</span> Then Solomon assembled the elders of
Israel, and all the heads of the tribes, the princes of the fathers'
\[houses\] of the children of Israel, unto king Solomon in Jerusalem, to
bring up the ark of the covenant of Jehovah out of the city of David,
which is Zion.

<span id="an_8:2">8:2</span> And all the men of Israel assembled
themselves unto king Solomon at the feast, in the month Ethanim, which
is the seventh month.

<span id="an_8:3">8:3</span> And all the elders of Israel came, and the
priests took up the ark.

<span id="an_8:4">8:4</span> And they brought up the ark of Jehovah, and
the tent of meeting, and all the holy vessels that were in the Tent;
even these did the priests and the Levites bring up.

<span id="an_8:5">8:5</span> And king Solomon and all the congregation
of Israel, that were assembled unto him, were with him before the ark,
sacrificing sheep and oxen, that could not be counted nor numbered for
multitude.

<span id="an_8:6">8:6</span> And the priests brought in the ark of the
covenant of Jehovah unto its place, into the oracle of the house, to the
most holy place, even under the wings of the cherubim.

<span id="an_8:7">8:7</span> For the cherubim spread forth their wings
over the place of the ark, and the cherubim covered the ark and the
staves thereof above.

<span id="an_8:8">8:8</span> And the staves were so long that the ends
of the staves were seen from the holy place before the oracle; but they
were not seen without: and there they are unto this day.

<span id="an_8:9">8:9</span> There was nothing in the ark save the two
tables of stone which Moses put there at Horeb, when Jehovah made a
covenant with the children of Israel, when they came out of the land of
Egypt.

<span id="an_8:10">8:10</span> And it came to pass, when the priests
were come out of the holy place, that the cloud filled the house of
Jehovah,

<span id="an_8:11">8:11</span> so that the priests could not stand to
minister by reason of the cloud; for the glory of Jehovah filled the
house of Jehovah.

<span id="an_8:12">8:12</span> Then spake Solomon, Jehovah hath said
that he would dwell in the thick darkness.

<span id="an_8:13">8:13</span> I have surely built thee a house of
habitation, a place for thee to dwell in for ever.

<span id="an_8:14">8:14</span> And the king turned his face about, and
blessed all the assembly of Israel: and all the assembly of Israel
stood.

<span id="an_8:15">8:15</span> And he said, Blessed be Jehovah, the God
of Israel, who spake with his mouth unto David thy father, and hath with
his hand fulfilled it, saying,

<span id="an_8:16">8:16</span> Since the day that I brought forth my
people Israel out of Egypt, I chose no city out of all the tribes of
Israel to build a house, that my name might be there; but I chose David
to be over my people Israel.

<span id="an_8:17">8:17</span> Now it was in the heart of David my
father to build a house for the name of Jehovah, the God of Israel.

<span id="an_8:18">8:18</span> But Jehovah said unto David my father,
Whereas it was in thy heart to build a house for my name, thou didst
well that it was in thy heart:

<span id="an_8:19">8:19</span> nevertheless thou shalt not build the
house; but thy son that shall come forth out of thy loins, he shall
build the house for my name.

<span id="an_8:20">8:20</span> And Jehovah hath established his word
that he spake; for I am risen up in the room of David my father, and sit
on the throne of Israel, as Jehovah promised, and have built the house
for the name of Jehovah, the God of Israel.

<span id="an_8:21">8:21</span> And there have I set a place for the ark,
wherein is the covenant of Jehovah, which he made with our fathers, when
he brought them out of the land of Egypt.

<span id="an_8:22">8:22</span> And Solomon stood before the altar of
Jehovah in the presence of all the assembly of Israel, and spread forth
his hands toward heaven;

<span id="an_8:23">8:23</span> and he said, O Jehovah, the God of
Israel, there is no God like thee, in heaven above, or on earth beneath;
who keepest covenant and lovingkindness with thy servants, that walk
before thee with all their heart;

<span id="an_8:24">8:24</span> who hast kept with thy servant David my
father that which thou didst promise him: yea, thou spakest with thy
mouth, and hast fulfilled it with thy hand, as it is this day.

<span id="an_8:25">8:25</span> Now therefore, O Jehovah, the God of
Israel, keep with thy servant David my father that which thou hast
promised him, saying, There shall not fail thee a man in my sight to sit
on the throne of Israel, if only thy children take heed to their way, to
walk before me as thou hast walked before me.

<span id="an_8:26">8:26</span> Now therefore, O God of Israel, let thy
word, I pray thee, be verified, which thou spakest unto thy servant
David my father.

<span id="an_8:27">8:27</span> But will God in very deed dwell on the
earth? behold, heaven and the heaven of heavens cannot contain thee; how
much less this house that I have builded!

<span id="an_8:28">8:28</span> Yet have thou respect unto the prayer of
thy servant, and to his supplication, O Jehovah my God, to hearken unto
the cry and to the prayer which thy servant prayeth before thee this
day;

<span id="an_8:29">8:29</span> that thine eyes may be open toward this
house night and day, even toward the place whereof thou hast said, My
name shall be there; to hearken unto the prayer which thy servant shall
pray toward this place.

<span id="an_8:30">8:30</span> And hearken thou to the supplication of
thy servant, and of thy people Israel, when they shall pray toward this
place: yea, hear thou in heaven thy dwelling-place; and when thou
hearest, forgive.

<span id="an_8:31">8:31</span> If a man sin against his neighbor, and an
oath be laid upon him to cause him to swear, and he come \[and\] swear
before thine altar in this house;

<span id="an_8:32">8:32</span> then hear thou in heaven, and do, and
judge thy servants, condemning the wicked, to bring his way upon his own
head, and justifying the righteous, to give him according to his
righteousness.

<span id="an_8:33">8:33</span> When thy people Israel are smitten down
before the enemy, because they have sinned against thee; if they turn
again to thee, and confess thy name, and pray and make supplication unto
thee in this house:

<span id="an_8:34">8:34</span> then hear thou in heaven, and forgive the
sin of thy people Israel, and bring them again unto the land which thou
gavest unto their fathers.

<span id="an_8:35">8:35</span> When heaven is shut up, and there is no
rain, because they have sinned against thee; if they pray toward this
place, and confess thy name, and turn from their sin, when thou dost
afflict them:

<span id="an_8:36">8:36</span> then hear thou in heaven, and forgive the
sin of thy servants, and of thy people Israel, when thou teachest them
the good way wherein they should walk; and send rain upon thy land,
which thou hast given to thy people for an inheritance.

<span id="an_8:37">8:37</span> If there be in the land famine, if there
be pestilence, if there be blasting \[or\] mildew, locust \[or\]
caterpillar; if their enemy besiege them in the land of their cities;
whatsoever plague, whatsoever sickness there be;

<span id="an_8:38">8:38</span> what prayer and supplication soever be
made by any man, \[or\] by all thy people Israel, who shall know every
man the plague of his own heart, and spread forth his hands toward this
house:

<span id="an_8:39">8:39</span> then hear thou in heaven thy
dwelling-place, and forgive, and do, and render unto every man according
to all his ways, whose heart thou knowest; (for thou, even thou only,
knowest the hearts of all the children of men;)

<span id="an_8:40">8:40</span> that they may fear thee all the days that
they live in the land which thou gavest unto our fathers.

<span id="an_8:41">8:41</span> Moreover concerning the foreigner, that
is not of thy people Israel, when he shall come out of a far country for
thy name's sake

<span id="an_8:42">8:42</span> (for they shall hear of thy great name,
and of thy mighty hand, and of thine outstretched arm); when he shall
come and pray toward this house;

<span id="an_8:43">8:43</span> hear thou in heaven thy dwelling-place,
and do according to all that the foreigner calleth to thee for; that all
the peoples of the earth may know thy name, to fear thee, as doth thy
people Israel, and that they may know that this house which I have built
is called by my name.

<span id="an_8:44">8:44</span> If thy people go out to battle against
their enemy, by whatsoever way thou shalt send them, and they pray unto
Jehovah toward the city which thou hast chosen, and toward the house
which I have built for thy name;

<span id="an_8:45">8:45</span> then hear thou in heaven their prayer and
their supplication, and maintain their cause.

<span id="an_8:46">8:46</span> If they sin against thee (for there is no
man that sinneth not), and thou be angry with them, and deliver them to
the enemy, so that they carry them away captive unto the land of the
enemy, far off or near;

<span id="an_8:47">8:47</span> yet if they shall bethink themselves in
the land whither they are carried captive, and turn again, and make
supplication unto thee in the land of them that carried them captive,
saying, We have sinned, and have done perversely, we have dealt
wickedly;

<span id="an_8:48">8:48</span> if they return unto thee with all their
heart and with all their soul in the land of their enemies, who carried
them captive, and pray unto thee toward their land, which thou gavest
unto their fathers, the city which thou hast chosen, and the house which
I have built for thy name:

<span id="an_8:49">8:49</span> then hear thou their prayer and their
supplication in heaven thy dwelling-place, and maintain their cause;

<span id="an_8:50">8:50</span> and forgive thy people who have sinned
against thee, and all their transgressions wherein they have
transgressed against thee; and give them compassion before those who
carried them captive, that they may have compassion on them

<span id="an_8:51">8:51</span> (for they are thy people, and thine
inheritance, which thou broughtest forth out of Egypt, from the midst of
the furnace of iron);

<span id="an_8:52">8:52</span> that thine eyes may be open unto the
supplication of thy servant, and unto the supplication of thy people
Israel, to hearken unto them whensoever they cry unto thee.

<span id="an_8:53">8:53</span> For thou didst separate them from among
all the peoples of the earth, to be thine inheritance, as thou spakest
by Moses thy servant, when thou broughtest our fathers out of Egypt, O
Lord Jehovah.

<span id="an_8:54">8:54</span> And it was so, that, when Solomon had
made an end of praying all this prayer and supplication unto Jehovah, he
arose from before the altar of Jehovah, from kneeling on his knees with
his hands spread forth toward heaven.

<span id="an_8:55">8:55</span> And he stood, and blessed all the
assembly of Israel with a loud voice, saying,

<span id="an_8:56">8:56</span> Blessed be Jehovah, that hath given rest
unto his people Israel, according to all that he promised: there hath
not failed one word of all his good promise, which he promised by Moses
his servant.

<span id="an_8:57">8:57</span> Jehovah our God be with us, as he was
with our fathers: let him not leave us, nor forsake us;

<span id="an_8:58">8:58</span> that he may incline our hearts unto him,
to walk in all his ways, and to keep his commandments, and his statutes,
and his ordinances, which he commanded our fathers.

<span id="an_8:59">8:59</span> And let these my words, wherewith I have
made supplication before Jehovah, be nigh unto Jehovah our God day and
night, that he maintain the cause of his servant, and the cause of his
people Israel, as every day shall require;

<span id="an_8:60">8:60</span> that all the peoples of the earth may
know that Jehovah, he is God; there is none else.

<span id="an_8:61">8:61</span> Let your heart therefore be perfect with
Jehovah our God, to walk in his statutes, and to keep his commandments,
as at this day.

<span id="an_8:62">8:62</span> And the king, and all Israel with him,
offered sacrifice before Jehovah.

<span id="an_8:63">8:63</span> And Solomon offered for the sacrifice of
peace-offerings, which he offered unto Jehovah, two and twenty thousand
oxen, and a hundred and twenty thousand sheep. So the king and all the
children of Israel dedicated the house of Jehovah.

<span id="an_8:64">8:64</span> The same day did the king hallow the
middle of the court that was before the house of Jehovah; for there he
offered the burnt-offering, and the meal-offering, and the fat of the
peace-offerings, because the brazen altar that was before Jehovah was
too little to receive the burnt-offering, and the meal-offering, and the
fat of the peace-offerings.

<span id="an_8:65">8:65</span> So Solomon held the feast at that time,
and all Israel with him, a great assembly, from the entrance of Hamath
unto the brook of Egypt, before Jehovah our God, seven days and seven
days, even fourteen days.

<span id="an_8:66">8:66</span> On the eighth day he sent the people
away; and they blessed the king, and went unto their tents joyful and
glad of heart for all the goodness that Jehovah had showed unto David
his servant, and to Israel his people.

<span id="an_9:1">9:1</span> And it came to pass, when Solomon had
finished the building of the house of Jehovah, and the king's house, and
all Solomon's desire which he was pleased to do,

<span id="an_9:2">9:2</span> that Jehovah appeared to Solomon the second
time, as he had appeared unto him at Gibeon.

<span id="an_9:3">9:3</span> And Jehovah said unto him, I have heard thy
prayer and thy supplication, that thou hast made before me: I have
hallowed this house, which thou hast built, to put my name there for
ever; and mine eyes and my heart shall be there perpetually.

<span id="an_9:4">9:4</span> And as for thee, if thou wilt walk before
me, as David thy father walked, in integrity of heart, and in
uprightness, to do according to all that I have commanded thee, and wilt
keep my statutes and mine ordinances;

<span id="an_9:5">9:5</span> then I will establish the throne of thy
kingdom over Israel for ever, according as I promised to David thy
father, saying, There shall not fail thee a man upon the throne of
Israel.

<span id="an_9:6">9:6</span> But if ye shall turn away from following
me, ye or your children, and not keep my commandments and my statutes
which I have set before you, but shall go and serve other gods, and
worship them;

<span id="an_9:7">9:7</span> then will I cut off Israel out of the land
which I have given them; and this house, which I have hallowed for my
name, will I cast out of my sight; and Israel shall be a proverb and a
byword among all peoples.

<span id="an_9:8">9:8</span> And though this house is so high, yet shall
every one that passeth by it be astonished, and shall hiss; and they
shall say, Why hath Jehovah done thus unto this land, and to this house?

<span id="an_9:9">9:9</span> and they shall answer, Because they forsook
Jehovah their God, who brought forth their fathers out of the land of
Egypt, and laid hold on other gods, and worshipped them, and served
them: therefore hath Jehovah brought all this evil upon them.

<span id="an_9:10">9:10</span> And it came to pass at the end of twenty
years, wherein Solomon had built the two houses, the house of Jehovah
and the king's house

<span id="an_9:11">9:11</span> (now Hiram the king of Tyre had furnished
Solomon with cedar-trees and fir-trees, and with gold, according to all
his desire), that then king Solomon gave Hiram twenty cities in the land
of Galilee.

<span id="an_9:12">9:12</span> And Hiram came out from Tyre to see the
cities which Solomon had given him; and they pleased him not.

<span id="an_9:13">9:13</span> And he said, What cities are these which
thou hast given me, my brother? And he called them the land of Cabul
unto this day.

<span id="an_9:14">9:14</span> And Hiram sent to the king sixscore
talents of gold.

<span id="an_9:15">9:15</span> And this is the reason of the levy which
king Solomon raised, to build the house of Jehovah, and his own house,
and Millo, and the wall of Jerusalem, and Hazor, and Megiddo, and Gezer.

<span id="an_9:16">9:16</span> Pharaoh king of Egypt had gone up, and
taken Gezer, and burnt it with fire, and slain the Canaanites that dwelt
in the city, and given it for a portion unto his daughter, Solomon's
wife.

<span id="an_9:17">9:17</span> And Solomon built Gezer, and Beth-horon
the nether,

<span id="an_9:18">9:18</span> and Baalath, and Tamar in the wilderness,
in the land,

<span id="an_9:19">9:19</span> and all the store-cities that Solomon
had, and the cities for his chariots, and the cities for his horsemen,
and that which Solomon desired to build for his pleasure in Jerusalem,
and in Lebanon, and in all the land of his dominion.

<span id="an_9:20">9:20</span> As for all the people that were left of
the Amorites, the Hittites, the Perizzites, the Hivites, and the
Jebusites, who were not of the children of Israel;

<span id="an_9:21">9:21</span> their children that were left after them
in the land, whom the children of Israel were not able utterly to
destroy, of them did Solomon raise a levy of bondservants unto this day.

<span id="an_9:22">9:22</span> But of the children of Israel did Solomon
make no bondservants; but they were the men of war, and his servants,
and his princes, and his captains, and rulers of his chariots and of his
horsemen.

<span id="an_9:23">9:23</span> These were the chief officers that were
over Solomon's work, five hundred and fifty, who bare rule over the
people that wrought in the work.

<span id="an_9:24">9:24</span> But Pharaoh's daughter came up out of the
city of David unto her house which \[Solomon\] had built for her: then
did he build Millo.

<span id="an_9:25">9:25</span> And three times a year did Solomon offer
burnt-offerings and peace-offerings upon the altar which he built unto
Jehovah, burning incense therewith, \[upon the altar\] that was before
Jehovah. So he finished the house.

<span id="an_9:26">9:26</span> And king Solomon made a navy of ships in
Ezion-geber, which is beside Eloth, on the shore of the Red Sea, in the
land of Edom.

<span id="an_9:27">9:27</span> And Hiram sent in the navy his servants,
shipmen that had knowledge of the sea, with the servants of Solomon.

<span id="an_9:28">9:28</span> And they came to Ophir, and fetched from
thence gold, four hundred and twenty talents, and brought it to king
Solomon.

<span id="an_10:1">10:1</span> And when the queen of Sheba heard of the
fame of Solomon concerning the name of Jehovah, she came to prove him
with hard questions.

<span id="an_10:2">10:2</span> And she came to Jerusalem with a very
great train, with camels that bare spices, and very much gold, and
precious stones; and when she was come to Solomon, she communed with him
of all that was in her heart.

<span id="an_10:3">10:3</span> And Solomon told her all her questions:
there was not anything hid from the king which he told her not.

<span id="an_10:4">10:4</span> And when the queen of Sheba had seen all
the wisdom of Solomon, and the house that he had built,

<span id="an_10:5">10:5</span> and the food of his table, and the
sitting of his servants, and the attendance of his ministers, and their
apparel, and his cupbearers, and his ascent by which he went up unto the
house of Jehovah; there was no more spirit in her.

<span id="an_10:6">10:6</span> And she said to the king, It was a true
report that I heard in mine own land of thine acts, and of thy wisdom.

<span id="an_10:7">10:7</span> Howbeit I believed not the words, until I
came, and mine eyes had seen it: and, behold, the half was not told me;
thy wisdom and prosperity exceed the fame which I heard.

<span id="an_10:8">10:8</span> Happy are thy men, happy are these thy
servants, that stand continually before thee, \[and\] that hear thy
wisdom.

<span id="an_10:9">10:9</span> Blessed be Jehovah thy God, who delighted
in thee, to set thee on the throne of Israel: because Jehovah loved
Israel for ever, therefore made he thee king, to do justice and
righteousness.

<span id="an_10:10">10:10</span> And she gave the king a hundred and
twenty talents of gold, and of spices very great store, and precious
stones: there came no more such abundance of spices as these which the
queen of Sheba gave to king Solomon.

<span id="an_10:11">10:11</span> And the navy also of Hiram, that
brought gold from Ophir, brought in from Ophir great plenty of
almug-trees and precious stones.

<span id="an_10:12">10:12</span> And the king made of the almug-trees
pillars for the house of Jehovah, and for the king's house, harps also
and psalteries for the singers: there came no such almug-trees, nor were
seen, unto this day.

<span id="an_10:13">10:13</span> And king Solomon gave to the queen of
Sheba all her desire, whatsoever she asked, besides that which Solomon
gave her of his royal bounty. So she turned, and went to her own land,
she and her servants.

<span id="an_10:14">10:14</span> Now the weight of gold that came to
Solomon in one year was six hundred threescore and six talents of gold,

<span id="an_10:15">10:15</span> besides \[that which\] the traders
\[brought\], and the traffic of the merchants, and of all the kings of
the mingled people, and of the governors of the country.

<span id="an_10:16">10:16</span> And king Solomon made two hundred
bucklers of beaten gold; six hundred \[shekels\] of gold went to one
buckler.

<span id="an_10:17">10:17</span> And \[he made\] three hundred shields
of beaten gold; three pounds of gold went to one shield: and the king
put them in the house of the forest of Lebanon.

<span id="an_10:18">10:18</span> Moreover the king made a great throne
of ivory, and overlaid it with the finest gold.

<span id="an_10:19">10:19</span> There were six steps to the throne, and
the top of the throne was round behind; and there were stays on either
side by the place of the seat, and two lions standing beside the stays.

<span id="an_10:20">10:20</span> And twelve lions stood there on the one
side and on the other upon the six steps: there was not the like made in
any kingdom.

<span id="an_10:21">10:21</span> And all king Solomon's drinking vessels
were of gold, and all the vessels of the house of the forest of Lebanon
were of pure gold: none were of silver; it was nothing accounted of in
the days of Solomon.

<span id="an_10:22">10:22</span> For the king had at sea a navy of
Tarshish with the navy of Hiram: once every three years came the navy of
Tarshish, bringing gold, and silver, ivory, and apes, and peacocks.

<span id="an_10:23">10:23</span> So king Solomon exceeded all the kings
of the earth in riches and in wisdom.

<span id="an_10:24">10:24</span> And all the earth sought the presence
of Solomon, to hear his wisdom, which God had put in his heart.

<span id="an_10:25">10:25</span> And they brought every man his tribute,
vessels of silver, and vessels of gold, and raiment, and armor, and
spices, horses, and mules, a rate year by year.

<span id="an_10:26">10:26</span> And Solomon gathered together chariots
and horsemen: and he had a thousand and four hundred chariots, and
twelve thousand horsemen, that he bestowed in the chariot cities, and
with the king at Jerusalem.

<span id="an_10:27">10:27</span> And the king made silver to be in
Jerusalem as stones, and cedars made he to be as the sycomore-trees that
are in the lowland, for abundance.

<span id="an_10:28">10:28</span> And the horses which Solomon had were
brought out of Egypt; and the king's merchants received them in droves,
each drove at a price.

<span id="an_10:29">10:29</span> And a chariot came up and went out of
Egypt for six hundred \[shekels\] of silver, and a horse for a hundred
and fifty; and so for all the kings of the Hittites, and for the kings
of Syria, did they bring them out by their means.

<span id="an_11:1">11:1</span> Now king Solomon loved many foreign
women, together with the daughter of Pharaoh, women of the Moabites,
Ammonites, Edomites, Sidonians, and Hittites;

<span id="an_11:2">11:2</span> of the nations concerning which Jehovah
said unto the children of Israel, Ye shall not go among them, neither
shall they come among you; for surely they will turn away your heart
after their gods: Solomon clave unto these in love.

<span id="an_11:3">11:3</span> And he had seven hundred wives,
princesses, and three hundred concubines; and his wives turned away his
heart.

<span id="an_11:4">11:4</span> For it came to pass, when Solomon was
old, that his wives turned away his heart after other gods; and his
heart was not perfect with Jehovah his God, as was the heart of David
his father.

<span id="an_11:5">11:5</span> For Solomon went after Ashtoreth the
goddess of the Sidonians, and after Milcom the abomination of the
Ammonites.

<span id="an_11:6">11:6</span> And Solomon did that which was evil in
the sight of Jehovah, and went not fully after Jehovah, as did David his
father.

<span id="an_11:7">11:7</span> Then did Solomon build a high place for
Chemosh the abomination of Moab, in the mount that is before Jerusalem,
and for Molech the abomination of the children of Ammon.

<span id="an_11:8">11:8</span> And so did he for all his foreign wives,
who burnt incense and sacrificed unto their gods.

<span id="an_11:9">11:9</span> And Jehovah was angry with Solomon,
because his heart was turned away from Jehovah, the God of Israel, who
had appeared unto him twice,

<span id="an_11:10">11:10</span> and had commanded him concerning this
thing, that he should not go after other gods: but he kept not that
which Jehovah commanded.

<span id="an_11:11">11:11</span> Wherefore Jehovah said unto Solomon,
Forasmuch as this is done of thee, and thou hast not kept my covenant
and my statutes, which I have commanded thee, I will surely rend the
kingdom from thee, and will give it to thy servant.

<span id="an_11:12">11:12</span> Notwithstanding in thy days I will not
do it, for David thy father's sake: but I will rend it out of the hand
of thy son.

<span id="an_11:13">11:13</span> Howbeit I will not rend away all the
kingdom; but I will give one tribe to thy son, for David my servant's
sake, and for Jerusalem's sake which I have chosen.

<span id="an_11:14">11:14</span> And Jehovah raised up an adversary unto
Solomon, Hadad the Edomite: he was of the king's seed in Edom.

<span id="an_11:15">11:15</span> For it came to pass, when David was in
Edom, and Joab the captain of the host was gone up to bury the slain,
and had smitten every male in Edom

<span id="an_11:16">11:16</span> (for Joab and all Israel remained there
six months, until he had cut off every male in Edom);

<span id="an_11:17">11:17</span> that Hadad fled, he and certain
Edomites of his father's servants with him, to go into Egypt, Hadad
being yet a little child.

<span id="an_11:18">11:18</span> And they arose out of Midian, and came
to Paran; and they took men with them out of Paran, and they came to
Egypt, unto Pharaoh king of Egypt, who gave him a house, and appointed
him victuals, and gave him land.

<span id="an_11:19">11:19</span> And Hadad found great favor in the
sight of Pharaoh, so that he gave him to wife the sister of his own
wife, the sister of Tahpenes the queen.

<span id="an_11:20">11:20</span> And the sister of Tahpenes bare him
Genubath his son, whom Tahpenes weaned in Pharaoh's house; and Genubath
was in Pharaoh's house among the sons of Pharaoh.

<span id="an_11:21">11:21</span> And when Hadad heard in Egypt that
David slept with his fathers, and that Joab the captain of the host was
dead, Hadad said to Pharaoh, Let me depart, that I may go to mine own
country.

<span id="an_11:22">11:22</span> Then Pharaoh said unto him, But what
hast thou lacked with me, that, behold, thou seekest to go to thine own
country? And he answered, Nothing: howbeit only let me depart.

<span id="an_11:23">11:23</span> And God raised up \[another\] adversary
unto him, Rezon the son of Eliada, who had fled from his lord Hadadezer
king of Zobah.

<span id="an_11:24">11:24</span> And he gathered men unto him, and
became captain over a troop, when David slew them \[of Zobah\]: and they
went to Damascus, and dwelt therein, and reigned in Damascus.

<span id="an_11:25">11:25</span> And he was an adversary to Israel all
the days of Solomon, besides the mischief that Hadad \[did\]: and he
abhorred Israel, and reigned over Syria.

<span id="an_11:26">11:26</span> And Jeroboam the son of Nebat, an
Ephraimite of Zeredah, a servant of Solomon, whose mother's name was
Zeruah, a widow, he also lifted up his hand against the king.

<span id="an_11:27">11:27</span> And this was the reason why he lifted
up his hand against the king: Solomon built Millo, and repaired the
breach of the city of David his father.

<span id="an_11:28">11:28</span> And the man Jeroboam was a mighty man
of valor; and Solomon saw the young man that he was industrious, and he
gave him charge over all the labor of the house of Joseph.

<span id="an_11:29">11:29</span> And it came to pass at that time, when
Jeroboam went out of Jerusalem, that the prophet Ahijah the Shilonite
found him in the way; now \[Ahijah\] had clad himself with a new
garment; and they two were alone in the field.

<span id="an_11:30">11:30</span> And Ahijah laid hold of the new garment
that was on him, and rent it in twelve pieces.

<span id="an_11:31">11:31</span> And he said to Jeroboam, Take thee ten
pieces; for thus saith Jehovah, the God of Israel, Behold, I will rend
the kingdom out of the hand of Solomon, and will give ten tribes to thee

<span id="an_11:32">11:32</span> (but he shall have one tribe, for my
servant David's sake and for Jerusalem's sake, the city which I have
chosen out of all the tribes of Israel);

<span id="an_11:33">11:33</span> because that they have forsaken me, and
have worshipped Ashtoreth the goddess of the Sidonians, Chemosh the god
of Moab, and Milcom the god of the children of Ammon; and they have not
walked in my ways, to do that which is right in mine eyes, and \[to
keep\] my statutes and mine ordinances, as did David his father.

<span id="an_11:34">11:34</span> Howbeit I will not take the whole
kingdom out of his hand; but I will make him prince all the days of his
life, for David my servant's sake whom I chose, who kept my commandments
and my statutes;

<span id="an_11:35">11:35</span> but I will take the kingdom out of his
son's hand, and will give it unto thee, even ten tribes.

<span id="an_11:36">11:36</span> And unto his son will I give one tribe,
that David my servant may have a lamp alway before me in Jerusalem, the
city which I have chosen me to put my name there.

<span id="an_11:37">11:37</span> And I will take thee, and thou shalt
reign according to all that thy soul desireth, and shalt be king over
Israel.

<span id="an_11:38">11:38</span> And it shall be, if thou wilt hearken
unto all that I command thee, and wilt walk in my ways, and do that
which is right in mine eyes, to keep my statutes and my commandments, as
David my servant did; that I will be with thee, and will build thee a
sure house, as I built for David, and will give Israel unto thee.

<span id="an_11:39">11:39</span> And I will for this afflict the seed of
David, but not for ever.

<span id="an_11:40">11:40</span> Solomon sought therefore to kill
Jeroboam; but Jeroboam arose, and fled into Egypt, unto Shishak king of
Egypt, and was in Egypt until the death of Solomon.

<span id="an_11:41">11:41</span> Now the rest of the acts of Solomon,
and all that he did, and his wisdom, are they not written in the book of
the acts of Solomon?

<span id="an_11:42">11:42</span> And the time that Solomon reigned in
Jerusalem over all Israel was forty years.

<span id="an_11:43">11:43</span> And Solomon slept with his fathers, and
was buried in the city of David his father: and Rehoboam his son reigned
in his stead.

<span id="an_12:1">12:1</span> And Rehoboam went to Shechem: for all
Israel were come to Shechem to make him king.

<span id="an_12:2">12:2</span> And it came to pass, when Jeroboam the
son of Nebat heard of it (for he was yet in Egypt, whither he had fled
from the presence of king Solomon, and Jeroboam dwelt in Egypt,

<span id="an_12:3">12:3</span> and they sent and called him), that
Jeroboam and all the assembly of Israel came, and spake unto Rehoboam,
saying,

<span id="an_12:4">12:4</span> Thy father made our yoke grievous: now
therefore make thou the grievous service of thy father, and his heavy
yoke which he put upon us, lighter, and we will serve thee.

<span id="an_12:5">12:5</span> And he said unto them, Depart yet for
three days, then come again to me. And the people departed.

<span id="an_12:6">12:6</span> And king Rehoboam took counsel with the
old men, that had stood before Solomon his father while he yet lived,
saying, What counsel give ye me to return answer to this people?

<span id="an_12:7">12:7</span> And they spake unto him, saying, If thou
wilt be a servant unto this people this day, and wilt serve them, and
answer them, and speak good words to them, then they will be thy
servants for ever.

<span id="an_12:8">12:8</span> But he forsook the counsel of the old men
which they had given him, and took counsel with the young men that were
grown up with him, that stood before him.

<span id="an_12:9">12:9</span> And he said unto them, What counsel give
ye, that we may return answer to this people, who have spoken to me,
saying, Make the yoke that thy father did put upon us lighter?

<span id="an_12:10">12:10</span> And the young men that were grown up
with him spake unto him, saying, Thus shalt thou say unto this people
that spake unto thee, saying, Thy father made our yoke heavy, but make
thou it lighter unto us; thus shalt thou speak unto them, My little
finger is thicker than my father's loins.

<span id="an_12:11">12:11</span> And now whereas my father did lade you
with a heavy yoke, I will add to your yoke: my father chastised you with
whips, but I will chastise you with scorpions.

<span id="an_12:12">12:12</span> So Jeroboam and all the people came to
Rehoboam the third day, as the king bade, saying, Come to me again the
third day.

<span id="an_12:13">12:13</span> And the king answered the people
roughly, and forsook the counsel of the old men which they had given
him,

<span id="an_12:14">12:14</span> and spake to them after the counsel of
the young men, saying, My father made your yoke heavy, but I will add to
your yoke: my father chastised you with whips, but I will chastise you
with scorpions.

<span id="an_12:15">12:15</span> So the king hearkened not unto the
people; for it was a thing brought about of Jehovah, that he might
establish his word, which Jehovah spake by Ahijah the Shilonite to
Jeroboam the son of Nebat.

<span id="an_12:16">12:16</span> And when all Israel saw that the king
hearkened not unto them, the people answered the king, saying, What
portion have we in David? neither have we inheritance in the son of
Jesse: to your tents, O Israel: now see to thine own house, David. So
Israel departed unto their tents.

<span id="an_12:17">12:17</span> But as for the children of Israel that
dwelt in the cities of Judah, Rehoboam reigned over them.

<span id="an_12:18">12:18</span> Then king Rehoboam sent Adoram, who was
over the men subject to taskwork; and all Israel stoned him to death
with stones. And king Rehoboam made speed to get him up to his chariot,
to flee to Jerusalem.

<span id="an_12:19">12:19</span> So Israel rebelled against the house of
David unto this day.

<span id="an_12:20">12:20</span> And it came to pass, when all Israel
heard that Jeroboam was returned, that they sent and called him unto the
congregation, and made him king over all Israel: there was none that
followed the house of David, but the tribe of Judah only.

<span id="an_12:21">12:21</span> And when Rehoboam was come to
Jerusalem, he assembled all the house of Judah, and the tribe of
Benjamin, a hundred and fourscore thousand chosen men, that were
warriors, to fight against the house of Israel, to bring the kingdom
again to Rehoboam the son of Solomon.

<span id="an_12:22">12:22</span> But the word of God came unto Shemaiah
the man of God, saying,

<span id="an_12:23">12:23</span> Speak unto Rehoboam the son of Solomon,
king of Judah, and unto all the house of Judah and Benjamin, and to the
rest of the people, saying,

<span id="an_12:24">12:24</span> Thus saith Jehovah, Ye shall not go up,
nor fight against your brethren the children of Israel: return every man
to his house; for this thing is of me. So they hearkened unto the word
of Jehovah, and returned and went their way, according to the word of
Jehovah.

<span id="an_12:25">12:25</span> Then Jeroboam built Shechem in the
hill-country of Ephraim, and dwelt therein; and he went out from thence,
and built Penuel.

<span id="an_12:26">12:26</span> And Jeroboam said in his heart, Now
will the kingdom return to the house of David:

<span id="an_12:27">12:27</span> if this people go up to offer
sacrifices in the house of Jehovah at Jerusalem, then will the heart of
this people turn again unto their lord, even unto Rehoboam king of
Judah; and they will kill me, and return to Rehoboam king of Judah.

<span id="an_12:28">12:28</span> Whereupon the king took counsel, and
made two calves of gold; and he said unto them, It is too much for you
to go up to Jerusalem: behold thy gods, O Israel, which brought thee up
out of the land of Egypt.

<span id="an_12:29">12:29</span> And he set the one in Beth-el, and the
other put he in Dan.

<span id="an_12:30">12:30</span> And this thing became a sin; for the
people went \[to worship\] before the one, even unto Dan.

<span id="an_12:31">12:31</span> And he made houses of high places, and
made priests from among all the people, that were not of the sons of
Levi.

<span id="an_12:32">12:32</span> And Jeroboam ordained a feast in the
eighth month, on the fifteenth day of the month, like unto the feast
that is in Judah, and he went up unto the altar; so did he in Beth-el,
sacrificing unto the calves that he had made: and he placed in Beth-el
the priests of the high places that he had made.

<span id="an_12:33">12:33</span> And he went up unto the altar which he
had made in Beth-el on the fifteenth day in the eighth month, even in
the month which he had devised of his own heart: and he ordained a feast
for the children of Israel, and went up unto the altar, to burn incense.

<span id="an_13:1">13:1</span> And, behold, there came a man of God out
of Judah by the word of Jehovah unto Beth-el: and Jeroboam was standing
by the altar to burn incense.

<span id="an_13:2">13:2</span> And he cried against the altar by the
word of Jehovah, and said, O altar, altar, thus saith Jehovah: Behold, a
son shall be born unto the house of David, Josiah by name; and upon thee
shall he sacrifice the priests of the high places that burn incense upon
thee, and men's bones shall they burn upon thee.

<span id="an_13:3">13:3</span> And he gave a sign the same day, saying,
This is the sign which Jehovah hath spoken: Behold, the altar shall be
rent, and the ashes that are upon it shall be poured out.

<span id="an_13:4">13:4</span> And it came to pass, when the king heard
the saying of the man of God, which he cried against the altar in
Beth-el, that Jeroboam put forth his hand from the altar, saying, Lay
hold on him. And his hand, which he put forth against him, dried up, so
that he could not draw it back again to him.

<span id="an_13:5">13:5</span> The altar also was rent, and the ashes
poured out from the altar, according to the sign which the man of God
had given by the word of Jehovah.

<span id="an_13:6">13:6</span> And the king answered and said unto the
man of God, Entreat now the favor of Jehovah thy God, and pray for me,
that my hand may be restored me again. And the man of God entreated
Jehovah, and the king's hand was restored him again, and became as it
was before.

<span id="an_13:7">13:7</span> And the king said unto the man of God,
Come home with me, and refresh thyself, and I will give thee a reward.

<span id="an_13:8">13:8</span> And the man of God said unto the king, If
thou wilt give me half thy house, I will not go in with thee, neither
will I eat bread nor drink water in this place;

<span id="an_13:9">13:9</span> for so was it charged me by the word of
Jehovah, saying, Thou shalt eat no bread, nor drink water, neither
return by the way that thou camest.

<span id="an_13:10">13:10</span> So he went another way, and returned
not by the way that he came to Beth-el.

<span id="an_13:11">13:11</span> Now there dwelt an old prophet in
Beth-el; and one of his sons came and told him all the works that the
man of God had done that day in Beth-el: the words which he had spoken
unto the king, them also they told unto their father.

<span id="an_13:12">13:12</span> And their father said unto them, What
way went he? Now his sons had seen what way the man of God went, that
came from Judah.

<span id="an_13:13">13:13</span> And he said unto his sons, Saddle me
the ass. So they saddled him the ass; and he rode thereon.

<span id="an_13:14">13:14</span> And he went after the man of God, and
found him sitting under an oak; and he said unto him, Art thou the man
of God that camest from Judah? And he said, I am.

<span id="an_13:15">13:15</span> Then he said unto him, Come home with
me, and eat bread.

<span id="an_13:16">13:16</span> And he said, I may not return with
thee, nor go in with thee; neither will I eat bread nor drink water with
thee in this place:

<span id="an_13:17">13:17</span> for it was said to me by the word of
Jehovah, Thou shalt eat no bread nor drink water there, nor turn again
to go by the way that thou camest.

<span id="an_13:18">13:18</span> And he said unto him, I also am a
prophet as thou art; and an angel spake unto me by the word of Jehovah,
saying, Bring him back with thee into thy house, that he may eat bread
and drink water. \[But\] he lied unto him.

<span id="an_13:19">13:19</span> So he went back with him, and did eat
bread in his house, and drank water.

<span id="an_13:20">13:20</span> And it came to pass, as they sat at the
table, that the word of Jehovah came unto the prophet that brought him
back;

<span id="an_13:21">13:21</span> and he cried unto the man of God that
came from Judah, saying, Thus saith Jehovah, Forasmuch as thou hast been
disobedient unto the mouth of Jehovah, and hast not kept the commandment
which Jehovah thy God commanded thee,

<span id="an_13:22">13:22</span> but camest back, and hast eaten bread
and drunk water in the place of which he said to thee, Eat no bread, and
drink no water; thy body shall not come unto the sepulchre of thy
fathers.

<span id="an_13:23">13:23</span> And it came to pass, after he had eaten
bread, and after he had drunk, that he saddled for him the ass, \[to
wit\], for the prophet whom he had brought back.

<span id="an_13:24">13:24</span> And when he was gone, a lion met him by
the way, and slew him: and his body was cast in the way, and the ass
stood by it; the lion also stood by the body.

<span id="an_13:25">13:25</span> And, behold, men passed by, and saw the
body cast in the way, and the lion standing by the body; and they came
and told it in the city where the old prophet dwelt.

<span id="an_13:26">13:26</span> And when the prophet that brought him
back from the way heard thereof, he said, It is the man of God, who was
disobedient unto the mouth of Jehovah: therefore Jehovah hath delivered
him unto the lion, which hath torn him, and slain him, according to the
word of Jehovah, which he spake unto him.

<span id="an_13:27">13:27</span> And he spake to his sons, saying,
Saddle me the ass. And they saddled it.

<span id="an_13:28">13:28</span> And he went and found his body cast in
the way, and the ass and the lion standing by the body: the lion had not
eaten the body, nor torn the ass.

<span id="an_13:29">13:29</span> And the prophet took up the body of the
man of God, and laid it upon the ass, and brought it back; and he came
to the city of the old prophet, to mourn, and to bury him.

<span id="an_13:30">13:30</span> And he laid his body in his own grave;
and they mourned over him, \[saying\], Alas, my brother!

<span id="an_13:31">13:31</span> And it came to pass, after he had
buried him, that he spake to his sons, saying, When I am dead, then bury
me in the sepulchre wherein the man of God is buried; lay my bones
beside his bones.

<span id="an_13:32">13:32</span> For the saying which he cried by the
word of Jehovah against the altar in Beth-el, and against all the houses
of the high places which are in the cities of Samaria, shall surely come
to pass.

<span id="an_13:33">13:33</span> After this thing Jeroboam returned not
from his evil way, but made again from among all the people priests of
the high places: whosoever would, he consecrated him, that there might
be priests of the high places.

<span id="an_13:34">13:34</span> And this thing became sin unto the
house of Jeroboam, even to cut it off, and to destroy it from off the
face of the earth.

<span id="an_14:1">14:1</span> At that time Abijah the son of Jeroboam
fell sick.

<span id="an_14:2">14:2</span> And Jeroboam said to his wife, Arise, I
pray thee, and disguise thyself, that thou be not known to be the wife
of Jeroboam; and get thee to Shiloh: behold, there is Ahijah the
prophet, who spake concerning me that I should be king over this people.

<span id="an_14:3">14:3</span> And take with thee ten loaves, and cakes,
and a cruse of honey, and go to him: he will tell thee what shall become
of the child.

<span id="an_14:4">14:4</span> And Jeroboam's wife did so, and arose,
and went to Shiloh, and came to the house of Ahijah. Now Ahijah could
not see; for his eyes were set by reason of his age.

<span id="an_14:5">14:5</span> And Jehovah said unto Ahijah, Behold, the
wife of Jeroboam cometh to inquire of thee concerning her son; for he is
sick: thus and thus shalt thou say unto her; for it will be, when she
cometh in, that she will feign herself to be another woman.

<span id="an_14:6">14:6</span> And it was so, when Ahijah heard the
sound of her feet, as she came in at the door, that he said, Come in,
thou wife of Jeroboam; why feignest thou thyself to be another? for I am
sent to thee with heavy tidings.

<span id="an_14:7">14:7</span> Go, tell Jeroboam, Thus saith Jehovah,
the God of Israel: Forasmuch as I exalted thee from among the people,
and made thee prince over my people Israel,

<span id="an_14:8">14:8</span> and rent the kingdom away from the house
of David, and gave it thee; and yet thou hast not been as my servant
David, who kept my commandments, and who followed me with all his heart,
to do that only which was right in mine eyes,

<span id="an_14:9">14:9</span> but hast done evil above all that were
before thee, and hast gone and made thee other gods, and molten images,
to provoke me to anger, and hast cast me behind thy back:

<span id="an_14:10">14:10</span> therefore, behold, I will bring evil
upon the house of Jeroboam, and will cut off from Jeroboam every
man-child, him that is shut up and him that is left at large in Israel,
and will utterly sweep away the house of Jeroboam, as a man sweepeth
away dung, till it be all gone.

<span id="an_14:11">14:11</span> Him that dieth of Jeroboam in the city
shall the dogs eat; and him that dieth in the field shall the birds of
the heavens eat: for Jehovah hath spoken it.

<span id="an_14:12">14:12</span> Arise thou therefore, get thee to thy
house: \[and\] when thy feet enter into the city, the child shall die.

<span id="an_14:13">14:13</span> And all Israel shall mourn for him, and
bury him; for he only of Jeroboam shall come to the grave, because in
him there is found some good thing toward Jehovah, the God of Israel, in
the house of Jeroboam.

<span id="an_14:14">14:14</span> Moreover Jehovah will raise him up a
king over Israel, who shall cut off the house of Jeroboam that day: but
what? even now.

<span id="an_14:15">14:15</span> For Jehovah will smite Israel, as a
reed is shaken in the water; and he will root up Israel out of this good
land which he gave to their fathers, and will scatter them beyond the
River, because they have made their Asherim, provoking Jehovah to anger.

<span id="an_14:16">14:16</span> And he will give Israel up because of
the sins of Jeroboam, which he hath sinned, and wherewith he hath made
Israel to sin.

<span id="an_14:17">14:17</span> And Jeroboam's wife arose, and
departed, and came to Tirzah: \[and\] as she came to the threshold of
the house, the child died.

<span id="an_14:18">14:18</span> And all Israel buried him, and mourned
for him, according to the word of Jehovah, which he spake by his servant
Ahijah the prophet.

<span id="an_14:19">14:19</span> And the rest of the acts of Jeroboam,
how he warred, and how he reigned, behold, they are written in the book
of the chronicles of the kings of Israel.

<span id="an_14:20">14:20</span> And the days which Jeroboam reigned
were two and twenty years: and he slept with his fathers, and Nadab his
son reigned in his stead.

<span id="an_14:21">14:21</span> And Rehoboam the son of Solomon reigned
in Judah. Rehoboam was forty and one years old when he began to reign,
and he reigned seventeen years in Jerusalem, the city which Jehovah had
chosen out of all the tribes of Israel, to put his name there: and his
mother's name was Naamah the Ammonitess.

<span id="an_14:22">14:22</span> And Judah did that which was evil in
the sight of Jehovah, and they provoked him to jealousy with their sins
which they committed, above all that their fathers had done.

<span id="an_14:23">14:23</span> For they also built them high places,
and pillars, and Asherim, on every high hill, and under every green
tree;

<span id="an_14:24">14:24</span> and there were also sodomites in the
land: they did according to all the abominations of the nations which
Jehovah drove out before the children of Israel.

<span id="an_14:25">14:25</span> And it came to pass in the fifth year
of king Rehoboam, that Shishak king of Egypt came up against Jerusalem;

<span id="an_14:26">14:26</span> and he took away the treasures of the
house of Jehovah, and the treasures of the king's house; he even took
away all: and he took away all the shields of gold which Solomon had
made.

<span id="an_14:27">14:27</span> And king Rehoboam made in their stead
shields of brass, and committed them to the hands of the captains of the
guard, who kept the door of the king's house.

<span id="an_14:28">14:28</span> And it was so, that, as oft as the king
went into the house of Jehovah, the guard bare them, and brought them
back into the guard-chamber.

<span id="an_14:29">14:29</span> Now the rest of the acts of Rehoboam,
and all that he did, are they not written in the book of the chronicles
of the kings of Judah?

<span id="an_14:30">14:30</span> And there was war between Rehoboam and
Jeroboam continually.

<span id="an_14:31">14:31</span> And Rehoboam slept with his fathers,
and was buried with his fathers in the city of David: and his mother's
name was Naamah the Ammonitess. And Abijam his son reigned in his stead.

<span id="an_15:1">15:1</span> Now in the eighteenth year of king
Jeroboam the son of Nebat began Abijam to reign over Judah.

<span id="an_15:2">15:2</span> Three years reigned he in Jerusalem: and
his mother's name was Maacah the daughter of Abishalom.

<span id="an_15:3">15:3</span> And he walked in all the sins of his
father, which he had done before him; and his heart was not perfect with
Jehovah his God, as the heart of David his father.

<span id="an_15:4">15:4</span> Nevertheless for David's sake did Jehovah
his God give him a lamp in Jerusalem, to set up his son after him, and
to establish Jerusalem;

<span id="an_15:5">15:5</span> because David did that which was right in
the eyes of Jehovah, and turned not aside from anything that he
commanded him all the days of his life, save only in the matter of Uriah
the Hittite.

<span id="an_15:6">15:6</span> Now there was war between Rehoboam and
Jeroboam all the days of his life.

<span id="an_15:7">15:7</span> And the rest of the acts of Abijam, and
all that he did, are they not written in the book of the chronicles of
the kings of Judah? And there was war between Abijam and Jeroboam.

<span id="an_15:8">15:8</span> And Abijam slept with his fathers; and
they buried him in the city of David: and Asa his son reigned in his
stead.

<span id="an_15:9">15:9</span> And in the twentieth year of Jeroboam
king of Israel began Asa to reign over Judah.

<span id="an_15:10">15:10</span> And forty and one years reigned he in
Jerusalem: and his mother's name was Maacah the daughter of Abishalom.

<span id="an_15:11">15:11</span> And Asa did that which was right in the
eyes of Jehovah, as did David his father.

<span id="an_15:12">15:12</span> And he put away the sodomites out of
the land, and removed all the idols that his fathers had made.

<span id="an_15:13">15:13</span> And also Maacah his mother he removed
from being queen, because she had made an abominable image for an
Asherah; and Asa cut down her image, and burnt it at the brook Kidron.

<span id="an_15:14">15:14</span> But the high places were not taken
away: nevertheless the heart of Asa was perfect with Jehovah all his
days.

<span id="an_15:15">15:15</span> And he brought into the house of
Jehovah the things that his father had dedicated, and the things that
himself had dedicated, silver, and gold, and vessels.

<span id="an_15:16">15:16</span> And there was war between Asa and
Baasha king of Israel all their days.

<span id="an_15:17">15:17</span> And Baasha king of Israel went up
against Judah, and built Ramah, that he might not suffer any one to go
out or come in to Asa king of Judah.

<span id="an_15:18">15:18</span> Then Asa took all the silver and the
gold that were left in the treasures of the house of Jehovah, and the
treasures of the king's house, and delivered them into the hand of his
servants; and king Asa sent them to Ben-hadad, the son of Tabrimmon, the
son of Hezion, king of Syria, that dwelt at Damascus, saying,

<span id="an_15:19">15:19</span> \[There is\] a league between me and
thee, between my father and thy father: behold, I have sent unto thee a
present of silver and gold; go, break thy league with Baasha king of
Israel, that he may depart from me.

<span id="an_15:20">15:20</span> And Ben-hadad hearkened unto king Asa,
and sent the captains of his armies against the cities of Israel, and
smote Ijon, and Dan, and Abel-beth-maacah, and all Chinneroth, with all
the land of Naphtali.

<span id="an_15:21">15:21</span> And it came to pass, when Baasha heard
thereof, that he left off building Ramah, and dwelt in Tirzah.

<span id="an_15:22">15:22</span> Then king Asa made a proclamation unto
all Judah; none was exempted: and they carried away the stones of Ramah,
and the timber thereof, wherewith Baasha had builded; and king Asa built
therewith Geba of Benjamin, and Mizpah.

<span id="an_15:23">15:23</span> Now the rest of all the acts of Asa,
and all his might, and all that he did, and the cities which he built,
are they not written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of
Judah? But in the time of his old age he was diseased in his feet.

<span id="an_15:24">15:24</span> And Asa slept with his fathers, and was
buried with his fathers in the city of David his father; and Jehoshaphat
his son reigned in his stead.

<span id="an_15:25">15:25</span> And Nadab the son of Jeroboam began to
reign over Israel in the second year of Asa king of Judah; and he
reigned over Israel two years.

<span id="an_15:26">15:26</span> And he did that which was evil in the
sight of Jehovah, and walked in the way of his father, and in his sin
wherewith he made Israel to sin.

<span id="an_15:27">15:27</span> And Baasha the son of Ahijah, of the
house of Issachar, conspired against him; and Baasha smote him at
Gibbethon, which belonged to the Philistines; for Nadab and all Israel
were laying siege to Gibbethon.

<span id="an_15:28">15:28</span> Even in the third year of Asa king of
Judah did Baasha slay him, and reigned in his stead.

<span id="an_15:29">15:29</span> And it came to pass that, as soon as he
was king, he smote all the house of Jeroboam: he left not to Jeroboam
any that breathed, until he had destroyed him; according unto the saying
of Jehovah, which he spake by his servant Ahijah the Shilonite;

<span id="an_15:30">15:30</span> for the sins of Jeroboam which he
sinned, and wherewith he made Israel to sin, because of his provocation
wherewith he provoked Jehovah, the God of Israel, to anger.

<span id="an_15:31">15:31</span> Now the rest of the acts of Nadab, and
all that he did, are they not written in the book of the chronicles of
the kings of Israel?

<span id="an_15:32">15:32</span> And there was war between Asa and
Baasha king of Israel all their days.

<span id="an_15:33">15:33</span> In the third year of Asa king of Judah
began Baasha the son of Ahijah to reign over all Israel in Tirzah, \[and
reigned\] twenty and four years.

<span id="an_15:34">15:34</span> And he did that which was evil in the
sight of Jehovah, and walked in the way of Jeroboam, and in his sin
wherewith he made Israel to sin.

<span id="an_16:1">16:1</span> And the word of Jehovah came to Jehu the
son of Hanani against Baasha, saying,

<span id="an_16:2">16:2</span> Forasmuch as I exalted thee out of the
dust, and made thee prince over my people Israel, and thou hast walked
in the way of Jeroboam, and hast made my people Israel to sin, to
provoke me to anger with their sins;

<span id="an_16:3">16:3</span> behold, I will utterly sweep away Baasha
and his house; and I will make thy house like the house of Jeroboam the
son of Nebat.

<span id="an_16:4">16:4</span> Him that dieth of Baasha in the city
shall the dogs eat; and him that dieth of his in the field shall the
birds of the heavens eat.

<span id="an_16:5">16:5</span> Now the rest of the acts of Baasha, and
what he did, and his might, are they not written in the book of the
chronicles of the kings of Israel?

<span id="an_16:6">16:6</span> And Baasha slept with his fathers, and
was buried in Tirzah; and Elah his son reigned in his stead.

<span id="an_16:7">16:7</span> And moreover by the prophet Jehu the son
of Hanani came the word of Jehovah against Baasha, and against his
house, both because of all the evil that he did in the sight of Jehovah,
to provoke him to anger with the work of his hands, in being like the
house of Jeroboam, and because he smote him.

<span id="an_16:8">16:8</span> In the twenty and sixth year of Asa king
of Judah began Elah the son of Baasha to reign over Israel in Tirzah,
\[and reigned\] two years.

<span id="an_16:9">16:9</span> And his servant Zimri, captain of half
his chariots, conspired against him. Now he was in Tirzah, drinking
himself drunk in the house of Arza, who was over the household in
Tirzah:

<span id="an_16:10">16:10</span> and Zimri went in and smote him, and
killed him, in the twenty and seventh year of Asa king of Judah, and
reigned in his stead.

<span id="an_16:11">16:11</span> And it came to pass, when he began to
reign, as soon as he sat on his throne, that he smote all the house of
Baasha: he left him not a single man-child, neither of his kinsfolks,
nor of his friends.

<span id="an_16:12">16:12</span> Thus did Zimri destroy all the house of
Baasha, according to the word of Jehovah, which he spake against Baasha
by Jehu the prophet,

<span id="an_16:13">16:13</span> for all the sins of Baasha, and the
sins of Elah his son, which they sinned, and wherewith they made Israel
to sin, to provoke Jehovah, the God of Israel, to anger with their
vanities.

<span id="an_16:14">16:14</span> Now the rest of the acts of Elah, and
all that he did, are they not written in the book of the chronicles of
the kings of Israel?

<span id="an_16:15">16:15</span> In the twenty and seventh year of Asa
king of Judah did Zimri reign seven days in Tirzah. Now the people were
encamped against Gibbethon, which belonged to the Philistines.

<span id="an_16:16">16:16</span> And the people that were encamped heard
say, Zimri hath conspired, and hath also smitten the king: wherefore all
Israel made Omri, the captain of the host, king over Israel that day in
the camp.

<span id="an_16:17">16:17</span> And Omri went up from Gibbethon, and
all Israel with him, and they besieged Tirzah.

<span id="an_16:18">16:18</span> And it came to pass, when Zimri saw
that the city was taken, that he went into the castle of the king's
house, and burnt the king's house over him with fire, and died,

<span id="an_16:19">16:19</span> for his sins which he sinned in doing
that which was evil in the sight of Jehovah, in walking in the way of
Jeroboam, and in his sin which he did, to make Israel to sin.

<span id="an_16:20">16:20</span> Now the rest of the acts of Zimri, and
his treason that he wrought, are they not written in the book of the
chronicles of the kings of Israel?

<span id="an_16:21">16:21</span> Then were the people of Israel divided
into two parts: half of the people followed Tibni the son of Ginath, to
make him king; and half followed Omri.

<span id="an_16:22">16:22</span> But the people that followed Omri
prevailed against the people that followed Tibni the son of Ginath: so
Tibni died, and Omri reigned.

<span id="an_16:23">16:23</span> In the thirty and first year of Asa
king of Judah began Omri to reign over Israel, \[and reigned\] twelve
years: six years reigned he in Tirzah.

<span id="an_16:24">16:24</span> And he bought the hill Samaria of
Shemer for two talents of silver; and he built on the hill, and called
the name of the city which he built, after the name of Shemer, the owner
of the hill, Samaria.

<span id="an_16:25">16:25</span> And Omri did that which was evil in the
sight of Jehovah, and dealt wickedly above all that were before him.

<span id="an_16:26">16:26</span> For he walked in all the way of
Jeroboam the son of Nebat, and in his sins wherewith he made Israel to
sin, to provoke Jehovah, the God of Israel, to anger with their
vanities.

<span id="an_16:27">16:27</span> Now the rest of the acts of Omri which
he did, and his might that he showed, are they not written in the book
of the chronicles of the kings of Israel?

<span id="an_16:28">16:28</span> So Omri slept with his fathers, and was
buried in Samaria; and Ahab his son reigned in his stead.

<span id="an_16:29">16:29</span> And in the thirty and eighth year of
Asa king of Judah began Ahab the son of Omri to reign over Israel: and
Ahab the son of Omri reigned over Israel in Samaria twenty and two
years.

<span id="an_16:30">16:30</span> And Ahab the son of Omri did that which
was evil in the sight of Jehovah above all that were before him.

<span id="an_16:31">16:31</span> And it came to pass, as if it had been
a light thing for him to walk in the sins of Jeroboam the son of Nebat,
that he took to wife Jezebel the daughter of Ethbaal king of the
Sidonians, and went and served Baal, and worshipped him.

<span id="an_16:32">16:32</span> And he reared up an altar for Baal in
the house of Baal, which he had built in Samaria.

<span id="an_16:33">16:33</span> And Ahab made the Asherah; and Ahab did
yet more to provoke Jehovah, the God of Israel, to anger than all the
kings of Israel that were before him.

<span id="an_16:34">16:34</span> In his days did Hiel the Beth-elite
build Jericho: he laid the foundation thereof with the loss of Abiram
his first-born, and set up the gates thereof with the loss of his
youngest son Segub, according to the word of Jehovah, which he spake by
Joshua the son of Nun.

<span id="an_17:1">17:1</span> And Elijah the Tishbite, who was of the
sojourners of Gilead, said unto Ahab, As Jehovah, the God of Israel,
liveth, before whom I stand, there shall not be dew nor rain these
years, but according to my word.

<span id="an_17:2">17:2</span> And the word of Jehovah came unto him,
saying,

<span id="an_17:3">17:3</span> Get thee hence, and turn thee eastward,
and hide thyself by the brook Cherith, that is before the Jordan.

<span id="an_17:4">17:4</span> And it shall be, that thou shalt drink of
the brook; and I have commanded the ravens to feed thee there.

<span id="an_17:5">17:5</span> So he went and did according unto the
word of Jehovah; for he went and dwelt by the brook Cherith, that is
before the Jordan.

<span id="an_17:6">17:6</span> And the ravens brought him bread and
flesh in the morning, and bread and flesh in the evening; and he drank
of the brook.

<span id="an_17:7">17:7</span> And it came to pass after a while, that
the brook dried up, because there was no rain in the land.

<span id="an_17:8">17:8</span> And the word of Jehovah came unto him,
saying,

<span id="an_17:9">17:9</span> Arise, get thee to Zarephath, which
belongeth to Sidon, and dwell there: behold, I have commanded a widow
there to sustain thee.

<span id="an_17:10">17:10</span> So he arose and went to Zarephath; and
when he came to the gate of the city, behold, a widow was there
gathering sticks: and he called to her, and said, Fetch me, I pray thee,
a little water in a vessel, that I may drink.

<span id="an_17:11">17:11</span> And as she was going to fetch it, he
called to her, and said, Bring me, I pray thee, a morsel of bread in thy
hand.

<span id="an_17:12">17:12</span> And she said, As Jehovah thy God
liveth, I have not a cake, but a handful of meal in the jar, and a
little oil in the cruse: and, behold, I am gathering two sticks, that I
may go in and dress it for me and my son, that we may eat it, and die.

<span id="an_17:13">17:13</span> And Elijah said unto her, Fear not; go
and do as thou hast said; but make me thereof a little cake first, and
bring it forth unto me, and afterward make for thee and for thy son.

<span id="an_17:14">17:14</span> For thus saith Jehovah, the God of
Israel, The jar of meal shall not waste, neither shall the cruse of oil
fail, until the day that Jehovah sendeth rain upon the earth.

<span id="an_17:15">17:15</span> And she went and did according to the
saying of Elijah: and she, and he, and her house, did eat \[many\] days.

<span id="an_17:16">17:16</span> The jar of meal wasted not, neither did
the cruse of oil fail, according to the word of Jehovah, which he spake
by Elijah.

<span id="an_17:17">17:17</span> And it came to pass after these things,
that the son of the woman, the mistress of the house, fell sick; and his
sickness was so sore, that there was no breath left in him.

<span id="an_17:18">17:18</span> And she said unto Elijah, What have I
to do with thee, O thou man of God? thou art come unto me to bring my
sin to remembrance, and to slay my son!

<span id="an_17:19">17:19</span> And he said unto her, Give me thy son.
And he took him out of her bosom, and carried him up into the chamber,
where he abode, and laid him upon his own bed.

<span id="an_17:20">17:20</span> And he cried unto Jehovah, and said, O
Jehovah my God, hast thou also brought evil upon the widow with whom I
sojourn, by slaying her son?

<span id="an_17:21">17:21</span> And he stretched himself upon the child
three times, and cried unto Jehovah, and said, O Jehovah my God, I pray
thee, let this child's soul come into him again.

<span id="an_17:22">17:22</span> And Jehovah hearkened unto the voice of
Elijah; and the soul of the child came into him again, and he revived.

<span id="an_17:23">17:23</span> And Elijah took the child, and brought
him down out of the chamber into the house, and delivered him unto his
mother; and Elijah said, See, thy son liveth.

<span id="an_17:24">17:24</span> And the woman said to Elijah, Now I
know that thou art a man of God, and that the word of Jehovah in thy
mouth is truth.

<span id="an_18:1">18:1</span> And it came to pass after many days, that
the word of Jehovah came to Elijah, in the third year, saying, Go, show
thyself unto Ahab; and I will send rain upon the earth.

<span id="an_18:2">18:2</span> And Elijah went to show himself unto
Ahab. And the famine was sore in Samaria.

<span id="an_18:3">18:3</span> And Ahab called Obadiah, who was over the
household. (Now Obadiah feared Jehovah greatly:

<span id="an_18:4">18:4</span> for it was so, when Jezebel cut off the
prophets of Jehovah, that Obadiah took a hundred prophets, and hid them
by fifty in a cave, and fed them with bread and water.)

<span id="an_18:5">18:5</span> And Ahab said unto Obadiah, Go through
the land, unto all the fountains of water, and unto all the brooks:
peradventure we may find grass and save the horses and mules alive, that
we lose not all the beasts.

<span id="an_18:6">18:6</span> So they divided the land between them to
pass throughout it: Ahab went one way by himself, and Obadiah went
another way by himself.

<span id="an_18:7">18:7</span> And as Obadiah was in the way, behold,
Elijah met him: and he knew him, and fell on his face, and said, Is it
thou, my lord Elijah?

<span id="an_18:8">18:8</span> And he answered him, It is I: go, tell
thy lord, Behold, Elijah \[is here\].

<span id="an_18:9">18:9</span> And he said, Wherein have I sinned, that
thou wouldest deliver thy servant into the hand of Ahab, to slay me?

<span id="an_18:10">18:10</span> As Jehovah thy God liveth, there is no
nation or kingdom, whither my lord hath not sent to seek thee: and when
they said, He is not here, he took an oath of the kingdom and nation,
that they found thee not.

<span id="an_18:11">18:11</span> And now thou sayest, Go, tell thy lord,
Behold, Elijah \[is here\].

<span id="an_18:12">18:12</span> And it will come to pass, as soon as I
am gone from thee, that the Spirit of Jehovah will carry thee whither I
know not; and so when I come and tell Ahab, and he cannot find thee, he
will slay me: but I thy servant fear Jehovah from my youth.

<span id="an_18:13">18:13</span> Was it not told my lord what I did when
Jezebel slew the prophets of Jehovah, how I hid a hundred men of
Jehovah's prophets by fifty in a cave, and fed them with bread and
water?

<span id="an_18:14">18:14</span> And now thou sayest, Go, tell thy lord,
Behold, Elijah \[is here\]; and he will slay me.

<span id="an_18:15">18:15</span> And Elijah said, As Jehovah of hosts
liveth, before whom I stand, I will surely show myself unto him to-day.

<span id="an_18:16">18:16</span> So Obadiah went to meet Ahab, and told
him; and Ahab went to meet Elijah.

<span id="an_18:17">18:17</span> And it came to pass, when Ahab saw
Elijah, that Ahab said unto him, Is it thou, thou troubler of Israel?

<span id="an_18:18">18:18</span> And he answered, I have not troubled
Israel; but thou, and thy father's house, in that ye have forsaken the
commandments of Jehovah, and thou hast followed the Baalim.

<span id="an_18:19">18:19</span> Now therefore send, and gather to me
all Israel unto mount Carmel, and the prophets of Baal four hundred and
fifty, and the prophets of the Asherah four hundred, that eat at
Jezebel's table.

<span id="an_18:20">18:20</span> So Ahab sent unto all the children of
Israel, and gathered the prophets together unto mount Carmel.

<span id="an_18:21">18:21</span> And Elijah came near unto all the
people, and said, How long go ye limping between the two sides? if
Jehovah be God, follow him; but if Baal, then follow him. And the people
answered him not a word.

<span id="an_18:22">18:22</span> Then said Elijah unto the people, I,
even I only, am left a prophet of Jehovah; but Baal's prophets are four
hundred and fifty men.

<span id="an_18:23">18:23</span> Let them therefore give us two
bullocks; and let them choose one bullock for themselves, and cut it in
pieces, and lay it on the wood, and put no fire under; and I will dress
the other bullock, and lay it on the wood, and put no fire under.

<span id="an_18:24">18:24</span> And call ye on the name of your god,
and I will call on the name of Jehovah; and the God that answereth by
fire, let him be God. And all the people answered and said, It is well
spoken.

<span id="an_18:25">18:25</span> And Elijah said unto the prophets of
Baal, Choose you one bullock for yourselves, and dress it first; for ye
are many; and call on the name of your god, but put no fire under.

<span id="an_18:26">18:26</span> And they took the bullock which was
given them, and they dressed it, and called on the name of Baal from
morning even until noon, saying, O Baal, hear us. But there was no
voice, nor any that answered. And they leaped about the altar which was
made.

<span id="an_18:27">18:27</span> And it came to pass at noon, that
Elijah mocked them, and said, Cry aloud; for he is a god: either he is
musing, or he is gone aside, or he is on a journey, or peradventure he
sleepeth and must be awaked.

<span id="an_18:28">18:28</span> And they cried aloud, and cut
themselves after their manner with knives and lances, till the blood
gushed out upon them.

<span id="an_18:29">18:29</span> And it was so, when midday was past,
that they prophesied until the time of the offering of the \[evening\]
oblation; but there was neither voice, nor any to answer, nor any that
regarded.

<span id="an_18:30">18:30</span> And Elijah said unto all the people,
Come near unto me; and all the people came near unto him. And he
repaired the altar of Jehovah that was thrown down.

<span id="an_18:31">18:31</span> And Elijah took twelve stones,
according to the number of the tribes of the sons of Jacob, unto whom
the word of Jehovah came, saying, Israel shall be thy name.

<span id="an_18:32">18:32</span> And with the stones he built an altar
in the name of Jehovah; and he made a trench about the altar, as great
as would contain two measures of seed.

<span id="an_18:33">18:33</span> And he put the wood in order, and cut
the bullock in pieces, and laid it on the wood. And he said, Fill four
jars with water, and pour it on the burnt-offering, and on the wood.

<span id="an_18:34">18:34</span> And he said, Do it the second time; and
they did it the second time. And he said, Do it the third time; and they
did it the third time.

<span id="an_18:35">18:35</span> And the water ran round about the
altar; and he filled the trench also with water.

<span id="an_18:36">18:36</span> And it came to pass at the time of the
offering of the \[evening\] oblation, that Elijah the prophet came near,
and said, O Jehovah, the God of Abraham, of Isaac, and of Israel, let it
be known this day that thou art God in Israel, and that I am thy
servant, and that I have done all these things at thy word.

<span id="an_18:37">18:37</span> Hear me, O Jehovah, hear me, that this
people may know that thou, Jehovah, art God, and \[that\] thou hast
turned their heart back again.

<span id="an_18:38">18:38</span> Then the fire of Jehovah fell, and
consumed the burnt-offering, and the wood, and the stones, and the dust,
and licked up the water that was in the trench.

<span id="an_18:39">18:39</span> And when all the people saw it, they
fell on their faces: and they said, Jehovah, he is God; Jehovah, he is
God.

<span id="an_18:40">18:40</span> and Elijah said unto them, Take the
prophets of Baal; let not one of them escape. And they took them; and
Elijah brought them down to the brook Kishon, and slew them there.

<span id="an_18:41">18:41</span> And Elijah said unto Ahab, Get thee up,
eat and drink; for there is the sound of abundance of rain.

<span id="an_18:42">18:42</span> So Ahab went up to eat and to drink.
And Elijah went up to the top of Carmel; and he bowed himself down upon
the earth, and put his face between his knees.

<span id="an_18:43">18:43</span> And he said to his servant, Go up now,
look toward the sea. And he went up, and looked, and said, There is
nothing. And he said, Go again seven times.

<span id="an_18:44">18:44</span> And it came to pass at the seventh
time, that he said, Behold, there ariseth a cloud out of the sea, as
small as a man's hand. And he said, Go up, say unto Ahab, Make ready
\[thy chariot\], and get thee down, that the rain stop thee not.

<span id="an_18:45">18:45</span> And it came to pass in a little while,
that the heavens grew black with clouds and wind, and there was a great
rain. And Ahab rode, and went to Jezreel:

<span id="an_18:46">18:46</span> and the hand of Jehovah was on Elijah;
and he girded up his loins, and ran before Ahab to the entrance of
Jezreel.

<span id="an_19:1">19:1</span> And Ahab told Jezebel all that Elijah had
done, and withal how he had slain all the prophets with the sword.

<span id="an_19:2">19:2</span> Then Jezebel send a messenger unto
Elijah, saying, So let the gods do to me, and more also, if I make not
thy life as the life of one of them by to-morrow about this time.

<span id="an_19:3">19:3</span> And when he saw that, he arose, and went
for his life, and came to Beer-sheba, which belongeth to Judah, and left
his servant there.

<span id="an_19:4">19:4</span> But he himself went a day's journey into
the wilderness, and came and sat down under a juniper-tree: and he
requested for himself that he might die, and said, It is enough; now, O
Jehovah, take away my life; for I am not better than my fathers.

<span id="an_19:5">19:5</span> And he lay down and slept under a
juniper-tree; and, behold, an angel touched him, and said unto him,
Arise and eat.

<span id="an_19:6">19:6</span> And he looked, and, behold, there was at
his head a cake baken on the coals, and a cruse of water. And he did eat
and drink, and laid him down again.

<span id="an_19:7">19:7</span> And the angel of Jehovah came again the
second time, and touched him, and said, Arise and eat, because the
journey is too great for thee.

<span id="an_19:8">19:8</span> And he arose, and did eat and drink, and
went in the strength of that food forty days and forty nights unto Horeb
the mount of God.

<span id="an_19:9">19:9</span> And he came thither unto a cave, and
lodged there; and, behold, the word of Jehovah came to him, and he said
unto him, What doest thou here, Elijah?

<span id="an_19:10">19:10</span> And he said, I have been very jealous
for Jehovah, the God of hosts; for the children of Israel have forsaken
thy covenant, thrown down thine altars, and slain thy prophets with the
sword: and I, even I only, am left; and they seek my life, to take it
away.

<span id="an_19:11">19:11</span> And he said, Go forth, and stand upon
the mount before Jehovah. And, behold, Jehovah passed by, and a great
and strong wind rent the mountains, and brake in pieces the rocks before
Jehovah; but Jehovah was not in the wind: and after the wind an
earthquake; but Jehovah was not in the earthquake:

<span id="an_19:12">19:12</span> and after the earthquake a fire; but
Jehovah was not in the fire: and after the fire a still small voice.

<span id="an_19:13">19:13</span> And it was so, when Elijah heard it,
that he wrapped his face in his mantle, and went out, and stood in the
entrance of the cave. And, behold, there came a voice unto him, and
said, What doest thou here, Elijah?

<span id="an_19:14">19:14</span> And he said, I have been very jealous
for Jehovah, the God of hosts; for the children of Israel have forsaken
thy covenant, thrown down thine altars, and slain thy prophets with the
sword; and I, even I only, am left; and they seek my life, to take it
away.

<span id="an_19:15">19:15</span> And Jehovah said unto him, Go, return
on thy way to the wilderness of Damascus: and when thou comest, thou
shalt anoint Hazael to be king over Syria;

<span id="an_19:16">19:16</span> and Jehu the son of Nimshi shalt thou
anoint to be king over Israel; and Elisha the son of Shaphat of
Abel-meholah shalt thou anoint to be prophet in thy room.

<span id="an_19:17">19:17</span> And it shall come to pass, that him
that escapeth from the sword of Hazael shall Jehu slay; and him that
escapeth from the sword of Jehu shall Elisha slay.

<span id="an_19:18">19:18</span> Yet will I leave \[me\] seven thousand
in Israel, all the knees which have not bowed unto Baal, and every mouth
which hath not kissed him.

<span id="an_19:19">19:19</span> So he departed thence, and found Elisha
the son of Shaphat, who was plowing, with twelve yoke \[of oxen\] before
him, and he with the twelfth: and Elijah passed over unto him, and cast
his mantle upon him.

<span id="an_19:20">19:20</span> And he left the oxen, and ran after
Elijah, and said, Let me, I pray thee, kiss my father and my mother, and
then I will follow thee. And he said unto him, Go back again; for what
have I done to thee?

<span id="an_19:21">19:21</span> And he returned from following him, and
took the yoke of oxen, and slew them, and boiled their flesh with the
instruments of the oxen, and gave unto the people, and they did eat.
Then he arose, and went after Elijah, and ministered unto him.

<span id="an_20:1">20:1</span> And Ben-hadad the king of Syria gathered
all his host together; and there were thirty and two kings with him, and
horses and chariots: and he went up and besieged Samaria, and fought
against it.

<span id="an_20:2">20:2</span> And he sent messengers to Ahab king of
Israel, into the city, and said unto him, Thus saith Ben-hadad,

<span id="an_20:3">20:3</span> Thy silver and thy gold is mine; thy
wives also and thy children, even the goodliest, are mine.

<span id="an_20:4">20:4</span> And the king of Israel answered and said,
It is according to thy saying, my lord, O king; I am thine, and all that
I have.

<span id="an_20:5">20:5</span> And the messengers came again, and said,
Thus speaketh Ben-hadad, saying, I sent indeed unto thee, saying, Thou
shalt deliver me thy silver, and thy gold, and thy wives, and thy
children;

<span id="an_20:6">20:6</span> but I will send my servants unto thee
to-morrow about this time, and they shall search thy house, and the
houses of thy servants; and it shall be, that whatsoever is pleasant in
thine eyes, they shall put it in their hand, and take it away.

<span id="an_20:7">20:7</span> Then the king of Israel called all the
elders of the land, and said, Mark, I pray you, and see how this man
seeketh mischief: for he sent unto me for my wives, and for my children,
and for my silver, and for my gold; and I denied him not.

<span id="an_20:8">20:8</span> And all the elders and all the people
said unto him, Hearken thou not, neither consent.

<span id="an_20:9">20:9</span> Wherefore he said unto the messengers of
Ben-hadad, Tell my lord the king, All that thou didst send for to thy
servant at the first I will do; but this thing I may not do. And the
messengers departed, and brought him word again.

<span id="an_20:10">20:10</span> And Ben-hadad sent unto him, and said,
The gods do so unto me, and more also, if the dust of Samaria shall
suffice for handfuls for all the people that follow me.

<span id="an_20:11">20:11</span> And the king of Israel answered and
said, Tell him, Let not him that girdeth on \[his armor\] boast himself
as he that putteth it off.

<span id="an_20:12">20:12</span> And it came to pass, when \[Ben-hadad\]
heard this message, as he was drinking, he and the kings, in the
pavilions, that he said unto his servants, Set \[yourselves in array\].
And they set \[themselves in array\] against the city.

<span id="an_20:13">20:13</span> And, behold, a prophet came near unto
Ahab king of Israel, and said, Thus saith Jehovah, Hast thou seen all
this great multitude? behold, I will deliver it into thy hand this day;
and thou shalt know that I am Jehovah.

<span id="an_20:14">20:14</span> And Ahab said, By whom? And he said,
Thus saith Jehovah, By the young men of the princes of the provinces.
Then he said, Who shall begin the battle? And he answered, Thou.

<span id="an_20:15">20:15</span> Then he mustered the young men of the
princes of the provinces, and they were two hundred and thirty-two: and
after them he mustered all the people, even all the children of Israel,
being seven thousand.

<span id="an_20:16">20:16</span> And they went out at noon. But
Ben-hadad was drinking himself drunk in the pavilions, he and the kings,
the thirty and two kings that helped him.

<span id="an_20:17">20:17</span> And the young men of the princes of the
provinces went out first; and Ben-hadad sent out, and they told him,
saying, There are men come out from Samaria.

<span id="an_20:18">20:18</span> And he said, Whether they are come out
for peace, take them alive, or whether they are come out for war, taken
them alive.

<span id="an_20:19">20:19</span> So these went out of the city, the
young men of the princes of the provinces, and the army which followed
them.

<span id="an_20:20">20:20</span> And they slew every one his man; and
the Syrians fled, and Israel pursued them: and Ben-hadad the king of
Syria escaped on a horse with horsemen.

<span id="an_20:21">20:21</span> And the king of Israel went out, and
smote the horses and chariots, and slew the Syrians with a great
slaughter.

<span id="an_20:22">20:22</span> And the prophet came near to the king
of Israel, and said unto him, Go, strengthen thyself, and mark, and see
what thou doest; for at the return of the year the king of Syria will
come up against thee.

<span id="an_20:23">20:23</span> And the servants of the king of Syria
said unto him, Their god is a god of the hills; therefore they were
stronger than we: but let us fight against them in the plain, and surely
we shall be stronger than they.

<span id="an_20:24">20:24</span> And do this thing: take the kings away,
every man out of his place, and put captains in their room;

<span id="an_20:25">20:25</span> and number thee an army, like the army
that thou hast lost, horse for horse, and chariot for chariot; and we
will fight against them in the plain, and surely we shall be stronger
than they. And he hearkened unto their voice, and did so.

<span id="an_20:26">20:26</span> And it came to pass at the return of
the year, that Ben-hadad mustered the Syrians, and went up to Aphek, to
fight against Israel.

<span id="an_20:27">20:27</span> And the children of Israel were
mustered, and were victualled, and went against them: and the children
of Israel encamped before them like two little flocks of kids; but the
Syrians filled the country.

<span id="an_20:28">20:28</span> And a man of God came near and spake
unto the king of Israel, and said, Thus saith Jehovah, Because the
Syrians have said, Jehovah is a god of the hills, but he is not a god of
the valleys; therefore will I deliver all this great multitude into thy
hand, and ye shall know that I am Jehovah.

<span id="an_20:29">20:29</span> And they encamped one over against the
other seven days. And so it was, that in the seventh day the battle was
joined; and the children of Israel slew of the Syrians a hundred
thousand footmen in one day.

<span id="an_20:30">20:30</span> But the rest fled to Aphek, into the
city; and the wall fell upon twenty and seven thousand men that were
left. And Ben-hadad fled, and came into the city, into an inner chamber.

<span id="an_20:31">20:31</span> And his servants said unto him, Behold
now, we have heard that the kings of the house of Israel are merciful
kings: let us, we pray thee, put sackcloth on our loins, and ropes upon
our heads, and go out to the king of Israel: peradventure he will save
thy life.

<span id="an_20:32">20:32</span> So they girded sackcloth on their
loins, and \[put\] ropes on their heads, and came to the king of Israel,
and said, Thy servant Ben-hadad saith, I pray thee, let me live. And he
said, Is he yet alive? he is my brother.

<span id="an_20:33">20:33</span> Now the men observed diligently, and
hasted to catch whether it were his mind; and they said, Thy brother
Ben-hadad. Then he said, Go ye, bring him. Then Ben-hadad came forth to
him; and he caused him to come up into the chariot.

<span id="an_20:34">20:34</span> And \[Ben-hadad\] said unto him, The
cities which my father took from thy father I will restore; and thou
shalt make streets for thee in Damascus, as my father made in Samaria.
And I, \[said Ahab\], will let thee go with this covenant. So he made a
covenant with him, and let him go.

<span id="an_20:35">20:35</span> And a certain man of the sons of the
prophets said unto his fellow by the word of Jehovah, Smite me, I pray
thee. And the man refused to smite him.

<span id="an_20:36">20:36</span> Then said he unto him, Because thou
hast not obeyed the voice of Jehovah, behold, as soon as thou art
departed from me, a lion shall slay thee. And as soon as he was departed
from him, a lion found him, and slew him.

<span id="an_20:37">20:37</span> Then he found another man, and said,
Smite me, I pray thee. And the man smote him, smiting and wounding him.

<span id="an_20:38">20:38</span> So the prophet departed, and waited for
the king by the way, and disguised himself with his headband over his
eyes.

<span id="an_20:39">20:39</span> And as the king passed by, he cried
unto the king; and he said, Thy servant went out into the midst of the
battle; and, behold, a man turned aside, and brought a man unto me, and
said, Keep this man: if by any means he be missing, then shall thy life
be for his life, or else thou shalt pay a talent of silver.

<span id="an_20:40">20:40</span> And as thy servant was busy here and
there, he was gone. And the king of Israel said unto him, So shall thy
judgment be; thyself hast decided it.

<span id="an_20:41">20:41</span> And he hasted, and took the headband
away from his eyes; and the king of israel discerned him that he was of
the prophets.

<span id="an_20:42">20:42</span> And he said unto him, Thus saith
Jehovah, Because thou hast let go out of thy hand the man whom I had
devoted to destruction, therefore thy life shall go for his life, and
thy people for his people.

<span id="an_20:43">20:43</span> And the king of Israel went to his
house heavy and displeased, and came to Samaria.

<span id="an_21:1">21:1</span> And it came to pass after these things,
that Naboth the Jezreelite had a vineyard, which was in Jezreel, hard by
the palace of Ahab king of Samaria.

<span id="an_21:2">21:2</span> And Ahab spake unto Naboth, saying, Give
me thy vineyard, that I may have it for a garden of herbs, because it is
near unto my house; and I will give thee for it a better vineyard than
it: or, if it seem good to thee, I will give thee the worth of it in
money.

<span id="an_21:3">21:3</span> And Naboth said to Ahab, Jehovah forbid
it me, that I should give the inheritance of my fathers unto thee.

<span id="an_21:4">21:4</span> And Ahab came into his house heavy and
displeased because of the word which Naboth the Jezreelite had spoken to
him; for he had said, I will not give thee the inheritance of my
fathers. And he laid him down upon his bed, and turned away his face,
and would eat no bread.

<span id="an_21:5">21:5</span> But Jezebel his wife came to him, and
said unto him, Why is thy spirit so sad, that thou eatest no bread?

<span id="an_21:6">21:6</span> And he said unto her, Because I spake
unto Naboth the Jezreelite, and said unto him, Give me thy vineyard for
money; or else, if it please thee, I will give thee \[another\] vineyard
for it: and he answered, I will not give thee my vineyard.

<span id="an_21:7">21:7</span> And Jezebel his wife said unto him, Dost
thou now govern the kingdom of Israel? arise, and eat bread, and let thy
heart be merry: I will give thee the vineyard of Naboth the Jezreelite.

<span id="an_21:8">21:8</span> So she wrote letters in Ahab's name, and
sealed them with his seal, and sent the letters unto the elders and to
the nobles that were in his city, \[and\] that dwelt with Naboth.

<span id="an_21:9">21:9</span> And she wrote in the letters, saying,
Proclaim a fast, and set Naboth on high among the people:

<span id="an_21:10">21:10</span> and set two men, base fellows, before
him, and let them bear witness against him, saying, Thou didst curse God
and the king. And then carry him out, and stone him to death.

<span id="an_21:11">21:11</span> And the men of his city, even the
elders and the nobles who dwelt in his city, did as Jezebel had sent
unto them, according as it was written in the letters which she had sent
unto them.

<span id="an_21:12">21:12</span> They proclaimed a fast, and set Naboth
on high among the people.

<span id="an_21:13">21:13</span> And the two men, the base fellows, came
in and sat before him: and the base fellows bare witness against him,
even against Naboth, in the presence of the people, saying, Naboth did
curse God and the king. Then they carried him forth out of the city, and
stoned him to death with stones.

<span id="an_21:14">21:14</span> Then they sent to Jezebel, saying,
Naboth is stoned, and is dead.

<span id="an_21:15">21:15</span> And it came to pass, when Jezebel heard
that Naboth was stoned, and was dead, that Jezebel said to Ahab, Arise,
take possession of the vineyard of Naboth the Jezreelite, which he
refused to give thee for money; for Naboth is not alive, but dead.

<span id="an_21:16">21:16</span> And it came to pass, when Ahab heard
that Naboth was dead, that Ahab rose up to go down to the vineyard of
Naboth the Jezreelite, to take possession of it.

<span id="an_21:17">21:17</span> And the word of Jehovah came to Elijah
the Tishbite, saying,

<span id="an_21:18">21:18</span> Arise, go down to meet Ahab king of
Israel, who dwelleth in Samaria: behold, he is in the vineyard of
Naboth, whither he is gone down to take possession of it.

<span id="an_21:19">21:19</span> And thou shalt speak unto him, saying,
Thus saith Jehovah, Hast thou killed and also taken possession? And thou
shalt speak unto him, saying, Thus saith Jehovah, In the place where
dogs licked the blood of Naboth shall dogs lick thy blood, even thine.

<span id="an_21:20">21:20</span> And Ahab said to Elijah, Hast thou
found me, O mine enemy? And he answered, I have found thee, because thou
hast sold thyself to do that which is evil in the sight of Jehovah.

<span id="an_21:21">21:21</span> Behold, I will bring evil upon thee,
and will utterly sweep thee away and will cut off from Ahab every
man-child, and him that is shut up and him that is left at large in
Israel:

<span id="an_21:22">21:22</span> and I will make thy house like the
house of Jeroboam the son of Nebat, and like the house of Baasha the son
of Ahijah for the provocation wherewith thou hast provoked me to anger,
and hast made Israel to sin.

<span id="an_21:23">21:23</span> And of Jezebel also spake Jehovah,
saying, The dogs shall eat Jezebel by the rampart of Jezreel.

<span id="an_21:24">21:24</span> Him that dieth of Ahab in the city the
dogs shall eat; and him that dieth in the field shall the birds of the
heavens eat.

<span id="an_21:25">21:25</span> (But there was none like unto Ahab, who
did sell himself to do that which was evil in the sight of Jehovah, whom
Jezebel his wife stirred up.

<span id="an_21:26">21:26</span> And he did very abominably in following
idols, according to all that the Amorites did, whom Jehovah cast out
before the children of Israel.)

<span id="an_21:27">21:27</span> And it came to pass, when Ahab heard
those words, that he rent his clothes, and put sackcloth upon his flesh,
and fasted, and lay in sackcloth, and went softly.

<span id="an_21:28">21:28</span> And the word of Jehovah came to Elijah
the Tishbite, saying,

<span id="an_21:29">21:29</span> Seest thou how Ahab humbleth himself
before me? because he humbleth himself before me, I will not bring the
evil in his days; but in his son's days will I bring the evil upon his
house.

<span id="an_22:1">22:1</span> And they continued three years without
war between Syria and Israel.

<span id="an_22:2">22:2</span> And it came to pass in the third year,
that Jehoshaphat the king of Judah came down to the king of Israel.

<span id="an_22:3">22:3</span> And the king of Israel said unto his
servants, Know ye that Ramoth-gilead is ours, and we are still, and take
it not out of the hand of the king of Syria?

<span id="an_22:4">22:4</span> And he said unto Jehoshaphat, Wilt thou
go with me to battle to Ramoth-gilead? And Jehoshaphat said to the king
of Israel, I am as thou art, my people as thy people, my horses as thy
horses.

<span id="an_22:5">22:5</span> And Jehoshaphat said unto the king of
Israel, Inquire first, I pray thee, for the word of Jehovah.

<span id="an_22:6">22:6</span> Then the king of Israel gathered the
prophets together, about four hundred men, and said unto them, Shall I
go against Ramoth-gilead to battle, or shall I forbear? And they said,
Go up; for the Lord will deliver it into the hand of the king.

<span id="an_22:7">22:7</span> But Jehoshaphat said, Is there not here a
prophet of Jehovah besides, that we may inquire of him?

<span id="an_22:8">22:8</span> And the king of Israel said unto
Jehoshaphat, there is yet one man by whom we may inquire of Jehovah,
Micaiah the son of Imlah: but I hate him; for he doth not prophesy good
concerning me, but evil. And Jehoshaphat said, Let not the king say so.

<span id="an_22:9">22:9</span> Then the king of Israel called an
officer, and said, Fetch quickly Micaiah the son of Imlah.

<span id="an_22:10">22:10</span> Now the king of Israel and Jehoshaphat
the king of Judah were sitting each on his throne, arrayed in their
robes, in an open place at the entrance of the gate of Samaria; and all
the prophets were prophesying before them.

<span id="an_22:11">22:11</span> And Zedekiah the son of Chenaanah made
him horns of iron, and said, Thus saith Jehovah, With these shalt thou
push the Syrians, until they be consumed.

<span id="an_22:12">22:12</span> And all the prophets prophesied so,
saying, Go up to Ramoth-gilead, and prosper; for Jehovah will deliver it
into the hand of the king.

<span id="an_22:13">22:13</span> And the messenger that went to call
Micaiah spake unto him, saying, Behold now, the words of the prophets
\[declare\] good unto the king with one mouth: let thy word, I pray
thee, be like the word of one of them, and speak thou good.

<span id="an_22:14">22:14</span> And Micaiah said, As Jehovah liveth,
what Jehovah saith unto me, that will I speak.

<span id="an_22:15">22:15</span> And when he was come to the king, the
king said unto him, Micaiah, shall we go to Ramoth-gilead to battle, or
shall we forbear? And he answered him, Go up and prosper; and Jehovah
will deliver it into the hand of the king.

<span id="an_22:16">22:16</span> And the king said unto him, How many
times shall I adjure thee that thou speak unto me nothing but the truth
in the name of Jehovah?

<span id="an_22:17">22:17</span> And he said, I saw all Israel scattered
upon the mountains, as sheep that have no shepherd: and Jehovah said,
These have no master; let them return every man to his house in peace.

<span id="an_22:18">22:18</span> And the king of Israel said to
Jehoshaphat, Did I not tell thee that he would not prophesy good
concerning me, but evil?

<span id="an_22:19">22:19</span> And \[Micaiah\] said, Therefore hear
thou the word of Jehovah: I saw Jehovah sitting on his throne, and all
the host of heaven standing by him on his right hand and on his left.

<span id="an_22:20">22:20</span> And Jehovah said, Who shall entice
Ahab, that he may go up and fall at Ramoth-gilead? And one said on this
manner; and another said on that manner.

<span id="an_22:21">22:21</span> And there came forth a spirit, and
stood before Jehovah, and said, I will entice him.

<span id="an_22:22">22:22</span> And Jehovah said unto him, Wherewith?
And he said, I will go forth, and will be a lying spirit in the mouth of
all his prophets. And he said, Thou shalt entice him, and shalt prevail
also: go forth, and do so.

<span id="an_22:23">22:23</span> Now therefore, behold, Jehovah hath put
a lying spirit in the mouth of all these thy prophets; and Jehovah hath
spoken evil concerning thee.

<span id="an_22:24">22:24</span> Then Zedekiah the son of Chenaanah came
near, and smote Micaiah on the cheek, and said, Which way went the
Spirit of Jehovah from me to speak unto thee?

<span id="an_22:25">22:25</span> And Micaiah said, Behold, thou shalt
see on that day, when thou shalt go into an inner chamber to hide
thyself.

<span id="an_22:26">22:26</span> And the king of Israel said, Take
Micaiah, and carry him back unto Amon the governor of the city, and to
Joash the king's son;

<span id="an_22:27">22:27</span> and say, Thus saith the king, Put this
fellow in the prison, and feed him with bread of affliction and with
water of affliction, until I come in peace.

<span id="an_22:28">22:28</span> And Micaiah said, If thou return at all
in peace, Jehovah hath not spoken by me. And he said, Hear, ye peoples,
all of you.

<span id="an_22:29">22:29</span> So the king of Israel and Jehoshaphat
the king of Judah went up to Ramoth-gilead.

<span id="an_22:30">22:30</span> And the king of Israel said unto
Jehoshaphat, I will disguise myself, and go into the battle; but put
thou on thy robes. And the king of Israel disguised himself, and went
into the battle.

<span id="an_22:31">22:31</span> Now the king of Syria had commanded the
thirty and two captains of his chariots, saying, Fight neither with
small nor great, save only with the king of Israel.

<span id="an_22:32">22:32</span> And it came to pass, when the captains
of the chariots saw Jehoshaphat, that they said, Surely it is the king
of Israel; and they turned aside to fight against him: and Jehoshaphat
cried out.

<span id="an_22:33">22:33</span> And it came to pass, when the captains
of the chariots saw that it was not the king of Israel, that they turned
back from pursuing him.

<span id="an_22:34">22:34</span> And a certain man drew his bow at a
venture, and smote the king of Israel between the joints of the armor:
wherefore he said unto the driver of his chariot, Turn thy hand, and
carry me out of the host; for I am sore wounded.

<span id="an_22:35">22:35</span> And the battle increased that day: and
the king was stayed up in his chariot against the Syrians, and died at
even; and the blood ran out of the wound into the bottom of the chariot.

<span id="an_22:36">22:36</span> And there went a cry throughout the
host about the going down of the sun, saying, Every man to his city, and
every man to his country.

<span id="an_22:37">22:37</span> So the king died, and was brought to
Samaria; and they buried the king in Samaria.

<span id="an_22:38">22:38</span> And they washed the chariot by the pool
of Samaria; and the dogs licked up his blood (now the harlots washed
themselves \[there\]); according unto the word of Jehovah which he
spake.

<span id="an_22:39">22:39</span> Now the rest of the acts of Ahab, and
all that he did, and the ivory house which he built, and all the cities
that he built, are they not written in the book of the chronicles of the
kings of Israel?

<span id="an_22:40">22:40</span> So Ahab slept with his fathers; and
Ahaziah his son reigned in his stead.

<span id="an_22:41">22:41</span> And Jehoshaphat the son of Asa began to
reign over Judah in the fourth year of Ahab king of Israel.

<span id="an_22:42">22:42</span> Jehoshaphat was thirty and five years
old when he began to reign; and he reigned twenty and five years in
Jerusalem. And his mother's name was Azubah the daughter of Shilhi.

<span id="an_22:43">22:43</span> And he walked in all the way of Asa his
father; He turned not aside from it, doing that which was right in the
eyes of Jehovah: howbeit the high places were not taken away; the people
still sacrificed and burnt incense in the high places.

<span id="an_22:44">22:44</span> And Jehoshaphat made peace with the
king of Israel.

<span id="an_22:45">22:45</span> Now the rest of the acts of
Jehoshaphat, and his might that he showed, and how he warred, are they
not written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Judah?

<span id="an_22:46">22:46</span> And the remnant of the sodomites, that
remained in the days of his father Asa, he put away out of the land.

<span id="an_22:47">22:47</span> And there was no king in Edom: a deputy
was king.

<span id="an_22:48">22:48</span> Jehoshaphat made ships of Tarshish to
go to Ophir for gold: but they went not; for the ships were broken at
Ezion-geber.

<span id="an_22:49">22:49</span> Then said Ahaziah the son of Ahab unto
Jehoshaphat, Let my servants go with thy servants in the ships. But
Jehoshaphat would not.

<span id="an_22:50">22:50</span> And Jehoshaphat slept with his fathers,
and was buried with his fathers in the city of David his father; And
Jehoram his son reigned in his stead.

<span id="an_22:51">22:51</span> Ahaziah the son of Ahab began to reign
over Israel in Samaria in the seventeenth year of Jehoshaphat king of
Judah, and he reigned two years over Israel.

<span id="an_22:52">22:52</span> And he did that which was evil in the
sight of Jehovah, and walked in the way of his father, and in the way of
his mother, and in the way of Jeroboam the son of Nebat, wherein he made
Israel to sin.

<span id="an_22:53">22:53</span> And he served Baal, and worshipped him,
and provoked to anger Jehovah, the God of Israel, according to all that
his father had done.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 Kings](kg2.md)
