[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index)  [English
Bibles](../eb)  [Index](index)  [Previous](mar)  [Next](joh) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### American Standard Version: Luke

<span id="an_1:1">1:1</span> Forasmuch as many have taken in hand to
draw up a narrative concerning those matters which have been fulfilled
among us,

<span id="an_1:2">1:2</span> even as they delivered them unto us, who
from the beginning were eyewitnesses and ministers of the word,

<span id="an_1:3">1:3</span> it seemed good to me also, having traced
the course of all things accurately from the first, to write unto thee
in order, most excellent Theophilus;

<span id="an_1:4">1:4</span> that thou mightest know the certainty
concerning the things wherein thou wast instructed.

<span id="an_1:5">1:5</span> There was in the days of Herod, king of
Judaea, a certain priest named Zacharias, of the course of Abijah: and
he had a wife of the daughters of Aaron, and her name was Elisabeth.

<span id="an_1:6">1:6</span> And they were both righteous before God,
walking in all the commandments and ordinances of the Lord blameless.

<span id="an_1:7">1:7</span> And they had no child, because that
Elisabeth was barren, and they both were \[now\] well stricken in years.

<span id="an_1:8">1:8</span> Now it came to pass, while he executed the
priest's office before God in the order of his course,

<span id="an_1:9">1:9</span> according to the custom of the priest's
office, his lot was to enter into the temple of the Lord and burn
incense.

<span id="an_1:10">1:10</span> And the whole multitude of the people
were praying without at the hour of incense.

<span id="an_1:11">1:11</span> And there appeared unto him an angel of
the Lord standing on the right side of altar of incense.

<span id="an_1:12">1:12</span> And Zacharias was troubled when he saw
\[him\], and fear fell upon him.

<span id="an_1:13">1:13</span> But the angel said unto him, Fear not,
Zacharias: because thy supplication is heard, and thy wife Elisabeth
shall bear thee a son, and thou shalt call his name John.

<span id="an_1:14">1:14</span> And thou shalt have joy and gladness; and
many shall rejoice at his birth.

<span id="an_1:15">1:15</span> For he shall be great in the sight of the
Lord, and he shall drink no wine nor strong drink; and he shall be
filled with the Holy Spirit, even from his mother's womb.

<span id="an_1:16">1:16</span> And many of the children of Israel shall
be turn unto the Lord their God.

<span id="an_1:17">1:17</span> And he shall go before his face in the
spirit and power of Elijah, to turn the hearts of the fathers to the
children, and the disobedient \[to walk\] in the wisdom of the just; to
make ready for the Lord a people prepared \[for him\].

<span id="an_1:18">1:18</span> And Zacharias said unto the angel,
Whereby shall I know this? for I am an old man, and my wife well
stricken in years.

<span id="an_1:19">1:19</span> And the angel answering said unto him, I
am Gabriel, that stand in the presence of God; and I was sent to speak
unto thee, and to bring thee these good tidings.

<span id="an_1:20">1:20</span> And behold, thou shalt be silent and not
able to speak, until the day that these things shall come to pass,
because thou believedst not my words, which shall be fulfilled in their
season.

<span id="an_1:21">1:21</span> And the people were waiting for
Zacharias, and they marvelled while he tarried in the temple.

<span id="an_1:22">1:22</span> And when he came out, he could not speak
unto them: and they perceived that he had seen a vision in the temple:
and he continued making signs unto them, and remained dumb.

<span id="an_1:23">1:23</span> And it came to pass, when the days of his
ministration were fulfilled, he departed unto his house.

<span id="an_1:24">1:24</span> And after these days Elisabeth his wife
conceived; and she hid herself five months, saying,

<span id="an_1:25">1:25</span> Thus hath the Lord done unto me in the
days wherein he looked upon \[me\], to take away my reproach among men.

<span id="an_1:26">1:26</span> Now in the sixth month the angel Gabriel
was sent from God unto a city of Galilee, named Nazareth,

<span id="an_1:27">1:27</span> to a virgin betrothed to a man whose name
was Joseph, of the house of David; and the virgin's name was Mary.

<span id="an_1:28">1:28</span> And he came in unto her, and said, Hail,
thou that art highly favored, the Lord \[is\] with thee.

<span id="an_1:29">1:29</span> But she was greatly troubled at the
saying, and cast in her mind what manner of salutation this might be.

<span id="an_1:30">1:30</span> And the angel said unto her, Fear not,
Mary: for thou hast found favor with God.

<span id="an_1:31">1:31</span> And behold, thou shalt conceive in thy
womb, and bring forth a son, and shalt call his name JESUS.

<span id="an_1:32">1:32</span> He shall be great, and shall be called
the Son of the Most High: and the Lord God shall give unto him the
throne of his father David:

<span id="an_1:33">1:33</span> and he shall reign over the house of
Jacob for ever; and of his kingdom there shall be no end.

<span id="an_1:34">1:34</span> And Mary said unto the angel, How shall
this be, seeing I know not a man?

<span id="an_1:35">1:35</span> And the angel answered and said unto her,
The Holy Spirit shall come upon thee, and the power of the Most High
shall overshadow thee: wherefore also the holy thing which is begotten
shall be called the Son of God.

<span id="an_1:36">1:36</span> And behold, Elisabeth thy kinswoman, she
also hath conceived a son in her old age; and this is the sixth month
with her that was called barren.

<span id="an_1:37">1:37</span> For no word from God shall be void of
power.

<span id="an_1:38">1:38</span> And Mary said, Behold, the handmaid of
the Lord; be it unto me according to thy word. And the angel departed
from her.

<span id="an_1:39">1:39</span> And Mary arose in these days and went
into the hill country with haste, into a city of Judah;

<span id="an_1:40">1:40</span> and entered into the house of Zacharias
and saluted Elisabeth.

<span id="an_1:41">1:41</span> And it came to pass, when Elisabeth heard
the salutation of Mary, the babe leaped in her womb; and Elisabeth was
filled with the Holy Spirit;

<span id="an_1:42">1:42</span> and she lifted up her voice with a loud
cry, and said, Blessed \[art\] thou among women, and blessed \[is\] the
fruit of thy womb.

<span id="an_1:43">1:43</span> And whence is this to me, that the mother
of my Lord should come unto me?

<span id="an_1:44">1:44</span> For behold, when the voice of thy
salutation came into mine ears, the babe leaped in my womb for joy.

<span id="an_1:45">1:45</span> And blessed \[is\] she that believed; for
there shall be a fulfilment of the things which have been spoken to her
from the Lord.

<span id="an_1:46">1:46</span> And Mary said, My soul doth magnify the
Lord,

<span id="an_1:47">1:47</span> And my spirit hath rejoiced in God my
Saviour.

<span id="an_1:48">1:48</span> For he hath looked upon the low estate of
his handmaid: For behold, from henceforth all generations shall call me
blessed.

<span id="an_1:49">1:49</span> For he that is mighty hath done to me
great things; And holy is his name.

<span id="an_1:50">1:50</span> And his mercy is unto generations and
generations On them that fear him.

<span id="an_1:51">1:51</span> He hath showed strength with his arm; He
hath scattered the proud in the imagination of their heart.

<span id="an_1:52">1:52</span> He hath put down princes from \[their\]
thrones, And hath exalted them of low degree.

<span id="an_1:53">1:53</span> The hungry he hath filled with good
things; And the rich he hath sent empty away.

<span id="an_1:54">1:54</span> He hath given help to Israel his servant,
That he might remember mercy

<span id="an_1:55">1:55</span> (As he spake unto our fathers) Toward
Abraham and his seed for ever.

<span id="an_1:56">1:56</span> And Mary abode with her about three
months, and returned unto her house.

<span id="an_1:57">1:57</span> Now Elisabeth's time was fulfilled that
she should be delivered; and she brought forth a son.

<span id="an_1:58">1:58</span> And her neighbors and her kinsfolk heard
that the Lord had magnified his mercy towards her; and they rejoiced
with her.

<span id="an_1:59">1:59</span> And it came to pass on the eighth day,
that they came to circumcise the child; and they would have called him
Zacharias, after the name of the father.

<span id="an_1:60">1:60</span> And his mother answered and said, Not so;
but he shall be called John.

<span id="an_1:61">1:61</span> And they said unto her, There is none of
thy kindred that is called by this name.

<span id="an_1:62">1:62</span> And they made signs to his father, what
he would have him called.

<span id="an_1:63">1:63</span> And he asked for a writing tablet, and
wrote, saying, His name is John. And they marvelled all.

<span id="an_1:64">1:64</span> And his mouth was opened immediately, and
his tongue \[loosed\], and he spake, blessing God.

<span id="an_1:65">1:65</span> And fear came on all that dwelt round
about them: and all these sayings were noised abroad throughout all the
hill country of Judaea.

<span id="an_1:66">1:66</span> And all that heard them laid them up in
their heart, saying, What then shall this child be? For the hand of the
Lord was with him.

<span id="an_1:67">1:67</span> And his father Zacharias was filled with
the Holy Spirit, and prophesied, saying,

<span id="an_1:68">1:68</span> Blessed \[be\] the Lord, the God of
Israel; For he hath visited and wrought redemption for his people,

<span id="an_1:69">1:69</span> And hath raised up a horn of salvation
for us In the house of his servant David

<span id="an_1:70">1:70</span> (As he spake by the mouth of his holy
prophets that have been from of old),

<span id="an_1:71">1:71</span> Salvation from our enemies, and from the
hand of all that hate us;

<span id="an_1:72">1:72</span> To show mercy towards, our fathers, And
to remember his holy covenant;

<span id="an_1:73">1:73</span> The oath which he spake unto Abraham our
father,

<span id="an_1:74">1:74</span> To grant unto us that we being delivered
out of the hand of our enemies Should serve him without fear,

<span id="an_1:75">1:75</span> In holiness and righteousness before him
all our days.

<span id="an_1:76">1:76</span> Yea and thou, child, shalt be called the
prophet of the Most High: For thou shalt go before the face of the Lord
to make ready his ways;

<span id="an_1:77">1:77</span> To give knowledge of salvation unto his
people In the remission of their sins,

<span id="an_1:78">1:78</span> Because of the tender mercy of our God,
Whereby the dayspring from on high shall visit us,

<span id="an_1:79">1:79</span> To shine upon them that sit in darkness
and the shadow of death; To guide our feet into the way of peace.

<span id="an_1:80">1:80</span> And the child grew, and waxed strong in
spirit, and was in the deserts till the day of his showing unto Israel.

<span id="an_2:1">2:1</span> Now it came to pass in those days, there
went out a decree from Caesar Augustus, that all the world should be
enrolled.

<span id="an_2:2">2:2</span> This was the first enrolment made when
Quirinius was governor of Syria.

<span id="an_2:3">2:3</span> And all went to enrol themselves, every one
to his own city.

<span id="an_2:4">2:4</span> And Joseph also went up from Galilee, out
of the city of Nazareth, into Judaea, to the city of David, which is
called Bethlehem, because he was of the house and family of David;

<span id="an_2:5">2:5</span> to enrol himself with Mary, who was
betrothed to him, being great with child.

<span id="an_2:6">2:6</span> And it came to pass, while they were there,
the days were fulfilled that she should be delivered.

<span id="an_2:7">2:7</span> And she brought forth her firstborn son;
and she wrapped him in swaddling clothes, and laid him in a manger,
because there was no room for them in the inn.

<span id="an_2:8">2:8</span> And there were shepherds in the same
country abiding in the field, and keeping watch by night over their
flock.

<span id="an_2:9">2:9</span> And an angel of the Lord stood by them, and
the glory of the Lord shone round about them: and they were sore afraid.

<span id="an_2:10">2:10</span> And the angel said unto them, Be not
afraid; for behold, I bring you good tidings of great joy which shall be
to all the people:

<span id="an_2:11">2:11</span> for there is born to you this day in the
city of David a Saviour, who is Christ the Lord.

<span id="an_2:12">2:12</span> And this \[is\] the sign unto you: Ye
shall find a babe wrapped in swaddling clothes, and lying in a manger.

<span id="an_2:13">2:13</span> And suddenly there was with the angel a
multitude of the heavenly host praising God, and saying,

<span id="an_2:14">2:14</span> Glory to God in the highest, And on earth
peace among men in whom he is well pleased.

<span id="an_2:15">2:15</span> And it came to pass, when the angels went
away from them into heaven, the shepherds said one to another, Let us
now go even unto Bethlehem, and see this thing that is come to pass,
which the Lord hath made known unto us.

<span id="an_2:16">2:16</span> And they came with haste, and found both
Mary and Joseph, and the babe lying in the manger.

<span id="an_2:17">2:17</span> And when they saw it, they made known
concerning the saying which was spoken to them about this child.

<span id="an_2:18">2:18</span> And all that heard it wondered at the
things which were spoken unto them by the shepherds.

<span id="an_2:19">2:19</span> But Mary kept all these sayings,
pondering them in her heart.

<span id="an_2:20">2:20</span> And the shepherds returned, glorifying
and praising God for all the things that they had heard and seen, even
as it was spoken unto them.

<span id="an_2:21">2:21</span> And when eight days were fulfilled for
circumcising him, his name was called JESUS, which was so called by the
angel before he was conceived in the womb.

<span id="an_2:22">2:22</span> And when the days of their purification
according to the law of Moses were fulfilled, they brought him up to
Jerusalem, to present him to the Lord

<span id="an_2:23">2:23</span> (as it is written in the law of the Lord,
Every male that openeth the womb shall be called holy to the Lord),

<span id="an_2:24">2:24</span> and to offer a sacrifice according to
that which is said in the law of the Lord, A pair of turtledoves, or two
young pigeons.

<span id="an_2:25">2:25</span> And behold, there was a man in Jerusalem
whose name was Simeon; and this man was righteous and devout, looking
for the consolation of Israel: and the Holy Spirit was upon him.

<span id="an_2:26">2:26</span> And it had been revealed unto him by the
Holy Spirit, that he should not see death, before he had seen the Lord's
Christ.

<span id="an_2:27">2:27</span> And he came in the Spirit into the
temple: and when the parents brought in the child Jesus, that they might
do concerning him after the custom of the law,

<span id="an_2:28">2:28</span> then he received him into his arms, and
blessed God, and said,

<span id="an_2:29">2:29</span> Now lettest thou thy servant depart,
Lord, According to thy word, in peace;

<span id="an_2:30">2:30</span> For mine eyes have seen thy salvation,

<span id="an_2:31">2:31</span> Which thou hast prepared before the face
of all peoples;

<span id="an_2:32">2:32</span> A light for revelation to the Gentiles,
And the glory of thy people Israel.

<span id="an_2:33">2:33</span> And his father and his mother were
marvelling at the things which were spoken concerning him;

<span id="an_2:34">2:34</span> and Simeon blessed them, and said unto
Mary his mother, Behold, this \[child\] is set for the falling and the
rising of many in Israel; and for a sign which is spoken against;

<span id="an_2:35">2:35</span> yea and a sword shall pierce through
thine own soul; that thoughts out of many hearts may be revealed.

<span id="an_2:36">2:36</span> And there was one Anna, a prophetess, the
daughter of Phanuel, of the tribe of Asher (she was of a great age,
having lived with a husband seven years from her virginity,

<span id="an_2:37">2:37</span> and she had been a widow even unto
fourscore and four years), who departed not from the temple, worshipping
with fastings and supplications night and day.

<span id="an_2:38">2:38</span> And coming up at that very hour she gave
thanks unto God, and spake of him to all them that were looking for the
redemption of Jerusalem.

<span id="an_2:39">2:39</span> And when they had accomplished all things
that were according to the law of the Lord, they returned into Galilee,
to their own city Nazareth.

<span id="an_2:40">2:40</span> And the child grew, and waxed strong,
filled with wisdom: and the grace of God was upon him.

<span id="an_2:41">2:41</span> And his parents went every year to
Jerusalem at the feast of the passover.

<span id="an_2:42">2:42</span> And when he was twelve years old, they
went up after the custom of the feast;

<span id="an_2:43">2:43</span> and when they had fulfilled the days, as
they were returning, the boy Jesus tarried behind in Jerusalem; and his
parents knew it not;

<span id="an_2:44">2:44</span> but supposing him to be in the company,
they went a day's journey; and they sought for him among their kinsfolk
and acquaintance:

<span id="an_2:45">2:45</span> and when they found him not, they
returned to Jerusalem, seeking for him.

<span id="an_2:46">2:46</span> And it came to pass, after three days
they found him in the temple, sitting in the midst of the teachers, both
hearing them, and asking them questions:

<span id="an_2:47">2:47</span> and all that heard him were amazed at his
understanding and his answers.

<span id="an_2:48">2:48</span> And when they saw him, they were
astonished; and his mother said unto him, Son, why hast thou thus dealt
with us? behold, thy father and I sought thee sorrowing.

<span id="an_2:49">2:49</span> And he said unto them, How is it that ye
sought me? knew ye not that I must be in my Father's house?

<span id="an_2:50">2:50</span> And they understood not the saying which
he spake unto them.

<span id="an_2:51">2:51</span> And he went down with them, and came to
Nazareth; and he was subject unto them: and his mother kept all
\[these\] sayings in her heart.

<span id="an_2:52">2:52</span> And Jesus advanced in wisdom and stature,
and in favor with God and men.

<span id="an_3:1">3:1</span> Now in the fifteenth year of the reign of
Tiberius Caesar, Pontius Pilate being governor of Judaea, and Herod
being tetrarch of Galilee, and his brother Philip tetrarch of the region
of Ituraea and Trachonitis, and Lysanias tetrarch of Abilene,

<span id="an_3:2">3:2</span> in the highpriesthood of Annas and
Caiaphas, the word of God came unto John the son of Zacharias in the
wilderness.

<span id="an_3:3">3:3</span> And he came into all the region round about
the Jordan, preaching the baptism of repentance unto remission of sins;

<span id="an_3:4">3:4</span> as it is written in the book of the words
of Isaiah the prophet, The voice of one crying in the wilderness, Make
ye ready the way of the Lord, Make his paths straight.

<span id="an_3:5">3:5</span> Every valley shall be filled, And every
mountain and hill shall be brought low; And the crooked shall become
straight, And the rough ways smooth;

<span id="an_3:6">3:6</span> And all flesh shall see the salvation of
God.

<span id="an_3:7">3:7</span> He said therefore to the multitudes that
went out to be baptized of him, Ye offspring of vipers, who warned you
to flee from the wrath to come?

<span id="an_3:8">3:8</span> Bring forth therefore fruits worthy of
repentance, and begin not to say within yourselves, We have Abraham to
our father: for I say unto you, that God is able of these stones to
raise up children unto Abraham.

<span id="an_3:9">3:9</span> And even now the axe also lieth at the root
of the trees: every tree therefore that bringeth not forth good fruit is
hewn down, and cast into the fire.

<span id="an_3:10">3:10</span> And the multitudes asked him, saying,
What then must we do?

<span id="an_3:11">3:11</span> And he answered and said unto them, He
that hath two coats, let him impart to him that hath none; and he that
hath food, let him do likewise.

<span id="an_3:12">3:12</span> And there came also publicans to be
baptized, and they said unto him, Teacher, what must we do?

<span id="an_3:13">3:13</span> And he said unto them, Extort no more
than that which is appointed you.

<span id="an_3:14">3:14</span> And soldiers also asked him, saying, And
we, what must we do? And he said unto them, Extort from no man by
violence, neither accuse \[any one\] wrongfully; and be content with
your wages.

<span id="an_3:15">3:15</span> And as the people were in expectation,
and all men reasoned in their hearts concerning John, whether haply he
were the Christ;

<span id="an_3:16">3:16</span> John answered, saying unto them all, I
indeed baptize you with water; but there cometh he that is mightier than
I, the latchet of whose shoes I am not worthy to unloose: he shall
baptize you in the Holy Spirit and \[in\] fire:

<span id="an_3:17">3:17</span> whose fan is in his hand, thoroughly to
cleanse his threshing-floor, and to gather the wheat into his garner;
but the chaff he will burn up with unquenchable fire.

<span id="an_3:18">3:18</span> With many other exhortations therefore
preached he good tidings unto the people;

<span id="an_3:19">3:19</span> but Herod the tetrarch, being reproved by
him for Herodias his brother's wife, and for all the evil things which
Herod had done,

<span id="an_3:20">3:20</span> added this also to them all, that he shut
up John in prison.

<span id="an_3:21">3:21</span> Now it came to pass, when all the people
were baptized, that, Jesus also having been baptized, and praying, the
heaven was opened,

<span id="an_3:22">3:22</span> and the Holy Spirit descended in a bodily
form, as a dove, upon him, and a voice came out of heaven, Thou art my
beloved Son; in thee I am well pleased.

<span id="an_3:23">3:23</span> And Jesus himself, when he began \[to
teach\], was about thirty years of age, being the son (as was supposed)
of Joseph, the \[son\] of Heli,

<span id="an_3:24">3:24</span> the \[son\] of Matthat, the \[son\] of
Levi, the \[son\] of Melchi, the \[son\] of Jannai, the \[son\] of
Joseph,

<span id="an_3:25">3:25</span> the \[son\] of Mattathias, the \[son\] of
Amos, the \[son\] of Nahum, the \[son\] of Esli, the \[son\] of Naggai,

<span id="an_3:26">3:26</span> the \[son\] of Maath, the \[son\] of
Mattathias, the \[son\] of Semein, the \[son\] of Josech, the \[son\] of
Joda,

<span id="an_3:27">3:27</span> the \[son\] of Joanan, the \[son\] of
Rhesa, the \[son\] of Zerubbabel, the \[son\] of Shealtiel, the \[son\]
of Neri,

<span id="an_3:28">3:28</span> the \[son\] of Melchi, the \[son\] of
Addi, the \[son\] of Cosam, the \[son\] of Elmadam, the \[son\] of Er,

<span id="an_3:29">3:29</span> the \[son\] of Jesus, the \[son\] of
Eliezer, the son of Jorim, the \[son\] of Matthat, the \[son\] of Levi,

<span id="an_3:30">3:30</span> the \[son\] of Symeon, the \[son\] of
Judas, the \[son\] of Joseph, the \[son\] of Jonam, the \[son\] of
Eliakim,

<span id="an_3:31">3:31</span> the \[son\] of Melea, the \[son\] of
Menna, the \[son\] of Mattatha, the \[son\] of Nathan, the \[son\] of
David,

<span id="an_3:32">3:32</span> the \[son\] of Jesse, the \[son\] of
Obed, the \[son\] of Boaz, the \[son\] of Salmon, the \[son\] of
Nahshon,

<span id="an_3:33">3:33</span> the \[son\] of Amminadab, the \[son\] of
Arni, the \[son\] of Hezron, the \[son\] of Perez, the \[son\] of Judah,

<span id="an_3:34">3:34</span> the \[son\] of Jacob, the \[son\] of
Isaac, the \[son\] of Abraham, the \[son\] of Terah, the \[son\] of
Nahor,

<span id="an_3:35">3:35</span> the \[son\] of Serug, the \[son\] of Reu,
the \[son\] of Peleg, the \[son\] of Eber, the \[son\] of Shelah

<span id="an_3:36">3:36</span> the \[son\] of Cainan, the \[son\] of
Arphaxad, the \[son\] of Shem, the \[son\] of Noah, the \[son\] of
Lamech,

<span id="an_3:37">3:37</span> the \[son\] of Methuselah, the \[son\] of
Enoch, the \[son\] of Jared, the \[son\] of Mahalaleel, the \[son\] of
Cainan,

<span id="an_3:38">3:38</span> the \[son\] of Enos, the \[son\] of Seth,
the \[son\] of Adam, the \[son\] of God.

<span id="an_4:1">4:1</span> And Jesus, full of the Holy Spirit,
returned from the Jordan, and was led in the Spirit in the wilderness

<span id="an_4:2">4:2</span> during forty days, being tempted of the
devil. And he did eat nothing in those days: and when they were
completed, he hungered.

<span id="an_4:3">4:3</span> And the devil said unto him, if thou art
the Son of God, command this stone that it become bread.

<span id="an_4:4">4:4</span> And Jesus answered unto him, It is written,
Man shall not live by bread alone.

<span id="an_4:5">4:5</span> And he led him up, and showed him all the
kingdoms of the world in a moment of time.

<span id="an_4:6">4:6</span> And the devil said unto him, To thee will I
give all this authority, and the glory of them: for it hath been
delivered unto me; and to whomsoever I will I give it.

<span id="an_4:7">4:7</span> If thou therefore wilt worship before me,
it shall all be thine.

<span id="an_4:8">4:8</span> And Jesus answered and said unto him, It is
written, Thou shalt worship the Lord thy God, and him only shalt thou
serve.

<span id="an_4:9">4:9</span> And he led him to Jerusalem, and set him on
the pinnacle of the temple, and said unto him, If thou art the Son of
God, cast thyself down from hence:

<span id="an_4:10">4:10</span> for it is written, He shall give his
angels charge concerning thee, to guard thee:

<span id="an_4:11">4:11</span> and, On their hands they shall bear thee
up, Lest haply thou dash thy foot against a stone.

<span id="an_4:12">4:12</span> And Jesus answering said unto him, It is
said, Thou shalt not make trial of the Lord thy God.

<span id="an_4:13">4:13</span> And when the devil had completed every
temptation, he departed from him for a season.

<span id="an_4:14">4:14</span> And Jesus returned in the power of the
Spirit into Galilee: and a fame went out concerning him through all the
region round about.

<span id="an_4:15">4:15</span> And he taught in their synagogues, being
glorified of all.

<span id="an_4:16">4:16</span> And he came to Nazareth, where he had
been brought up: and he entered, as his custom was, into the synagogue
on the sabbath day, and stood up to read.

<span id="an_4:17">4:17</span> And there was delivered unto him the book
of the prophet Isaiah. And he opened the book, and found the place where
it was written,

<span id="an_4:18">4:18</span> The Spirit of the Lord is upon me,
Because he anointed me to preach good tidings to the poor: He hath sent
me to proclaim release to the captives, And recovering of sight to the
blind, To set at liberty them that are bruised,

<span id="an_4:19">4:19</span> To proclaim the acceptable year of the
Lord.

<span id="an_4:20">4:20</span> And he closed the book, and gave it back
to the attendant, and sat down: and the eyes of all in the synagogue
were fastened on him.

<span id="an_4:21">4:21</span> And he began to say unto them, To-day
hath this scripture been fulfilled in your ears.

<span id="an_4:22">4:22</span> And all bare him witness, and wondered at
the words of grace which proceeded out of his mouth: and they said, Is
not this Joseph's son?

<span id="an_4:23">4:23</span> And he said unto them, Doubtless ye will
say unto me this parable, Physician, heal thyself: whatsoever we have
heard done at Capernaum, do also here in thine own country.

<span id="an_4:24">4:24</span> And he said, Verily I say unto you, No
prophet is acceptable in his own country.

<span id="an_4:25">4:25</span> But of a truth I say unto you, There were
many widows in Israel in the days of Elijah, when the heaven was shut up
three years and six months, when there came a great famine over all the
land;

<span id="an_4:26">4:26</span> and unto none of them was Elijah sent,
but only to Zarephath, in the land of Sidon, unto a woman that was a
widow.

<span id="an_4:27">4:27</span> And there were many lepers in Israel in
the time of Elisha the prophet; and none of them was cleansed, but only
Naaman the Syrian.

<span id="an_4:28">4:28</span> And they were all filled with wrath in
the synagogue, as they heard these things;

<span id="an_4:29">4:29</span> and they rose up, and cast him forth out
of the city, and led him unto the brow of the hill whereon their city
was built, that they might throw him down headlong.

<span id="an_4:30">4:30</span> But he passing through the midst of them
went his way.

<span id="an_4:31">4:31</span> And he came down to Capernaum, a city of
Galilee. And he was teaching them on the sabbath day:

<span id="an_4:32">4:32</span> and they were astonished at his teaching;
for his word was with authority.

<span id="an_4:33">4:33</span> And in the synagogue there was a man,
that had a spirit of an unclean demon; and he cried out with a loud
voice,

<span id="an_4:34">4:34</span> Ah! what have we to do with thee, Jesus
thou Nazarene? art thou come to destroy us? I know thee who thou art,
the Holy One of God.

<span id="an_4:35">4:35</span> And Jesus rebuked him, saying, Hold thy
peace, and come out of him. And when the demon had thrown him down in
the midst, he came out of him, having done him no hurt.

<span id="an_4:36">4:36</span> And amazement came upon all, and they
spake together, one with another, saying, What is this word? for with
authority and power he commandeth the unclean spirits, and they come
out.

<span id="an_4:37">4:37</span> And there went forth a rumor concerning
him into every place of the region round about.

<span id="an_4:38">4:38</span> And he rose up from the synagogue, and
entered into the house of Simon. And Simon's wife's mother was holden
with a great fever; and they besought him for her.

<span id="an_4:39">4:39</span> And he stood over her, and rebuked the
fever; and it left her: and immediately she rose up and ministered unto
them.

<span id="an_4:40">4:40</span> And when the sun was setting, all they
that had any sick with divers diseases brought them unto him; and he
laid his hands on every one of them, and healed them.

<span id="an_4:41">4:41</span> And demons also came out from many,
crying out, and saying, Thou art the Son of God. And rebuking them, he
suffered them not to speak, because they knew that he was the Christ.

<span id="an_4:42">4:42</span> And when it was day, he came out and went
into a desert place: and the multitudes sought after him, and came unto
him, and would have stayed him, that he should not go from them.

<span id="an_4:43">4:43</span> But he said unto them, I must preach the
good tidings of the kingdom of God to the other cities also: for
therefore was I sent.

<span id="an_4:44">4:44</span> And he was preaching in the synagogues of
Galilee.

<span id="an_5:1">5:1</span> Now it came to pass, while the multitude
pressed upon him and heard the word of God, that he was standing by the
lake of Gennesaret;

<span id="an_5:2">5:2</span> and he saw two boats standing by the lake:
but the fishermen had gone out of them, and were washing their nets.

<span id="an_5:3">5:3</span> And he entered into one of the boats, which
was Simon's, and asked him to put out a little from the land. And he sat
down and taught the multitudes out of the boat.

<span id="an_5:4">5:4</span> And when he had left speaking, he said unto
Simon, Put out into the deep, and let down your nets for a draught.

<span id="an_5:5">5:5</span> And Simon answered and said, Master, we
toiled all night, and took nothing: but at thy word I will let down the
nets.

<span id="an_5:6">5:6</span> And when they had done this, they inclosed
a great multitude of fishes; and their nets were breaking;

<span id="an_5:7">5:7</span> and they beckoned unto their partners in
the other boat, that they should come and help them. And they came, and
filled both the boats, so that they began to sink.

<span id="an_5:8">5:8</span> But Simon Peter, when he saw it, fell down
at Jesus' knees, saying, Depart from me; for I am a sinful man, O Lord.

<span id="an_5:9">5:9</span> For he was amazed, and all that were with
him, at the draught of the fishes which they had taken;

<span id="an_5:10">5:10</span> and so were also James and John, sons of
Zebedee, who were partners with Simon. And Jesus said unto Simon, Fear
not; from henceforth thou shalt catch men.

<span id="an_5:11">5:11</span> And when they had brought their boats to
land, they left all, and followed him.

<span id="an_5:12">5:12</span> And it came to pass, while he was in one
of the cities, behold, a man full of leprosy: and when he saw Jesus, he
fell on his face, and besought him, saying, Lord, if thou wilt, thou
canst make me clean.

<span id="an_5:13">5:13</span> And he stretched forth his hand, and
touched him, saying, I will; be thou made clean. And straightway the
leprosy departed from him.

<span id="an_5:14">5:14</span> And he charged him to tell no man: but go
thy way, and show thyself to the priest, and offer for thy cleansing,
according as Moses commanded, for a testimony unto them.

<span id="an_5:15">5:15</span> But so much the more went abroad the
report concerning him: and great multitudes came together to hear, and
to be healed of their infirmities.

<span id="an_5:16">5:16</span> But he withdrew himself in the deserts,
and prayed.

<span id="an_5:17">5:17</span> And it came to pass on one of those days,
that he was teaching; and there were Pharisees and doctors of the law
sitting by, who were come out of every village of Galilee and Judaea and
Jerusalem: and the power of the Lord was with him to heal.

<span id="an_5:18">5:18</span> And behold, men bring on a bed a man that
was palsied: and they sought to bring him in, and to lay him before him.

<span id="an_5:19">5:19</span> And not finding by what \[way\] they
might bring him in because of the multitude, they went up to the
housetop, and let him down through the tiles with his couch into the
midst before Jesus.

<span id="an_5:20">5:20</span> And seeing their faith, he said, Man, thy
sins are forgiven thee.

<span id="an_5:21">5:21</span> And the scribes and the Pharisees began
to reason, saying, Who is this that speaketh blasphemies? Who can
forgive sins, but God alone?

<span id="an_5:22">5:22</span> But Jesus perceiving their reasonings,
answered and said unto them, Why reason ye in your hearts?

<span id="an_5:23">5:23</span> Which is easier, to say, Thy sins are
forgiven thee; or to say, Arise and walk?

<span id="an_5:24">5:24</span> But that ye may know that the Son of man
hath authority on earth to forgive sins (he said unto him that was
palsied), I say unto thee, Arise, and take up thy couch, and go unto thy
house.

<span id="an_5:25">5:25</span> And immediately he rose up before them,
and took up that whereon he lay, and departed to his house, glorifying
God.

<span id="an_5:26">5:26</span> And amazement took hold on all, and they
glorified God; and they were filled with fear, saying, We have seen
strange things to-day.

<span id="an_5:27">5:27</span> And after these things he went forth, and
beheld a publican, named Levi, sitting at the place of toll, and said
unto him, Follow me.

<span id="an_5:28">5:28</span> And he forsook all, and rose up and
followed him.

<span id="an_5:29">5:29</span> And Levi made him a great feast in his
house: and there was a great multitude of publicans and of others that
were sitting at meat with them.

<span id="an_5:30">5:30</span> And the Pharisees and their scribes
murmured against his disciples, saying, Why do ye eat and drink with the
publicans and sinners?

<span id="an_5:31">5:31</span> And Jesus answering said unto them, They
that are in health have no need of a physician; but they that are sick.

<span id="an_5:32">5:32</span> I am not come to call the righteous but
sinners to repentance.

<span id="an_5:33">5:33</span> And they said unto him, The disciples of
John fast often, and make supplications; likewise also the \[disciples\]
of the Pharisees; but thine eat and drink.

<span id="an_5:34">5:34</span> And Jesus said unto them, Can ye make the
sons of the bride-chamber fast, while the bridegroom is with them?

<span id="an_5:35">5:35</span> But the days will come; and when the
bridegroom shall be taken away from them, then will they fast in those
days.

<span id="an_5:36">5:36</span> And he spake also a parable unto them: No
man rendeth a piece from a new garment and putteth it upon an old
garment; else he will rend the new, and also the piece from the new will
not agree with the old.

<span id="an_5:37">5:37</span> And no man putteth new wine into old
wine-skins; else the new wine will burst the skins, and itself will be
spilled, and the skins will perish.

<span id="an_5:38">5:38</span> But new wine must be put into fresh
wine-skins.

<span id="an_5:39">5:39</span> And no man having drunk old \[wine\]
desireth new; for he saith, The old is good.

<span id="an_6:1">6:1</span> Now it came to pass on a sabbath, that he
was going through the grainfields; and his disciples plucked the ears,
and did eat, rubbing them in their hands.

<span id="an_6:2">6:2</span> But certain of the Pharisees said, Why do
ye that which it is not lawful to do on the sabbath day?

<span id="an_6:3">6:3</span> And Jesus answering them said, Have ye not
read even this, what David did, when he was hungry, he, and they that
were with him;

<span id="an_6:4">6:4</span> how he entered into the house of God, and
took and ate the showbread, and gave also to them that were with him;
which it is not lawful to eat save for the priests alone?

<span id="an_6:5">6:5</span> And he said unto them, The Son of man is
lord of the sabbath.

<span id="an_6:6">6:6</span> And it came to pass on another sabbath,
that he entered into the synagogue and taught: and there was a man
there, and his right hand was withered.

<span id="an_6:7">6:7</span> And the scribes and the Pharisees watched
him, whether he would heal on the sabbath; that they might find how to
accuse him.

<span id="an_6:8">6:8</span> But he knew their thoughts; and he said to
the man that had his hand withered, Rise up, and stand forth in the
midst. And he arose and stood forth.

<span id="an_6:9">6:9</span> And Jesus said unto them, I ask you, Is it
lawful on the sabbath to do good, or to do harm? to save a life, or to
destroy it?

<span id="an_6:10">6:10</span> And he looked round about on them all,
and said unto him, Stretch forth thy hand. And he did \[so\]: and his
hand was restored.

<span id="an_6:11">6:11</span> But they were filled with madness; and
communed one with another what they might do to Jesus.

<span id="an_6:12">6:12</span> And it came to pass in these days, that
he went out into the mountain to pray; and he continued all night in
prayer to God.

<span id="an_6:13">6:13</span> And when it was day, he called his
disciples; and he chose from them twelve, whom also he named apostles:

<span id="an_6:14">6:14</span> Simon, whom he also named Peter, and
Andrew his brother, and James and John, and Philip and Bartholomew,

<span id="an_6:15">6:15</span> and Matthew and Thomas, and James \[the
son\] of Alphaeus, and Simon who was called the Zealot,

<span id="an_6:16">6:16</span> and Judas \[the son\] of James, and Judas
Iscariot, who became a traitor;

<span id="an_6:17">6:17</span> and he came down with them, and stood on
a level place, and a great multitude of his disciples, and a great
number of the people from all Judaea and Jerusalem, and the sea coast of
Tyre and Sidon, who came to hear him, and to be healed of their
diseases;

<span id="an_6:18">6:18</span> and they that were troubled with unclean
spirits were healed.

<span id="an_6:19">6:19</span> And all the multitude sought to touch
him; for power came forth from him, and healed \[them\] all.

<span id="an_6:20">6:20</span> And he lifted up his eyes on his
disciples, and said, Blessed \[are\] ye poor: for yours is the kingdom
of God.

<span id="an_6:21">6:21</span> Blessed \[are\] ye that hunger now: for
ye shall be filled. Blessed \[are\] ye that weep now: for ye shall
laugh.

<span id="an_6:22">6:22</span> Blessed are ye, when men shall hate you,
and when they shall separate you \[from their company\], and reproach
you, and cast out your name as evil, for the Son of man's sake.

<span id="an_6:23">6:23</span> Rejoice in that day, and leap \[for
joy\]: for behold, your reward is great in heaven; for in the same
manner did their fathers unto the prophets.

<span id="an_6:24">6:24</span> But woe unto you that are rich! for ye
have received your consolation.

<span id="an_6:25">6:25</span> Woe unto you, ye that are full now! for
ye shall hunger. Woe \[unto you\], ye that laugh now! for ye shall mourn
and weep.

<span id="an_6:26">6:26</span> Woe \[unto you\], when all men shall
speak well of you! for in the same manner did their fathers to the false
prophets.

<span id="an_6:27">6:27</span> But I say unto you that hear, Love your
enemies, do good to them that hate you,

<span id="an_6:28">6:28</span> bless them that curse you, pray for them
that despitefully use you.

<span id="an_6:29">6:29</span> To him that smiteth thee on the \[one\]
cheek offer also the other; and from him that taketh away thy cloak
withhold not thy coat also.

<span id="an_6:30">6:30</span> Give to every one that asketh thee; and
of him that taketh away thy goods ask them not again.

<span id="an_6:31">6:31</span> And as ye would that men should do to
you, do ye also to them likewise.

<span id="an_6:32">6:32</span> And if ye love them that love you, what
thank have ye? for even sinners love those that love them.

<span id="an_6:33">6:33</span> And if ye do good to them that do good to
you, what thank have ye? for even sinners do the same.

<span id="an_6:34">6:34</span> And if ye lend to them of whom ye hope to
receive, what thank have ye? even sinners lend to sinners, to receive
again as much.

<span id="an_6:35">6:35</span> But love your enemies, and do \[them\]
good, and lend, never despairing; and your reward shall be great, and ye
shall be sons of the Most High: for he is kind toward the unthankful and
evil.

<span id="an_6:36">6:36</span> Be ye merciful, even as your Father is
merciful.

<span id="an_6:37">6:37</span> And judge not, and ye shall not be
judged: and condemn not, and ye shall not be condemned: release, and ye
shall be released:

<span id="an_6:38">6:38</span> give, and it shall be given unto you;
good measure, pressed down, shaken together, running over, shall they
give into your bosom. For with what measure ye mete it shall be measured
to you again.

<span id="an_6:39">6:39</span> And he spake also a parable unto them,
Can the blind guide the blind? shall they not both fall into a pit?

<span id="an_6:40">6:40</span> The disciple is not above his teacher:
but every one when he is perfected shall be as his teacher.

<span id="an_6:41">6:41</span> And why beholdest thou the mote that is
in thy brother's eye, but considerest not the beam that is in thine own
eye?

<span id="an_6:42">6:42</span> Or how canst thou say to thy brother,
Brother, let me cast out the mote that is in thine eye, when thou
thyself beholdest not the beam that is in thine own eye? Thou hypocrite,
cast out first the beam out of thine own eye, and then shalt thou see
clearly to cast out the mote that is in thy brother's eye.

<span id="an_6:43">6:43</span> For there is no good tree that bringeth
forth corrupt fruit; nor again a corrupt tree that bringeth forth good
fruit.

<span id="an_6:44">6:44</span> For each tree is known by its own fruit.
For of thorns men do not gather figs, nor of a bramble bush gather they
grapes.

<span id="an_6:45">6:45</span> The good man out of the good treasure of
his heart bringeth forth that which is good; and the evil \[man\] out of
the evil \[treasure\] bringeth forth that which is evil: for out of the
abundance of the heart his mouth speaketh.

<span id="an_6:46">6:46</span> And why call ye me, Lord, Lord, and do
not the things which I say?

<span id="an_6:47">6:47</span> Every one that cometh unto me, and
heareth my words, and doeth them, I will show you to whom he is like:

<span id="an_6:48">6:48</span> he is like a man building a house, who
digged and went deep, and laid a foundation upon the rock: and when a
flood arose, the stream brake against that house, and could not shake
it: because it had been well builded.

<span id="an_6:49">6:49</span> But he that heareth, and doeth not, is
like a man that built a house upon the earth without a foundation;
against which the stream brake, and straightway it fell in; and the ruin
of that house was great.

<span id="an_7:1">7:1</span> After he had ended all his sayings in the
ears of the people, he entered into Capernaum.

<span id="an_7:2">7:2</span> And a certain centurion's servant, who was
dear unto him, was sick and at the point of death.

<span id="an_7:3">7:3</span> And when he heard concerning Jesus, he sent
unto him elders of the Jews, asking him that he would come and save his
servant.

<span id="an_7:4">7:4</span> And they, when they came to Jesus, besought
him earnestly, saying, He is worthy that thou shouldest do this for him;

<span id="an_7:5">7:5</span> for he loveth our nation, and himself built
us our synagogue.

<span id="an_7:6">7:6</span> And Jesus went with them. And when he was
now not far from the house, the centurion sent friends to him, saying
unto him, Lord, trouble not thyself; for I am not worthy that thou
shouldest come under my roof:

<span id="an_7:7">7:7</span> wherefore neither thought I myself worthy
to come unto thee: but say the word, and my servant shall be healed.

<span id="an_7:8">7:8</span> For I also am a man set under authority,
having under myself soldiers: and I say to this one, Go, and he goeth;
and to another, Come, and he cometh; and to my servant, Do this, and he
doeth it.

<span id="an_7:9">7:9</span> And when Jesus heard these things, he
marvelled at him, and turned and said unto the multitude that followed
him, I say unto you, I have not found so great faith, no, not in Israel.

<span id="an_7:10">7:10</span> And they that were sent, returning to the
house, found the servant whole.

<span id="an_7:11">7:11</span> And it came to pass soon afterwards, that
he went to a city called Nain; and his disciples went with him, and a
great multitude.

<span id="an_7:12">7:12</span> Now when he drew near to the gate of the
city, behold, there was carried out one that was dead, the only son of
his mother, and she was a widow: and much people of the city was with
her.

<span id="an_7:13">7:13</span> And when the Lord saw her, he had
compassion on her, and said unto her, Weep not.

<span id="an_7:14">7:14</span> And he came nigh and touched the bier:
and the bearers stood still. And he said, Young man, I say unto thee,
Arise.

<span id="an_7:15">7:15</span> And he that was dead sat up, and began to
speak. And he gave him to his mother.

<span id="an_7:16">7:16</span> And fear took hold on all: and they
glorified God, saying, A great prophet is arisen among us: and, God hath
visited his people.

<span id="an_7:17">7:17</span> And this report went forth concerning him
in the whole of Judaea, and all the region round about.

<span id="an_7:18">7:18</span> And the disciples of John told him of all
these things.

<span id="an_7:19">7:19</span> And John calling unto him two of his
disciples sent them to the Lord, saying, Art thou he that cometh, or
look we for another?

<span id="an_7:20">7:20</span> And when the men were come unto him, they
said, John the Baptist hath sent us unto thee, saying, Art thou he that
cometh, or look we for another?

<span id="an_7:21">7:21</span> In that hour he cured many of diseases
and plagues and evil spirits; and on many that were blind he bestowed
sight.

<span id="an_7:22">7:22</span> And he answered and said unto them, Go
and tell John the things which ye have seen and heard; the blind receive
their sight, the lame walk, the lepers are cleansed, and the deaf hear,
the dead are raised up, the poor have good tidings preached to them.

<span id="an_7:23">7:23</span> And blessed is he, whosoever shall find
no occasion of stumbling in me.

<span id="an_7:24">7:24</span> And when the messengers of John were
departed, he began to say unto the multitudes concerning John, What went
ye out into the wilderness to behold? a reed shaken with the wind?

<span id="an_7:25">7:25</span> But what went ye out to see? a man
clothed in soft raiment? Behold, they that are gorgeously apparelled,
and live delicately, are in kings' courts.

<span id="an_7:26">7:26</span> But what went ye out to see? a prophet?
Yea, I say unto you, and much more than a prophet.

<span id="an_7:27">7:27</span> This is he of whom it is written, Behold,
I send my messenger before thy face, Who shall prepare thy way before
thee.

<span id="an_7:28">7:28</span> I say unto you, Among them that are born
of women there is none greater than John: yet he that is but little in
the kingdom of God is greater than he.

<span id="an_7:29">7:29</span> And all the people when they heard, and
the publicans, justified God, being baptized with the baptism of John.

<span id="an_7:30">7:30</span> But the Pharisees and the lawyers
rejected for themselves the counsel of God, being not baptized of him.

<span id="an_7:31">7:31</span> Whereunto then shall I liken the men of
this generation, and to what are they like?

<span id="an_7:32">7:32</span> They are like unto children that sit in
the marketplace, and call one to another; who say, We piped unto you,
and ye did not dance; we wailed, and ye did not weep.

<span id="an_7:33">7:33</span> For John the Baptist is come eating no
bread nor drinking wine; and ye say, He hath a demon.

<span id="an_7:34">7:34</span> The Son of man is come eating and
drinking; and ye say, Behold, a gluttonous man, and a winebibber, a
friend of publicans and sinners!

<span id="an_7:35">7:35</span> And wisdom is justified of all her
children.

<span id="an_7:36">7:36</span> And one of the Pharisees desired him that
he would eat with him. And he entered into the Pharisee's house, and sat
down to meat.

<span id="an_7:37">7:37</span> And behold, a woman who was in the city,
a sinner; and when she knew that he was sitting at meat in the
Pharisee's house, she brought an alabaster cruse of ointment,

<span id="an_7:38">7:38</span> and standing behind at his feet, weeping,
she began to wet his feet with her tears, and wiped them with the hair
of her head, and kissed his feet, and anointed them with the ointment.

<span id="an_7:39">7:39</span> Now when the Pharisee that had bidden him
saw it, he spake within himself, saying, This man, if he were a prophet,
would have perceived who and what manner of woman this is that toucheth
him, that she is a sinner.

<span id="an_7:40">7:40</span> And Jesus answering said unto him, Simon,
I have somewhat to say unto thee. And he saith, Teacher, say on.

<span id="an_7:41">7:41</span> A certain lender had two debtors: the one
owed five hundred shillings, and the other fifty.

<span id="an_7:42">7:42</span> When they had not \[wherewith\] to pay,
he forgave them both. Which of them therefore will love him most?

<span id="an_7:43">7:43</span> Simon answered and said, He, I suppose,
to whom he forgave the most. And he said unto him, Thou hast rightly
judged.

<span id="an_7:44">7:44</span> And turning to the woman, he said unto
Simon, Seest thou this woman? I entered into thy house, thou gavest me
no water for my feet: but she hath wetted my feet with her tears, and
wiped them with her hair.

<span id="an_7:45">7:45</span> Thou gavest me no kiss: but she, since
the time I came in, hath not ceased to kiss my feet.

<span id="an_7:46">7:46</span> My head with oil thou didst not anoint:
but she hath anointed my feet with ointment.

<span id="an_7:47">7:47</span> Wherefore I say unto thee, Her sins,
which are many, are forgiven; for she loved much: but to whom little is
forgiven, \[the same\] loveth little.

<span id="an_7:48">7:48</span> And he said unto her, Thy sins are
forgiven.

<span id="an_7:49">7:49</span> And they that sat at meat with him began
to say within themselves, Who is this that even forgiveth sins?

<span id="an_7:50">7:50</span> And he said unto the woman, Thy faith
hath saved thee; go in peace.

<span id="an_8:1">8:1</span> And it came to pass soon afterwards, that
he went about through cities and villages, preaching and bringing the
good tidings of the kingdom of God, and with him the twelve,

<span id="an_8:2">8:2</span> and certain women who had been healed of
evil spirits and infirmities: Mary that was called Magdalene, from whom
seven demons had gone out,

<span id="an_8:3">8:3</span> and Joanna the wife of Chuzas Herod's
steward, and Susanna, and many others, who ministered unto them of their
substance.

<span id="an_8:4">8:4</span> And when a great multitude came together,
and they of every city resorted unto him, he spake by a parable:

<span id="an_8:5">8:5</span> The sower went forth to sow his seed: and
as he sowed, some fell by the way side; and it was trodden under foot,
and the birds of the heaven devoured it.

<span id="an_8:6">8:6</span> And other fell on the rock; and as soon as
it grew, it withered away, because it had no moisture.

<span id="an_8:7">8:7</span> And other fell amidst the thorns; and the
thorns grew with it, and choked it.

<span id="an_8:8">8:8</span> And other fell into the good ground, and
grew, and brought forth fruit a hundredfold. As he said these things, he
cried, He that hath ears to hear, let him hear.

<span id="an_8:9">8:9</span> And his disciples asked him what this
parable might be.

<span id="an_8:10">8:10</span> And he said, Unto you it is given to know
the mysteries of the kingdom of God: but to the rest in parables; that
seeing they may not see, and hearing they may not understand.

<span id="an_8:11">8:11</span> Now the parable is this: The seed is the
word of God.

<span id="an_8:12">8:12</span> And those by the way side are they that
have heard; then cometh the devil, and taketh away the word from their
heart, that they may not believe and be saved.

<span id="an_8:13">8:13</span> And those on the rock \[are\] they who,
when they have heard, receive the word with joy; and these have no root,
who for a while believe, and in time of temptation fall away.

<span id="an_8:14">8:14</span> And that which fell among the thorns,
these are they that have heard, and as they go on their way they are
choked with cares and riches and pleasures of \[this\] life, and bring
no fruit to perfection.

<span id="an_8:15">8:15</span> And that in the good ground, these are
such as in an honest and good heart, having heard the word, hold it
fast, and bring forth fruit with patience.

<span id="an_8:16">8:16</span> And no man, when he hath lighted a lamp,
covereth it with a vessel, or putteth it under a bed; but putteth it on
a stand, that they that enter in may see the light.

<span id="an_8:17">8:17</span> For nothing is hid, that shall not be
made manifest; nor \[anything\] secret, that shall not be known and come
to light.

<span id="an_8:18">8:18</span> Take heed therefore how ye hear: for
whosoever hath, to him shall be given; and whosoever hath not, from him
shall be taken away even that which he thinketh he hath.

<span id="an_8:19">8:19</span> And there came to him his mother and
brethren, and they could not come at him for the crowd.

<span id="an_8:20">8:20</span> And it was told him, Thy mother and thy
brethren stand without, desiring to see thee.

<span id="an_8:21">8:21</span> But he answered and said unto them, My
mother and my brethren are these that hear the word of God, and do it.

<span id="an_8:22">8:22</span> Now it came to pass on one of those days,
that he entered into a boat, himself and his disciples; and he said unto
them, Let us go over unto the other side of the lake: and they launched
forth.

<span id="an_8:23">8:23</span> But as they sailed he fell asleep: and
there came down a storm of wind on the lake; and they were filling
\[with water\], and were in jeopardy.

<span id="an_8:24">8:24</span> And they came to him, and awoke him,
saying, Master, master, we perish. And he awoke, and rebuked the wind
and the raging of the water: and they ceased, and there was a calm.

<span id="an_8:25">8:25</span> And he said unto them, Where is your
faith? And being afraid they marvelled, saying one to another, Who then
is this, that he commandeth even the winds and the water, and they obey
him?

<span id="an_8:26">8:26</span> And they arrived at the country of the
Gerasenes, which is over against Galilee.

<span id="an_8:27">8:27</span> And when he was come forth upon the land,
there met him a certain man out of the city, who had demons; and for a
long time he had worn no clothes, and abode not in \[any\] house, but in
the tombs.

<span id="an_8:28">8:28</span> And when he saw Jesus, he cried out, and
fell down before him, and with a loud voice said, What have I to do with
thee, Jesus, thou Son of the Most High God? I beseech thee, torment me
not.

<span id="an_8:29">8:29</span> For he was commanding the unclean spirit
to come out from the man. For oftentimes it had seized him: and he was
kept under guard, and bound with chains and fetters; and breaking the
bands asunder, he was driven of the demon into the deserts.

<span id="an_8:30">8:30</span> And Jesus asked him, What is thy name?
And he said, Legion; for many demons were entered into him.

<span id="an_8:31">8:31</span> And they entreated him that he would not
command them to depart into the abyss.

<span id="an_8:32">8:32</span> Now there was there a herd of many swine
feeding on the mountain: and they entreated him that he would give them
leave to enter into them. And he gave them leave.

<span id="an_8:33">8:33</span> And the demons came out from the man, and
entered into the swine: and the herd rushed down the steep into the
lake, and were drowned.

<span id="an_8:34">8:34</span> And when they that fed them saw what had
come to pass, they fled, and told it in the city and in the country.

<span id="an_8:35">8:35</span> And they went out to see what had come to
pass; and they came to Jesus, and found the man, from whom the demons
were gone out, sitting, clothed and in his right mind, at the feet of
Jesus: and they were afraid.

<span id="an_8:36">8:36</span> And they that saw it told them how he
that was possessed with demons was made whole.

<span id="an_8:37">8:37</span> And all the people of the country of the
Gerasenes round about asked him to depart from them, for they were
holden with great fear: and he entered into a boat, and returned.

<span id="an_8:38">8:38</span> But the man from whom the demons were
gone out prayed him that he might be with him: but he sent him away,
saying,

<span id="an_8:39">8:39</span> Return to thy house, and declare how
great things God hath done for thee. And he went his way, publishing
throughout the whole city how great things Jesus had done for him.

<span id="an_8:40">8:40</span> And as Jesus returned, the multitude
welcomed him; for they were all waiting for him.

<span id="an_8:41">8:41</span> And behold, there came a man named
Jairus, and he was a ruler of the synagogue: and he fell down at Jesus'
feet, and besought him to come into his house;

<span id="an_8:42">8:42</span> for he had an only daughter, about twelve
years of age, and she was dying. But as he went the multitudes thronged
him.

<span id="an_8:43">8:43</span> And a woman having an issue of blood
twelve years, who had spent all her living upon physicians, and could
not be healed of any,

<span id="an_8:44">8:44</span> came behind him, and touched the border
of his garment: and immediately the issue of her blood stanched.

<span id="an_8:45">8:45</span> And Jesus said, Who is it that touched
me? And when all denied, Peter said, and they that were with him,
Master, the multitudes press thee and crush \[thee\].

<span id="an_8:46">8:46</span> But Jesus said, Some one did touch me;
for I perceived that power had gone forth from me.

<span id="an_8:47">8:47</span> And when the woman saw that she was not
hid, she came trembling, and falling down before him declared in the
presence of all the people for what cause she touched him, and how she
was healed immediately.

<span id="an_8:48">8:48</span> And he said unto her, Daughter, thy faith
hath made thee whole; go in peace.

<span id="an_8:49">8:49</span> While he yet spake, there cometh one from
the ruler of the synagogue's \[house\], saying, Thy daughter is dead;
trouble not the Teacher.

<span id="an_8:50">8:50</span> But Jesus hearing it, answered him, Fear
not: only believe, and she shall be made whole.

<span id="an_8:51">8:51</span> And when he came to the house, he
suffered not any man to enter in with him, save Peter, and John, and
James, and the father of the maiden and her mother.

<span id="an_8:52">8:52</span> And all were weeping, and bewailing her:
but he said, Weep not; for she is not dead, but sleepeth.

<span id="an_8:53">8:53</span> And they laughed him to scorn, knowing
that she was dead.

<span id="an_8:54">8:54</span> But he, taking her by the hand, called,
saying, Maiden, arise.

<span id="an_8:55">8:55</span> And her spirit returned, and she rose up
immediately: and he commanded that \[something\] be given her to eat.

<span id="an_8:56">8:56</span> And her parents were amazed: but he
charged them to tell no man what had been done.

<span id="an_9:1">9:1</span> And he called the twelve together, and gave
them power and authority over all demons, and to cure diseases.

<span id="an_9:2">9:2</span> And he sent them forth to preach the
kingdom of God, and to heal the sick.

<span id="an_9:3">9:3</span> And he said unto them, Take nothing for
your journey, neither staff, nor wallet, nor bread, nor money; neither
have two coats.

<span id="an_9:4">9:4</span> And into whatsoever house ye enter, there
abide, and thence depart.

<span id="an_9:5">9:5</span> And as many as receive you not, when ye
depart from that city, shake off the dust from your feet for a testimony
against them.

<span id="an_9:6">9:6</span> And they departed, and went throughout the
villages, preaching the gospel, and healing everywhere.

<span id="an_9:7">9:7</span> Now Herod the tetrarch heard of all that
was done: and he was much perplexed, because that it was said by some,
that John was risen from the dead;

<span id="an_9:8">9:8</span> and by some, that Elijah had appeared; and
by others, that one of the old prophets was risen again.

<span id="an_9:9">9:9</span> And Herod said, John I beheaded: but who is
this, about whom I hear such things? And he sought to see him.

<span id="an_9:10">9:10</span> And the apostles, when they were
returned, declared unto him what things they had done. And he took them,
and withdrew apart to a city called Bethsaida.

<span id="an_9:11">9:11</span> But the multitudes perceiving it followed
him: and he welcomed them, and spake to them of the kingdom of God, and
them that had need of healing he cured.

<span id="an_9:12">9:12</span> And the day began to wear away; and the
twelve came, and said unto him, Send the multitude away, that they may
go into the villages and country round about, and lodge, and get
provisions: for we are here in a desert place.

<span id="an_9:13">9:13</span> But he said unto them, Give ye them to
eat. And they said, We have no more than five loaves and two fishes;
except we should go and buy food for all this people.

<span id="an_9:14">9:14</span> For they were about five thousand men.
And he said unto his disciples, Make them sit down in companies, about
fifty each.

<span id="an_9:15">9:15</span> And they did so, and made them all sit
down.

<span id="an_9:16">9:16</span> And he took the five loaves and the two
fishes, and looking up to heaven, he blessed them, and brake; and gave
to the disciples to set before the multitude.

<span id="an_9:17">9:17</span> And they ate, and were all filled: and
there was taken up that which remained over to them of broken pieces,
twelve baskets.

<span id="an_9:18">9:18</span> And it came to pass, as he was praying
apart, the disciples were with him: and he asked them, saying, Who do
the multitudes say that I am?

<span id="an_9:19">9:19</span> And they answering said, John the
Baptist; but others \[say\], Elijah; and others, that one of the old
prophets is risen again.

<span id="an_9:20">9:20</span> And he said unto them, But who say ye
that I am? And Peter answering said, The Christ of God.

<span id="an_9:21">9:21</span> But he charged them, and commanded
\[them\] to tell this to no man;

<span id="an_9:22">9:22</span> saying, The Son of man must suffer many
things, and be rejected of the elders and chief priests and scribes, and
be killed, and the third day be raised up.

<span id="an_9:23">9:23</span> And he said unto all, If any man would
come after me, let him deny himself, and take up his cross daily, and
follow me.

<span id="an_9:24">9:24</span> For whosoever would save his life shall
lose it; but whosoever shall lose his life for my sake, the same shall
save it.

<span id="an_9:25">9:25</span> For what is a man profited, if he gain
the whole world, and lose or forfeit his own self?

<span id="an_9:26">9:26</span> For whosoever shall be ashamed of me and
of my words, of him shall the Son of man be ashamed, when he cometh in
his own glory, and \[the glory\] of the Father, and of the holy angels.

<span id="an_9:27">9:27</span> But I tell you of a truth, There are some
of them that stand here, who shall in no wise taste of death, till they
see the kingdom of God.

<span id="an_9:28">9:28</span> And it came to pass about eight days
after these sayings, that he took with him Peter and John and James, and
went up into the mountain to pray.

<span id="an_9:29">9:29</span> And as he was praying, the fashion of his
countenance was altered, and his raiment \[became\] white \[and\]
dazzling.

<span id="an_9:30">9:30</span> And behold, there talked with him two
men, who were Moses and Elijah;

<span id="an_9:31">9:31</span> who appeared in glory, and spake of his
decease which he was about to accomplish at Jerusalem.

<span id="an_9:32">9:32</span> Now Peter and they that were with him
were heavy with sleep: but when they were fully awake, they saw his
glory, and the two men that stood with him.

<span id="an_9:33">9:33</span> And it came to pass, as they were parting
from him, Peter said unto Jesus, Master, it is good for us to be here:
and let us make three tabernacles; one for thee, and one for Moses, and
one for Elijah: not knowing what he said.

<span id="an_9:34">9:34</span> And while he said these things, there
came a cloud, and overshadowed them: and they feared as they entered
into the cloud.

<span id="an_9:35">9:35</span> And a voice came out of the cloud,
saying, This is my Son, my chosen: hear ye him.

<span id="an_9:36">9:36</span> And when the voice came, Jesus was found
alone. And they held their peace, and told no man in those days any of
the things which they had seen.

<span id="an_9:37">9:37</span> And it came to pass, on the next day,
when they were come down from the mountain, a great multitude met him.

<span id="an_9:38">9:38</span> And behold, a man from the multitude
cried, saying, Teacher, I beseech thee to look upon my son; for he is
mine only child:

<span id="an_9:39">9:39</span> and behold, a spirit taketh him, and he
suddenly crieth out; and it teareth him that he foameth, and it hardly
departeth from him, bruising him sorely.

<span id="an_9:40">9:40</span> And I besought thy disciples to cast it
out; and they could not.

<span id="an_9:41">9:41</span> And Jesus answered and said, O faithless
and perverse generation, how long shall I be with you, and bear with
you? bring hither thy son.

<span id="an_9:42">9:42</span> And as he was yet a coming, the demon
dashed him down, and tare \[him\] grievously. But Jesus rebuked the
unclean spirit, and healed the boy, and gave him back to his father.

<span id="an_9:43">9:43</span> And they were all astonished at the
majesty of God. But while all were marvelling at all the things which he
did, he said unto his disciples,

<span id="an_9:44">9:44</span> Let these words sink into your ears: for
the Son of man shall be delivered up into the hands of men.

<span id="an_9:45">9:45</span> But they understood not this saying, and
it was concealed from them, that they should not perceive it; and they
were afraid to ask him about this saying.

<span id="an_9:46">9:46</span> And there arose a reasoning among them,
which of them was the greatest.

<span id="an_9:47">9:47</span> But when Jesus saw the reasoning of their
heart, he took a little child, and set him by his side,

<span id="an_9:48">9:48</span> and said unto them, Whosoever shall
receive this little child in my name receiveth me: and whosoever shall
receive me receiveth him that sent me: for he that is least among you
all, the same is great.

<span id="an_9:49">9:49</span> And John answered and said, Master, we
saw one casting out demons in thy name; and we forbade him, because he
followeth not with us.

<span id="an_9:50">9:50</span> But Jesus said unto him, Forbid \[him\]
not: for he that is not against you is for you.

<span id="an_9:51">9:51</span> And it came to pass, when the days were
well-nigh come that he should be received up, he stedfastly set his face
to go to Jerusalem,

<span id="an_9:52">9:52</span> and sent messengers before his face: and
they went, and entered into a village of the Samaritans, to make ready
for him.

<span id="an_9:53">9:53</span> And they did not receive him, because his
face was \[as though he were\] going to Jerusalem.

<span id="an_9:54">9:54</span> And when his disciples James and John saw
\[this\], they said, Lord, wilt thou that we bid fire to come down from
heaven, and consume them?

<span id="an_9:55">9:55</span> But he turned, and rebuked them.

<span id="an_9:56">9:56</span> And they went to another village.

<span id="an_9:57">9:57</span> And as they went on the way, a certain
man said unto him, I will follow thee whithersoever thou goest.

<span id="an_9:58">9:58</span> And Jesus said unto him, The foxes have
holes, and the birds of the heaven \[have\] nests; but the Son of man
hath not where to lay his head.

<span id="an_9:59">9:59</span> And he said unto another, Follow me. But
he said, Lord, suffer me first to go and bury my father.

<span id="an_9:60">9:60</span> But he said unto him, Leave the dead to
bury their own dead; but go thou and publish abroad the kingdom of God.

<span id="an_9:61">9:61</span> And another also said, I will follow
thee, Lord; but first suffer me to bid farewell to them that are at my
house.

<span id="an_9:62">9:62</span> But Jesus said unto him, No man, having
put his hand to the plow, and looking back, is fit for the kingdom of
God.

<span id="an_10:1">10:1</span> Now after these things the Lord appointed
seventy others, and sent them two and two before his face into every
city and place, whither he himself was about to come.

<span id="an_10:2">10:2</span> And he said unto them, The harvest indeed
is plenteous, but the laborers are few: pray ye therefore the Lord of
the harvest, that he send forth laborers into his harvest.

<span id="an_10:3">10:3</span> Go your ways; behold, I send you forth as
lambs in the midst of wolves.

<span id="an_10:4">10:4</span> Carry no purse, no wallet, no shoes; and
salute no man on the way.

<span id="an_10:5">10:5</span> And into whatsoever house ye shall enter,
first say, Peace \[be\] to this house.

<span id="an_10:6">10:6</span> And if a son of peace be there, your
peace shall rest upon him: but if not, it shall turn to you again.

<span id="an_10:7">10:7</span> And in that same house remain, eating and
drinking such things as they give: for the laborer is worthy of his
hire. Go not from house to house.

<span id="an_10:8">10:8</span> And into whatsoever city ye enter, and
they receive you, eat such things as are set before you:

<span id="an_10:9">10:9</span> and heal the sick that are therein, and
say unto them, The kingdom of God is come nigh unto you.

<span id="an_10:10">10:10</span> But into whatsoever city ye shall
enter, and they receive you not, go out into the streets thereof and
say,

<span id="an_10:11">10:11</span> Even the dust from your city, that
cleaveth to our feet, we wipe off against you: nevertheless know this,
that the kingdom of God is come nigh.

<span id="an_10:12">10:12</span> I say unto you, it shall be more
tolerable in that day for Sodom, than for that city.

<span id="an_10:13">10:13</span> Woe unto thee, Chorazin! woe unto thee,
Bethsaida! for if the mighty works had been done in Tyre and Sidon,
which were done in you, they would have repented long ago, sitting in
sackcloth and ashes.

<span id="an_10:14">10:14</span> But it shall be more tolerable for Tyre
and Sidon in the judgment, than for you.

<span id="an_10:15">10:15</span> And thou, Capernaum, shalt thou be
exalted unto heaven? thou shalt be brought down unto Hades.

<span id="an_10:16">10:16</span> He that heareth you heareth me; and he
that rejecteth you rejecteth me; and he that rejecteth me rejecteth him
that sent me.

<span id="an_10:17">10:17</span> And the seventy returned with joy,
saying, Lord, even the demons are subject unto us in thy name.

<span id="an_10:18">10:18</span> And he said unto them, I beheld Satan
fallen as lightning from heaven.

<span id="an_10:19">10:19</span> Behold, I have given you authority to
tread upon serpents and scorpions, and over all the power of the enemy:
and nothing shall in any wise hurt you.

<span id="an_10:20">10:20</span> Nevertheless in this rejoice not, that
the spirits are subject unto you; but rejoice that your names are
written in heaven.

<span id="an_10:21">10:21</span> In that same hour he rejoiced in the
Holy Spirit, and said, I thank thee, O Father, Lord of heaven and earth,
that thou didst hide these things from the wise and understanding, and
didst reveal them unto babes: yea, Father; for so it was well-pleasing
in thy sight.

<span id="an_10:22">10:22</span> All things have been delivered unto me
of my Father: and no one knoweth who the Son is, save the Father; and
who the Father is, save the Son, and he to whomsoever the Son willeth to
reveal \[him\].

<span id="an_10:23">10:23</span> And turning to the disciples, he said
privately, Blessed \[are\] the eyes which see the things that ye see:

<span id="an_10:24">10:24</span> for I say unto you, that many prophets
and kings desired to see the things which ye see, and saw them not; and
to hear the things which ye hear, and heard them not.

<span id="an_10:25">10:25</span> And behold, a certain lawyer stood up
and made trial of him, saying, Teacher, what shall I do to inherit
eternal life?

<span id="an_10:26">10:26</span> And he said unto him, What is written
in the law? how readest thou?

<span id="an_10:27">10:27</span> And he answering said, Thou shalt love
the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all
thy strength, and with all thy mind; and thy neighbor as thyself.

<span id="an_10:28">10:28</span> And he said unto him, Thou hast
answered right: this do, and thou shalt live.

<span id="an_10:29">10:29</span> But he, desiring to justify himself,
said unto Jesus, And who is my neighbor?

<span id="an_10:30">10:30</span> Jesus made answer and said, A certain
man was going down from Jerusalem to Jericho; and he fell among robbers,
who both stripped him and beat him, and departed, leaving him half dead.

<span id="an_10:31">10:31</span> And by chance a certain priest was
going down that way: and when he saw him, he passed by on the other
side.

<span id="an_10:32">10:32</span> And in like manner a Levite also, when
he came to the place, and saw him, passed by on the other side.

<span id="an_10:33">10:33</span> But a certain Samaritan, as he
journeyed, came where he was: and when he saw him, he was moved with
compassion,

<span id="an_10:34">10:34</span> and came to him, and bound up his
wounds, pouring on \[them\] oil and wine; and he set him on his own
beast, and brought him to an inn, and took care of him.

<span id="an_10:35">10:35</span> And on the morrow he took out two
shillings, and gave them to the host, and said, Take care of him; and
whatsoever thou spendest more, I, when I come back again, will repay
thee.

<span id="an_10:36">10:36</span> Which of these three, thinkest thou,
proved neighbor unto him that fell among the robbers?

<span id="an_10:37">10:37</span> And he said, He that showed mercy on
him. And Jesus said unto him, Go, and do thou likewise.

<span id="an_10:38">10:38</span> Now as they went on their way, he
entered into a certain village: and a certain woman named Martha
received him into her house.

<span id="an_10:39">10:39</span> And she had a sister called Mary, who
also sat at the Lord's feet, and heard his word.

<span id="an_10:40">10:40</span> But Martha was cumbered about much
serving; and she came up to him, and said, Lord, dost thou not care that
my sister did leave me to serve alone? bid her therefore that she help
me.

<span id="an_10:41">10:41</span> But the Lord answered and said unto
her, Martha, Martha, thou art anxious and troubled about many things:

<span id="an_10:42">10:42</span> but one thing is needful: for Mary hath
chosen the good part, which shall not be taken away from her.

<span id="an_11:1">11:1</span> And it came to pass, as he was praying in
a certain place, that when he ceased, one of his disciples said unto
him, Lord, teach us to pray, even as John also taught his disciples.

<span id="an_11:2">11:2</span> And he said unto them, When ye pray, say,
Father, Hallowed be thy name. Thy kingdom come.

<span id="an_11:3">11:3</span> Give us day by day our daily bread.

<span id="an_11:4">11:4</span> And forgive us our sins; for we ourselves
also forgive every one that is indebted to us. And bring us not into
temptation.

<span id="an_11:5">11:5</span> And he said unto them, Which of you shall
have a friend, and shall go unto him at midnight, and say to him,
Friend, lend me three loaves;

<span id="an_11:6">11:6</span> for a friend of mine is come to me from a
journey, and I have nothing to set before him;

<span id="an_11:7">11:7</span> and he from within shall answer and say,
Trouble me not: the door is now shut, and my children are with me in
bed; I cannot rise and give thee?

<span id="an_11:8">11:8</span> I say unto you, Though he will not rise
and give him because he is his friend, yet because of his importunity he
will arise and give him as many as he needeth.

<span id="an_11:9">11:9</span> And I say unto you, Ask, and it shall be
given you; seek, and ye shall find; knock, and it shall be opened unto
you.

<span id="an_11:10">11:10</span> For every one that asketh receiveth;
and he that seeketh findeth; and to him that knocketh it shall be
opened.

<span id="an_11:11">11:11</span> And of which of you that is a father
shall his son ask a loaf, and he give him a stone? or a fish, and he for
a fish give him a serpent?

<span id="an_11:12">11:12</span> Or \[if\] he shall ask an egg, will he
give him a scorpion?

<span id="an_11:13">11:13</span> If ye then, being evil, know how to
give good gifts unto your children, how much more shall \[your\]
heavenly Father give the Holy Spirit to them that ask him?

<span id="an_11:14">11:14</span> And he was casting out a demon \[that
was\] dumb. And it came to pass, when the demon was gone out, the dumb
man spake; and the multitudes marvelled.

<span id="an_11:15">11:15</span> But some of them said, By Beelzebub the
prince of the demons casteth he out demons.

<span id="an_11:16">11:16</span> And others, trying \[him\], sought of
him a sign from heaven.

<span id="an_11:17">11:17</span> But he, knowing their thoughts, said
unto them, Every kingdom divided against itself is brought to
desolation; and a house \[divided\] against a house falleth.

<span id="an_11:18">11:18</span> And if Satan also is divided against
himself, how shall his kingdom stand? because ye say that I cast out
demons by Beelzebub.

<span id="an_11:19">11:19</span> And if I by Beelzebub cast out demons,
by whom do your sons cast them out? therefore shall they be your judges.

<span id="an_11:20">11:20</span> But if I by the finger of God cast out
demons, then is the kingdom of God come upon you.

<span id="an_11:21">11:21</span> When the strong \[man\] fully armed
guardeth his own court, his goods are in peace:

<span id="an_11:22">11:22</span> but when a stronger than he shall come
upon him, and overcome him, he taketh from him his whole armor wherein
he trusted, and divideth his spoils.

<span id="an_11:23">11:23</span> He that is not with me is against me;
and he that gathereth not with me scattereth.

<span id="an_11:24">11:24</span> The unclean spirit when he is gone out
of the man, passeth through waterless places, seeking rest, and finding
none, he saith, I will turn back unto my house whence I came out.

<span id="an_11:25">11:25</span> And when he is come, he findeth it
swept and garnished.

<span id="an_11:26">11:26</span> Then goeth he, and taketh \[to him\]
seven other spirits more evil than himself; and they enter in and dwell
there: and the last state of that man becometh worse than the first.

<span id="an_11:27">11:27</span> And it came to pass, as he said these
things, a certain woman out of the multitude lifted up her voice, and
said unto him, Blessed is the womb that bare thee, and the breasts which
thou didst suck.

<span id="an_11:28">11:28</span> But he said, Yea rather, blessed are
they that hear the word of God, and keep it.

<span id="an_11:29">11:29</span> And when the multitudes were gathering
together unto him, he began to say, This generation is an evil
generation: it seeketh after a sign; and there shall no sign be given to
it but the sign of Jonah.

<span id="an_11:30">11:30</span> For even as Jonah became a sign unto
the Ninevites, so shall also the Son of man be to this generation.

<span id="an_11:31">11:31</span> The queen of the south shall rise up in
the judgment with the men of this generation, and shall condemn them:
for she came from the ends of the earth to hear the wisdom of Solomon;
and behold, a greater than Solomon is here.

<span id="an_11:32">11:32</span> The men of Nineveh shall stand up in
the judgment with this generation, and shall condemn it: for they
repented at the preaching of Jonah; and behold, a greater than Jonah is
here.

<span id="an_11:33">11:33</span> No man, when he hath lighted a lamp,
putteth it in a cellar, neither under the bushel, but on the stand, that
they which enter in may see the light.

<span id="an_11:34">11:34</span> The lamp of thy body is thine eye: when
thine eye is single, thy whole body also is full of light; but when it
is evil, thy body also is full of darkness.

<span id="an_11:35">11:35</span> Look therefore whether the light that
is in thee be not darkness.

<span id="an_11:36">11:36</span> If therefore thy whole body be full of
light, having no part dark, it shall be wholly full of light, as when
the lamp with its bright shining doth give thee light.

<span id="an_11:37">11:37</span> Now as he spake, a Pharisee asketh him
to dine with him: and he went in, and sat down to meat.

<span id="an_11:38">11:38</span> And when the Pharisee saw it, he
marvelled that he had not first bathed himself before dinner.

<span id="an_11:39">11:39</span> And the Lord said unto him, Now ye the
Pharisees cleanse the outside of the cup and of the platter; but your
inward part is full of extortion and wickedness.

<span id="an_11:40">11:40</span> Ye foolish ones, did not he that made
the outside make the inside also?

<span id="an_11:41">11:41</span> But give for alms those things which
are within; and behold, all things are clean unto you.

<span id="an_11:42">11:42</span> But woe unto you Pharisees! for ye
tithe mint and rue and every herb, and pass over justice and the love of
God: but these ought ye to have done, and not to leave the other undone.

<span id="an_11:43">11:43</span> Woe unto you Pharisees! for ye love the
chief seats in the synagogues, and the salutations in the marketplaces.

<span id="an_11:44">11:44</span> Woe unto you! for ye are as the tombs
which appear not, and the men that walk over \[them\] know it not.

<span id="an_11:45">11:45</span> And one of the lawyers answering saith
unto him, Teacher, in saying this thou reproachest us also.

<span id="an_11:46">11:46</span> And he said, Woe unto you lawyers also!
for ye load men with burdens grievous to be borne, and ye yourselves
touch not the burdens with one of your fingers.

<span id="an_11:47">11:47</span> Woe unto you! for ye build the tombs of
the prophets, and your fathers killed them.

<span id="an_11:48">11:48</span> So ye are witnesses and consent unto
the works of your fathers: for they killed them, and ye build \[their
tombs\].

<span id="an_11:49">11:49</span> Therefore also said the wisdom of God,
I will send unto them prophets and apostles; and \[some\] of them they
shall kill and persecute;

<span id="an_11:50">11:50</span> that the blood of all the prophets,
which was shed from the foundation of the world, may be required of this
generation;

<span id="an_11:51">11:51</span> from the blood of Abel unto the blood
of Zachariah, who perished between the altar and the sanctuary: yea, I
say unto you, it shall be required of this generation.

<span id="an_11:52">11:52</span> Woe unto you lawyers! for ye took away
the key of knowledge: ye entered not in yourselves, and them that were
entering in ye hindered.

<span id="an_11:53">11:53</span> And when he was come out from thence,
the scribes and the Pharisees began to press upon \[him\] vehemently,
and to provoke him to speak of many things;

<span id="an_11:54">11:54</span> laying wait for him, to catch something
out of his mouth.

<span id="an_12:1">12:1</span> In the mean time, when the many thousands
of the multitude were gathered together, insomuch that they trod one
upon another, he began to say unto his disciples first of all, Beware ye
of the leaven of the Pharisees, which is hypocrisy.

<span id="an_12:2">12:2</span> But there is nothing covered up, that
shall not be revealed; and hid, that shall not be known.

<span id="an_12:3">12:3</span> Wherefore whatsoever ye have said in the
darkness shall be heard in the light; and what ye have spoken in the ear
in the inner chambers shall be proclaimed upon the housetops.

<span id="an_12:4">12:4</span> And I say unto you my friends, Be not
afraid of them that kill the body, and after that have no more that they
can do.

<span id="an_12:5">12:5</span> But I will warn you whom ye shall fear:
Fear him, who after he hath killed hath power to cast into hell; yea, I
say unto you, Fear him.

<span id="an_12:6">12:6</span> Are not five sparrows sold for two pence?
and not one of them is forgotten in the sight of God.

<span id="an_12:7">12:7</span> But the very hairs of your head are all
numbered. Fear not: ye are of more value than many sparrows.

<span id="an_12:8">12:8</span> And I say unto you, Every one who shall
confess me before men, him shall the Son of man also confess before the
angels of God:

<span id="an_12:9">12:9</span> but he that denieth me in the presence of
men shall be denied in the presence of the angels of God.

<span id="an_12:10">12:10</span> And every one who shall speak a word
against the Son of man, it shall be forgiven him: but unto him that
blasphemeth against the Holy Spirit it shall not be forgiven.

<span id="an_12:11">12:11</span> And when they bring you before the
synagogues, and the rulers, and the authorities, be not anxious how or
what ye shall answer, or what ye shall say:

<span id="an_12:12">12:12</span> for the Holy Spirit shall teach you in
that very hour what ye ought to say.

<span id="an_12:13">12:13</span> And one out of the multitude said unto
him, Teacher, bid my brother divide the inheritance with me.

<span id="an_12:14">12:14</span> But he said unto him, Man, who made me
a judge or a divider over you?

<span id="an_12:15">12:15</span> And he said unto them, Take heed, and
keep yourselves from all covetousness: for a man's life consisteth not
in the abundance of the things which he possesseth.

<span id="an_12:16">12:16</span> And he spake a parable unto them,
saying, The ground of a certain rich man brought forth plentifully:

<span id="an_12:17">12:17</span> and he reasoned within himself, saying,
What shall I do, because I have not where to bestow my fruits?

<span id="an_12:18">12:18</span> And he said, This will I do: I will
pull down my barns, and build greater; and there will I bestow all my
grain and my goods.

<span id="an_12:19">12:19</span> And I will say to my soul, Soul, thou
hast much goods laid up for many years; take thine ease, eat, drink, be
merry.

<span id="an_12:20">12:20</span> But God said unto him, Thou foolish
one, this night is thy soul required of thee; and the things which thou
hast prepared, whose shall they be?

<span id="an_12:21">12:21</span> So is he that layeth up treasure for
himself, and is not rich toward God.

<span id="an_12:22">12:22</span> And he said unto his disciples,
Therefore I say unto you, Be not anxious for \[your\] life, what ye
shall eat; nor yet for your body, what ye shall put on.

<span id="an_12:23">12:23</span> For the life is more than the food, and
the body than the raiment.

<span id="an_12:24">12:24</span> Consider the ravens, that they sow not,
neither reap; which have no store-chamber nor barn; and God feedeth
them: of how much more value are ye than the birds!

<span id="an_12:25">12:25</span> And which of you by being anxious can
add a cubit unto the measure of his life?

<span id="an_12:26">12:26</span> If then ye are not able to do even that
which is least, why are ye anxious concerning the rest?

<span id="an_12:27">12:27</span> Consider the lilies, how they grow:
they toil not, neither do they spin; yet I say unto you, Even Solomon in
all his glory was not arrayed like one of these.

<span id="an_12:28">12:28</span> But if God doth so clothe the grass in
the field, which to-day is, and to-morrow is cast into the oven; how
much more \[shall he clothe\] you, O ye of little faith?

<span id="an_12:29">12:29</span> And seek not ye what ye shall eat, and
what ye shall drink, neither be ye of doubtful mind.

<span id="an_12:30">12:30</span> For all these things do the nations of
the world seek after: but your Father knoweth that ye have need of these
things.

<span id="an_12:31">12:31</span> Yet seek ye his kingdom, and these
things shall be added unto you.

<span id="an_12:32">12:32</span> Fear not, little flock; for it is your
Father's good pleasure to give you the kingdom.

<span id="an_12:33">12:33</span> Sell that which ye have, and give alms;
make for yourselves purses which wax not old, a treasure in the heavens
that faileth not, where no thief draweth near, neither moth destroyeth.

<span id="an_12:34">12:34</span> For where your treasure is, there will
your heart be also.

<span id="an_12:35">12:35</span> Let your loins be girded about, and
your lamps burning;

<span id="an_12:36">12:36</span> and be ye yourselves like unto men
looking for their lord, when he shall return from the marriage feast;
that, when he cometh and knocketh, they may straightway open unto him.

<span id="an_12:37">12:37</span> Blessed are those servants, whom the
lord when he cometh shall find watching: verily I say unto you, that he
shall gird himself, and make them sit down to meat, and shall come and
serve them.

<span id="an_12:38">12:38</span> And if he shall come in the second
watch, and if in the third, and find \[them\] so blessed are those
\[servants\].

<span id="an_12:39">12:39</span> But know this, that if the master of
the house had known in what hour the thief was coming, he would have
watched, and not have left his house to be broken through.

<span id="an_12:40">12:40</span> Be ye also ready: for in an hour that
ye think not the Son of man cometh.

<span id="an_12:41">12:41</span> And Peter said, Lord, speakest thou
this parable unto us, or even unto all?

<span id="an_12:42">12:42</span> And the Lord said, Who then is the
faithful and wise steward, whom his lord shall set over his household,
to give them their portion of food in due season?

<span id="an_12:43">12:43</span> Blessed is that servant, whom his lord
when he cometh shall find so doing.

<span id="an_12:44">12:44</span> Of a truth I say unto you, that he will
set him over all that he hath.

<span id="an_12:45">12:45</span> But if that servant shall say in his
heart, My lord delayeth his coming; and shall begin to beat the
menservants and the maidservants, and to eat and drink, and to be
drunken;

<span id="an_12:46">12:46</span> the lord of that servant shall come in
a day when he expecteth not, and in an hour when he knoweth not, and
shall cut him asunder, and appoint his portion with the unfaithful.

<span id="an_12:47">12:47</span> And that servant, who knew his lord's
will, and made not ready, nor did according to his will, shall be beaten
with many \[stripes\];

<span id="an_12:48">12:48</span> but he that knew not, and did things
worthy of stripes, shall be beaten with few \[stripes\]. And to
whomsoever much is given, of him shall much be required: and to whom
they commit much, of him will they ask the more.

<span id="an_12:49">12:49</span> I came to cast fire upon the earth; and
what do I desire, if it is already kindled?

<span id="an_12:50">12:50</span> But I have a baptism to be baptized
with; and how am I straitened till it be accomplished!

<span id="an_12:51">12:51</span> Think ye that I am come to give peace
in the earth? I tell you, Nay; but rather division:

<span id="an_12:52">12:52</span> for there shall be from henceforth five
in one house divided, three against two, and two against three.

<span id="an_12:53">12:53</span> They shall be divided, father against
son, and son against father; mother against daughter, and daughter
against her mother; mother in law against her daughter in law, and
daughter in law against her mother in law.

<span id="an_12:54">12:54</span> And he said to the multitudes also,
When ye see a cloud rising in the west, straightway ye say, There cometh
a shower; and so it cometh to pass.

<span id="an_12:55">12:55</span> And when \[ye see\] a south wind
blowing, ye say, There will be a scorching heat; and it cometh to pass.

<span id="an_12:56">12:56</span> Ye hypocrites, ye know how to interpret
the face of the earth and the heaven; but how is it that ye know not how
to interpret this time?

<span id="an_12:57">12:57</span> And why even of yourselves judge ye not
what is right?

<span id="an_12:58">12:58</span> For as thou art going with thine
adversary before the magistrate, on the way give diligence to be quit of
him; lest haply he drag thee unto the judge, and the judge shall deliver
thee to the officer, and the officer shall cast thee into prison.

<span id="an_12:59">12:59</span> I say unto thee, Thou shalt by no means
come out thence, till thou have paid the very last mite.

<span id="an_13:1">13:1</span> Now there were some present at that very
season who told him of the Galilaeans, whose blood Pilate had mingled
with their sacrifices.

<span id="an_13:2">13:2</span> And he answered and said unto them, Think
ye that these Galilaeans were sinners above all the Galilaeans, because
they have suffered these things?

<span id="an_13:3">13:3</span> I tell you, Nay: but, except ye repent,
ye shall all in like manner perish.

<span id="an_13:4">13:4</span> Or those eighteen, upon whom the tower in
Siloam fell, and killed them, think ye that they were offenders above
all the men that dwell in Jerusalem?

<span id="an_13:5">13:5</span> I tell you, Nay: but, except ye repent,
ye shall all likewise perish.

<span id="an_13:6">13:6</span> And he spake this parable; A certain man
had a fig tree planted in his vineyard; and he came seeking fruit
thereon, and found none.

<span id="an_13:7">13:7</span> And he said unto the vinedresser, Behold,
these three years I come seeking fruit on this fig tree, and find none:
cut it down; why doth it also cumber the ground?

<span id="an_13:8">13:8</span> And he answering saith unto him, Lord,
let it alone this year also, till I shall dig about it, and dung it:

<span id="an_13:9">13:9</span> and if it bear fruit thenceforth,
\[well\]; but if not, thou shalt cut it down.

<span id="an_13:10">13:10</span> And he was teaching in one of the
synagogues on the sabbath day.

<span id="an_13:11">13:11</span> And behold, a woman that had a spirit
of infirmity eighteen years; and she was bowed together, and could in no
wise lift herself up.

<span id="an_13:12">13:12</span> And when Jesus saw her, he called her,
and said to her, Woman, thou art loosed from thine infirmity.

<span id="an_13:13">13:13</span> And he laid his hands upon her: and
immediately she was made straight, and glorified God.

<span id="an_13:14">13:14</span> And the ruler of the synagogue, being
moved with indignation because Jesus had healed on the sabbath, answered
and said to the multitude, There are six days in which men ought to
work: in them therefore come and be healed, and not on the day of the
sabbath.

<span id="an_13:15">13:15</span> But the Lord answered him, and said, Ye
hypocrites, doth not each one of you on the sabbath loose his ox or his
ass from the stall, and lead him away to watering?

<span id="an_13:16">13:16</span> And ought not this woman, being a
daughter of Abraham, whom Satan had bound, lo, \[these\] eighteen years,
to have been loosed from this bond on the day of the sabbath?

<span id="an_13:17">13:17</span> And as he said these things, all his
adversaries were put to shame: and all the multitude rejoiced for all
the glorious things that were done by him.

<span id="an_13:18">13:18</span> He said therefore, Unto what is the
kingdom of God like? and whereunto shall I liken it?

<span id="an_13:19">13:19</span> It is like unto a grain of mustard
seed, which a man took, and cast into his own garden; and it grew, and
became a tree; and the birds of the heaven lodged in the branches
thereof.

<span id="an_13:20">13:20</span> And again he said, Whereunto shall I
liken the kingdom of God?

<span id="an_13:21">13:21</span> It is like unto leaven, which a woman
took and hid in three measures of meal, till it was all leavened.

<span id="an_13:22">13:22</span> And he went on his way through cities
and villages, teaching, and journeying on unto Jerusalem.

<span id="an_13:23">13:23</span> And one said unto him, Lord, are they
few that are saved? And he said unto them,

<span id="an_13:24">13:24</span> Strive to enter in by the narrow door:
for many, I say unto you, shall seek to enter in, and shall not be able.

<span id="an_13:25">13:25</span> When once the master of the house is
risen up, and hath shut to the door, and ye begin to stand without, and
to knock at the door, saying, Lord, open to us; and he shall answer and
say to you, I know you not whence ye are;

<span id="an_13:26">13:26</span> then shall ye begin to say, We did eat
and drink in thy presence, and thou didst teach in our streets;

<span id="an_13:27">13:27</span> and he shall say, I tell you, I know
not whence ye are; depart from me, all ye workers of iniquity.

<span id="an_13:28">13:28</span> There shall be the weeping and the
gnashing of teeth, when ye shall see Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob, and
all the prophets, in the kingdom of God, and yourselves cast forth
without.

<span id="an_13:29">13:29</span> And they shall come from the east and
west, and from the north and south, and shall sit down in the kingdom of
God.

<span id="an_13:30">13:30</span> And behold, there are last who shall be
first, and there are first who shall be last.

<span id="an_13:31">13:31</span> In that very hour there came certain
Pharisees, saying to him, Get thee out, and go hence: for Herod would
fain kill thee.

<span id="an_13:32">13:32</span> And he said unto them, Go and say to
that fox, Behold, I cast out demons and perform cures to-day and
to-morrow, and the third \[day\] I am perfected.

<span id="an_13:33">13:33</span> Nevertheless I must go on my way to-day
and to-morrow and the \[day\] following: for it cannot be that a prophet
perish out of Jerusalem.

<span id="an_13:34">13:34</span> O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, that killeth
the prophets, and stoneth them that are sent unto her! how often would I
have gathered thy children together, even as a hen \[gathereth\] her own
brood under her wings, and ye would not!

<span id="an_13:35">13:35</span> Behold, your house is left unto you
\[desolate\]: and I say unto you, Ye shall not see me, until ye shall
say, Blessed is he that cometh in the name of the Lord.

<span id="an_14:1">14:1</span> And it came to pass, when he went into
the house of one of the rulers of the Pharisees on a sabbath to eat
bread, that they were watching him.

<span id="an_14:2">14:2</span> And behold, there was before him a
certain man that had the dropsy.

<span id="an_14:3">14:3</span> And Jesus answering spake unto the
lawyers and Pharisees, saying, Is it lawful to heal on the sabbath, or
not?

<span id="an_14:4">14:4</span> But they held their peace. And he took
him, and healed him, and let him go.

<span id="an_14:5">14:5</span> And he said unto them, Which of you shall
have an ass or an ox fallen into a well, and will not straightway draw
him up on a sabbath day?

<span id="an_14:6">14:6</span> And they could not answer again unto
these things.

<span id="an_14:7">14:7</span> And he spake a parable unto those that
were bidden, when he marked how they chose out the chief seats; saying
unto them,

<span id="an_14:8">14:8</span> When thou art bidden of any man to a
marriage feast, sit not down in the chief seat; lest haply a more
honorable man than thou be bidden of him,

<span id="an_14:9">14:9</span> and he that bade thee and him shall come
and say to thee, Give this man place; and then thou shalt begin with
shame to take the lowest place.

<span id="an_14:10">14:10</span> But when thou art bidden, go and sit
down in the lowest place; that when he that hath bidden thee cometh, he
may say to thee, Friend, go up higher: then shalt thou have glory in the
presence of all that sit at meat with thee.

<span id="an_14:11">14:11</span> For everyone that exalteth himself
shall be humbled; and he that humbleth himself shall be exalted.

<span id="an_14:12">14:12</span> And he said to him also that had bidden
him, When thou makest a dinner or a supper, call not thy friends, nor
thy brethren, nor thy kinsmen, nor rich neighbors; lest haply they also
bid thee again, and a recompense be made thee.

<span id="an_14:13">14:13</span> But when thou makest a feast, bid the
poor, the maimed, the lame, the blind:

<span id="an_14:14">14:14</span> and thou shalt be blessed; because they
have not \[wherewith\] to recompense thee: for thou shalt be recompensed
in the resurrection of the just.

<span id="an_14:15">14:15</span> And when one of them that sat at meat
with him heard these things, he said unto him, Blessed is he that shall
eat bread in the kingdom of God.

<span id="an_14:16">14:16</span> But he said unto him, A certain man
made a great supper; and he bade many:

<span id="an_14:17">14:17</span> and he sent forth his servant at supper
time to say to them that were bidden, Come; for \[all\] things are now
ready.

<span id="an_14:18">14:18</span> And they all with one \[consent\] began
to make excuse. The first said unto him, I have bought a field, and I
must needs go out and see it; I pray thee have me excused.

<span id="an_14:19">14:19</span> And another said, I have bought five
yoke of oxen, and I go to prove them; I pray thee have me excused.

<span id="an_14:20">14:20</span> And another said, I have married a
wife, and therefore I cannot come.

<span id="an_14:21">14:21</span> And the servant came, and told his lord
these things. Then the master of the house being angry said to his
servant, Go out quickly into the streets and lanes of the city, and
bring in hither the poor and maimed and blind and lame.

<span id="an_14:22">14:22</span> And the servant said, Lord, what thou
didst command is done, and yet there is room.

<span id="an_14:23">14:23</span> And the lord said unto the servant, Go
out into the highways and hedges, and constrain \[them\] to come in,
that my house may be filled.

<span id="an_14:24">14:24</span> For I say unto you, that none of those
men that were bidden shall taste of my supper.

<span id="an_14:25">14:25</span> Now there went with him great
multitudes: and he turned, and said unto them,

<span id="an_14:26">14:26</span> If any man cometh unto me, and hateth
not his own father, and mother, and wife, and children, and brethren,
and sisters, yea, and his own life also, he cannot be my disciple.

<span id="an_14:27">14:27</span> Whosoever doth not bear his own cross,
and come after me, cannot be my disciple.

<span id="an_14:28">14:28</span> For which of you, desiring to build a
tower, doth not first sit down and count the cost, whether he have
\[wherewith\] to complete it?

<span id="an_14:29">14:29</span> Lest haply, when he hath laid a
foundation, and is not able to finish, all that behold begin to mock
him,

<span id="an_14:30">14:30</span> saying, This man began to build, and
was not able to finish.

<span id="an_14:31">14:31</span> Or what king, as he goeth to encounter
another king in war, will not sit down first and take counsel whether he
is able with ten thousand to meet him that cometh against him with
twenty thousand?

<span id="an_14:32">14:32</span> Or else, while the other is yet a great
way off, he sendeth an ambassage, and asketh conditions of peace.

<span id="an_14:33">14:33</span> So therefore whosoever he be of you
that renounceth not all that he hath, he cannot be my disciple.

<span id="an_14:34">14:34</span> Salt therefore is good: but if even the
salt have lost its savor, wherewith shall it be seasoned?

<span id="an_14:35">14:35</span> It is fit neither for the land nor for
the dunghill: \[men\] cast it out. He that hath ears to hear, let him
hear.

<span id="an_15:1">15:1</span> Now all the publicans and sinners were
drawing near unto him to hear him.

<span id="an_15:2">15:2</span> And both the Pharisees and the scribes
murmured, saying, This man receiveth sinners, and eateth with them.

<span id="an_15:3">15:3</span> And he spake unto them this parable,
saying,

<span id="an_15:4">15:4</span> What man of you, having a hundred sheep,
and having lost one of them, doth not leave the ninety and nine in the
wilderness, and go after that which is lost, until he find it?

<span id="an_15:5">15:5</span> And when he hath found it, he layeth it
on his shoulders, rejoicing.

<span id="an_15:6">15:6</span> And when he cometh home, he calleth
together his friends and his neighbors, saying unto them, Rejoice with
me, for I have found my sheep which was lost.

<span id="an_15:7">15:7</span> I say unto you, that even so there shall
be joy in heaven over one sinner that repenteth, \[more\] than over
ninety and nine righteous persons, who need no repentance.

<span id="an_15:8">15:8</span> Or what woman having ten pieces of
silver, if she lose one piece, doth not light a lamp, and sweep the
house, and seek diligently until she find it?

<span id="an_15:9">15:9</span> And when she hath found it, she calleth
together her friends and neighbors, saying, Rejoice with me, for I have
found the piece which I had lost.

<span id="an_15:10">15:10</span> Even so, I say unto you, there is joy
in the presence of the angels of God over one sinner that repenteth.

<span id="an_15:11">15:11</span> And he said, A certain man had two
sons:

<span id="an_15:12">15:12</span> and the younger of them said to his
father, Father, give me the portion of \[thy\] substance that falleth to
me. And he divided unto them his living.

<span id="an_15:13">15:13</span> And not many days after, the younger
son gathered all together and took his journey into a far country; and
there he wasted his substance with riotous living.

<span id="an_15:14">15:14</span> And when he had spent all, there arose
a mighty famine in that country; and he began to be in want.

<span id="an_15:15">15:15</span> And he went and joined himself to one
of the citizens of that country; and he sent him into his fields to feed
swine.

<span id="an_15:16">15:16</span> And he would fain have filled his belly
with the husks that the swine did eat: and no man gave unto him.

<span id="an_15:17">15:17</span> But when he came to himself he said,
How many hired servants of my father's have bread enough and to spare,
and I perish here with hunger!

<span id="an_15:18">15:18</span> I will arise and go to my father, and
will say unto him, Father, I have sinned against heaven, and in thy
sight:

<span id="an_15:19">15:19</span> I am no more worthy to be called your
son: make me as one of thy hired servants.

<span id="an_15:20">15:20</span> And he arose, and came to his father.
But while he was yet afar off, his father saw him, and was moved with
compassion, and ran, and fell on his neck, and kissed him.

<span id="an_15:21">15:21</span> And the son said unto him, Father, I
have sinned against heaven, and in thy sight: I am no more worthy to be
called thy son.

<span id="an_15:22">15:22</span> But the father said to his servants,
Bring forth quickly the best robe, and put it on him; and put a ring on
his hand, and shoes on his feet:

<span id="an_15:23">15:23</span> and bring the fatted calf, \[and\] kill
it, and let us eat, and make merry:

<span id="an_15:24">15:24</span> for this my son was dead, and is alive
again; he was lost, and is found. And they began to be merry.

<span id="an_15:25">15:25</span> Now his elder son was in the field: and
as he came and drew nigh to the house, he heard music and dancing.

<span id="an_15:26">15:26</span> And he called to him one of the
servants, and inquired what these things might be.

<span id="an_15:27">15:27</span> And he said unto him, Thy brother is
come; and thy father hath killed the fatted calf, because he hath
received him safe and sound.

<span id="an_15:28">15:28</span> But he was angry, and would not go in:
and his father came out, and entreated him.

<span id="an_15:29">15:29</span> But he answered and said to his father,
Lo, these many years do I serve thee, and I never transgressed a
commandment of thine; and \[yet\] thou never gavest me a kid, that I
might make merry with my friends:

<span id="an_15:30">15:30</span> but when this thy son came, who hath
devoured thy living with harlots, thou killedst for him the fatted calf.

<span id="an_15:31">15:31</span> And he said unto him, Son, thou art
ever with me, and all that is mine is thine.

<span id="an_15:32">15:32</span> But it was meet to make merry and be
glad: for this thy brother was dead, and is alive \[again\]; and \[was\]
lost, and is found.

<span id="an_16:1">16:1</span> And he said also unto the disciples,
There was a certain rich man, who had a steward; and the same was
accused unto him that he was wasting his goods.

<span id="an_16:2">16:2</span> And he called him, and said unto him,
What is this that I hear of thee? render the account of thy stewardship;
for thou canst be no longer steward.

<span id="an_16:3">16:3</span> And the steward said within himself, What
shall I do, seeing that my lord taketh away the stewardship from me? I
have not strength to dig; to beg I am ashamed.

<span id="an_16:4">16:4</span> I am resolved what to do, that, when I am
put out of the stewardship, they may receive me into their houses.

<span id="an_16:5">16:5</span> And calling to him each one of his lord's
debtors, he said to the first, How much owest thou unto my lord?

<span id="an_16:6">16:6</span> And he said, A hundred measures of oil.
And he said unto him, Take thy bond, and sit down quickly and write
fifty.

<span id="an_16:7">16:7</span> Then said he to another, And how much
owest thou? And he said, A hundred measures of wheat. He saith unto him,
Take thy bond, and write fourscore.

<span id="an_16:8">16:8</span> And his lord commended the unrighteous
steward because he had done wisely: for the sons of this world are for
their own generation wiser than the sons of the light.

<span id="an_16:9">16:9</span> And I say unto you, Make to yourselves
friends by means of the mammon of unrighteousness; that, when it shall
fail, they may receive you into the eternal tabernacles.

<span id="an_16:10">16:10</span> He that is faithful in a very little is
faithful also in much: and he that is unrighteous in a very little is
unrighteous also in much.

<span id="an_16:11">16:11</span> If therefore ye have not been faithful
in the unrighteous mammon, who will commit to your trust the true
\[riches\]?

<span id="an_16:12">16:12</span> And if ye have not been faithful in
that which is another's, who will give you that which is your own?

<span id="an_16:13">16:13</span> No servant can serve two masters: for
either he will hate the one, and love the other; or else he will hold to
one, and despise the other. Ye cannot serve God and mammon.

<span id="an_16:14">16:14</span> And the Pharisees, who were lovers of
money, heard all these things; and they scoffed at him.

<span id="an_16:15">16:15</span> And he said unto them, Ye are they that
justify yourselves in the sight of men; but God knoweth your hearts: for
that which is exalted among men is an abomination in the sight of God.

<span id="an_16:16">16:16</span> The law and the prophets \[were\] until
John: from that time the gospel of the kingdom of God is preached, and
every man entereth violently into it.

<span id="an_16:17">16:17</span> But it is easier for heaven and earth
to pass away, than for one tittle of the law to fall.

<span id="an_16:18">16:18</span> Every one that putteth away his wife,
and marrieth another, committeth adultery: and he that marrieth one that
is put away from a husband committeth adultery.

<span id="an_16:19">16:19</span> Now there was a certain rich man, and
he was clothed in purple and fine linen, faring sumptuously every day:

<span id="an_16:20">16:20</span> and a certain beggar named Lazarus was
laid at his gate, full of sores,

<span id="an_16:21">16:21</span> and desiring to be fed with the
\[crumbs\] that fell from the rich man's table; yea, even the dogs come
and licked his sores.

<span id="an_16:22">16:22</span> And it came to pass, that the beggar
died, and that he was carried away by the angels into Abraham's bosom:
and the rich man also died, and was buried.

<span id="an_16:23">16:23</span> And in Hades he lifted up his eyes,
being in torments, and seeth Abraham afar off, and Lazarus in his bosom.

<span id="an_16:24">16:24</span> And he cried and said, Father Abraham,
have mercy on me, and send Lazarus, that he may dip the tip of his
finger in water, and cool my tongue; for I am in anguish in this flame.

<span id="an_16:25">16:25</span> But Abraham said, Son, remember that
thou in thy lifetime receivedst thy good things, and Lazarus in like
manner evil things: but now here he is comforted and thou art in
anguish.

<span id="an_16:26">16:26</span> And besides all this, between us and
you there is a great gulf fixed, that they that would pass from hence to
you may not be able, and that none may cross over from thence to us.

<span id="an_16:27">16:27</span> And he said, I pray thee therefore,
father, that thou wouldest send him to my father's house;

<span id="an_16:28">16:28</span> for I have five brethren; that he may
testify unto them, lest they also come into this place of torment.

<span id="an_16:29">16:29</span> But Abraham saith, They have Moses and
the prophets; let them hear them.

<span id="an_16:30">16:30</span> And he said, Nay, father Abraham: but
if one go to them from the dead, they will repent.

<span id="an_16:31">16:31</span> And he said unto him, If they hear not
Moses and the prophets, neither will they be persuaded, if one rise from
the dead.

<span id="an_17:1">17:1</span> And he said unto his disciples, It is
impossible but that occasions of stumbling should come; but woe unto
him, through whom they come!

<span id="an_17:2">17:2</span> It were well for him if a millstone were
hanged about his neck, and he were thrown into the sea, rather than that
he should cause one of these little ones to stumble.

<span id="an_17:3">17:3</span> Take heed to yourselves: if thy brother
sin, rebuke him; and if he repent, forgive him.

<span id="an_17:4">17:4</span> And if he sin against thee seven times in
the day, and seven times turn again to thee, saying, I repent; thou
shalt forgive him.

<span id="an_17:5">17:5</span> And the apostles said unto the Lord,
Increase our faith.

<span id="an_17:6">17:6</span> And the Lord said, If ye had faith as a
grain of mustard seed, ye would say unto this sycamine tree, Be thou
rooted up, and be thou planted in the sea; and it would obey you.

<span id="an_17:7">17:7</span> But who is there of you, having a servant
plowing or keeping sheep, that will say unto him, when he is come in
from the field, Come straightway and sit down to meat;

<span id="an_17:8">17:8</span> and will not rather say unto him, Make
ready wherewith I may sup, and gird thyself, and serve me, till I have
eaten and drunken; and afterward thou shalt eat and drink?

<span id="an_17:9">17:9</span> Doth he thank the servant because he did
the things that were commanded?

<span id="an_17:10">17:10</span> Even so ye also, when ye shall have
done all the things that are commanded you, say, We are unprofitable
servants; we have done that which it was our duty to do.

<span id="an_17:11">17:11</span> And it came to pass, as they were on
their way to Jerusalem, that he was passing along the borders of Samaria
and Galilee.

<span id="an_17:12">17:12</span> And as he entered into a certain
village, there met him ten men that were lepers, who stood afar off:

<span id="an_17:13">17:13</span> and they lifted up their voices,
saying, Jesus, Master, have mercy on us.

<span id="an_17:14">17:14</span> And when he saw them, he said unto
them, Go and show yourselves unto the priests. And it came to pass, as
they went, they were cleansed.

<span id="an_17:15">17:15</span> And one of them, when he saw that he
was healed, turned back, with a loud voice glorifying God;

<span id="an_17:16">17:16</span> and he fell upon his face at his feet,
giving him thanks: and he was a Samaritan.

<span id="an_17:17">17:17</span> And Jesus answering said, Were not the
ten cleansed? but where are the nine?

<span id="an_17:18">17:18</span> Were there none found that returned to
give glory to God, save this stranger?

<span id="an_17:19">17:19</span> And he said unto him, Arise, and go thy
way: thy faith hath made thee whole.

<span id="an_17:20">17:20</span> And being asked by the Pharisees, when
the kingdom of God cometh, he answered them and said, The kingdom of God
cometh not with observation:

<span id="an_17:21">17:21</span> neither shall they say, Lo, here! or,
There! for lo, the kingdom of God is within you.

<span id="an_17:22">17:22</span> And he said unto the disciples, The
days will come, when ye shall desire to see one of the days of the Son
of man, and ye shall not see it.

<span id="an_17:23">17:23</span> And they shall say to you, Lo, there!
Lo, here! go not away, nor follow after \[them\]:

<span id="an_17:24">17:24</span> for as the lightning, when it
lighteneth out of the one part under the heaven, shineth unto the other
part under heaven; so shall the Son of man be in his day.

<span id="an_17:25">17:25</span> But first must he suffer many things
and be rejected of this generation.

<span id="an_17:26">17:26</span> And as it came to pass in the days of
Noah, even so shall it be also in the days of the Son of man.

<span id="an_17:27">17:27</span> They ate, they drank, they married,
they were given in marriage, until the day that Noah entered into the
ark, and the flood came, and destroyed them all.

<span id="an_17:28">17:28</span> Likewise even as it came to pass in the
days of Lot; they ate, they drank, they bought, they sold, they planted,
they builded;

<span id="an_17:29">17:29</span> but in the day that Lot went out from
Sodom it rained fire and brimstone from heaven, and destroyed them all:

<span id="an_17:30">17:30</span> after the same manner shall it be in
the day that the Son of man is revealed.

<span id="an_17:31">17:31</span> In that day, he that shall be on the
housetop, and his goods in the house, let him not go down to take them
away: and let him that is in the field likewise not return back.

<span id="an_17:32">17:32</span> Remember Lot's wife.

<span id="an_17:33">17:33</span> Whosoever shall seek to gain his life
shall lose it: but whosoever shall lose \[his life\] shall preserve it.

<span id="an_17:34">17:34</span> I say unto you, In that night there
shall be two men on one bed; the one shall be taken, and the other shall
be left.

<span id="an_17:35">17:35</span> There shall be two women grinding
together; the one shall be taken, and the other shall be left.

<span id="an_17:36">17:36</span> \[There shall be two men in the field;
the one shall be taken, and the other shall be left.\]

<span id="an_17:37">17:37</span> And they answering say unto him, Where,
Lord? And he said unto them, Where the body \[is\], thither will the
eagles also be gathered together.

<span id="an_18:1">18:1</span> And he spake a parable unto them to the
end that they ought always to pray, and not to faint;

<span id="an_18:2">18:2</span> saying, There was in a city a judge, who
feared not God, and regarded not man:

<span id="an_18:3">18:3</span> and there was a widow in that city; and
she came oft unto him, saying, Avenge me of mine adversary.

<span id="an_18:4">18:4</span> And he would not for a while: but
afterward he said within himself, Though I fear not God, nor regard man;

<span id="an_18:5">18:5</span> yet because this widow troubleth me, I
will avenge her, lest she wear me out by her continual coming.

<span id="an_18:6">18:6</span> And the Lord said, Hear what the
unrighteous judge saith.

<span id="an_18:7">18:7</span> And shall not God avenge his elect, that
cry to him day and night, and \[yet\] he is longsuffering over them?

<span id="an_18:8">18:8</span> I say unto you, that he will avenge them
speedily. Nevertheless, when the Son of man cometh, shall he find faith
on the earth?

<span id="an_18:9">18:9</span> And he spake also this parable unto
certain who trusted in themselves that they were righteous, and set all
others at nought:

<span id="an_18:10">18:10</span> Two men went up into the temple to
pray; the one a Pharisee, and the other a publican.

<span id="an_18:11">18:11</span> The Pharisee stood and prayed thus with
himself, God, I thank thee, that I am not as the rest of men,
extortioners, unjust, adulterers, or even as this publican.

<span id="an_18:12">18:12</span> I fast twice in the week; I give tithes
of all that I get.

<span id="an_18:13">18:13</span> But the publican, standing afar off,
would not lift up so much as his eyes unto heaven, but smote his breast,
saying, God, be thou merciful to me a sinner.

<span id="an_18:14">18:14</span> I say unto you, This man went down to
his house justified rather than the other: for every one that exalteth
himself shall be humbled; but he that humbleth himself shall be exalted.

<span id="an_18:15">18:15</span> And they were bringing unto him also
their babes, that he should touch them: but when the disciples saw it,
they rebuked them.

<span id="an_18:16">18:16</span> But Jesus called them unto him, saying,
Suffer the little children to come unto me, and forbid them not: for to
such belongeth the kingdom of God.

<span id="an_18:17">18:17</span> Verily I say unto you, Whosoever shall
not receive the kingdom of God as a little child, he shall in no wise
enter therein.

<span id="an_18:18">18:18</span> And a certain ruler asked him, saying,
Good Teacher, what shall I do to inherit eternal life?

<span id="an_18:19">18:19</span> And Jesus said unto him, Why callest
thou me good? none is good, save one, \[even\] God.

<span id="an_18:20">18:20</span> Thou knowest the commandments, Do not
commit adultery, Do not kill, Do not steal, Do not bear false witness,
Honor thy father and mother.

<span id="an_18:21">18:21</span> And he said, All these things have I
observed from my youth up.

<span id="an_18:22">18:22</span> And when Jesus heard it, he said unto
him, One thing thou lackest yet: sell all that thou hast, and distribute
unto the poor, and thou shalt have treasure in heaven: and come, follow
me.

<span id="an_18:23">18:23</span> But when he heard these things, he
became exceeding sorrowful; for he was very rich.

<span id="an_18:24">18:24</span> And Jesus seeing him said, How hardly
shall they that have riches enter into the kingdom of God!

<span id="an_18:25">18:25</span> For it is easier for a camel to enter
in through a needle's eye, than for a rich man to enter into the kingdom
of God.

<span id="an_18:26">18:26</span> And they that heard it said, Then who
can be saved?

<span id="an_18:27">18:27</span> But he said, The things which are
impossible with men are possible with God.

<span id="an_18:28">18:28</span> And Peter said, Lo, we have left our
own, and followed thee.

<span id="an_18:29">18:29</span> And he said unto them, Verily I say
unto you, There is no man that hath left house, or wife, or brethren, or
parents, or children, for the kingdom of God's sake,

<span id="an_18:30">18:30</span> who shall not receive manifold more in
this time, and in the world to come eternal life.

<span id="an_18:31">18:31</span> And he took unto him the twelve, and
said unto them, Behold, we go up to Jerusalem, and all the things that
are written through the prophets shall be accomplished unto the Son of
man.

<span id="an_18:32">18:32</span> For he shall be delivered up unto the
Gentiles, and shall be mocked, and shamefully treated, and spit upon:

<span id="an_18:33">18:33</span> and they shall scourge and kill him:
and the third day he shall rise again.

<span id="an_18:34">18:34</span> And they understood none of these
things; and this saying was hid from them, and they perceived not the
things that were said.

<span id="an_18:35">18:35</span> And it came to pass, as he drew nigh
unto Jericho, a certain blind man sat by the way side begging:

<span id="an_18:36">18:36</span> and hearing a multitude going by, he
inquired what this meant.

<span id="an_18:37">18:37</span> And they told him that Jesus of
Nazareth passeth by.

<span id="an_18:38">18:38</span> And he cried, saying, Jesus, thou son
of David, have mercy on me.

<span id="an_18:39">18:39</span> And they that went before rebuked him,
that he should hold his peace: but he cried out the more a great deal,
Thou son of David, have mercy on me.

<span id="an_18:40">18:40</span> And Jesus stood, and commanded him to
be brought unto him: and when he was come near, he asked him,

<span id="an_18:41">18:41</span> What wilt thou that I should do unto
thee? And he said, Lord, that I may receive my sight.

<span id="an_18:42">18:42</span> And Jesus said unto him, Receive thy
sight; thy faith hath made thee whole.

<span id="an_18:43">18:43</span> And immediately he received his sight,
and followed him, glorifying God: and all the people, when they saw it,
gave praise unto God.

<span id="an_19:1">19:1</span> And he entered and was passing through
Jericho.

<span id="an_19:2">19:2</span> And behold, a man called by name
Zacchaeus; and he was a chief publican, and he was rich.

<span id="an_19:3">19:3</span> And he sought to see Jesus who he was;
and could not for the crowd, because he was little of stature.

<span id="an_19:4">19:4</span> And he ran on before, and climbed up into
a sycomore tree to see him: for he was to pass that way.

<span id="an_19:5">19:5</span> And when Jesus came to the place, he
looked up, and said unto him, Zacchaeus, make haste, and come down; for
to-day I must abide at thy house.

<span id="an_19:6">19:6</span> And he made haste, and came down, and
received him joyfully.

<span id="an_19:7">19:7</span> And when they saw it, they all murmured,
saying, He is gone in to lodge with a man that is a sinner.

<span id="an_19:8">19:8</span> And Zacchaeus stood, and said unto the
Lord, Behold, Lord, the half of my goods I give to the poor; and if I
have wrongfully exacted aught of any man, I restore fourfold.

<span id="an_19:9">19:9</span> And Jesus said unto him, To-day is
salvation come to this house, forasmuch as he also is a son of Abraham.

<span id="an_19:10">19:10</span> For the Son of man came to seek and to
save that which was lost.

<span id="an_19:11">19:11</span> And as they heard these things, he
added and spake a parable, because he was nigh to Jerusalem, and
\[because\] they supposed that the kingdom of God was immediately to
appear.

<span id="an_19:12">19:12</span> He said therefore, A certain nobleman
went into a far country, to receive for himself a kingdom, and to
return.

<span id="an_19:13">19:13</span> And he called ten servants of his, and
gave them ten pounds, and said unto them, Trade ye \[herewith\] till I
come.

<span id="an_19:14">19:14</span> But his citizens hated him, and sent an
ambassage after him, saying, We will not that this man reign over us.

<span id="an_19:15">19:15</span> And it came to pass, when he was come
back again, having received the kingdom, that he commanded these
servants, unto whom he had given the money, to be called to him, that he
might know what they had gained by trading.

<span id="an_19:16">19:16</span> And the first came before him, saying,
Lord, thy pound hath made ten pounds more.

<span id="an_19:17">19:17</span> And he said unto him, Well done, thou
good servant: because thou wast found faithful in a very little, have
thou authority over ten cities.

<span id="an_19:18">19:18</span> And the second came, saying, Thy pound,
Lord, hath made five pounds.

<span id="an_19:19">19:19</span> And he said unto him also, Be thou also
over five cities.

<span id="an_19:20">19:20</span> And another came, saying, Lord, behold,
\[here is\] thy pound, which I kept laid up in a napkin:

<span id="an_19:21">19:21</span> for I feared thee, because thou art an
austere man: thou takest up that which thou layedst not down, and
reapest that which thou didst not sow.

<span id="an_19:22">19:22</span> He saith unto him, Out of thine own
mouth will I judge thee, thou wicked servant. Thou knewest that I am an
austere man, taking up that which I laid not down, and reaping that
which I did not sow;

<span id="an_19:23">19:23</span> then wherefore gavest thou not my money
into the bank, and I at my coming should have required it with interest?

<span id="an_19:24">19:24</span> And he said unto them that stood by,
Take away from him the pound, and give it unto him that hath the ten
pounds.

<span id="an_19:25">19:25</span> And they said unto him, Lord, he hath
ten pounds.

<span id="an_19:26">19:26</span> I say unto you, that unto every one
that hath shall be given; but from him that hath not, even that which he
hath shall be taken away from him.

<span id="an_19:27">19:27</span> But these mine enemies, that would not
that I should reign over them, bring hither, and slay them before me.

<span id="an_19:28">19:28</span> And when he had thus spoken, he went on
before, going up to Jerusalem.

<span id="an_19:29">19:29</span> And it came to pass, when he drew nigh
unto Bethphage and Bethany, at the mount that is called Olivet, he sent
two of the disciples,

<span id="an_19:30">19:30</span> saying, Go your way into the village
over against \[you\]; in which as ye enter ye shall find a colt tied,
whereon no man ever yet sat: loose him, and bring him.

<span id="an_19:31">19:31</span> And if any one ask you, Why do ye loose
him? thus shall ye say, The Lord hath need of him.

<span id="an_19:32">19:32</span> And they that were sent went away, and
found even as he had said unto them.

<span id="an_19:33">19:33</span> And as they were loosing the colt, the
owners thereof said unto them, Why loose ye the colt?

<span id="an_19:34">19:34</span> And they said, The Lord hath need of
him.

<span id="an_19:35">19:35</span> And they brought him to Jesus: and they
threw their garments upon the colt, and set Jesus thereon.

<span id="an_19:36">19:36</span> And as he went, they spread their
garments in the way.

<span id="an_19:37">19:37</span> And as he was now drawing nigh,
\[even\] at the descent of the mount of Olives, the whole multitude of
the disciples began to rejoice and praise God with a loud voice for all
the mighty works which they had seen;

<span id="an_19:38">19:38</span> saying, Blessed \[is\] the King that
cometh in the name of the Lord: peace in heaven, and glory in the
highest.

<span id="an_19:39">19:39</span> And some of the Pharisees from the
multitude said unto him, Teacher, rebuke thy disciples.

<span id="an_19:40">19:40</span> And he answered and said, I tell you
that, if these shall hold their peace, the stones will cry out.

<span id="an_19:41">19:41</span> And when he drew nigh, he saw the city
and wept over it,

<span id="an_19:42">19:42</span> saying, If thou hadst known in this
day, even thou, the things which belong unto peace! but now they are hid
from thine eyes.

<span id="an_19:43">19:43</span> For the days shall come upon thee, when
thine enemies shall cast up a bank about thee, and compass thee round,
and keep thee in on every side,

<span id="an_19:44">19:44</span> and shall dash thee to the ground, and
thy children within thee; and they shall not leave in thee one stone
upon another; because thou knewest not the time of thy visitation.

<span id="an_19:45">19:45</span> And he entered into the temple, and
began to cast out them that sold,

<span id="an_19:46">19:46</span> saying unto them, It is written, And my
house shall be a house of prayer: but ye have made it a den of robbers.

<span id="an_19:47">19:47</span> And he was teaching daily in the
temple. But the chief priests and the scribes and the principal men of
the people sought to destroy him:

<span id="an_19:48">19:48</span> and they could not find what they might
do; for the people all hung upon him, listening.

<span id="an_20:1">20:1</span> And it came to pass, on one of the days,
as he was teaching the people in the temple, and preaching the gospel,
there came upon him the chief priests and the scribes with the elders;

<span id="an_20:2">20:2</span> and they spake, saying unto him, Tell us:
By what authority doest thou these things? or who is he that gave thee
this authority?

<span id="an_20:3">20:3</span> And he answered and said unto them, I
also will ask you a question; and tell me:

<span id="an_20:4">20:4</span> The baptism of John, was it from heaven,
or from men?

<span id="an_20:5">20:5</span> And they reasoned with themselves,
saying, If we shall say, From heaven; he will say, Why did ye not
believe him?

<span id="an_20:6">20:6</span> But if we shall say, From men; all the
people will stone us: for they are persuaded that John was a prophet.

<span id="an_20:7">20:7</span> And they answered, that they knew not
whence \[it was\].

<span id="an_20:8">20:8</span> And Jesus said unto them, Neither tell I
you by what authority I do these things.

<span id="an_20:9">20:9</span> And he began to speak unto the people
this parable: A man planted a vineyard, and let it out to husbandmen,
and went into another country for a long time.

<span id="an_20:10">20:10</span> And at the season he sent unto the
husbandmen a servant, that they should give him of the fruit of the
vineyard: but the husbandmen beat him, and sent him away empty.

<span id="an_20:11">20:11</span> And he sent yet another servant: and
him also they beat, and handled him shamefully, and sent him away empty.

<span id="an_20:12">20:12</span> And he sent yet a third: and him also
they wounded, and cast him forth.

<span id="an_20:13">20:13</span> And the lord of the vineyard said, What
shall I do? I will send my beloved son; it may be they will reverence
him.

<span id="an_20:14">20:14</span> But when the husbandmen saw him, they
reasoned one with another, saying, This is the heir; let us kill him,
that the inheritance may be ours.

<span id="an_20:15">20:15</span> And they cast him forth out of the
vineyard, and killed him. What therefore will the lord of the vineyard
do unto them?

<span id="an_20:16">20:16</span> He will come and destroy these
husbandmen, and will give the vineyard unto others. And when they heard
it, they said, God forbid.

<span id="an_20:17">20:17</span> But he looked upon them, and said, What
then is this that is written, The stone which the builders rejected, The
same was made the head of the corner?

<span id="an_20:18">20:18</span> Every one that falleth on that stone
shall be broken to pieces; but on whomsoever it shall fall, it will
scatter him as dust.

<span id="an_20:19">20:19</span> And the scribes and the chief priests
sought to lay hands on him in that very hour; and they feared the
people: for they perceived that he spake this parable against them.

<span id="an_20:20">20:20</span> And they watched him, and sent forth
spies, who feigned themselves to be righteous, that they might take hold
of his speech, so as to deliver him up to the rule and to the authority
of the governor.

<span id="an_20:21">20:21</span> And they asked him, saying, Teacher, we
know that thou sayest and teachest rightly, and acceptest not the person
\[of any\], but of a truth teachest the way of God:

<span id="an_20:22">20:22</span> Is it lawful for us to give tribute
unto Caesar, or not?

<span id="an_20:23">20:23</span> But he perceived their craftiness, and
said unto them,

<span id="an_20:24">20:24</span> Show me a denarius. Whose image and
superscription hath it? And they said, Caesar's.

<span id="an_20:25">20:25</span> And he said unto them, Then render unto
Caesar the things that are Caesar's, and unto God the things that are
God's.

<span id="an_20:26">20:26</span> And they were not able to take hold of
the saying before the people: and they marvelled at his answer, and held
their peace.

<span id="an_20:27">20:27</span> And there came to him certain of the
Sadducees, they that say that there is no resurrection;

<span id="an_20:28">20:28</span> and they asked him, saying, Teacher,
Moses wrote unto us, that if a man's brother die, having a wife, and he
be childless, his brother should take the wife, and raise up seed unto
his brother.

<span id="an_20:29">20:29</span> There were therefore seven brethren:
and the first took a wife, and died childless;

<span id="an_20:30">20:30</span> and the second:

<span id="an_20:31">20:31</span> and the third took her; and likewise
the seven also left no children, and died.

<span id="an_20:32">20:32</span> Afterward the woman also died.

<span id="an_20:33">20:33</span> In the resurrection therefore whose
wife of them shall she be? for the seven had her to wife.

<span id="an_20:34">20:34</span> And Jesus said unto them, The sons of
this world marry, and are given in marriage:

<span id="an_20:35">20:35</span> but they that are accounted worthy to
attain to that world, and the resurrection from the dead, neither marry,
nor are given in marriage:

<span id="an_20:36">20:36</span> for neither can they die any more: for
they are equal unto the angels; and are sons of God, being sons of the
resurrection.

<span id="an_20:37">20:37</span> But that the dead are raised, even
Moses showed, in \[the place concerning\] the Bush, when he calleth the
Lord the God of Abraham, and the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob.

<span id="an_20:38">20:38</span> Now he is not the God of the dead, but
of the living: for all live unto him.

<span id="an_20:39">20:39</span> And certain of the scribes answering
said, Teacher, thou hast well said.

<span id="an_20:40">20:40</span> For they durst not any more ask him any
question.

<span id="an_20:41">20:41</span> And he said unto them, How say they
that the Christ is David's son?

<span id="an_20:42">20:42</span> For David himself saith in the book of
Psalms, The Lord said unto my Lord, Sit thou on my right hand,

<span id="an_20:43">20:43</span> Till I make thine enemies the footstool
of thy feet.

<span id="an_20:44">20:44</span> David therefore calleth him Lord, and
how is he his son?

<span id="an_20:45">20:45</span> And in the hearing of all the people he
said unto his disciples,

<span id="an_20:46">20:46</span> Beware of the scribes, who desire to
walk in long robes, and love salutations in the marketplaces, and chief
seats in the synagogues, and chief places at feasts;

<span id="an_20:47">20:47</span> who devour widows' houses, and for a
pretence make long prayers: these shall receive greater condemnation.

<span id="an_21:1">21:1</span> And he looked up, and saw the rich men
that were casting their gifts into the treasury.

<span id="an_21:2">21:2</span> And he saw a certain poor widow casting
in thither two mites.

<span id="an_21:3">21:3</span> And he said, Of a truth I say unto you,
This poor widow cast in more than they all:

<span id="an_21:4">21:4</span> for all these did of their superfluity
cast in unto the gifts; but she of her want did cast in all the living
that she had.

<span id="an_21:5">21:5</span> And as some spake of the temple, how it
was adorned with goodly stones and offerings, he said,

<span id="an_21:6">21:6</span> As for these things which ye behold, the
days will come, in which there shall not be left here one stone upon
another, that shall not be thrown down.

<span id="an_21:7">21:7</span> And they asked him, saying, Teacher, when
therefore shall these things be? and what \[shall be\] the sign when
these things are about to come to pass?

<span id="an_21:8">21:8</span> And he said, Take heed that ye be not led
astray: for many shall come in my name, saying, I am \[he\]; and, The
time is at hand: go ye not after them.

<span id="an_21:9">21:9</span> And when ye shall hear of wars and
tumults, be not terrified: for these things must needs come to pass
first; but the end is not immediately.

<span id="an_21:10">21:10</span> Then said he unto them, Nation shall
rise against nation, and kingdom against kingdom;

<span id="an_21:11">21:11</span> and there shall be great earthquakes,
and in divers places famines and pestilences; and there shall be terrors
and great signs from heaven.

<span id="an_21:12">21:12</span> But before all these things, they shall
lay their hands on you, and shall persecute you, delivering you up to
the synagogues and prisons, bringing you before kings and governors for
my name's sake.

<span id="an_21:13">21:13</span> It shall turn out unto you for a
testimony.

<span id="an_21:14">21:14</span> Settle it therefore in your hearts, not
to meditate beforehand how to answer:

<span id="an_21:15">21:15</span> for I will give you a mouth and wisdom,
which all your adversaries shall not be able to withstand or to gainsay.

<span id="an_21:16">21:16</span> But ye shall be delivered up even by
parents, and brethren, and kinsfolk, and friends; and \[some\] of you
shall they cause to be put to death.

<span id="an_21:17">21:17</span> And ye shall be hated of all men for my
name's sake.

<span id="an_21:18">21:18</span> And not a hair of your head shall
perish.

<span id="an_21:19">21:19</span> In your patience ye shall win your
souls.

<span id="an_21:20">21:20</span> But when ye see Jerusalem compassed
with armies, then know that her desolation is at hand.

<span id="an_21:21">21:21</span> Then let them that are in Judaea flee
unto the mountains; and let them that are in the midst of her depart
out; and let not them that are in the country enter therein.

<span id="an_21:22">21:22</span> For these are days of vengeance, that
all things which are written may be fulfilled.

<span id="an_21:23">21:23</span> Woe unto them that are with child and
to them that give suck in those days! for there shall be great distress
upon the land, and wrath unto this people.

<span id="an_21:24">21:24</span> And they shall fall by the edge of the
sword, and shall be led captive into all the nations: and Jerusalem
shall be trodden down of the Gentiles, until the times of the Gentiles
be fulfilled.

<span id="an_21:25">21:25</span> And there shall be signs in sun and
moon and stars; and upon the earth distress of nations, in perplexity
for the roaring of the sea and the billows;

<span id="an_21:26">21:26</span> men fainting for fear, and for
expectation of the things which are coming on the world: for the powers
of the heavens shall be shaken.

<span id="an_21:27">21:27</span> And then shall they see the Son of man
coming in a cloud with power and great glory.

<span id="an_21:28">21:28</span> But when these things begin to come to
pass, look up, and lift up your heads; because your redemption draweth
nigh.

<span id="an_21:29">21:29</span> And he spake to them a parable: Behold
the fig tree, and all the trees:

<span id="an_21:30">21:30</span> when they now shoot forth, ye see it
and know of your own selves that the summer is now nigh.

<span id="an_21:31">21:31</span> Even so ye also, when ye see these
things coming to pass, know ye that the kingdom of God is nigh.

<span id="an_21:32">21:32</span> Verily I say unto you, This generation
shall not pass away, till all things be accomplished.

<span id="an_21:33">21:33</span> Heaven and earth shall pass away: but
my words shall not pass away.

<span id="an_21:34">21:34</span> But take heed to yourselves, lest haply
your hearts be overcharged with surfeiting, and drunkenness, and cares
of this life, and that day come on you suddenly as a snare:

<span id="an_21:35">21:35</span> for \[so\] shall it come upon all them
that dwell on the face of all the earth.

<span id="an_21:36">21:36</span> But watch ye at every season, making
supplication, that ye may prevail to escape all these things that shall
come to pass, and to stand before the Son of man.

<span id="an_21:37">21:37</span> And every day he was teaching in the
temple; and every night he went out, and lodged in the mount that is
called Olivet.

<span id="an_21:38">21:38</span> And all the people came early in the
morning to him in the temple, to hear him.

<span id="an_22:1">22:1</span> Now the feast of unleavened bread drew
nigh, which is called the Passover.

<span id="an_22:2">22:2</span> And the chief priests and the scribes
sought how they might put him to death; for they feared the people.

<span id="an_22:3">22:3</span> And Satan entered into Judas who was
called Iscariot, being of the number of the twelve.

<span id="an_22:4">22:4</span> And he went away, and communed with the
chief priests and captains, how he might deliver him unto them.

<span id="an_22:5">22:5</span> And they were glad, and covenanted to
give him money.

<span id="an_22:6">22:6</span> And he consented, and sought opportunity
to deliver him unto them in the absence of the multitude.

<span id="an_22:7">22:7</span> And the day of unleavened bread came, on
which the passover must be sacrificed.

<span id="an_22:8">22:8</span> And he sent Peter and John, saying, Go
and make ready for us the passover, that we may eat.

<span id="an_22:9">22:9</span> And they said unto him, Where wilt thou
that we make ready?

<span id="an_22:10">22:10</span> And he said unto them, Behold, when ye
are entered into the city, there shall meet you a man bearing a pitcher
of water; follow him into the house whereinto he goeth.

<span id="an_22:11">22:11</span> And ye shall say unto the master of the
house, The Teacher saith unto thee, Where is the guestchamber, where I
shall eat the passover with my disciples?

<span id="an_22:12">22:12</span> And he will show you a large upper room
furnished: there make ready.

<span id="an_22:13">22:13</span> And they went, and found as he had said
unto them: and they made ready the passover.

<span id="an_22:14">22:14</span> And when the hour was come, he sat
down, and the apostles with him.

<span id="an_22:15">22:15</span> And he said unto them, With desire I
have desired to eat this passover with you before I suffer:

<span id="an_22:16">22:16</span> for I say unto you, I shall not eat it,
until it be fulfilled in the kingdom of God.

<span id="an_22:17">22:17</span> And he received a cup, and when he had
given thanks, he said, Take this, and divide it among yourselves:

<span id="an_22:18">22:18</span> for I say unto you, I shall not drink
from henceforth of the fruit of the vine, until the kingdom of God shall
come.

<span id="an_22:19">22:19</span> And he took bread, and when he had
given thanks, he brake it, and gave to them, saying, This is my body
which is given for you: this do in remembrance of me.

<span id="an_22:20">22:20</span> And the cup in like manner after
supper, saying, This cup is the new covenant in my blood, \[even\] that
which is poured out for you.

<span id="an_22:21">22:21</span> But behold, the hand of him that
betrayeth me is with me on the table.

<span id="an_22:22">22:22</span> For the Son of man indeed goeth, as it
hath been determined: but woe unto that man through whom he is betrayed!

<span id="an_22:23">22:23</span> And they began to question among
themselves, which of them it was that should do this thing.

<span id="an_22:24">22:24</span> And there arose also a contention among
them, which of them was accounted to be greatest.

<span id="an_22:25">22:25</span> And he said unto them, The kings of the
Gentiles have lordship over them; and they that have authority over them
are called Benefactors.

<span id="an_22:26">22:26</span> But ye \[shall\] not \[be\] so: but he
that is the greater among you, let him become as the younger; and he
that is chief, as he that doth serve.

<span id="an_22:27">22:27</span> For which is greater, he that sitteth
at meat, or he that serveth? is not he that sitteth at meat? but I am in
the midst of you as he that serveth.

<span id="an_22:28">22:28</span> But ye are they that have continued
with me in my temptations;

<span id="an_22:29">22:29</span> and I appoint unto you a kingdom, even
as my Father appointed unto me,

<span id="an_22:30">22:30</span> that ye may eat and drink at my table
in my kingdom; and ye shall sit on thrones judging the twelve tribes of
Israel.

<span id="an_22:31">22:31</span> Simon, Simon, behold, Satan asked to
have you, that he might sift you as wheat:

<span id="an_22:32">22:32</span> but I made supplication for thee, that
thy faith fail not; and do thou, when once thou hast turned again,
establish thy brethren.

<span id="an_22:33">22:33</span> And he said unto him, Lord, with thee I
am ready to go both to prison and to death.

<span id="an_22:34">22:34</span> And he said, I tell thee, Peter, the
cock shall not crow this day, until thou shalt thrice deny that thou
knowest me.

<span id="an_22:35">22:35</span> And he said unto them, When I sent you
forth without purse, and wallet, and shoes, lacked ye anything? And they
said, Nothing.

<span id="an_22:36">22:36</span> And he said unto them, But now, he that
hath a purse, let him take it, and likewise a wallet; and he that hath
none, let him sell his cloak, and buy a sword.

<span id="an_22:37">22:37</span> For I say unto you, that this which is
written must be fulfilled in me, And he was reckoned with transgressors:
for that which concerneth me hath fulfilment.

<span id="an_22:38">22:38</span> And they said, Lord, behold, here are
two swords. And he said unto them, It is enough.

<span id="an_22:39">22:39</span> And he came out, and went, as his
custom was, unto the mount of Olives; and the disciples also followed
him.

<span id="an_22:40">22:40</span> And when he was at the place, he said
unto them, Pray that ye enter not into temptation.

<span id="an_22:41">22:41</span> And he was parted from them about a
stone's cast; and he kneeled down and prayed,

<span id="an_22:42">22:42</span> saying, Father, if thou be willing,
remove this cup from me: nevertheless not my will, but thine, be done.

<span id="an_22:43">22:43</span> And there appeared unto him an angel
from heaven, strengthening him.

<span id="an_22:44">22:44</span> And being in an agony he prayed more
earnestly; and his sweat became as it were great drops of blood falling
down upon the ground.

<span id="an_22:45">22:45</span> And when he rose up from his prayer, he
came unto the disciples, and found them sleeping for sorrow,

<span id="an_22:46">22:46</span> and said unto them, Why sleep ye? rise
and pray, that ye enter not into temptation.

<span id="an_22:47">22:47</span> While he yet spake, behold, a
multitude, and he that was called Judas, one of the twelve, went before
them; and he drew near unto Jesus to kiss him.

<span id="an_22:48">22:48</span> But Jesus said unto him, Judas,
betrayest thou the Son of man with a kiss?

<span id="an_22:49">22:49</span> And when they that were about him saw
what would follow, they said, Lord, shall we smite with the sword?

<span id="an_22:50">22:50</span> And a certain one of them smote the
servant of the high priest, and struck off his right ear.

<span id="an_22:51">22:51</span> But Jesus answered and said, Suffer ye
\[them\] thus far. And he touched his ear, and healed him.

<span id="an_22:52">22:52</span> And Jesus said unto the chief priests,
and captains of the temple, and elders, that were come against him, Are
ye come out, as against a robber, with swords and staves?

<span id="an_22:53">22:53</span> When I was daily with you in the
temple, ye stretched not forth your hands against me: but this is your
hour, and the power of darkness.

<span id="an_22:54">22:54</span> And they seized him, and led him
\[away\], and brought him into the high priest's house. But Peter
followed afar off.

<span id="an_22:55">22:55</span> And when they had kindled a fire in the
midst of the court, and had sat down together, Peter sat in the midst of
them.

<span id="an_22:56">22:56</span> And a certain maid seeing him as he sat
in the light \[of the fire\], and looking stedfastly upon him, said,
This man also was with him.

<span id="an_22:57">22:57</span> But he denied, saying, Woman, I know
him not.

<span id="an_22:58">22:58</span> And after a little while another saw
him, and said, Thou also art \[one\] of them. But Peter said, Man, I am
not.

<span id="an_22:59">22:59</span> And after the space of about one hour
another confidently affirmed, saying, Of a truth this man also was with
him; for he is a Galilaean.

<span id="an_22:60">22:60</span> But Peter said, Man, I know not what
thou sayest. And immediately, while he yet spake, the cock crew.

<span id="an_22:61">22:61</span> And the Lord turned, and looked upon
Peter. And Peter remembered the word of the Lord, how that he said unto
him, Before the cock crow this day thou shalt deny me thrice.

<span id="an_22:62">22:62</span> And he went out, and wept bitterly.

<span id="an_22:63">22:63</span> And the men that held \[Jesus\] mocked
him, and beat him.

<span id="an_22:64">22:64</span> And they blindfolded him, and asked
him, saying, Prophesy: who is he that struck thee?

<span id="an_22:65">22:65</span> And many other things spake they
against him, reviling him.

<span id="an_22:66">22:66</span> And as soon as it was day, the assembly
of the elders of the people was gathered together, both chief priests
and scribes; and they led him away into their council, saying,

<span id="an_22:67">22:67</span> If thou art the Christ, tell us. But he
said unto them, If I tell you, ye will not believe:

<span id="an_22:68">22:68</span> and if I ask \[you\], ye will not
answer.

<span id="an_22:69">22:69</span> But from henceforth shall the Son of
man be seated at the right hand of the power of God.

<span id="an_22:70">22:70</span> And they all said, Art thou then the
Son of God? And he said unto them, Ye say that I am.

<span id="an_22:71">22:71</span> And they said, What further need have
we of witness? for we ourselves have heard from his own mouth.

<span id="an_23:1">23:1</span> And the whole company of them rose up,
and brought him before Pilate.

<span id="an_23:2">23:2</span> And they began to accuse him, saying, We
found this man perverting our nation, and forbidding to give tribute to
Caesar, and saying that he himself is Christ a king.

<span id="an_23:3">23:3</span> And Pilate asked him, saying, Art thou
the King of the Jews? And he answered him and said, Thou sayest.

<span id="an_23:4">23:4</span> And Pilate said unto the chief priests
and the multitudes, I find no fault in this man.

<span id="an_23:5">23:5</span> But they were the more urgent, saying, He
stirreth up the people, teaching throughout all Judaea, and beginning
from Galilee even unto this place.

<span id="an_23:6">23:6</span> But when Pilate heard it, he asked
whether the man were a Galilaean.

<span id="an_23:7">23:7</span> And when he knew that he was of Herod's
jurisdiction, he sent him unto Herod, who himself also was at Jerusalem
in these days.

<span id="an_23:8">23:8</span> Now when Herod saw Jesus, he was
exceeding glad: for he was of a long time desirous to see him, because
he had heard concerning him; and he hoped to see some miracle done by
him.

<span id="an_23:9">23:9</span> And he questioned him in many words; but
he answered him nothing.

<span id="an_23:10">23:10</span> And the chief priests and the scribes
stood, vehemently accusing him.

<span id="an_23:11">23:11</span> And Herod with his soldiers set him at
nought, and mocked him, and arraying him in gorgeous apparel sent him
back to Pilate.

<span id="an_23:12">23:12</span> And Herod and Pilate became friends
with each other that very day: for before they were at enmity between
themselves.

<span id="an_23:13">23:13</span> And Pilate called together the chief
priests and the rulers and the people,

<span id="an_23:14">23:14</span> and said unto them, Ye brought unto me
this man, as one that perverteth the people: and behold, I having
examined him before you, found no fault in this man touching those
things whereof ye accuse him:

<span id="an_23:15">23:15</span> no, nor yet Herod: for he sent him back
unto us; and behold, nothing worthy of death hath been done by him.

<span id="an_23:16">23:16</span> I will therefore chastise him, and
release him.

<span id="an_23:17">23:17</span> \[Now he must needs release unto them
at the feast one prisoner.\]

<span id="an_23:18">23:18</span> But they cried out all together,
saying, Away with this man, and release unto us Barabbas: --

<span id="an_23:19">23:19</span> one who for a certain insurrection made
in the city, and for murder, was cast into prison.

<span id="an_23:20">23:20</span> And Pilate spake unto them again,
desiring to release Jesus;

<span id="an_23:21">23:21</span> but they shouted, saying, Crucify,
crucify him.

<span id="an_23:22">23:22</span> And he said unto them the third time,
Why, what evil hath this man done? I have found no cause of death in
him: I will therefore chastise him and release him.

<span id="an_23:23">23:23</span> But they were urgent with loud voices,
asking that he might be crucified. And their voices prevailed.

<span id="an_23:24">23:24</span> And Pilate gave sentence that what they
asked for should be done.

<span id="an_23:25">23:25</span> And he released him that for
insurrection and murder had been cast into prison, whom they asked for;
but Jesus he delivered up to their will.

<span id="an_23:26">23:26</span> And when they led him away, they laid
hold upon one Simon of Cyrene, coming from the country, and laid on him
the cross, to bear it after Jesus.

<span id="an_23:27">23:27</span> And there followed him a great
multitude of the people, and of women who bewailed and lamented him.

<span id="an_23:28">23:28</span> But Jesus turning unto them said,
Daughters of Jerusalem, weep not for me, but weep for yourselves, and
for your children.

<span id="an_23:29">23:29</span> For behold, the days are coming, in
which they shall say, Blessed are the barren, and the wombs that never
bare, and the breasts that never gave suck.

<span id="an_23:30">23:30</span> Then shall they begin to say to the
mountains, Fall on us; and to the hills, Cover us.

<span id="an_23:31">23:31</span> For if they do these things in the
green tree, what shall be done in the dry?

<span id="an_23:32">23:32</span> And there were also two others,
malefactors, led with him to be put to death.

<span id="an_23:33">23:33</span> And when they came unto the place which
is called The skull, there they crucified him, and the malefactors, one
on the right hand and the other on the left.

<span id="an_23:34">23:34</span> And Jesus said, Father, forgive them;
for they know not what they do. And parting his garments among them,
they cast lots.

<span id="an_23:35">23:35</span> And the people stood beholding. And the
rulers also scoffed at him, saying, He saved others; let him save
himself, if this is the Christ of God, his chosen.

<span id="an_23:36">23:36</span> And the soldiers also mocked him,
coming to him, offering him vinegar,

<span id="an_23:37">23:37</span> and saying, If thou art the King of the
Jews, save thyself.

<span id="an_23:38">23:38</span> And there was also a superscription
over him, THIS IS THE KING OF THE JEWS.

<span id="an_23:39">23:39</span> And one of the malefactors that were
hanged railed on him, saying, Art not thou the Christ? save thyself and
us.

<span id="an_23:40">23:40</span> But the other answered, and rebuking
him said, Dost thou not even fear God, seeing thou art in the same
condemnation?

<span id="an_23:41">23:41</span> And we indeed justly; for we receive
the due reward of our deeds: but this man hath done nothing amiss.

<span id="an_23:42">23:42</span> And he said, Jesus, remember me when
thou comest in thy kingdom.

<span id="an_23:43">23:43</span> And he said unto him, Verily I say unto
thee, To-day shalt thou be with me in Paradise.

<span id="an_23:44">23:44</span> And it was now about the sixth hour,
and a darkness came over the whole land until the ninth hour,

<span id="an_23:45">23:45</span> the sun's light failing: and the veil
of the temple was rent in the midst.

<span id="an_23:46">23:46</span> And Jesus, crying with a loud voice,
said, Father, into thy hands I commend my spirit: and having said this,
he gave up the ghost.

<span id="an_23:47">23:47</span> And when the centurion saw what was
done, he glorified God, saying, Certainly this was a righteous man.

<span id="an_23:48">23:48</span> And all the multitudes that came
together to this sight, when they beheld the things that were done,
returned smiting their breasts.

<span id="an_23:49">23:49</span> And all his acquaintance, and the women
that followed with him from Galilee, stood afar off, seeing these
things.

<span id="an_23:50">23:50</span> And behold, a man named Joseph, who was
a councillor, a good and righteous man

<span id="an_23:51">23:51</span> (he had not consented to their counsel
and deed), \[a man\] of Arimathaea, a city of the Jews, who was looking
for the kingdom of God:

<span id="an_23:52">23:52</span> this man went to Pilate, and asked for
the body of Jesus.

<span id="an_23:53">23:53</span> And he took it down, and wrapped it in
a linen cloth, and laid him in a tomb that was hewn in stone, where
never man had yet lain.

<span id="an_23:54">23:54</span> And it was the day of the Preparation,
and the sabbath drew on.

<span id="an_23:55">23:55</span> And the women, who had come with him
out of Galilee, followed after, and beheld the tomb, and how his body
was laid.

<span id="an_23:56">23:56</span> And they returned, and prepared spices
and ointments. And on the sabbath they rested according to the
commandment.

<span id="an_24:1">24:1</span> But on the first day of the week, at
early dawn, they came unto the tomb, bringing the spices which they had
prepared.

<span id="an_24:2">24:2</span> And they found the stone rolled away from
the tomb.

<span id="an_24:3">24:3</span> And they entered in, and found not the
body of the Lord Jesus.

<span id="an_24:4">24:4</span> And it came to pass, while they were
perplexed thereabout, behold, two men stood by them in dazzling apparel:

<span id="an_24:5">24:5</span> and as they were affrighted and bowed
down their faces to the earth, they said unto them, Why seek ye the
living among the dead?

<span id="an_24:6">24:6</span> He is not here, but is risen: remember
how he spake unto you when he was yet in Galilee,

<span id="an_24:7">24:7</span> saying that the Son of man must be
delivered up into the hands of sinful men, and be crucified, and the
third day rise again.

<span id="an_24:8">24:8</span> And they remembered his words,

<span id="an_24:9">24:9</span> and returned from the tomb, and told all
these things to the eleven, and to all the rest.

<span id="an_24:10">24:10</span> Now they were Mary Magdalene, and
Joanna, and Mary the \[mother\] of James: and the other women with them
told these things unto the apostles.

<span id="an_24:11">24:11</span> And these words appeared in their sight
as idle talk; and they disbelieved them.

<span id="an_24:12">24:12</span> But Peter arose, and ran unto the tomb;
and stooping and looking in, he seeth the linen cloths by themselves;
and he departed to his home, wondering at that which was come to pass.

<span id="an_24:13">24:13</span> And behold, two of them were going that
very day to a village named Emmaus, which was threescore furlongs from
Jerusalem.

<span id="an_24:14">24:14</span> And they communed with each other of
all these things which had happened.

<span id="an_24:15">24:15</span> And it came to pass, while they
communed and questioned together, that Jesus himself drew near, and went
with them.

<span id="an_24:16">24:16</span> But their eyes were holden that they
should not know him.

<span id="an_24:17">24:17</span> And he said unto them, What
communications are these that ye have one with another, as ye walk? And
they stood still, looking sad.

<span id="an_24:18">24:18</span> And one of them, named Cleopas,
answering said unto him, Dost thou alone sojourn in Jerusalem and not
know the things which are come to pass there in these days?

<span id="an_24:19">24:19</span> And he said unto them, What things? And
they said unto him, The things concerning Jesus the Nazarene, who was a
prophet mighty in deed and word before God and all the people:

<span id="an_24:20">24:20</span> and how the chief priests and our
rulers delivered him up to be condemned to death, and crucified him.

<span id="an_24:21">24:21</span> But we hoped that it was he who should
redeem Israel. Yea and besides all this, it is now the third day since
these things came to pass.

<span id="an_24:22">24:22</span> Moreover certain women of our company
amazed us, having been early at the tomb;

<span id="an_24:23">24:23</span> and when they found not his body, they
came, saying, that they had also seen a vision of angels, who said that
he was alive.

<span id="an_24:24">24:24</span> And certain of them that were with us
went to the tomb, and found it even so as the women had said: but him
they saw not.

<span id="an_24:25">24:25</span> And he said unto them, O foolish men,
and slow of heart to believe in all that the prophets have spoken!

<span id="an_24:26">24:26</span> Behooved it not the Christ to suffer
these things, and to enter into his glory?

<span id="an_24:27">24:27</span> And beginning from Moses and from all
the prophets, he interpreted to them in all the scriptures the things
concerning himself.

<span id="an_24:28">24:28</span> And they drew nigh unto the village,
whither they were going: and he made as though he would go further.

<span id="an_24:29">24:29</span> And they constrained him, saying, Abide
with us; for it is toward evening, and the day is now far spent. And he
went in to abide with them.

<span id="an_24:30">24:30</span> And it came to pass, when he had sat
down with them to meat, he took the bread and blessed; and breaking
\[it\] he gave to them.

<span id="an_24:31">24:31</span> And their eyes were opened, and they
knew him; and he vanished out of their sight.

<span id="an_24:32">24:32</span> And they said one to another, Was not
our heart burning within us, while he spake to us in the way, while he
opened to us the scriptures?

<span id="an_24:33">24:33</span> And they rose up that very hour, and
returned to Jerusalem, and found the eleven gathered together, and them
that were with them,

<span id="an_24:34">24:34</span> saying, The Lord is risen indeed, and
hath appeared to Simon.

<span id="an_24:35">24:35</span> And they rehearsed the things \[that
happened\] in the way, and how he was known of them in the breaking of
the bread.

<span id="an_24:36">24:36</span> And as they spake these things, he
himself stood in the midst of them, and saith unto them, Peace \[be\]
unto you.

<span id="an_24:37">24:37</span> But they were terrified and affrighted,
and supposed that they beheld a spirit.

<span id="an_24:38">24:38</span> And he said unto them, Why are ye
troubled? and wherefore do questionings arise in your heart?

<span id="an_24:39">24:39</span> See my hands and my feet, that it is I
myself: handle me, and see; for a spirit hath not flesh and bones, as ye
behold me having.

<span id="an_24:40">24:40</span> And when he had said this, he showed
them his hands and his feet.

<span id="an_24:41">24:41</span> And while they still disbelieved for
joy, and wondered, he said unto them, Have ye here anything to eat?

<span id="an_24:42">24:42</span> And they gave him a piece of a broiled
fish.

<span id="an_24:43">24:43</span> And he took it, and ate before them.

<span id="an_24:44">24:44</span> And he said unto them, These are my
words which I spake unto you, while I was yet with you, that all things
must needs be fulfilled, which are written in the law of Moses, and the
prophets, and the psalms, concerning me.

<span id="an_24:45">24:45</span> Then opened he their mind, that they
might understand the scriptures;

<span id="an_24:46">24:46</span> and he said unto them, Thus it is
written, that the Christ should suffer, and rise again from the dead the
third day;

<span id="an_24:47">24:47</span> and that repentance and remission of
sins should be preached in his name unto all the nations, beginning from
Jerusalem.

<span id="an_24:48">24:48</span> Ye are witnesses of these things.

<span id="an_24:49">24:49</span> And behold, I send forth the promise of
my Father upon you: but tarry ye in the city, until ye be clothed with
power from on high.

<span id="an_24:50">24:50</span> And he led them out until \[they were\]
over against Bethany: and he lifted up his hands, and blessed them.

<span id="an_24:51">24:51</span> And it came to pass, while he blessed
them, he parted from them, and was carried up into heaven.

<span id="an_24:52">24:52</span> And they worshipped him, and returned
to Jerusalem with great joy:

<span id="an_24:53">24:53</span> and were continually in the temple,
blessing God.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: John](joh)
