[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index.md)  [English
Bibles](../eb)  [Index](index)  [Previous](zac)  [Next](mat.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### American Standard Version: Malachi

<span id="an_1:1">1:1</span> The burden of the word of Jehovah to Israel
by Malachi.

<span id="an_1:2">1:2</span> I have loved you, saith Jehovah. Yet ye
say, Wherein hast thou loved us? Was not Esau Jacob's brother, saith
Jehovah: yet I loved Jacob;

<span id="an_1:3">1:3</span> but Esau I hated, and made his mountains a
desolation, and \[gave\] his heritage to the jackals of the wilderness.

<span id="an_1:4">1:4</span> Whereas Edom saith, We are beaten down, but
we will return and build the waste places; thus saith Jehovah of hosts,
They shall build, but I will throw down; and men shall call them The
border of wickedness, and The people against whom Jehovah hath
indignation for ever.

<span id="an_1:5">1:5</span> And your eyes shall see, and ye shall say,
Jehovah be magnified beyond the border of Israel.

<span id="an_1:6">1:6</span> A son honoreth his father, and a servant
his master: if then I am a father, where is mine honor? and if I am a
master, where is my fear? saith Jehovah of hosts unto you, O priests,
that despise my name. And ye say, Wherein have we despised thy name?

<span id="an_1:7">1:7</span> Ye offer polluted bread upon mine altar.
And ye say, Wherein have we polluted thee? In that ye say, The table of
Jehovah is contemptible.

<span id="an_1:8">1:8</span> And when ye offer the blind for sacrifice,
it is no evil! and when ye offer the lame and sick, it is no evil!
Present it now unto thy governor; will he be pleased with thee? or will
he accept thy person? saith Jehovah of hosts.

<span id="an_1:9">1:9</span> And now, I pray you, entreat the favor of
God, that he may be gracious unto us: this hath been by your means: will
he accept any of your persons? saith Jehovah of hosts.

<span id="an_1:10">1:10</span> Oh that there were one among you that
would shut the doors, that ye might not kindle \[fire on\] mine altar in
vain! I have no pleasure in you, saith Jehovah of hosts, neither will I
accept an offering at your hand.

<span id="an_1:11">1:11</span> For from the rising of the sun even unto
the going down of the same my name \[shall be\] great among the
Gentiles; and in every place incense \[shall be\] offered unto my name,
and a pure offering: for my name \[shall be\] great among the Gentiles,
saith Jehovah of hosts.

<span id="an_1:12">1:12</span> But ye profane it, in that ye say, The
table of Jehovah is polluted, and the fruit thereof, even its food, is
contemptible.

<span id="an_1:13">1:13</span> Ye say also, Behold, what a weariness is
it! and ye have snuffed at it, saith Jehovah of hosts; and ye have
brought that which was taken by violence, and the lame, and the sick;
thus ye bring the offering: should I accept this at your hand? saith
Jehovah.

<span id="an_1:14">1:14</span> But cursed be the deceiver, who hath in
his flock a male, and voweth, and sacrificeth unto the Lord a blemished
thing; for I am a great King, saith Jehovah of hosts, and my name is
terrible among the Gentiles.

<span id="an_2:1">2:1</span> And now, O ye priests, this commandment is
for you.

<span id="an_2:2">2:2</span> If ye will not hear, and if ye will not lay
it to heart, to give glory unto my name, saith Jehovah of hosts, then
will I send the curse upon you, and I will curse your blessings; yea, I
have cursed them already, because ye do not lay it to heart.

<span id="an_2:3">2:3</span> Behold, I will rebuke your seed, and will
spread dung upon your faces, even the dung of your feasts; and ye shall
be taken away with it.

<span id="an_2:4">2:4</span> And ye shall know that I have sent this
commandment unto you, that my covenant may be with Levi, saith Jehovah
of hosts.

<span id="an_2:5">2:5</span> My covenant was with him of life and peace;
and I gave them to him that he might fear; and he feared me, and stood
in awe of my name.

<span id="an_2:6">2:6</span> The law of truth was in his mouth, and
unrighteousness was not found in his lips: he walked with me in peace
and uprightness, and turned many away from iniquity.

<span id="an_2:7">2:7</span> For the priest's lips should keep
knowledge, and they should seek the law at his mouth; for he is the
messenger of Jehovah of hosts.

<span id="an_2:8">2:8</span> But ye are turned aside out of the way; ye
have caused many to stumble in the law; ye have corrupted the covenant
of Levi, saith Jehovah of hosts.

<span id="an_2:9">2:9</span> Therefore have I also made you contemptible
and base before all the people, according as ye have not kept my ways,
but have had respect of persons in the law.

<span id="an_2:10">2:10</span> Have we not all one father? hath not one
God created us? why do we deal treacherously every man against his
brother, profaning the covenant of our fathers?

<span id="an_2:11">2:11</span> Judah hath dealt treacherously, and an
abomination is committed in Israel and in Jerusalem; for Judah hath
profaned the holiness of Jehovah which he loveth, and hath married the
daughter of a foreign god.

<span id="an_2:12">2:12</span> Jehovah will cut off, to the man that
doeth this, him that waketh and him that answereth, out of the tents of
Jacob, and him that offereth an offering unto Jehovah of hosts.

<span id="an_2:13">2:13</span> And this again ye do: ye cover the altar
of Jehovah with tears, with weeping, and with sighing, insomuch that he
regardeth not the offering any more, neither receiveth it with good will
at your hand.

<span id="an_2:14">2:14</span> Yet ye say, Wherefore? Because Jehovah
hath been witness between thee and the wife of thy youth, against whom
thou hast dealt treacherously, though she is thy companion, and the wife
of thy covenant.

<span id="an_2:15">2:15</span> And did he not make one, although he had
the residue of the Spirit? And wherefore one? He sought a godly seed.
Therefore take heed to your spirit, and let none deal treacherously
against the wife of his youth.

<span id="an_2:16">2:16</span> For I hate putting away, saith Jehovah,
the God of Israel, and him that covereth his garment with violence,
saith Jehovah of hosts: therefore take heed to your spirit, that ye deal
not treacherously.

<span id="an_2:17">2:17</span> Ye have wearied Jehovah with your words.
Yet ye say, Wherein have we wearied him? In that ye say, Every one that
doeth evil is good in the sight of Jehovah, and he delighteth in them;
or where is the God of justice?

<span id="an_3:1">3:1</span> Behold, I send my messenger, and he shall
prepare the way before me: and the Lord, whom ye seek, will suddenly
come to his temple; and the messenger of the covenant, whom ye desire,
behold, he cometh, saith Jehovah of hosts.

<span id="an_3:2">3:2</span> But who can abide the day of his coming?
and who shall stand when he appeareth? for he is like a refiner's fire,
and like fuller's soap:

<span id="an_3:3">3:3</span> and he will sit as a refiner and purifier
of silver, and he will purify the sons of Levi, and refine them as gold
and silver; and they shall offer unto Jehovah offerings in
righteousness.

<span id="an_3:4">3:4</span> Then shall the offering of Judah and
Jerusalem be pleasant unto Jehovah, as in the days of old, and as in
ancient years.

<span id="an_3:5">3:5</span> And I will come near to you to judgment;
and I will be a swift witness against the sorcerers, and against the
adulterers, and against the false swearers, and against those that
oppress the hireling in his wages, the widow, and the fatherless, and
that turn aside the sojourner \[from his right\], and fear not me, saith
Jehovah of hosts.

<span id="an_3:6">3:6</span> For I, Jehovah, change not; therefore ye, O
sons of Jacob, are not consumed.

<span id="an_3:7">3:7</span> From the days of your fathers ye have
turned aside from mine ordinances, and have not kept them. Return unto
me, and I will return unto you, saith Jehovah of hosts. But ye say,
Wherein shall we return?

<span id="an_3:8">3:8</span> Will a man rob God? yet ye rob me. But ye
say, Wherein have we robbed thee? In tithes and offerings.

<span id="an_3:9">3:9</span> Ye are cursed with the curse; for ye rob
me, even this whole nation.

<span id="an_3:10">3:10</span> Bring ye the whole tithe into the
store-house, that there may be food in my house, and prove me now
herewith, saith Jehovah of hosts, if I will not open you the windows of
heaven, and pour you out a blessing, that there shall not be room enough
\[to receive it\].

<span id="an_3:11">3:11</span> And I will rebuke the devourer for your
sakes, and he shall not destroy the fruits of your ground; neither shall
your vine cast its fruit before the time in the field, saith Jehovah of
hosts.

<span id="an_3:12">3:12</span> And all nations shall call you happy; for
ye shall be a delightsome land, saith Jehovah of hosts.

<span id="an_3:13">3:13</span> Your words have been stout against me,
saith Jehovah. Yet ye say, What have we spoken against thee?

<span id="an_3:14">3:14</span> Ye have said, It is vain to serve God;
and what profit is it that we have kept his charge, and that we have
walked mournfully before Jehovah of hosts?

<span id="an_3:15">3:15</span> And now we call the proud happy; yea,
they that work wickedness are built up; yea, they tempt God, and escape.

<span id="an_3:16">3:16</span> Then they that feared Jehovah spake one
with another; and Jehovah hearkened, and heard, and a book of
remembrance was written before him, for them that feared Jehovah, and
that thought upon his name.

<span id="an_3:17">3:17</span> And they shall be mine, saith Jehovah of
hosts, \[even\] mine own possession, in the day that I make; and I will
spare them, as a man spareth his own son that serveth him.

<span id="an_3:18">3:18</span> Then shall ye return and discern between
the righteous and the wicked, between him that serveth God and him that
serveth him not.

<span id="an_4:1">4:1</span> For, behold, the day cometh, it burneth as
a furnace; and all the proud, and all that work wickedness, shall be
stubble; and the day that cometh shall burn them up, saith Jehovah of
hosts, that it shall leave them neither root nor branch.

<span id="an_4:2">4:2</span> But unto you that fear my name shall the
sun of righteousness arise with healing in its wings; and ye shall go
forth, and gambol as calves of the stall.

<span id="an_4:3">4:3</span> And ye shall tread down the wicked; for
they shall be ashes under the soles of your feet in the day that I make,
saith Jehovah of hosts.

<span id="an_4:4">4:4</span> Remember ye the law of Moses my servant,
which I commanded unto him in Horeb for all Israel, even statutes and
ordinances.

<span id="an_4:5">4:5</span> Behold, I will send you Elijah the prophet
before the great and terrible day of Jehovah come.

<span id="an_4:6">4:6</span> And he shall turn the heart of the fathers
to the children, and the heart of the children to their fathers; lest I
come and smite the earth with a curse.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Matthew](mat.md)
