[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index)  [English
Bibles](../eb)  [Index](index)  [Previous](ezr)  [Next](est) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### American Standard Version: Nehemiah

<span id="an_1:1">1:1</span> The words of Nehemiah the son of Hacaliah.
Now it came to pass in the month Chislev, in the twentieth year, as I
was in Shushan the palace,

<span id="an_1:2">1:2</span> that Hanani, one of my brethren, came, he
and certain men out of Judah; and I asked them concerning the Jews that
had escaped, that were left of the captivity, and concerning Jerusalem.

<span id="an_1:3">1:3</span> And they said unto me, The remnant that are
left of the captivity there in the province are in great affliction and
reproach: the wall of Jerusalem also is broken down, and the gates
thereof are burned with fire.

<span id="an_1:4">1:4</span> And it came to pass, when I heard these
words, that I sat down and wept, and mourned certain days; and I fasted
and prayed before the God of heaven,

<span id="an_1:5">1:5</span> and said, I beseech thee, O Jehovah, the
God of heaven, the great and terrible God, that keepeth covenant and
lovingkindness with them that love him and keep his commandments:

<span id="an_1:6">1:6</span> Let thine ear now be attentive, and thine
eyes open, that thou mayest hearken unto the prayer of thy servant,
which I pray before thee at this time, day and night, for the children
of Israel thy servants while I confess the sins of the children of
Israel, which we have sinned against thee. Yea, I and my father's house
have sinned:

<span id="an_1:7">1:7</span> we have dealt very corruptly against thee,
and have not kept the commandments, nor the statutes, nor the
ordinances, which thou commandedst thy servant Moses.

<span id="an_1:8">1:8</span> Remember, I beseech thee, the word that
thou commandedst thy servant Moses, saying, If ye trespass, I will
scatter you abroad among the peoples:

<span id="an_1:9">1:9</span> but if ye return unto me, and keep my
commandments and do them, though your outcasts were in the uttermost
part of the heavens, yet will I gather them from thence, and will bring
them unto the place that I have chosen, to cause my name to dwell there.

<span id="an_1:10">1:10</span> Now these are thy servants and thy
people, whom thou hast redeemed by thy great power, and by thy strong
hand.

<span id="an_1:11">1:11</span> O Lord, I beseech thee, let now thine ear
be attentive to the prayer of thy servant, and to the prayer of thy
servants, who delight to fear thy name; and prosper, I pray thee, thy
servant this day, and grant him mercy in the sight of this man. Now I
was cupbearer to the king.

<span id="an_2:1">2:1</span> And it came to pass in the month Nisan, in
the twentieth year of Artaxerxes the king, when wine was before him,
that I took up the wine, and gave it unto the king. Now I had not been
\[beforetime\] sad in his presence.

<span id="an_2:2">2:2</span> And the king said unto me, Why is thy
countenance sad, seeing thou art not sick? this is nothing else but
sorrow of heart. Then I was very sore afraid.

<span id="an_2:3">2:3</span> And I said unto the king, Let the king live
for ever: why should not my countenance be sad, when the city, the place
of my fathers' sepulchres, lieth waste, and the gates thereof are
consumed with fire?

<span id="an_2:4">2:4</span> Then the king said unto me, For what dost
thou make request? So I prayed to the God of heaven.

<span id="an_2:5">2:5</span> And I said unto the king, If it please the
king, and if thy servant have found favor in thy sight, that thou
wouldest send me unto Judah, unto the city of my fathers' sepulchres,
that I may build it.

<span id="an_2:6">2:6</span> And the king said unto me (the queen also
sitting by him,) For how long shall thy journey be? and when wilt thou
return? So it pleased the king to send me; and I set him a time.

<span id="an_2:7">2:7</span> Moreover I said unto the king, If it please
the king, let letters be given me to the governors beyond the River,
that they may let me pass through till I come unto Judah;

<span id="an_2:8">2:8</span> and a letter unto Asaph the keeper of the
king's forest, that he may give me timber to make beams for the gates of
the castle which appertaineth to the house, and for the wall of the
city, and for the house that I shall enter into. And the king granted
me, according to the good hand of my God upon me.

<span id="an_2:9">2:9</span> Then I came to the governors beyond the
River, and gave them the king's letters. Now the king had sent with me
captains of the army and horsemen.

<span id="an_2:10">2:10</span> And when Sanballat the Horonite, and
Tobiah the servant, the Ammonite, heard of it, it grieved them
exceedingly, for that there was come a man to seek the welfare of the
children of Israel.

<span id="an_2:11">2:11</span> So I came to Jerusalem, and was there
three days.

<span id="an_2:12">2:12</span> And I arose in the night, I and some few
men with me; neither told I any man what my God put into my heart to do
for Jerusalem; neither was there any beast with me, save the beast that
I rode upon.

<span id="an_2:13">2:13</span> And I went out by night by the valley
gate, even toward the jackal's well, and to the dung gate, and viewed
the walls of Jerusalem, which were broken down, and the gates thereof
were consumed with fire.

<span id="an_2:14">2:14</span> Then I went on to the fountain gate and
to the king's pool: but there was no place for the beast that was under
me to pass.

<span id="an_2:15">2:15</span> Then went I up in the night by the brook,
and viewed the wall; and I turned back, and entered by the valley gate,
and so returned.

<span id="an_2:16">2:16</span> And the rulers knew not whither I went,
or what I did; neither had I as yet told it to the Jews, nor to the
priests, nor to the nobles, nor to the rulers, nor to the rest that did
the work.

<span id="an_2:17">2:17</span> Then said I unto them, Ye see the evil
case that we are in, how Jerusalem lieth waste, and the gates thereof
are burned with fire: come, and let us build up the wall of Jerusalem,
that we be no more a reproach.

<span id="an_2:18">2:18</span> And I told them of the hand of my God
which was good upon me, as also of the king's words that he had spoken
unto me. And they said, Let us rise up and build. So they strengthened
their hands for the good \[work\].

<span id="an_2:19">2:19</span> But when Sanballat the Horonite, and
Tobiah the servant, the Ammonite, and Geshem the Arabian, heard it, they
laughed us to scorn, and despised us, and said, What is this thing that
ye do? will ye rebel against the king?

<span id="an_2:20">2:20</span> Then answered I them, and said unto them,
The God of heaven, he will prosper us; therefore we his servants will
arise and build: but ye have no portion, nor right, nor memorial, in
Jerusalem.

<span id="an_3:1">3:1</span> Then Eliashib the high priest rose up with
his brethren the priests, and they builded the sheep gate; they
sanctified it, and set up the doors of it; even unto the tower of
Hammeah they sanctified it, unto the tower of Hananel.

<span id="an_3:2">3:2</span> And next unto him builded the men of
Jericho. And next to them builded Zaccur the son of Imri.

<span id="an_3:3">3:3</span> And the fish gate did the sons of Hassenaah
build; they laid the beams thereof, and set up the doors thereof, the
bolts thereof, and the bars thereof.

<span id="an_3:4">3:4</span> And next unto them repaired Meremoth the
son of Uriah, the son of Hakkoz. And next unto them repaired Meshullam
the son of Berechiah, the son of Meshezabel. And next unto them repaired
Zadok the son of Baana.

<span id="an_3:5">3:5</span> And next unto them the Tekoites repaired;
but their nobles put not their necks to the work of their lord.

<span id="an_3:6">3:6</span> And the old gate repaired Joiada the son of
Paseah and Meshullam the son of Besodeiah; they laid the beams thereof,
and set up the doors thereof, and the bolts thereof, and the bars
thereof.

<span id="an_3:7">3:7</span> And next unto them repaired Melatiah the
Gibeonite, and Jadon the Meronothite, the men of Gibeon, and of Mizpah,
\[that appertained\] to the throne of the governor beyond the River.

<span id="an_3:8">3:8</span> Next unto him repaired Uzziel the son of
Harhaiah, goldsmiths. And next unto him repaired Hananiah one of the
perfumers, and they fortified Jerusalem even unto the broad wall.

<span id="an_3:9">3:9</span> And next unto them repaired Rephaiah the
son of Hur, the ruler of half the district of Jerusalem.

<span id="an_3:10">3:10</span> And next unto them repaired Jedaiah the
son of Harumaph, over against his house. And next unto him repaired
Hattush the son of Hashabneiah.

<span id="an_3:11">3:11</span> Malchijah the son of Harim, and Hasshub
the son of Pahath-moab, repaired another portion, and the tower of the
furnaces.

<span id="an_3:12">3:12</span> And next unto him repaired Shallum the
son of Hallohesh, the ruler of half the district of Jerusalem, he and
his daughters.

<span id="an_3:13">3:13</span> The valley gate repaired Hanun, and the
inhabitants of Zanoah; they built it, and set up the doors thereof, the
bolts thereof, and the bars thereof, and a thousand cubits of the wall
unto the dung gate.

<span id="an_3:14">3:14</span> And the dung gate repaired Malchijah the
son of Rechab, the ruler of the district of Beth-haccherem; he built it,
and set up the doors thereof, the bolts thereof, and the bars thereof.

<span id="an_3:15">3:15</span> And the fountain gate repaired Shallun
the son of Colhozeh, the ruler of the district of Mizpah; he built it,
and covered it, and set up the doors thereof, the bolts thereof, and the
bars thereof, and the wall of the pool of Shelah by the king's garden,
even unto the stairs that go down from the city of David.

<span id="an_3:16">3:16</span> After him repaired Nehemiah the son of
Azbuk, the ruler of half the district of Beth-zur, unto the place over
against the sepulchres of David, and unto the pool that was made, and
unto the house of the mighty men.

<span id="an_3:17">3:17</span> After him repaired the Levites, Rehum the
son of Bani. Next unto him repaired Hashabiah, the ruler of half the
district of Keilah, for his district.

<span id="an_3:18">3:18</span> After him repaired their brethren, Bavvai
the son of Henadad, the ruler of half the district of Keilah.

<span id="an_3:19">3:19</span> And next to him repaired Ezer the son of
Jeshua, the ruler of Mizpah, another portion, over against the ascent to
the armory at the turning \[of the wall\].

<span id="an_3:20">3:20</span> After him Baruch the son of Zabbai
earnestly repaired another portion, from the turning \[of the wall\]
unto the door of the house of Eliashib the high priest.

<span id="an_3:21">3:21</span> After him repaired Meremoth the son of
Uriah the son of Hakkoz another portion, from the door of the house of
Eliashib even to the end of the house of Eliashib.

<span id="an_3:22">3:22</span> And after him repaired the priests, the
men of the Plain.

<span id="an_3:23">3:23</span> After them repaired Benjamin and Hasshub
over against their house. After them repaired Azariah the son of
Maaseiah the son of Ananiah beside his own house.

<span id="an_3:24">3:24</span> After him repaired Binnui the son of
Henadad another portion, from the house of Azariah unto the turning \[of
the wall\], and unto the corner.

<span id="an_3:25">3:25</span> Palal the son of Uzai \[repaired\] over
against the turning \[of the wall\], and the tower that standeth out
from the upper house of the king, which is by the court of the guard.
After him Pedaiah the son of Parosh \[repaired\].

<span id="an_3:26">3:26</span> (Now the Nethinim dwelt in Ophel, unto
the place over against the water gate toward the east, and the tower
that standeth out.)

<span id="an_3:27">3:27</span> After him the Tekoites repaired another
portion, over against the great tower that standeth out, and unto the
wall of Ophel.

<span id="an_3:28">3:28</span> Above the horse gate repaired the
priests, every one over against his own house.

<span id="an_3:29">3:29</span> After them repaired Zadok the son of
Immer over against his own house. And after him repaired Shemaiah the
son of Shecaniah, the keeper of the east gate.

<span id="an_3:30">3:30</span> After him repaired Hananiah the son of
Shelemiah, and Hanun the sixth son of Zalaph, another portion. After him
repaired Meshullam the son of Berechiah over against his chamber.

<span id="an_3:31">3:31</span> After him repaired Malchijah one of the
goldsmiths unto the house of the Nethinim, and of the merchants, over
against the gate of Hammiphkad, and to the ascent of the corner.

<span id="an_3:32">3:32</span> And between the ascent of the corner and
the sheep gate repaired the goldsmiths and the merchants.

<span id="an_4:1">4:1</span> But it came to pass that, when Sanballat
heard that we were building the wall, he was wroth, and took great
indignation, and mocked the Jews.

<span id="an_4:2">4:2</span> And he spake before his brethren and the
army of Samaria, and said, What are these feeble Jews doing? will they
fortify themselves? will they sacrifice? will they make an end in a day?
will they revive the stones out of the heaps of rubbish, seeing they are
burned?

<span id="an_4:3">4:3</span> Now Tobiah the Ammonite was by him, and he
said, Even that which they are building, if a fox go up, he shall break
down their stone wall.

<span id="an_4:4">4:4</span> Hear, O our God; for we are despised: and
turn back their reproach upon their own head, and give them up for a
spoil in a land of captivity;

<span id="an_4:5">4:5</span> and cover not their iniquity, and let not
their sin be blotted out from before thee; for they have provoked
\[thee\] to anger before the builders.

<span id="an_4:6">4:6</span> So we built the wall; and all the wall was
joined together unto half \[the height\] thereof: for the people had a
mind to work.

<span id="an_4:7">4:7</span> But it came to pass that, when Sanballat,
and Tobiah, and the Arabians, and the Ammonites, and the Ashdodites,
heard that the repairing of the walls of Jerusalem went forward, \[and\]
that the breaches began to be stopped, then they were very wroth;

<span id="an_4:8">4:8</span> and they conspired all of them together to
come and fight against Jerusalem, and to cause confusion therein.

<span id="an_4:9">4:9</span> But we made our prayer unto our God, and
set a watch against them day and night, because of them.

<span id="an_4:10">4:10</span> And Judah said, The strength of the
bearers of burdens is decayed, and there is much rubbish; so that we are
not able to build the wall.

<span id="an_4:11">4:11</span> And our adversaries said, They shall not
know, neither see, till we come into the midst of them, and slay them,
and cause the work to cease.

<span id="an_4:12">4:12</span> And it came to pass that, when the Jews
that dwelt by them came, they said unto us ten times from all places, Ye
must return unto us.

<span id="an_4:13">4:13</span> Therefore set I in the lowest parts of
the space behind the wall, in the open places, I set \[there\] the
people after their families with their swords, their spears, and their
bows.

<span id="an_4:14">4:14</span> And I looked, and rose up, and said unto
the nobles, and to the rulers, and to the rest of the people, Be not ye
afraid of them: remember the Lord, who is great and terrible, and fight
for your brethren, your sons, and your daughters, your wives, and your
houses.

<span id="an_4:15">4:15</span> And it came to pass, when our enemies
heard that it was known unto us, and God had brought their counsel to
nought, that we returned all of us to the wall, every one unto his work.

<span id="an_4:16">4:16</span> And it came to pass from that time forth,
that half of my servants wrought in the work, and half of them held the
spears, the shields, and the bows, and the coats of mail; and the rulers
were behind all the house of Judah.

<span id="an_4:17">4:17</span> They all builded the wall and they that
bare burdens laded themselves; every one with one of his hands wrought
in the work, and with the other held his weapon;

<span id="an_4:18">4:18</span> and the builders, every one had his sword
girded by his side, and so builded. And he that sounded the trumpet was
by me.

<span id="an_4:19">4:19</span> And I said unto the nobles, and to the
rulers and to the rest of the people, The work is great and large, and
we are separated upon the wall, one far from another:

<span id="an_4:20">4:20</span> in what place soever ye hear the sound of
the trumpet, resort ye thither unto us; our God will fight for us.

<span id="an_4:21">4:21</span> So we wrought in the work: and half of
them held the spears from the rising of the morning till the stars
appeared.

<span id="an_4:22">4:22</span> Likewise at the same time said I unto the
people, Let every one with his servant lodge within Jerusalem, that in
the night they may be a guard to us, and may labor in the day.

<span id="an_4:23">4:23</span> So neither I, nor my brethren, nor my
servants, nor the men of the guard that followed me, none of us put off
our clothes, every one \[went with\] his weapon \[to\] the water.

<span id="an_5:1">5:1</span> Then there arose a great cry of the people
and of their wives against their brethren the Jews.

<span id="an_5:2">5:2</span> For there were that said, We, our sons and
our daughters, are many: let us get grain, that we may eat and live.

<span id="an_5:3">5:3</span> Some also there were that said, We are
mortgaging our fields, and our vineyards, and our houses: let us get
grain, because of the dearth.

<span id="an_5:4">5:4</span> There were also that said, We have borrowed
money for the king's tribute \[upon\] our fields and our vineyards.

<span id="an_5:5">5:5</span> Yet now our flesh is as the flesh of our
brethren, our children as their children: and, lo, we bring into bondage
our sons and our daughters to be servants, and some of our daughters are
brought into bondage \[already\]: neither is it in our power to help it;
for other men have our fields and our vineyards.

<span id="an_5:6">5:6</span> And I was very angry when I heard their cry
and these words.

<span id="an_5:7">5:7</span> Then I consulted with myself, and contended
with the nobles and the rulers, and said unto them, Ye exact usury,
every one of his brother. And I held a great assembly against them.

<span id="an_5:8">5:8</span> And I said unto them, We after our ability
have redeemed our brethren the Jews, that were sold unto the nations;
and would ye even sell your brethren, and should they be sold unto us?
Then held they their peace, and found never a word.

<span id="an_5:9">5:9</span> Also I said, The thing that ye do is not
good: ought ye not to walk in the fear of our God, because of the
reproach of the nations our enemies?

<span id="an_5:10">5:10</span> And I likewise, my brethren and my
servants, do lend them money and grain. I pray you, let us leave off
this usury.

<span id="an_5:11">5:11</span> Restore, I pray you, to them, even this
day, their fields, their vineyards, their oliveyards, and their houses,
also the hundredth part of the money, and of the grain, the new wine,
and the oil, that ye exact of them.

<span id="an_5:12">5:12</span> Then said they, We will restore them, and
will require nothing of them; so will we do, even as thou sayest. Then I
called the priests, and took an oath of them, that they would do
according to this promise.

<span id="an_5:13">5:13</span> Also I shook out my lap, and said, So God
shake out every man from his house, and from his labor, that performeth
not this promise; even thus be he shaken out, and emptied. And all the
assembly said, Amen, and praised Jehovah. And the people did according
to this promise.

<span id="an_5:14">5:14</span> Moreover from the time that I was
appointed to be their governor in the land of Judah, from the twentieth
year even unto the two and thirtieth year of Artaxerxes the king, \[that
is\], twelve years, I and my brethren have not eaten the bread of the
governor.

<span id="an_5:15">5:15</span> But the former governors that were before
me were chargeable unto the people, and took of them bread and wine,
besides forty shekels of silver; yea, even their servants bare rule over
the people: but so did not I, because of the fear of God.

<span id="an_5:16">5:16</span> Yea, also I continued in the work of this
wall, neither bought we any land: and all my servants were gathered
thither unto the work.

<span id="an_5:17">5:17</span> Moreover there were at my table, of the
Jews and the rulers, a hundred and fifty men, besides those that came
unto us from among the nations that were round about us.

<span id="an_5:18">5:18</span> Now that which was prepared for one day
was one ox and six choice sheep; also fowls were prepared for me, and
once in ten days store of all sorts of wine: yet for all this I demanded
not the bread of the governor, because the bondage was heavy upon this
people.

<span id="an_5:19">5:19</span> Remember unto me, O my God, for good, all
that I have done for this people.

<span id="an_6:1">6:1</span> Now it came to pass, when it was reported
to Sanballat and Tobiah, and to Geshem the Arabian, and unto the rest of
our enemies, that I had builded the wall, and that there was no breach
left therein; (though even unto that time I had not set up the doors in
the gates;)

<span id="an_6:2">6:2</span> that Sanballat and Geshem sent unto me,
saying, Come, let us meet together in \[one of\] the villages in the
plain of Ono. But they thought to do me mischief.

<span id="an_6:3">6:3</span> And I sent messengers unto them, saying, I
am doing a great work, so that I cannot come down: why should the work
cease, whilst I leave it, and come down to you?

<span id="an_6:4">6:4</span> And they sent unto me four times after this
sort; and I answered them after the same manner.

<span id="an_6:5">6:5</span> Then sent Sanballat his servant unto me in
like manner the fifth time with an open letter in his hand,

<span id="an_6:6">6:6</span> wherein was written, It is reported among
the nations, and Gashmu saith it, that thou and the Jews think to rebel;
for which cause thou art building the wall: and thou wouldest be their
king, according to these words.

<span id="an_6:7">6:7</span> And thou hast also appointed prophets to
preach of thee at Jerusalem, saying, There is a king in Judah: and now
shall it be reported to the king according to these words. Come now
therefore, and let us take counsel together.

<span id="an_6:8">6:8</span> Then I sent unto him, saying, There are no
such things done as thou sayest, but thou feignest them out of thine own
heart.

<span id="an_6:9">6:9</span> For they all would have made us afraid,
saying, Their hands shall be weakened from the work, that it be not
done. But now, \[O God\], strengthen thou my hands.

<span id="an_6:10">6:10</span> And I went unto the house of Shemaiah the
son of Delaiah the son of Mehetabel, who was shut up; and he said, Let
us meet together in the house of God, within the temple, and let us shut
the doors of the temple: for they will come to slay thee; yea, in the
night will they come to slay thee.

<span id="an_6:11">6:11</span> And I said, Should such a man as I flee?
and who is there, that, being such as I, would go into the temple to
save his life? I will not go in.

<span id="an_6:12">6:12</span> And I discerned, and, lo, God had not
sent him; but he pronounced this prophecy against me: and Tobiah and
Sanballat had hired him.

<span id="an_6:13">6:13</span> For this cause was he hired, that I
should be afraid, and do so, and sin, and that they might have matter
for an evil report, that they might reproach me.

<span id="an_6:14">6:14</span> Remember, O my God, Tobiah and Sanballat
according to these their works, and also the prophetess Noadiah, and the
rest of the prophets, that would have put me in fear.

<span id="an_6:15">6:15</span> So the wall was finished in the twenty
and fifth \[day\] of \[the month\] Elul, in fifty and two days.

<span id="an_6:16">6:16</span> And it came to pass, when all our enemies
heard \[thereof\], that all the nations that were about us feared, and
were much cast down in their own eyes; for they perceived that this work
was wrought of our God.

<span id="an_6:17">6:17</span> Moreover in those days the nobles of
Judah sent many letters unto Tobiah, and \[the letters\] of Tobiah came
unto them.

<span id="an_6:18">6:18</span> For there were many in Judah sworn unto
him, because he was the son-in-law of Shecaniah the son of Arah; and his
son Jehohanan had taken the daughter of Meshullam the son of Berechiah
to wife.

<span id="an_6:19">6:19</span> Also they spake of his good deeds before
me, and reported my words to him. \[And\] Tobiah sent letters to put me
in fear.

<span id="an_7:1">7:1</span> Now it came to pass, when the wall was
built, and I had set up the doors, and the porters and the singers and
the Levites were appointed,

<span id="an_7:2">7:2</span> that I gave my brother Hanani, and Hananiah
the governor of the castle, charge over Jerusalem; for he was a faithful
man, and feared God above many.

<span id="an_7:3">7:3</span> And I said unto them, Let not the gates of
Jerusalem be opened until the sun be hot; and while they stand \[on
guard\], let them shut the doors, and bar ye them: and appoint watches
of the inhabitants of Jerusalem, every one in his watch, and every one
\[to be\] over against his house.

<span id="an_7:4">7:4</span> Now the city was wide and large; but the
people were few therein, and the houses were not builded.

<span id="an_7:5">7:5</span> And my God put into my heart to gather
together the nobles, and the rulers, and the people, that they might be
reckoned by genealogy. And I found the book of the genealogy of them
that came up at the first, and I found written therein:

<span id="an_7:6">7:6</span> These are the children of the province,
that went up out of the captivity of those that had been carried away,
whom Nebuchadnezzar the king of Babylon had carried away, and that
returned unto Jerusalem and to Judah, every one unto his city;

<span id="an_7:7">7:7</span> who came with Zerubbabel, Jeshua, Nehemiah,
Azariah, Raamiah, Nahamani, Mordecai, Bilshan, Mispereth, Bigvai, Nehum,
Baanah. The number of the men of the people of Israel:

<span id="an_7:8">7:8</span> The children of Parosh, two thousand a
hundred and seventy and two.

<span id="an_7:9">7:9</span> The children of Shephatiah, three hundred
seventy and two.

<span id="an_7:10">7:10</span> The children of Arah, six hundred fifty
and two.

<span id="an_7:11">7:11</span> The children of Pahath-moab, of the
children of Jeshua and Joab, two thousand and eight hundred \[and\]
eighteen.

<span id="an_7:12">7:12</span> The children of Elam, a thousand two
hundred fifty and four.

<span id="an_7:13">7:13</span> The children of Zattu, eight hundred
forty and five.

<span id="an_7:14">7:14</span> The children of Zaccai, seven hundred and
threescore.

<span id="an_7:15">7:15</span> The children of Binnui, six hundred forty
and eight.

<span id="an_7:16">7:16</span> The children of Bebai, six hundred twenty
and eight.

<span id="an_7:17">7:17</span> The children of Azgad, two thousand three
hundred twenty and two.

<span id="an_7:18">7:18</span> The children of Adonikam, six hundred
threescore and seven.

<span id="an_7:19">7:19</span> The children of Bigvai, two thousand
threescore and seven.

<span id="an_7:20">7:20</span> The children of Adin, six hundred fifty
and five.

<span id="an_7:21">7:21</span> The children of Ater, of Hezekiah, ninety
and eight.

<span id="an_7:22">7:22</span> The children of Hashum, three hundred
twenty and eight.

<span id="an_7:23">7:23</span> The children of Bezai, three hundred
twenty and four.

<span id="an_7:24">7:24</span> The children of Hariph, a hundred and
twelve.

<span id="an_7:25">7:25</span> The children of Gibeon, ninety and five.

<span id="an_7:26">7:26</span> The men of Bethlehem and Netophah, a
hundred fourscore and eight.

<span id="an_7:27">7:27</span> The men of Anathoth, a hundred twenty and
eight.

<span id="an_7:28">7:28</span> The men of Beth-azmaveth, forty and two.

<span id="an_7:29">7:29</span> The men of Kiriath-jearim, Chephirah, and
Beeroth, seven hundred forty and three.

<span id="an_7:30">7:30</span> The men of Ramah and Geba, six hundred
twenty and one.

<span id="an_7:31">7:31</span> The men of Michmas, a hundred and twenty
and two.

<span id="an_7:32">7:32</span> The men of Beth-el and Ai, a hundred
twenty and three.

<span id="an_7:33">7:33</span> The men of the other Nebo, fifty and two.

<span id="an_7:34">7:34</span> The children of the other Elam, a
thousand two hundred fifty and four.

<span id="an_7:35">7:35</span> The children of Harim, three hundred and
twenty.

<span id="an_7:36">7:36</span> The children of Jericho, three hundred
forty and five.

<span id="an_7:37">7:37</span> The children of Lod, Hadid, and Ono,
seven hundred twenty and one.

<span id="an_7:38">7:38</span> The children of Senaah, three thousand
nine hundred and thirty.

<span id="an_7:39">7:39</span> The priests: The children of Jedaiah, of
the house of Jeshua, nine hundred seventy and three.

<span id="an_7:40">7:40</span> The children of Immer, a thousand fifty
and two.

<span id="an_7:41">7:41</span> The children of Pashhur, a thousand two
hundred forty and seven.

<span id="an_7:42">7:42</span> The children of Harim, a thousand \[and\]
seventeen.

<span id="an_7:43">7:43</span> The Levites: the children of Jeshua, of
Kadmiel, of the children of Hodevah, seventy and four.

<span id="an_7:44">7:44</span> The singers: the children of Asaph, a
hundred forty and eight.

<span id="an_7:45">7:45</span> The porters: the children of Shallum, the
children of Ater, the children of Talmon, the children of Akkub, the
children of Hatita, the children of Shobai, a hundred thirty and eight.

<span id="an_7:46">7:46</span> The Nethinim: the children of Ziha, the
children of Hasupha, the children of Tabbaoth,

<span id="an_7:47">7:47</span> the children of Keros, the children of
Sia, the children of Padon,

<span id="an_7:48">7:48</span> the children of Lebana, the children of
Hagaba, the children of Salmai,

<span id="an_7:49">7:49</span> the children of Hanan, the children of
Giddel, the children of Gahar,

<span id="an_7:50">7:50</span> the children of Reaiah, the children of
Rezin, the children of Nekoda,

<span id="an_7:51">7:51</span> the children of Gazzam, the children of
Uzza, the children of Paseah.

<span id="an_7:52">7:52</span> The children of Besai, the children of
Meunim, the children of Nephushesim,

<span id="an_7:53">7:53</span> the children of Bakbuk, the children of
Hakupha, the children of Harhur,

<span id="an_7:54">7:54</span> the children of Bazlith, the children of
Mehida, the children of Harsha,

<span id="an_7:55">7:55</span> the children of Barkos, the children of
Sisera, the children of Temah,

<span id="an_7:56">7:56</span> the children of Neziah, the children of
Hatipha.

<span id="an_7:57">7:57</span> The children of Solomon's servants: the
children of Sotai, the children of Sophereth, the children of Perida,

<span id="an_7:58">7:58</span> the children of Jaala, the children of
Darkon, the children of Giddel,

<span id="an_7:59">7:59</span> the children of Shephatiah, the children
of Hattil, the children of Pochereth-hazzebaim, the children of Amon.

<span id="an_7:60">7:60</span> All the Nethinim, and the children of
Solomon's servants, were three hundred ninety and two.

<span id="an_7:61">7:61</span> And these were they that went up from
Tel-melah, Tel-harsha, Cherub, Addon, and Immer; but they could not show
their fathers' houses, nor their seed, whether they were of Israel:

<span id="an_7:62">7:62</span> The children of Delaiah, the children of
Tobiah, the children of Nekoda, six hundred forty and two.

<span id="an_7:63">7:63</span> And of the priests: the children of
Hobaiah, the children of Hakkoz, the children of Barzillai, who took a
wife of the daughters of Barzillai the Gileadite, and was called after
their name.

<span id="an_7:64">7:64</span> These sought their register \[among\]
those that were reckoned by genealogy, but it was not found: therefore
were they deemed polluted and put from the priesthood.

<span id="an_7:65">7:65</span> And the governor said unto them, that
they should not eat of the most holy things, till there stood up a
priest with Urim and Thummim.

<span id="an_7:66">7:66</span> The whole assembly together was forty and
two thousand three hundred and threescore,

<span id="an_7:67">7:67</span> besides their men-servants and their
maid-servants, of whom there were seven thousand three hundred thirty
and seven: and they had two hundred forty and five singing men and
singing women.

<span id="an_7:68">7:68</span> Their horses were seven hundred thirty
and six; their mules, two hundred forty and five;

<span id="an_7:69">7:69</span> \[their\] camels, four hundred thirty and
five; \[their\] asses, six thousand seven hundred and twenty.

<span id="an_7:70">7:70</span> And some from among the heads of fathers'
\[houses\] gave unto the work. The governor gave to the treasury a
thousand darics of gold, fifty basins, five hundred and thirty priests'
garments.

<span id="an_7:71">7:71</span> And some of the heads of fathers'
\[houses\] gave into the treasury of the work twenty thousand darics of
gold, and two thousand and two hundred pounds of silver.

<span id="an_7:72">7:72</span> And that which the rest of the people
gave was twenty thousand darics of gold, and two thousand pounds of
silver, and threescore and seven priests' garments.

<span id="an_7:73">7:73</span> So the priests, and the Levites, and the
porters, and the singers, and some of the people, and the Nethinim, and
all Israel, dwelt in their cities. And when the seventh month was come,
the children of Israel were in their cities.

<span id="an_8:1">8:1</span> And all the people gathered themselves
together as one man into the broad place that was before the water gate;
and they spake unto Ezra the scribe to bring the book of the law of
Moses, which Jehovah had commanded to Israel.

<span id="an_8:2">8:2</span> And Ezra the priest brought the law before
the assembly, both men and women, and all that could hear with
understanding, upon the first day of the seventh month.

<span id="an_8:3">8:3</span> And he read therein before the broad place
that was before the water gate from early morning until midday, in the
presence of the men and the women, and of those that could understand;
and the ears of all the people were \[attentive\] unto the book of the
law.

<span id="an_8:4">8:4</span> And Ezra the scribe stood upon a pulpit of
wood, which they had made for the purpose; and beside him stood
Mattithiah, and Shema, and Anaiah, and Uriah, and Hilkiah, and Maaseiah,
on his right hand; and on his left hand, Pedaiah, and Mishael, and
Malchijah, and Hashum, and Hashbaddanah, Zechariah, \[and\] Meshullam.

<span id="an_8:5">8:5</span> And Ezra opened the book in the sight of
all the people; (for he was above all the people;) and when he opened
it, all the people stood up:

<span id="an_8:6">8:6</span> and Ezra blessed Jehovah, the great God.
And all the people answered, Amen, Amen, with the lifting up of their
hands: and they bowed their heads, and worshipped Jehovah with their
faces to the ground.

<span id="an_8:7">8:7</span> Also Jeshua, and Bani, and Sherebiah,
Jamin, Akkub, Shabbethai, Hodiah, Maaseiah, Kelita, Azariah, Jozabad,
Hanan, Pelaiah, and the Levites, caused the people to understand the
law: and the people \[stood\] in their place.

<span id="an_8:8">8:8</span> And they read in the book, in the law of
God, distinctly; and they gave the sense, so that they understood the
reading.

<span id="an_8:9">8:9</span> And Nehemiah, who was the governor, and
Ezra the priest the scribe, and the Levites that taught the people, said
unto all the people, This day is holy unto Jehovah your God; mourn not,
nor weep. For all the people wept, when they heard the words of the law.

<span id="an_8:10">8:10</span> Then he said unto them, Go your way, eat
the fat, and drink the sweet, and send portions unto him for whom
nothing is prepared; for this day is holy unto our Lord: neither be ye
grieved; for the joy of Jehovah is your strength.

<span id="an_8:11">8:11</span> So the Levites stilled all the people,
saying, Hold your peace, for the day is holy; neither be ye grieved.

<span id="an_8:12">8:12</span> And all the people went their way to eat,
and to drink, and to send portions, and to make great mirth, because
they had understood the words that were declared unto them.

<span id="an_8:13">8:13</span> And on the second day were gathered
together the heads of fathers' \[houses\] of all the people, the
priests, and the Levites, unto Ezra the scribe, even to give attention
to the words of the law.

<span id="an_8:14">8:14</span> And they found written in the law, how
that Jehovah had commanded by Moses, that the children of Israel should
dwell in booths in the feast of the seventh month;

<span id="an_8:15">8:15</span> and that they should publish and proclaim
in all their cities, and in Jerusalem, saying, Go forth unto the mount,
and fetch olive branches, and branches of wild olive, and myrtle
branches, and palm branches, and branches of thick trees, to make
booths, as it is written.

<span id="an_8:16">8:16</span> So the people went forth, and brought
them, and made themselves booths, every one upon the roof of his house,
and in their courts, and in the courts of the house of God, and in the
broad place of the water gate, and in the broad place of the gate of
Ephraim.

<span id="an_8:17">8:17</span> And all the assembly of them that were
come again out of the captivity made booths, and dwelt in the booths;
for since the days of Jeshua the son of Nun unto that day had not the
children of Israel done so. And there was very great gladness.

<span id="an_8:18">8:18</span> Also day by day, from the first day unto
the last day, he read in the book of the law of God. And they kept the
feast seven days; and on the eighth day was a solemn assembly, according
unto the ordinance.

<span id="an_9:1">9:1</span> Now in the twenty and fourth day of this
month the children of Israel were assembled with fasting, and with
sackcloth, and earth upon them.

<span id="an_9:2">9:2</span> And the seed of Israel separated themselves
from all foreigners, and stood and confessed their sins, and the
iniquities of their fathers.

<span id="an_9:3">9:3</span> And they stood up in their place, and read
in the book of the law of Jehovah their God a fourth part of the day;
and \[another\] fourth part they confessed, and worshipped Jehovah their
God.

<span id="an_9:4">9:4</span> Then stood up upon the stairs of the
Levites, Jeshua, and Bani, Kadmiel, Shebaniah, Bunni, Sherebiah, Bani,
\[and\] Chenani, and cried with a loud voice unto Jehovah their God.

<span id="an_9:5">9:5</span> Then the Levites, Jeshua, and Kadmiel,
Bani, Hashabneiah, Sherebiah, Hodiah, Shebaniah, \[and\] Pethahiah,
said, Stand up and bless Jehovah your God from everlasting to
everlasting; and blessed be thy glorious name, which is exalted above
all blessing and praise.

<span id="an_9:6">9:6</span> Thou art Jehovah, even thou alone; thou
hast made heaven, the heaven of heavens, with all their host, the earth
and all things that are thereon, the seas and all that is in them, and
thou preservest them all; and the host of heaven worshippeth thee.

<span id="an_9:7">9:7</span> Thou art Jehovah the God, who didst choose
Abram, and broughtest him forth out of Ur of the Chaldees, and gavest
him the name of Abraham,

<span id="an_9:8">9:8</span> and foundest his heart faithful before
thee, and madest a covenant with him to give the land of the Canaanite,
the Hittite, the Amorite, and the Perizzite, and the Jebusite, and the
Girgashite, to give it unto his seed, and hast performed thy words; for
thou art righteous.

<span id="an_9:9">9:9</span> And thou sawest the affliction of our
fathers in Egypt, and heardest their cry by the Red Sea,

<span id="an_9:10">9:10</span> and showedst signs and wonders upon
Pharaoh, and on all his servants, and on all the people of his land; for
thou knewest that they dealt proudly against them, and didst get thee a
name, as it is this day.

<span id="an_9:11">9:11</span> And thou didst divide the sea before
them, so that they went through the midst of the sea on the dry land;
and their pursuers thou didst cast into the depths, as a stone into the
mighty waters.

<span id="an_9:12">9:12</span> Moreover in a pillar of cloud thou
leddest them by day; and in a pillar of fire by night, to give them
light in the way wherein they should go.

<span id="an_9:13">9:13</span> Thou camest down also upon mount Sinai,
and spakest with them from heaven, and gavest them right ordinances and
true laws, good statutes and commandments,

<span id="an_9:14">9:14</span> and madest known unto them thy holy
sabbath, and commandedst them commandments, and statutes, and a law, by
Moses thy servant,

<span id="an_9:15">9:15</span> and gavest them bread from heaven for
their hunger, and broughtest forth water for them out of the rock for
their thirst, and commandedst them that they should go in to possess the
land which thou hadst sworn to give them.

<span id="an_9:16">9:16</span> But they and our fathers dealt proudly
and hardened their neck, and hearkened not to thy commandments,

<span id="an_9:17">9:17</span> and refused to obey, neither were mindful
of thy wonders that thou didst among them, but hardened their neck, and
in their rebellion appointed a captain to return to their bondage. But
thou art a God ready to pardon, gracious and merciful, slow to anger,
and abundant in lovingkindness, and forsookest them not.

<span id="an_9:18">9:18</span> Yea, when they had made them a molten
calf, and said, This is thy God that brought thee up out of Egypt, and
had wrought great provocations;

<span id="an_9:19">9:19</span> yet thou in thy manifold mercies
forsookest them not in the wilderness: the pillar of cloud departed not
from over them by day, to lead them in the way; neither the pillar of
fire by night, to show them light, and the way wherein they should go.

<span id="an_9:20">9:20</span> Thou gavest also thy good Spirit to
instruct them, and withheldest not thy manna from their mouth, and
gavest them water for their thirst.

<span id="an_9:21">9:21</span> Yea, forty years didst thou sustain them
in the wilderness, \[and\] they lacked nothing; their clothes waxed not
old, and their feet swelled not.

<span id="an_9:22">9:22</span> Moreover thou gavest them kingdoms and
peoples, which thou didst allot after their portions: so they possessed
the land of Sihon, even the land of the king of Heshbon, and the land of
Og king of Bashan.

<span id="an_9:23">9:23</span> Their children also multipliedst thou as
the stars of heaven, and broughtest them into the land concerning which
thou didst say to their fathers, that they should go in to possess it.

<span id="an_9:24">9:24</span> So the children went in and possessed the
land, and thou subduedst before them the inhabitants of the land, the
Canaanites, and gavest them into their hands, with their kings, and the
peoples of the land, that they might do with them as they would.

<span id="an_9:25">9:25</span> And they took fortified cities, and a fat
land, and possessed houses full of all good things, cisterns hewn out,
vineyards, and oliveyards, and fruit-trees in abundance: so they did
eat, and were filled, and became fat, and delighted themselves in thy
great goodness.

<span id="an_9:26">9:26</span> Nevertheless they were disobedient, and
rebelled against thee, and cast thy law behind their back, and slew thy
prophets that testified against them to turn them again unto thee, and
they wrought great provocations.

<span id="an_9:27">9:27</span> Therefore thou deliveredst them into the
hand of their adversaries, who distressed them: and in the time of their
trouble, when they cried unto thee, thou heardest from heaven; and
according to thy manifold mercies thou gavest them saviours who saved
them out of the hand of their adversaries.

<span id="an_9:28">9:28</span> But after they had rest, they did evil
again before thee; therefore leftest thou them in the hand of their
enemies, so that they had the dominion over them: yet when they
returned, and cried unto thee, thou heardest from heaven; and many times
didst thou deliver them according to thy mercies,

<span id="an_9:29">9:29</span> and testifiedst against them, that thou
mightest bring them again unto thy law. Yet they dealt proudly, and
hearkened not unto thy commandments, but sinned against thine
ordinances, (which if a man do, he shall live in them,) and withdrew the
shoulder, and hardened their neck, and would not hear.

<span id="an_9:30">9:30</span> Yet many years didst thou bear with them,
and testifiedst against them by thy Spirit through thy prophets: yet
would they not give ear: therefore gavest thou them into the hand of the
peoples of the lands.

<span id="an_9:31">9:31</span> Nevertheless in thy manifold mercies thou
didst not make a full end of them, nor forsake them; for thou art a
gracious and merciful God.

<span id="an_9:32">9:32</span> Now therefore, our God, the great, the
mighty, and the terrible God, who keepest covenant and lovingkindness,
let not all the travail seem little before thee, that hath come upon us,
on our kings, on our princes, and on our priests, and on our prophets,
and on our fathers, and on all thy people, since the time of the kings
of Assyria unto this day.

<span id="an_9:33">9:33</span> Howbeit thou art just in all that is come
upon us; for thou hast dealt truly, but we have done wickedly;

<span id="an_9:34">9:34</span> neither have our kings, our princes, our
priests, nor our fathers, kept thy law, nor hearkened unto thy
commandments and thy testimonies wherewith thou didst testify against
them.

<span id="an_9:35">9:35</span> For they have not served thee in their
kingdom, and in thy great goodness that thou gavest them, and in the
large and fat land which thou gavest before them, neither turned they
from their wicked works.

<span id="an_9:36">9:36</span> Behold, we are servants this day, and as
for the land that thou gavest unto our fathers to eat the fruit thereof
and the good thereof, behold, we are servants in it.

<span id="an_9:37">9:37</span> And it yieldeth much increase unto the
kings whom thou hast set over us because of our sins: also they have
power over our bodies, and over our cattle, at their pleasure, and we
are in great distress.

<span id="an_9:38">9:38</span> And yet for all this we make a sure
covenant, and write it; and our princes, our Levites, \[and\] our
priests, seal unto it.

<span id="an_10:1">10:1</span> Now those that sealed were: Nehemiah the
governor, the son of Hacaliah, and Zedekiah,

<span id="an_10:2">10:2</span> Seraiah, Azariah, Jeremiah,

<span id="an_10:3">10:3</span> Pashhur, Amariah, Malchijah,

<span id="an_10:4">10:4</span> Hattush, Shebaniah, Malluch,

<span id="an_10:5">10:5</span> Harim, Meremoth, Obadiah,

<span id="an_10:6">10:6</span> Daniel, Ginnethon, Baruch,

<span id="an_10:7">10:7</span> Meshullam, Abijah, Mijamin,

<span id="an_10:8">10:8</span> Maaziah, Bilgai, Shemaiah; these were the
priests.

<span id="an_10:9">10:9</span> And the Levites: namely, Jeshua the son
of Azaniah, Binnui of the sons of Henadad, Kadmiel;

<span id="an_10:10">10:10</span> and their brethren, Shebaniah, Hodiah,
Kelita, Pelaiah, Hanan,

<span id="an_10:11">10:11</span> Mica, Rehob, Hashabiah,

<span id="an_10:12">10:12</span> Zaccur, Sherebiah, Shebaniah,

<span id="an_10:13">10:13</span> Hodiah, Bani, Beninu.

<span id="an_10:14">10:14</span> The chiefs of the people: Parosh,
Pahath-moab, Elam, Zattu, Bani,

<span id="an_10:15">10:15</span> Bunni, Azgad, Bebai,

<span id="an_10:16">10:16</span> Adonijah, Bigvai, Adin,

<span id="an_10:17">10:17</span> Ater, Hezekiah, Azzur,

<span id="an_10:18">10:18</span> Hodiah, Hashum, Bezai,

<span id="an_10:19">10:19</span> Hariph, Anathoth, Nobai,

<span id="an_10:20">10:20</span> Magpiash, Meshullam, Hezir,

<span id="an_10:21">10:21</span> Meshezabel, Zadok, Jaddua,

<span id="an_10:22">10:22</span> Pelatiah, Hanan, Anaiah,

<span id="an_10:23">10:23</span> Hoshea, Hananiah, Hasshub,

<span id="an_10:24">10:24</span> Hallohesh, Pilha, Shobek,

<span id="an_10:25">10:25</span> Rehum, Hashabnah, Maaseiah,

<span id="an_10:26">10:26</span> and Ahiah, Hanan, Anan,

<span id="an_10:27">10:27</span> Malluch, Harim, Baanah.

<span id="an_10:28">10:28</span> And the rest of the people, the
priests, the Levites, the porters, the singers, the Nethinim, and all
they that had separated themselves from the peoples of the lands unto
the law of God, their wives, their sons, and their daughters, every one
that had knowledge, and understanding;

<span id="an_10:29">10:29</span> They clave to their brethren, their
nobles, and entered into a curse, and into an oath, to walk in God's
law, which was given by Moses the servant of God, and to observe and do
all the commandments of Jehovah our Lord, and his ordinances and his
statutes;

<span id="an_10:30">10:30</span> and that we would not give our
daughters unto the peoples of the land, nor take their daughters for our
sons;

<span id="an_10:31">10:31</span> and if the peoples of the land bring
wares or any grain on the sabbath day to sell, that we would not buy of
them on the sabbath, or on a holy day; and that we would forego the
seventh year, and the exaction of every debt.

<span id="an_10:32">10:32</span> Also we made ordinances for us, to
charge ourselves yearly with the third part of a shekel for the service
of the house of our God;

<span id="an_10:33">10:33</span> for the showbread, and for the
continual meal-offering, and for the continual burnt-offering, for the
sabbaths, for the new moons, for the set feasts, and for the holy
things, and for the sin-offerings to make atonement for Israel, and for
all the work of the house of our God.

<span id="an_10:34">10:34</span> And we cast lots, the priests, the
Levites, and the people, for the wood-offering, to bring it into the
house of our God, according to our fathers' houses, at times appointed,
year by year, to burn upon the altar of Jehovah our God, as it is
written in the law;

<span id="an_10:35">10:35</span> and to bring the first-fruits of our
ground, and the first-fruits of all fruit of all manner of trees, year
by year, unto the house of Jehovah;

<span id="an_10:36">10:36</span> also the first-born of our sons, and of
our cattle, as it is written in the law, and the firstlings of our herds
and of our flocks, to bring to the house of our God, unto the priests
that minister in the house of our God;

<span id="an_10:37">10:37</span> and that we should bring the
first-fruits of our dough, and our heave-offerings, and the fruit of all
manner of trees, the new wine and the oil, unto the priests, to the
chambers of the house of our God; and the tithes of our ground unto the
Levites; for they, the Levites, take the tithes in all the cities of our
tillage.

<span id="an_10:38">10:38</span> And the priest the son of Aaron shall
be with the Levites, when the Levites take tithes: and the Levites shall
bring up the tithe of the tithes unto the house of our God, to the
chambers, into the treasure-house.

<span id="an_10:39">10:39</span> For the children of Israel and the
children of Levi shall bring the heave-offering of the grain, of the new
wine, and of the oil, unto the chambers, where are the vessels of the
sanctuary, and the priests that minister, and the porters, and the
singers: and we will not forsake the house of our God.

<span id="an_11:1">11:1</span> And the princes of the people dwelt in
Jerusalem: the rest of the people also cast lots, to bring one of ten to
dwell in Jerusalem the holy city, and nine parts in the \[other\]
cities.

<span id="an_11:2">11:2</span> And the people blessed all the men that
willingly offered themselves to dwell in Jerusalem.

<span id="an_11:3">11:3</span> Now these are the chiefs of the province
that dwelt in Jerusalem: but in the cities of Judah dwelt every one in
his possession in their cities, \[to wit\], Israel, the priests, and the
Levites, and the Nethinim, and the children of Solomon's servants.

<span id="an_11:4">11:4</span> And in Jerusalem dwelt certain of the
children of Judah, and of the children of Benjamin. Of the children of
Judah: Athaiah the son of Uzziah, the son of Zechariah, the son of
Amariah, the son of Shephatiah, the son of Mahalalel, of the children of
Perez;

<span id="an_11:5">11:5</span> and Maaseiah the son of Baruch, the son
of Colhozeh, the son of Hazaiah, the son of Adaiah, the son of Joiarib,
the son of Zechariah, the son of the Shilonite.

<span id="an_11:6">11:6</span> All the sons of Perez that dwelt in
Jerusalem were four hundred threescore and eight valiant men.

<span id="an_11:7">11:7</span> And these are the sons of Benjamin: Sallu
the son of Meshullam, the son of Joed, the son of Pedaiah, the son of
Kolaiah, the son of Maaseiah, the son of Ithiel, the son of Jeshaiah.

<span id="an_11:8">11:8</span> And after him Gabbai, Sallai, nine
hundred twenty and eight.

<span id="an_11:9">11:9</span> And Joel the son of Zichri was their
overseer; and Judah the son of Hassenuah was second over the city.

<span id="an_11:10">11:10</span> Of the priests: Jedaiah the son of
Joiarib, Jachin,

<span id="an_11:11">11:11</span> Seraiah the son of Hilkiah, the son of
Meshullam, the son of Zadok, the son of Meraioth, the son of Ahitub, the
ruler of the house of God,

<span id="an_11:12">11:12</span> and their brethren that did the work of
the house, eight hundred twenty and two; and Adaiah the son of Jeroham,
the son of Pelaliah, the son of Amzi, the son of Zechariah, the son of
Pashhur, the son of Malchijah,

<span id="an_11:13">11:13</span> and his brethren, chiefs of fathers'
\[houses\], two hundred forty and two; and Amashsai the son of Azarel,
the son of Ahzai, the son of Meshillemoth, the son of Immer,

<span id="an_11:14">11:14</span> and their brethren, mighty men of
valor, a hundred twenty and eight; and their overseer was Zabdiel, the
son of Haggedolim.

<span id="an_11:15">11:15</span> And of the Levites: Shemaiah the son of
Hasshub, the son of Azrikam, the son of Hashabiah, the son of Bunni;

<span id="an_11:16">11:16</span> and Shabbethai and Jozabad, of the
chiefs of the Levites, who had the oversight of the outward business of
the house of God;

<span id="an_11:17">11:17</span> and Mattaniah the son of Mica, the son
of Zabdi, the son of Asaph, who was the chief to begin the thanksgiving
in prayer, and Bakbukiah, the second among his brethren; and Abda the
son of Shammua, the son of Galal, the son of Jeduthun.

<span id="an_11:18">11:18</span> All the Levites in the holy city were
two hundred fourscore and four.

<span id="an_11:19">11:19</span> Moreover the porters, Akkub, Talmon,
and their brethren, that kept watch at the gates, were a hundred seventy
and two.

<span id="an_11:20">11:20</span> And the residue of Israel, of the
priests, the Levites, were in all the cities of Judah, every one in his
inheritance.

<span id="an_11:21">11:21</span> But the Nethinim dwelt in Ophel: and
Ziha and Gishpa were over the Nethinim.

<span id="an_11:22">11:22</span> The overseer also of the Levites at
Jerusalem was Uzzi the son of Bani, the son of Hashabiah, the son of
Mattaniah, the son of Mica, of the sons of Asaph, the singers, over the
business of the house of God.

<span id="an_11:23">11:23</span> For there was a commandment from the
king concerning them, and a settled provision for the singers, as every
day required.

<span id="an_11:24">11:24</span> And Pethahiah the son of Meshezabel, of
the children of Zerah the son of Judah, was at the king's hand in all
matters concerning the people.

<span id="an_11:25">11:25</span> And as for the villages, with their
fields, some of the children of Judah dwelt in Kiriath-arba and the
towns thereof, and in Dibon and the towns thereof, and in Jekabzeel and
the villages thereof,

<span id="an_11:26">11:26</span> and in Jeshua, and in Moladah, and
Beth-pelet,

<span id="an_11:27">11:27</span> and in Hazar-shual, and in Beer-sheba
and the towns thereof,

<span id="an_11:28">11:28</span> and in Ziklag, and in Meconah and in
the towns thereof,

<span id="an_11:29">11:29</span> and in En-rimmon, and in Zorah, and in
Jarmuth,

<span id="an_11:30">11:30</span> Zanoah, Adullam, and their villages,
Lachish and the fields thereof, Azekah and the towns thereof. So they
encamped from Beer-sheba unto the valley of Hinnom.

<span id="an_11:31">11:31</span> The children of Benjamin also \[dwelt\]
from Geba \[onward\], at Michmash and Aija, and at Beth-el and the towns
thereof,

<span id="an_11:32">11:32</span> at Anathoth, Nob, Ananiah,

<span id="an_11:33">11:33</span> Hazor, Ramah, Gittaim,

<span id="an_11:34">11:34</span> Hadid, Zeboim, Neballat,

<span id="an_11:35">11:35</span> Lod, and Ono, the valley of craftsmen.

<span id="an_11:36">11:36</span> And of the Levites, certain courses in
Judah \[were joined\] to Benjamin.

<span id="an_12:1">12:1</span> Now these are the priests and the Levites
that went up with Zerubbabel the son of Shealtiel, and Jeshua: Seraiah,
Jeremiah, Ezra,

<span id="an_12:2">12:2</span> Amariah, Malluch, Hattush,

<span id="an_12:3">12:3</span> Shecaniah, Rehum, Meremoth,

<span id="an_12:4">12:4</span> Iddo, Ginnethoi, Abijah,

<span id="an_12:5">12:5</span> Mijamin, Maadiah, Bilgah,

<span id="an_12:6">12:6</span> Shemaiah, and Joiarib, Jedaiah.

<span id="an_12:7">12:7</span> Sallu, Amok, Hilkiah, Jedaiah. These were
the chiefs of the priests and of their brethren in the days of Jeshua.

<span id="an_12:8">12:8</span> Moreover the Levites: Jeshua, Binnui,
Kadmiel, Sherebiah, Judah, \[and\] Mattaniah, who was over the
thanksgiving, he and his brethren.

<span id="an_12:9">12:9</span> Also Bakbukiah and Unno, their brethren,
were over against them according to their offices.

<span id="an_12:10">12:10</span> And Jeshua begat Joiakim, and Joiakim
begat Eliashib, and Eliashib begat Joiada,

<span id="an_12:11">12:11</span> and Joiada begat Jonathan, and Jonathan
begat Jaddua.

<span id="an_12:12">12:12</span> And in the days of Joiakim were
priests, heads of fathers' \[houses\]: of Seraiah, Meraiah; of Jeremiah,
Hananiah;

<span id="an_12:13">12:13</span> of Ezra, Meshullam; of Amariah,
Jehohanan;

<span id="an_12:14">12:14</span> of Malluchi, Jonathan; of Shebaniah,
Joseph;

<span id="an_12:15">12:15</span> of Harim, Adna; of Meraioth, Helkai;

<span id="an_12:16">12:16</span> of Iddo, Zechariah; of Ginnethon,
Meshullam;

<span id="an_12:17">12:17</span> of Abijah, Zichri; of Miniamin, of
Moadiah, Piltai;

<span id="an_12:18">12:18</span> of Bilgah, Shammua; of Shemaiah,
Jehonathan;

<span id="an_12:19">12:19</span> and of Joiarib, Mattenai; of Jedaiah,
Uzzi;

<span id="an_12:20">12:20</span> of Sallai, Kallai; of Amok, Eber;

<span id="an_12:21">12:21</span> of Hilkiah, Hashabiah; of Jedaiah,
Nethanel.

<span id="an_12:22">12:22</span> As for the Levites, in the days of
Eliashib, Joiada, and Johanan, and Jaddua, there were recorded the heads
of fathers' \[houses\]; also the priests, in the reign of Darius the
Persian.

<span id="an_12:23">12:23</span> The sons of Levi, heads of fathers'
\[houses\], were written in the book of the chronicles, even until the
days of Johanan the son of Eliashib.

<span id="an_12:24">12:24</span> And the chiefs of the Levites:
Hashabiah, Sherebiah, and Jeshua the son of Kadmiel, with their brethren
over against them, to praise and give thanks, according to the
commandment of David the man of God, watch next to watch.

<span id="an_12:25">12:25</span> Mattaniah, and Bakbukiah, Obadiah,
Meshullam, Talmon, Akkub, were porters keeping the watch at the
store-houses of the gates.

<span id="an_12:26">12:26</span> These were in the days of Joiakim the
son of Jeshua, the son of Jozadak, and in the days of Nehemiah the
governor, and of Ezra the priest the scribe.

<span id="an_12:27">12:27</span> And at the dedication of the wall of
Jerusalem they sought the Levites out of all their places, to bring them
to Jerusalem, to keep the dedication with gladness, both with
thanksgivings, and with singing, with cymbals, psalteries, and with
harps.

<span id="an_12:28">12:28</span> And the sons of the singers gathered
themselves together, both out of the plain round about Jerusalem, and
from the villages of the Netophathites;

<span id="an_12:29">12:29</span> also from Beth-gilgal, and out of the
fields of Geba and Azmaveth: for the singers had builded them villages
round about Jerusalem.

<span id="an_12:30">12:30</span> And the priests and the Levites
purified themselves; and they purified the people, and the gates, and
the wall.

<span id="an_12:31">12:31</span> Then I brought up the princes of Judah
upon the wall, and appointed two great companies that gave thanks and
went in procession; \[whereof one went\] on the right hand upon the wall
toward the dung gate:

<span id="an_12:32">12:32</span> and after them went Hoshaiah, and half
of the princes of Judah,

<span id="an_12:33">12:33</span> and Azariah, Ezra, and Meshullam,

<span id="an_12:34">12:34</span> Judah, and Benjamin, and Shemaiah, and
Jeremiah,

<span id="an_12:35">12:35</span> and certain of the priests' sons with
trumpets: Zechariah the son of Jonathan, the son of Shemaiah, the son of
Mattaniah, the son of Micaiah, the son of Zaccur, the son of Asaph;

<span id="an_12:36">12:36</span> and his brethren, Shemaiah, and Azarel,
Milalai, Gilalai, Maai, Nethanel, and Judah, Hanani, with the musical
instruments of David the man of God; and Ezra the scribe was before
them.

<span id="an_12:37">12:37</span> And by the fountain gate, and straight
before them, they went up by the stairs of the city of David, at the
ascent of the wall, above the house of David, even unto the water gate
eastward.

<span id="an_12:38">12:38</span> And the other company of them that gave
thanks went to meet them, and I after them, with the half of the people,
upon the wall, above the tower of the furnaces, even unto the broad
wall,

<span id="an_12:39">12:39</span> and above the gate of Ephraim, and by
the old gate, and by the fish gate, and the tower of Hananel, and the
tower of Hammeah, even unto the sheep gate: and they stood still in the
gate of the guard.

<span id="an_12:40">12:40</span> So stood the two companies of them that
gave thanks in the house of God, and I, and the half of the rulers with
me;

<span id="an_12:41">12:41</span> and the priests, Eliakim, Maaseiah,
Miniamin, Micaiah, Elioenai, Zechariah, and Hananiah, with trumpets;

<span id="an_12:42">12:42</span> and Maaseiah, and Shemaiah, and
Eleazar, and Uzzi, and Jehohanan, and Malchijah, and Elam, and Ezer. And
the singers sang loud, with Jezrahiah their overseer.

<span id="an_12:43">12:43</span> And they offered great sacrifices that
day, and rejoiced; for God had made them rejoice with great joy; and the
women also and the children rejoiced: so that the joy of Jerusalem was
heard even afar off.

<span id="an_12:44">12:44</span> And on that day were men appointed over
the chambers for the treasures, for the heave-offerings, for the
first-fruits, and for the tithes, to gather into them, according to the
fields of the cities, the portions appointed by the law for the priests
and Levites: for Judah rejoiced for the priests and for the Levites that
waited.

<span id="an_12:45">12:45</span> And they kept the charge of their God,
and the charge of the purification, and \[so did\] the singers and the
porters, according to the commandment of David, and of Solomon his son.

<span id="an_12:46">12:46</span> For in the days of David and Asaph of
old there was a chief of the singers, and songs of praise and
thanksgiving unto God.

<span id="an_12:47">12:47</span> And all Israel in the days of
Zerubbabel, and in the days of Nehemiah, gave the portions of the
singers and the porters, as every day required: and they set apart
\[that which was\] for the Levites; and the Levites set apart \[that
which was\] for the sons of Aaron.

<span id="an_13:1">13:1</span> On that day they read in the book of
Moses in the audience of the people; and therein was found written, that
an Ammonite and a Moabite should not enter into the assembly of God for
ever,

<span id="an_13:2">13:2</span> because they met not the children of
Israel with bread and with water, but hired Balaam against them, to
curse them: howbeit our God turned the curse into a blessing.

<span id="an_13:3">13:3</span> And it came to pass, when they had heard
the law, that they separated from Israel all the mixed multitude.

<span id="an_13:4">13:4</span> Now before this, Eliashib the priest, who
was appointed over the chambers of the house of our God, being allied
unto Tobiah,

<span id="an_13:5">13:5</span> had prepared for him a great chamber,
where aforetime they laid the meal-offerings, the frankincense, and the
vessels, and the tithes of the grain, the new wine, and the oil, which
were given by commandment to the Levites, and the singers, and the
porters; and the heave-offerings for the priests.

<span id="an_13:6">13:6</span> But in all this \[time\] I was not at
Jerusalem; for in the two and thirtieth year of Artaxerxes king of
Babylon I went unto the king: and after certain days asked I leave of
the king,

<span id="an_13:7">13:7</span> and I came to Jerusalem, and understood
the evil that Eliashib had done for Tobiah, in preparing him a chamber
in the courts of the house of God.

<span id="an_13:8">13:8</span> And it grieved me sore: therefore I cast
forth all the household stuff of Tobiah out of the chamber.

<span id="an_13:9">13:9</span> Then I commanded, and they cleansed the
chambers: and thither brought I again the vessels of the house of God,
with the meal-offerings and the frankincense.

<span id="an_13:10">13:10</span> And I perceived that the portions of
the Levites had not been given them; so that the Levites and the
singers, that did the work, were fled every one to his field.

<span id="an_13:11">13:11</span> Then contended I with the rulers, and
said, Why is the house of God forsaken? And I gathered them together,
and set them in their place.

<span id="an_13:12">13:12</span> Then brought all Judah the tithe of the
grain and the new wine and the oil unto the treasuries.

<span id="an_13:13">13:13</span> And I made treasurers over the
treasuries, Shelemiah the priest, and Zadok the scribe, and of the
Levites, Pedaiah: and next to them was Hanan the son of Zaccur, the son
of Mattaniah; for they were counted faithful, and their business was to
distribute unto their brethren.

<span id="an_13:14">13:14</span> Remember me, O my God, concerning this,
and wipe not out my good deeds that I have done for the house of my God,
and for the observances thereof.

<span id="an_13:15">13:15</span> In those days saw I in Judah some men
treading wine-presses on the sabbath, and bringing in sheaves, and
lading asses \[therewith\]; as also wine, grapes, and figs, and all
manner of burdens, which they brought into Jerusalem on the sabbath day:
and I testified \[against them\] in the day wherein they sold victuals.

<span id="an_13:16">13:16</span> There dwelt men of Tyre also therein,
who brought in fish, and all manner of wares, and sold on the sabbath
unto the children of Judah, and in Jerusalem.

<span id="an_13:17">13:17</span> Then I contended with the nobles of
Judah, and said unto them, What evil thing is this that ye do, and
profane the sabbath day?

<span id="an_13:18">13:18</span> Did not your fathers thus, and did not
our God bring all this evil upon us, and upon this city? yet ye bring
more wrath upon Israel by profaning the sabbath.

<span id="an_13:19">13:19</span> And it came to pass that, when the
gates of Jerusalem began to be dark before the sabbath, I commanded that
the doors should be shut, and commanded that they should not be opened
till after the sabbath: and some of my servants set I over the gates,
that there should no burden be brought in on the sabbath day.

<span id="an_13:20">13:20</span> So the merchants and sellers of all
kind of wares lodged without Jerusalem once or twice.

<span id="an_13:21">13:21</span> Then I testified against them, and said
unto them, Why lodge ye about the wall? if ye do so again, I will lay
hands on you. From that time forth came they no more on the sabbath.

<span id="an_13:22">13:22</span> And I commanded the Levites that they
should purify themselves, and that they should come and keep the gates,
to sanctify the sabbath day. Remember unto me, O my God, this also, and
spare me according to the greatness of thy lovingkindness.

<span id="an_13:23">13:23</span> In those days also saw I the Jews that
had married women of Ashdod, of Ammon, \[and\] of Moab:

<span id="an_13:24">13:24</span> and their children spake half in the
speech of Ashdod, and could not speak in the Jews' language, but
according to the language of each people.

<span id="an_13:25">13:25</span> And I contended with them, and cursed
them, and smote certain of them, and plucked off their hair, and made
them swear by God, \[saying\], Ye shall not give your daughters unto
their sons, nor take their daughters for your sons, or for yourselves.

<span id="an_13:26">13:26</span> Did not Solomon king of Israel sin by
these things? yet among many nations was there no king like him, and he
was beloved of his God, and God made him king over all Israel:
nevertheless even him did foreign women cause to sin.

<span id="an_13:27">13:27</span> Shall we then hearken unto you to do
all this great evil, to trespass against our God in marrying foreign
women?

<span id="an_13:28">13:28</span> And one of the sons of Joiada, the son
of Eliashib the high priest, was son-in-law to Sanballat the Horonite:
therefore I chased him from me.

<span id="an_13:29">13:29</span> Remember them, O my God, because they
have defiled the priesthood, and the covenant of the priesthood, and of
the Levites.

<span id="an_13:30">13:30</span> Thus cleansed I them from all
foreigners, and appointed charges for the priests and for the Levites,
every one in his work;

<span id="an_13:31">13:31</span> and for the wood-offering, at times
appointed, and for the first-fruits. Remember me, O my God, for good.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Esther](est)
