[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index.md)  [English
Bibles](../eb)  [Index](index)  [Previous](jam)  [Next](pe2.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### American Standard Version: 1 Peter

<span id="an_1:1">1:1</span> Peter, an apostle of Jesus Christ, to the
elect who are sojourners of the Dispersion in Pontus, Galatia,
Cappadocia, Asia, and Bithynia,

<span id="an_1:2">1:2</span> according to the foreknowledge of God the
Father, in sanctification of the Spirit, unto obedience and sprinkling
of the blood of Jesus Christ: Grace to you and peace be multiplied.

<span id="an_1:3">1:3</span> Blessed \[be\] the God and Father of our
Lord Jesus Christ, who according to his great mercy begat us again unto
a living hope by the resurrection of Jesus Christ from the dead,

<span id="an_1:4">1:4</span> unto an inheritance incorruptible, and
undefiled, and that fadeth not away, reserved in heaven for you,

<span id="an_1:5">1:5</span> who by the power of God are guarded through
faith unto a salvation ready to be revealed in the last time.

<span id="an_1:6">1:6</span> Wherein ye greatly rejoice, though now for
a little while, if need be, ye have been put to grief in manifold
trials,

<span id="an_1:7">1:7</span> that the proof of your faith, \[being\]
more precious than gold that perisheth though it is proved by fire, may
be found unto praise and glory and honor at the revelation of Jesus
Christ:

<span id="an_1:8">1:8</span> whom not having seen ye love; on whom,
though now ye see him not, yet believing, ye rejoice greatly with joy
unspeakable and full of glory:

<span id="an_1:9">1:9</span> receiving the end of your faith, \[even\]
the salvation of \[your\] souls.

<span id="an_1:10">1:10</span> Concerning which salvation the prophets
sought and searched diligently, who prophesied of the grace that
\[should come\] unto you:

<span id="an_1:11">1:11</span> searching what \[time\] or what manner of
time the Spirit of Christ which was in them did point unto, when it
testified beforehand the sufferings of Christ, and the glories that
should follow them.

<span id="an_1:12">1:12</span> To whom it was revealed, that not unto
themselves, but unto you, did they minister these things, which now have
been announced unto you through them that preached the gospel unto you
by the Holy Spirit sent forth from heaven; which things angel desire to
look into.

<span id="an_1:13">1:13</span> Wherefore girding up the loins of your
mind, be sober and set your hope perfectly on the grace that is to be
brought unto you at the revelation of Jesus Christ;

<span id="an_1:14">1:14</span> as children of obedience, not fashioning
yourselves according to your former lusts in \[the time of\] your
ignorance:

<span id="an_1:15">1:15</span> but like as he who called you is holy, be
ye yourselves also holy in all manner of living;

<span id="an_1:16">1:16</span> because it is written, Ye shall be holy;
for I am holy.

<span id="an_1:17">1:17</span> And if ye call on him as Father, who
without respect of persons judgeth according to each man's work, pass
the time of your sojourning in fear:

<span id="an_1:18">1:18</span> knowing that ye were redeemed, not with
corruptible things, with silver or gold, from your vain manner of life
handed down from your fathers;

<span id="an_1:19">1:19</span> but with precious blood, as of a lamb
without spot, \[even the blood\] of Christ:

<span id="an_1:20">1:20</span> who was foreknown indeed before the
foundation of the world, but was manifested at the end of times for your
sake,

<span id="an_1:21">1:21</span> who through him are believers in God,
that raised him from the dead, and gave him glory; so that your faith
and hope might be in God.

<span id="an_1:22">1:22</span> Seeing ye have purified your souls in
your obedience to the truth unto unfeigned love of the brethren, love
one another from the heart fervently:

<span id="an_1:23">1:23</span> having been begotten again, not of
corruptible seed, but of incorruptible, through the word of God, which
liveth and abideth.

<span id="an_1:24">1:24</span> For, All flesh is as grass, And all the
glory thereof as the flower of grass. The grass withereth, and the
flower falleth:

<span id="an_1:25">1:25</span> But the word of the Lord abideth for
ever. And this is the word of good tidings which was preached unto you.

<span id="an_2:1">2:1</span> Putting away therefore all wickedness, and
all guile, and hypocrisies, and envies, and all evil speakings,

<span id="an_2:2">2:2</span> as newborn babes, long for the spiritual
milk which is without guile, that ye may grow thereby unto salvation;

<span id="an_2:3">2:3</span> if ye have tasted that the Lord is
gracious:

<span id="an_2:4">2:4</span> unto whom coming, a living stone, rejected
indeed of men, but with God elect, precious,

<span id="an_2:5">2:5</span> ye also, as living stones, are built up a
spiritual house, to be a holy priesthood, to offer up spiritual
sacrifices, acceptable to God through Jesus Christ.

<span id="an_2:6">2:6</span> Because it is contained in scripture,
Behold, I lay in Zion a chief corner stone, elect, precious: And he that
believeth on him shall not be put to shame.

<span id="an_2:7">2:7</span> For you therefore that believe is the
preciousness: but for such as disbelieve, The stone which the builders
rejected, The same was made the head of the corner;

<span id="an_2:8">2:8</span> and, A stone of stumbling, and a rock of
offence; for they stumble at the word, being disobedient: whereunto also
they were appointed.

<span id="an_2:9">2:9</span> But ye are a elect race, a royal
priesthood, a holy nation, a people for \[God's\] own possession, that
ye may show forth the excellencies of him who called you out of darkness
into his marvellous light:

<span id="an_2:10">2:10</span> who in time past were no people, but now
are the people of God: who had not obtained mercy, but now have obtained
mercy.

<span id="an_2:11">2:11</span> Beloved, I beseech you as sojourners and
pilgrims, to abstain from fleshly lust, which war against the soul;

<span id="an_2:12">2:12</span> having your behavior seemly among the
Gentiles; that, wherein they speak against you as evil-doers, they may
by your good works, which they behold, glorify God in the day of
visitation.

<span id="an_2:13">2:13</span> Be subject to every ordinance of man for
the Lord's sake: whether to the king, as supreme;

<span id="an_2:14">2:14</span> or unto governors, as sent by him for
vengeance on evil-doers and for praise to them that do well.

<span id="an_2:15">2:15</span> For so is the will of God, that by
well-doing ye should put to silence the ignorance of foolish men:

<span id="an_2:16">2:16</span> as free, and not using your freedom for a
cloak of wickedness, but as bondservants of God.

<span id="an_2:17">2:17</span> Honor all men. Love the brotherhood. Fear
God. Honor the king.

<span id="an_2:18">2:18</span> Servants, \[be\] in subjection to your
masters with all fear; not only to the good and gentle, but also to the
froward.

<span id="an_2:19">2:19</span> For this is acceptable, if for conscience
toward God a man endureth griefs, suffering wrongfully.

<span id="an_2:20">2:20</span> For what glory is it, if, when ye sin,
and are buffeted \[for it\], ye shall take it patiently? but if, when ye
do well, and suffer \[for it\], ye shall take it patiently, this is
acceptable with God.

<span id="an_2:21">2:21</span> For hereunto were ye called: because
Christ also suffered for you, leaving you an example, that ye should
follow his steps:

<span id="an_2:22">2:22</span> who did no sin, neither was guile found
in his mouth:

<span id="an_2:23">2:23</span> who, when he was reviled, reviled not
again; when he suffered threatened not; but committed \[himself\] to him
that judgeth righteously:

<span id="an_2:24">2:24</span> who his own self bare our sins in his
body upon the tree, that we, having died unto sins, might live unto
righteousness; by whose stripes ye were healed.

<span id="an_2:25">2:25</span> For ye were going astray like sheep; but
are now returned unto the Shepherd and Bishop of your souls.

<span id="an_3:1">3:1</span> In like manner, ye wives, \[be\] in
subjection to your won husbands; that, even if any obey not the word,
they may without the word be gained by the behavior of their wives;

<span id="an_3:2">3:2</span> beholding your chaste behavior \[coupled\]
with fear.

<span id="an_3:3">3:3</span> Whose \[adorning\] let it not be the
outward adorning of braiding the hair, and of wearing jewels of gold, or
of putting on apparel;

<span id="an_3:4">3:4</span> but \[let it be\] the hidden man of the
heart, in the incorruptible \[apparel\] of a meek and quiet spirit,
which is in the sight of God of great price.

<span id="an_3:5">3:5</span> For after this manner aforetime the holy
women also, who hoped in God, adorned themselves, being in subjection to
their own husbands:

<span id="an_3:6">3:6</span> as Sarah obeyed Abraham, calling him lord:
whose children ye now are, if ye do well, and are not put in fear by any
terror.

<span id="an_3:7">3:7</span> Ye husbands, in like manner, dwell with
\[your wives\] according to knowledge, giving honor unto the woman, as
unto the weaker vessel, as being also joint-heirs of the grace of life;
to the end that your prayers be not hindered.

<span id="an_3:8">3:8</span> Finally, \[be\] ye all likeminded,
compassionate, loving as brethren, tenderhearted, humbleminded:

<span id="an_3:9">3:9</span> not rendering evil for evil, or reviling
for reviling; but contrariwise blessing; for hereunto were ye called,
that ye should inherit a blessing.

<span id="an_3:10">3:10</span> For, He that would love life, And see
good days, Let him refrain his tongue from evil, And his lips that they
speak no guile:

<span id="an_3:11">3:11</span> And let him turn away from evil, and do
good; Let him seek peace, and pursue it.

<span id="an_3:12">3:12</span> For the eyes of the Lord are upon the
righteous, And his ears unto their supplication: But the face of the
Lord is upon them that do evil.

<span id="an_3:13">3:13</span> And who is he that will harm you, if ye
be zealous of that which is good?

<span id="an_3:14">3:14</span> But even if ye should suffer for
righteousness' sake, blessed \[are ye:\] and fear not their fear,
neither be troubled;

<span id="an_3:15">3:15</span> but sanctify in your hearts Christ as
Lord: \[being\] ready always to give answer to every man that asketh you
a reason concerning the hope that is in you, yet with meekness and fear:

<span id="an_3:16">3:16</span> having a good conscience; that, wherein
ye are spoken against, they may be put to shame who revile your good
manner of life in Christ.

<span id="an_3:17">3:17</span> For it is better, if the will of God
should so will, that ye suffer for well-doing than for evil-doing.

<span id="an_3:18">3:18</span> Because Christ also suffered for sins
once, the righteous for the unrighteous, that he might bring us to God;
being put to death in the flesh, but made alive in the spirit;

<span id="an_3:19">3:19</span> in which also he went and preached unto
the spirits in prison,

<span id="an_3:20">3:20</span> that aforetime were disobedient, when the
longsuffering of God waited in the days of Noah, while the ark was a
preparing, wherein few, that is, eight souls, were saved through water:

<span id="an_3:21">3:21</span> which also after a true likeness doth now
save you, \[even\] baptism, not the putting away of the filth of the
flesh, but the interrogation of a good conscience toward God, through
the resurrection of Jesus Christ;

<span id="an_3:22">3:22</span> who is one the right hand of God, having
gone into heaven; angels and authorities and powers being made subject
unto him.

<span id="an_4:1">4:1</span> Forasmuch then as Christ suffered in the
flesh, arm ye yourselves also with the same mind; for he that hath
suffered in the flesh hath ceased from sin;

<span id="an_4:2">4:2</span> that ye no longer should live the rest of
your time in flesh to the lusts of men, but to the will of God.

<span id="an_4:3">4:3</span> For the time past may suffice to have
wrought the desire of the Gentiles, and to have walked in
lasciviousness, lusts, winebibbings, revellings, carousings, and
abominable idolatries:

<span id="an_4:4">4:4</span> wherein they think strange that ye run not
with \[them\] into the same excess of riot, speaking evil of \[of\]:

<span id="an_4:5">4:5</span> who shall give account to him that is ready
to judge the living and the dead.

<span id="an_4:6">4:6</span> For unto this end was the gospel preached
even to the dead, that they might be judged indeed according to men in
the flesh, but live according to God in the spirit.

<span id="an_4:7">4:7</span> But the end of all things is at hand: be ye
therefore of sound mind, and be sober unto prayer:

<span id="an_4:8">4:8</span> above all things being fervent in your love
among yourselves; for love covereth a multitude of sins:

<span id="an_4:9">4:9</span> using hospitality one to another without
murmuring:

<span id="an_4:10">4:10</span> according as each hath received a gift,
ministering it among yourselves, as good stewards of the manifold grace
of God;

<span id="an_4:11">4:11</span> if any man speaketh, \[speaking\] as it
were oracles of God; is any man ministereth, \[ministering\] as of the
strength which God supplieth: that in all things God may be glorified
through Jesus Christ, whose is the glory and the dominion for ever and
ever. Amen.

<span id="an_4:12">4:12</span> Beloved, think it not strange concerning
the fiery trial among you, which cometh upon you to prove you, as though
a strange thing happened unto you:

<span id="an_4:13">4:13</span> but insomuch as ye are partakers of
Christ's sufferings, rejoice; that at the revelation of his glory also
ye may rejoice with exceeding joy.

<span id="an_4:14">4:14</span> If ye are reproached for the name of
Christ, blessed \[are ye\]; because the \[Spirit\] of glory and the
Spirit of God resteth upon you.

<span id="an_4:15">4:15</span> For let none of you suffer as a murderer,
or a thief, or an evil-doer, or as a meddler in other men's matters:

<span id="an_4:16">4:16</span> but if \[a man suffer\] as a Christian,
let him not be ashamed; but let him glorify God in this name.

<span id="an_4:17">4:17</span> For the time \[is come\] for judgment to
begin at the house of God: and if \[it begin\] first at us, what \[shall
be\] the end of them that obey not the gospel of God?

<span id="an_4:18">4:18</span> And if the righteous is scarcely saved,
where shall the ungodly and sinner appear?

<span id="an_4:19">4:19</span> Wherefore let them also that suffer
according to the will of God commit their souls in well-doing unto a
faithful Creator.

<span id="an_5:1">5:1</span> The elders among you I exhort, who am a
fellow-elder, and a witness of the sufferings of Christ, who am also a
partaker of the glory that shall be revealed:

<span id="an_5:2">5:2</span> Tend the flock of God which is among you,
exercising the oversight, not of constraint, but willingly, according to
\[the will of\] God; nor yet for filthy lucre, but of a ready mind;

<span id="an_5:3">5:3</span> neither as lording it over the charge
allotted to you, but making yourselves ensamples to the flock.

<span id="an_5:4">5:4</span> And when the chief Shepherd shall be
manifested, ye shall receive the crown of glory that fadeth not away.

<span id="an_5:5">5:5</span> Likewise, ye younger, be subject unto the
elder. Yea, all of you gird yourselves with humility, to serve one
another: for God resisteth the proud, but giveth grace to the humble.

<span id="an_5:6">5:6</span> Humble yourselves therefore under the
mighty hand of God, that he may exalt you in due time;

<span id="an_5:7">5:7</span> casting all your anxiety upon him, because
he careth for you.

<span id="an_5:8">5:8</span> Be sober, be watchful: your adversary the
devil, as a roaring lion, walketh about, seeking whom he may devour,

<span id="an_5:9">5:9</span> whom withstand stedfast in your faith,
knowing that the same sufferings are accomplished in your brethren who
are in the world.

<span id="an_5:10">5:10</span> And the God of all grace, who called you
unto his eternal glory in Christ, after that ye have suffered a little
while, shall himself perfect, establish, strengthen you.

<span id="an_5:11">5:11</span> To him \[be\] the dominion for ever and
ever. Amen.

<span id="an_5:12">5:12</span> By Silvanus, our faithful brother, as I
account \[him\], I have written unto you briefly, exhorting, and
testifying that this is the true grace of God. Stand ye fast therein.

<span id="an_5:13">5:13</span> She that is in Babylon, elect together
with \[you\], saluteth you; and \[so doth\] Mark my son.

<span id="an_5:14">5:14</span> Salute one another with a kiss of love.
Peace be unto you all that are in Christ.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 Peter](pe2.md)
