[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index)  [English
Bibles](../eb)  [Index](index)  [Previous](eph)  [Next](col) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### American Standard Version: Philippians

<span id="an_1:1">1:1</span> Paul and Timothy, servants of Christ Jesus,
to all the saints in Christ Jesus that are at Philippi, with the bishops
and deacons:

<span id="an_1:2">1:2</span> Grace to you and peace from God our Father
and the Lord Jesus Christ.

<span id="an_1:3">1:3</span> I thank my God upon all my remembrance of
you,

<span id="an_1:4">1:4</span> always in every supplication of mine on
behalf of you all making my supplication with joy,

<span id="an_1:5">1:5</span> for your fellowship in furtherance of the
gospel from the first day until now;

<span id="an_1:6">1:6</span> being confident of this very thing, that he
who began a good work in you will perfect it until the day of Jesus
Christ:

<span id="an_1:7">1:7</span> even as it is right for me to be thus
minded on behalf of you all, because I have you in my heart, inasmuch
as, both in my bonds and in the defence and confirmation of the gospel,
ye all are partakers with me of grace.

<span id="an_1:8">1:8</span> For God is my witness, how I long after you
all in the tender mercies of Christ Jesus.

<span id="an_1:9">1:9</span> And this I pray, that your love may abound
yet more and more in knowledge and all discernment;

<span id="an_1:10">1:10</span> so that ye may approve the things that
are excellent; that ye may be sincere and void of offence unto the day
of Christ;

<span id="an_1:11">1:11</span> being filled with the fruits of
righteousness, which are through Jesus Christ, unto the glory and praise
of God.

<span id="an_1:12">1:12</span> Now I would have you know, brethren, that
the things \[which happened\] unto me have fallen out rather unto the
progress of the gospel;

<span id="an_1:13">1:13</span> so that my bonds became manifest in
Christ throughout the whole praetorian guard, and to all the rest;

<span id="an_1:14">1:14</span> and that most of the brethren in the
Lord, being confident through my bonds, are more abundantly bold to
speak the word of God without fear.

<span id="an_1:15">1:15</span> Some indeed preach Christ even of envy
and strife; and some also of good will:

<span id="an_1:16">1:16</span> the one \[do it\] of love, knowing that I
am set for the defence of the gospel;

<span id="an_1:17">1:17</span> but the other proclaim Christ of faction,
not sincerely, thinking to raise up affliction for me in my bonds.

<span id="an_1:18">1:18</span> What then? only that in every way,
whether in pretence or in truth, Christ is proclaimed; and therein I
rejoice, yea, and will rejoice.

<span id="an_1:19">1:19</span> For I know that this shall turn out to my
salvation, through your supplication and the supply of the Spirit of
Jesus Christ,

<span id="an_1:20">1:20</span> according to my earnest expectation and
hope, that in nothing shall I be put to shame, but \[that\] with all
boldness, as always, \[so\] now also Christ shall be magnified in my
body, whether by life, or by death.

<span id="an_1:21">1:21</span> For to me to live is Christ, and to die
is gain.

<span id="an_1:22">1:22</span> But if to live in the flesh, --\[if\]
this shall bring fruit from my work, then what I shall choose I know
not.

<span id="an_1:23">1:23</span> But I am in a strait betwixt the two,
having the desire to depart and be with Christ; for it is very far
better:

<span id="an_1:24">1:24</span> yet to abide in the flesh is more needful
for your sake.

<span id="an_1:25">1:25</span> And having this confidence, I know that I
shall abide, yea, and abide with you all, for your progress and joy in
the faith;

<span id="an_1:26">1:26</span> that your glorying may abound in Christ
Jesus in me through my presence with you again.

<span id="an_1:27">1:27</span> Only let your manner of life be worthy of
the gospel of Christ: that, whether I come and see you and be absent, I
may hear of your state, that ye stand fast in one spirit, with one soul
striving for the faith of the gospel;

<span id="an_1:28">1:28</span> and in nothing affrighted by the
adversaries: which is for them an evident token of perdition, but of
your salvation, and that from God;

<span id="an_1:29">1:29</span> because to you it hath been granted in
the behalf of Christ, not only to believe on him, but also to suffer in
his behalf:

<span id="an_1:30">1:30</span> having the same conflict which ye saw in
me, and now hear to be in me.

<span id="an_2:1">2:1</span> If there is therefore any exhortation in
Christ, if any consolation of love, if any fellowship of the Spirit, if
any tender mercies and compassions,

<span id="an_2:2">2:2</span> make full my joy, that ye be of the same
mind, having the same love, being of one accord, of one mind;

<span id="an_2:3">2:3</span> \[doing\] nothing through faction or
through vainglory, but in lowliness of mind each counting other better
than himself;

<span id="an_2:4">2:4</span> not looking each of you to his own things,
but each of you also to the things of others.

<span id="an_2:5">2:5</span> Have this mind in you, which was also in
Christ Jesus:

<span id="an_2:6">2:6</span> who, existing in the form of God, counted
not the being on an equality with God a thing to be grasped,

<span id="an_2:7">2:7</span> but emptied himself, taking the form of a
servant, being made in the likeness of men;

<span id="an_2:8">2:8</span> and being found in fashion as a man, he
humbled himself, becoming obedient \[even\] unto death, yea, the death
of the cross.

<span id="an_2:9">2:9</span> Wherefore also God highly exalted him, and
gave unto him the name which is above every name;

<span id="an_2:10">2:10</span> that in the name of Jesus every knee
should bow, of \[things\] in heaven and \[things\] on earth and
\[things\] under the earth,

<span id="an_2:11">2:11</span> and that every tongue should confess that
Jesus Christ is Lord, to the glory of God the Father.

<span id="an_2:12">2:12</span> So then, my beloved, even as ye have
always obeyed, not as in my presence only, but now much more in my
absence, work out your own salvation with fear and trembling;

<span id="an_2:13">2:13</span> for it is God who worketh in you both to
will and to work, for his good pleasure.

<span id="an_2:14">2:14</span> Do all things without murmurings and
questionings:

<span id="an_2:15">2:15</span> that ye may become blameless and
harmless, children of God without blemish in the midst of a crooked and
perverse generation, among whom ye are seen as lights in the world,

<span id="an_2:16">2:16</span> holding forth the word of life; that I
may have whereof to glory in the day of Christ, that I did not run in
vain neither labor in vain.

<span id="an_2:17">2:17</span> Yea, and if I am offered upon the
sacrifice and service of your faith, I joy, and rejoice with you all:

<span id="an_2:18">2:18</span> and in the same manner do ye also joy,
and rejoice with me.

<span id="an_2:19">2:19</span> But I hope in the Lord Jesus to send
Timothy shortly unto you, that I also may be of good comfort, when I
know your state.

<span id="an_2:20">2:20</span> For I have no man likeminded, who will
care truly for your state.

<span id="an_2:21">2:21</span> For they all seek their own, not the
things of Jesus Christ.

<span id="an_2:22">2:22</span> But ye know the proof of him, that, as a
child \[serveth\] a father, \[so\] he served with me in furtherance of
the gospel.

<span id="an_2:23">2:23</span> Him therefore I hope to send forthwith,
so soon as I shall see how it will go with me:

<span id="an_2:24">2:24</span> but I trust in the Lord that I myself
also shall come shortly.

<span id="an_2:25">2:25</span> But I counted it necessary to send to you
Epaphroditus, my brother and fellow-worker and fellow-soldier, and your
messenger and minister to my need;

<span id="an_2:26">2:26</span> since he longed after you all, and was
sore troubled, because ye had heard that he was sick:

<span id="an_2:27">2:27</span> for indeed he was sick nigh unto death:
but God had mercy on him; and not on him only, but on me also, that I
might not have sorrow upon sorrow.

<span id="an_2:28">2:28</span> I have sent him therefore the more
diligently, that, when ye see him again, ye may rejoice, and that I may
be the less sorrowful.

<span id="an_2:29">2:29</span> Receive him therefore in the Lord with
all joy; and hold such in honor:

<span id="an_2:30">2:30</span> because for the work of Christ he came
nigh unto death, hazarding his life to supply that which was lacking in
your service toward me.

<span id="an_3:1">3:1</span> Finally, my brethren, rejoice in the Lord.
To write the same things to you, to me indeed is not irksome, but for
you it is safe.

<span id="an_3:2">3:2</span> Beware of the dogs, beware of the evil
workers, beware of the concision:

<span id="an_3:3">3:3</span> for we are the circumcision, who worship by
the Spirit of God, and glory in Christ Jesus, and have no confidence in
the flesh:

<span id="an_3:4">3:4</span> though I myself might have confidence even
in the flesh: if any other man thinketh to have confidence in the flesh,
I yet more:

<span id="an_3:5">3:5</span> circumcised the eighth day, of the stock of
Israel, of the tribe of Benjamin, a Hebrew of Hebrews; as touching the
law, a Pharisee;

<span id="an_3:6">3:6</span> as touching zeal, persecuting the church;
as touching the righteousness which is in the law, found blameless.

<span id="an_3:7">3:7</span> Howbeit what things were gain to me, these
have I counted loss for Christ.

<span id="an_3:8">3:8</span> Yea verily, and I count all things to be
loss for the excellency of the knowledge of Christ Jesus my Lord: for
whom I suffered the loss of all things, and do count them but refuse,
that I may gain Christ,

<span id="an_3:9">3:9</span> and be found in him, not having a
righteousness of mine own, \[even\] that which is of the law, but that
which is through faith in Christ, the righteousness which is from God by
faith:

<span id="an_3:10">3:10</span> that I may know him, and the power of his
resurrection, and the fellowship of his sufferings, becoming conformed
unto his death;

<span id="an_3:11">3:11</span> if by any means I may attain unto the
resurrection from the dead.

<span id="an_3:12">3:12</span> Not that I have already obtained, or am
already made perfect: but I press on, if so be that I may lay hold on
that for which also I was laid hold on by Christ Jesus.

<span id="an_3:13">3:13</span> Brethren, I could not myself yet to have
laid hold: but one thing \[I do\], forgetting the things which are
behind, and stretching forward to the things which are before,

<span id="an_3:14">3:14</span> I press on toward the goal unto the prize
of the high calling of God in Christ Jesus.

<span id="an_3:15">3:15</span> Let us therefore, as many as are perfect,
be thus minded: and if in anything ye are otherwise minded, this also
shall God reveal unto you:

<span id="an_3:16">3:16</span> only, whereunto we have attained, by that
same \[rule\] let us walk.

<span id="an_3:17">3:17</span> Brethren, be ye imitators together of me,
and mark them that so walk even as ye have us for an ensample.

<span id="an_3:18">3:18</span> For many walk, of whom I told you often,
and now tell you even weeping, \[that they are\] the enemies of the
cross of Christ:

<span id="an_3:19">3:19</span> whose end is perdition, whose god is the
belly, and \[whose\] glory is in their shame, who mind earthly things.

<span id="an_3:20">3:20</span> For our citizenship is in heaven; whence
also we wait for a Saviour, the Lord Jesus Christ:

<span id="an_3:21">3:21</span> who shall fashion anew the body of our
humiliation, \[that it may be\] conformed to the body of his glory,
according to the working whereby he is able even to subject all things
unto himself.

<span id="an_4:1">4:1</span> Wherefore, my brethren beloved and longed
for, my joy and crown, so stand fast in the Lord, my beloved.

<span id="an_4:2">4:2</span> I exhort Euodia, and I exhort Syntyche, to
be of the same mind in the Lord.

<span id="an_4:3">4:3</span> Yea, I beseech thee also, true yokefellow,
help these women, for they labored with me in the gospel, with Clement
also, and the rest of my fellow-workers, whose names are in the book of
life.

<span id="an_4:4">4:4</span> Rejoice in the Lord always: again I will
say, Rejoice.

<span id="an_4:5">4:5</span> Let your forbearance be known unto all men.
The Lord is at hand.

<span id="an_4:6">4:6</span> In nothing be anxious; but in everything by
prayer and supplication with thanksgiving let your requests be made
known unto God.

<span id="an_4:7">4:7</span> And the peace of God, which passeth all
understanding, shall guard your hearts and your thoughts in Christ
Jesus.

<span id="an_4:8">4:8</span> Finally, brethren, whatsoever things are
true, whatsoever things are honorable, whatsoever things are just,
whatsoever things are pure, whatsoever things are lovely, whatsoever
things are of good report; if there be any virtue, and if there be any
praise, think on these things.

<span id="an_4:9">4:9</span> The things which ye both learned and
received and heard and saw in me, these things do: and the God of peace
shall be with you.

<span id="an_4:10">4:10</span> But I rejoice in the Lord greatly, that
now at length ye have revived your thought for me; wherein ye did indeed
take thought, but ye lacked opportunity.

<span id="an_4:11">4:11</span> Not that I speak in respect of want: for
I have learned, in whatsoever state I am, therein to be content.

<span id="an_4:12">4:12</span> I know how to be abased, and I know also
how to abound: in everything and in all things have I learned the secret
both to be filled and to be hungry, both to abound and to be in want.

<span id="an_4:13">4:13</span> I can do all things in him that
strengtheneth me.

<span id="an_4:14">4:14</span> Howbeit ye did well that ye had
fellowship with my affliction.

<span id="an_4:15">4:15</span> And ye yourselves also know, ye
Philippians, that in the beginning of the gospel, when I departed from
Macedonia, no church had fellowship with me in the matter of giving and
receiving but ye only;

<span id="an_4:16">4:16</span> for even in Thessalonica ye sent once and
again unto my need.

<span id="an_4:17">4:17</span> Not that I seek for the gift; but I seek
for the fruit that increaseth to your account.

<span id="an_4:18">4:18</span> But I have all things, and abound: I am
filled, having received from Epaphroditus the things \[that came\] from
you, and odor of a sweet smell, a sacrifice acceptable, well-pleasing to
God.

<span id="an_4:19">4:19</span> And my God shall supply every need of
yours according to his riches in glory in Christ Jesus.

<span id="an_4:20">4:20</span> Now unto our God and Father \[be\] the
glory for ever and ever. Amen.

<span id="an_4:21">4:21</span> Salute every saint in Christ Jesus. The
brethren that are with me salute you.

<span id="an_4:22">4:22</span> All the saints salute you, especially
they that are of Caesar's household.

<span id="an_4:23">4:23</span> The grace of the Lord Jesus Christ be
with your spirit.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Colossians](col)
