[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index.md)  [English
Bibles](../eb)  [Index](index)  [Previous](psa)  [Next](ecc.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### American Standard Version: Proverbs

<span id="an_1:1">1:1</span> The proverbs of Solomon the son of David,
king of Israel:

<span id="an_1:2">1:2</span> To know wisdom and instruction; To discern
the words of understanding;

<span id="an_1:3">1:3</span> To receive instruction in wise dealing, In
righteousness and justice and equity;

<span id="an_1:4">1:4</span> To give prudence to the simple, To the
young man knowledge and discretion:

<span id="an_1:5">1:5</span> That the wise man may hear, and increase in
learning; And that the man of understanding may attain unto sound
counsels:

<span id="an_1:6">1:6</span> To understand a proverb, and a figure, The
words of the wise, and their dark sayings.

<span id="an_1:7">1:7</span> The fear of Jehovah is the beginning of
knowledge; \[But\] the foolish despise wisdom and instruction.

<span id="an_1:8">1:8</span> My son, hear the instruction of thy father,
And forsake not the law of thy mother:

<span id="an_1:9">1:9</span> For they shall be a chaplet of grace unto
thy head, And chains about thy neck.

<span id="an_1:10">1:10</span> My son, if sinners entice thee, Consent
thou not.

<span id="an_1:11">1:11</span> If they say, Come with us, Let us lay
wait for blood; Let us lurk privily for the innocent without cause;

<span id="an_1:12">1:12</span> Let us swallow them up alive as Sheol,
And whole, as those that go down into the pit;

<span id="an_1:13">1:13</span> We shall find all precious substance; We
shall fill our houses with spoil;

<span id="an_1:14">1:14</span> Thou shalt cast thy lot among us; We will
all have one purse:

<span id="an_1:15">1:15</span> My son, walk not thou in the way with
them; Refrain thy foot from their path:

<span id="an_1:16">1:16</span> For their feet run to evil, And they make
haste to shed blood.

<span id="an_1:17">1:17</span> For in vain is the net spread In the
sight of any bird:

<span id="an_1:18">1:18</span> And these lay wait for their own blood;
They lurk privily for their own lives.

<span id="an_1:19">1:19</span> So are the ways of every one that is
greedy of gain; It taketh away the life of the owners thereof.

<span id="an_1:20">1:20</span> Wisdom crieth aloud in the street; She
uttereth her voice in the broad places;

<span id="an_1:21">1:21</span> She crieth in the chief place of
concourse; At the entrance of the gates, In the city, she uttereth her
words:

<span id="an_1:22">1:22</span> How long, ye simple ones, will ye love
simplicity? And scoffers delight them in scoffing, And fools hate
knowledge?

<span id="an_1:23">1:23</span> Turn you at my reproof: Behold, I will
pour out my spirit upon you; I will make known my words unto you.

<span id="an_1:24">1:24</span> Because I have called, and ye have
refused; I have stretched out my hand, and no man hath regarded;

<span id="an_1:25">1:25</span> But ye have set at nought all my counsel,
And would none of my reproof:

<span id="an_1:26">1:26</span> I also will laugh in \[the day of\] your
calamity; I will mock when your fear cometh;

<span id="an_1:27">1:27</span> When your fear cometh as a storm, And
your calamity cometh on as a whirlwind; When distress and anguish come
upon you.

<span id="an_1:28">1:28</span> Then will they call upon me, but I will
not answer; They will seek me diligently, but they shall not find me:

<span id="an_1:29">1:29</span> For that they hated knowledge, And did
not choose the fear of Jehovah:

<span id="an_1:30">1:30</span> They would none of my counsel; They
despised all my reproof.

<span id="an_1:31">1:31</span> Therefore shall they eat of the fruit of
their own way, And be filled with their own devices.

<span id="an_1:32">1:32</span> For the backsliding of the simple shall
slay them, And the careless ease of fools shall destroy them.

<span id="an_1:33">1:33</span> But whoso hearkeneth unto me shall dwell
securely, And shall be quiet without fear of evil.

<span id="an_2:1">2:1</span> My son, if thou wilt receive my words, And
lay up my commandments with thee;

<span id="an_2:2">2:2</span> So as to incline thine ear unto wisdom, And
apply thy heart to understanding;

<span id="an_2:3">2:3</span> Yea, if thou cry after discernment, And
lift up thy voice for understanding;

<span id="an_2:4">2:4</span> If thou seek her as silver, And search for
her as for hid treasures:

<span id="an_2:5">2:5</span> Then shalt thou understand the fear of
Jehovah, And find the knowledge of God.

<span id="an_2:6">2:6</span> For Jehovah giveth wisdom; Out of his mouth
\[cometh\] knowledge and understanding:

<span id="an_2:7">2:7</span> He layeth up sound wisdom for the upright;
\[He is\] a shield to them that walk in integrity;

<span id="an_2:8">2:8</span> That he may guard the paths of justice, And
preserve the way of his saints.

<span id="an_2:9">2:9</span> Then shalt thou understand righteousness
and justice, And equity, \[yea\], every good path.

<span id="an_2:10">2:10</span> For wisdom shall enter into thy heart,
And knowledge shall be pleasant unto thy soul;

<span id="an_2:11">2:11</span> Discretion shall watch over thee;
Understanding shall keep thee:

<span id="an_2:12">2:12</span> To deliver thee from the way of evil,
From the men that speak perverse things;

<span id="an_2:13">2:13</span> Who forsake the paths of uprightness, To
walk in the ways of darkness;

<span id="an_2:14">2:14</span> Who rejoice to do evil, And delight in
the perverseness of evil;

<span id="an_2:15">2:15</span> Who are crooked in their ways, And
wayward in their paths:

<span id="an_2:16">2:16</span> To deliver thee from the strange woman,
Even from the foreigner that flattereth with her words;

<span id="an_2:17">2:17</span> That forsaketh the friend of her youth,
And forgetteth the covenant of her God:

<span id="an_2:18">2:18</span> For her house inclineth unto death, And
her paths unto the dead;

<span id="an_2:19">2:19</span> None that go unto her return again,
Neither do they attain unto the paths of life:

<span id="an_2:20">2:20</span> That thou mayest walk in the way of good
men, And keep the paths of the righteous.

<span id="an_2:21">2:21</span> For the upright shall dwell in the land,
And the perfect shall remain in it.

<span id="an_2:22">2:22</span> But the wicked shall be cut off from the
land, And the treacherous shall be rooted out of it.

<span id="an_3:1">3:1</span> My son, forget not my law; But let thy
heart keep my commandments:

<span id="an_3:2">3:2</span> For length of days, and years of life, And
peace, will they add to thee.

<span id="an_3:3">3:3</span> Let not kindness and truth forsake thee:
Bind them about thy neck; Write them upon the tablet of thy heart:

<span id="an_3:4">3:4</span> So shalt thou find favor and good
understanding In the sight of God and man.

<span id="an_3:5">3:5</span> Trust in Jehovah with all thy heart, And
lean not upon thine own understanding:

<span id="an_3:6">3:6</span> In all thy ways acknowledge him, And he
will direct thy paths.

<span id="an_3:7">3:7</span> Be not wise in thine own eyes; Fear
Jehovah, and depart from evil:

<span id="an_3:8">3:8</span> It will be health to thy navel, And marrow
to thy bones.

<span id="an_3:9">3:9</span> Honor Jehovah with thy substance, And with
the first-fruits of all thine increase:

<span id="an_3:10">3:10</span> So shall thy barns be filled with plenty,
And thy vats shall overflow with new wine.

<span id="an_3:11">3:11</span> My son, despise not the chastening of
Jehovah; Neither be weary of his reproof:

<span id="an_3:12">3:12</span> For whom Jehovah loveth he reproveth;
Even as a father the son in whom he delighteth.

<span id="an_3:13">3:13</span> Happy is the man that findeth wisdom, And
the man that getteth understanding.

<span id="an_3:14">3:14</span> For the gaining of it is better than the
gaining of silver, And the profit thereof than fine gold.

<span id="an_3:15">3:15</span> She is more precious than rubies: And
none of the things thou canst desire are to be compared unto her.

<span id="an_3:16">3:16</span> Length of days is in her right hand; In
her left hand are riches and honor.

<span id="an_3:17">3:17</span> Her ways are ways of pleasantness, And
all her paths are peace.

<span id="an_3:18">3:18</span> She is a tree of life to them that lay
hold upon her: And happy is every one that retaineth her.

<span id="an_3:19">3:19</span> Jehovah by wisdom founded the earth; By
understanding he established the heavens.

<span id="an_3:20">3:20</span> By his knowledge the depths were broken
up, And the skies drop down the dew.

<span id="an_3:21">3:21</span> My son, let them not depart from thine
eyes; Keep sound wisdom and discretion:

<span id="an_3:22">3:22</span> So shall they be life unto thy soul, And
grace to thy neck.

<span id="an_3:23">3:23</span> Then shalt thou walk in thy way securely,
And thy foot shall not stumble.

<span id="an_3:24">3:24</span> When thou liest down, thou shalt not be
afraid: Yea, thou shalt lie down, and thy sleep shall be sweet.

<span id="an_3:25">3:25</span> Be not afraid of sudden fear, Neither of
the desolation of the wicked, when it cometh:

<span id="an_3:26">3:26</span> For Jehovah will be thy confidence, And
will keep thy foot from being taken.

<span id="an_3:27">3:27</span> Withhold not good from them to whom it is
due, When it is in the power of thy hand to do it.

<span id="an_3:28">3:28</span> Say not unto thy neighbor, Go, and come
again, And to-morrow I will give; When thou hast it by thee.

<span id="an_3:29">3:29</span> Devise not evil against thy neighbor,
Seeing he dwelleth securely by thee.

<span id="an_3:30">3:30</span> Strive not with a man without cause, If
he have done thee no harm.

<span id="an_3:31">3:31</span> Envy thou not the man of violence, And
choose none of his ways.

<span id="an_3:32">3:32</span> For the perverse is an abomination to
Jehovah; But his friendship is with the upright.

<span id="an_3:33">3:33</span> The curse of Jehovah is in the house of
the wicked; But he blesseth the habitation of the righteous.

<span id="an_3:34">3:34</span> Surely he scoffeth at the scoffers; But
he giveth grace unto the lowly.

<span id="an_3:35">3:35</span> The wise shall inherit glory; But shame
shall be the promotion of fools.

<span id="an_4:1">4:1</span> Hear, \[my\] sons, the instruction of a
father, And attend to know understanding:

<span id="an_4:2">4:2</span> For I give you good doctrine; Forsake ye
not my law.

<span id="an_4:3">4:3</span> For I was a son unto my father, Tender and
only beloved in the sight of my mother.

<span id="an_4:4">4:4</span> And he taught me, and said unto me: Let thy
heart retain my words; Keep my commandments, and live;

<span id="an_4:5">4:5</span> Get wisdom, get understanding; Forget not,
neither decline from the words of my mouth;

<span id="an_4:6">4:6</span> Forsake her not, and she will preserve
thee; Love her, and she will keep thee.

<span id="an_4:7">4:7</span> Wisdom \[is\] the principal thing;
\[therefore\] get wisdom; Yea, with all thy getting get understanding.

<span id="an_4:8">4:8</span> Exalt her, and she will promote thee; She
will bring thee to honor, when thou dost embrace her.

<span id="an_4:9">4:9</span> She will give to thy head a chaplet of
grace; A crown of beauty will she deliver to thee.

<span id="an_4:10">4:10</span> Hear, O my son, and receive my sayings;
And the years of thy life shall be many.

<span id="an_4:11">4:11</span> I have taught thee in the way of wisdom;
I have led thee in paths of uprightness.

<span id="an_4:12">4:12</span> When thou goest, thy steps shall not be
straitened; And if thou runnest, thou shalt not stumble.

<span id="an_4:13">4:13</span> Take fast hold of instruction; let her
not go: Keep her; for she is thy life.

<span id="an_4:14">4:14</span> Enter not into the path of the wicked,
And walk not in the way of evil men.

<span id="an_4:15">4:15</span> Avoid it, pass not by it; Turn from it,
and pass on.

<span id="an_4:16">4:16</span> For they sleep not, except they do evil;
And their sleep is taken away, unless they cause some to fall.

<span id="an_4:17">4:17</span> For they eat the bread of wickedness, And
drink the wine of violence.

<span id="an_4:18">4:18</span> But the path of the righteous is as the
dawning light, That shineth more and more unto the perfect day.

<span id="an_4:19">4:19</span> The way of the wicked is as darkness:
They know not at what they stumble.

<span id="an_4:20">4:20</span> My son, attend to my words; Incline thine
ear unto my sayings.

<span id="an_4:21">4:21</span> Let them not depart from thine eyes; Keep
them in the midst of thy heart.

<span id="an_4:22">4:22</span> For they are life unto those that find
them, And health to all their flesh.

<span id="an_4:23">4:23</span> Keep thy heart with all diligence; For
out of it are the issues of life.

<span id="an_4:24">4:24</span> Put away from thee a wayward mouth, And
perverse lips put far from thee.

<span id="an_4:25">4:25</span> Let thine eyes look right on, And let
thine eyelids look straight before thee.

<span id="an_4:26">4:26</span> Make level the path of thy feet, And let
all thy ways be established.

<span id="an_4:27">4:27</span> Turn not to the right hand nor to the
left: Remove thy foot from evil.

<span id="an_5:1">5:1</span> My son, attend unto my wisdom; Incline
thine ear to my understanding:

<span id="an_5:2">5:2</span> That thou mayest preserve discretion, And
that thy lips may keep knowledge.

<span id="an_5:3">5:3</span> For the lips of a strange woman drop honey,
And her mouth is smoother than oil:

<span id="an_5:4">5:4</span> But in the end she is bitter as wormwood,
Sharp as a two-edged sword.

<span id="an_5:5">5:5</span> Her feet go down to death; Her steps take
hold on Sheol;

<span id="an_5:6">5:6</span> So that she findeth not the level path of
life: Her ways are unstable, \[and\] she knoweth \[it\] not.

<span id="an_5:7">5:7</span> Now therefore, \[my\] sons, hearken unto
me, And depart not from the words of my mouth.

<span id="an_5:8">5:8</span> Remove thy way far from her, And come not
nigh the door of her house;

<span id="an_5:9">5:9</span> Lest thou give thine honor unto others, And
thy years unto the cruel;

<span id="an_5:10">5:10</span> Lest strangers be filled with thy
strength, And thy labors \[be\] in the house of an alien,

<span id="an_5:11">5:11</span> And thou mourn at thy latter end, When
thy flesh and thy body are consumed,

<span id="an_5:12">5:12</span> And say, How have I hated instruction,
And my heart despised reproof;

<span id="an_5:13">5:13</span> Neither have I obeyed the voice of my
teachers, Nor inclined mine ear to them that instructed me!

<span id="an_5:14">5:14</span> I was well-nigh in all evil In the midst
of the assembly and congregation.

<span id="an_5:15">5:15</span> Drink waters out of thine own cistern,
And running waters out of thine own well.

<span id="an_5:16">5:16</span> Should thy springs be dispersed abroad,
And streams of water in the streets?

<span id="an_5:17">5:17</span> Let them be for thyself alone, And not
for strangers with thee.

<span id="an_5:18">5:18</span> Let thy fountain be blessed; And rejoice
in the wife of thy youth.

<span id="an_5:19">5:19</span> \[As\] a loving hind and a pleasant doe,
Let her breasts satisfy thee at all times; And be thou ravished always
with her love.

<span id="an_5:20">5:20</span> For why shouldest thou, my son, be
ravished with a strange woman, And embrace the bosom of a foreigner?

<span id="an_5:21">5:21</span> For the ways of man are before the eyes
of Jehovah; And he maketh level all his paths.

<span id="an_5:22">5:22</span> His own iniquities shall take the wicked,
And he shall be holden with the cords of his sin.

<span id="an_5:23">5:23</span> He shall die for lack of instruction; And
in the greatness of his folly he shall go astray.

<span id="an_6:1">6:1</span> My son, if thou art become surety for thy
neighbor, If thou hast stricken thy hands for a stranger;

<span id="an_6:2">6:2</span> Thou art snared with the words of thy
mouth, Thou art taken with the words of thy mouth.

<span id="an_6:3">6:3</span> Do this now, my son, and deliver thyself,
Seeing thou art come into the hand of thy neighbor: Go, humble thyself,
and importune thy neighbor;

<span id="an_6:4">6:4</span> Give not sleep to thine eyes, Nor slumber
to thine eyelids;

<span id="an_6:5">6:5</span> Deliver thyself as a roe from the hand \[of
the hunter\], And as a bird from the hand of the fowler.

<span id="an_6:6">6:6</span> Go to the ant, thou sluggard; Consider her
ways, and be wise:

<span id="an_6:7">6:7</span> Which having no chief, Overseer, or ruler,

<span id="an_6:8">6:8</span> Provideth her bread in the summer, And
gathereth her food in the harvest.

<span id="an_6:9">6:9</span> How long wilt thou sleep, O sluggard? When
wilt thou arise out of thy sleep?

<span id="an_6:10">6:10</span> \[Yet\] a little sleep, a little slumber,
A little folding of the hands to sleep:

<span id="an_6:11">6:11</span> So shall thy poverty come as a robber,
And thy want as an armed man.

<span id="an_6:12">6:12</span> A worthless person, a man of iniquity, Is
he that walketh with a perverse mouth;

<span id="an_6:13">6:13</span> That winketh with his eyes, that speaketh
with his feet, That maketh signs with his fingers;

<span id="an_6:14">6:14</span> In whose heart is perverseness, Who
deviseth evil continually, Who soweth discord.

<span id="an_6:15">6:15</span> Therefore shall his calamity come
suddenly; On a sudden shall he be broken, and that without remedy.

<span id="an_6:16">6:16</span> There are six things which Jehovah
hateth; Yea, seven which are an abomination unto him:

<span id="an_6:17">6:17</span> Haughty eyes, a lying tongue, And hands
that shed innocent blood;

<span id="an_6:18">6:18</span> A heart that deviseth wicked purposes,
Feet that are swift in running to mischief,

<span id="an_6:19">6:19</span> A false witness that uttereth lies, And
he that soweth discord among brethren.

<span id="an_6:20">6:20</span> My son, keep the commandment of thy
father, And forsake not the law of thy mother:

<span id="an_6:21">6:21</span> Bind them continually upon thy heart; Tie
them about thy neck.

<span id="an_6:22">6:22</span> When thou walkest, it shall lead thee;
When thou sleepest, it shall watch over thee; And when thou awakest, it
shall talk with thee.

<span id="an_6:23">6:23</span> For the commandment is a lamp; and the
law is light; And reproofs of instruction are the way of life:

<span id="an_6:24">6:24</span> To keep thee from the evil woman, From
the flattery of the foreigner's tongue.

<span id="an_6:25">6:25</span> Lust not after her beauty in thy heart;
Neither let her take thee with her eyelids.

<span id="an_6:26">6:26</span> For on account of a harlot \[a man is
brought\] to a piece of bread; And the adulteress hunteth for the
precious life.

<span id="an_6:27">6:27</span> Can a man take fire in his bosom, And his
clothes not be burned?

<span id="an_6:28">6:28</span> Or can one walk upon hot coals, And his
feet not be scorched?

<span id="an_6:29">6:29</span> So he that goeth in to his neighbor's
wife; Whosoever toucheth her shall not be unpunished.

<span id="an_6:30">6:30</span> Men do not despise a thief, if he steal
To satisfy himself when he is hungry:

<span id="an_6:31">6:31</span> But if he be found, he shall restore
sevenfold; He shall give all the substance of his house.

<span id="an_6:32">6:32</span> He that committeth adultery with a woman
is void of understanding: He doeth it who would destroy his own soul.

<span id="an_6:33">6:33</span> Wounds and dishonor shall he get; And his
reproach shall not be wiped away.

<span id="an_6:34">6:34</span> For jealousy is the rage of a man; And he
will not spare in the day of vengeance.

<span id="an_6:35">6:35</span> He will not regard any ransom; Neither
will he rest content, though thou givest many gifts.

<span id="an_7:1">7:1</span> My son, keep my words, And lay up my
commandments with thee.

<span id="an_7:2">7:2</span> Keep my commandments and live; And my law
as the apple of thine eye.

<span id="an_7:3">7:3</span> Bind them upon thy fingers; Write them upon
the tablet of thy heart.

<span id="an_7:4">7:4</span> Say unto wisdom, Thou art my sister; And
call understanding \[thy\] kinswoman:

<span id="an_7:5">7:5</span> That they may keep thee from the strange
woman, From the foreigner that flattereth with her words.

<span id="an_7:6">7:6</span> For at the window of my house I looked
forth through my lattice;

<span id="an_7:7">7:7</span> And I beheld among the simple ones, I
discerned among the youths, A young man void of understanding,

<span id="an_7:8">7:8</span> Passing through the street near her corner;
And he went the way to her house,

<span id="an_7:9">7:9</span> In the twilight, in the evening of the day,
In the middle of the night and in the darkness.

<span id="an_7:10">7:10</span> And, behold, there met him a woman With
the attire of a harlot, and wily of heart.

<span id="an_7:11">7:11</span> She is clamorous and wilful; Her feet
abide not in her house:

<span id="an_7:12">7:12</span> Now she is in the streets, now in the
broad places, And lieth in wait at every corner.

<span id="an_7:13">7:13</span> So she caught him, and kissed him,
\[And\] with an impudent face she said unto him:

<span id="an_7:14">7:14</span> Sacrifices of peace-offerings are with
me; This day have I paid my vows.

<span id="an_7:15">7:15</span> Therefore came I forth to meet thee,
Diligently to seek thy face, and I have found thee.

<span id="an_7:16">7:16</span> I have spread my couch with carpets of
tapestry, With striped cloths of the yarn of Egypt.

<span id="an_7:17">7:17</span> I have perfumed my bed With myrrh, aloes,
and cinnamon.

<span id="an_7:18">7:18</span> Come, let us take our fill of love until
the morning; Let us solace ourselves with loves.

<span id="an_7:19">7:19</span> For the man is not at home; He is gone a
long journey:

<span id="an_7:20">7:20</span> He hath taken a bag of money with him; He
will come home at the full moon.

<span id="an_7:21">7:21</span> With her much fair speech she causeth him
to yield; With the flattering of her lips she forceth him along.

<span id="an_7:22">7:22</span> He goeth after her straightway, As an ox
goeth to the slaughter, Or as \[one in\] fetters to the correction of
the fool;

<span id="an_7:23">7:23</span> Till an arrow strike through his liver;
As a bird hasteth to the snare, And knoweth not that it is for his life.

<span id="an_7:24">7:24</span> Now therefore, \[my\] sons, hearken unto
me, And attend to the words of my mouth.

<span id="an_7:25">7:25</span> Let not thy heart decline to her ways; Go
not astray in her paths.

<span id="an_7:26">7:26</span> For she hath cast down many wounded: Yea,
all her slain are a mighty host.

<span id="an_7:27">7:27</span> Her house is the way to Sheol, Going down
to the chambers of death.

<span id="an_8:1">8:1</span> Doth not wisdom cry, And understanding put
forth her voice?

<span id="an_8:2">8:2</span> On the top of high places by the way, Where
the paths meet, she standeth;

<span id="an_8:3">8:3</span> Beside the gates, at the entry of the city,
At the coming in at the doors, she crieth aloud:

<span id="an_8:4">8:4</span> Unto you, O men, I call; And my voice is to
the sons of men.

<span id="an_8:5">8:5</span> O ye simple, understand prudence; And, ye
fools, be of an understanding heart.

<span id="an_8:6">8:6</span> Hear, for I will speak excellent things;
And the opening of my lips shall be right things.

<span id="an_8:7">8:7</span> For my mouth shall utter truth; And
wickedness is an abomination to my lips.

<span id="an_8:8">8:8</span> All the words of my mouth are in
righteousness; There is nothing crooked or perverse in them.

<span id="an_8:9">8:9</span> They are all plain to him that
understandeth, And right to them that find knowledge.

<span id="an_8:10">8:10</span> Receive my instruction, and not silver;
And knowledge rather than choice gold.

<span id="an_8:11">8:11</span> For wisdom is better than rubies; And all
the things that may be desired are not to be compared unto it.

<span id="an_8:12">8:12</span> I wisdom have made prudence my dwelling,
And find out knowledge \[and\] discretion.

<span id="an_8:13">8:13</span> The fear of Jehovah is to hate evil:
Pride, and arrogancy, and the evil way, And the perverse mouth, do I
hate.

<span id="an_8:14">8:14</span> Counsel is mine, and sound knowledge: I
am understanding; I have might.

<span id="an_8:15">8:15</span> By me kings reign, And princes decree
justice.

<span id="an_8:16">8:16</span> By me princes rule, And nobles, \[even\]
all the judges of the earth.

<span id="an_8:17">8:17</span> I love them that love me; And those that
seek me diligently shall find me.

<span id="an_8:18">8:18</span> Riches and honor are with me; \[Yea\],
durable wealth and righteousness.

<span id="an_8:19">8:19</span> My fruit is better than gold, yea, than
fine gold; And my revenue than choice silver.

<span id="an_8:20">8:20</span> I walk in the way of righteousness, In
the midst of the paths of justice;

<span id="an_8:21">8:21</span> That I may cause those that love me to
inherit substance, And that I may fill their treasuries.

<span id="an_8:22">8:22</span> Jehovah possessed me in the beginning of
his way, Before his works of old.

<span id="an_8:23">8:23</span> I was set up from everlasting, from the
beginning, Before the earth was.

<span id="an_8:24">8:24</span> When there were no depths, I was brought
forth, When there were no fountains abounding with water.

<span id="an_8:25">8:25</span> Before the mountains were settled, Before
the hills was I brought forth;

<span id="an_8:26">8:26</span> While as yet he had not made the earth,
nor the fields, Nor the beginning of the dust of the world.

<span id="an_8:27">8:27</span> When he established the heavens, I was
there: When he set a circle upon the face of the deep,

<span id="an_8:28">8:28</span> When he made firm the skies above, When
the fountains of the deep became strong,

<span id="an_8:29">8:29</span> When he gave to the sea its bound, That
the waters should not transgress his commandment, When he marked out the
foundations of the earth;

<span id="an_8:30">8:30</span> Then I was by him, \[as\] a master
workman; And I was daily \[his\] delight, Rejoicing always before him,

<span id="an_8:31">8:31</span> Rejoicing in his habitable earth; And my
delight was with the sons of men.

<span id="an_8:32">8:32</span> Now therefore, \[my\] sons, hearken unto
me; For blessed are they that keep my ways.

<span id="an_8:33">8:33</span> Hear instruction, and be wise, And refuse
it not.

<span id="an_8:34">8:34</span> Blessed is the man that heareth me,
Watching daily at my gates, Waiting at the posts of my doors.

<span id="an_8:35">8:35</span> For whoso findeth me findeth life, And
shall obtain favor of Jehovah.

<span id="an_8:36">8:36</span> But he that sinneth against me wrongeth
his own soul: All they that hate me love death.

<span id="an_9:1">9:1</span> Wisdom hath builded her house; She hath
hewn out her seven pillars:

<span id="an_9:2">9:2</span> She hath killed her beasts; She hath
mingled her wine; She hath also furnished her table:

<span id="an_9:3">9:3</span> She hath sent forth her maidens; She crieth
upon the highest places of the city:

<span id="an_9:4">9:4</span> Whoso is simple, let him turn in hither: As
for him that is void of understanding, she saith to him,

<span id="an_9:5">9:5</span> Come, eat ye of my bread, And drink of the
wine which I have mingled.

<span id="an_9:6">9:6</span> Leave off, ye simple ones, and live; And
walk in the way of understanding.

<span id="an_9:7">9:7</span> He that correcteth a scoffer getteth to
himself reviling; And he that reproveth a wicked man \[getteth\] himself
a blot.

<span id="an_9:8">9:8</span> Reprove not a scoffer, lest he hate thee:
Reprove a wise man, and he will love thee.

<span id="an_9:9">9:9</span> Give \[instruction\] to a wise man, and he
will be yet wiser: Teach a righteous man, and he will increase in
learning.

<span id="an_9:10">9:10</span> The fear of Jehovah is the beginning of
wisdom; And the knowledge of the Holy One is understanding.

<span id="an_9:11">9:11</span> For by me thy days shall be multiplied,
And the years of thy life shall be increased.

<span id="an_9:12">9:12</span> If thou art wise, thou art wise for
thyself; And if thou scoffest, thou alone shalt bear it.

<span id="an_9:13">9:13</span> The foolish woman is clamorous; \[She
is\] simple, and knoweth nothing.

<span id="an_9:14">9:14</span> And she sitteth at the door of her house,
On a seat in the high places of the city,

<span id="an_9:15">9:15</span> To call to them that pass by, Who go
right on their ways:

<span id="an_9:16">9:16</span> Whoso is simple, let him turn in hither;
And as for him that is void of understanding, she saith to him,

<span id="an_9:17">9:17</span> Stolen waters are sweet, And bread
\[eaten\] in secret is pleasant.

<span id="an_9:18">9:18</span> But he knoweth not that the dead are
there; That her guests are in the depths of Sheol.

<span id="an_10:1">10:1</span> The proverbs of Solomon. A wise son
maketh a glad father; But a foolish son is the heaviness of his mother.

<span id="an_10:2">10:2</span> Treasures of wickedness profit nothing;
But righteousness delivereth from death.

<span id="an_10:3">10:3</span> Jehovah will not suffer the soul of the
righteous to famish; But he thrusteth away the desire of the wicked.

<span id="an_10:4">10:4</span> He becometh poor that worketh with a
slack hand; But the hand of the diligent maketh rich.

<span id="an_10:5">10:5</span> He that gathereth in summer is a wise
son; \[But\] he that sleepeth in harvest is a son that causeth shame.

<span id="an_10:6">10:6</span> Blessings are upon the head of the
righteous; But violence covereth the mouth of the wicked.

<span id="an_10:7">10:7</span> The memory of the righteous is blessed;
But the name of the wicked shall rot.

<span id="an_10:8">10:8</span> The wise in heart will receive
commandments; But a prating fool shall fall.

<span id="an_10:9">10:9</span> He that walketh uprightly walketh surely;
But he that perverteth his ways shall be known.

<span id="an_10:10">10:10</span> He that winketh with the eye causeth
sorrow; But a prating fool shall fall.

<span id="an_10:11">10:11</span> The mouth of the righteous is a
fountain of life; But violence covereth the mouth of the wicked.

<span id="an_10:12">10:12</span> Hatred stirreth up strifes; But love
covereth all transgressions.

<span id="an_10:13">10:13</span> In the lips of him that hath
discernment wisdom is found; But a rod is for the back of him that is
void of understanding.

<span id="an_10:14">10:14</span> Wise men lay up knowledge; But the
mouth of the foolish is a present destruction.

<span id="an_10:15">10:15</span> The rich man's wealth is his strong
city: The destruction of the poor is their poverty.

<span id="an_10:16">10:16</span> The labor of the righteous \[tendeth\]
to life; The increase of the wicked, to sin.

<span id="an_10:17">10:17</span> He is in the way of life that heedeth
correction; But he that forsaketh reproof erreth.

<span id="an_10:18">10:18</span> He that hideth hatred is of lying lips;
And he that uttereth a slander is a fool.

<span id="an_10:19">10:19</span> In the multitude of words there wanteth
not transgression; But he that refraineth his lips doeth wisely.

<span id="an_10:20">10:20</span> The tongue of the righteous is \[as\]
choice silver: The heart of the wicked is little worth.

<span id="an_10:21">10:21</span> The lips of the righteous feed many;
But the foolish die for lack of understanding.

<span id="an_10:22">10:22</span> The blessing of Jehovah, it maketh
rich; And he addeth no sorrow therewith.

<span id="an_10:23">10:23</span> It is as sport to a fool to do
wickedness; And \[so is\] wisdom to a man of understanding.

<span id="an_10:24">10:24</span> The fear of the wicked, it shall come
upon him; And the desire of the righteous shall be granted.

<span id="an_10:25">10:25</span> When the whirlwind passeth, the wicked
is no more; But the righteous is an everlasting foundation.

<span id="an_10:26">10:26</span> As vinegar to the teeth, and as smoke
to the eyes, So is the sluggard to them that send him.

<span id="an_10:27">10:27</span> The fear of Jehovah prolongeth days;
But the years of the wicked shall be shortened.

<span id="an_10:28">10:28</span> The hope of the righteous \[shall be\]
gladness; But the expectation of the wicked shall perish.

<span id="an_10:29">10:29</span> The way of Jehovah is a stronghold to
the upright; But it is a destruction to the workers of iniquity.

<span id="an_10:30">10:30</span> The righteous shall never be removed;
But the wicked shall not dwell in the land.

<span id="an_10:31">10:31</span> The mouth of the righteous bringeth
forth wisdom; But the perverse tongue shall be cut off.

<span id="an_10:32">10:32</span> The lips of the righteous know what is
acceptable; But the mouth of the wicked \[speaketh\] perverseness.

<span id="an_11:1">11:1</span> A false balance is an abomination to
Jehovah; But a just weight is his delight.

<span id="an_11:2">11:2</span> When pride cometh, then cometh shame; But
with the lowly is wisdom.

<span id="an_11:3">11:3</span> The integrity of the upright shall guide
them; But the perverseness of the treacherous shall destroy them.

<span id="an_11:4">11:4</span> Riches profit not in the day of wrath;
But righteousness delivereth from death.

<span id="an_11:5">11:5</span> The righteousness of the perfect shall
direct his way; But the wicked shall fall by his own wickedness.

<span id="an_11:6">11:6</span> The righteousness of the upright shall
deliver them; But the treacherous shall be taken in their own iniquity.

<span id="an_11:7">11:7</span> When a wicked man dieth, \[his\]
expectation shall perish; And the hope of iniquity perisheth.

<span id="an_11:8">11:8</span> The righteous is delivered out of
trouble, And the wicked cometh in his stead.

<span id="an_11:9">11:9</span> With his mouth the godless man destroyeth
his neighbor; But through knowledge shall the righteous be delivered.

<span id="an_11:10">11:10</span> When it goeth well with the righteous,
the city rejoiceth; And when the wicked perish, there is shouting.

<span id="an_11:11">11:11</span> By the blessing of the upright the city
is exalted; But it is overthrown by the mouth of the wicked.

<span id="an_11:12">11:12</span> He that despiseth his neighbor is void
of wisdom; But a man of understanding holdeth his peace.

<span id="an_11:13">11:13</span> He that goeth about as a tale-bearer
revealeth secrets; But he that is of a faithful spirit concealeth a
matter.

<span id="an_11:14">11:14</span> Where no wise guidance is, the people
falleth; But in the multitude of counsellors there is safety.

<span id="an_11:15">11:15</span> He that is surety for a stranger shall
smart for it; But he that hateth suretyship is secure.

<span id="an_11:16">11:16</span> A gracious woman obtaineth honor; And
violent men obtain riches.

<span id="an_11:17">11:17</span> The merciful man doeth good to his own
soul; But he that is cruel troubleth his own flesh.

<span id="an_11:18">11:18</span> The wicked earneth deceitful wages; But
he that soweth righteousness \[hath\] a sure reward.

<span id="an_11:19">11:19</span> He that is stedfast in righteousness
\[shall attain\] unto life; And he that pursueth evil \[doeth it\] to
his own death.

<span id="an_11:20">11:20</span> They that are perverse in heart are an
abomination to Jehovah; But such as are perfect in \[their\] way are his
delight.

<span id="an_11:21">11:21</span> \[Though\] hand \[join\] in hand, the
evil man shall not be unpunished; But the seed of the righteous shall be
delivered.

<span id="an_11:22">11:22</span> \[As\] a ring of gold in a swine's
snout, \[So is\] a fair woman that is without discretion.

<span id="an_11:23">11:23</span> The desire of the righteous is only
good; \[But\] the expectation of the wicked is wrath.

<span id="an_11:24">11:24</span> There is that scattereth, and
increaseth yet more; And there is that withholdeth more than is meet,
but \[it tendeth\] only to want.

<span id="an_11:25">11:25</span> The liberal soul shall be made fat; And
he that watereth shall be watered also himself.

<span id="an_11:26">11:26</span> He that withholdeth grain, the people
shall curse him; But blessing shall be upon the head of him that selleth
it.

<span id="an_11:27">11:27</span> He that diligently seeketh good seeketh
favor; But he that searcheth after evil, it shall come unto him.

<span id="an_11:28">11:28</span> He that trusteth in his riches shall
fall; But the righteous shall flourish as the green leaf.

<span id="an_11:29">11:29</span> He that troubleth his own house shall
inherit the wind; And the foolish shall be servant to the wise of heart.

<span id="an_11:30">11:30</span> The fruit of the righteous is a tree of
life; And he that is wise winneth souls.

<span id="an_11:31">11:31</span> Behold, the righteous shall be
recompensed in the earth: How much more the wicked and the sinner!

<span id="an_12:1">12:1</span> Whoso loveth correction loveth knowledge;
But he that hateth reproof is brutish.

<span id="an_12:2">12:2</span> A good man shall obtain favor of Jehovah;
But a man of wicked devices will he condemn.

<span id="an_12:3">12:3</span> A man shall not be established by
wickedness; But the root of the righteous shall not be moved.

<span id="an_12:4">12:4</span> A worthy woman is the crown of her
husband; But she that maketh ashamed is as rottenness in his bones.

<span id="an_12:5">12:5</span> The thoughts of the righteous are just;
\[But\] the counsels of the wicked are deceit.

<span id="an_12:6">12:6</span> The words of the wicked are of lying in
wait for blood; But the mouth of the upright shall deliver them.

<span id="an_12:7">12:7</span> The wicked are overthrown, and are not;
But the house of the righteous shall stand.

<span id="an_12:8">12:8</span> A man shall be commended according to his
wisdom; But he that is of a perverse heart shall be despised.

<span id="an_12:9">12:9</span> Better is he that is lightly esteemed,
and hath a servant, Than he that honoreth himself, and lacketh bread.

<span id="an_12:10">12:10</span> A righteous man regardeth the life of
his beast; But the tender mercies of the wicked are cruel.

<span id="an_12:11">12:11</span> He that tilleth his land shall have
plenty of bread; But he that followeth after vain \[persons\] is void of
understanding.

<span id="an_12:12">12:12</span> The wicked desireth the net of evil
men; But the root of the righteous yieldeth \[fruit\].

<span id="an_12:13">12:13</span> In the transgression of the lips is a
snare to the evil man; But the righteous shall come out of trouble.

<span id="an_12:14">12:14</span> A man shall be satisfied with good by
the fruit of his mouth; And the doings of a man's hands shall be
rendered unto him.

<span id="an_12:15">12:15</span> The way of a fool is right in his own
eyes; But he that is wise hearkeneth unto counsel.

<span id="an_12:16">12:16</span> A fool's vexation is presently known;
But a prudent man concealeth shame.

<span id="an_12:17">12:17</span> He that uttereth truth showeth forth
righteousness; But a false witness, deceit.

<span id="an_12:18">12:18</span> There is that speaketh rashly like the
piercings of a sword; But the tongue of the wise is health.

<span id="an_12:19">12:19</span> The lip of truth shall be established
for ever; But a lying tongue is but for a moment.

<span id="an_12:20">12:20</span> Deceit is in the heart of them that
devise evil; But to the counsellors of peace is joy.

<span id="an_12:21">12:21</span> There shall no mischief happen to the
righteous; But the wicked shall be filled with evil.

<span id="an_12:22">12:22</span> Lying lips are an abomination to
Jehovah; But they that deal truly are his delight.

<span id="an_12:23">12:23</span> A prudent man concealeth knowledge; But
the heart of fools proclaimeth foolishness.

<span id="an_12:24">12:24</span> The hand of the diligent shall bear
rule; But the slothful shall be put under taskwork.

<span id="an_12:25">12:25</span> Heaviness in the heart of a man maketh
it stoop; But a good word maketh it glad.

<span id="an_12:26">12:26</span> The righteous is a guide to his
neighbor; But the way of the wicked causeth them to err.

<span id="an_12:27">12:27</span> The slothful man roasteth not that
which he took in hunting; But the precious substance of men \[is to\]
the diligent.

<span id="an_12:28">12:28</span> In the way of righteousness is life;
And in the pathway thereof there is no death.

<span id="an_13:1">13:1</span> A wise son \[heareth\] his father's
instruction; But a scoffer heareth not rebuke.

<span id="an_13:2">13:2</span> A man shall eat good by the fruit of his
mouth; But the soul of the treacherous \[shall eat\] violence.

<span id="an_13:3">13:3</span> He that guardeth his mouth keepeth his
life; \[But\] he that openeth wide his lips shall have destruction.

<span id="an_13:4">13:4</span> The soul of the sluggard desireth, and
hath nothing; But the soul of the diligent shall be made fat.

<span id="an_13:5">13:5</span> A righteous man hateth lying; But a
wicked man is loathsome, and cometh to shame.

<span id="an_13:6">13:6</span> Righteousness guardeth him that is
upright in the way; But wickedness overthroweth the sinner.

<span id="an_13:7">13:7</span> There is that maketh himself rich, yet
hath nothing: There is that maketh himself poor, yet hath great wealth.

<span id="an_13:8">13:8</span> The ransom of a man's life is his riches;
But the poor heareth no threatening.

<span id="an_13:9">13:9</span> The light of the righteous rejoiceth; But
the lamp of the wicked shall be put out.

<span id="an_13:10">13:10</span> By pride cometh only contention; But
with the well-advised is wisdom.

<span id="an_13:11">13:11</span> Wealth gotten by vanity shall be
diminished; But he that gathereth by labor shall have increase.

<span id="an_13:12">13:12</span> Hope deferred maketh the heart sick;
But when the desire cometh, it is a tree of life.

<span id="an_13:13">13:13</span> Whoso despiseth the word bringeth
destruction on himself; But he that feareth the commandment shall be
rewarded.

<span id="an_13:14">13:14</span> The law of the wise is a fountain of
life, That one may depart from the snares of death.

<span id="an_13:15">13:15</span> Good understanding giveth favor; But
the way of the transgressor is hard.

<span id="an_13:16">13:16</span> Every prudent man worketh with
knowledge; But a fool flaunteth \[his\] folly.

<span id="an_13:17">13:17</span> A wicked messenger falleth into evil;
But a faithful ambassador is health.

<span id="an_13:18">13:18</span> Poverty and shame \[shall be to\] him
that refuseth correction; But he that regardeth reproof shall be
honored.

<span id="an_13:19">13:19</span> The desire accomplished is sweet to the
soul; But it is an abomination to fools to depart from evil.

<span id="an_13:20">13:20</span> Walk with wise men, and thou shalt be
wise; But the companion of fools shall smart for it.

<span id="an_13:21">13:21</span> Evil pursueth sinners; But the
righteous shall be recompensed with good.

<span id="an_13:22">13:22</span> A good man leaveth an inheritance to
his children's children; And the wealth of the sinner is laid up for the
righteous.

<span id="an_13:23">13:23</span> Much food \[is in\] the tillage of the
poor; But there is that is destroyed by reason of injustice.

<span id="an_13:24">13:24</span> He that spareth his rod hateth his son;
But he that loveth him chasteneth him betimes.

<span id="an_13:25">13:25</span> The righteous eateth to the satisfying
of his soul; But the belly of the wicked shall want.

<span id="an_14:1">14:1</span> Every wise woman buildeth her house; But
the foolish plucketh it down with her own hands.

<span id="an_14:2">14:2</span> He that walketh in his uprightness
feareth Jehovah; But he that is perverse in his ways despiseth him.

<span id="an_14:3">14:3</span> In the mouth of the foolish is a rod for
\[his\] pride; But the lips of the wise shall preserve them.

<span id="an_14:4">14:4</span> Where no oxen are, the crib is clean; But
much increase is by the strength of the ox.

<span id="an_14:5">14:5</span> A faithful witness will not lie; But a
false witness uttereth lies.

<span id="an_14:6">14:6</span> A scoffer seeketh wisdom, and \[findeth
it\] not; But knowledge is easy unto him that hath understanding.

<span id="an_14:7">14:7</span> Go into the presence of a foolish man,
And thou shalt not perceive \[in him\] the lips of knowledge.

<span id="an_14:8">14:8</span> The wisdom of the prudent is to
understand his way; But the folly of fools is deceit.

<span id="an_14:9">14:9</span> A trespass-offering mocketh fools; But
among the upright there is good will.

<span id="an_14:10">14:10</span> The heart knoweth its own bitterness;
And a stranger doth not intermeddle with its joy.

<span id="an_14:11">14:11</span> The house of the wicked shall be
overthrown; But the tent of the upright shall flourish.

<span id="an_14:12">14:12</span> There is a way which seemeth right unto
a man; But the end thereof are the ways of death.

<span id="an_14:13">14:13</span> Even in laughter the heart is
sorrowful; And the end of mirth is heaviness.

<span id="an_14:14">14:14</span> The backslider in heart shall be filled
with his own ways; And a good man \[shall be satisfied\] from himself.

<span id="an_14:15">14:15</span> The simple believeth every word; But
the prudent man looketh well to his going.

<span id="an_14:16">14:16</span> A wise man feareth, and departeth from
evil; But the fool beareth himself insolently, and is confident.

<span id="an_14:17">14:17</span> He that is soon angry will deal
foolishly; And a man of wicked devices is hated.

<span id="an_14:18">14:18</span> The simple inherit folly; But the
prudent are crowned with knowledge.

<span id="an_14:19">14:19</span> The evil bow down before the good; And
the wicked, at the gates of the righteous.

<span id="an_14:20">14:20</span> The poor is hated even of his own
neighbor; But the rich hath many friends.

<span id="an_14:21">14:21</span> He that despiseth his neighbor sinneth;
But he that hath pity on the poor, happy is he.

<span id="an_14:22">14:22</span> Do they not err that devise evil? But
mercy and truth \[shall be to\] them that devise good.

<span id="an_14:23">14:23</span> In all labor there is profit; But the
talk of the lips \[tendeth\] only to penury.

<span id="an_14:24">14:24</span> The crown of the wise is their riches;
\[But\] the folly of fools is \[only\] folly.

<span id="an_14:25">14:25</span> A true witness delivereth souls; But he
that uttereth lies \[causeth\] deceit.

<span id="an_14:26">14:26</span> In the fear of Jehovah is strong
confidence; And his children shall have a place of refuge.

<span id="an_14:27">14:27</span> The fear of Jehovah is a fountain of
life, That one may depart from the snares of death.

<span id="an_14:28">14:28</span> In the multitude of people is the
king's glory; But in the want of people is the destruction of the
prince.

<span id="an_14:29">14:29</span> He that is slow to anger is of great
understanding; But he that is hasty of spirit exalteth folly.

<span id="an_14:30">14:30</span> A tranquil heart is the life of the
flesh; But envy is the rottenness of the bones.

<span id="an_14:31">14:31</span> He that oppresseth the poor reproacheth
his Maker; But he that hath mercy on the needy honoreth him.

<span id="an_14:32">14:32</span> The wicked is thrust down in his
evil-doing; But the righteous hath a refuge in his death.

<span id="an_14:33">14:33</span> Wisdom resteth in the heart of him that
hath understanding; But \[that which is\] in the inward part of fools is
made known.

<span id="an_14:34">14:34</span> Righteousness exalteth a nation; But
sin is a reproach to any people.

<span id="an_14:35">14:35</span> The king's favor is toward a servant
that dealeth wisely; But his wrath will be \[against\] him that causeth
shame.

<span id="an_15:1">15:1</span> A soft answer turneth away wrath; But a
grievous word stirreth up anger.

<span id="an_15:2">15:2</span> The tongue of the wise uttereth knowledge
aright; But the mouth of fools poureth out folly.

<span id="an_15:3">15:3</span> The eyes of Jehovah are in every place,
Keeping watch upon the evil and the good.

<span id="an_15:4">15:4</span> A gentle tongue is a tree of life; But
perverseness therein is a breaking of the spirit.

<span id="an_15:5">15:5</span> A fool despiseth his father's correction;
But he that regardeth reproof getteth prudence.

<span id="an_15:6">15:6</span> In the house of the righteous is much
treasure; But in the revenues of the wicked is trouble.

<span id="an_15:7">15:7</span> The lips of the wise disperse knowledge;
But the heart of the foolish \[doeth\] not so.

<span id="an_15:8">15:8</span> The sacrifice of the wicked is an
abomination to Jehovah; But the prayer of the upright is his delight.

<span id="an_15:9">15:9</span> The way of the wicked is an abomination
to Jehovah; But he loveth him that followeth after righteousness.

<span id="an_15:10">15:10</span> There is grievous correction for him
that forsaketh the way; \[And\] he that hateth reproof shall die.

<span id="an_15:11">15:11</span> Sheol and Abaddon are before Jehovah:
How much more then the hearts of the children of men!

<span id="an_15:12">15:12</span> A scoffer loveth not to be reproved; He
will not go unto the wise.

<span id="an_15:13">15:13</span> A glad heart maketh a cheerful
countenance; But by sorrow of heart the spirit is broken.

<span id="an_15:14">15:14</span> The heart of him that hath
understanding seeketh knowledge; But the mouth of fools feedeth on
folly.

<span id="an_15:15">15:15</span> All the days of the afflicted are evil;
But he that is of a cheerful heart \[hath\] a continual feast.

<span id="an_15:16">15:16</span> Better is little, with the fear of
Jehovah, Than great treasure and trouble therewith.

<span id="an_15:17">15:17</span> Better is a dinner of herbs, where love
is, Than a stalled ox and hatred therewith.

<span id="an_15:18">15:18</span> A wrathful man stirreth up contention;
But he that is slow to anger appeaseth strife.

<span id="an_15:19">15:19</span> The way of the sluggard is as a hedge
of thorns; But the path of the upright is made a highway.

<span id="an_15:20">15:20</span> A wise son maketh a glad father; But a
foolish man despiseth his mother.

<span id="an_15:21">15:21</span> Folly is joy to him that is void of
wisdom; But a man of understanding maketh straight his going.

<span id="an_15:22">15:22</span> Where there is no counsel, purposes are
disappointed; But in the multitude of counsellors they are established.

<span id="an_15:23">15:23</span> A man hath joy in the answer of his
mouth; And a word in due season, how good is it!

<span id="an_15:24">15:24</span> To the wise the way of life \[goeth\]
upward, That he may depart from Sheol beneath.

<span id="an_15:25">15:25</span> Jehovah will root up the house of the
proud; But he will establish the border of the widow.

<span id="an_15:26">15:26</span> Evil devices are an abomination to
Jehovah; But pleasant words \[are\] pure.

<span id="an_15:27">15:27</span> He that is greedy of gain troubleth his
own house; But he that hateth bribes shall live.

<span id="an_15:28">15:28</span> The heart of the righteous studieth to
answer; But the mouth of the wicked poureth out evil things.

<span id="an_15:29">15:29</span> Jehovah is far from the wicked; But he
heareth the prayer of the righteous.

<span id="an_15:30">15:30</span> The light of the eyes rejoiceth the
heart; \[And\] good tidings make the bones fat.

<span id="an_15:31">15:31</span> The ear that hearkeneth to the reproof
of life Shall abide among the wise.

<span id="an_15:32">15:32</span> He that refuseth correction despiseth
his own soul; But he that hearkeneth to reproof getteth understanding.

<span id="an_15:33">15:33</span> The fear of Jehovah is the instruction
of wisdom; And before honor \[goeth\] humility.

<span id="an_16:1">16:1</span> The plans of the heart belong to man; But
the answer of the tongue is from Jehovah.

<span id="an_16:2">16:2</span> All the ways of a man are clean in his
own eyes; But Jehovah weigheth the spirits.

<span id="an_16:3">16:3</span> Commit thy works unto Jehovah, And thy
purposes shall be established.

<span id="an_16:4">16:4</span> Jehovah hath made everything for its own
end; Yea, even the wicked for the day of evil.

<span id="an_16:5">16:5</span> Every one that is proud in heart is an
abomination to Jehovah: \[Though\] hand \[join\] in hand, he shall not
be unpunished.

<span id="an_16:6">16:6</span> By mercy and truth iniquity is atoned
for; And by the fear of Jehovah men depart from evil.

<span id="an_16:7">16:7</span> When a man's ways please Jehovah, He
maketh even his enemies to be at peace with him.

<span id="an_16:8">16:8</span> Better is a little, with righteousness,
Than great revenues with injustice.

<span id="an_16:9">16:9</span> A man's heart deviseth his way; But
Jehovah directeth his steps.

<span id="an_16:10">16:10</span> A divine sentence is in the lips of the
king; His mouth shall not transgress in judgment.

<span id="an_16:11">16:11</span> A just balance and scales are
Jehovah's; All the weights of the bag are his work.

<span id="an_16:12">16:12</span> It is an abomination to kings to commit
wickedness; For the throne is established by righteousness.

<span id="an_16:13">16:13</span> Righteous lips are the delight of
kings; And they love him that speaketh right.

<span id="an_16:14">16:14</span> The wrath of a king is \[as\]
messengers of death; But a wise man will pacify it.

<span id="an_16:15">16:15</span> In the light of the king's countenance
is life; And his favor is as a cloud of the latter rain.

<span id="an_16:16">16:16</span> How much better is it to get wisdom
than gold! Yea, to get understanding is rather to be chosen than silver.

<span id="an_16:17">16:17</span> The highway of the upright is to depart
from evil: He that keepeth his way preserveth his soul.

<span id="an_16:18">16:18</span> Pride \[goeth\] before destruction, And
a haughty spirit before a fall.

<span id="an_16:19">16:19</span> Better it is to be of a lowly spirit
with the poor, Than to divide the spoil with the proud.

<span id="an_16:20">16:20</span> He that giveth heed unto the word shall
find good; And whoso trusteth in Jehovah, happy is he.

<span id="an_16:21">16:21</span> The wise in heart shall be called
prudent; And the sweetness of the lips increaseth learning.

<span id="an_16:22">16:22</span> Understanding is a well-spring of life
unto him that hath it; But the correction of fools is \[their\] folly.

<span id="an_16:23">16:23</span> The heart of the wise instructeth his
mouth, And addeth learning to his lips.

<span id="an_16:24">16:24</span> Pleasant words are \[as\] a honeycomb,
Sweet to the soul, and health to the bones.

<span id="an_16:25">16:25</span> There is a way which seemeth right unto
a man, But the end thereof are the ways of death.

<span id="an_16:26">16:26</span> The appetite of the laboring man
laboreth for him; For his mouth urgeth him \[thereto\].

<span id="an_16:27">16:27</span> A worthless man deviseth mischief; And
in his lips there is as a scorching fire.

<span id="an_16:28">16:28</span> A perverse man scattereth abroad
strife; And a whisperer separateth chief friends.

<span id="an_16:29">16:29</span> A man of violence enticeth his
neighbor, And leadeth him in a way that is not good.

<span id="an_16:30">16:30</span> He that shutteth his eyes, \[it is\] to
devise perverse things: He that compresseth his lips bringeth evil to
pass.

<span id="an_16:31">16:31</span> The hoary head is a crown of glory; It
shall be found in the way of righteousness.

<span id="an_16:32">16:32</span> He that is slow to anger is better than
the mighty; And he that ruleth his spirit, than he that taketh a city.

<span id="an_16:33">16:33</span> The lot is cast into the lap; But the
whole disposing thereof is of Jehovah.

<span id="an_17:1">17:1</span> Better is a dry morsel, and quietness
therewith, Than a house full of feasting with strife.

<span id="an_17:2">17:2</span> A servant that dealeth wisely shall have
rule over a son that causeth shame, And shall have part in the
inheritance among the brethren.

<span id="an_17:3">17:3</span> The refining pot is for silver, and the
furnace for gold; But Jehovah trieth the hearts.

<span id="an_17:4">17:4</span> An evil-doer giveth heed to wicked lips;
\[And\] a liar giveth ear to a mischievous tongue.

<span id="an_17:5">17:5</span> Whoso mocketh the poor reproacheth his
Maker; \[And\] he that is glad at calamity shall not be unpunished.

<span id="an_17:6">17:6</span> Children's children are the crown of old
men; And the glory of children are their fathers.

<span id="an_17:7">17:7</span> Excellent speech becometh not a fool;
Much less do lying lips a prince.

<span id="an_17:8">17:8</span> A bribe is \[as\] a precious stone in the
eyes of him that hath it; Whithersoever it turneth, it prospereth.

<span id="an_17:9">17:9</span> He that covereth a transgression seeketh
love; But he that harpeth on a matter separateth chief friends.

<span id="an_17:10">17:10</span> A rebuke entereth deeper into one that
hath understanding Than a hundred stripes into a fool.

<span id="an_17:11">17:11</span> An evil man seeketh only rebellion;
Therefore a cruel messenger shall be sent against him.

<span id="an_17:12">17:12</span> Let a bear robbed of her whelps meet a
man, Rather than a fool in his folly.

<span id="an_17:13">17:13</span> Whoso rewardeth evil for good, Evil
shall not depart from his house.

<span id="an_17:14">17:14</span> The beginning of strife is \[as\] when
one letteth out water: Therefore leave off contention, before there is
quarrelling.

<span id="an_17:15">17:15</span> He that justifieth the wicked, and he
that condemneth the righteous, Both of them alike are an abomination to
Jehovah.

<span id="an_17:16">17:16</span> Wherefore is there a price in the hand
of a fool to buy wisdom, Seeing he hath no understanding?

<span id="an_17:17">17:17</span> A friend loveth at all times; And a
brother is born for adversity.

<span id="an_17:18">17:18</span> A man void of understanding striketh
hands, And becometh surety in the presence of his neighbor.

<span id="an_17:19">17:19</span> He loveth transgression that loveth
strife: He that raiseth high his gate seeketh destruction.

<span id="an_17:20">17:20</span> He that hath a wayward heart findeth no
good; And he that hath a perverse tongue falleth into mischief.

<span id="an_17:21">17:21</span> He that begetteth a fool \[doeth it\]
to his sorrow; And the father of a fool hath no joy.

<span id="an_17:22">17:22</span> A cheerful heart is a good medicine;
But a broken spirit drieth up the bones.

<span id="an_17:23">17:23</span> A wicked man receiveth a bribe out of
the bosom, To pervert the ways of justice.

<span id="an_17:24">17:24</span> Wisdom is before the face of him that
hath understanding; But the eyes of a fool are in the ends of the earth.

<span id="an_17:25">17:25</span> A foolish son is a grief to his father,
And bitterness to her that bare him.

<span id="an_17:26">17:26</span> Also to punish the righteous is not
good, \[Nor\] to smite the noble for \[their\] uprightness.

<span id="an_17:27">17:27</span> He that spareth his words hath
knowledge; And he that is of a cool spirit is a man of understanding.

<span id="an_17:28">17:28</span> Even a fool, when he holdeth his peace,
is counted wise; When he shutteth his lips, he is \[esteemed as\]
prudent.

<span id="an_18:1">18:1</span> He that separateth himself seeketh \[his
own\] desire, And rageth against all sound wisdom.

<span id="an_18:2">18:2</span> A fool hath no delight in understanding,
But only that his heart may reveal itself.

<span id="an_18:3">18:3</span> When the wicked cometh, there cometh also
contempt, And with ignominy \[cometh\] reproach.

<span id="an_18:4">18:4</span> The words of a man's mouth are \[as\]
deep waters; The wellspring of wisdom is \[as\] a flowing brook.

<span id="an_18:5">18:5</span> To respect the person of the wicked is
not good, \[Nor\] to turn aside the righteous in judgment.

<span id="an_18:6">18:6</span> A fool's lips enter into contention, And
his mouth calleth for stripes.

<span id="an_18:7">18:7</span> A fool's mouth is his destruction, And
his lips are the snare of his soul.

<span id="an_18:8">18:8</span> The words of a whisperer are as dainty
morsels, And they go down into the innermost parts.

<span id="an_18:9">18:9</span> He also that is slack in his work Is
brother to him that is a destroyer.

<span id="an_18:10">18:10</span> The name of Jehovah is a strong tower;
The righteous runneth into it, and is safe.

<span id="an_18:11">18:11</span> The rich man's wealth is his strong
city, And as a high wall in his own imagination.

<span id="an_18:12">18:12</span> Before destruction the heart of man is
haughty; And before honor \[goeth\] humility.

<span id="an_18:13">18:13</span> He that giveth answer before he
heareth, It is folly and shame unto him.

<span id="an_18:14">18:14</span> The spirit of a man will sustain his
infirmity; But a broken spirit who can bear?

<span id="an_18:15">18:15</span> The heart of the prudent getteth
knowledge; And the ear of the wise seeketh knowledge.

<span id="an_18:16">18:16</span> A man's gift maketh room for him, And
bringeth him before great men.

<span id="an_18:17">18:17</span> He that pleadeth his cause first
\[seemeth\] just; But his neighbor cometh and searcheth him out.

<span id="an_18:18">18:18</span> The lot causeth contentions to cease,
And parteth between the mighty.

<span id="an_18:19">18:19</span> A brother offended \[is harder to be
won\] than a strong city; And \[such\] contentions are like the bars of
a castle.

<span id="an_18:20">18:20</span> A man's belly shall be filled with the
fruit of his mouth; With the increase of his lips shall he be satisfied.

<span id="an_18:21">18:21</span> Death and life are in the power of the
tongue; And they that love it shall eat the fruit thereof.

<span id="an_18:22">18:22</span> Whoso findeth a wife findeth a good
thing, And obtaineth favor of Jehovah.

<span id="an_18:23">18:23</span> The poor useth entreaties; But the rich
answereth roughly.

<span id="an_18:24">18:24</span> He that maketh many friends \[doeth
it\] to his own destruction; But there is a friend that sticketh closer
than a brother.

<span id="an_19:1">19:1</span> Better is the poor that walketh in his
integrity Than he that is perverse in his lips and is a fool.

<span id="an_19:2">19:2</span> Also, that the soul be without knowledge
is not good; And he that hasteth with his feet sinneth.

<span id="an_19:3">19:3</span> The foolishness of man subverteth his
way; And his heart fretteth against Jehovah.

<span id="an_19:4">19:4</span> Wealth addeth many friends; But the poor
is separated from his friend.

<span id="an_19:5">19:5</span> A false witness shall not be unpunished;
And he that uttereth lies shall not escape.

<span id="an_19:6">19:6</span> Many will entreat the favor of the
liberal man; And every man is a friend to him that giveth gifts.

<span id="an_19:7">19:7</span> All the brethren of the poor do hate him:
How much more do his friends go far from him! He pursueth \[them with\]
words, \[but\] they are gone.

<span id="an_19:8">19:8</span> He that getteth wisdom loveth his own
soul: He that keepeth understanding shall find good.

<span id="an_19:9">19:9</span> A false witness shall not be unpunished;
And he that uttereth lies shall perish.

<span id="an_19:10">19:10</span> Delicate living is not seemly for a
fool; Much less for a servant to have rule over princes.

<span id="an_19:11">19:11</span> The discretion of a man maketh him slow
to anger; And it is his glory to pass over a transgression.

<span id="an_19:12">19:12</span> The king's wrath is as the roaring of a
lion; But his favor is as dew upon the grass.

<span id="an_19:13">19:13</span> A foolish son is the calamity of his
father; And the contentions of a wife are a continual dropping.

<span id="an_19:14">19:14</span> House and riches are an inheritance
from fathers; But a prudent wife is from Jehovah.

<span id="an_19:15">19:15</span> Slothfulness casteth into a deep sleep;
And the idle soul shall suffer hunger.

<span id="an_19:16">19:16</span> He that keepeth the commandment keepeth
his soul; \[But\] he that is careless of his ways shall die.

<span id="an_19:17">19:17</span> He that hath pity upon the poor lendeth
unto Jehovah, And his good deed will he pay him again.

<span id="an_19:18">19:18</span> Chasten thy son, seeing there is hope;
nd set not thy heart on his destruction.

<span id="an_19:19">19:19</span> A man of great wrath shall bear the
penalty; For if thou deliver \[him\], thou must do it yet again.

<span id="an_19:20">19:20</span> Hear counsel, and receive instruction,
That thou mayest be wise in thy latter end.

<span id="an_19:21">19:21</span> There are many devices in a man's
heart; But the counsel of Jehovah, that shall stand.

<span id="an_19:22">19:22</span> That which maketh a man to be desired
is his kindness; And a poor man is better than a liar.

<span id="an_19:23">19:23</span> The fear of Jehovah \[tendeth\] to
life; And he \[that hath it\] shall abide satisfied; He shall not be
visited with evil.

<span id="an_19:24">19:24</span> The sluggard burieth his hand in the
dish, And will not so much as bring it to his mouth again.

<span id="an_19:25">19:25</span> Smite a scoffer, and the simple will
learn prudence; And reprove one that hath understanding, \[and\] he will
understand knowledge.

<span id="an_19:26">19:26</span> He that doeth violence to his father,
and chaseth away his mother, Is a son that causeth shame and bringeth
reproach.

<span id="an_19:27">19:27</span> Cease, my son, to hear instruction
\[Only\] to err from the words of knowledge.

<span id="an_19:28">19:28</span> A worthless witness mocketh at justice;
And the mouth of the wicked swalloweth iniquity.

<span id="an_19:29">19:29</span> Judgments are prepared for scoffers,
And stripes for the back of fools.

<span id="an_20:1">20:1</span> Wine is a mocker, strong drink a brawler;
And whosoever erreth thereby is not wise.

<span id="an_20:2">20:2</span> The terror of a king is as the roaring of
a lion: He that provoketh him to anger sinneth \[against\] his own life.

<span id="an_20:3">20:3</span> It is an honor for a man to keep aloof
from strife; But every fool will be quarrelling.

<span id="an_20:4">20:4</span> The sluggard will not plow by reason of
the winter; Therefore he shall beg in harvest, and have nothing.

<span id="an_20:5">20:5</span> Counsel in the heart of man is \[like\]
deep water; But a man of understanding will draw it out.

<span id="an_20:6">20:6</span> Most men will proclaim every one his own
kindness; But a faithful man who can find?

<span id="an_20:7">20:7</span> A righteous man that walketh in his
integrity, Blessed are his children after him.

<span id="an_20:8">20:8</span> A king that sitteth on the throne of
judgment Scattereth away all evil with his eyes.

<span id="an_20:9">20:9</span> Who can say, I have made my heart clean,
I am pure from my sin?

<span id="an_20:10">20:10</span> Diverse weights, and diverse measures,
Both of them alike are an abomination to Jehovah.

<span id="an_20:11">20:11</span> Even a child maketh himself known by
his doings, Whether his work be pure, and whether it be right.

<span id="an_20:12">20:12</span> The hearing ear, and the seeing eye,
Jehovah hath made even both of them.

<span id="an_20:13">20:13</span> Love not sleep, let thou come to
poverty; Open thine eyes, \[and\] thou shalt be satisfied with bread.

<span id="an_20:14">20:14</span> It is bad, it is bad, saith the buyer;
But when he is gone his way, then he boasteth.

<span id="an_20:15">20:15</span> There is gold, and abundance of rubies;
But the lips of knowledge are a precious jewel.

<span id="an_20:16">20:16</span> Take his garment that is surety for a
stranger; And hold him in pledge \[that is surety\] for foreigners.

<span id="an_20:17">20:17</span> Bread of falsehood is sweet to a man;
But afterwards his mouth shall be filled with gravel.

<span id="an_20:18">20:18</span> Every purpose is established by
counsel; And by wise guidance make thou war.

<span id="an_20:19">20:19</span> He that goeth about as a tale-bearer
revealeth secrets; Therefore company not with him that openeth wide his
lips.

<span id="an_20:20">20:20</span> Whoso curseth his father or his mother,
His lamp shall be put out in blackness of darkness.

<span id="an_20:21">20:21</span> An inheritance \[may be\] gotten
hastily at the beginning; But the end thereof shall not be blessed.

<span id="an_20:22">20:22</span> Say not thou, I will recompense evil:
Wait for Jehovah, and he will save thee.

<span id="an_20:23">20:23</span> Diverse weights are an abomination to
Jehovah; And a false balance is not good.

<span id="an_20:24">20:24</span> A man's goings are of Jehovah; How then
can man understand his way?

<span id="an_20:25">20:25</span> It is a snare to a man rashly to say,
\[It is\] holy, And after vows to make inquiry.

<span id="an_20:26">20:26</span> A wise king winnoweth the wicked, And
bringeth the \[threshing\] -wheel over them.

<span id="an_20:27">20:27</span> The spirit of man is the lamp of
Jehovah, Searching all his innermost parts.

<span id="an_20:28">20:28</span> Kindness and truth preserve the king;
And his throne is upholden by kindness.

<span id="an_20:29">20:29</span> The glory of young men is their
strength; And the beauty of old men is the hoary head.

<span id="an_20:30">20:30</span> Stripes that wound cleanse away evil;
And strokes \[reach\] the innermost parts.

<span id="an_21:1">21:1</span> The king's heart is in the hand of
Jehovah as the watercourses: He turneth it whithersoever he will.

<span id="an_21:2">21:2</span> Every way of a man is right in his own
eyes; But Jehovah weigheth the hearts.

<span id="an_21:3">21:3</span> To do righteousness and justice Is more
acceptable to Jehovah than sacrifice.

<span id="an_21:4">21:4</span> A high look, and a proud heart, \[Even\]
the lamp of the wicked, is sin.

<span id="an_21:5">21:5</span> The thoughts of the diligent \[tend\]
only to plenteousness; But every one that is hasty \[hasteth\] only to
want.

<span id="an_21:6">21:6</span> The getting of treasures by a lying
tongue Is a vapor driven to and fro by them that seek death.

<span id="an_21:7">21:7</span> The violence of the wicked shall sweep
them away, Because they refuse to do justice.

<span id="an_21:8">21:8</span> The way of him that is laden with guilt
is exceeding crooked; But as for the pure, his work is right.

<span id="an_21:9">21:9</span> It is better to dwell in the corner of
the housetop, Than with a contentious woman in a wide house.

<span id="an_21:10">21:10</span> The soul of the wicked desireth evil:
His neighbor findeth no favor in his eyes.

<span id="an_21:11">21:11</span> When the scoffer is punished, the
simple is made wise; And when the wise is instructed, he receiveth
knowledge.

<span id="an_21:12">21:12</span> The righteous man considereth the house
of the wicked, \[How\] the wicked are overthrown to \[their\] ruin.

<span id="an_21:13">21:13</span> Whoso stoppeth his ears at the cry of
the poor, He also shall cry, but shall not be heard.

<span id="an_21:14">21:14</span> A gift in secret pacifieth anger; And a
present in the bosom, strong wrath.

<span id="an_21:15">21:15</span> It is joy to the righteous to do
justice; But it is a destruction to the workers of iniquity.

<span id="an_21:16">21:16</span> The man that wandereth out of the way
of understanding Shall rest in the assembly of the dead.

<span id="an_21:17">21:17</span> He that loveth pleasure shall be a poor
man: He that loveth wine and oil shall not be rich.

<span id="an_21:18">21:18</span> The wicked is a ransom for the
righteous; And the treacherous \[cometh\] in the stead of the upright.

<span id="an_21:19">21:19</span> It is better to dwell in a desert land,
Than with a contentious and fretful woman.

<span id="an_21:20">21:20</span> There is precious treasure and oil in
the dwelling of the wise; But a foolish man swalloweth it up.

<span id="an_21:21">21:21</span> He that followeth after righteousness
and kindness Findeth life, righteousness, and honor.

<span id="an_21:22">21:22</span> A wise man scaleth the city of the
mighty, And bringeth down the strength of the confidence thereof.

<span id="an_21:23">21:23</span> Whoso keepeth his mouth and his tongue
Keepeth his soul from troubles.

<span id="an_21:24">21:24</span> The proud and haughty man, scoffer is
his name; He worketh in the arrogance of pride.

<span id="an_21:25">21:25</span> The desire of the sluggard killeth him;
For his hands refuse to labor.

<span id="an_21:26">21:26</span> There is that coveteth greedily all the
day long; But the righteous giveth and withholdeth not.

<span id="an_21:27">21:27</span> The sacrifice of the wicked is an
abomination: How much more, when he bringeth it with a wicked mind!

<span id="an_21:28">21:28</span> A false witness shall perish; But the
man that heareth shall speak so as to endure.

<span id="an_21:29">21:29</span> A wicked man hardeneth his face; But as
for the upright, he establisheth his ways.

<span id="an_21:30">21:30</span> There is no wisdom nor understanding
Nor counsel against Jehovah.

<span id="an_21:31">21:31</span> The horse is prepared against the day
of battle; But victory is of Jehovah.

<span id="an_22:1">22:1</span> A \[good\] name is rather to be chosen
than great riches, \[And\] loving favor rather than silver and gold.

<span id="an_22:2">22:2</span> The rich and the poor meet together:
Jehovah is the maker of them all.

<span id="an_22:3">22:3</span> A prudent man seeth the evil, and hideth
himself; But the simple pass on, and suffer for it.

<span id="an_22:4">22:4</span> The reward of humility \[and\] the fear
of Jehovah \[Is\] riches, and honor, and life.

<span id="an_22:5">22:5</span> Thorns \[and\] snares are in the way of
the perverse: He that keepeth his soul shall be far from them.

<span id="an_22:6">22:6</span> Train up a child in the way he should go,
And even when he is old he will not depart from it.

<span id="an_22:7">22:7</span> The rich ruleth over the poor; And the
borrower is servant to the lender.

<span id="an_22:8">22:8</span> He that soweth iniquity shall reap
calamity; And the rod of his wrath shall fail.

<span id="an_22:9">22:9</span> He that hath a bountiful eye shall be
blessed; For he giveth of his bread to the poor.

<span id="an_22:10">22:10</span> Cast out the scoffer, and contention
will go out; Yea, strife and ignominy will cease.

<span id="an_22:11">22:11</span> He that loveth pureness of heart,
\[For\] the grace of his lips the king will be his friend.

<span id="an_22:12">22:12</span> The eyes of Jehovah preserve \[him that
hath\] knowledge; But he overthroweth the words of the treacherous man.

<span id="an_22:13">22:13</span> The sluggard saith, There is a lion
without: I shall be slain in the streets.

<span id="an_22:14">22:14</span> The mouth of strange women is a deep
pit: He that is abhorred of Jehovah shall fall therein.

<span id="an_22:15">22:15</span> Foolishness is bound up in the heart of
a child; \[But\] the rod of correction shall drive it far from him.

<span id="an_22:16">22:16</span> He that oppresseth the poor to increase
his \[gain\], \[And\] he that giveth to the rich, \[shall come\] only to
want.

<span id="an_22:17">22:17</span> Incline thine ear, and hear the words
of the wise, And apply thy heart unto my knowledge.

<span id="an_22:18">22:18</span> For it is a pleasant thing if thou keep
them within thee, If they be established together upon thy lips.

<span id="an_22:19">22:19</span> That thy trust may be in Jehovah, I
have made \[them\] known to thee this day, even to thee.

<span id="an_22:20">22:20</span> Have not I written unto thee excellent
things Of counsels and knowledge,

<span id="an_22:21">22:21</span> To make thee know the certainty of the
words of truth, That thou mayest carry back words of truth to them that
send thee?

<span id="an_22:22">22:22</span> Rob not the poor, because he is poor;
Neither oppress the afflicted in the gate:

<span id="an_22:23">22:23</span> For Jehovah will plead their cause, And
despoil of life those that despoil them.

<span id="an_22:24">22:24</span> Make no friendship with a man that is
given to anger; And with a wrathful man thou shalt not go:

<span id="an_22:25">22:25</span> Lest thou learn this ways, And get a
snare to thy soul.

<span id="an_22:26">22:26</span> Be thou not one of them that strike
hands, \[Or\] of them that are sureties for debts.

<span id="an_22:27">22:27</span> If thou hast not wherewith to pay, Why
should he take away thy bed from under thee?

<span id="an_22:28">22:28</span> Remove not the ancient landmark, Which
thy fathers have set.

<span id="an_22:29">22:29</span> Seest thou a man diligent in his
business? he shall stand before kings; He shall not stand before mean
men.

<span id="an_23:1">23:1</span> When thou sittest to eat with a ruler,
Consider diligently him that is before thee;

<span id="an_23:2">23:2</span> And put a knife to thy throat, If thou be
a man given to appetite.

<span id="an_23:3">23:3</span> Be not desirous of his dainties; Seeing
they are deceitful food.

<span id="an_23:4">23:4</span> Weary not thyself to be rich; Cease from
thine own wisdom.

<span id="an_23:5">23:5</span> Wilt thou set thine eyes upon that which
is not? For \[riches\] certainly make themselves wings, Like an eagle
that flieth toward heaven.

<span id="an_23:6">23:6</span> Eat thou not the bread of him that hath
an evil eye, Neither desire thou his dainties:

<span id="an_23:7">23:7</span> For as he thinketh within himself, so is
he: Eat and drink, saith he to thee; But his heart is not with thee.

<span id="an_23:8">23:8</span> The morsel which thou hast eaten shalt
thou vomit up, And lose thy sweet words.

<span id="an_23:9">23:9</span> Speak not in the hearing of a fool; For
he will despise the wisdom of thy words.

<span id="an_23:10">23:10</span> Remove not the ancient landmark; And
enter not into the fields of the fatherless:

<span id="an_23:11">23:11</span> For their Redeemer is strong; He will
plead their cause against thee.

<span id="an_23:12">23:12</span> Apply thy heart unto instruction, And
thine ears to the words of knowledge.

<span id="an_23:13">23:13</span> Withhold not correction from the child;
\[For\] if thou beat him with the rod, he will not die.

<span id="an_23:14">23:14</span> Thou shalt beat him with the rod, And
shalt deliver his soul from Sheol.

<span id="an_23:15">23:15</span> My son, if thy heart be wise, My heart
will be glad, even mine:

<span id="an_23:16">23:16</span> Yea, my heart will rejoice, When thy
lips speak right things.

<span id="an_23:17">23:17</span> Let not thy heart envy sinners; But
\[be thou\] in the fear of Jehovah all the day long:

<span id="an_23:18">23:18</span> For surely there is a reward; And thy
hope shall not be cut off.

<span id="an_23:19">23:19</span> Hear thou, my son, and be wise, And
guide thy heart in the way.

<span id="an_23:20">23:20</span> Be not among winebibbers, Among
gluttonous eaters of flesh:

<span id="an_23:21">23:21</span> For the drunkard and the glutton shall
come to poverty; And drowsiness will clothe \[a man\] with rags.

<span id="an_23:22">23:22</span> Hearken unto thy father that begat
thee, And despise not thy mother when she is old.

<span id="an_23:23">23:23</span> Buy the truth, and sell it not;
\[Yea\], wisdom, and instruction, and understanding.

<span id="an_23:24">23:24</span> The father of the righteous will
greatly rejoice; And he that begetteth a wise child will have joy of
him.

<span id="an_23:25">23:25</span> Let thy father and thy mother be glad,
And let her that bare thee rejoice.

<span id="an_23:26">23:26</span> My son, give me thy heart; And let
thine eyes delight in my ways.

<span id="an_23:27">23:27</span> For a harlot is a deep ditch; And a
foreign woman is a narrow pit.

<span id="an_23:28">23:28</span> Yea, she lieth in wait as a robber, And
increaseth the treacherous among men.

<span id="an_23:29">23:29</span> Who hath woe? who hath sorrow? who hath
contentions? Who hath complaining? who hath wounds without cause? Who
hath redness of eyes?

<span id="an_23:30">23:30</span> They that tarry long at the wine; They
that go to seek out mixed wine.

<span id="an_23:31">23:31</span> Look not thou upon the wine when it is
red, When it sparkleth in the cup, When it goeth down smoothly:

<span id="an_23:32">23:32</span> At the last it biteth like a serpent,
And stingeth like an adder.

<span id="an_23:33">23:33</span> Thine eyes shall behold strange things,
And thy heart shall utter perverse things.

<span id="an_23:34">23:34</span> Yea, thou shalt be as he that lieth
down in the midst of the sea, Or as he that lieth upon the top of a
mast.

<span id="an_23:35">23:35</span> They have stricken me, \[shalt thou
say\], and I was not hurt; They have beaten me, and I felt it not: When
shall I awake? I will seek it yet again.

<span id="an_24:1">24:1</span> Be not thou envious against evil men;
Neither desire to be with them:

<span id="an_24:2">24:2</span> For their heart studieth oppression, And
their lips talk of mischief.

<span id="an_24:3">24:3</span> Through wisdom is a house builded; And by
understanding it is established;

<span id="an_24:4">24:4</span> And by knowledge are the chambers filled
With all precious and pleasant riches.

<span id="an_24:5">24:5</span> A wise man is strong; Yea, a man of
knowledge increaseth might

<span id="an_24:6">24:6</span> For by wise guidance thou shalt make thy
war; And in the multitude of counsellors there is safety.

<span id="an_24:7">24:7</span> Wisdom is too high for a fool: He openeth
not his mouth in the gate.

<span id="an_24:8">24:8</span> He that deviseth to do evil, Men shall
call him a mischief-maker.

<span id="an_24:9">24:9</span> The thought of foolishness is sin; And
the scoffer is an abomination to men.

<span id="an_24:10">24:10</span> If thou faint in the day of adversity,
Thy strength is small.

<span id="an_24:11">24:11</span> Deliver them that are carried away unto
death, And those that are ready to be slain see that thou hold back.

<span id="an_24:12">24:12</span> If thou sayest, Behold, we knew not
this; Doth not he that weigheth the hearts consider it? And he that
keepeth thy soul, doth not he know it? And shall not he render to every
man according to his work?

<span id="an_24:13">24:13</span> My son, eat thou honey, for it is good;
And the droppings of the honeycomb, which are sweet to thy taste:

<span id="an_24:14">24:14</span> So shalt thou know wisdom to be unto
thy soul; If thou hast found it, then shall there be a reward, And thy
hope shall not be cut off.

<span id="an_24:15">24:15</span> Lay not wait, O wicked man, against the
habitation of the righteous; Destroy not his resting-place:

<span id="an_24:16">24:16</span> For a righteous man falleth seven
times, and riseth up again; But the wicked are overthrown by calamity.

<span id="an_24:17">24:17</span> Rejoice not when thine enemy falleth,
And let not thy heart be glad when he is overthrown;

<span id="an_24:18">24:18</span> Lest Jehovah see it, and it displease
him, And he turn away his wrath from him.

<span id="an_24:19">24:19</span> Fret not thyself because of evil-doers;
Neither be thou envious at the wicked:

<span id="an_24:20">24:20</span> For there shall be no reward to the
evil man; The lamp of the wicked shall be put out.

<span id="an_24:21">24:21</span> My son, fear thou Jehovah and the king;
\[And\] company not with them that are given to change:

<span id="an_24:22">24:22</span> For their calamity shall rise suddenly;
And the destruction from them both, who knoweth it?

<span id="an_24:23">24:23</span> These also are \[sayings\] of the wise.
To have respect of persons in judgment is not good.

<span id="an_24:24">24:24</span> He that saith unto the wicked, Thou art
righteous; Peoples shall curse him, nations shall abhor him:

<span id="an_24:25">24:25</span> But to them that rebuke \[him\] shall
be delight, And a good blessing shall come upon them.

<span id="an_24:26">24:26</span> He kisseth the lips Who giveth a right
answer.

<span id="an_24:27">24:27</span> Prepare thy work without, And make it
ready for thee in the field; And afterwards build thy house.

<span id="an_24:28">24:28</span> Be not a witness against thy neighbor
without cause; And deceive not with thy lips.

<span id="an_24:29">24:29</span> Say not, I will do so to him as he hath
done to me; I will render to the man according to his work.

<span id="an_24:30">24:30</span> I went by the field of the sluggard,
And by the vineyard of the man void of understanding;

<span id="an_24:31">24:31</span> And, lo, it was all grown over with
thorns, The face thereof was covered with nettles, And the stone wall
thereof was broken down.

<span id="an_24:32">24:32</span> Then I beheld, and considered well; I
saw, and received instruction:

<span id="an_24:33">24:33</span> \[Yet\] a little sleep, a little
slumber, A little folding of the hands to sleep;

<span id="an_24:34">24:34</span> So shall thy poverty come as a robber,
And thy want as an armed man.

<span id="an_25:1">25:1</span> These also are proverbs of Solomon, which
the men of Hezekiah king of Judah copied out.

<span id="an_25:2">25:2</span> It is the glory of God to conceal a
thing; But the glory of kings is to search out a matter.

<span id="an_25:3">25:3</span> As the heavens for height, and the earth
for depth, So the heart of kings is unsearchable.

<span id="an_25:4">25:4</span> Take away the dross from the silver, And
there cometh forth a vessel for the refiner:

<span id="an_25:5">25:5</span> Take away the wicked \[from\] before the
king, And his throne shall be established in righteousness.

<span id="an_25:6">25:6</span> Put not thyself forward in the presence
of the king, And stand not in the place of great men:

<span id="an_25:7">25:7</span> For better is it that it be said unto
thee, Come up hither, Than that thou shouldest be put lower in the
presence of the prince, Whom thine eyes have seen.

<span id="an_25:8">25:8</span> Go not forth hastily to strive, Lest
\[thou know not\] what to do in the end thereof, When thy neighbor hath
put thee to shame.

<span id="an_25:9">25:9</span> Debate thy cause with thy neighbor
\[himself\], And disclose not the secret of another;

<span id="an_25:10">25:10</span> Lest he that heareth it revile thee,
And thine infamy turn not away.

<span id="an_25:11">25:11</span> A word fitly spoken Is \[like\] apples
of gold in network of silver.

<span id="an_25:12">25:12</span> \[As\] an ear-ring of gold, and an
ornament of fine gold, \[So is\] a wise reprover upon an obedient ear.

<span id="an_25:13">25:13</span> As the cold of snow in the time of
harvest, \[So is\] a faithful messenger to them that send him; For he
refresheth the soul of his masters.

<span id="an_25:14">25:14</span> \[As\] clouds and wind without rain,
\[So is\] he that boasteth himself of his gifts falsely.

<span id="an_25:15">25:15</span> By long forbearing is a ruler
persuaded, And a soft tongue breaketh the bone.

<span id="an_25:16">25:16</span> Hast thou found honey? eat so much as
is sufficient for thee, Lest thou be filled therewith, and vomit it.

<span id="an_25:17">25:17</span> Let thy foot be seldom in thy
neighbor's house, Lest he be weary of thee, and hate thee.

<span id="an_25:18">25:18</span> A man that beareth false witness
against his neighbor Is a maul, and a sword, and a sharp arrow.

<span id="an_25:19">25:19</span> Confidence in an unfaithful man in time
of trouble Is \[like\] a broken tooth, and a foot out of joint.

<span id="an_25:20">25:20</span> \[As\] one that taketh off a garment in
cold weather, \[and as\] vinegar upon soda, So is he that singeth songs
to a heavy heart.

<span id="an_25:21">25:21</span> If thine enemy be hungry, give him
bread to eat; And if he be thirsty, give him water to drink:

<span id="an_25:22">25:22</span> For thou wilt heap coals of fire upon
his head, And Jehovah will reward thee.

<span id="an_25:23">25:23</span> The north wind bringeth forth rain: So
doth a backbiting tongue an angry countenance.

<span id="an_25:24">25:24</span> It is better to dwell in the corner of
the housetop, Than with a contentious woman in a wide house.

<span id="an_25:25">25:25</span> \[As\] cold waters to a thirsty soul,
So is good news from a far country.

<span id="an_25:26">25:26</span> \[As\] a troubled fountain, and a
corrupted spring, \[So is\] a righteous man that giveth way before the
wicked.

<span id="an_25:27">25:27</span> It is not good to eat much honey: So
\[for men\] to search out their own glory is grievous.

<span id="an_25:28">25:28</span> He whose spirit is without restraint Is
\[like\] a city that is broken down and without walls.

<span id="an_26:1">26:1</span> As snow in summer, and as rain in
harvest, So honor is not seemly for a fool.

<span id="an_26:2">26:2</span> As the sparrow in her wandering, as the
swallow in her flying, So the curse that is causeless alighteth not.

<span id="an_26:3">26:3</span> A whip for the horse, a bridle for the
ass, And a rod for the back of fools.

<span id="an_26:4">26:4</span> Answer not a fool according to his folly,
Lest thou also be like unto him.

<span id="an_26:5">26:5</span> Answer a fool according to his folly,
Lest he be wise in his own conceit.

<span id="an_26:6">26:6</span> He that sendeth a message by the hand of
a fool Cutteth off \[his own\] feet, \[and\] drinketh in damage.

<span id="an_26:7">26:7</span> The legs of the lame hang loose: So is a
parable in the mouth of fools.

<span id="an_26:8">26:8</span> As one that bindeth a stone in a sling,
So is he that giveth honor to a fool.

<span id="an_26:9">26:9</span> \[As\] a thorn that goeth up into the
hand of a drunkard, So is a parable in the mouth of fools.

<span id="an_26:10">26:10</span> \[As\] an archer that woundeth all, So
is he that hireth a fool and he that hireth them that pass by.

<span id="an_26:11">26:11</span> As a dog that returneth to his vomit,
\[So is\] a fool that repeateth his folly.

<span id="an_26:12">26:12</span> Seest thou a man wise in his own
conceit? There is more hope of a fool than of him.

<span id="an_26:13">26:13</span> The sluggard saith, There is a lion in
the way; A lion is in the streets.

<span id="an_26:14">26:14</span> \[As\] the door turneth upon its
hinges, So doth the sluggard upon his bed.

<span id="an_26:15">26:15</span> The sluggard burieth his hand in the
dish; It wearieth him to bring it again to his mouth.

<span id="an_26:16">26:16</span> The sluggard is wiser in his own
conceit Than seven men that can render a reason.

<span id="an_26:17">26:17</span> He that passeth by, \[and\] vexeth
himself with strife belonging not to him, Is \[like\] one that taketh a
dog by the ears.

<span id="an_26:18">26:18</span> As a madman who casteth firebrands,
Arrows, and death,

<span id="an_26:19">26:19</span> So is the man that deceiveth his
neighbor, And saith, Am not I in sport?

<span id="an_26:20">26:20</span> For lack of wood the fire goeth out;
And where there is no whisperer, contention ceaseth.

<span id="an_26:21">26:21</span> \[As\] coals are to hot embers, and
wood to fire, So is a contentious man to inflame strife.

<span id="an_26:22">26:22</span> The words of a whisperer are as dainty
morsels, And they go down into the innermost parts.

<span id="an_26:23">26:23</span> Fervent lips and a wicked heart Are
\[like\] an earthen vessel overlaid with silver dross.

<span id="an_26:24">26:24</span> He that hateth dissembleth with his
lips; But he layeth up deceit within him:

<span id="an_26:25">26:25</span> When he speaketh fair, believe him not;
For there are seven abominations in his heart:

<span id="an_26:26">26:26</span> Though \[his\] hatred cover itself with
guile, His wickedness shall be openly showed before the assembly.

<span id="an_26:27">26:27</span> Whoso diggeth a pit shall fall therein;
And he that rolleth a stone, it shall return upon him.

<span id="an_26:28">26:28</span> A lying tongue hateth those whom it
hath wounded; And a flattering mouth worketh ruin.

<span id="an_27:1">27:1</span> Boast not thyself of tomorrow; For thou
knowest not what a day may bring forth.

<span id="an_27:2">27:2</span> Let another man praise thee, and not
thine own mouth; A stranger, and not thine own lips.

<span id="an_27:3">27:3</span> A stone is heavy, and the sand weighty;
But a fool's vexation is heavier than they both.

<span id="an_27:4">27:4</span> Wrath is cruel, and anger is
overwhelming; But who is able to stand before jealousy?

<span id="an_27:5">27:5</span> Better is open rebuke Than love that is
hidden.

<span id="an_27:6">27:6</span> Faithful are the wounds of a friend; But
the kisses of an enemy are profuse.

<span id="an_27:7">27:7</span> The full soul loatheth a honeycomb; But
to the hungry soul every bitter thing is sweet.

<span id="an_27:8">27:8</span> As a bird that wandereth from her nest,
So is a man that wandereth from his place.

<span id="an_27:9">27:9</span> Oil and perfume rejoice the heart; So
doth the sweetness of a man's friend \[that cometh\] of hearty counsel.

<span id="an_27:10">27:10</span> Thine own friend, and thy father's
friend, forsake not; And go not to thy brother's house in the day of thy
calamity: Better is a neighbor that is near than a brother far off.

<span id="an_27:11">27:11</span> My son, be wise, and make my heart
glad, That I may answer him that reproacheth me.

<span id="an_27:12">27:12</span> A prudent man seeth the evil, \[and\]
hideth himself; \[But\] the simple pass on, \[and\] suffer for it.

<span id="an_27:13">27:13</span> Take his garment that is surety for a
stranger; And hold him in pledge \[that is surety\] for a foreign woman.

<span id="an_27:14">27:14</span> He that blesseth his friend with a loud
voice, rising early in the morning, It shall be counted a curse to him.

<span id="an_27:15">27:15</span> A continual dropping in a very rainy
day And a contentious woman are alike:

<span id="an_27:16">27:16</span> He that would restrain her restraineth
the wind; And his right hand encountereth oil.

<span id="an_27:17">27:17</span> Iron sharpeneth iron; So a man
sharpeneth the countenance of his friend.

<span id="an_27:18">27:18</span> Whoso keepeth the fig-tree shall eat
the fruit thereof; And he that regardeth his master shall be honored.

<span id="an_27:19">27:19</span> As in water face \[answereth\] to face,
So the heart of man to man.

<span id="an_27:20">27:20</span> Sheol and Abaddon are never satisfied;
And the eyes of man are never satisfied.

<span id="an_27:21">27:21</span> The refining pot is for silver, and the
furnace for gold; And a man is \[tried\] by his praise.

<span id="an_27:22">27:22</span> Though thou shouldest bray a fool in a
mortar with a pestle along with bruised grain, Yet will not his
foolishness depart from him.

<span id="an_27:23">27:23</span> Be thou diligent to know the state of
thy flocks, \[And\] look well to thy herds:

<span id="an_27:24">27:24</span> For riches are not for ever: And doth
the crown endure unto all generations?

<span id="an_27:25">27:25</span> The hay is carried, and the tender
grass showeth itself, And the herbs of the mountains are gathered in.

<span id="an_27:26">27:26</span> The lambs are for thy clothing, And the
goats are the price of the field;

<span id="an_27:27">27:27</span> And \[there will be\] goats' milk
enough for thy food, for the food of thy household, And maintenance for
thy maidens.

<span id="an_28:1">28:1</span> The wicked flee when no man pursueth; But
the righteous are bold as a lion.

<span id="an_28:2">28:2</span> For the transgression of a land many are
the princes thereof; But by men of understanding \[and\] knowledge the
state \[thereof\] shall be prolonged.

<span id="an_28:3">28:3</span> A needy man that oppresseth the poor Is
\[like\] a sweeping rain which leaveth no food.

<span id="an_28:4">28:4</span> They that forsake the law praise the
wicked; But such as keep the law contend with them.

<span id="an_28:5">28:5</span> Evil men understand not justice; But they
that seek Jehovah understand all things.

<span id="an_28:6">28:6</span> Better is the poor that walketh in his
integrity, Than he that is perverse in \[his\] ways, though he be rich.

<span id="an_28:7">28:7</span> Whoso keepeth the law is a wise son; But
he that is a companion of gluttons shameth his father.

<span id="an_28:8">28:8</span> He that augmenteth his substance by
interest and increase, Gathereth it for him that hath pity on the poor.

<span id="an_28:9">28:9</span> He that turneth away his ear from hearing
the law, Even his prayer is an abomination.

<span id="an_28:10">28:10</span> Whoso causeth the upright to go astray
in an evil way, He shall fall himself into his own pit; But the perfect
shall inherit good.

<span id="an_28:11">28:11</span> The rich man is wise in his own
conceit; But the poor that hath understanding searcheth him out.

<span id="an_28:12">28:12</span> When the righteous triumph, there is
great glory; But when the wicked rise, men hide themselves.

<span id="an_28:13">28:13</span> He that covereth his transgressions
shall not prosper: But whoso confesseth and forsaketh them shall obtain
mercy.

<span id="an_28:14">28:14</span> Happy is the man that feareth alway;
But he that hardeneth his heart shall fall into mischief.

<span id="an_28:15">28:15</span> \[As\] a roaring lion, and a ranging
bear, \[So is\] a wicked ruler over a poor people.

<span id="an_28:16">28:16</span> The prince that lacketh understanding
is also a great oppressor; \[But\] he that hateth covetousness shall
prolong his days.

<span id="an_28:17">28:17</span> A man that is laden with the blood of
any person Shall flee unto the pit; let no man stay him.

<span id="an_28:18">28:18</span> Whoso walketh uprightly shall be
delivered; But he that is perverse in \[his\] ways shall fall at once.

<span id="an_28:19">28:19</span> He that tilleth his land shall have
plenty of bread; But he that followeth after vain \[persons\] shall have
poverty enough.

<span id="an_28:20">28:20</span> A faithful man shall abound with
blessings; But he that maketh haste to be rich shall not be unpunished.

<span id="an_28:21">28:21</span> To have respect of persons is not good;
Neither that a man should transgress for a piece of bread.

<span id="an_28:22">28:22</span> he that hath an evil eye hasteth after
riches, And knoweth not that want shall come upon him.

<span id="an_28:23">28:23</span> He that rebuketh a man shall afterward
find more favor Than he that flattereth with the tongue.

<span id="an_28:24">28:24</span> Whoso robbeth his father or his mother,
and saith, It is no transgression, The same is the companion of a
destroyer.

<span id="an_28:25">28:25</span> He that is of a greedy spirit stirreth
up strife; But he that putteth his trust in Jehovah shall be made fat.

<span id="an_28:26">28:26</span> He that trusteth in his own heart is a
fool; But whoso walketh wisely, he shall be delivered.

<span id="an_28:27">28:27</span> He that giveth unto the poor shall not
lack; But he that hideth his eyes shall have many a curse.

<span id="an_28:28">28:28</span> When the wicked rise, men hide
themselves; But when they perish, the righteous increase.

<span id="an_29:1">29:1</span> He that being often reproved hardeneth
his neck Shall suddenly be destroyed, and that without remedy.

<span id="an_29:2">29:2</span> When the righteous are increased, the
people rejoice; But when a wicked man beareth rule, the people sigh.

<span id="an_29:3">29:3</span> Whoso loveth wisdom rejoiceth his father;
But he that keepeth company with harlots wasteth \[his\] substance.

<span id="an_29:4">29:4</span> The king by justice establisheth the
land; But he that exacteth gifts overthroweth it.

<span id="an_29:5">29:5</span> A man that flattereth his neighbor
Spreadeth a net for his steps.

<span id="an_29:6">29:6</span> In the transgression of an evil man there
is a snare; But the righteous doth sing and rejoice.

<span id="an_29:7">29:7</span> The righteous taketh knowledge of the
cause of the poor; The wicked hath not understanding to know \[it\].

<span id="an_29:8">29:8</span> Scoffers set a city in a flame; But wise
men turn away wrath.

<span id="an_29:9">29:9</span> If a wise man hath a controversy with a
foolish man, Whether he be angry or laugh, there will be no rest.

<span id="an_29:10">29:10</span> The bloodthirsty hate him that is
perfect; And as for the upright, they seek his life.

<span id="an_29:11">29:11</span> A fool uttereth all his anger; But a
wise man keepeth it back and stilleth it.

<span id="an_29:12">29:12</span> If a ruler hearkeneth to falsehood, All
his servants are wicked.

<span id="an_29:13">29:13</span> The poor man and the oppressor meet
together; Jehovah lighteneth the eyes of them both.

<span id="an_29:14">29:14</span> The king that faithfully judgeth the
poor, His throne shall be established for ever.

<span id="an_29:15">29:15</span> The rod and reproof give wisdom; But a
child left to himself causeth shame to his mother.

<span id="an_29:16">29:16</span> When the wicked are increased,
transgression increaseth; But the righteous shall look upon their fall.

<span id="an_29:17">29:17</span> Correct thy son, and he will give thee
rest; Yea, he will give delight unto thy soul.

<span id="an_29:18">29:18</span> Where there is no vision, the people
cast off restraint; But he that keepeth the law, happy is he.

<span id="an_29:19">29:19</span> A servant will not be corrected by
words; For though he understand, he will not give heed.

<span id="an_29:20">29:20</span> Seest thou a man that is hasty in his
words? There is more hope of a fool than of him.

<span id="an_29:21">29:21</span> He that delicately bringeth up his
servant from a child Shall have him become a son at the last.

<span id="an_29:22">29:22</span> An angry man stirreth up strife, And a
wrathful man aboundeth in transgression.

<span id="an_29:23">29:23</span> A man's pride shall bring him low; But
he that is of a lowly spirit shall obtain honor.

<span id="an_29:24">29:24</span> Whoso is partner with a thief hateth
his own soul; He heareth the adjuration and uttereth nothing.

<span id="an_29:25">29:25</span> The fear of man bringeth a snare; But
whoso putteth his trust in Jehovah shall be safe.

<span id="an_29:26">29:26</span> Many seek the ruler's favor; But a
man's judgment \[cometh\] from Jehovah.

<span id="an_29:27">29:27</span> An unjust man is an abomination to the
righteous; And he that is upright in the way is an abomination to the
wicked.

<span id="an_30:1">30:1</span> The words of Agur the son of Jakeh; The
oracle. The man saith unto Ithiel, unto Ithiel and Ucal:

<span id="an_30:2">30:2</span> Surely I am more brutish than any man,
And have not the understanding of a man;

<span id="an_30:3">30:3</span> And I have not learned wisdom, Neither
have I the knowledge of the Holy One.

<span id="an_30:4">30:4</span> Who hath ascended up into heaven, and
descended? Who hath gathered the wind in his fists? Who hath bound the
waters in his garment? Who hath established all the ends of the earth?
What is his name, and what is his son's name, if thou knowest?

<span id="an_30:5">30:5</span> Every word of God is tried: He is a
shield unto them that take refuge in him.

<span id="an_30:6">30:6</span> Add thou not unto his words, Lest he
reprove thee, and thou be found a liar.

<span id="an_30:7">30:7</span> Two things have I asked of thee; Deny me
\[them\] not before I die:

<span id="an_30:8">30:8</span> Remove far from me falsehood and lies;
Give me neither poverty nor riches; Feed me with the food that is
needful for me:

<span id="an_30:9">30:9</span> Lest I be full, and deny \[thee\], and
say, Who is Jehovah? Or lest I be poor, and steal, And use profanely the
name of my God.

<span id="an_30:10">30:10</span> Slander not a servant unto his master,
Lest he curse thee, and thou be held guilty.

<span id="an_30:11">30:11</span> There is a generation that curse their
father, And bless not their mother.

<span id="an_30:12">30:12</span> There is a generation that are pure in
their own eyes, And \[yet\] are not washed from their filthiness.

<span id="an_30:13">30:13</span> There is a generation, oh how lofty are
their eyes! And their eyelids are lifted up.

<span id="an_30:14">30:14</span> There is a generation whose teeth are
\[as\] swords, and their jaw teeth \[as\] knives, To devour the poor
from off the earth, and the needy from among men.

<span id="an_30:15">30:15</span> The horseleach hath two daughters,
\[crying\], Give, give. There are three things that are never satisfied,
\[Yea\], four that say not, Enough:

<span id="an_30:16">30:16</span> Sheol; and the barren womb; The earth
that is not satisfied with water; And the fire that saith not, Enough.

<span id="an_30:17">30:17</span> The eye that mocketh at his father, And
despiseth to obey his mother, The ravens of the valley shall pick it
out, And the young eagles shall eat it.

<span id="an_30:18">30:18</span> There are three things which are too
wonderful for me, Yea, four which I know not:

<span id="an_30:19">30:19</span> The way of an eagle in the air; The way
of a serpent upon a rock; The way of a ship in the midst of the sea; And
the way of a man with a maiden.

<span id="an_30:20">30:20</span> So is the way of an adulterous woman;
She eateth, and wipeth her mouth, And saith, I have done no wickedness.

<span id="an_30:21">30:21</span> For three things the earth doth
tremble, And for four, \[which\] it cannot bear:

<span id="an_30:22">30:22</span> For a servant when he is king; And a
fool when he is filled with food;

<span id="an_30:23">30:23</span> For an odious woman when she is
married; And a handmaid that is heir to her mistress.

<span id="an_30:24">30:24</span> There are four things which are little
upon the earth, But they are exceeding wise:

<span id="an_30:25">30:25</span> The ants are a people not strong, Yet
they provide their food in the summer;

<span id="an_30:26">30:26</span> The conies are but a feeble folk, Yet
make they their houses in the rocks;

<span id="an_30:27">30:27</span> The locusts have no king, Yet go they
forth all of them by bands;

<span id="an_30:28">30:28</span> The lizard taketh hold with her hands,
Yet is she in kings' palaces.

<span id="an_30:29">30:29</span> There are three things which are
stately in their march, Yea, four which are stately in going:

<span id="an_30:30">30:30</span> The lion, which is mightiest among
beasts, And turneth not away for any;

<span id="an_30:31">30:31</span> The greyhound; the he-goat also; And
the king against whom there is no rising up.

<span id="an_30:32">30:32</span> If thou hast done foolishly in lifting
up thyself, Or if thou hast thought evil, \[Lay\] thy hand upon thy
mouth.

<span id="an_30:33">30:33</span> For the churning of milk bringeth forth
butter, And the wringing of the nose bringeth forth blood; So the
forcing of wrath bringeth forth strife.

<span id="an_31:1">31:1</span> The words of king Lemuel; the oracle
which his mother taught him.

<span id="an_31:2">31:2</span> What, my son? and what, O son of my womb?
And what, O son of my vows?

<span id="an_31:3">31:3</span> Give not thy strength unto women, Nor thy
ways to that which destroyeth kings.

<span id="an_31:4">31:4</span> It is not for kings, O Lemuel, it is not
for kings to drink wine; Nor for princes \[to say\], Where is strong
drink?

<span id="an_31:5">31:5</span> Lest they drink, and forget the law, And
pervert the justice \[due\] to any that is afflicted.

<span id="an_31:6">31:6</span> Give strong drink unto him that is ready
to perish, And wine unto the bitter in soul:

<span id="an_31:7">31:7</span> Let him drink, and forget his poverty,
And remember his misery no more.

<span id="an_31:8">31:8</span> Open thy mouth for the dumb, In the cause
of all such as are left desolate.

<span id="an_31:9">31:9</span> Open thy mouth, judge righteously, And
minister justice to the poor and needy.

<span id="an_31:10">31:10</span> A worthy woman who can find? For her
price is far above rubies.

<span id="an_31:11">31:11</span> The heart of her husband trusteth in
her, And he shall have no lack of gain.

<span id="an_31:12">31:12</span> She doeth him good and not evil All the
days of her life.

<span id="an_31:13">31:13</span> She seeketh wool and flax, And worketh
willingly with her hands.

<span id="an_31:14">31:14</span> She is like the merchant-ships; She
bringeth her bread from afar.

<span id="an_31:15">31:15</span> She riseth also while it is yet night,
And giveth food to her household, And their task to her maidens.

<span id="an_31:16">31:16</span> She considereth a field, and buyeth it;
With the fruit of her hands she planteth a vineyard.

<span id="an_31:17">31:17</span> She girdeth her loins with strength,
And maketh strong her arms.

<span id="an_31:18">31:18</span> She perceiveth that her merchandise is
profitable: Her lamp goeth not out by night.

<span id="an_31:19">31:19</span> She layeth her hands to the distaff,
And her hands hold the spindle.

<span id="an_31:20">31:20</span> She stretcheth out her hand to the
poor; Yea, she reacheth forth her hands to the needy.

<span id="an_31:21">31:21</span> She is not afraid of the snow for her
household; For all her household are clothed with scarlet.

<span id="an_31:22">31:22</span> She maketh for herself carpets of
tapestry; Her clothing is fine linen and purple.

<span id="an_31:23">31:23</span> Her husband is known in the gates, When
he sitteth among the elders of the land.

<span id="an_31:24">31:24</span> She maketh linen garments and selleth
them, And delivereth girdles unto the merchant.

<span id="an_31:25">31:25</span> Strength and dignity are her clothing;
And she laugheth at the time to come.

<span id="an_31:26">31:26</span> She openeth her mouth with wisdom; And
the law of kindness is on her tongue.

<span id="an_31:27">31:27</span> She looketh well to the ways of her
household, And eateth not the bread of idleness.

<span id="an_31:28">31:28</span> Her children rise up, and call her
blessed; Her husband \[also\], and he praiseth her, \[saying\]:

<span id="an_31:29">31:29</span> Many daughters have done worthily, But
thou excellest them all.

<span id="an_31:30">31:30</span> Grace is deceitful, and beauty is vain;
\[But\] a woman that feareth Jehovah, she shall be praised.

<span id="an_31:31">31:31</span> Give her of the fruit of her hands; And
let her works praise her in the gates.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ecclesiastes](ecc.md)
