[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index.md)  [English
Bibles](../eb)  [Index](index)  [Previous](ecc)  [Next](isa.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### American Standard Version: Song of Solomon

<span id="an_1:1">1:1</span> The Song of songs, which is Solomon's.

<span id="an_1:2">1:2</span> Let him kiss me with the kisses of his
mouth; For thy love is better than wine.

<span id="an_1:3">1:3</span> Thine oils have a goodly fragrance; Thy
name is \[as\] oil poured forth; Therefore do the virgins love thee.

<span id="an_1:4">1:4</span> Draw me; we will run after thee: The king
hath brought me into his chambers; We will be glad and rejoice in thee;
We will make mention of thy love more than of wine: Rightly do they love
thee.

<span id="an_1:5">1:5</span> I am black, but comely, Oh ye daughters of
Jerusalem, As the tents of Kedar, As the curtains of Solomon.

<span id="an_1:6">1:6</span> Look not upon me, because I am swarthy,
Because the sun hath scorched me. My mother's sons were incensed against
me; They made me keeper of the vineyards; \[But\] mine own vineyard have
I not kept.

<span id="an_1:7">1:7</span> Tell me, O thou whom my soul loveth, Where
thou feedest \[thy flock\], Where thou makest \[it\] to rest at noon:
For why should I be as one that is veiled Beside the flocks of thy
companions?

<span id="an_1:8">1:8</span> If thou know not, O thou fairest among
women, Go thy way forth by the footsteps of the flock, And feed thy kids
beside the shepherds' tents.

<span id="an_1:9">1:9</span> I have compared thee, O my love, To a steed
in Pharaoh's chariots.

<span id="an_1:10">1:10</span> Thy cheeks are comely with plaits \[of
hair\], Thy neck with strings of jewels.

<span id="an_1:11">1:11</span> We will make thee plaits of gold With
studs of silver.

<span id="an_1:12">1:12</span> While the king sat at his table, My
spikenard sent forth its fragrance.

<span id="an_1:13">1:13</span> My beloved is unto me \[as\] a bundle of
myrrh, That lieth betwixt my breasts.

<span id="an_1:14">1:14</span> My beloved is unto me \[as\] a cluster of
henna-flowers In the vineyards of En-gedi.

<span id="an_1:15">1:15</span> Behold, thou art fair, my love; Behold
thou art fair; Thine eyes are \[as\] doves.

<span id="an_1:16">1:16</span> Behold, thou art fair, my beloved, yea,
pleasant: Also our couch is green.

<span id="an_1:17">1:17</span> The beams of our house are cedars,
\[And\] our rafters are firs.

<span id="an_2:1">2:1</span> I am a rose of Sharon, A lily of the
valleys.

<span id="an_2:2">2:2</span> As a lily among thorns, So is my love among
the daughters.

<span id="an_2:3">2:3</span> As the apple-tree among the trees of the
wood, So is my beloved among the sons. I sat down under his shadow with
great delight, And his fruit was sweet to my taste.

<span id="an_2:4">2:4</span> He brought me to the banqueting-house, And
his banner over me was love.

<span id="an_2:5">2:5</span> Stay ye me with raisins, refresh me with
apples; For I am sick from love.

<span id="an_2:6">2:6</span> His left hand \[is\] under my head, And his
right hand doth embrace me.

<span id="an_2:7">2:7</span> I adjure you, O daughters of Jerusalem, By
the roes, or by the hinds of the field, That ye stir not up, nor awake
\[my\] love, Until he please.

<span id="an_2:8">2:8</span> The voice of my beloved! behold, he cometh,
Leaping upon the mountains, Skipping upon the hills.

<span id="an_2:9">2:9</span> My beloved is like a roe or a young hart:
Behold, he standeth behind our wall; He looketh in at the windows; He
glanceth through the lattice.

<span id="an_2:10">2:10</span> My beloved spake, and said unto me, Rise
up, my love, my fair one, and come away.

<span id="an_2:11">2:11</span> For, lo, the winter is past; The rain is
over and gone;

<span id="an_2:12">2:12</span> The flowers appear on the earth; The time
of the singing \[of birds\] is come, And the voice of the turtle-dove is
heard in our land;

<span id="an_2:13">2:13</span> The fig-tree ripeneth her green figs, And
the vines are in blossom; They give forth their fragrance. Arise, my
love, my fair one, and come away.

<span id="an_2:14">2:14</span> O my dove, that art in the clefts of the
rock, In the covert of the steep place, Let me see thy countenance, Let
me hear thy voice; For sweet is thy voice, and thy countenance is
comely.

<span id="an_2:15">2:15</span> Take us the foxes, the little foxes, That
spoil the vineyards; For our vineyards are in blossom.

<span id="an_2:16">2:16</span> My beloved is mine, and I am his: He
feedeth \[his flock\] among the lilies.

<span id="an_2:17">2:17</span> Until the day be cool, and the shadows
flee away, Turn, my beloved, and be thou like a roe or a young hart Upon
the mountains of Bether.

<span id="an_3:1">3:1</span> By night on my bed I sought him whom my
soul loveth: I sought him, but I found him not.

<span id="an_3:2">3:2</span> \[I said\], I will rise now, and go about
the city; In the streets and in the broad ways I will seek him whom my
soul loveth: I sought him, but I found him not.

<span id="an_3:3">3:3</span> The watchmen that go about the city found
me; \[To whom I said\], Saw ye him whom my soul loveth?

<span id="an_3:4">3:4</span> It was but a little that I passed from
them, When I found him whom my soul loveth: I held him, and would not
let him go, Until I had brought him into my mother's house, And into the
chamber of her that conceived me.

<span id="an_3:5">3:5</span> I adjure you, O daughters of Jerusalem, By
the roes, or by the hinds of the field, That ye stir not up, nor awake
\[my\] love, Until he please.

<span id="an_3:6">3:6</span> Who is this that cometh up from the
wilderness Like pillars of smoke, Perfumed with myrrh and frankincense,
With all powders of the merchant?

<span id="an_3:7">3:7</span> Behold, it is the litter of Solomon;
Threescore mighty men are about it, Of the mighty men of Israel.

<span id="an_3:8">3:8</span> They all handle the sword, \[and\] are
expert in war: Every man hath his sword upon his thigh, Because of fear
in the night.

<span id="an_3:9">3:9</span> King Solomon made himself a palanquin Of
the wood of Lebanon.

<span id="an_3:10">3:10</span> He made the pillars thereof of silver,
The bottom thereof of gold, the seat of it of purple, The midst thereof
being paved with love, From the daughters of Jerusalem.

<span id="an_3:11">3:11</span> Go forth, O ye daughters of Zion, and
behold king Solomon, With the crown wherewith his mother hath crowned
him In the day of his espousals, And in the day of the gladness of his
heart.

<span id="an_4:1">4:1</span> Behold, thou art fair, my love; behold,
thou art fair; Thine eyes are \[as\] doves behind thy veil. Thy hair is
as a flock of goats, That lie along the side of mount Gilead.

<span id="an_4:2">4:2</span> Thy teeth are like a flock \[of ewes\] that
are \[newly\] shorn, Which are come up from the washing, Whereof every
one hath twins, And none is bereaved among them.

<span id="an_4:3">4:3</span> Thy lips are like a thread of scarlet, And
thy mouth is comely. Thy temples are like a piece of a pomegranate
Behind thy veil.

<span id="an_4:4">4:4</span> Thy neck is like the tower of David builded
for an armory, Whereon there hang a thousand bucklers, All the shields
of the mighty men.

<span id="an_4:5">4:5</span> Thy two breasts are like two fawns That are
twins of a roe, Which feed among the lilies.

<span id="an_4:6">4:6</span> Until the day be cool, and the shadows flee
away, I will get me to the mountain of myrrh, And to the hill of
frankincense.

<span id="an_4:7">4:7</span> Thou art all fair, my love; And there is no
spot in thee.

<span id="an_4:8">4:8</span> Come with me from Lebanon, \[my\] bride,
With me from Lebanon: Look from the top of Amana, From the top of Senir
and Hermon, From the lions' dens, From the mountains of the leopards.

<span id="an_4:9">4:9</span> Thou hast ravished my heart, my sister,
\[my\] bride; Thou hast ravished my heart with one of thine eyes, With
one chain of thy neck.

<span id="an_4:10">4:10</span> How fair is thy love, my sister, \[my\]
bride! How much better is thy love than wine! And the fragrance of thine
oils than all manner of spices!

<span id="an_4:11">4:11</span> Thy lips, O \[my\] bride, drop \[as\] the
honeycomb: Honey and milk are under thy tongue; And the smell of thy
garments is like the smell of Lebanon.

<span id="an_4:12">4:12</span> A garden shut up is my sister, \[my\]
bride; A spring shut up, a fountain sealed.

<span id="an_4:13">4:13</span> Thy shoots are an orchard of
pomegranates, with precious fruits; Henna with spikenard plants,

<span id="an_4:14">4:14</span> Spikenard and saffron, Calamus and
cinnamon, with all trees of frankincense; Myrrh and aloes, with all the
chief spices.

<span id="an_4:15">4:15</span> \[Thou art\] a fountain of gardens, A
well of living waters, And flowing streams from Lebanon.

<span id="an_4:16">4:16</span> Awake, O north wind; and come, thou
south; Blow upon my garden, that the spices thereof may flow out. Let my
beloved come into his garden, And eat his precious fruits.

<span id="an_5:1">5:1</span> I am come into my garden, my sister, \[my\]
bride: I have gathered my myrrh with my spice; I have eaten my honeycomb
with my honey; I have drunk my wine with my milk. Eat, O friends; Drink,
yea, drink abundantly, O beloved.

<span id="an_5:2">5:2</span> I was asleep, but my heart waked: It is the
voice of my beloved that knocketh, \[saying\], Open to me, my sister, my
love, my dove, my undefiled; For my head is filled with dew, My locks
with the drops of the night.

<span id="an_5:3">5:3</span> I have put off my garment; how shall I put
it on? I have washed my feet; how shall I defile them?

<span id="an_5:4">5:4</span> My beloved put in his hand by the hole \[of
the door\], And my heart was moved for him.

<span id="an_5:5">5:5</span> I rose up to open to my beloved; And my
hands droppeth with myrrh, And my fingers with liquid myrrh, Upon the
handles of the bolt.

<span id="an_5:6">5:6</span> I opened to my beloved; But my beloved had
withdrawn himself, \[and\] was gone. My soul had failed me when he
spake: I sought him, but I could not find him; I called him, but he gave
me no answer.

<span id="an_5:7">5:7</span> The watchmen that go about the city found
me, They smote me, they wounded me; The keepers of the walls took away
my mantle from me.

<span id="an_5:8">5:8</span> I adjure you, O daughters of Jerusalem, If
ye find my beloved, That ye tell him, that I am sick from love.

<span id="an_5:9">5:9</span> What is thy beloved more than \[another\]
beloved, O thou fairest among women? What is thy beloved more than
\[another\] beloved, That thou dost so adjure us?

<span id="an_5:10">5:10</span> My beloved is white and ruddy, The
chiefest among ten thousand.

<span id="an_5:11">5:11</span> His head is \[as\] the most fine gold;
His locks are bushy, \[and\] black as a raven.

<span id="an_5:12">5:12</span> His eyes are like doves beside the
water-brooks, Washed with milk, \[and\] fitly set.

<span id="an_5:13">5:13</span> His cheeks are as a bed of spices, \[As\]
banks of sweet herbs: His lips are \[as\] lilies, dropping liquid myrrh.

<span id="an_5:14">5:14</span> His hands are \[as\] rings of gold set
with beryl: His body is \[as\] ivory work overlaid \[with\] sapphires.

<span id="an_5:15">5:15</span> His legs are \[as\] pillars of marble,
set upon sockets of fine gold: His aspect is like Lebanon, excellent as
the cedars.

<span id="an_5:16">5:16</span> His mouth is most sweet; Yea, he is
altogether lovely. This is my beloved, and this is my friend, O
daughters of Jerusalem.

<span id="an_6:1">6:1</span> Whither is thy beloved gone, O thou fairest
among women? Whither hath thy beloved turned him, That we may seek him
with thee?

<span id="an_6:2">6:2</span> My beloved is gone down to his garden, To
the beds of spices, To feed in the gardens, and to gather lilies.

<span id="an_6:3">6:3</span> I am my beloved's, and my beloved is mine;
He feedeth \[his flock\] among the lilies,

<span id="an_6:4">6:4</span> Thou art fair, O my love, as Tirzah, Comely
as Jerusalem, Terrible as an army with banners.

<span id="an_6:5">6:5</span> Turn away thine eyes from me, For they have
overcome me. Thy hair is as a flock of goats, That lie along the side of
Gilead.

<span id="an_6:6">6:6</span> Thy teeth are like a flock of ewes, Which
are come up from the washing; Whereof every one hath twins, And none is
bereaved among them.

<span id="an_6:7">6:7</span> Thy temples are like a piece of a
pomegranate Behind thy veil.

<span id="an_6:8">6:8</span> There are threescore queens, and fourscore
concubines, And virgins without number.

<span id="an_6:9">6:9</span> My dove, my undefiled, is \[but\] one; She
is the only one of her mother; She is the choice one of her that bare
her. The daughters saw her, and called her blessed; \[Yea\], the queens
and the concubines, and they praised her.

<span id="an_6:10">6:10</span> Who is she that looketh forth as the
morning, Fair as the moon, Clear as the sun, Terrible as an army with
banners?

<span id="an_6:11">6:11</span> I went down into the garden of nuts, To
see the green plants of the valley, To see whether the vine budded,
\[And\] the pomegranates were in flower.

<span id="an_6:12">6:12</span> Before I was aware, my soul set me
\[Among\] the chariots of my princely people.

<span id="an_6:13">6:13</span> Return, return, O Shulammite; Return,
return, that we may look upon thee. Why will ye look upon the
Shulammite, As upon the dance of Mahanaim?

<span id="an_7:1">7:1</span> How beautiful are thy feet in sandals, O
prince's daughter! Thy rounded thighs are like jewels, The work of the
hands of a skilful workman.

<span id="an_7:2">7:2</span> Thy body is \[like\] a round goblet,
\[Wherein\] no mingled wine is wanting: Thy waist is \[like\] a heap of
wheat Set about with lilies.

<span id="an_7:3">7:3</span> Thy two breasts are like two fawns That are
twins of a roe.

<span id="an_7:4">7:4</span> Thy neck is like the tower of ivory; Thine
eyes \[as\] the pools in Heshbon, By the gate of Bath-rabbim; Thy nose
is like the tower of Lebanon Which looketh toward Damascus.

<span id="an_7:5">7:5</span> Thy head upon thee is like Carmel, And the
hair of thy head like purple; The king is held captive in the tresses
\[thereof\].

<span id="an_7:6">7:6</span> How fair and how pleasant art thou, O love,
for delights!

<span id="an_7:7">7:7</span> This thy stature is like to a palm-tree,
And thy breasts to its clusters.

<span id="an_7:8">7:8</span> I said, I will climb up into the palm-tree,
I will take hold of the branches thereof: Let thy breasts be as clusters
of the vine, And the smell of thy breath like apples,

<span id="an_7:9">7:9</span> And thy mouth like the best wine, That
goeth down smoothly for my beloved, Gliding through the lips of those
that are asleep.

<span id="an_7:10">7:10</span> I am my beloved's; And his desire is
toward me.

<span id="an_7:11">7:11</span> Come, my beloved, let us go forth into
the field; Let us lodge in the villages.

<span id="an_7:12">7:12</span> Let us get up early to the vineyards; Let
us see whether the vine hath budded, \[And\] its blossom is open,
\[And\] the pomegranates are in flower: There will I give thee my love.

<span id="an_7:13">7:13</span> The mandrakes give forth fragrance; And
at our doors are all manner of precious fruits, new and old, Which I
have laid up for thee, O my beloved.

<span id="an_8:1">8:1</span> Oh that thou wert as my brother, That
sucked the breasts of my mother! \[When\] I should find thee without, I
would kiss thee; Yea, and none would despise me.

<span id="an_8:2">8:2</span> I would lead thee, \[and\] bring thee into
my mother's house, Who would instruct me; I would cause thee to drink of
spiced wine, Of the juice of my pomegranate.

<span id="an_8:3">8:3</span> His left hand \[should be\] under my head,
And his right hand should embrace me.

<span id="an_8:4">8:4</span> I adjure you, O daughters of Jerusalem,
That ye stir not up, nor awake \[my\] love, Until he please.

<span id="an_8:5">8:5</span> Who is this that cometh up from the
wilderness, Leaning upon her beloved? Under the apple-tree I awakened
thee: There thy mother was in travail with thee, There was she in
travail that brought thee forth.

<span id="an_8:6">8:6</span> Set me as a seal upon thy heart, As a seal
upon thine arm: For love is strong as death; Jealousy is cruel as Sheol;
The flashes thereof are flashes of fire, A very flame of Jehovah.

<span id="an_8:7">8:7</span> Many waters cannot quench love, Neither can
floods drown it: If a man would give all the substance of his house for
love, He would utterly be contemned.

<span id="an_8:8">8:8</span> We have a little sister, And she hath no
breasts: What shall we do for our sister In the day when she shall be
spoken for?

<span id="an_8:9">8:9</span> If she be a wall, We will build upon her a
turret of silver: And if she be a door, We will inclose her with boards
of cedar.

<span id="an_8:10">8:10</span> I am a wall, and my breasts like the
towers \[thereof\] Then was I in his eyes as one that found peace.

<span id="an_8:11">8:11</span> Solomon had a vineyard at Baal-hamon; He
let out the vineyard unto keepers; Every one for the fruit thereof was
to bring a thousand \[pieces\] of silver.

<span id="an_8:12">8:12</span> My vineyard, which is mine, is before me:
Thou, O Solomon, shalt have the thousand, And those that keep the fruit
thereof two hundred.

<span id="an_8:13">8:13</span> Thou that dwellest in the gardens, The
companions hearken for thy voice: Cause me to hear it.

<span id="an_8:14">8:14</span> Make haste, my beloved, And be thou like
to a roe or to a young hart Upon the mountains of spices.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Isaiah](isa.md)
