[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index.md)  [English
Bibles](../eb)  [Index](index)  [Previous](ti2)  [Next](plm.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### American Standard Version: Titus

<span id="an_1:1">1:1</span> Paul, a servant of God, and an apostle of
Jesus Christ, according to the faith of God's elect, and the knowledge
of the truth which is according to godliness,

<span id="an_1:2">1:2</span> in hope of eternal life, which God, who
cannot lie, promised before times eternal;

<span id="an_1:3">1:3</span> but in his own seasons manifested his word
in the message, wherewith I was intrusted according to the commandment
of God our Saviour;

<span id="an_1:4">1:4</span> to Titus, my true child after a common
faith: Grace and peace from God the Father and Christ Jesus our Saviour.

<span id="an_1:5">1:5</span> For this cause left I thee in Crete, that
thou shouldest set in order the things that were wanting, and appoint
elders in every city, as I gave thee charge;

<span id="an_1:6">1:6</span> if any man is blameless, the husband of one
wife, having children that believe, who are not accused of riot or
unruly.

<span id="an_1:7">1:7</span> For the bishop must be blameless, as God's
steward; not self-willed, not soon angry, no brawler, no striker, not
greedy of filthy lucre;

<span id="an_1:8">1:8</span> but given to hospitality, as lover of good,
sober-minded, just, holy, self-controlled;

<span id="an_1:9">1:9</span> holding to the faithful word which is
according to the teaching, that he may be able to exhort in the sound
doctrine, and to convict the gainsayers.

<span id="an_1:10">1:10</span> For there are many unruly men, vain
talkers and deceivers, specially they of the circumcision,

<span id="an_1:11">1:11</span> whose mouths must be stopped; men who
overthrow whole houses, teaching things which they ought not, for filthy
lucre's sake.

<span id="an_1:12">1:12</span> One of themselves, a prophet of their
own, said, Cretans are always liars, evil beasts, idle gluttons.

<span id="an_1:13">1:13</span> This testimony is true. For which cause
reprove them sharply, that they may be sound in the faith,

<span id="an_1:14">1:14</span> not giving heed to Jewish fables, and
commandments of men who turn away from the truth.

<span id="an_1:15">1:15</span> To the pure all things are pure: but to
them that are defiled and unbelieving nothing is pure; but both their
mind and their conscience are defiled.

<span id="an_1:16">1:16</span> They profess that they know God; but by
their works they deny him, being abominable, and disobedient, and unto
every good work reprobate.

<span id="an_2:1">2:1</span> But speak thou the things which befit the
sound doctrine:

<span id="an_2:2">2:2</span> that aged men be temperate, grave,
sober-minded, sound in faith, in love, in patience:

<span id="an_2:3">2:3</span> that aged women likewise be reverent in
demeanor, not slanderers nor enslaved to much wine, teachers of that
which is good;

<span id="an_2:4">2:4</span> that they may train the young women to love
their husbands, to love their children,

<span id="an_2:5">2:5</span> \[to be\] sober-minded, chaste, workers at
home, kind, being in subjection to their own husbands, that the word of
God be not blasphemed:

<span id="an_2:6">2:6</span> the younger men likewise exhort to be
sober-minded:

<span id="an_2:7">2:7</span> in all things showing thyself an ensample
of good works; in thy doctrine \[showing\] uncorruptness, gravity,

<span id="an_2:8">2:8</span> sound speech, that cannot be condemned;
that he that is of the contrary part may be ashamed, having no evil
thing to say of us.

<span id="an_2:9">2:9</span> \[Exhort\] servants to be in subjection to
their own masters, \[and\] to be well-pleasing \[to them\] in all
things; not gainsaying;

<span id="an_2:10">2:10</span> not purloining, but showing all good
fidelity; that they may adorn the doctrine of God our Saviour in all
things.

<span id="an_2:11">2:11</span> For the grace of God hath appeared,
bringing salvation to all men,

<span id="an_2:12">2:12</span> instructing us, to the intent that,
denying ungodliness and worldly lusts, we should live soberly and
righteously and godly in this present world;

<span id="an_2:13">2:13</span> looking for the blessed hope and
appearing of the glory of the great God and our Saviour Jesus Christ;

<span id="an_2:14">2:14</span> who gave himself for us, that he might
redeem us from all iniquity, and purify unto himself a people for his
own possession, zealous of good works.

<span id="an_2:15">2:15</span> These things speak and exhort and reprove
with all authority. Let no man despise thee.

<span id="an_3:1">3:1</span> Put them in mind to be in subjection to
rulers, to authorities, to be obedient, to be ready unto every good
work,

<span id="an_3:2">3:2</span> to speak evil of no man, not to be
contentious, to be gentle, showing all meekness toward all men.

<span id="an_3:3">3:3</span> For we also once were foolish, disobedient,
deceived, serving divers lusts and pleasures, living in malice and envy,
hateful, hating one another.

<span id="an_3:4">3:4</span> But when the kindness of God our Saviour,
and his love toward man, appeared,

<span id="an_3:5">3:5</span> not by works \[done\] in righteousness,
which we did ourselves, but according to his mercy he saved us, through
the washing of regeneration and renewing of the Holy Spirit,

<span id="an_3:6">3:6</span> which he poured out upon us richly, through
Jesus Christ our Saviour;

<span id="an_3:7">3:7</span> that, being justified by his grace, we
might be made heirs according to the hope of eternal life.

<span id="an_3:8">3:8</span> Faithful is the saying, and concerning
these things I desire that thou affirm confidently, to the end that they
who have believed God may be careful to maintain good works. These
things are good and profitable unto men:

<span id="an_3:9">3:9</span> but shun foolish questionings, and
genealogies, and strifes, and fightings about law; for they are
unprofitable and vain.

<span id="an_3:10">3:10</span> A factious man after a first and second
admonition refuse;

<span id="an_3:11">3:11</span> knowing that such a one is perverted, and
sinneth, being self-condemned.

<span id="an_3:12">3:12</span> When I shall send Artemas unto thee, or
Tychicus, give diligence to come unto me to Nicopolis: for there I have
determined to winter.

<span id="an_3:13">3:13</span> Set forward Zenas the lawyer and Apollos
on their journey diligently, that nothing be wanting unto them.

<span id="an_3:14">3:14</span> And let our \[people\] also learn to
maintain good works for necessary uses, that they be not unfruitful.

<span id="an_3:15">3:15</span> All that are with me salute thee. Salute
them that love us in faith. Grace be with you all.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Philemon](plm.md)
