[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](mcft10)  [Next](mcft12) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# The Greek Princess and the Young Gardener

THERE was once a king, but I didn't hear what country he was over, and
he had one very beautiful daughter. Well, he was getting old and sickly,
and the doctors found out that the finest medicine in the world for him
was the apples of a tree that grew in the orchard just under his window.
So you may be sure he had the tree well minded, and used to get the
apples counted from the time they were the size of small marbles. One
harvest, just as they were beginning to turn ripe, the king was awakened
one night by the flapping of wings outside in the orchard ; and when he
looked out, what did he see but a bird among the branches of his tree.
Its feathers were so bright that they made a light all round them, and
the minute it saw the king in his night-cap and night-shirt it picked
off an apple, and flew away "Oh, botheration to that thief of a
gardener! " says the king, "this is a nice way he's watching my precious
fruit."

He didn't sleep a wink the rest of the night and as soon as any one was
stirring in the palace, he sent for the gardener, and abused him for his
neglect.

"Please your Majesty!" says he, " not another apple you shall lose. My
three sons are the best shots at the bow and arrow in the kingdom, and
they and myself will watch in turn every night."

When the night came, the gardener's eldest son took his post in the
garden, with his bow strung and his arrow between his fingers, and
watched, and watched. But at the dead hour, the king, that was wide
awake, heard the flapping of wings, and ran to the window. There was the
bright bird in the tree, and the boy fast asleep, sitting with his back
to the wall, and his bow on his lap.

"Rise, you lazy thief ! " says the king, '' there's the bird again,
botheration to her !"

Up jumped the poor fellow ; but while he was fumbling with the arrow and
the string, away was the bird with the nicest apple on the tree. Well,
to be sure, how the king fumed and fretted, and how he abused the
gardener and the boy, and what a twenty-four hours he spent till
midnight came again !

He had his eye this time on the second son of the gardener; but though
he was up and lively enough when the clock began to strike twelve, it
wasn't done with the last bang when he saw him stretched like one dead
on the long grass, and saw the bright bird again, and heard the flap of
her wings, and saw her carry away the third apple. The poor fellow woke
with the roar the king let at him, and even was in time enough to let
fly an arrow after the bird. He did not hit her, you may depend; and
though the king was mad enough, he saw the poor fellows were under '
*pishtrogues,* and could not help it.

Well, he had some hopes out of the youngest, for he was a brave, active
young fellow, that had everybody's good word. There he was ready, and
there was the king watching him, and talking to him at the first stroke
of twelve. At the last clang, the brightness coming before the bird
lighted up the wall and the trees, and the rushing of the wings was
heard as it flew into the branches ; but at the same instant the crack
of the arrow on her side might be heard a quarter of a mile off. Down
came the arrow and a large bright feather along with it, and away was
the bird, with a screech that was enough to break the drum of your ear.
She hadn't time to carry off an apple; and bedad, when the feather was
thrown up into the king's room it was heavier than lead, and turned out
to be the finest beaten gold.

Well, there was great *cooramuch* made about the youngest boy next day,
and he watched night after night for a week, but not a mite of a bird or
bird's feather was to be seen, and then the king told him to go home and
sleep. Every one admired the beauty of the gold feather beyond anything,
but the king was fairly bewitched. He was turning it round and round,
and rubbing it against his forehead and his nose the live-long day; and
at last he proclaimed that he'd give his daughter and half his kingdom
to whoever would bring him the bird with the gold feathers, dead or
alive.

The gardener's eldest son had great conceit of himself and away he went
to look for the bird. In the afternoon he sat down under a tree to rest
himself; and eat a bit of bread and cold meat that he had in his wallet,
when up comes as fine a looking fox as you'd see in the burrow of
Munfin. " Musha, sir," says he, " would you spare a bit of that meat to
a poor body that's hungry?"

" Well," says the other, " you must have the divil's own assurance, you
common robber, to ask me such a question. Here's the answer," and he let
fly at the

moddhereen rua.

The arrow scraped from his side up over his back, as if he was made of
hammered iron, and stuck in a tree a couple of perches off.

"Foul play," says the fox ; but I respect your young brother, and will
give a bit of advice. At nightfall you'll come into a village. One side
of the street you'll see a large room lighted up, and filled with young
men and women, dancing and drinking. The other side you'll see a house
with no light, only from the fire in the front room, and no one near it
but a man and his wife, and their child. Take a fool's advice, and get
lodging there." With that he curled his tail over his crupper, and
trotted off.

The boy found things as the fox said, but *begonies* he chose the
dancing and drinking, and there we'll leave him. In a week's time, when
they got tired at home waiting for him, the second son said he'd try his
fortune, and off he set. He was just as ill-natured and foolish as his
brother, and the same thing happened to him. Well, when a week was over,
away went the youngest of all, and as sure as the hearth-money, he sat
under the same tree, and pulled out his bread and meat, and the same fox
came up and saluted him. Well, the young fellow shared his dinner with
the *moddhereen,* and he wasn't long beating about the bush, but told
the other he knew all about his business.

"I'll help you," says he, "if I find you're biddable. So just at
nightfall you'll come into a village … Good-bye till to-morrow."

It was just as the fox said, but the boy took care not to go near
dancer, drinker, fiddler, or piper. He got welcome in the quiet house to
supper and bed, and was on his journey next morning before the sun was
the height of the trees.

He wasn't gone a quarter of a mile when he saw the fox coming out of a
wood that was by the roadside.

"Good-morrow, fox," says one.

"Good-morrow, sir," says the other.

"Have you any notion how far you have to travel till you find the garden
bird?"

"Dickens a notion have I ; - how could I ?"

"Well, I have. She's in the King of Spain's palace, and that's a good
two hundred miles off."

"Oh, dear! we'll be a week going."

"No, we won't. Sit down on my tail, and we'll soon make the road short."

"Tail, indeed ! that 'ud be the droll saddle, my poor *moddhereen.*"

"Do as I tell you, or I'll leave you to yourself."

Well, rather than vex him he sat down on the tail that was spread out
level like a wing, and away they went like thought. They overtook the
wind that was before them, and the wind that came after didn't overtake
them. In the afternoon, they stopped in a wood near the King of Spain's
palace, and there they stayed till nightfall.

"Now," says the fox, "I'll go before you to make the minds of the guards
easy, and you'll have nothing to do but go from lighted hall to another
lighted hall till you find the golden bird in the last. If you have a
head on you, you'll bring himself and his cage outside the door, and no
one then can lay hands on him or you. If you haven't a head I can't help
you, nor no one else." So he went over to the gates.

In a quarter of an hour the boy followed, and in the first hall he
passed he saw a score of armed guards standing upright, but all dead
asleep. In the next he saw a dozen, and in the next half a dozen, and in
the next three, and in the room beyond that there was no guard at all,
nor lamp, nor candle, but it was as bright as day ; for there was the
golden bird in a common wood and wire cage, and on the table were the
three apples turned into solid gold.

On the same table was the most lovely golden cage eye ever beheld, and
it entered the boy's head that it would be a thousand pities not to put
the precious bird into it, the common cage was so unfit for her. Maybe
he thought of the money it was worth ; anyhow he made the exchange, and
he had soon good reason to be sorry for it. The instant the shoulder of
the bird's wing touched the golden wires, he let such a *squawk* out of
him as was enough to break all the panes of glass in the windows, and at
the same minute the three men, and the half-dozen, and the dozen, and
the score men, woke up and clattered their swords and spears, and
surrounded the poor boy, and jibed, and cursed, and swore at home, till
he didn't know whether it's his foot or head he was standing on. They
called the king, and told him what happened, and he put on a very grim
face. "It's on a gibbet you ought to be this moment," says he, " but
I'll give you a chance of your life, and of the golden bird, too. I lay
you under prohibitions, and restrictions, and death, and destruction, to
go and bring me the King of *Moroco's* bay filly that outruns the wind,
and leaps over the walls of castle-bawns. When you fetch it her into the
bawn of this palace, you must get the golden bird, and liberty to go
where you please."

Out passed the boy, very down-hearted, but as he went along, who should
come out of a brake but the fox again.

"Ah, my friend," says he, " I was right when I suspected you hadn't a
head on you; but I won't rub your hair again' the grain. Get on my tail
again, and when we come to the King of Moroco's paIace, we'll see what
we can do."

So away they went like thought. The wind that was before them they would
overtake the wind that was behind them would not overtake them.

Well, the nightfall came on them in a wood near the palace, and says the
fox, ' I'll go and make things easy for you at the stables, and when you
are leading out the filly, don't let her touch the door, nor doorposts,
nor anything but the ground, and that with her hoofs and if you haven't
a head on you once you are in the stable, you'll be worse off than
before."

So the boy delayed for a quarter of an hour, and then he went into the
big bawn of the palace. There were two rows of armed men reaching from
the gate to the stable, and every man was in the depth of deep sleep,
and through them went the boy till he got into the stable. There was the
filly, as handsome a beast as ever stretched leg, and there was one
stable-boy with a currycomb in his hand, and another with a bridle, and
another with a sieve of oats, and another with an armful of hay, and all
as if they were cut out of stone. The filly was the only live thing in
the place except himself. She had a common wood and leather saddle on
her back, but a golden saddle with the nicest work on it was hung from
the post, and he thought it the greatest pity not to put it in place of
the other. Well, I believe there was some *pishrogues* over it for a
saddle ; anyhow, he took off the other, and put the gold one in its
place.

Out came a squeal from the filly's throat when she felt the strange
article, that might be heard from Tombrick to Bunclody, and all as ready
were the armed men and the stable-boys to run and surround the
*ornadhan* of a boy, and the King of Moroco was soon there along with
the rest, with a face on him as black as the sole of your foot. After he
stood enjoying the abuse the poor boy got from every-body for some time,
he says to him, "You deserve high hanging for your impudence, but l'll
give you a chance for your life and the filly, too. I lay on you all
sorts of prohibitions, and restrictions, and death, and destruction to
go bring me Princess Golden Locks, the King of Greek's daughter. When
you deliver her into my hand, you may have the 'daughter of the wind,'
and welcome. Come in and take your supper and your rest, and be off at
the flight of night."

The poor boy was down in the mouth, you may suppose, as he was walking
away next morning, and very much ashamed when the fox looked up in his
face after coming out of the wood.

"What a thing it is," says he, "not to have a head when a body wants it
worst ; and here we have a fine long journey before us to the King of
Greek's palace. The worse luck now, the same always. Here, get on my
tail, and we'll be making the road shorter."

So he sat on the fox's tail, and swift as thought they went. The wind
that was before them they would overtake it, the wind that was behind
them would not overtake them, and in the evening they were eating their
bread and cold meat in the wood near the castle.

"Now," says the fox, when they were done, "I'll go before you to make
things easy. Follow me in a quarter of an hour. Don't let Princess
Golden Locks touch the jambs of the doors with her hands, or hair, or
clothes, and if you're asked any favour, mind how you answer. Once she's
outside the door, no one can take her from you."

Into the palace walked the boy at the proper time, and there were the
score, and the dozen, and the half-dozen, and the three guards all
standing up or leaning on their arms, and all dead asleep, and in the
farthest room of all was the Princess Golden Locks, as lovely as Venus
herself. She was asleep in one chair, and her father, the King of Greek,
in another. He stood before her for ever so long with the love sinking
deeper into his heart every minute. till at last he went down on one
knee, and took her darling white hand in his hand, and kissed it.

When she opened her eyes, she was a little frightened, but I believe not
very angry, for the boy, as I call him, was a fine handsome young
fellow, and all the respect and love that ever you could think of was in
his face. She asked him what he wanted, and he stammered, and blushed,
and began his story six times, before she understood it.

"And would you give me up to that ugly black King of Moroco ?" says she.

"I am obliged to do so," says he, " by prohibitions, and restrictions,
and death, and destruction, but I'll have his life and free you, or lose
my own. If I can't get you for my wife, my days on the earth will be
short."

"Well," says she, "let me take leave of my father at any rate."

"Ah, I can't do that," says he, " or they'd all waken, and myself would
be put to death, or sent to some task worse than any I got yet."

But she asked leave at any rate to kiss the old man; that wouldn't waken
him, and then she'd go. How could he refuse her, and his heart tied up
in every curl of her hair? But, bedad, the moment her lips touched her
father's, he let a cry, and every one of the score, the dozen guards
woke up, and clashed their arms, and were going to make *gibbets* of the
foolish boy.

But the king ordered them to hold their hands, till he'd be *insensed*
of what it was all about, and when he heard the boy's story he gave him
a chance for his life.

"There is," says he, "a great heap of clay in front of the palace, that
won't let the sun shine on the walls in the middle of summer. Every one
that ever worked at it found two shovelfuls added to it for every one
they threw away. Remove it, and I'll let my daughter go with you. If
you're the man I suspect you to be, I think she'll be in no danger of
being wife to that yellow *Molott.*"

Early next morning was the boy tackled to his work, and for every
shovelful he flung away two came back on him, and at last he could
hardly get out of the heap that gathered round him. Well, the poor
fellow scrambled out some way, and sat down on a sod, and he'd have
cried only for the shame of it. He began at it in ever so many places,
and one was still worse than the other, and in the heel of the evening,
when he was sitting with his head between his hands, who should be
standing before him but the fox.

"Well, my poor fellow," says he, "you're low enough. Go in: I won't say
anything to add to your trouble. Take your supper and your rest :
to-morrow will be a new day."

"How is the work going off?" says the king, when they I were at supper.

"Faith, your Majesty," says the poor boy, "it's not going off; but
coming on it is. I suppose you'll have the trouble of digging me out at
sunset to-morrow, and waking me."

"I hope not," says the princess, with a smile on her kind face; and the
boy was as happy as anything the rest of the evening.

He was wakened up next morning with voices shouting, and bugles blowing,
and drums beating, and such a hullibullo he never heard in his life
before. He ran out to see what was the matter, and there, where the heap
of clay was the evening before, were soldiers, and servants, and lords,
and ladies, dancing like mad for joy that it was gone.

"Ah, my poor fox !" says he to himself; "this is your work."

Well, there was little delay about his return. The king was going to
send a great retinue with the princess and himself; but he wouldn't let
him take the trouble.

"I have a friend," says he, "that will bring us both to the King of
Moroco's palace in a day, d -- fly away with him !"

There was great crying when she was parting from her father.

"Ah ! " says he, "what a lonesome life I'll have now! Your poor brother
in the power of that wicked witch, and kept away from us, and now you
taken from me in my old age!"

Well, they both were walking on through the wood, and he telling her how
much he loved her; out walked the fox from behind a brake, and in a
short time he and she were sitting on the brush, and holding one another
fast for fear of slipping off; and away they went like thought. The wind
that was before them they would overtake it, and in the evening he and
she were in the big bawn of the King of Moroco's castle.

"Well," says he to the boy, "you've done your duty well; bring out the
bay filly. I'd give the full of the bawn of such fillies, if I had them,
for this handsome princess. Get on your steed, and here is a good purse
of guineas for the road."

"Thank you," says he. "I suppose you'll let me shake hands with the
princess before I start."

"Yes, indeed, and welcome."

Well, he was some little time about the hand-shaking, and before it was
over he had her fixed snug behind him; and while you could count three,
he, and she, and the filly were through all the guards, and a hundred
perches away.; On they went, and next morning they were in the wood near
the King of Spain's palace, and there was the fox before them.

"Leave your princess here with me," says he, "and go get the golden bird
and the three apples. If you don't bring us back the filly along with
the bird, I must carry you both home myself."

Well, when the King of Spain saw the boy and the filly in the bawn, he
made the golden bird, and the golden cage, and the golden apples be
brought out and handed to him, and was very thankful and very glad of
his prize. But the boy could not part with the nice beast without
petting it and rubbing it; and while no one was expecting such a thing,
he was up on its back, and through the guards, and a hundred perches
away, and he wasn't long till he came to where he left his princess and
the fox.

They hurried away till they were safe out of the King of Spain's land,
and then they went on easier; and if I was to tell you all the loving
things they said to one another, the story wouldn't be over till
morning. When they were passing the village of the dance house, they
found his two brothers begging, and they brought them along. When they
came to where the fox appeared first, he begged the young man to cut off
his head and his tail.

He would not do it for him ; he shivered at the very thought, but the
eldest brother was ready enough. The head and tail vanished with the
blows, and the body changed into the finest young man you could see, and
who was he but the princess's brother that was bewitched. Whatever joy
they had before, they had twice as much now, and when they arrived at
the palace bonfires were set blazing, oxes roasting, and puncheons of
wine put out in the lawn.

The young Prince of Greece was married to the king's daughter, and the
prince's sister to the gardener's son. He and she went a shorter way
back to her father's house, with many attendants, and the king was so
glad of the golden bird and the golden apples, that he had sent a waggon
full of gold and a waggon full of silver along with them.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Russet Dog](mcft12)
