[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](rosa11)  [Next](rosa13) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B00295RH64/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Religion of the Samurai*, by Kaiten Nukariya, \[1913\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

ORIGIN OF MAN

\[1\]

### INTRODUCTION

ALL animated beings that live (under the sun) have an origin, while each
of inanimate things, countless in number, owes its existence to some
source.\[2\] There can never be (any being nor) any thing that has (no
origin, as there can be no) branch which has no root. How could man, the
most spiritual of the Three Powers\[3\] exist without an origin?

(It is said),\[4\] moreover, that that which knows others is intellect,
and that that which knows itself is wisdom. Now if I, being born among
men, know not whence I came (into this life), how could I know whither I
am going in the after-life? How could I understand all human affairs,
ancient and modern, in the world? So, for some scores of years I learned
under many different tutors, and read extensively (not only) the
Buddhist (but also) outside books. By that means I tried to trace my
Self, and never stopped my research till I attained, as I had expected,
to its origin.

\[1. The author treats the origin of life and of the universe, but the
book was entitled as we have seen in the preface.

2\. The same idea and expression are found in Tao Teh King
(Do-toku-kyo), by Lao Tsz (Ro-shi, 604-522 B.C.).

3\. The Three Powers are-(1) Heaven, that has the power of revolution;
(2) Earth, that has the power of production; and (3) Man, that has the
power of thought.

4\. The sentence is a direct quotation of Tao Teh King.\]

Confucianists and Taoists of our age, nevertheless, merely know that our
nearest origin is the father or the grandfather, as we are descended
from them, and they from their fathers in succession. (They say) that
the remotest (origin) is the undefinable (primordial) Gas\[1\] in the
state of chaos; that it split itself into the two (different) principles
of the Positive and the Negative; that the two brought forth the Three
Powers of Heaven, Earth, and Man, which (in their turn) produced all
other things; that man as well as other things originated in the Gas.

(Some)\[2\] Buddhists, (however), maintain simply that the nearest
(origin) is Karma,\[3\] as we were born among men as the results of the
Karma that we had produced in the past existences; and that the remotest
(origin) is the Alaya-vijñana,\[4\] (because) our Karma is brought forth
by illusion, and (illusion by attachment), and so forth, in one word,
the Alaya is the origin of life. Although all of (these scholars) claim
that they have already grasped the ultimate truth, yet not in fact.

Confucius, Lao Tsz, and Shakya, however, were all the wisest of sages.
Each of them gave his teachings in a way different from the other two,
that they might meet the spiritual needs of his time and fit to the
capacities of men. (So that) the Buddhist and the outside doctrines,
each

\[1. Such a statement concerning the creation of the universe as the one
here given is found in I King (Eeki-kyo). The primordial substance is
not exactly 'gas,' but we may conceive it as being something like a
nebula.

2\. Not all Buddhists, but some of them, are meant here-that is,
Hinayanists and Dharma-laksanists.

3\. According to Hinayanists, Karma (action) is that moral germ which
survives death and continues in transmigration. It may be conceived as
something like an energy, by the influence of which beings undergo
metempsychosis.

4 According to the Dharma-laksana Sect, Alaya-vijñana
(receptacle-knowledge) is the spiritual Substance which holds the
'seeds' or potentialities of all things.\]

supplementing the other, have done good to the multitude. They were all
(intended) to encourage thousands of virtuous acts by explaining the
whole chain of causality. They were (also intended) to investigate
thousands of things, and throw light on the beginning and on the end of
their evolution. Although all these doctrines (might) answer the purpose
of the sages, yet there must be some teachings that would be
temporary,\[1\] while others would be eternal. The first two faiths are
merely temporary, while Buddhism includes both the temporary and the
eternal. We may act according to the precepts of these three faiths,
which aim at the peace and welfare (of man), in so far as they encourage
thousands of virtuous acts by giving warning against evil and
recommending good. (But) Buddhism (alone) is altogether perfect and best
of all, in investigating thousands of things and in tracing them back to
their first cause, in order to acquire thorough understanding of the
natures of things and to attain to the ultimate truth.

Each of our contemporary scholars, nevertheless, adheres to one school
of the (above mentioned) teachings. And there are some (even) among the
Buddhists who mistake the temporary for the eternal doctrine. In
consequence they are never successful in tracing Heaven, Earth, Man, and
other things back to their First Cause. But I am now (going to show how)
to infer an Ultimate Cause for thousands of things, not only from the
Buddhist, but from outsiders' teachings. First I shall treat of the
superficial doctrines, and then of the profound, (in order to) free the
followers of the temporary faiths from those (prejudices that prove to
be) obstructions in their way to the truth, and enable them to attain to
the Ultimate Reality. Afterwards I shall point out, according to the
perfect doctrine, how

\[1. The temporary doctrine means the teaching preached by Shakya Muni
to meet the temporary needs of the hearers. The term is always used in
contrast with the real or eternal doctrine.\]

things evolved themselves through one stage after another out of the
First Cause (in order to) make the incomplete doctrines fuse into the
complete one, and to enable the followers to explain the phenomenal
universe.'

This essay is entitled 'Origin of Man,' and it consists of the
(following) four chapters: (1) Refutation of Delusive and Prejudiced
(Doctrine); (2) Refutation of Incomplete and Superficial (Doctrine); (3)
Direct Explanation of the Real Origin; (4) Reconciliation of the
Temporary with the Eternal Doctrine.

\[1. A. 'That is, Heaven, Earth, Man, and other things.'\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter I: Refutation of Delusive and Prejudiced
(Doctrine)](rosa13)
