[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](rosa05)  [Next](rosa07) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B00295RH64/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Religion of the Samurai*, by Kaiten Nukariya, \[1913\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# CHAPTER IV

## BUDDHA, THE UNIVERSAL SPIRIT

1\. **The Ancient Buddhist Pantheon**.--The ancient Buddhist pantheon
was full of deities or Buddhas, 3,000\[1\] in number, or rather
countless, and also of Bodhisattvas no less than Buddhas. Nowadays,
however, in every church of Mahayanism one Buddha or another together
with some Bodhisattvas reigns supreme as the sole object of worship,
while other supernatural beings sink in oblivion. These Enlightened
Beings, regardless of their positions in the pantheon, were generally
regarded as persons who in their past lives cultivated virtues,
underwent austerities, and various sorts of penance, and at length
attained to a complete Enlightenment, by virtue of which they secured
not only peace and eternal bliss, but acquired divers supernatural
powers, such as clairvoyance, clairaudience, all-knowledge, and what
not. Therefore, it is natural that some Mahayanists\[2\] came to believe
that, if they should go through the same course of discipline and study,
they could attain to the same Enlightenment and Bliss, or the same
Buddhahood, while other Mahayanists\[3\] came to believe in the doctrine
that the believer is saved

\[1. Trikalpa-trisahasra-buddhanrama-sutra gives the names of 3,000
Buddhas, and Buddhabhisita-buddhanama-sutra enumerates Buddhas and
Bodhisattvas 11,093 in number. See Nanjo's Catalogue, Nos. 404, 405,
406, 407.

2\. Those who believe in the doctrine of Holy Path. See 'A History of
the Twelve Japanese Buddhist Sects,' pp. 109-111.

3\. Those who believe in the doctrine of the Pure Land.\]

and led up to the eternal state of bliss, without undergoing these hard
disciplines, by the power of a Buddha known as having boundless mercy
and fathomless wisdom whom he invokes.

2\. **Zen is Iconoclastic**.--For the followers of Bodhidharma, however,
this conception of Buddha seemed too crude to be accepted unhesitatingly
and the doctrine too much irrelevant with and uncongenial to actual
life. Since Zen denounced, as we have seen in the previous chapter, the
scriptural authority, it is quite reasonable to have given up this view
of Buddha inculcated in the Mahayana sutras, and to set at naught those
statues and images of supernatural beings kept in veneration by the
orthodox Buddhists. Tan Hia (Tan-ka), a noted Chinese Zen master, was
found warming himself on a cold morning by the fire made of a wooden
statue of Buddha. On another occasion he was found mounting astride the
statue of a saint. Chao Chen (Jo-shu) one day happened to find Wang Yuen
(Bun-yen) worshipping the Buddha in the temple, and forthwith struck him
with his staff. "Is there not anything good in the worshipping of the
Buddha?" protested Wang Yuen. Then the master said: "Nothing is better
than anything good."\[1\] These examples fully illustrate Zen's attitude
towards the objects of Buddhist worship. Zen is not, nevertheless,
iconoclastic in the commonly accepted sense of the term, nor is it
idolatrous, as Christian missionaries are apt to suppose.

Zen is more iconoclastic than any of the Christian or the Mohammedan
denominations in the sense that it opposes the acceptance of the
petrified idea of Deity, so conventional and formal that it carries no
inner conviction of the believers. Faith dies out whenever one comes to
stick to one's fixed and immutable idea of Deity, and to deceive

\[1. Zen-rin-rui-shu.\]

oneself, taking bigotry for genuine faith. Faith must be living and
growing, and the living and growing faith should assume no fixed form.
It might seem for a superficial observer to take a fixed form, as a
running river appears constant, though it goes through ceaseless
changes. The dead faith, immutable and conventional, makes its embracer
appear religious and respectable, while it arrests his spiritual growth.
It might give its owner comfort and pride, yet it at bottom proves to be
fetters to his moral uplifting. It is on this account that Zen declares:
"Buddha is nothing but spiritual chain or moral fetters," and, "If you
remember even a name of Buddha, it would deprive you of purity of
heart." The conventional or orthodox idea of Buddha or Deity might seem
smooth and fair, like a gold chain, being polished and hammered through
generations by religious goldsmiths; but it has too much fixity and
frigidity to be worn by us.

"Strike off thy fetters, bonds that bind thee down  
Of shining gold or darker, baser ore;  
       \*       \*       \*       \*       \*  
Know slave is slave caressed or whipped, not free;  
For fetters tho' of gold, are not less strong to bind."

                                        *The Song of the Sannyasin*.

3\. **Buddha is Unnamable**.--Give a definite name to Deity, He would be
no more than what the name implies. The Deity under the name of Brahman
necessarily differs from the Being under the appellation of Jehovah,
just as the Hindu differs from the Jew. In like manner the Being
designated by God necessarily differs from One named Amitabha or from
Him entitled Allah. To give a name to the Deity is to give Him
tradition, nationality, limitation, and fixity, and it never brings us
nearer to Him. Zen's object of worship cannot be named and determined as
God, or Brahman, or Amitabha, or Creator, or Nature, or Reality, or
Substance, or the like. Neither Chinese nor Japanese masters of Zen
tried to give a definite name to their object of adoration. They now
called Him That One, now This One, now Mind, now Buddha, now Tathagata,
now Certain Thing, now the True, now Dharma-nature, now Buddha-nature,
and so forth. Tüng Shan\[1\] (To-zan) on a certain occasion declared it
to be "A Certain Thing that pillars heaven above and supports the earth
below; dark as lacquer and undefinable; manifesting itself through its
activities, yet not wholly comprisable within them." So-kei\[2\]
expressed it in the same wise: "There exists a Certain Thing, bright as
a mirror, spiritual as a mind, not subjected to growth nor to decay."
Hüen Sha (Gen-sha) comparing it with a gem says: "There exists a bright
gem illuminating through the worlds in ten directions by its
light."\[3\]

This certain thing or being is too sublime to be named after a
traditional or a national deity, too spiritual to be symbolized by human
art, too full of life to be formulated in terms of mechanical science,
too free to be rationalized by intellectual philosophy, too universal to
be perceived by bodily senses; but everybody can feel its irresistible
power, see its invisible presence, and touch its heart and soul within
himself. "This mysterious Mind," says Kwei Fung (Kei-ho), "is higher
than the highest, deeper than the deepest, limitless in all directions.
There is no centre in it. No distinction of east and west, and above and
below. Is it empty? Yes, but not empty like space. Has it a form? Yes,
but has no form dependent on another for its existence. Is it
intelligent? Yes, but not intelligent like your mind. Is it
non-intelligent? Yes, but not non-intelligent like

\[1. Tüng Shan Luh (To-zan-roku, 'Sayings and Doings of Ta-zan') is one
of the best Zen books.

2\. So-kei, a Korean Zenist, whose work entitled Zen-ke-ki-kwan is
worthy of our note as a representation of Korean Zen.

3 Sho-bo-gen-zo.\]

trees and stone. Is it conscious? Yes, but not conscious like you when
waking. Is it bright? Yes, but not bright like the sun or the moon." To
the question, "What and who is Buddha?" Yuen Wu (En-go) replied: "Hold
your tongue: the mouth is the gate of evils!" while Pao Fuh (Ho-fuku)
answered to the same question: "No skill of art can picture Him." Thus
Buddha is unnamable, indescribable, and indefinable, but we
provisionally call Him Buddha.

4\. **Buddha, the Universal Life**.--Zen conceives Buddha as a Being,
who moves, stirs, inspires, enlivens, and vitalizes everything.
Accordingly, we may call Him the Universal Life in the sense that He is
the source of all lives in the universe. This Universal Life, according
to Zen, pillars the heaven, supports the earth, glorifies the sun and
moon, gives voice to thunder, tinges clouds, adorns the pasture with
flowers, enriches the field with harvest, gives animals beauty and
strength. Therefore, Zen declares even a dead clod of earth to be imbued
with the divine life, just as Lowell expresses a similar idea when he
says:

"Every clod feels a stir of might,  
An instinct within it that reaches and towers,  
And groping blindly above it for light,  
Climbs to a soul in grass and flowers."

One of our contemporary Zenists wittily observed that 'vegetables are
the children of earth, that animals which feed on vegetables are the
grand-children of earth, and that men who subsist on animals are the
great-grand-children of earth.' If there be no life in earth, how could
life come out of it? If there be no life, the same as the animal's life
in the vegetables, how could animals sustain their lives feeding on
vegetables? If there be no life similar to ours in animals, how could we
sustain our life by subsisting on them? The poet must be in the right,
not only in his esthetic, but in his scientific point of view, in
saying-

                         "I must  
Confess that I am only dust.  
But once a rose within me grew;  
Its rootlets shot, its flowerets flew;  
And all rose's sweetness rolled  
Throughout the texture of my mould;  
And so it is that I impart  
Perfume to them, whoever thou art."

As we men live and act, so do our arteries; so does blood; so do
corpuscles. As cells and protoplasm live and act, so do elements,
molecules, and atoms. As elements and atoms live and act, so do clouds;
so does the earth; so does the ocean, the Milky Way, and the Solar
System. What is this life which pervades the grandest as well as the
minutest works of Nature, and which may fitly be said 'greater than the
greatest and smaller than the smallest?' It cannot be defined. It cannot
be subjected to exact analysis. But it is directly experienced and
recognized within us, just as the beauty of the rose is to be perceived
and enjoyed, but not reduced to exact analysis. At any rate, it is
something stirring, moving, acting and reacting continually. This
something which can be experienced and felt and enjoyed directly by
every one of us. This life of living principle in the microcosmos is
identical with that of the macrocosmos, and the Universal Life of the
macrocosmos is the common source of all lives. Therefore, the
Mahaparinirvana-sutra says:

"Tathagata (another name for Buddha) gives life to all beings, just as
the lake Anavatapta gives rise to the four great rivers." "Tathagata,"
says the same sutra, "divides his own body into innumerable bodies, and
also restores an infinite number of bodies to one body. Now be becomes
cities, villages, houses, mountains, rivers, and trees; now he has a
large body; now he has a small body; now he becomes men, women, boys,
and girls."

5\. **Life and Change**.--A peculiar phase of life is change which
appears in the form of growth and decay. Nobody can deny the
transitoriness of life. One of our friends humorously observed:
"Everything in the world may be doubtful to you, but it can never be
doubted that you will die." Life is like a burning lamp. Every minute
its flame dies out and is renewed. Life is like a running stream. Every
moment it pushes onward. If there be anything constant in this world of
change, it should be change itself. Is it not just one step from rosy
childhood to snowy age? Is it not just one moment from the nuptial song
to the funeral-dirge? Who can live the same moment twice?

In comparison with an organism, inorganic matter appears to be constant
and changeless; but, in fact, it is equally subjected to ceaseless
alteration. Every morning, looking into the mirror, you will find your
visage reflected in it just as it was on the preceding day; so also
every morning, looking at the sun and the earth, you will find them
reflected in your retina just as they were on the previous morning; but
the sun and the earth are no less changeless than you. Why do the sun
and the earth seem changeless and constant to you? Only because you
yourself undergo change more quickly than they. When you look at the
clouds sweeping across the face of the moon, they seem to be at rest,
and the moon in rapid motion; but, in fact, the clouds, as well as the
moon, incessantly move on.

Science might maintain the quantitative constancy of matter, but the
so-called matter is mere abstraction. To say matter is changeless is as
much as to say 2 is always 2, changeless and constant, because the
arithmetical number is not more abstract than the physiological matter.
The moon appears standing still when you look at her only a few moments.
In like manner she seems to be free from change when you look at her in
your short span of life. Astronomers, nevertheless, can tell you how she
saw her better days, and is now in her wrinkles and white hair.

6\. **Pessimistic View of the Ancient Hindus**.--In addition to this,
the new theory of matter has entirely over thrown the old conception of
the unchanging atoms, and they are now regarded to be composed of
magnetic forces, ions, and corpuscles in incessant motion. Therefore we
have no inert matter in the concrete, no unchanging thing in the sphere
of experience, no constant organism in the transient universe. These
considerations often led many thinkers, ancient and modern, to the
pessimistic view of life. What is the use of your exertion, they would
say, in accumulating wealth, which is doomed to melt away in the
twinkling of an eye? What is the use of your striving after power, which
is more short-lived than a bubble? What is the use of your endeavour in
the reformation of society, which does not endure any longer than the
castle in the air? How do kings differ from beggars in the eye of
Transience? How do the rich differ from the poor, how the beautiful from
the ugly, bow the young from the old, how the good from the evil, how
the lucky from the unlucky, how the wise from the unwise, in the court
of Death? Vain is ambition. Vain is fame. Vain is pleasure. Vain are
struggles and efforts. All is in vain. An ancient Hindu thinker \[1\]
says:

"O saint, what is the use of the enjoyment of pleasures in this
offensive, pithless body--a mere mass of bones, skins, sinews, marrow,
and flesh? What is the use of the enjoyment of pleasures in this body,
which is assailed by lust, hatred, greed, delusion, fear, anguish,
jealousy, separation from what is loved, union with what is not loved,
hunger,

\[1. Maitrayana Upanisad.\]

old age, death, illness, grief, and other evils? In such a world as
this, what is the use of the enjoyment of pleasures, if he who has fed
on them is to return to this world again and again? In this world I am
like a frog in a dry well."

It is this consideration on the transitoriness of life that led some
Taoist in China to prefer death to life, as expressed in Chwang Tsz
(Su-shi):\[1\]

"When Kwang-zze went to Khu, he saw an empty skull, bleached indeed, but
still retaining its shape. Tapping it with his horse-switch, he asked it
saying: 'Did you, sir, in your greed of life, fail in the lessons of
reason and come to this? Or did you do so, in the service of a perishing
state, by the punishment of an axe? Or was it through your evil conduct,
reflecting disgrace on your parents and on your wife and children? Or
was it through your hard endurances of cold and hunger? Or was it that
you had completed your term of life?'

"Having given expression to these questions, he took up the skull and
made a pillow of it, and went to sleep. At midnight the skull appeared
to him in a dream, and said: 'What you said to me was after the fashion
of an orator. All your words were about the entanglements of men in
their lifetime. There are none of those things after death. Would you
like to hear me, sir, tell you about death?' 'I should,' said Kwang-zze,
and the skull resumed: 'In death there are not (the distinctions of)
ruler above minister below. There are none of the phenomena of the four
seasons. Tranquil and at ease, our years are those of heaven and earth.
No king in his court has greater enjoyment than we have.' Kwang-zze did
not believe it, and said: 'If I could get the Ruler of our Destiny to
restore your body to life with its bones and flesh and skin, and to give
you back your father and mother, your wife and children, and all your
village acquaintances, would you wish

\[1. 'Chwang Tsz,' vol. vi., p. 23.\]

me to do so?' The skull stared fixedly at him, and knitted its brows and
said: 'How should I cast away the enjoyment of my royal court, and
undertake again the toils of life among mankind?'"

7\. **Hinayanism and its Doctrine**.--The doctrine of Transience was the
first entrance gate of Hinayanism. Transience never fails to deprive us
of what is dear and near to us. It disappoints us in our expectation and
hope. It brings out grief, fear, anguish, and lamentation. It spreads
terror and destruction among families, communities, nations, mankind. It
threatens with perdition the whole earth, the whole universe. Therefore
it follows that life is full of disappointment, sufferings, and
miseries, and that man is like 'a frog in a dry well.' This is the
doctrine called by the Hinayanists the Holy Truth of Suffering.

Again, when Transcience once gets hold of our imagination, we can easily
foresee ruins and disasters in the very midst of prosperity and
happiness, and also old age and ugliness in the prime and youth of
beauty. It gives rise quite naturally to the thought that body is a bag
full of pus and blood, a mere heap of rotten flesh and broken pieces of
bone, a decaying corpse inhabited by innumerable maggots. This is the
doctrine called by the Hinayanists the Holy Truth of Impurity.\[1\]

And, again, Transience holds its tyrannical sway not only over the
material but over the spiritual world. At its touch Atman, or soul, is
brought to nothing. By its call Devas, or celestial beings, are made to
succumb to death. It follows, therefore, that to believe in Atman,
eternal and

\[1. Mahasaptipatthana Suttanta, 7, runs as follows: "And, moreover,
bhikkhu, a brother, just as if he had been a body abandoned in the
charnel-field, dead for one, two, or three days, swollen, turning black
and blue, and decomposed, apply that perception to this very body (of
his own), reflecting: 'This body, too, is even so constituted, is of
such a nature, has not got beyond that (fate).'"\]

unchanging, would be a whim of the ignorant. This is the doctrine called
by the Hinayanists the Holy Truth of No-atman.

If, as said, there could be nothing free from Transience, Constancy
should be a gross mistake of the ignorant; if even gods have to die,
Eternity should be no more than a stupid dream of the vulgar; if all
phenomena be flowing and changing, there could be no constant noumena
underlying them. It therefore follows that all things in the universe
are empty and unreal. This is the doctrine called by the Hinayanists the
Holy Truth of Unreality. Thus Hinayana Buddhism, starting from the
doctrine of Transience, arrived at the pessimistic view of life in its
extreme form.

8\. **Change as seen by Zen**.--Zen, like Hinayanism., does not deny the
doctrine of Transience, but it has come to a view diametrically opposite
to that of the Hindus. Transience for Zen simply means change. It is a
form in which life manifests itself. Where there is life there is change
or Transience. Where there is more change there is more vital activity.
Suppose an absolutely changeless body: it must be absolutely lifeless.
An eternally changeless life is equivalent to an eternally changeless
death. Why do we value the morning glory, which fades in a few hours,
more than an artificial glass flower, which endures hundreds of years?
Why do we prefer an animal life, which passes away in a few scores of
years, to a vegetable life, which can exist thousands of years? Why do
we prize changing organism more than inorganic matter, unchanging and
constant? If there be no change in the bright hues of a flower, it is as
worthless as a stone. If there be no change in the song of a bird, it is
as valueless as a whistling wind. If there be no change in trees and
grass, they are utterly unsuitable to be planted in a garden. Now, then,
what is the use of our life, if it stand still? As the water of a
running stream is always fresh and wholesome because it does not stop
for a moment, so life is ever fresh and new because it does not stand
still, but rapidly moves on from parents to children, from children to
grandchildren, from grandchildren to great-grandchildren, and flows on
through generation after generation, renewing itself ceaselessly.

We can never deny the existence of old age and death--nay, death is of
capital importance for a continuation of life, because death carries
away all the decaying organism in the way of life. But for it life would
be choked up with organic rubbish. The only way of life's pushing itself
onward or its renewing itself is its producing of the young and getting
rid of the old. If there be no old age nor death, life is not life, but
death.

9\. **Life and Change.**--Transformation and change are the essential
features of life; life is not transformation nor change itself, as
Bergson seems to assume. It is something which comes under our
observation through transformation and change. There are, among
Buddhists as well as Christians, not a few who covet constancy and
fixity of life, being allured by such smooth names as eternal life,
everlasting joy, permanent peace, and what not. They have forgotten that
their souls can never rest content with things monotonous. If there be
everlasting joy for their souls, it must be presented to them through
incessant change. So also if there be eternal life granted for their
souls, it must be given through ceaseless alteration. What is the
difference between eternal life, fixed and constant, and eternal death?
What is the difference between everlasting bliss, changeless and
monotonous, and everlasting suffering? If constancy, instead of change,
govern life, then hope or pleasure is absolutely impossible.
Fortunately, however, life is not constant. It changes and becomes.
Pleasure arises through change itself. Mere change of food or clothes is
often pleasing to us, while the appearance of the same thing twice or
thrice, however pleasing it may be, causes us little 'pleasure. It will
become disgusting and tire us down, if it be presented repeatedly from
time to time.

An important element in the pleasure we derive from social meetings,
from travels, from sight-seeings, etc., is nothing but change. Even
intellectual pleasure consists mainly of change. A dead, unchanging
abstract truth, 2 and 2 make 4, excites no interest; while a changeable,
concrete truth, such as the Darwinian theory of evolution, excites a
keen interest.

10\. **Life, Change, and Hope**.--The doctrine of Transcience never
drives us to the pessimistic view of life. On the contrary, it gives us
an inexhaustible source of pleasure and hope. Let us ask you: Are you
satisfied with the present state of things? Do you not sympathize with
poverty-stricken millions living side by side with millionaires
saturated with wealth? Do you not shed tears over those hunger-bitten
children who cower in the dark lanes of a great city? Do you not wish to
put down the stupendous oppressor--Might-is-right? Do you not want to do
away with the so-called armoured peace among nations? Do you not need to
mitigate the struggle for existence more sanguine than the war of
weapons?

Life changes and is changeable; consequently, has its future. Hope is
therefore possible. Individual development, social betterment,
international peace, reformation of mankind in general, can be hoped.
Our ideal, however unpractical it may seem at the first sight, can be
realized. Moreover, the world itself, too, is changing and changeable.
It reveals new phases from time to time, and can be moulded to subserve
our purpose. We must not take life or the world as completed and doomed
as it is now. No fact verifies the belief that the world was ever
created by some other power and predestined to be as it is now. It
lives, acts, and changes. It is transforming itself continually, just as
we are changing and becoming. Thus the doctrine of Transience supplies
us with an inexhaustible source of hope and comfort, leads us into the
living universe, and introduces us to the presence of Universal Life or
Buddha.

The reader may easily understand how Zen conceives Buddha as the living
principle from the following dialogues: "Is it true, sir," asked a monk
of Teu tsz (To-shi), "that all the voices of Nature are those of
Buddha?" "Yes, certainly," replied Teu tsz. "What is, reverend sir,"
asked a man of Chao Cheu (Jo-shu), "the holy temple (of Buddha)?" "An
innocent girl," replied the teacher. "Who is the master of the temple?"
asked the other again. "A baby in her womb," was the answer. "What is,
sir," asked a monk to Yen Kwan (Yen-kan), "the original body of Buddha
Vairocana?"\[1\] "Fetch me a pitcher with water," said the teacher. The
monk did as he was ordered. "Put it back in its place," said Yen Kwan
again.\[2\]

11\. **Everything is Living according to Zen**.--Everything alive has a
strong innate tendency to preserve itself, to assert itself, to push
itself forward, and to act on its environment, consciously or
unconsciously. The innate, strong tendency of the living is an
undeveloped, but fundamental, nature of Spirit or Mind. It shows itself
first in inert matter as impenetrability, or affinity, or mechanical
force. Rock has a powerful tendency to preserve itself. And it is hard
to crush it. Diamond has a robust tendency

\[1. Literally, All Illuminating Buddha, the highest of the Trikayas.
See Eitel, p. 192.

2 Zen-rin-rui-shu.\]

to assert itself. And it permits nothing to destroy it. Salt has the
same strong tendency, for its particles act and react by themselves, and
never cease till its crystals are formed. Steam, too, should have the
same, because it pushes aside everything in its way and goes where it
will.

In the eye of simple folks of old, mountains, rivers, trees, serpents,
oxen, and eagles were equally full of life; hence the deification of
them. No doubt it is irrational to believe in nymphs, fairies, elves,
and the like, yet still we may say that mountains stand of their own
accord, rivers run as they will, just as we say that trees and grass
turn their leaves towards the sun of their own accord. Neither is it a
mere figure of speech to say that thunder speaks and hills respond, nor
to describe birds as singing and flowers as smiling, nor to narrate
winds as moaning and rain as weeping, nor to state lovers as looking at
the moon, the moon as looking at them, when we observe spiritual element
in activities of all this. Haeckel says, not without reason: "I cannot
imagine the simple chemical and physical forces without attributing the
movement of material particles to conscious sensation." The same author
says again: "We may ascribe the feeling of pleasure and pain to all
atoms, and so explain the electric affinity in chemistry."

12\. **The Creative Force of Nature and Humanity**.--The innate tendency
of self-preservation, which manifests itself as mechanical force or
chemical affinity in the inorganic nature, unfolds itself as the desire
of the preservation of species in the vegetables and animals. See how
vegetables fertilize themselves in a complicated way, and how they
spread their seeds far and wide in a most mysterious manner. A far more
developed form of the same desire is seen in the sexual attachment and
parental love of animals. Who does not know that even the smallest birds
defend their young against every enemy with self -sacrificing courage,
and that they bring food whilst they themselves often starve and grow
lean? In human beings we can observe the various transformations of the
self-same desire. For instance, sorrow or despair is experienced when it
is impossible; anger, when it is hindered by others; joy, when it is
fulfilled; fear, when it is threatened; pleasure, when it is
facilitated. Although it manifests itself as the sexual attachment and
parental love in lower animals, yet its developed forms, such as
sympathy, loyalty, benevolence, mercy, humanity, are observed in human
beings.

Again, the creative force in inorganic nature, in order to assert itself
and act more effectively, creates the germ of organic nature, and
gradually ascending the scale of evolution, develops the sense organs
and the nervous system; hence intellectual powers, such as sensation,
perception, imagination, memory, unfold themselves. Thus the creative
force, exerting itself gradually, widens its sphere of action, and
necessitates the union of individuals into families, clans, tribes,
communities, and nations. For the sake of this union and co-operation
they established customs, enacted laws, and instituted political and
educational systems. Furthermore, to reinforce itself, it gave birth to
languages and sciences; and to enrich itself, morality and religion.

13\. **Universal Life is Universal Spirit**.--These considerations
naturally lead us to see that Universal Life is not a blind vital force,
but Creative Spirit, or Mind, or Consciousness, which unfolds itself in
myriads of ways. Everything in the universe, according to Zen, lives and
acts, and at the same time discloses its spirit. To be alive is
identically the same as to be spiritual. As the poet has his song, so
does the nightingale, so does the cricket, so does the rivulet. As we
are pleased or offended, so are horses, so are dogs, so are sparrows,
ants, earthworms, and mushrooms. Simpler the body, simpler its spirit;
more complicated the body, more complicated its spirit. 'Mind slumbers
in the pebble, dreams in the plant, gathers energy in the animal, and
awakens to self-conscious discovery in the soul of man.'

It is this Creative, Universal Spirit that sends forth Aurora to
illuminate the sky, that makes Diana shed her benign rays and Æolus play
on his harp, wreathes spring with flowers, that clothes autumn with
gold, that induces plants to put forth blossoms, that incites animals to
be energetic, and that awakens consciousness in man. The author of
Mahavaipulya-purnabuddha-sutra expressly states our idea when he says:
"Mountains, rivers, skies, the earth: all these are embraced in the True
Spirit, enlightened and mysterious." Rin-zai also says: "Spirit is
formless, but it penetrates through the world in the ten
directions."\[1\] The Sixth Patriarch expresses the same idea more
explicitly: "What creates the phenomena is Mind; what transcends all the
phenomena is Buddha."\[2\]

14\. **Poetical Intuition and Zen**.--Since Universal Life or Spirit
permeates the universe, the poetical intuition of man never fails to
find it, and to delight in everything typical of that Spirit. "The
leaves of the plantain," says a Zen poet, "unfold themselves, hearing
the voice of thunder. The flowers of the hollyhock turn towards the sun,
looking at it all day long." Jesus could see in the lily the Unseen
Being who clothed it so lovely. Wordsworth found the most profound thing
in all the world to be the universal spiritual life, which manifests
itself most directly in nature, clothed in its own proper dignity and
peace. "Through every star," says Carlyle, "through every grass blade,
most through every soul, the glory of present God still beams."

\[1. Rin-zai-roku.

2\. Roku-so-dan-kyo.\]

It is not only grandeur and sublimity that indicate Universal Life, but
smallness and commonplace do the same. A sage of old awakened to the
faith\[1\] when he heard a bell ring; another, when he looked at the
peach blossom; another, when he heard the frogs croaking; and another,
when he saw his own form reflected in a river. The minutest particles of
dust form a world. The meanest grain of sand under our foot proclaims a
divine law. Therefore Teu Tsz Jo-shi), pointing to a stone in front of
his temple, said: " All the Buddhas of the past, the present, and the
future are living therein."\[2\]

15\. **Enlightened Consciousness**.--In addition to these
considerations, which mainly depend on indirect experience, we can have
direct experience of life within us. In the first place, we experience
that our life is not a bare mechanical motion or change, but is a
spiritual, purposive, and self-directing force. In the second place, we
directly experience that it knows, feels, and wills. In the third place,
we experience that there exists some power unifying the intellectual,
emotional, and volitional activities so as to make life uniform and
rational. Lastly, we experience that there lies deeply rooted within us
Enlightened Consciousness, which neither psychologists treat of nor
philosophers believe in, but which Zen teachers expound with strong
conviction. Enlightened Consciousness is, according to Zen, the centre
of spiritual life. It is the mind of minds, and the consciousness of
consciousness. It is the Universal Spirit awakened in the human mind. It
is not the mind that feels joy or sorrow; nor is it the mind that
reasons and infers; nor is it the mind that fancies and dreams; nor is
it the mind that hopes and fears; nor is it the mind that distinguishes
good

\[1. Both the Chinese and the Japanese history of Zen are full of such
incidents.

2 Zen-rin-rui-shu and To-shi-go-roku.\]

from evil. It is Enlightened Consciousness that holds communion with
Universal Spirit or Buddha, and realizes that individual lives are
inseparably united, and of one and the same nature with Universal Life.
It is always bright as a burnished mirror, and cannot be dimmed by doubt
and ignorance. It is ever pure as a lotus flower, and cannot be polluted
by the mud of evil and folly. Although all sentient beings are endowed
with this Enlightened Consciousness, they are not aware of its
existence, excepting men who can discover it by the practice of
Meditation. Enlightened consciousness is often called Buddha-nature, as
it is the real nature of Universal Spirit. Zen teachers compare it with
a precious stone ever fresh and pure, even if it be buried in the heaps
of dust. Its divine light can never be extinguished by doubt or fear,
just as the sunlight cannot be destroyed by mist and cloud. Let us quote
a Chinese Zen poet to see how Zen treats of it:\[1\]

"I have an image of Buddha,  
The worldly people know it not.  
It is not made of clay or cloth,  
Nor is it carved out of wood,  
Nor is it moulded of earth nor of ashes.  
No artist can paint it;  
No robber can steal it.  
There it exists from dawn of time.  
It's clean, although not swept and wiped.  
Although it is but one,  
Divides itself to a hundred thousand million forms."

16\. **Buddha Dwelling in the Individual Mind**.--Enlightened
Consciousness in the individual mind acquires for its possessor, not a
relative knowledge of things as his intellect does, but the profoundest
insight in reference to universal brotherhood of all beings, and enables
him to understand the absolute holiness of their nature, and the highest
goal for which all of them are making. Enlightened

\[1. See Zen-gaku-ho-ten.\]

Consciousness once awakened within us serves as a guiding principle, and
leads us to hope, bliss, and life; consequently, it is called the
Master\[1\] of both mind and body. Sometimes it is called the
Original\[2\] Mind, as it is the mind of minds. It is Buddha dwelling in
individuals. You might call it God in man, if you like. The following
dialogues all point to this single idea:

On one occasion a butcher, who was used to kill one thousand sheep a
day, came to Gotama, and, throwing down his butcher-knife, said "I am
one of the thousand Buddhas." "Yes, really," replied Gotama. A monk,
Hwui Chao (E-cha) by name, asked Pao Yen (Ho-gen): "What is Buddha?"
"You are Hwui Chao," replied the master. The same question was put to
Sheu Shan (Shu-zan), Chi Man (Chi-mon), and Teu Tsz (To-shi), the first
of whom answered: "A bride mounts on a donkey and her mother-in-law
drives it;" and the second: "He goes barefooted, his sandals being worn
out;" while the third rose from his chair and stood still without saying
a word. Chwen Hih (Fu-kiu) explains this point in unequivocal terms:
"Night after night I sleep with Buddha, and every morning I get up with
Him. He accompanies me wherever I go. When I stand or sit, when I speak
or be mute, when I am out or in, He never leaves me, even as a shadow
accompanies body. Would you know where He is? Listen to that voice and
word."\[3\]

17\. **Enlightened Consciousness is not an Intellectual
Insight**.--Enlightened Consciousness is not a bare intellectual
insight, for it is full of beautiful emotions. It loves, caresses,
embraces, and at the same time esteems all

\[1. It is often called the Lord or Master of mind.

2\. Another name for Buddha is the Original Mind" (Kechi-myaku-ron).

3 For such dialogues, see Sho-yo-roku, Mu-mon-kan, Heki-gan-shu.
Fu-kiu's words are repeatedly quoted by Zen masters.\]

beings, being ever merciful to them. It has no enemies to conquer, no
evil to fight with, but constantly finds friends to help, good to
promote. Its warm heart beats in harmony with those of all fellow
beings. The author of Brahmajala-sutra fully expresses this idea as he
says: "All women are our mothers; all men our fathers; all earth and
water our bodies in the past existences; all fire and air our essence."

Thus relying on our inner experience, which is the only direct way of
knowing Buddha, we conceive Him as a Being with profound wisdom and
boundless mercy, who loves all beings as His children, whom He is
fostering, bringing up, guiding, and teaching. "These three worlds are
His, and all beings living in them are His children."\[1\] "The Blessed
One is the mother of all sentient beings, and gives them all the milk of
mercy."\[2\] Some people named Him Absolute, as He is all light, all
hope, all mercy, and all wisdom; some, Heaven, as He is high and
enlightened; some, God, as He is sacred and mysterious; some, Truth, as
He is true to Himself; some, Buddha, as He is free from illusion; some,
Creator, as He is the creative force immanent in the universe; some,
Path, as He is the Way we must follow; some, Unknowable, as He is beyond
relative knowledge; some, Self, as He is the Self of individual selves.
All these names are applied to one Being, whom we designate by the name
of Universal Life or Spirit.

18\. **Our Conception of Buddha is not Final**.--Has, then, the divine
nature of Universal Spirit been completely and exhaustively revealed in
our Enlightened Consciousness? To this question we should answer
negatively, for, so far as our limited experience is concerned,
Universal Spirit reveals itself as a Being with profound

\[1. Saddharma-pundarika-sutra.

2 Mahaparinirvana-sutra.\]

wisdom and boundless mercy; this, nevertheless, does not imply that the
conception is the only possible and complete one. We should always bear
in mind that the world is alive, and changing, and moving. It goes on to
disclose a new phase, or to add a new truth. The subtlest logic of old
is a mere quibble of nowadays. The miracles of yesterday are the
commonplaces of to-day. Now theories are formed, new discoveries are
made, only to give their places to newer theories are discoveries. New
ideals realized or new desires satisfied are sure to awaken newer and
stronger desires. Not an instant life remains immutable, but it rushes
on, amplifying and enriching itself from the dawn of time to the end of
eternity.

Therefore Universal Life may in the future possibly unfold its new
spiritual content, yet unknown to us because it has refined, lifted up,
and developed living beings from the amœba to man, increasing the
intelligence and range of individuals, until highly civilized man emerge
into the plane of consciousness-consciousness of divine light in him.
Thus to believe in Buddha is to be content and thankful for the grace of
His, and to hope for the infinite unfoldment of His glories in man.

19\. **How to Worship Buddha**.--The author of
Vimalakirtti-nirdeça-sutra well explains our attitude towards Buddha
when he says: "We ask Buddha for nothing. We ask Dharma for nothing. We
ask Samgha for nothing." Nothing we ask of Buddha. No worldly success,
no rewards in the future life, no special blessing. Hwang Pah (O-baku)
said: "I simply worship Buddha. I ask Buddha for nothing. I ask Dharma
for nothing., I ask Samgha for nothing." Then a prince\[1\] questioned
him: "You ask Buddha for nothing. You ask Dharma for

\[1. Afterwards the Emperor Süen Tsung (Sen-so), of the Tang dynasty.\]

nothing. You ask Samgha for nothing. What, then, is the use of your
worship?" The Prince earned a slap as an answer to his utilitarian
question.\[1\] This incident well illustrates that worship, as
understood by Zen masters, is a pure act of thanksgiving, or the opening
of the grateful heart; in other words, the disclosing of Enlightened
Consciousness. We are living the very life of Buddha, enjoying His
blessing, and holding communion with Him through speech, thought, and
action. The earth is not 'the vale of tears,' but the glorious creation
of Universal Spirit; nor man 'the poor miserable sinner' but the living
altar of Buddha Himself. Whatever we do, we do with grateful heart and
pure joy sanctioned by Enlightened Consciousness; eating, drinking,
talking, walking, and every other work of our daily life are the worship
and devotion. We agree with Margaret Fuller when she says: "Reverence
the highest; have patience with the lowest; let this day's performance
of the meanest duty be thy religion. Are the stars too distant? Pick up
the pebble that lies at thy feet, and from it learn all."

\[1. For the details, see Heki-gan-shu.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter V: The Nature of Man](rosa07)
