[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](rosa04)  [Next](rosa06) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B00295RH64/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Religion of the Samurai*, by Kaiten Nukariya, \[1913\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# CHAPTER III

## THE UNIVERSE IS THE SCRIPTURE<sup>\[1\]</sup> OF ZEN

1\. **Scripture is no More than Waste Paper**.--Zen is based on the
highest spiritual plane attained by Shakya Muni himself. It can only be
realized by one who has

\[1. Zen is not based on any particular sutra, either of Mahayana or of
Hinayana. There are twofold Tripitakas (or the three collections of the
Buddhist scriptures)-namely, the Mahayana-tripitaka and the
Hinayana-tripitaka. The former are the basis of the Mahayana, or the
higher and reformed Buddhism, full of profound metaphysical reasonings;
while the latter form that of the Hinayana, or the lower and early
Buddhism, which is simple and ethical teaching. These twofold Tripitakas
are as follows:

THE MAHAYANA-TRIPITAKA.

The Sutra Pitaka.-The Saddharma-pundarika-sutra, Samdhi-nirmocana-sutra,
Avatamsaka-sutra, Prajñaparamita-sutra, Amitayus-sutra,
Mahaparinirvana-sutra, etc.

The Vinaya Pitaka.--Brahmajala-sutra, Bodhisattva-caryanirdeça, etc.

The Abhidharma Pitaka.--Mahaprajñaparamita-sutra,
Mahayana-craddhotpada-çastra, Madhyamaka-çastra, Yogacarya bhumi-çastra,
etc.

THE HINAYANA-TRIPITAKA.

The Sutra Pitaka.--Dirghagama, Ekottaragama, Madhyamagama, Samyuktagama,
etc.

The Vinaya Pitaka.--Dharmagupta-vinaya, Mahasamghika-vinaya,
Sarvastivada-vinaya, etc.

The Abhidharma Pitaka.--Dharma-skandha-pada, Samgiti-paryaya-pada,
Jñanaprasthana-çastra, Abhidharma-kosa-çastra, etc,

The term 'Tripitaka,' however, was not known at the time of Shakya Muni,
and almost all of the northern Buddhist records agree in stating that
the Tripitaka was rehearsed and settled in the same year in which the
Muni died. Mahavansa also says: "The book called Abhidharma-pitaka was
compiled, which was preached to god, and was arranged in due order by
500 Budhu priests." But we believe that Shakya Muni's teaching was known
to the early Buddhists, not as Tripitaka, but as Vinaya and Dharma, and
even at the time of King Açoka (who ascended the throne about 269 B.C.)
it was not called Tripitaka, but Dharma, as we have it in his Edicts.
Mahayanists unanimously assert the compilation of the Tripitaka in the
first council of Rajagrha, but they differ in opinion as to the question
who rehearsed the Abhidharma; notwithstanding, they agree as for the
other respects, as you see in the following:

The Sutra Pitaka, compiled by Ananda; the Vinaya Pitaka, compiled by
Upali; the Abhidharma Pitaka, compiled by Ananda--according to Nagarjuna
(Mahaprajñaparamita-çastra).

The Sutra Pitaka, compiled by Ananda; the Vinaya Pitaka, compiled by
Upali; the Abhidharma Pitaka, compiled by Kaçyapa according to Hüen
Tsang (Ta-tan-si-yü-ki).

The Sutra Pitaka, compiled by Ananda; the Vinaya Pitaka, compiled by
Upali; the Abhidharma Pitaka, compiled by Purna--according to Paramartha
('A Commentary on the History of the Hinayana Schools').

The above-mentioned discrepancy clearly betrays the uncertainty of their
assertions, and gives us reason to discredit the compilation of
Abhidharma Pitaka at the first council. Besides, judging from the
Dharma-gupta-vinaya and other records, which states that Purna took no
part in the first council, and that he had different opinions as to the
application of the rules of discipline from that of Kaçyapa, there
should be some errors in Paramartha's assertion.

Of these three collections of the Sacred Writings, the first two, or
Sutra and Vinaya, of Mahayana, as well as of Himayana, are believed to
be the direct teachings of Shakya Muni himself, because all the
instructions are put in the mouth of the Master or sanctioned by him.
The Mahayanists, however, compare the Hinayana doctrine with a
resting-place on the road for a traveller, while the Mahayana doctrine
with his destination. All the denominations of Buddhism, with a single
exception of Zen, are based on the authority of some particular sacred
writings. The Ten Dai Sect, for instance, is based on
Saddharma-pundarika-sutra; the Jo Do Sect on Larger Sukhavati-vyuha,
Smaller Sukhavati-vyuha, and Amitayus-dhyana-sutra; the Ke Gon Sect on
Avatamsaka-sutra; the Hosso Sect on Samdhi-nirmocana-sutra.\]

attained the same plane. To describe it in full by means of words is
beyond the power even of Gotama himself. It is for this reason that the
author of Lankavatara-sutra insists that Shakya Muni spoke no word
through his long career of forty-nine years as a religious teacher, and
that of Mahaprajñaparamita-sutra\[1\] also express the same opinion. The
Scripture is no more nor less than the finger pointing to the moon of
Buddhahood. When we recognize the moon and enjoy its benign beauty, the
finger is of no use. As the finger has no brightness whatever, so the
Scripture has no holiness whatever. The Scripture is religious currency
representing spiritual wealth. It does not matter whether money be gold,
or sea-shells, or cows. It is a mere substitute. What it stands for is
of paramount importance. Away with your stone-knife! Do not watch the
stake against which a running hare once struck its head and died. Do not
wait for another hare. Another may not come for ever. Do not cut the
side of the boat out of which you dropped your sword to mark where it
sunk. The boat is ever moving on. The Canon is the window through which
we observe the grand scenery of spiritual nature. To hold communion
directly with it we must get out of the window. It is a mere stray fly
that is always buzzing within it, struggling to get out. Those who spend
most of their lives in the study of the Scriptures, arguing and
explaining with hair-splitting reasonings, and attain no higher plane in
spirituality, are religious flies good for nothing but their buzzing
about the nonsensical technicalities. It is on this account that Rin-zai
declared: \[2\] 'The twelve divisions of the Buddhist Canon are nothing
better than waste paper.'

2\. **No Need of the Scriptural Authority for Zen**.--Some Occidental
scholars erroneously identify Buddhism with the primitive faith of
Hinayanism, and are inclined to call Mahayanism, a later developed
faith, a degenerated one. If the primitive faith be called the genuine,
as

\[1. Mahaprajñaparamita-sutra, vol. 425.

2\. Rin-zai-roku.\]

these scholars think, and the later developed faith be the degenerated
one, then the child should be called the genuine man and the grown-up
people be the degenerated ones; similarly, the primitive society must be
the genuine and the modern civilization be the degenerated one. So also
the earliest writings of the Old Testament should be genuine and the
four Gospels be degenerated. Beyond all doubt Zen belongs to Mahayanism,
yet this does not imply that it depends on the scriptural authority of
that school, because it does not trouble itself about the Canon whether
it be Hinayana or Mahayana, or whether it was directly spoken by Shakya
Muni or written by some later Buddhists. Zen is completely free from the
fetters of old dogmas, dead creeds, and conventions of stereotyped past,
that check the development of a religious faith and prevent the
discovery of a new truth. Zen needs no Inquisition. It never compelled
nor will compel the compromise of a Galileo or a Descartes. No
excommunication of a Spinoza or the burning of a Bruno is possible for
Zen.

On a certain occasion Yoh Shan (Yaku-san) did not preach the doctrine
for a long while, and was requested to give a sermon by his assistant
teacher, saying: "Would your reverence preach the Dharma to your pupils,
who long thirst after your merciful instruction?" "Then ring the bell,"
replied Yoh Shan. The bell rang, and all the monks assembled in the Hall
eager to bear the sermon. Yoh Shan went up to the pulpit and descended
immediately without saying a word. "You, reverend sir," asked the
assistant, "promised to deliver a sermon a little while ago. Why do you
not preach?" "Sutras are taught by the Sutra teachers," said the master;
"Çastras are taught by the Çastra teachers. No wonder that I say
nothing."\[1\] This little episode will show you that Zen is no fixed
doctrine embodied in a Sutra or a

\[1. Zen-rin-rui-shu and E-gen.\]

Çastra, but a conviction or realization within us. To quote another
example, an officer offered to Tüng Shan (To-zan) plenty of alms, and
requested him to recite the sacred Canon. Tüng Shan, rising from his
chair, made a bow respectfully to the officer, who did the same to the
teacher. Then Tüng Shan went round the chair, taking the officer with
him, and making a bow again to the officer, asked: "Do you see what I
mean?" "No, sir," replied the other. "I have been reciting the sacred
Canon, why do you not see?"\[1\] Thus Zen does not regard Scriptures in
black and white as its Canon, for it takes to-days and tomorrows of this
actual life as its inspired pages.

3\. **The Usual Explanation of the Canon**.--An eminent Chinese Buddhist
scholar, well known as Ten Dai Dai Shi (A.D. 538-597), arranged the
whole preachings of Shakya Muni in a chronological order in accordance
with his own religious theory, and observed that there were the Five
Periods in the career of the Buddha as a religious teacher. He tried to
explain away all the discrepancies and contradictions, with which the
Sacred Books are encumbered, by arranging the Sutras in a line of
development. His elucidation was so minute and clear, and his
metaphysical reasonings so acute and captivating, that his opinion was
universally accepted as an historical truth, not merely by the Chinese,
but also by the Japanese Mahayanists. We shall briefly state here the
so-called Five Periods.

Shakya Muni attained to Buddhaship in his thirtieth year, and sat
motionless for seven days under the Bodhi tree, absorbed in deep
meditation, enjoying the first bliss of his Enlightenment. In the second
week he preached his Dharma to the innumerable multitude of
Bodhisattvas,\[2\]

\[1. Zen-rin-rui-sha and To-zan-roku.

2 Bodhisattva is an imaginary personage, or ideal saint, superior to
Arhat, or the highest saint of Hinayanism. The term 'Bodhisattva' was
first applied to the Buddha before his Enlightenment, and afterwards was
adopted by Mahayanists to mean the adherent of Mahayanism in
contradistinction with the Çravaka or hearers of Hinayanism.\]

celestial beings, and deities in the nine assemblies held at seven
different places. This is the origin of a famous Mahayana book entitled
Buddhavatamsaka-mahavaipulya-sutra. In this book the Buddha set forth
his profound Law just as it was discovered by his highly Enlightened
mind, without considering the mental states of his hearers. Consequently
the ordinary hearers (or the Buddha's immediate disciples) could not
understand the doctrine, and sat stupefied as if they were 'deaf and
dumb,' while the great Bodhisattvas fully understood and realized the
doctrine. This is called the first period, which lasted only two or
three\[1\] weeks.

Thereupon Shakya Muni, having discovered that ordinary bearers were too
ignorant to believe in the Mahayana doctrine and appreciate the
greatness of Buddhahood, thought it necessary to modify his teaching so
as to adjust it to the capacity of ordinary people. So he went to
Varanasi (or Benares) and preached his modified doctrine--that is,
Hinayanism. The instruction given at that time has been handed down to
us as the four Agamas,\[1\] or the four Nikayas. This is called the
second period, which lasted about twelve years. It was at the beginning
of this period that the Buddha converted the five ascetics,\[3\] who
became his disciples. Most of the Çravakas

\[1. Bodhiruci says to the effect that the preachings in the first five
assemblies were made in the first week, and the rest were delivered in
the second week. Nagarjuna says that the Buddha spoke no word for
fifty-seven days after his Enlightenment. It is said in
Saddharma-pundarika-sutra that after three weeks the Buddha preached at
Varanasi, and it says nothing respecting Avatamsaka-sutra. Though there
are divers opinions about the Buddha's first sermon and its date, all
traditions agree in this that he spent some time in meditation, and then
delivered the first sermon to the five ascetics at Varanasi.

2\. (1) Anguttara, (2) Majjhima, (3) Digha, (4) Samyutta.

3\. Kondañña, Vappa, Baddiya, Mahanana, Assaji.\]

or the adherents of Hinayanism were converted during this period. They
trained their hearts in accordance with the modified Law, learned the
four noble truths,\[1\] and worked out their own salvation.

The Buddha then having found his disciples firmly adhering to Hinayanism
without knowing that it was a modified and imperfect doctrine, he had to
lead them up to a higher and perfect doctrine that he might lead them up
to Buddhahood. With this object in view Shakya Muni preached
Vimalakirtti-nirdeça-sutra\[2\], Lankavatara-sutra, and other sutras, in
which he compared Hinayanism with Mahayanism, and described the latter
in glowing terms as a deep and perfect Law, whilst he set forth the
former at naught as a superficial and imperfect one. Thus he showed his
disciples the inferiority of Hinayanism, and caused them to desire for
Mahayanism. This is said to be the third period, which lasted some eight
years.

The disciples of the Buddha now understood that Mahayanism was far
superior to Hinayanism, but they thought the higher doctrine was only
for Bodhisattvas and beyond their understanding. Therefore they still
adhered to the modified doctrine, though they did no longer decry
Mahayanism, which they had no mind to

\[1. The first is the sacred truth of suffering; the second the truth of
the origin of suffering--that is, lust and desire; the third the sacred
truth of the extinction of suffering; the fourth the sacred truth of the
path that leads to the extinction of suffering. There are eight noble
paths that lead to the extinction of suffering--that is, Right faith,
Right resolve, Right speech, Right action, Right living, Right effort,
Right thought, and Right meditation.

2 This is one of the most noted Mahayana books, and is said to be the
best specimen of the sutras belonging to this period. It is in this
sutra that most of Shakya's eminent disciples, known as the adherents of
Hinayanism, are astonished with the profound wisdom, the eloquent
speech, and the supernatural power of Vimalakirtti, a Bodhisattva, and
confess the inferiority of their faith. The author frequently introduces
episodes in order to condemn Hinayanism, making use of miracles of his
own invention.\]

practise. Upon this Shakya Muni preached Prajñaparamita-sutras\[1\] in
the sixteen assemblies held at four different places, and taught them
Mahayanism in detail in order to cause them to believe it and practise
it. Thus they became aware that there was no definite demarcation
between Mahayanism and Hinayanism, and that they might become
Mahayanists. This is the fourth period, which lasted about twenty-two
years.

Now, the Buddha, aged seventy-two, thought it was high time to preach
his long-cherished doctrine that all sentient beings can attain to
Supreme Enlightenment; so he preached Saddharma-pundarika-sutra, in
which he prophesied when and where his disciples should become Buddhas.
It was his greatest object to cause all sentient beings to be
Enlightened and enable them to enjoy the bliss of Nirvana. It was for
this that he had endured great pain and hardships through his previous
existences. It was for this that he had left his heavenly abode to
appear on earth. It was for this that he had preached from time to time
through his long career of forty-seven years. Having thus realized his
great aim, Shakya Muni had now to prepare for his final departure, and
preached Mahaparinirvana-sutra in order to show that all the animated
and inanimate things were endowed with the same nature as his. After
this last instruction he passed to eternity. This is called the fifth
period, which lasted some eight years.

These five periods above mentioned can scarcely be called historical in
the proper sense of the term, yet they are ingeniously invented by Ten
Dai Dai Shi to set the Buddhist Scriptures in the order of doctrinal
development, and place Saddharma-pundarika in the highest rank among the
Mahayana books. His argument, however dogmatic and anti-historical in no
small degree, would be

\[1. Nagarjuna's doctrine depends mainly on these sutras.\]

not a little valuable for our reader, who wants to know the general
phase of the Buddhist Canon, consisting of thousands of fascicles.

4\. **Sutras used by Zen Masters**.--Ten Dai failed to explain away the
discrepancies and contradictions of which the Canon is full, and often
contradicted himself by the ignoring of historical\[1\] facts. To say
nothing of the strong

\[1. Let us state our own opinion on the subject in question. The
foundation of Hinayanism consists in the four Nikayas, or four Agamas,
the most important books of that school. Besides the four Agamas, there
exist in the Chinese Tripitaka numerous books translated by various
authors, some of which are extracts from Agamas, and some the lives of
the Buddha, while others are entirely different sutras, apparently of
later date. Judging from these sources, it seems to us that most of
Shakya Muni's original teachings are embodied into the four Agamas. But
it is still a matter of uncertainty that whether they are stated in
Agamas now extant just as they were, for the Buddha's preachings were
rehearsed immediately after the Buddha's death in the first council held
at Rajagrha, yet not consigned to writing. They were handed down by
memory about one hundred years. Then the monks at Vaisali committed the
so-called Ten Indulgences, infringing the rules of the Order, and
maintained that Shakya Muni had not condemned them in his preachings. As
there were, however, no written sutras to disprove their assertion, the
elders, such as Yaça, Revata, and others, who opposed the Indulgences,
had to convoke the second council of 700 monks, in which they succeeded
in getting the Indulgences condemned, and rehearsed the Buddha's
instruction for the second time. Even in this council of Vaisali we
cannot find the fact that the Master's preachings were reduced to
writing. The decisions of the 700 elders were not accepted by the party
of opposition, who held a separate council, and settled their own rules
and doctrine. Thus the same doctrine of the Teacher be.-an to be
differently stated and believed.

This being the first open schism, one disruption after another took
place among the Buddhistic Order. There were many different schools of
the Buddhists at the time when King Açoka ascended the throne (about 269
B.C.), and the patronage of the King drew a great number of pagan
ascetics into the Order, who, though they dressed themselves in the
yellow robes, yet still preserved their religious views in their
original colour. This naturally led the Church into continual
disturbances and moral corruption. In the eighteenth year of Açoka's
reign the King summoned the council of 1,000 monks at Pataliputra
(Patna), and settled the orthodox doctrine in order to keep the Dharma
pure from heretical beliefs. We believe that about this time some of the
Buddha's preachings were reduced to writing, for the missionaries
despatched by the King in the year following the council seem to have
set out with written sutras. In addition to this, some of the names of
the passages of the Dharma are given in the Bharbra edict of the King,
which was addressed to the monks in Magadha. We do not suppose, however,
that all the sutras were written at once in these days, but that they
were copied down from memory one after another at different times,
because some of the sutras were put down in Ceylon 160 years after the
Council of Patna.

In the introductory book of Ekottaragama (Anguttara Nikaya), now extant
in the Chinese Tripitaka, we notice the following points: (1) It is
written in a style quite different from that of the original Agama, but
similar to that of the supplementary books of the Mahayana sutras; (2)
it states Ananda's compilation of the Tripitaka after the death of the
Master; (3) it refers to the past Buddhas, the future Buddha Maitreya,
and innumerable Bodhisattvas; (4) it praises the profound doctrine of
Mahayanism. From this we infer that the Agama was put in the present
form after the rise of the Mahayana School, and handed down through the
hand of Mahasanghika scholars, who were much in sympathy with
Mahayanism.

Again, the first book of Dirghagama, (Digha Nikaya), that describes the
line of Buddhas who appeared before Shakya Muni, adopts the whole legend
of Gotama's life as a common mode of all Buddhas appearing on earth;
while the second book narrates the death of Gotama and the distribution
of his relies, and refers to Pataliputra, the new capital of Açoka. This
shows us that the present Agama is not of an earlier date than the third
century B.C. Samyuktagama (Samyutta Nikaya) also gives a detailed
account of Açoka's conversion, and of his father Bindusara. From these
evidences we may safely infer that the Hinayana sutras were put in the
present shape at different times between the third century B.C. and the
first century A.D.

With regard to the Mahayana sutras we have little doubt about their
being the writings of the later Buddhist reformers, even if they are put
in the mouth of Shakya Muni. They are entirely different from the sutras
of Hinayanism, and cannot be taken as the preachings of one and the same
person. The reader should notice the following points:

\(1\) Four councils were held for the rehearsal of the Tripitaka namely,
the first at Rajagrha, in the year of Shakya Muni's death; the second at
Vaisali, some 100 years after the Buddha; the third at the time of King
Açoka, about 235 years after the Master; the fourth at the time of King
Kanishka, the first century A.D. But all these councils were held to
compile the Hinayana sutras, and nothing is known of the rehearsal of
the Mahayana books. Some are of opinion that the first council was held
within the Sattapanni cave, near Rajagrha, where the Hinayana Tripitaka
was rehearsed by 500 monks, while outside the cave there assembled a
greater number of monks, who were not admitted into the cave, and
rehearsed the Mahayana Tripitaka. This opinion, however, is based on no
reliable source.

\(2\) The Indian orthodox Buddhists of old declared that the Mahayana
sutras were the fabrication of heretics or of the Evil One, and not the
teachings of the Buddha. In reply to this, the Mahayanists had to prove
that the Mahayana sutras were compiled by the direct disciples of the
Master; but even Nagarjuna could not vindicate the compilation of the
doubtful books, and said (in Mahaprajñaparamita-çastra) that they were
compiled by Ananda and Manjuçri, with myriads of Bodhisattvas at the
outside of the Iron Mountain Range, which encloses the earth. Asanga
also proved (in Mahayanalankara-sutra-çastra) with little success that
Mahayanism was the Buddha's direct teachings. Some may quote
Bodhisattva-garbhastha-sutra in favour of the Mahayana; but it is of no
avail, as the sutra itself is the work of a later date.

\(3\) Although almost all of the Mahayana sutras, excepting
Avatamsaka-sutra, treat of Hinayanism as the imperfect doctrine taught
in the first part of the Master's career, yet not merely the whole life
of Gotama, but also events which occurred after his death are narrated
in the Hinayana sutras. This shows that the Mahayana sutras were
composed after the establishment of early Buddhism.

\(4\) The narratives given in the Hinayana sutras in reference to Shakya
Muni seem to be based on historical facts, but those in the Mahayana
books are full of wonders and extravagant miracles far from facts.

\(5\) The Hinayana sutras retain the traces of their having been
classified and compiled as we see in Ekottaragama, while Mahayana books
appear to have been composed one after another by different authors at
different times, because each of them strives to excel others, declaring
itself to be the sutra of the highest doctrine, as we see in
Saddharma-pundarika, Samdhinirmocana, Suvarnaprabhasottamaraja, etc.

\(6\) The dialogues in the Hinayana sutras are in general those between
the Buddha and his disciples, while in the Mahayana books imaginary
beings called Bodhisattvas take the place of disciples. Moreover, in
some books no monks are mentioned.

\(7\) Most of the Mahayana sutras declare that they themselves possess
those mystic powers that protect the reader or the owner from such evils
as epidemic, famine, war, etc.; but the Hinayana sutras are pure from
such beliefs.

\(8\) The Mahayana sutras extol not only the merits of the reading, but
the copying of the sutras. This unfailingly shows the fact that they
were not handed down by memory, as the Hinayana sutras, but written by
their respective authors.

\(9\) The Hinayana sutras were written with a plain style in Pali, while
the Mahayana books, with brilliant phraseology, in Sanskrit.

\(10\) The Buddha in the Hinayana sutras is little more than a human
being, while Buddha or Tathagata in the Mahayana is a superhuman being
or Great Deity.

\(11\) The moral precepts of the Hinayana were laid down by the Master
every time when his disciples acted indecently, while those of the
Mahayana books were spoken all at once by Tathagata.

\(12\) Some Mahayana sutras appear to be the exaggeration or
modification of what was stated in the Hinayana books, as we see in
Mahaparinirvana-sutra.

\(13\) If we take both the Hinayana and the Mahayana as spoken by one
and the same person, we cannot understand why there are so many
contradictory statements, as we see in the following:

\(a\) *Historical Contradictions*.--For instance, Hinayana sutras are
held to be the first sermon of the Buddha by the author of
Saddharma-pundarika, while Avatamsaka declares itself to be the first
sermon. Nagarjuna holds that Prajña sutras are the first.

\(b\) *Contradictions as to the Person of the Master*.--For instance,
Agamas say the Buddha's body was marked with thirty-two peculiarities,
while the Mahayana books enumerate ninety-seven peculiarities, or even
innumerable marks.

\(c\) *Doctrinal Contradictions*.--For instance, the Hinayana sutras put
forth the pessimistic, nihilistic view of life, while the Mahayana
books, as a rule, express the optimistic, idealistic view.

\(14\) The Hinayana sutras say nothing of the Mahayana books, while the
latter always compare their doctrine with that of the former, and speak
of it in contempt. It is clear that the name 'Hinayana' was coined by
the Mahayanists, as there is no sutra which calls itself 'Hinayana.' It
is therefore evident that when the Hinayana books took the present shape
there appeared no Mahayana sutras.

\(15\) The authors of the Mahayana sutras should have expected the
opposition of the Hinayanists, because they say not seldom that there
might be some who would. not believe in and oppose Mahayanism as not
being the Buddha's teaching, but that of the Evil One. They say also
that one who would venture to say the Mahayana books are fictitious
should fall into Hell. For example, the author of Mahaparinirvana-sutra
says: "Wicked Bhiksus would say all Vaipulya Mahayana sutras are not
spoken by the Buddha, but by the Evil One."

\(16\) There are evidences showing that the Mahayana doctrine was
developed out of the Hinayana one.

\(a\) The Mahayanists' grand conception of Tathagata is the natural
development of that of those progressive Hinayanists who belonged to the
Mahasamghika School, which was formed some one hundred years after the
Master. These Hinayanists maintained that the Buddha had infinite power,
endless life, and limitlessly great body. The author of
Mahaparinirvana-sutra also says that Buddha is immortal, his Dharma-kaya
is infinite and eternal. The authors of
Mahayana-mulagata-hrdayabhumi-dhyana-sutra and of
Suvarnaprabha-sottamaraja-sutra enumerate the Three Bodies of Buddha,
while the writer of Lankavatara-sutra describes the Four Bodies, and
that of Avatamsaka-sutra the Ten Bodies of Tathagata.

\(b\) According to the Hinayana sutras, there are only four stages of
saintship, but the Mahasamghika School increases the number and gives
ten steps. Some Mahayana sutras also enumerate the ten stages of
Bodhisattva, while others give forty-one or fifty two stages.

\(c\) The Himayana sutras name six past Buddhas and one future Buddha
Maitreya, while the Mahayana sutras name thirty-five, fifty-three, or
three thousand Buddhas.

\(d\) The Hinayana sutras give the names of six Vijñanas, while the
Mahayana books seven, eight, or nine Vijñanas.

\(17\) For a few centuries after the Buddha we hear only of Hinayanism,
but not of Mahayanism, there being no Mahayana teacher.

\(18\) In some Mahayana sutras (Mahavairocanabhisambodhi-sutra, for
example) Tathagata Vairocana takes the place of Gotama, and nothing is
said of the latter.

\(19\) The contents of the Mahayana sutras often prove that they were,
composed, or rewritten, or some additions were made, long after the
Buddha. For instance, Mahamaya-sutra says that Açvaghosa would refute
heretical doctrines 600 years after the Master, and Nagarjuna would
advocate the Dharma 700 years after Gotama, while Lankavatara-sutra
prophesies that Nagarjuna would appear in South India.

\(20\) The author of San-ron-gen-gi tells us Mahadeva, a leader of the
Mahasamghika School, used Mahayana sutras, together with the orthodox
Tripitaka 116 after the Buddha. It is, however, doubtful that they
existed at so early a date.

\(21\) Mahaprajñaparamita-çastra, ascribed to Nagarjuna, refers to many
Mahayana books, which include Saddharma-pundarika, Vimalakirtti-nirdeça,
Sukhavati-vyuha, Mahaprajñaparamita,
Pratyutpanna-buddhasammukhavasthita-samadhi, etc. He quotes in his
Daçabhumivibhasa çastra, Mahaparinirvana, Daçabhumi, etc.

\(22\) Sthiramati, whose date is said to be earlier than Nagarjuna and
later than Açvaghosa, tries to prove that Mahayanism was directly taught
by the Master in his Mahayanavataraka-çastra. And
Mahayanottaratantra-çastra, which is ascribed by some scholars to him,
refers to Avatamsaka, Vajracchedikka-prajñaparamita, Saddharmapundarika,
Crimala-devi-simhananda, etc.

\(23\) Chi-leu-cia-chin, who came to China in A.D. 147 or A.D. 164,
translated some part of Mahayana books known as Maharatnakuta-sutra and
Mahavaipulya-mahasannipata-sutra.

\(24\) An-shi-kao, who came to China in A.D. 148, translated such
Mahayana books as Sukhavati-vyaha, Candra-dipa-samadhi, etc.

\(25\) Matanga, who came to China in A.D. 67, is said by his biographer
to have been informed of both Mahayanism and Hinayanism to have given
interpretations to a noted Mahayana book, entitled Suvarnaprabhasa.

\(26\) Sandhinirmocana-sutra is supposed to be a work of Asanga not
without reason, because Asanga's doctrine is identical with that of the
sutra, and the sutra itself is contained in the latter part of
Yogaçaryabhumi-çastra. The author divides the whole preachings of the
Master into the three periods that he might place the Idealistic
doctrine in the highest rank of the Mahayana schools.

\(27\) We have every reason to believe that Mahayana sutras began to
appear (perhaps Prajña sutras being the first) early in the first
century A.D., that most of the important books appeared before
Nagarjuna, and that some of Mantra sutras were composed so late as the
time of Vajrabodhi, who came to China in A.D. 719.\]

opposition raised by the Japanese scholars,\[1\] such an assumption can
be met with an assumption of entirely opposite nature, and the
difficulties can never be overcome. For Zen masters, therefore, these
assumptions and reasonings are mere quibbles unworthy of their
attention.

\[1. The foremost of them was Chuki Tominaga (1744), of whose life
little is known. He is said to have been a nameless merchant at Osaka.
His Shutsu-jo-ko-go is the first great work of higher criticism on the
Buddhist Scriptures.\]

To believe blindly in the Scriptures is one thing, and to be pious is
another. How often the childish views of Creation and of God in the
Scriptures concealed the light of scientific truths; how often the blind
believers of them fettered the progress of civilization; how often
religious men prevented us from the realizing of a new truth, simply
because it is against the ancient folk-lore in the Bible. Nothing is
more absurd than the constant dread in which religious men, declaring to
worship God in truth and in spirit, are kept at the scientific discovery
of new facts incompatible with the folk-lore. Nothing is more
irreligious than to persecute the seekers of truth in order to keep up
absurdities and superstitions of bygone ages. Nothing is more inhuman
than the commission of 'devout cruelty' under the mask of love of God
and man. Is it not the misfortune, not only of Christianity, but of
whole mankind, to have the Bible encumbered with legendary histories,
stories of miracles, and a crude cosmology, which from time to time come
in conflict with science?

The Buddhist Scriptures are also overloaded with Indian superstitions
and a crude cosmology, which pass under the name of Buddhism.
Accordingly, Buddhist scholars have confused not seldom the doctrine of
the Buddha with these absurdities, and thought it impious to abandon
them. Kaiseki,\[1\] for instance, was at a loss to distinguish Buddhism
from the Indian astronomy, which is utterly untenable in the face of the
fact. He taxed his reason to the utmost to demonstrate the Indian theory
and at the same time to refute the Copernican theory. One day he called
on Yeki-do\[2\] a contemporary Zen master, and explained the
construction of the Three Worlds as described in the Scriptures, Baying
that Buddhism would come to naught if the theory of the Three Worlds be
overthrown by the Copernican. Then Yeki-do exclaimed: "Buddhism aims to
destroy the Three Worlds and to establish Buddha's Holy Kingdom
throughout

\[1. A learned Japanese Buddhist scholar, who died in 1882.

2\. A famous Zen master, the abbot of the So-ji-ji Monastery, who died
in 1879.\]

the universe. Why do you waste your energy in the construction of the
Three Worlds?'\[1\] In this way Zen does not trouble itself about
unessentials of the Scriptures, on which it never depends for its
authority. Do-gen, the founder of the Japanese So To Sect, severely
condemns (in his Sho-bo-gen-zo) the notions of the impurity of women
inculcated in the Scriptures. He openly attacks those Chinese monks who
swore that they would not see any woman, and ridicules those who laid
down rules prohibiting women from getting access to monasteries. A Zen
master was asked by a Samurai whether there was hell in sooth as taught
in the Scriptures. "I must ask you," replied he, "before I give you an
answer. For what purpose is your question? What business have you, a
Samurai, with a thing of that sort? Why do you bother yourself about
such an idle question? Surely you neglect your duty and are engaged in
such a fruitless research. Does this not amount to your stealing the
annual salary from your lord?" The Samurai, offended not a little with
these rebukes, stared at the master, ready to draw his sword at another
insult. Then the teacher said smilingly: "Now you are in Hell. Don't you
see?"

Does, then, Zen use no scripture? To this question we answer both
affirmatively and negatively: negatively, because Zen regards all sutras
as a sort of pictured food which has no power of appeasing spiritual
hunger; affirmatively, because it freely makes use of them irrespective
of Mahayana or Hinayana. Zen would not make a bonfire of the Scriptures
as Caliph Omar did of the Alexandrian library. A Zen master, having seen
a Confucianist burning his books on the thought that they were rather a
hindrance to his spiritual growth, observed: "You had better burn your
books in mind and heart, but not the books in black and white."\[2\]

\[1. Kin-sei-zen-rin-gen-ko-roku.

2\. Ukiyo-soshi.\]

As even deadly poison proves to be medicine in the band of a good
doctor, so a heterodox doctrine antagonistic to Buddhism is used by the
Zen teachers as a finger pointing to the principle of Zen. But they as a
rule resorted to Lankavatara-sutra,\[1\]
Vajracchedika-prajña-paramita-sutra,\[2\]
Vimalakirtti-nirdeça-sutra\[3\] Mahavaipulya-purnabuddha-sutra\[4\]
Mababuddhosnisa-tathagata-guhyahetu-saksatkrta-prasannatha-sarvabhodhisattvacarya-surangama-sutra,\[5\]
Mahapari-nirvana-sutra,\[6\] Saddharma-pundarika-sutra,
Avatamsaka-sutra, and so forth.

5\. **A Sutra Equal in Size to the Whole World**.-The holy writ that Zen
masters admire is not one of parchment nor of palm-leaves, nor in black
and white, but one written in heart and mind. On one occasion a King of
Eastern India invited the venerable Prajñatara, the teacher of
Bodhidharma, and his disciples to dinner at his own palace.

\[1. This book is the nearest approach to the doctrine of Zen, and is
said to have been pointed out by Bodhidharma as the best book for the
use of his followers. See Nanjo's Catalogue, Nos. 175, 1761 177.

2\. The author of the sutra insists on the unreality of all things. The
book was first used by the Fifth Patriarch, as we have seen in the first
chapter. See Nanjo's Catalogue, Nos. 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15.

3\. The sutra agrees with Zen in many respects, especially in its
maintaining that the highest truth can only be realized in mind, and
cannot be expressed by word of mouth. See Nanjo's Catalogue, Nos. 144,
145, 146, 147, 148, 149.

4\. The sutra was translated into Chinese by Buddhatrata in the seventh
century. The author treats at length of Samadhi, and sets forth a
doctrine similar to Zen, so that the text was used by many Chinese
Zenists. See Nanjo's Catalogue, Nos. 427 and 1629.

5\. The sutra was translated into Chinese by Paramiti and Mikaçakya, of
the Tang dynasty (618-907). The author conceives. Reality as Mind or
Spirit. The book belongs to the Mantra class, although it is much used
by Zenists. See Nanjo's Catalogue, No. 446.

6\. The author of the book sets forth his own conception of Nirvana and
of Buddha, and maintains that all beings are endowed with Buddha-nature.
He also gives in detail an incredible account about Gotama's death.\]

Finding all the monks reciting the sacred sutras with the single
exception of the master, the Ring questioned Prajñatara: "Why do you
not, reverend sir, recite the Scriptures as others do?" "My poor self,
your majesty," replied he, "does not go out to the objects of sense in
my expiration nor is it confined within body and mind in my inspiration.
Thus I constantly recite hundreds, thousands, and millions of sacred
sutras." In like manner the Emperor Wu, of the Liang dynasty, once
requested Chwen Hih (Fu Dai-shi) to give a lecture on the Scriptures.
Chwen went upon the platform, struck the desk with a block of wood, and
came down. Pao Chi (Ho-shi), a Buddhist tutor to the Emperor, asked the
perplexed monarch: "Does your Lordship understand him?" "No," answered
His Majesty. "The lecture of the Great Teacher is over." As it is clear
to you from these examples, Zen holds that the faith must be based not
on the dead Scriptures, but on living facts, that one must turn over not
the gilt pages of the holy writ, but read between the lines in the holy
pages of daily life, that Buddha must be prayed not by word of mouth,
but by actual deed and work, and that one must split open, as the author
of Avatamsaka-sutra allegorically tells us, the smallest grain of dirt
to find therein a sutra equal in size to the whole world. "The so-called
sutra," says Do-gen, "covers the whole universe. It transcends time and
space. It is written with the characters of heaven, of man, of beasts,
of Asuras,\[l\] of hundreds of grass, and of thousands of trees. There
are characters, some long, some short, some round, some square, some
blue, some red, some yellow, and some white-in short, all the phenomena
in the universe are the characters with which the sutra is written."
Shakya Muni read that sutra through the bright star illuminating the
broad expanse of the morning skies, when he sat in

\[1. The name of a demon.\]

meditation under the Bodhi Tree. Ling Yun (Rei-un) read it through the
lovely flowers of a peach-tree in spring after some twenty years of his
research for Light, and said:

"A score of years I looked for Light:  
There came and went many a spring and fall.  
E'er since the peach blossoms came in my sight,  
I never doubt anything at all."

Hian Yen (Kyo-gen) read it through the noise of bamboo, at which he
threw pebbles. Su Shih (So-shoku) read it through a waterfall, one
evening, and said:

"The brook speaks forth the Tathagata's words divine,  
The hills reveal His glorious forms that shine."

6\. **Great Men and Nature**.--All great men, whether they be poets or
scientists or religious men or philosophers, are not mere readers of
books, but the perusers of Nature. Men of erudition are often lexicons
in flesh and blood, but men of genius read between the lines in the
pages of life. Kant, a man of no great erudition, could accomplish in
the theory of knowledge what Copernicus did in astronomy. Newton found
the law of gravitation not in a written page, but in a falling apple.
Unlettered Jesus realized truth beyond the comprehension of many learned
doctors. Charles Darwin, whose theory changed the whole current of the
world's thought, was not a great reader of books, but a careful observer
of facts. Shakespeare, the greatest of poets, was the greatest reader of
Nature and life. He could hear the music even of heavenly bodies, and
said:

"There's not the smallest orb which thou beholdest,  
But in his motion like an angel sings."

Chwang Tsz (So-shi), the greatest of Chinese philosophers, says: Thou
knowest the music of men, but not the music

\[1. Chwang Tsz, vol. i., p. 10.\]

of the earth. Thou knowest the music of the earth, but not the music of
the heaven." Goethe, perceiving a profound meaning in Nature, says:
"Flowers are the beautiful hieroglyphics of Nature with which she
indicates how much she loves us." Son-toku\[1\] (Ninomiya), a great
economist, who, overcoming all difficulties and hardships by which he
was beset from his childhood, educated himself, says: "The earth and the
heaven utter no word, but they ceaselessly repeat the holy book
unwritten."

7\. **The Absolute and Reality are but an Abstraction**.--A grain of
sand you, trample upon has a deeper significance than a series of
lectures by your verbal philosopher whom you respect. It contains within
itself the whole history of the earth; it tells you what it has seen
since the dawn of time; while your philosopher simply plays on abstract
terms and empty words. What does his Absolute, or One, or Substance
mean? What does his Reality or Truth imply? Do they denote or connote
anything? Mere name! mere abstraction! One school of philosophy after
another has been established on logical subtleties; thousands of books
have been written on these grand names and fair mirages, which vanish
the moment that your hand of experience reaches after them.

"Duke Hwan," says Chwang Tsz,\[2\]"seated above in his hall, was"(once)
reading a book, and a wheelwright, Phien, was making a wheel below it.
Laying aside his hammer and chisel, Phien went up the steps and said: 'I
venture to ask your Grace what words you are reading?' The duke said:
'The words of sages.' 'Are these sages alive?' Phien continued. 'They
are dead,' was the reply. 'Then, said the other, 'what you, my Ruler,
are reading is only the dregs and sediments of those old men.' The duke
said:

\[1. One of the greatest self-made men in Japan, who lived 1787-1856.

2\. Chwang Tsz, vol. ii., p. 24.\]

'How should you, a wheelwright, have anything to say about the book
which I am reading? If you can explain yourself, very well; if you
cannot, you shall die.' The wheelwright said: 'Your servant will look at
the thing from the point of view of his own art. In making a wheel, if I
proceed gently, that is pleasant enough, but the workmanship is not
strong; if I proceed violently, that is toilsome and the joinings do not
fit. If the movements of my band are neither (too) gentle nor (too)
violent, the idea in my mind is realized. But I cannot tell (how to do
this) by word of mouth; there is a knack in it. I cannot teach the knack
to my son, nor can my son learn it from me. Thus it is that I am in my
seventieth year, and am (still) making wheels in my old age. But these
ancients, and what it was not possible for them to convey, are dead and
gone. So then what you, my Ruler, are reading is but their dregs and
sediments."' Zen has no business with the dregs and sediments of sages
of yore.

8\. **The Sermon of the Inanimate**.--The Scripture of Zen is written
with facts simple and familiar, so simple and familiar with everyday
life that they escape observation on that very account. The sun rises in
the east. The moon sets in the west. High is the mountain. Deep is the
sea. spring comes with flowers; summer with the cool breeze; autumn with
the bright moon; winter with the fakes of snow. These things, perhaps
too simple and too familiar for ordinary observers to pay attention to,
have had profound significance for Zen. Li Ngao (Ri-ko) one day asked
Yoh Shan (Yaku-san): "What is the way to truth?" Yoh Shan, pointing to
the sky and then to the pitcher beside him, said: "You see?" "No, sir,"
replied Li Ngao. "The cloud is in the sky," said Yoh Shan, "and the
water in the pitcher." Hüen Sha (Gen-sha) one day went upon the platform
and was ready to deliver a sermon when he heard a swallow singing.
"Listen," said he, "that small bird preaches the essential doctrine and
proclaims the eternal truth." Then he went back to his room, giving no
sermon.\[1\]

The letters of the alphabet, a, b, c, etc., have no meaning whatever.
They are but artificial signs, but when spelt they can express any great
idea that great thinkers may form. Trees, grass, mountains, rivers,
stars, moons, suns. These are the alphabets with which the Zen Scripture
is written. Even a, b, c, etc., when spelt, can express any great idea.
Why not, then, these trees, grass, etc., the alphabets of Nature when
they compose the Volume of the Universe? Even the meanest clod of earth
proclaims the sacred law.

Hwui Chung\[2\] (E-chu) is said first to have given an expression to the
Sermon of the Inanimate. "Do the inanimate preach the Doctrine?" asked a
monk of Hwui Chung on one occasion. "Yes, they preach eloquently and
incessantly. There is no pause in their orations," was the reply. "Why,
then, do I not hear them?" asked the other again. "Even if you do not,
there are many others who can hear them." "Who can hear them?" "All the
sages hear and understand them," said Hwui Chung. Thus the Sermon of the
Inanimate had been a favourite topic of discussion 900 years before
Shakespeare who expressed the similar idea, saying:

"And this our life, exempt from public haunt,  
Finds tongues in trees, books in the running brooks,  
Sermons in stones, and good in everything."

"How wonderful is the Sermon of the Inanimate," says Tüng Shan (To-zan).
"You cannot hear it through your ears, but you can hear it through your
eyes." You should hear it through your mind's eyes, through your heart's
eyes, through your inmost soul's eyes, not through your

\[1. Den-to-roku and E-gen.

2 A direct disciple of the Sixth Patriarch.\]

intellect, not through your perception, not through your knowledge, not
through your logic, not through your metaphysics. To understand it you
have to divine, not to define; you have to observe, not to calculate;
you have to sympathize, not to analyze; you have to see through, not to
criticize; you have not to explain, but to feel; you have not to
abstract, but to grasp; you have to see all in each, but not to know all
in all; you have to get directly at the soul of things, penetrating
their hard crust of matter by your rays of the innermost consciousness.
"The falling leaves as well as the blooming flowers reveal to us the
holy law of Buddha," says a Japanese Zenist.

Ye who seek for purity and peace, go to Nature. She will give you more
than ye ask. Ye who long for strength and perseverance, go to Nature.
She will train and strengthen you. Ye who aspire after an ideal, go to
Nature. She will help you in its realization. Ye who yearn after
Enlightenment, go to Nature. She will never fail to grant your request.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IV: Buddha, The Universal Spirit](rosa06)
