[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](rosa09)  [Next](rosa11) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B00295RH64/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Religion of the Samurai*, by Kaiten Nukariya, \[1913\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# CHAPTER VIII

## THE TRAINING OF THE MIND AND THE PRACTICE OF MEDITATION

1\. **The Method of Instruction Adopted by Zen Masters.**--Thus far we
have described the doctrine of Zen inculcated by both Chinese and
Japanese masters, and in this chapter we propose to sketch the practice
of mental training and the method of practising Dhyana or Meditation.
Zen teachers never instruct their pupils by means of explanation or
argument, but urge them to solve by themselves through the practice of
Meditation such problems as--'What is Buddha?' What is self?' 'What is
the spirit of Bodhidharma?' 'What is life and death?' 'What is the real
nature of mind?' and so on. Ten Shwai (To-sotsu), for instance, was wont
to put three questions\[1\] to the following effect: (1) Your study and
discipline aim at the understanding of the real nature of mind. Where
does the real nature of mind exist? (2) When you understand the real
nature of mind, you are free from birth and death. How can you be saved
when you are at the verge of death? (3) When you are free from birth and
death, you know where you go after death. Where do you go when your body
is reduced to elements? The pupils are not requested to express their
solution of these problems in the form of a theory or an argument, but
to show how they have grasped the profound meaning implied in these
problems, how they have

\[1. The famous three difficult questions, known as the Three Gates of
Teu Shwai (To Sotsu San Kwan), who died in 1091. See Mu Mon Kwan,
xlvii.\]

established their conviction, and how they can carry out what they
grasped in their daily life.

A Chinese Zen master\[1\] tells us that the method of instruction
adopted by Zen may aptly be compared with that of an old burglar who
taught his son the art of burglary. The burglar one evening said to his
little son, whom he desired to instruct in the secret of his trade:
"Would you not, my dear boy, be a great burglar like myself?" "Yes,
father," replied the promising young man." "Come with me, then. I will
teach you the art." So saying, the man went out, followed by his son.
Finding a rich mansion in a certain village, the veteran burglar made a
hole in the wall that surrounded it. Through that hole they crept into
the yard, and opening a window with complete ease broke into the house,
where they found a huge box firmly locked up as if its contents were
very valuable articles. The old man clapped his hands at the lock,
which, strange to tell, unfastened itself. Then he removed the cover and
told his son to get into it and pick up treasures as fast as he could.
No sooner had the boy entered the box than the father replaced the cover
and locked it up. He then exclaimed at the top of his voice: "Thief!
thief! thief! thief!" Thus, having aroused the inmates, he went out
without taking anything. All the house was in utter confusion for a
while; but finding nothing stolen, they went to bed again. The boy sat
holding his breath a short while; but making up his mind to get out of
his narrow prison, began to scratch the bottom of the box with his
finger-nails. The servant of the house, listening to the noise, supposed
it to be a mouse gnawing at the inside of the box; so she came out, lamp
in hand, and unlocked it. On removing the cover, she was greatly
surprised to find the boy instead of a little mouse, and gave alarm. In
the meantime the boy got out of the box and

\[1. Wu Tsu (Go So), the teacher of Yuen Wu (En Go).\]

went down into the yard, hotly pursued by the people. He ran as fast as
possible toward the well, picked up a large stone, threw it down into
it, and hid himself among the bushes. The pursuers, thinking the thief
fell into the well, assembled around it, and were looking into it, while
the boy crept out unnoticed through the hole and went home in safety.
Thus the burglar taught his son how to rid himself of overwhelming
difficulties by his own efforts; so also Zen teachers teach their pupils
how to overcome difficulties that beset them on all sides and work out
salvation by themselves.

2\. **The First Step in the Mental Training.**--Some of the old Zen
masters are said to have attained to supreme Enlightenment after the
practice of Meditation for one week, some for one day, some for a score
of years, and some for a few months. The practice of Meditation,
however, is not simply a means for Enlightenment, as is usually
supposed, but also it is the enjoyment of Nirvana, or the beatitude of
Zen. It is a matter, of course, that we have fully to understand the
doctrine of Zen, and that we have to go through the mental training
peculiar to Zen in order to be Enlightened.

The first step in the mental training is to become the master of
external things. He who is addicted to worldly pleasures, however
learned or ignorant he may be, however high or low his social position
may be, is a servant to mere things. He cannot adapt the external world
to his own end, but he adapts himself to it. He is constantly employed,
ordered, driven by sensual objects. Instead of taking possession of
wealth, he is possessed by wealth. Instead of drinking liquors, he is
swallowed up by his liquors. Balls and music bid him to run mad. Games
and shows order him not to stay at home. Houses, furniture, pictures,
watches, chains, hats, bonnets, rings, bracelets, shoes--in short,
everything has a word to command him. How can such a person be the
master of things? To Ju (Na-kae) says: "There is a great jail, not a
jail for criminals, that contains the world in it. Fame, gain, pride,
and bigotry form its four walls. Those who are confined in it fall a
prey to sorrow and sigh for ever."

To be the ruler of things we have first to shut up all our senses, and
turn the currents of thoughts inward, and see ourselves as the centre of
the world, and meditate that we are the beings of highest intelligence;
that Buddha never puts us at the mercy of natural forces; that the earth
is in our possession; that everything on earth is to be made use of for
our noble ends; that fire, water, air, grass, trees, rivers, hills,
thunder, cloud, stars, the moon, the sun, are at our command; that we
are the law-givers of the natural phenomena; that we are the makers of
the phenomenal world; that it is we that appoint a mission through life,
and determine the fate of man.

3\. **The Next Step in the Mental Training.**--In the next place we have
to strive to be the master of our bodies. With most of the
unenlightened, body holds absolute control over Self. Every order of the
former has to be faithfully obeyed by the latter. Even if Self revolts
against the tyranny of body, it is easily trampled down under the brutal
hoofs of bodily passion. For example, Self wants to be temperate for the
sake of health, and would fain pass by the resort for drinking, but body
would force Self into it. Self at times lays down a strict dietetic rule
for himself, but body would threaten Self to act against both the letter
and spirit of the rule. Now Self aspires to get on a higher place among
sages, but body pulls Self down to the pavement of masses. Now Self
proposes to give some money to the poor, but body closes the purse
tightly. Now Self admires divine beauty, but body compels him to prefer
sensuality. Again, Self likes spiritual liberty, but body confines him
in its dungeons.

Therefore, to got Enlightened, we must establish the authority of Self
over the whole body. We must use our bodies as we use our clothes in
order to accomplish our noble purposes. Let us command body not to
shudder under a cold shower-bath in inclement weather, not to be nervous
from sleepless nights, not to be sick with any sort of food, not to
groan under a surgeon's knife, not to succumb even if we stand a whole
day in the midsummer sun, not to break down under any form of disease,
not to be excited in the thick of battlefield--in brief, we have to
control our body as we will.

Sit in a quiet place and meditate in imagination that body is no more
bondage to you, that it is your machine for your work of life, that you
are not flesh, that you are the governor of it, that you can use it at
pleasure, and that it always obeys your order faithfully. Imagine body
as separated from you. When it cries out, stop it instantly, as a mother
does her baby. When it disobeys you, correct it by discipline, as a
master does his pupil. When it is wanton, tame it down, as a
horse-breaker does his wild horse. When it is sick, prescribe to it, as
a doctor does to his patient. Imagine that you are not a bit injured,
even if it streams blood; that you are entirely safe, even if it is
drowned in water or burned by fire.

E-Shun, a pupil and sister of Ryo-an,\[1\] a famous Japanese master,
burned herself calmly sitting cross-legged on a pile of firewood which
consumed her. She attained to the complete mastery of her body.
Socrates' self was never poisoned, even if his person was destroyed by
the venom he took. Abraham Lincoln himself stood unharmed, even if his
body was laid low by the assassin. Masa-shige was quite

\[1. Ryo an (E-myo, died 1411), the founder of the monastery of
Sai-jo-ji, near the city of Odawara. See To-jo-ren-to-roku.\]

safe, even if his body was hewed by the traitors' swords. Those martyrs
that sang at the stake to the praise of God could never be burned, even
if their bodies were reduced to ashes, nor those seekers after truth who
were killed by ignorance and superstition. Is it not a great pity to see
a man endowed with divine spirit and power easily upset by a bit of
headache, or crying as a child under a surgeon's knife, or apt to give
up the ghost at the coming of little danger, or trembling through a
little cold, or easily laid low by a bit of indisposition, or yielding
to trivial temptation?

It is no easy matter to be the dictator of body. It is not a matter of
theory, but of practice. You must train your body that you may enable it
to bear any sort of suffering, and to stand unflinched in the face of
hardship. It is for this that So-rai\[1\] (Ogiu) laid himself on a sheet
of straw-mat spread on the ground in the coldest nights of winter, or
was used to go up and down the roof of his house, having himself clad in
heavy armour. It is for this that ancient Japanese soldiers led
extremely simple lives, and that they often held the
meeting-of-perseverance,\[2\] in which they exposed themselves to the
coldest weather in winter or to the hottest weather in summer. It is for
this that Katsu Awa practised fencing in the middle of night in a deep
forest.\[3\]

Ki-saburo, although he was a mere outlaw, having his left arm half cut
at the elbow in a quarrel, ordered his servant to cut it off with a saw,
and during the operation he could calmly sit talking and laughing with
his friends. Hiko-kuro (Takayama),\[4\] a Japanese loyalist of note, one

\[1. One of the greatest scholars of the Tokugawa period, who died in
1728. See Etsu-wa-bun-ko.

2 The soldiers of the Tokugawa period were used to hold such a meeting.

3 Kai-shu-gen-ko-roku.

4 A well-known loyalist in the Tokugawa period, who died in 1793.\]

evening happened to come to a bridge where two robbers were lying in
wait for him. They lay fully stretching themselves, each with his head
in the middle of the bridge, that he might not pass across it without
touching them. Hiko-kuro was not excited nor disheartened, but calmly
approached the vagabonds and passed the bridge, treading upon their
heads, which act so frightened them that they took to their heels
without doing any harm to him.\[1\]

The history of Zen is full of the anecdotes that show Zen priests were
the lords of their bodies. Here we quote a single example by way of
illustration: Ta Hwui (Dai-ye), once having had a boil on his hip, sent
for a doctor, who told him that it was fatal, that he must not sit in
Meditation as usual. Then Ta Hwui said to the physician: " I must sit in
Meditation with all my might during my remaining days, for if your
diagnosis be not mistaken, I shall die before long." He sat day and
night in constant Meditation, quite forgetful of his boil, which was
broken and gone by itself.\[2\]

4\. The Third Step in the Mental Training.-To be the lord of mind is
more essential to Enlightenment, which, in a sense, is the clearing away
of illusions, the putting out of mean desires and passions, and the
awakening of the innermost wisdom. He alone can attain to real happiness
who has perfect control over his passions tending to disturb the
equilibrium of his mind. Such passions as anger, hatred, jealousy,
sorrow, worry, grudge, and fear always untune one's mood and break the
harmony of one's mind. They poison one's body, not in a figurative, but
in a literal sense of the word. Obnoxious passions once aroused never
fail to bring about the physiological change in the nerves, in the
organs, and eventually in the whole constitution, and

\[1. Etsu-wa-bun-ko.

2\. Sho-bo-gen-zo-zui-mon-ki, by Do-gen.\]

leave those injurious impressions that make one more liable to passions
of similar nature.

We do not mean, however, that we ought to be cold and passionless, as
the most ancient Hinayanists were used to be. Such an attitude has been
blamed by Zen masters. "What is the best way of living for us monks?"
asked a monk to Yun Kü (Un-go), who replied: "You had better live among
mountains." Then the monk bowed politely to the teacher, who questioned:
"How did you understand me?" "Monks, as I understood," answered the man,
"ought to keep their hearts as immovable as mountains, not being moved
either by good or by evil, either by birth or by death, either by
prosperity or by adversity." Hereupon Yun Kü struck the monk with his
stick and said: "You forsake the Way of the old sages, and will bring my
followers to perdition!" Then, turning to another monk, inquired: "How
did you understand me?" "Monks, as I understand," replied the man,
"ought to shut their eyes to attractive sights and close their ears to
musical notes." "You, too," exclaimed Yun Ka, "forsake the Way of the
old sages, and will bring my followers to perdition!" An old woman, to
quote another example repeatedly told by Zen masters, used to give food
and clothing to a monk for a score of years. One day she instructed a
young girl to embrace and ask him: "How do you feel now?" "A lifeless
tree," replied the monk coolly, "stands on cold rock. There is no
warmth, as if in the coldest season of the year." The matron, being told
of this, observed: "Oh that I have made offerings to such a vulgar
fellow for twenty years!" She forced the monk to leave the temple and
reduced it to ashes.\[1\]

If you want to secure Dhyana, let go of your anxieties and failures in
the past; let bygones be bygones; cast aside enmity, shame, and trouble,
never admit them into

\[1. These instances are quoted from Zen-rin-rui-shu.\]

your brain; let pass the imagination and anticipation of future
hardships and sufferings; let go of all your annoyances, vexations,
doubts, melancholies, that impede your speed in the race of the struggle
for existence. As the miser sets his heart on worthless dross and
accumulates it, so an unenlightened person clings to worthless mental
dross and spiritual rubbish, and makes his mind a dust-heap. Some people
constantly dwell on the minute details of their unfortunate
circumstances, to make themselves more unfortunate than they really are;
some go over and over again the symptoms of their disease to think
themselves into serious illness; and some actually bring evils on them
by having them constantly in view and waiting for them. A man asked Poh
Chang (Hyaku-jo): "How shall I learn the Law?" "Eat when you are
hungry," replied the teacher; " sleep when you are tired. People do not
simply eat at table, but think of hundreds of things; they do not simply
sleep in bed, but think of thousands of things."\[1\]

A ridiculous thing it is, in fact, that man or woman, endowed with the
same nature as Buddha's, born the lord of all material objects, is ever
upset by petty cares, haunted by the fearful phantoms of his or her own
creation, and burning up his or her energy in a fit of passion, wasting
his or her vitality for the sake of foolish or insignificant things.

It is a man who can keep the balance of his mind under any
circumstances, who can be calm and serene in the hottest strife of life,
that is worthy of success, reward, respect, and reputation, for he is
the master of men. It was at the age of forty-seven that Wang Yang
Ming\[2\]

\[1. E-gen and Den-to-roku.

2\. The founder of the Wang School of Confucianism, a practiser of
Meditation, who was born in 1472, and died at the age of fifty-seven in
1529.\]

(O-yo-mei) won a splendid victory over the rebel army which threatened
the throne of the Ming dynasty. During that warfare Wang was giving a
course of lectures to a number of students at the headquarters of the
army, of which he was the Commander-in-chief. At the very outset of the
battle a messenger brought him the news of defeat of the foremost ranks.
All the students were terror-stricken and grew pale at the unfortunate
tidings, but the teacher was not a whit disturbed by it. Some time after
another messenger brought in the news of complete rout of the enemy. All
the students, enraptured, stood up and cheered, but he was as cool as
before, and did not break off lecturing. Thus the practiser of Zen has
so perfect control over his heart that he can keep presence of mind
under an impending danger, even in the presence of death itself.

It was at the age of twenty-three that Haku-in got on board a boat bound
for the Eastern Provinces, which met with a tempest and was almost
wrecked. All the passengers were laid low with fear and fatigue, but
Haku-in enjoyed a quiet sleep during the storm, as if he were lying on a
comfortable bed. It was in the fifth of Mei-ji era that Doku-on; lived
for some time in the city of Tokyo, whom some Christian zealots
attempted to murder. One day he met with a few young men equipped with
swords at the gate of his temple. "We want to see Doku-on; go and tell
him," said they to the priest. "I am Doku-on," replied he calmly, "whom
you want to see, gentlemen. What can I do for you?" "We have come to ask
you a favour; we are Christians; we want your hoary head." So saying
they were ready to attack him, who, smiling, replied: "All right,
gentlemen. Behead me forthwith, if you please." Surprised by this
unexpected boldness on the part of the priest,

\[1. Doku On (Ogino), a distinguished Zen master, an abbot of
So-koku-ji, who was born in 1818, and died in 1895.\]

they turned back without harming even a hair of the old Buddhist.\[1\]

These teachers could through long practice constantly keep their minds
buoyant, casting aside useless encumbrances of idle thoughts; bright,
driving off the dark cloud of melancholy; tranquil, putting down
turbulent waves of passion; pure, cleaning away the dust and ashes of
illusion; and serene, brushing off the cobwebs of doubt and fear. The
only means of securing all this is to realize the conscious union with
the Universal Life through the Enlightened Consciousness, which can be
awakened by dint of Dhyana.

5\. **Zazen, or the Sitting in Meditation.**--Habit comes out of
practice, and forms character by degrees, and eventually works out
destiny. Therefore we must practically sow optimism, and habitually
nourish it in order to reap the blissful fruit of Enlightenment. The
sole means of securing mental calmness is the practice of Zazen, or the
sitting in Meditation. This method was known in India as Yoga as early
as the Upanisad period, and developed by the followers of the Yoga
system.\[2\] But Buddhists sharply distinguished Zazen from Yoga, and
have the method peculiar to themselves. Kei-zan\[3\] describes the
method to the following effect: 'Secure a quiet room neither extremely
light nor extremely dark, neither very warm nor very cold, a room, if
you can, in the Buddhist temple located in a beautiful mountainous
district. You should not practise Zazen in a place where a conflagration
or a flood or robbers

\[1. Kin-sei-zen-rin-gen-ko-roku, by D. Mori.

2\. See Yoga Sutra with the Commentary of Bhoja Raja (translated by
Rajendralala Mitra), pp. 102-104.

3 Kei-zan (Jo-kin), the founder of So-ji-ji, the head temple of the So
To Sect of Zen, who died at the age of fifty-eight in 1325. He sets
forth the doctrine of Zen and the method of practising Zazen in his
famous work, entitled Za-zen-yo-jin-ki.\]

may be likely to disturb you, nor should you sit in a place close by the
sea or drinking-shops or brothel-houses, or the houses of widows and of
maidens or buildings for music, nor should you live in close proximity
to the place frequented by kings, ministers, powerful statesmen,
ambitious or insincere persons. You must not sit in Meditation in a
windy or very high place lest you should get ill. Be sure not to let the
wind or smoke get into your room, not to expose it to rain and storm.
Keep your room clean. Keep it not too light by day nor too dark by
night. Keep it warm in winter and cool in summer. Do not sit leaning
against a wall, or a chair, or a screen. You must not wear soiled
clothes or beautiful clothes, for the former are the cause of illness,
while the latter the cause of attachment. Avoid the Three
Insufficiencies-that is to say, insufficient clothes, insufficient food,
and insufficient sleep. Abstain from all sorts of uncooked or hard or
spoiled or unclean food, and also from very delicious dishes, because
the former cause troubles in your alimentary canal, while the latter
cause you to covet after diet. Eat and drink just too appease your
hunger and thirst, never mind whether the food be tasty or not. Take
your meals regularly and punctually, and never sit in Meditation
immediately after any meal. Do not practise Dhyana soon after you have
taken a heavy dinner, lest you should get sick thereby. Sesame, barley,
corn, potatoes, milk, and the like are the best material for your food.
Frequently wash your eyes, face, hands, and feet, and keep them cool and
clean.

'There are two postures in Zazen--that is to say, the crossed-leg
sitting, and the half crossed-leg sitting. Seat yourself on a thick
cushion, putting it right under your haunch. Keep your body so erect
that the tip of the nose and the navel are in one perpendicular line,
and both ears and shoulders are in the same plane. Then place the right
foot upon the left thigh, the left foot on the right thigh, so as the
legs come across each other. Next put your right hand with the palm
upward on the left foot, and your left hand on the right palm with the
tops of both the thumbs touching each other. This is the posture called
the crossed-leg sitting. You may simply place the left foot upon the
right thigh, the position of the hands being the same as in the
cross-legged sitting. This posture is named the half crossed-leg
sitting.

'Do not shut your eyes, keep them always open during whole Meditation.
Do not breathe through the mouth; press your tongue against the roof of
the mouth, putting the upper lips and teeth together with the lower.
Swell your abdomen so as to hold the breath in the belly; breathe
rhythmically through the nose, keeping a measured time for inspiration
and expiration. Count for some time either the inspiring or the expiring
breaths from one to ten, then beginning with one again. Concentrate your
attention on your breaths going in and out as if you are the sentinel
standing at the gate of the nostrils. If you do some mistake in
counting, or be forgetful of the breath, it is evident that your mind is
distracted.'

Chwang Tsz seems to have noticed that the harmony of breathing is
typical of the harmony of mind, since he says: " The true men of old did
not dream when they slept. Their breathing came deep and silently. The
breathing of true men comes (even) from his heels, while men generally
breathe (only) from their throats."\[1\] At any rate, the counting of
breaths is an expedient for calming down of mind, and elaborate rules
are given in the Zen Sutra,\[2\] but Chinese and Japanese Zen masters do
not lay so much stress on this point as Indian teachers.

6\. **The Breathing Exercise of the Yogi.**--Breathing exercise is one
of the practices of Yoga, and somewhat

\[1. Chwang Tsz, vol. iii., p. 2.

2\. Dharmatara-dhyana-sutra.\]

similar in its method and end to those of Zen. We quote here\[1\] Yogi
Ramacharaka to show how modern Yogis practise it: "(1) Stand or sit
erect. Breathing through the nostrils, inhale steadily, first filling
the lower part of the lungs, which is accomplished by bringing into play
the diaphragm, which, descending, exerts a gentle pressure on the
abdominal organs, pushing forward the front walls of the abdomen. Then
fill the middle part of the lungs, pushing out the lower ribs,
breastbone, and chest. Then fill the higher portion of the lungs,
protruding the upper chest, thus lifting the chest, including the upper
six or seven pairs of ribs. In the final movement the lower part of the
abdomen will be slightly drawn in, which movement gives the lungs a
support, and also helps to fill the highest part of the lungs. At the
first reading it may appear that this breath consists of three distinct
movements. This, however, is not the correct idea. The inhalation is
continuous, the entire chest cavity from the lower diaphragm to the
highest point of the chest in the region of the collar-bone being
expanded with a uniform movement. Avoid a jerking series of inhalations,
and strive to attain a steady, continuous action. Practice will soon
overcome the tendency to divide the inhalation into three movements, and
will result in a uniform continuous breath. You will be able to complete
the inhalation in a couple of seconds after a little practice. (2)
Retain the breath a few seconds. (3) Exhale quite slowly, holding the
chest in a firm position, and drawing the abdomen in a little and
lifting it upward slowly as the air leaves the lungs. When the air is
entirely exhaled, relax the chest and abdomen. A little practice will
render this part of exercise easy, and the movement once acquired will
be afterwards performed almost automatically."

\[1. Hatha Yoga, pp. 112, 113.\]

7\. **Calmness of Mind.**--The Yogi breathing above mentioned is fit
rather for physical exercise than for mental balance, and it will be
beneficial if you take that exercise before or after Meditation.
Japanese masters mostly bold it very important to push forward. The
lowest part of the abdomen during Zazen, and they are right so far as
the present writer's personal experiences go.

'If you feel your mind distracted, look at the tip of the nose; never
lose sight of it for some time, or look at your own palm, and let not
your mind go out of it, or gaze at one spot before you.' This will
greatly help you in restoring the equilibrium of your mind. Chwang
Tsz\[1\] thought that calmness of mind is essential to sages, and said:
"The stillness of the sages does not belong to them as a consequence of
their skilful ability; all things are not able to disturb their minds;
it is on this account that they are still. When water is still, its
clearness shows the beard and eyebrows (of him who looks into it). It is
a perfect level, and the greatest artificer takes his rule from it. Such
is the clearness of still water, and how much greater is that of the
human spirit? The still mind of the sage is the mirror of heaven and
earth, the glass of all things."

Forget all worldly concerns, expel all cares and anxieties, let go of
passions and desires, give up ideas and thoughts, set your mind at
liberty absolutely, and make it as clear as a burnished mirror. Thus let
flow your inexhaustible fountain of purity, let open your inestimable
treasure of virtue, bring forth your inner hidden nature of goodness,
disclose your innermost divine wisdom, and waken your Enlightened
Consciousness to see Universal Life within you. "Zazen enables the
practiser," says Kei-zan,\[2\] "to open up his mind, to see his own
nature, to become conscious of mysteriously pure and bright spirit, or
eternal light within him."

\[1. Chwang Tsz, vol. v., p. 5.

2\. Za-zen-yo-jin-ki.\]

Once become conscious of Divine Life within you, yon can see it in your
brethren, no matter how different they may be in circumstances, in
abilities, in characters, in nationalities, in language, in religion,
and in race. You can see it in animals, vegetables, and minerals, no
matter how diverse they may be in form, no matter how wild and ferocious
some may seem in nature, no matter how unfeeling in heart some may seem,
no matter how devoid of intelligence some may appear, no matter how
insignificant some may be, no matter how simple in construction some may
be, no matter how lifeless some may seem. You can see that the whole
universe is Enlightened and penetrated by Divine Life.

8\. **Zazen and the Forgetting of Self.**--Zazen is a most effectual
means of destroying selfishness, the root of all Sin, folly, vice, and
evil, since it enables us to see that every being is endowed with divine
spirituality in common with men. It is selfishness that throws dark
shadows on life, just as it is not the sun but the body that throws
shadow before it. It is the self-same selfishness that gave rise to the
belief in the immortality of soul, in spite of its irrationality,
foolishness, and superstition. Individual self should be a poor
miserable thing if it were not essentially connected with the Universal
Life. We can always enjoy pure happiness when we are united with nature,
quite forgetful of our poor self. When you look, for example, into the
smiling face of a pretty baby, and smile with it, or listen to the sweet
melody of a songster and sing with it, you completely forget your poor
self at that enraptured moment. But your feelings of beauty and
happiness are for ever gone when you resume your self, and begin to
consider them after your own selfish ideas. To forget self and identify
it with nature is to break down its limitation and to set it at liberty.
To break down petty selfishness and extend it into Universal Self is to
unfetter and deliver it from bondage. It therefore follows that
salvation can be secured not by the continuation of individuality in
another life, but by the realization of one's union with Universal Life,
which is immortal, free, limitless, eternal, and bliss itself. This is
easily effected by Zazen.

9\. **Zen and Supernatural Power.**--Yoga\[1\] claims that various
supernatural powers can be acquired by Meditation, but Zen does not make
any such absurd claims. It rather disdains those who are believed to
have acquired supernatural powers by the practice of austerities. The
following traditions clearly show this spirit: "When Fah Yung (Ho-yu)
lived in Mount Niu Teu\[2\] (Go-zu-san) he used to receive every morning
the offerings of flowers from hundreds of birds, and was believed to
have supernatural powers. But after his Enlightenment by the instruction
of the Fourth Patriarch, the birds ceased to make offering, because be
became a being too divine to be seen by inferior animals." "Hwang Pah
(O-baku), one day going up Mount Tien Tai (Ten-dai-san), which was
believed to have been inhabited by Arhats with supernatural powers, met
with a monk whose eyes emitted strange light. They went along the pass
talking with each other for a short while until they came to a river
roaring with torrent. There being no bridge, the master bad to stop at
the shore; but his companion crossed the river walking on the water and
beckoned to Hwang Pah to follow him. Thereupon Hwang Pah said: 'If I
knew thou art an Arhat, I would have doubled you up before thou got over
there!' The monk then understood the spiritual attainment of Hwang Pah,
and praised him as a true Mahayanist." "On one

\[1. 'Yoga Aphorisms of Patañjali,' chap. iii.

2 A prominent disciple of the Fourth Patriarch, the founder of the Niu
Teu School (Go-zu-zen) of Zen, who died ill A.D. 675.\]

occasion Yang Shan (Kyo-zan) saw a stranger monk flying through the air.
When that monk came down and approached him with a respectful
salutation, he asked: 'Where art thou from? 'Early this morning,'
replied the other, 'I set out from India.' 'Why,' said the teacher, 'art
thou so late?' 'I stopped,' responded the man, 'several times to look at
beautiful sceneries.' Thou mayst have supernatural powers,' exclaimed
Yang Shan, 'yet thou must give back the Spirit of Buddha to me ' Then
the monk praised Yang Shan saying: 'I have come over to China in order
to worship Mañjuçri,\[1\] and met unexpectedly with Minor Shakya,' and,
after giving the master some palm leaves he brought from India, went
back through the air.'"\[2\]

It is quite reasonable that Zenists distinguish supernatural powers from
spiritual uplifting, the former an acquirement of Devas, or of Asuras,
or of Arhats, or of even animals, and the latter as a nobler
accomplishment attained only by the practisers of Mahayanism. Moreover,
they use the term supernatural power in a meaning entirely different
from the original one. Lin Tsi (Rin-zai) says, for instance: "There are
six supernatural powers of Buddha: He is free from the temptation of
form, living in the world of form; He is free from the temptation of
.sound, living in the world of sound; He is free from the temptation of
smell, living in the world of smell; He is free from the temptation of
taste, living in the world of taste; He is free from the temptation of
Dharma,\[3\] living in the world of Dharma. These are six supernatural
powers."\[4\]

\[1 Mañjuçri is a legendary Bodhisattva, who became an object of worship
of some Mahayanists. He is treated as a personification of
transcendental wisdom.

2\. Hwui Yuen (E-gen) and Sho-bo-gen-zo.

3\. The things or objects, not of sense, but of mind.

4\. Lin Tsi Luh (Rin-zai-roku).\]

Sometimes Zenists use the term as if it meant what we call Zen Activity,
or the free display of Zen in action, as you see in the following
examples. Tüng Shan (To-Zan) was on one occasion attending on his
teacher Yun Yen (Un-gan), who asked: "What are your supernatural
powers?" Tüng Shan, saying nothing, clasped his hands on his breast, and
stood up before Yun Yen. "How do you display your supernatural powers?"
questioned the teacher again. Then Tüng Shan said farewell and went out.
Wei Shan (E-san) one day was taking a nap, and seeing his disciple Yang
Shan (Kyo-zan) coming into the room, turned his face towards the wall.
"You need not, Sir," said Yang Shan, "stand on ceremony, as I am your
disciple." Wei Shan seemed to try to get up, so Yang Shan went out; but
Wei Shan called him back and said: "I shall tell you of a dream I
dreamed." The other inclined his head as if to listen. "Now," said Wei
Shan, "divine my fortune by the dream." Thereupon Yang Shan fetched a
basin of water and a towel and gave them to the master, who washed his
face thereby. By-and-by Hiang Yen (Kyo-gen) came in, to whom Wei Shan
said: "We displayed supernatural powers a moment ago. It was not such
supernatural powers as are shown by Hinayanists." "I know it, Sir,"
replied the other, "though I was down below." "Say, then, what it was,"
demanded the master. Then Hiang Yen made tea and gave a cup to Wei Shan,
who praised the two disciples, saying: "You surpass Çariputra\[1\] and
Maudgalyayana\[2\] in your wisdom and supernatural powers."\[3\]

Again, ancient Zenists did not claim that there was

\[1. One of the prominent disciples of Shakya Muni, who became famous
for his wisdom.

2\. One of the eminent disciples of Shakya Muni, noted for his
supernatural powers.

3\. Zen-rin-rui-sku.\]

any mysterious element in their spiritual attainment, as Do-gen
says\[1\] unequivocally respecting his Enlightenment: "I recognized only
that my eyes are placed crosswise above the nose that stands lengthwise,
and that I was not deceived by others. I came home from China with
nothing in my hand. There is nothing mysterious in Buddhism. Time passes
as it is natural, the sun rising in the east, and the moon setting into
the west."

10\. True Dhyana.-To sit in Meditation is not the only method of
practising Zazen. "We practise Dhyana in sitting, in standing, and in
walking," says one of the Japanese Zenists. Lin Tsi (Rin-Zai) also says:
" To concentrate one's mind, or to dislike noisy places, and seek only
for stillness, is the characteristic of heterodox Dhyana." It is easy to
keep self-possession in a place of tranquillity, yet it is by no means
easy to keep mind undisturbed amid the bivouac of actual life. It is
true Dhyana that makes our mind sunny while the storms of strife rage
around us. It is true Dhyana that secures the harmony of heart, while
the surges of struggle toss us violently. It is true Dhyana that makes
us bloom and smile, while the winter of life covets us with frost and
snow.

"Idle thoughts come and go over unenlightened minds six hundred and
fifty times in a snap of one's fingers," writes an Indian teacher,\[2\]
"and thirteen hundred million times every twenty-four hours." This might
be an exaggeration, yet we cannot but acknowledge that one idle thought
after another ceaselessly bubbles up in the stream of consciousness.
"Dhyana is the letting go," continues the writer--"that is to say, the
letting go of the thirteen hundred million of idle thoughts." The very
root of these

\[1. Ei-hei-ko-roku.

2\. The introduction to Anapana-sutra by Khin San Hwui, who came to
China A.D. 241.\]

thirteen hundred million idle thoughts is an illusion about one's self.
He is indeed the poorest creature, even if he be in heaven, who thinks
himself poor. On the contrary, he is an angel who thinks himself hopeful
and happy, even though he be in hell. " Pray deliver me," said a sinner
to Sang Tsung (So-san).\[1\] "Who ties you up?" was the reply. You tie
yourself up day and night with the fine thread of idle thoughts, and
build a cocoon of environment from which you have no way of escape.
'There is no rope, yet you imagine yourself bound.' Who could put
fetters on your mind but your mind itself? Who could chain your will but
your own will? Who could blind your spiritual eyes, unless you yourself
shut them up? Who could prevent you from enjoying moral food, unless you
yourself refuse to eat? "There are many," said Süeh Fung (Sep-po) on one
occasion, "who starve in spite of their sitting in a large basket full
of victuals. There are many who thirst in spite of seating themselves on
the shore of a sea." "Yes, Sir," replied Hüen Sha (Gen-sha), "there are
many who starve in spite of putting their heads into the basket full of
victuals. There are many who thirst in spite of putting their heads into
the waters of the sea."\[2\] Who could cheer him up who abandons himself
to self-created misery? Who could save him who denies his own salvation?

11\. **Let Go of your Idle Thoughts.**\[3\]--A Brahmin, having troubled
himself a long while with reference to the problem of life and of the
world, went out to call on Shakya Muni that he might be instructed by
the Master. He got some beautiful flowers to offer them as a present to
the Muni, and proceeded to the place where He was

\[1. The Third Patriarch.

2\. Hwui Yuen (E-gen).

3\. A famous Zenist, Mu-go-koku-shi, is said to have replied to every
questioner, saying: "Let go of your idle thoughts."\]

addressing his disciples and believers. No sooner had he come -in sight
of the Master than he read in his mien the struggles going on within
him. "Let go of that," said the Muni to the Brahmin, who was going to
offer the flowers in both his hands. He dropped on the ground the
flowers in his right hand, but still holding those in his left. "Let go
of that," demanded the Master, and the Brahmin dropped the flowers in
his left hand rather reluctantly. "Let go of that, I say," the Muni
commanded again; but the Brahmin, having nothing to let go of, asked:
"What shall I let go of, Reverend Sir? I have nothing in my hands, you
know." "Lot go of that, you have neither in your right nor in your left
band, but in the middle." Upon these words of the Muni a light came into
the sufferer's mind, and he went home satisfied and in joy.\[1\] "Not to
attach to all things is Dhyana," writes an ancient Zenist, "and if you
understand this, going out, staying in, sitting, and lying are in
Dhyana." Therefore allow not your mind to be a receptacle for the dust
of society, or the ashes of life, or rags and waste paper of the world.
You bear too much burden upon your shoulders with which you have nothing
to do.

Learn the lesson of forgetfulness, and forget all that troubles you,
deprives you of sound sleep, and writes wrinkles on your forehead. Wang
Yang Ming, at the age of seventeen or so, is said to have forgotten the
day 'on which he was to be married to a handsome young lady, daughter of
a man of high position. It was the afternoon of the very day on which
their nuptials had to be held that he went out to take a walk. Without
any definite purpose he went into a temple in the neighbourhood, and
there he found a recluse apparently very old with white hair, but young
in countenance like a child. The man

\[1. 'Sutra on the Brahmacarin Black-family,' translated into Chinese by
K' Khien, of the Wu dynasty (A.D. 222-280).\]

was sitting absorbed in Meditation. There was something extremely calm
and serene in that old man's look and bearing that attracted the young
scholar's attention. Questioning him as to his name, age, and
birthplace, Wang found that the venerable man had enjoyed a life so
extraordinarily long that he forgot his name and age, but that he had
youthful energy so abundantly that be could talk with a voice sounding
as a large bell. Being asked by Wang the secret of longevity, the man
replied: "There is no secret in it; I merely kept my mind calm and
peaceful." Further, he explained the method of Meditation according to
Taoism and Buddhism. Thereupon Wang sat face to face with the old man
and began to practise Meditation, utterly forgetful of his bride and
-nuptial ceremony. The sun began to cast his slanting rays on the wall
of the temple, and they sat motionless; twilight came over them, and
night wrapped them with her sable shroud, and they sat as still as two
marble statues; midnight, dawn, at last the morning sun rose to find
them still in their reverie. The father of the bride, who had started a
search during the night, found to his surprise the bridegroom absorbed
in Meditation on the following day.\[1\]

It was at the age of forty-seven that Wang gained a great victory over
the rebel army, and wrote to a friend saying: "It is so easy to gain a
victory over the rebels fortifying themselves among the mountains, yet
it is not so with those rebels living in our mind."\[2\] Tsai Kiün Mu
(Sai-kun-bo) is said to have had an exceedingly long and beautiful
beard, and when asked by the Emperor, who received him in audience,
whether he should sleep with his beard on the comforters or beneath
them, be could not answer, since he had never known how he did. Being
distracted by this

\[1. O-yo-mei-shutsu-shin-sei-ran-roku.

2\. *Ibid*.\]

question, he went home and tried to find out how he had been used to
manage his beard in bed. First he put his beard on the comforters and
vainly tried to sleep; then he put it beneath the comforters and thought
it all right. Nevertheless, he was all the more disturbed by it. So
then, putting on the comforters, now putting it beneath them, he tried
to sleep all night long, but in vain. You must therefore forget your
mental beard that annoys you all the time.

Men of longevity never carried troubles to their beds. It is a
well-known fact that Zui-o (Shi-ga)\[1\] enjoyed robust health at the
age of over one hundred years. One day, being asked whether there is any
secret of longevity, he replied affirmatively, and said to the
questioner: "Keep your mind and body pure for two weeks, abstaining from
any sort of impurity, then I shall tell you of the secret." The man did
as was prescribed, and came again to be instructed in the secret. Zui-o
said: "Now I might tell you, but be cautious to keep yourself pure
another week so as to qualify yourself to learn the secret." When that
week was over the old man said: "Now I might tell you, but will you be
so careful as to keep yourself pure three days more in order to qualify
yourself to receive the secret?" The man did as he was ordered, and
requested the instruction. Thereupon Zui-o took the man to his private
room and softly whispered, with his mouth close to the ear of the man:
"Keep the secret I tell you now, even at the cost of your life. It is
this-don't be passionate. That is all."\[2\]

12\. **'The Five Ranks of Merit.'**--Thus far we have stated how to
train our body and mind according to the general rules and customs
established by Zenists. And here we shall describe the different stages
of mental uplifting

\[1. This famous old man died in A.D. 1730.

2 Se-ji-hyaku-dan.\]

through which the student of Zen has to go. They are technically called
'The Five Ranks of Merit.'\[1\] The first stage is called the Rank of
Turning,\[2\] in which the student 'turns' his mind from the external
objects of sense towards the inner Enlightened Consciousness. He gives
up all mean desires and aspires to spiritual elevation. He becomes aware
that he is not doomed to be the slave of material things, and strives to
conquer over them. Enlightened Consciousness is likened to the King, and
it is called the Mind-King, while the student who now turns towards the
King is likened to common people. Therefore in this first stage the
student is in the rank of common people.

The second stage is called the Rank of Service,\[3\] in which the
student distinguishes himself by his loyalty to the Mind-King, and
becomes a courtier to 'serve' him. He is in constant 'service' to the
King, attending him with obedience and love, and always fearing to
offend him. Thus the student in this stage is ever careful not to
neglect rules and precepts laid down by the sages, and endeavours to
uplift himself in spirituality by his fidelity.

The third stage is called the Rank of Merit,\[4\] in which the student
distinguishes himself by his 'meritorious' acts of conquering over the
rebel army of passion which rises against the Mind-King. Now, his rank
is not the rank of a courtier, but the rank of a general. In other
words, his duty is not only to keep rules and instructions of the sages,
but to subjugate his own passion and establish moral order in the mental
kingdom.

The fourth stage is called the Rank of Co-operative Merit,' in which the
student 'co-operates' with other persons in order to complete his merit.
Now, he is not compared with a general who conquers his foe, but with

\[1. Ko-kun-go-i. For further details, see So-to-ni-shi-roku.

2\. Ko in Japanese.

3\. Bu in Japanese.

4\. Ko in Japanese.

5\. Gu-ko in Japanese.\]

the prime-minister who co-operates with other officials to the benefit
of the people. Thus the student in this stage is not satisfied with his
own conquest of passion, but seeks after spiritual uplifting by means of
extending his kindness and sympathy to his fellow-men.

The fifth stage is called the Rank of Merit-over-Merit,\[l\] which means
the rank of meritless-merit. This is the rank of the King himself. The
King does nothing meritorious, because all the governmental works are
done by his ministers and subjects. All that he has to do is to keep his
inborn dignity and sit high on his throne. Therefore his conduct is
meritless, but all the meritorious acts of his subjects are done through
his authority. Doing nothing, he does everything. Without any merit, he
gets all merits. Thus the student in this stage no more strives to keep
precepts, but his doings are naturally in accord with them. No more he
aspires for spiritual elevation, but his, heart is naturally pure from
material desires. No more he makes an effort to vanquish his passion,
but no passion disturbs him. No more he feels it his duty to do good to
others, but he is naturally good and merciful. No more he sits in
Dhyana, but he naturally lives in Dhyana at all times. It is in this
fifth stage that the student is enabled to identify his Self with the
Mind-King or Enlightened Consciousness, and to abide in perfect bliss.

13\. **'The Ten Pictures of the Cowherd.'**\[2\]--Besides these Five
Ranks of Merit, Zenists make use of the Ten Pictures of the Cowherd, in
order to show the different stages of mental training through which the
student of Zen has to go. Some poems were written by Chinese and
Japanese teachers on each of these pictures by way

\[1. Ko-ko in Japanese.

2\. The pictures were drawn by Kwoh Ngan (Kaku-an), a Chinese Zenist.
For the details, see Zen-gaku-ho-ten.\]

of explanation, but they are too ambiguous to be translated into
English, and we rest content with the translation of a single Japanese
poem on each of the ten pictures, which are as follows:

The first picture, called 'the Searching of the Cow,' represents the
cowherd wandering in the wilderness with a vague hope of finding his
lost cow that is running wild out of his sight. The reader will notice
that the cow is likened to the mind of the student and the cowherd to
the student himself.

"I do not see my cow,  
But trees and grass,  
And hear the empty cries  
Of cicadas."

The second picture, called 'the Finding of the Cow's Tracks,' represents
the cowherd tracing the cow with the sure hope of restoring her, having
found her tracks on the ground.

"The grove is deep, and so  
Is my desire.  
How glad I am, O lo!  
I see her tracks."

The third picture, called 'the Finding out of the Cow,' represents the
cowherd slowly approaching the cow from a distance.

"Her loud and wild mooing  
Has led me here;  
I see her form afar,  
Like a dark shadow."

The fourth 'picture, called 'the Catching of the Cow,' represents the
cowherd catching hold of the cow, who struggles to break loose from him.

"Alas! it's hard to keep  
The cow I caught.  
She tries to run and leap  
And snap the cord."

The fifth picture, called 'the Taming of the Cow,' represents the
cowherd pacifying the cow, giving her grass and water.

"I'm glad the cow so wild  
Is tamed and mild.  
She follows me, as if  
She were my shadow."

The sixth picture, called 'the Going Home Riding on the Cow,' represents
the cowherd playing on a flute, riding on the cow.

"Slowly the clouds return  
To their own hill,  
Floating along the skies  
So calm and still.

The seventh picture, called 'the Forgetting of the Cow and the
Remembering of the Man,' represents the cowherd looking at the beautiful
scenery surrounding his cottage.

"The cow goes out by day  
And comes by night.  
I care for her in no way,  
But all is right."

The eighth picture, called 'the Forgetting of the Cow and of the Man,'
represents a large empty circle.

"There's no cowherd nor cow  
Within the pen;  
No moon of truth nor clouds  
Of doubt in men."

The ninth picture, called 'the Returning to the Root and Source,'
represents a beautiful landscape full of lovely trees in full blossom.

"There is no dyer of hills,  
Yet they are green;  
So flowers smile, and titter rills  
At their own wills."

The tenth picture, called 'the Going into the City with Open Hands,'
represents a smiling monk, gourd in hand, talking with a man who looks
like a pedlar.

"The cares for body make  
That body pine;  
Let go of cares and thoughts,  
O child of mine!"

These Ten Pictures of the Cowherd correspond in meaning to the Five
Ranks of Merit above stated, even if there is a slight difference, as is
shown in the following table:

<table data-border="0" width="638">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 50%" />
<col style="width: 50%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td data-valign="TOP" width="50%"><p>THE FIVE RANKS.</p></td>
<td data-valign="TOP" width="50%"><p>THE TEN PICTURES.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td data-valign="TOP" width="50%"><p>1. The Rank of Turning</p></td>
<td data-valign="TOP" width="50%"><p>1. The Searching of the Cow.<br />
2. The Finding of the Cow's Tracks.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td data-valign="TOP" width="50%"><p>2. The Rank of Service</p></td>
<td data-valign="TOP" width="50%"><p>3. The Finding of the Cow.<br />
4. The Catching of the Cow.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td data-valign="TOP" width="50%"><p>3. The Rank of Merit</p></td>
<td data-valign="TOP" width="50%"><p>5. The Taming of the Cow.<br />
6. The Going Home, Riding on the Cow.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td data-valign="TOP" width="50%"><p>4. The Rank of Co-operative Merit</p></td>
<td data-valign="TOP" width="50%"><p>9. The Returning to the Root and Source.<br />
10. The Going into the City with Open Hands.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td data-valign="TOP" width="50%"><p>5. The Rank of Merit-over-Merit</p></td>
<td data-valign="TOP" width="50%"><p>7. The Forgetting of the Cow and the Remembering of the Man.<br />
8. The Forgetting of the Cow and of the Man.</p></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

14\. **Zen and Nirvana.**--The beatitude of Zen is Nirvana, not in the
Hinayanistic sense of the term, but in the sense peculiar to the faith.
Nirvana literally means extinction or annihilation; hence the extinction
of life or the annihilation of individuality. To Zen, however, it means
the state of extinction of pain and the annihilation of sin. Zen never
looks for the realization of its beatitude in a place like heaven, nor
believes in the realm of Reality transcendental of the phenomenal
universe, nor gives countenance to the superstition of Immortality, nor
does it hold the world is the best of all possible worlds, nor conceives
life simply as blessing. It is in this life, full of shortcomings,
misery, and sufferings, that Zen hopes to realize its beatitude. It is
in this world, imperfect, changing, and moving, that Zen finds the
Divine Light it worships. It is in this phenomenal universe of
limitation and relativity that Zen aims to attain to highest Nirvana.
"We speak," says the author of Vimalakirtti-nirdeça-sutra, "of the
transitoriness of body, but not of the desire of the Nirvana or
destruction of it." "Paranirvana," according to the author of
Lankavatarasutra, "is neither death nor destruction, but bliss, freedom,
and purity." "Nirvana," says Kiai Hwan,\[1\]" means the extinction of
pain or the crossing over of the sea of life and death. It denotes the
real permanent state of spiritual attainment. It does not signify
destruction or annihilation. It denotes the belief in the great root of
life and spirit." It is Nirvana of Zen to enjoy bliss for all sufferings
of life. It is Nirvana of Zen to be serene in mind for all disturbances
of actual existence. It is Nirvana of Zen to be in the conscious union
with Universal Life or Buddha through Enlightenment.

15\. **Nature and her Lesson.**--Nature offers us nectar and ambrosia
every day, and everywhere we go the rose and lily await us. "Spring
visits us men," says Gu-do,\[2\] "her mercy is great. Every blossom
holds out the image of Tathagata." "What is the spiritual body of Buddha
who is immortal and divine?" asked a man to Ta Lun (Dai-ryu), who
instantly replied: "The flowers cover the mountain with golden brocade.
The waters tinge the rivulets with heavenly blue." "Universe is the
whole body of Tathagata; observed Do-gen. "The worlds in ten directions,
the earth, grass, trees, walls, fences, tiles, pebbles-in a word, all
the

\[1. A commentator of Saddharma-pundarika-sutra.

2\. One of the distinguished Zenists in the Tokugawa period, who died in
1661.\]

animated and inanimate objects partake of the Buddha-nature. Thereby,
those who partake in the benefit of the Wind and Water that rise out of
them are, all of them, helped by the mysterious influence of Buddha, and
show forth Enlightenment."\[1\]

Thus you can attain to highest bliss through your conscious union with
Buddha. Nothing can disturb your peace, when you can enjoy peace in the
midst of disturbances; nothing can cause you to suffer, when you welcome
misfortunes and hardships in order to train and strengthen your
character; nothing can tempt you to commit sin, when you are constantly
ready to listen to the sermon given by everything around you; nothing
can distress you, when you make the world the holy temple of Buddha.
This is the state of Nirvana which everyone believing in Buddha may
secure.

16\. **The Beatitude of Zen.**--We are far from denying, as already
shown in the foregoing chapters, the existence of troubles, pains,
diseases, sorrows, deaths in life. Our bliss consists in seeing the
fragrant rose of Divine mercy among the thorns of worldly trouble, in
finding the fair oasis of Buddha's wisdom in the desert of misfortunes,
in getting the wholesome balm of His love in the seeming poison of pain,
in gathering the sweet honey of His spirit even in the sting of horrible
death.

History testifies to the truth that it is misery that teaches men more
than happiness, that it is poverty that strengthens them more than
wealth, that it is adversity that moulds character more than prosperity,
that it is disease and death that call forth the inner life more than
health and long life. At least, no one can be blind to the fact that
good and evil have an equal share in forming the character and working
out the destiny of man. Even such a great pessimist as

\[1. Sho-bo gen-zo.\]

Schopenhauer says: "As our bodily frame would burst asunder if the
pressure of atmosphere were removed, so if the lives of men were
relieved of all need, hardship, and adversity, if everything they took
in hand were successful, they would be so swollen with arrogance . . .
that they would present the spectacle of unbridled folly. A ship without
ballast is unstable, and will not go straight." Therefore let us make
our ship of life go straight with its ballast of miseries and hardships,
over which we gain control.

The believer in Buddha is thankful to him, not only for the sunshine of
life, but also for its wind, rain, snow, thunder, and lightning, because
He gives us nothing in vain. Hisa-nobu (Ko-yama) was, perhaps, one of
the happiest persons that Japan ever produced, simply because he was
ever thankful to the Merciful One. One day he went out without an
umbrella and met with a shower. Hurrying up to go home, he stumbled and
fell, wounding both his legs. As he rose up, he was overheard to say:
"Thank heaven." And being asked why he was so thankful, replied: "I got
both my legs hurt, but, thank heaven, they were not broken." On another
occasion he lost consciousness, having been kicked violently by a wild
horse. When he came to himself, he exclaimed: "Thank heaven," in hearty
joy. Being asked the reason why he was so joyful, he answered: "I have
really given up my ghost, but, thank heaven, I have escaped death after
all."\[1\] A person in such a state of mind can do anything with heart
and might. Whatever he does is an act of thanks for the grace of Buddha,
and he does it, not as his duty, but as the overflowing of his gratitude
which lie himself cannot check. Here exists the formation of character.
Here exist real happiness and joy. Here exists the realization of
Nirvana.

\[1. Ki-jin-den.\]

Most people regard death as the greatest of evils, only because they
fear death. They fear death only because they have the instinct of
self-preservation. Hereupon pessimistic philosophy and religion propose
to attain to Nirvana by the extinction of Will-to-live, or by the total
annihilation of life. But this is as much as to propose death as the
final cure to a patient. Elie Metchnikoff proposes, in his 'Nature of
Man,' another cure, saying: 'If man could only contrive to live long
enough--say, for one hundred and forty years--a natural desire for
extinction would take the place of the instinct for self-preservation,
and the call of death would then harmoniously satisfy his legitimate
craving of a ripe old age.' Why, we must ask, do you trouble yourself so
much about death? Is there any instance of an individual who escaped it
in the whole history of mankind? If there be no way of escape, why do
you trouble yourself about it? Can you cause things to fall off the
earth against the law of gravitation? Is there any example of an
individual object that escaped the government of that law in the whole
history of the world? Why, then, do you trouble yourself about it? It is
no less silly to trouble yourself about death than you do about
gravitation. Can you realize that death, which you have yet no immediate
experience of, is the greatest of evil? We dare to declare death to be
one of the blessings which we have to be thankful for. Death is the
scavenger of the world; it sweeps away all uselessness, staleness, and
corruption from the world, and keeps life clean and ever now. When you
are of no use for the world it comes upon you, removes you to oblivion
in order to relieve life of useless encumbrance. The stream of existence
should be kept running, otherwise it would become putrid. If old lives
were to stop the running stream it would stand still, and consequently
become filthy, poisoned, and worthless. Suppose there were only births
and no deaths. The earth has to be packed with men and women, who are
doomed to live to all eternity, jostling, colliding, bumping, trampling
each other, and vainly struggling to get out of the Black Hole of the
earth. Thanks to death we are not in the Black Hole!

Only birth and no death is far worse than only death and no birth. "The
dead," says Chwang Tsz, "have no tyrannical king about, no slavish
subject to meet; no change of seasons overtakes them. The heaven and the
earth take the places of Spring and Autumn. The king or emperor of a
great nation cannot be happier than they." How would you be if death
should never overtake you when ugly decrepitude makes you blind and
deaf, bodily and mentally, and deprives you of all possible pleasures?
How would you be if you should not die when your body is broken to
pieces or terribly burned by an accident--say, by a violent earthquake
followed by a great conflagration? Just imagine Satan, immortal Satan,
thrown down by the ire of God into Hell's fiery gulf, rolling himself in
dreadful torture to the end of time. You cannot but conclude that it is
only death which relieves you of extreme sufferings, incurable diseases,
and it is one of the blessings you ought to be thankful for.

The believer of Buddha is thankful even for death itself, the which is
the sole means of conquering death. If he be thankful even for death,
how much more for the rest of things! He can find a meaning in every
form of life. He can perceive a blessing in every change of fortune. He
can acknowledge a mission for every individual. He can live in
contentment and joy under any conditions. Therefore Lin Tsi (Rin-zai)
says: "All the Buddhas might appear before me and I would not be glad.
All the Three Regions\[1\] and Hells might suddenly present themselves
before me, and I would not fear. . . . He (an Enlightened person)

\[1. (1) Naraka, or Hell; (2) Pretas, or hungry demons; (3) beasts.\]

might get into the fire, and it would not burn him. He might got into
water, and it would not drown him. He might be born in Hell, and he
would be happy as if he were in a fair garden. He might be born among
Pretas and beasts, and he would not suffer from pain. How can he be so?
Because be can enjoy everything."

\[1. Lin Tsi Luk (Rin-zai-roku).\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Appendix: Origin of Man: Preface](rosa11)
