[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](um04)  [Next](um06) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1878891014/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Unveiled Mysteries*, by Godfré Ray King, \[1934\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_1">p. 1</span>

# UNVEILED MYSTERIES

### CHAPTER I

### *Meeting the Master*

MOUNT SHASTA stood out boldly against the western sky, surrounded at its
base by a growth of pine and fir trees that made it look like a jewel of
diamond shining whiteness held in a filigree setting of green. Its snow
covered peaks glistened and changed color from moment to moment, as the
shadows lengthened in the sun's descent toward the horizon.

Rumor said there was a group of men, Divine men in Fact, called the
Brotherhood of Mount Shasta, who formed a branch of the Great White
Lodge, and that this Focus from very ancient times had continued
unbroken down to the present day.

I had been sent on government business to a little town situated at the
foot of the mountain, and while thus engaged occupied my leisure time
trying to unravel this rumor concerning The Brotherhood. I knew, through
travels in the Far East, that most rumors, myths, and legends have,
somewhere as their

<span id="page_2">p. 2</span>

origin, a deep underlying Truth that usually remains unrecognized by all
but those who are Real students of life.

I fell in love with Shasta and each morning, almost involuntarily,
saluted the Spirit of the Mountain and the Members of the Order. I
sensed something very unusual about the entire locality and, in the
light of the experiences that followed, I do not wonder that some of
them cast their shadows before.

Long hikes on the trail had become my habit, whenever I wanted to think
things out alone or make decisions of serious import. Here, on this
great giant of nature, I found recreation, inspiration, and peace that
soothed my soul and invigorated mind and body.

I had planned such a hike for pleasure as I thought, to spend some time
deep in the heart of the mountain, when the following experience entered
my life to change if so completely that I could almost believe I was on
another planet—but for my return to the usual routine in which I had
been engaged for months.

The morning in question, I started out at daybreak deciding to follow
where fancy led, and in a vague sort of way, asked God to direct my
path. By noon, I had climbed high up on the side of the mountain where
the view to the south was beautiful as a dream.

<span id="page_3">p. 3</span>

As the day advanced, it grew very warm and I stopped frequently to rest
and enjoy to the full the remarkable stretch of country around the
McCloud River, Valley, and town. It came time for lunch, and I sought a
mountain spring for clear, cold water. Cup in hand, I bent down to fill
it as an electrical current passed through my body from head to foot.

I looked around, and directly behind me stood a young man who, at first
glance, seemed to be someone on a hike like myself. I looked more
closely, and realized immediately that he was no ordinary person. As
this thought passed through my mind, he smiled and addressed me saying:

"My Brother, if you will hand me your cup, I will give you a much more
refreshing drink than spring water." I obeyed, and instantly the cup was
filled with a creamy liquid. Handing it back to me, he said:

"Drink it."

I did so and must have looked my astonishment for, while the taste was
delicious, the electrical vivifying effect in my mind and body made me
gasp with surprise. I did not see him put anything into the cup, and I
wondered what was happening.

"That which you drank," he explained, "comes directly from the Universal
Supply, pure and vivifying as Life Itself, in fact it is
Life—Omnipresent Life—for it exists everywhere about us. It is subject
to our

<span id="page_4">p. 4</span>

conscious control and direction, willingly obedient, when we Love
enough, because all the Universe obeys the behest of Love. Whatsoever I
desire manifests itself, when I command in Love. I held out the cup, and
that which I desired for you appeared.

"See! I have but to hold out my hand and, if I wish to use gold—gold is
here." Instantly, there lay in his palm a disc about the size of a ten
dollar gold piece. Again he continued:

"I see within you a certain Inner understanding of the Great Law but you
are not outwardly aware of It enough to produce that which you desire
direct from the Omnipresent Universal Supply. You have desired to see
something of this kind so intensely, so honestly, and so determinedly,
it could no longer be withheld from you.

"However, precipitation is one of the least important activities of the
Great Truth of Being. If your desire had not been free from selfishness
and the fascination of phenomena, such an experience could not have come
to you. When leaving home this morning, you thought you were coming on a
hike, that is, so far as the outer activity of your mind was concerned.
In the deeper—larger sense—you were really following the urge of your
Inner God Self that led to the person, place, and condition wherein your
most intense desire could be fulfilled.

"The Truth of Life is you cannot desire that which

<span id="page_5">p. 5</span>

is not possible of manifestation somewhere in the universe. The more
intense the feeling within the desire, the more quickly it will be
attained. However, if one is foolish enough to desire something that
will injure another of God's children or any other part of His Creation,
then that person will pay the penalty in discord and failure somewhere
in his own Life's experience.

"It is very important to realize fully that God's intent for every one
of His children is abundance of every good and perfect thing. He created
Perfection and endowed His children with exactly the same power. They
can create and maintain Perfection also and express God—dominion over
the earth and all that is therein. Mankind was originally created in the
Image: and Likeness of God. The only reason all do not manifest This
dominion is because they do not use their Divine Authority—that with
which each individual is endowed and by which he is intended to govern
his world. Thus, they are not obeying the Law of Love by pouring out
peace and blessing to all creation.

"This comes about through their failure to accept and acknowledge
themselves—Temples of the Most High Living God—and to hold this
acknowledgment with eternal recognition. Humanity—in its present seeming
limitation of time, space, and activity—is in the same condition a
person in need

<span id="page_6">p. 6</span>

would be to whom some one held out a handful of money. If the needing
one did not step forward and accept the money held out to him—how in the
world could he ever have the benefit—which it could bring.

"The mass of mankind is in exactly this state of consciousness today—and
will continue in it—until they accept the God within their hearts as—the
Owner—Giver—and Doer—of all the Good—that has ever come into their lives
and world.

"The personal self of every individual must acknowledge completely and
unconditionally that the human or outer activity of consciousness—has
absolutely—nothing—of its own. Even the energy—by which one recognizes
the Great God Within—is radiated into the personal self—by the Great God
Self.

"Love and praise—of That Great Self Within—and the attention maintained
focused upon Truth—health—freedom—peace—supply—or any other thing that
you may desire for a right use—persistently held in your conscious
thought and feeling—will bring them into your use and world—as surely as
there is a Great Law of Magnetic Attraction in the Universe.

"The Eternal Law of Life is that—'Whatever you think and feel you bring
into form; where your thought is there you are—for you are your
consciousness; and whatever you meditate upon—you become.'

"When one allows his mind to dwell upon thoughts

<span id="page_7">p. 7</span>

of hate—condemnation—lust—envy—jealousy—criticism—fear—doubt—or
suspicion—and allows these feelings of irritation to generate within
him—he will certainly have discord, failure and disaster in his mind,
body and world. As long as he persists in allowing his attention to be
held by such thoughts—whether they be about
nations—persons—places—conditions—or things—he is absorbing those
activities into the substance of his mind, his body, and his affairs—in
fact he is compelling—forcing—them into his experience.

"All these discordant activities reach the individual and his
world—through his thought and feeling. Feeling often flashes before one
is aware of the thought—in the outer consciousness—which he might use to
control it, and this kind of experience should teach him—how great is
the energy within his many creations—which has accumulated through
habit.

"The feeling activity of Life is the most unguarded point—of human
consciousness. It is the accumulative energy by which thoughts are
propelled into the atomic substance, and thus—do thoughts become things.
I tell you—the need of guarding the feeling cannot be emphasized too
strongly for control of the emotions plays the most important part of
anything in Life, in maintaining—balance in the mind—health in the
body-success and accomplishment in the affairs and world of the personal
self of every individual.

<span id="page_8">p. 8</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Thoughts can never
become things—until they are clothed with feeling.

"The Holy Ghost or Holy Spirit is the feeling side of Life—God—the
Activity of Divine Love—or the Mother Expression of Deity. This is why
the sin against the Holy Ghost is referred to—as that which brings such
great distress—because any discord in the feeling breaks the Law of
Love—which is the Law of Balance—Harmony—and Perfection.

"The greatest crime in the Universe against the Law of Love is
humanity's almost ceaseless sending forth—of every kind of irritable and
destructive feeling.

"One day the race will come to realize and recognize—that the sinister
destructive forces manifesting on this earth and in its
atmosphere—generated mark you by human thought and feeling—have only
entered the affairs of individuals or nations—through the lack of
control in the emotions—of everyone's—daily personal experience. Even
destructive thoughts—cannot express themselves as action, events, or
become physical things—except by passing through the world of feeling;
for it is in this phase of manifestation—that the activity of
[coalescing](errata.htm#0) the physical atom upon thought forms takes
place.

"As the noise from a sudden explosion shocks the nervous system of one
who hears it—setting up a trembling sensation in the cellular structure
of the

<span id="page_9">p. 9</span>

body—in exactly the same way—do the flares of irritated feeling
shock—disturb—and disarrange the finer substance in the atomic structure
of the mind, body, and world of the person who sends them
out—consciously or unconsciously—intentionally or unintentionally.

"Discordant feeling is the producer of conditions we call
disintegration—old age—lack of memory—and every other failure—in the
world of human experience. The effect upon the body structure is the
same as that produced upon a building—if the mortar holding the bricks
together were to receive repeated shocks, and each day those were to be
increased. This continued shock would shake apart the particles
composing the mortar—the building would collapse into a chaotic mass—and
the form be no more.

"That is what mankind is—constantly—doing to the atomic structure of the
human body.

"To give expression to the discordant thoughts and feelings in one's
self is the course of least resistance, and the habitual activity of the
undeveloped—undisciplined—and wilful individual—who refuses to
understand the 'Law of his own Being' and bring the personal self—which
is but his instrument of expression—into obedience to 'That Law.'

"He—who cannot or will not control his thoughts and feelings—is in a bad
way—for every door of his consciousness is wide open to the
disintegrating activities—

<span id="page_10">p. 10</span>

thrown off by other minds and the emotions of other personalities. It
takes neither strength, wisdom nor training to give way to unkind,
destructive impulses, and the full-grown human beings who do this are
but children—in their development of self-control.

"It is a blight upon the Life of mankind that so little control of the
emotions is taught humanity from the cradle to the grave. Attention to
this particular point is the greatest need—in the Western world today.
It is easy to give way to discordant thoughts, feelings, and activities
to be sure—because the mass of mankind are submerged as it were—by
environment and association entirely created by themselves.

"The individual—through his control of the outer consciousness—must make
the effort to rise out of this condition by his own free will—in order
to transcend these limitations—permanently—and no one can hope to rid
his life and world of misery, discord, and destruction—until he leashes
his own thought and feeling. In this way—he refuses to let the
Life—flowing through his mind and body—become qualified by the
discord—resulting from every little disturbing occurrence in the world
about him.

"At first—such discipline does require determined, continuous effort—for
the thoughts and feelings—of ninety-five per cent of humanity—run as
uncontrolled and free—as a little tramp dog.

<span id="page_11">p. 11</span>

"However—no matter how much effort it takes to bring these two
activities under control—it is worth any amount of time and energy
expended—and no Real—Permanent—Dominion—of one's Life and world can take
place without it. It will be my pleasure and privilege to teach you the
use of these Higher Laws, and their application will enable you to
release True Wisdom and bring about All Perfection.

"The first step to the control of yourself—is the stilling of all outer
activity—of both mind and body. Fifteen to thirty minutes—at night
before retiring and in the morning before beginning the day's work—using
the following exercise—will do wonders for anyone—who will make the
necessary effort.

"For the second step:—make certain of being undisturbed, and after
becoming very still—picture and feel your body enveloped in a Dazzling
White Light. The first five minutes—while holding this
picture—recognize—and feel intensely—the connection between the outer
self and Your Mighty God Within—focusing your attention upon the heart
center—and visualizing it—as a Golden Sun.

"The next step is the acknowledgment:—'I now joyously accept—the Fulness
of the Mighty God Presence—the Pure Christ.' Feel—the Great Brilliancy
of the 'Light' and intensify It—in every cell of your body for at least
ten minutes longer.

<span id="page_12">p. 12</span>

"Then close the meditation by the command:—*I am a Child of the
'Light'—I Love the 'Light'—I Serve the 'Light'—I Live in the 'Light'—I
am Protected, Illumined, Supplied, Sustained by the 'Light,' and I Bless
the 'Light'*.

"Remember always—'One becomes—*that*—upon which he meditates'—and since
all things have come forth from the 'Light'—'Light'—is the Supreme
Perfection—and Control—of all things.

"Contemplation and adoration of the 'Light' compels Illumination to take
place in the mind—health, strength, and order to come into the body—and
peace, harmony, and success to manifest in the affairs of every
individual—who will really do it, and seeks to maintain it.

"All the way down the centuries—in every age, under every condition—we
are told by all who have expressed the greater accomplishments of Life
that—the 'Light' is Supreme—the 'Light' is everywhere—and in the
'Light'—exist all things.

"That Truth is just as true today as it was a million years ago. As far
back as there is any record of humanity, the Wise and Great Ones of all
ages are portrayed with a radiation of 'Light' about them—emanating from
the head and body itself.

"This 'Light' is Real—just as Real as the electric lights in your homes.
The day is not far distant—when machines will be constructed to reveal
the

<span id="page_13">p. 13</span>

emanation of—'Light' about every individual—to the physical sight of any
one—who cares to observe it. Such a machine—will also show the
contamination—or discoloration—that becomes a cloud around the—'Light'
of God—which the personal self generates—through discordant thought and
feeling. This—and this only—is the way by which the energy—of the Great
Life Stream—becomes polluted.

"If you will practice this exercise faithfully and—feel it in every atom
of your mind and body—with deep, deep intensity—you will receive
abundant proof—of the Tremendous Activity, Power, and Perfection—that
abides and is forever active—within the 'Light.' When you have
experienced this—for even a short time—you will need no further proof.
You become your own proof. The 'Light' is—The Kingdom. Enter into It and
BE—at peace. Return to the Father's house. After the first ten days of
using—this exercise—it is well to do it three times a day—morning, noon,
and night.

"We often hear the complaint: 'Oh! I cannot give all that time.' To any
who are of that opinion, I wish to say simply this:

"The time the average person spends in criticising, condemning, and
blaming—people, conditions, and things—for not being something other
than they are—if occupied with this recognition and use of the
'Light'—will make heaven manifest on earth—for

<span id="page_14">p. 14</span>

the individual who dares to try and has determination enough to maintain
it. Nothing is impossible. The 'Light' never fails.

"The 'Light' is God's Way of creating and maintaining Order, Peace, and
Perfection throughout His Creation. Every human being on this earth can
have all the time he wants in which to do this—when his desire to do it
is intense enough. The intensity—in the desire itself—will re-order the
world of people, conditions, and things so as to provide that time—if he
earnestly wishes to use it for his upward climb. No person in the world
is an exception to—That Law—for the intense desire to do anything
constructive—when it becomes intense enough—is the God-Power that
releases the energy necessary to create and express the thing desired.

"Everyone has the same supreme privilege of contact—with the
All-Powerful Presence of God—and it is the Only Power that—ever did—does
now—or ever will—raise the personal self and its world—above earthly
discord and limitation.

"My Beloved Son, try this with great determination and know—God in You
is Your Certain Victory."

As his discourse ended, I began to realize—that he must be one of the
Ascended Masters—for he had not only given me proof of his Dominion over
the elements by precipitation—but had instructed and

<span id="page_15">p. 15</span>

explained—as he did it. I sat wondering how it was—that he knew me.

"My Son," he said, answering my thought at once, "I have known you for
æons. In raising your thought—by your own conscious effort—it made my
coming to you possible at this time. While I have always been in touch
with you, when we were both in our finer bodies—your conscious effort of
reaching out to some one of the Ascended Masters—opened the way for me
to come to you in a much more tangible way—that is—tangible to your
physical senses.

"I see you do not quite recognize me—in your outer consciousness. I was
present during your birth, at your mother's passing, and was
instrumental in bringing you and Lotus together—at the right time—that
your attainment might not be delayed. Again—I assisted—in bringing you
and your son into association—in this embodiment. However, be patient:

"Sit still a few moments—watch me closely—and I will reveal my identity
to you." I did as he requested and—in perhaps a full minute, I saw his
face—body—and clothing—become the
living—breathing—tangible—"Presence"—of the Master, Saint Germain,
smiling at my astonishment and enjoying my surprise.

He stood there before me—a Magnificent Godlike figure—in a white jeweled
robe—a Light and

<span id="page_16">p. 16</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Love sparkling in
his eyes—that revealed and proved—the Dominion and Majesty that is his.

"This," he explained, "is the body in which I work a great deal of the
time—when occupied with the welfare of mankind—unless the work I am
doing at the moment—requires closer contact with the outer world of
affairs, and in that case—I make my body take on the characteristics and
dress—of the nation with which I am working at the moment.

"Oh!" I exclaimed, "now, I know you—for I have seen you many times
like—that—at the Inner levels of consciousness."

"My Son," he explained, "do you not see—what Real Mastery—actually is?
We—in the Ascended State—can control the atomic structure of our
world—as a potter controls his clay. Every electron and atom in the
universe—is obedient—to our desire and command because of the God Power
by which we control it and of which—we have earned the right—to be the
Directors.

"Mankind in the unascended state marvel at these things—but I tell
you—it is no more effort—for us to change the appearance and activity of
our bodies—than it is for the ordinary human being—to change his
clothes. The unfortunate condition in human consciousness—that keeps
individuals in their self-created limitations—is their attitude of
mind—which either fears or ridicules—what it does not understand—

<span id="page_17">p. 17</span>

or what is still worse—in its ignorance says—'That is impossible.' A
thing may not be probable—under certain human conditions—but the
God-Self—which is the Great 'Light'—can change all human conditions—so
nothing is—impossible.

"Every individual has the Divine Flame of Life Within him, and—That
God-part of him—has Dominion—wherever he moves in the universe. If
he—because of his own mental inertia—will not exert the necessary
effort—to reorder his age old habits—of mind and body—he goes on bound
by the chains of his own forging—but if he chooses to know the God
Within himself—and dares—to give that God-Self—all control of his outer
activities—he will receive the knowledge once more of his Dominion over
all substance—which has been his from the beginning.

"The time has arrived, when many of humanity are rapidly awakening, and
they must—in some way be made to understand—that they have lived
again—and again—in hundreds—sometimes thousands of lives—each time in a
new physical body.

"The Law of re-embodiment—is the activity in human growth—that gives the
individual an opportunity to re-establish a balance—in conditions that
he has—consciously—caused to be thrown out of balance. It is but—one
activity—of the law of compensation—cause and effect—or what might be
called—an Automatic Balancing process—governing all forces—

<span id="page_18">p. 18</span>

everywhere in the universe. The right understanding of—this Law—gives
one the explanation of many conditions—in human experience—which
otherwise seem wholly unjust. It is the—only—logical—explanation for the
infinite complexities and experiences of human creation, and reveals—the
operation and the Law—upon which all manifestation rests. It makes
one—know that there is no such thing as—chance—or accident. All is under
direct, exact, and Perfect Law. Every experience of consciousness—has a
former cause, and everything at the same instant is the cause—of a
future effect.

"If a man has injured a woman in one life, he is certain to be
reincarnated in a feminine form and pass through a similar
experience—until he realizes and experiences—that—which he has caused
another to endure. The same thing is true—if a woman be unjust or
injures a man. This is the only way by which one is compelled—or rather
compels himself—to experience both the cause and effect of
everything—which he generates in his world. The individual can create
and experience—whatsoever he will in his own world—but if he chooses to
do that which causes others to experience discord, then he—compels
himself—to go through a similar condition—until he understands—what the
effect of his own creation is—upon the rest of the Life of the universe.

"Come with me, and we will review the physical

<span id="page_19">p. 19</span>

life in which you used a feminine form in France—wherein you were a
singer of splendid accomplishment with a voice of rare beauty and
power."

Immediately—without the least effort on my part—I stood outside my
physical body—seeing it clearly—as it reposed upon the ground. I
wondered, if it would be safe there on the mountainside, and in answer
to my thought, Saint Germain replied:

"Do not be disturbed. Not a thing in the world can harm your body—while
we are away. Observe!"

Instantly, I saw it surrounded by a White Flame—forming a circle about
fifty feet in diameter.

He placed his right arm around me, and I saw—we were rising rapidly from
the ground—but I soon became adjusted to his vibratory action. There was
no definite feeling of motion through space, but presently—we looked
down upon a village in the south of France, and he continued:

"Here, you were born as an only child—the daughter of a beautiful woman,
whose life was an example of Idealism far in advance of the majority in
that period. Your father was a most devoted husband and companion,
highly cultured, and inspired by the early Christian Spirit.

"The atmospheric ether of every environment records all that has ever
transpired—in that locality. I will revivify—these Etheric Records—and
you shall see—living pictures—giving every detail of your life.

<span id="page_20">p. 20</span>

"You sang at the church of this village and studied with a teacher, who
persuaded your parents to let her give you training. You made rapid
progress, and then received still greater advantages, when they moved to
Paris. After a year of intensive study, an opportunity came to sing
before the Queen of France, and through her patronage you had
appearances at many of her salons. This assured you a successful musical
career. France and success lavished their gifts upon you for the next
five years, and you accumulated much wealth.

"Suddenly, both parents passed through the change called death, and the
shock to you, was very great, followed by many weeks of serious illness.
When you recovered and returned again to concert work, a new sympathetic
quality had come into your voice, through the recent experience of
grief.

"A man, who had guided much of your musical study, became director of
your public work, and you came to depend upon him as one who seemed
worthy of trust. Then followed fourteen years of brilliant success, at
the end of which you became suddenly ill and passed on within a week.
Your jewels and wealth were left in care of the director to be used to
help others, and to fulfill certain plans for which you had worked all
your life. The last rites were no sooner over, than a complete change
took place within him. Greed took possession entirely. Now, I shall show

<span id="page_21">p. 21</span>

you that man whom you met some years ago here in America in your present
life. The incident in business, I am quite sure you remember clearly."

Here, he showed me a business association in which I had tried to help
several people while in the West some ten years previously, in
connection with a representative from the Belgian government.

"That man," he continued, "was given a chance here to right the wrong he
did you in France. He was shown the condition, and knew full well the
situation for we showed it to him, but he was not yet strong enough to
permit the working out of the Great Cosmic Law of Justice and balance
that debt. If he had done so of his own volition, it would have given
him freedom in many ways and enabled him to have progressed much more
rapidly in this embodiment."

Thus, does the outer life keep the individual bound to the wheel of
necessity, rebirth, continued struggle, and pain until we—let—the "Light
of the Christ Within"—illumine and purify us that we may respond only to
the Plan of God—Love, Peace, and Perfection for His Creation. This is
the kind of lesson—one never forgets—because objective teaching records
the experience in the—vision—as well as in the mind. The record in the
sight is deeper and—necessarily receives more attention—from the outer
activity of the intellect.

<span id="page_22">p. 22</span>

The essence of that long forgotten experience certainly fixed itself in
my memory—permanently—for I can recall every detail of it to this day,
as clearly as when I observed it with him.

"Now," he went on, "we will recall another of your embodiments—one that
you had in Egypt."

We rose from the earth, and moved rapidly forward. I was very conscious
of the Mediterranean, as we passed over its beautiful waters. We went on
to Karnak and Luxor—then again came into contact with the earth.

"Watch closely," he said. "This record is of a very ancient temple in
Luxor—not among those whose ruins the archæologists are exploring today
but one antedating any that have been discovered so far. If they knew
where to look—they would find magnificent temples in a state of almost
perfect preservation."

Indicating a certain spot filled with ruins—which is all that travellers
can see today—the scene became replaced by the activity in the ether, as
it had originally been—in all its beauty and splendor—far more
magnificent than anything of which the present generation has any
concept.

The gardens and pools were surrounded by great pillars of white marble
and rose granite. The entire locality became Living—Real—Vibrant—and
just as tangible as any physical city on earth today. It was

<span id="page_23">p. 23</span>

so perfectly natural and normal that I asked—how he made these
experiences so vivid?

"Man and his creations," he replied, "as well as Nature, have an etheric
counterpart—a pattern—which makes its eternal impression upon the
atmosphere about him—wherever he goes. The pattern of the individual's
activity and life experience is—within his own aura all the time. A
similar record exists in the aura of every locality. An Ascended Master
may—if he chooses revivify or reclothe the individual's record of former
activities—wherever that person happens to be—for the pattern upon which
the Master coalesces the atomic structure—is always in the aura of that
individual. When the Master reclothes—the record of a locality—he must
do it in the same specific place—for such a record, when
reclothed—becomes the same living form and structure—that it was—when
first built in physical substance.

"In this way—it is possible to coalesce again the physical structure of
entire buildings—and their surroundings—when the Ascended Master so
desires—for the accomplishment of some good purpose. When one has
attained this God-Given Dominion—he can and does—reclothe and
reanimate—any Etheric Record he desires to make visible—for the
instruction and benefit of students and others.

"When he does this—it is as Real as Reality Itself—

<span id="page_24">p. 24</span>

and the reclothed objects can be photographed, handled and made
physically tangible—to the physical senses of the one observing them.

"Notice!" he reminded me, "you are experiencing these activities in your
finer body—but they are none the less—Real—because of that—for your
physical body is only a garment which you—the
Self-Conscious—thinking—and experiencing individual, wear.

"It is the same as though you wore a heavy overcoat in the cold winter
atmosphere and only a light suit of clothes on a very warm summer day.
Experiences in your light suit of clothes—would surely be no
less—Real—than those you lived through in your heavy overcoat. I call
this to your attention, that you may understand—the fuller—and less
limited—activities of Life." We examined the grounds, the surrounding
country, and architecture.

"Come, let us enter," he said, and as he spoke, stepped forward and
passed through the main entrance into the temple itself. We then became
living actors and—at the same time observers—of the following
experience. We passed into the main part of the temple, and proceeded
toward the Inner Sanctuary. The High Priest came directly up to us, and
seemed to know me.

"This priest of ancient days," Saint Germain explained, "is now your
son." A lesser priest appeared

<span id="page_25">p. 25</span>

whom I immediately felt I knew, and he remarked:

"The assisting priest was yourself." We entered the Inner Sanctuary and
saw the vestal virgin guarding the—Sacred Fire. She—whom I now beheld
was Lotus—my beloved Twin Ray—whom I met and married some years ago
and—who is the mother of our son.

The scene changed—and we saw a visiting prince from a distant
province—plan to seize the vestal virgin for his bride. All seemed to go
well, until the High Priest was shown a vision—of what was about to take
place. It disturbed him—but he kept his own counsel.

Standing guard—as the slaves of the prince entered—he watched them
approach the Sanctuary. As they came nearer—he stepped forward and spoke
but one word, that meant

"Stop!"

One slave—bolder than the rest—came on. The High Priest warned him
back—but still he came nearer. When he reached a certain Sacred Circle
of force—which emanated from the Altar—the priest no longer hesitated.
He stepped to the outer-edge of that Protecting Radiance—raised his
right hand—and pointed directly at the slave.

A flash of Flame shot forth like lightning—and the slave fell lifeless
to the floor. The prince, who was watching, came forward—in an insane
rage.

<span id="page_26">p. 26</span>

"Stop!" commanded the priest again—in a voice like a clap of thunder.
The prince hesitated for a moment—stunned by the very power of the
word—and the priest continued:

"Listen to me! You shall—not—desecrate the highest of God's Gifts—to the
Temple of Life. Begone! before you follow the example—of your too brazen
and misdirected slave."

The High Priest was fully conscious—of the power he could wield and—as
he stood watching the prince—he was the very embodiment of
self-control—of Illimitable force—consciously held in obedience to his
will. He was Majesty—crowned with Eternal Power.

The will of the prince was powerful also—but he had no control over
himself and—as another wave of blind rage swept over him—when he found
himself again opposed—and giving full vent to lust—he rushed forward.

The priest—quick as a flash—raised his hand. The Flame flashed out a
second time—and the prince followed the fate of his former slave.

Saint Germain turned to me, and explained the experience still farther.

"You see," he began, "that is the way the quality within every
force—reacts—upon the one who sends it out. The prince and his slave
came with the qualities of hate, selfishness, and depravity within their
feelings and—when the priest directed the force—of

<span id="page_27">p. 27</span>

which he was the master—toward them—it took on their qualities—the
moment it touched their auras. He merely turned their own feelings and
selfishness—back upon themselves. The priest—in his unselfish effort to
protect another—was himself also protected."

That incident closed, the scene of splendor vanished, and again we stood
amidst the temple ruins. Saint Germain revealed still more to me, which
may not be recorded here.

"There is only one way," he went on, "to avoid the cosmic wheel of cause
and effect—the necessity for re-embodiment—and that is through the
conscious effort to comprehend—the Law of Life. One must earnestly seek
the God Within—make permanent, conscious contact with that 'Inner
Self'—and hold firmly to it—in the face of every condition in the outer
life. It will be my pleasure and privilege to show you more—but only for
the instruction it will bring—to yourself and others. Come! We must now
return." As we came near my body, he instructed again:

"Watch the circle of White Flame disappear!" I looked—it vanished—and a
moment later I was back in my body. The sun was sinking, and I knew it
would be nearly midnight by the time we arrived home.

"Place your arm about my shoulder," said Saint

<span id="page_28">p. 28</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Germain, "and
close your eyes." I felt my body lifted from the ground, but I was not
particularly conscious of moving forward. Presently, my feet touched the
floor and opening my eyes—I stood in the lodge. Saint Germain was
greatly amused, when I asked—how it was that we could come back in this
manner without attracting the attention of the people about us—and he
answered;

"We many times draw about our bodies the cloak of invisibility, when
moving among those in physical form," and the next second he was gone.

I had heard of the Great Ascended Masters who could take their bodies
with them wherever they go, and manifest—or bring into visibility
anything they desire to use—direct from the Universal. However, to
actually experience contact with one of them was a very different thing,
and I tried to realize in full the marvel of the experience. To Saint
Germain, it was evidently a most ordinary occurrence.

I sat in quiet contemplation for a long time in deep, deep
gratitude—trying to comprehend—and fully realize his explanation of—"The
Law"—concerning desire. He emphasized its importance and activity as a
motive power in the universe, to propel forward new ideas—compelling an
expansion of consciousness to take place within the Life of every
individual. He had explained it by saying:

"Constructive Desire is the expanding activity

<span id="page_29">p. 29</span>

within Life—for it is only in this way—that greater and greater ideas,
activity, and accomplishment are pushed through—into expression in the
outer world of substance and form. Within every—Right Desire—is the
power of its fulfillment. Man is the Son of God. He is commanded—by the
Father—to choose how he shall direct the—Life energy—and what quality he
wishes his fulfilled desire to express. This he—must—do for free will is
his birthright.

"It is the function—of the outer activity of the intellect—to
guide—all—expansion into constructive channels. This is the purpose and
duty—of the outer self. To allow the Great Life, or God Energy, to be
used only for the gratification of the sense desires—the habit of the
mass of mankind—is its destructive use and is always—without any
exception—followed by inharmony, weakness, failure, and destruction.

"The constructive use of desire is—the conscious direction—of this
limitless God Energy—by Wisdom. All desire directed—by Wisdom—carries
some kind of blessing to the rest of creation. All desire—directed by
the God Within—goes forth with the feeling of Love and blesses always."
The next few days, I spent writing this record of my experiences. Then
one morning on awakening I found a golden card lying on the table near
my couch. It looked like a piece of metallic gold and on it in beautiful
shaded script of a lovely violet color—was just one short sentence:

<span id="page_30">p. 30</span>

"Be at our trysting place on the mountain at seven in the morning,"
signed, "Saint Germain."

I put this card away carefully, and could scarcely wait the intervening
time—so great was my expectancy. Early the next morning, while preparing
a lunch, there came a distinct impulse—not to take anything with me. I
obeyed, and decided—to trust—that my needs would be supplied directly
from the Universal.

Light of heart, I was soon on my way, determined not to miss any
opportunity to ask questions—if permitted. As I approached the appointed
place—my body became lighter and lighter—until by the time I was within
a quarter of a mile—my feet scarcely touched the ground. There was no
one in sight, so I sat down on a log to wait for Saint Germain—feeling
no fatigue whatsoever—although my hike had been about ten miles.

As I contemplated the wonderful privilege and blessing that had come to
me, I heard a twig crack and looked around expecting to see him. Imagine
my surprise, when not fifty feet away, I saw a panther—slowly
approaching. My hair must have stood on end. I wanted to run—to
scream—anything—so frantic was the feeling of fear within me. It would
have been useless to move for one spring from the panther would have
been fatal to me.

My brain whirled so great was my fear—but one

<span id="page_31">p. 31</span>

idea came through clearly—and held my attention steady. I realized—that
I had the Mighty "Presence of God" right within me and—that this
"Presence" was all Love. This beautiful animal was a part of God's Life
also, and I made myself—look at it—directly in the eyes. Then came the
thought that—one part of God could not harm another part—and I was
conscious of this fact only.

A feeling of Love swept over me, and went out—like a Ray of
Light—directly to the panther—and with it went my fear. The stealthy
tread ceased—and I moved slowly toward it—feeling that God's Love filled
us both. The vicious glare in the eyes softened—the animal straightened
up—and came slowly to me, rubbing its shoulder against my leg. I reached
down and stroked the soft head. It looked up into my eyes for a moment
and then, laid down and rolled over like a playful kitten. The fur was a
beautiful, dark, reddish brown, the body long, supple and of great
strength. I continued to play with it and when I suddenly looked up,
Saint Germain stood beside me.

"My Son," he said, "I saw the great strength within you or—I would not
have permitted so great a test. You have conquered—fear. My
congratulations! Had you not conquered the outer self, I would not have
allowed the panther to harm you—but our association would have
ceased—for a time.

<span id="page_32">p. 32</span>

"I did not have anything to do with the panther being there. It was
part—of the Inner operation—of the Great Law—as you will see before the
association with your new found friend ceases. Now, that you have passed
the test of courage, it is possible for me to give—much
greater—assistance. Each day you will become stronger, happier, and
express much, greater freedom."

He held out his hand, and in a moment there appeared four little cakes
of a beautiful golden brown—each about two inches square. He offered
these and I ate them at his direction. They were most delicious.
Immediately—I felt a quickening, tingling sensation through my entire
body—a new sense of health and clearness of mind. Saint Germain seated
himself beside me and my instruction began.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter II. The Sahara Desert](um06)
