[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](um06)  [Next](um08) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1878891014/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Unveiled Mysteries*, by Godfré Ray King, \[1934\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_73">p. 73</span>

### CHAPTER III

### *The Royal Teton*

FOUR days passed without any unusual occurrence, and I tried to realize
fully the deeper significance of my recent experiences. It was just
growing dark on the evening of the fifth day, when there was a sound of
tapping on the window of my room. I looked out, and on the window sill
stood a snow white dove—with a tiny card in its mouth.

I stepped to the window and opened it. The dove walked in and—stood
calmly waiting. I took the card and read the message—which was written
in the same beautiful script—as the previous one—but this time in gold
ink—on a white card. On it were the words:

"Be at our meeting place at seven in the morning," signed, "Saint
Germain."

As soon as I had taken the card—the dove flew to my shoulder and rubbed
its head against my face—as if conveying a message of love—flew again to
the window, and was gone like an arrow. I put the card away carefully,
hoping it would remain, but the next morning as I looked for it before
starting on my hike—it had been dissolved. The golden card, on which the
first message was written, had lasted

<span id="page_74">p. 74</span>

into the third day for I looked at it several times, hoping I could keep
it permanently. When I found it had been returned to the universal my
heart sank, so great was my disappointment.

To make the hike of ten miles and be there at seven in the morning, I
knew would make it necessary for me to leave shortly after midnight. I
arose early, and was on my way at three o'clock. By walking rapidly, I
reached the forest just at daybreak. I had not gone far—until a
plaintive cry came to my ears. Before realizing it, I answered in the
same tone—so involuntary was my response. There was a rush of something
through the timber and my friend—the panther—bounded toward me, the very
embodiment of joy. I patted it and together we proceeded on our way to
the meeting place.

Promptly at seven o'clock, Saint Germain stepped—right out of the
atmosphere—greeting me with open arms. Again, he handed me the crystal
cup—filled this time with a clear—sparkling liquid. I drank it—and the
taste was not like anything I had ever physically experienced before. It
was almost like the juice of grape-fruit iced—but sparkling and
effervescing. The moment I drank it—a sensation like lightning went
through my body—carrying the feeling of its sparkling activity—into
every vein.

Saint Germain—then gave the panther a little brown cake—which it quickly
devoured. In a

<span id="page_75">p. 75</span>

moment its hair stood straight up—and he remarked:

"Your friend will never again kill deer."

"For the coming experience and instruction—it will be necessary to leave
your body here on the mountain side—because you have not yet called
forth the—Inner Power—enough to enable you to take it where we are going
today. The panther will be the guard for you and as an extra
precaution—I will place the cloak—of invisibility—around both. We will
go to the Royal Teton.

"Come."

Instantly—I stood out in my finer body—clothed in a rich garment—of
self-luminous, golden fabric.

"Observe carefully—the material in which you are clothed," he continued.
"The substance composing the garment you wear has certain, extraordinary
qualities and powers of its own—one of which is to enable its wearer—to
lift and transport physical objects. The garment itself—possesses pure
electronic energy, and can be used to move objects—the same as the force
one uses through his physical body. This is a phenomenal activity
that—the Great Masters of Light—have given permission to be used—for the
first time, on this planet."

For the benefit of my readers, I want to state clearly and unmistakably,
that—while I was clothed in a body which did function in four dimensions
during these experiences—yet it gave me the ability to feel

<span id="page_76">p. 76</span>

and handle solid objects in the physical world—the same as every one can
do in his own physical body. The body I used this time was—not—that
which is sometimes called—the astral body.

We soon reached the top of a majestic mountain that stands sentinel over
one of the most beautiful scenic belts in the United States. Vast
forests lay beneath us, and great ranges of mountains, with their
treasures of mineral wealth still untouched, stretched as far as the eye
could see.

Going to a point where huge masses of stone lay in confusion, as if
giants had hurled them in a war upon each other, Saint Germain touched a
great boulder. Instantly, the enormous mass tipped out perhaps four feet
away from its original position. He motioned me to follow. We entered
and, to my astonishment, stood before a large bronze door.

"This has been here since before the sinking of Atlantis—more than
twelve thousand years ago," he explained.

He stepped forward and pressed certain points on the door. The great
mass of bronze weighing many tons swung slowly open, and admitted us
into a spacious chamber from which a stairway, cut in the solid rock,
led downward. We descended some two hundred feet, and entered another
space—circular in shape. Saint Germain stepped across the room to a door
opposite the stairs, and placed his right hand

<span id="page_77">p. 77</span>

against it. As it opened, we stood before the entrance of a tube
elevator. The interior looked like frosted silver—and in answer to my
thought, he said:

"Yes, but harder and stronger than steel and—indestructible." A flat
disc of the same metal, fitting the tube quite closely, rose within it
to the level of the floor. The platform was controlled and
operated—entirely—by the Master. He stepped upon it, and I followed. The
door closed, and we began to descend. It was a long way down, although
we did not move rapidly. The platform came to a stop at another bronze
door of entirely different design.

"We have descended two thousand feet into the very heart of the
mountain," he commented, as we stepped out of the tube.

The space in which we stood was of peculiar design and arrangement. It
formed an oblong from east to west—whose northeast and northwest corners
had been cut on an angle. This formed an outer court or reception room.
The heavy bronze door from the tube elevator opened into the court on
the northeast wall.

In the north side were two other large bronze doors exactly alike,
entering into a great audience hall. On the northwest wall was still
another, a fourth door, like the one through which we had come in.
Opposite on the long unbroken stretch of the south wall, hung an immense
tapestry.

<span id="page_78">p. 78</span>

It was made of most unusual material and, while the weave was coarse,
yet the thread or fiber was as soft—as camel's hair. The background was
of a delicate cream color and against this were two life-sized
figures—representing—God Beings—of Great Majesty and Power. The one on
the right was masculine, the other feminine. Both were standing—as if in
the act of commanding—Cosmic Forces—to obey their decrees.

The masculine figure wore a full-flowing robe of some rich material, of
a deep sapphire blue, banded and heavily embroidered in gold. It was
evidently—a robe of state—or symbol of authority. Under the outer robe,
was a tunic of golden fabric, metal-like in appearance.

A sunburst of rubies, diamonds, sapphires, and emeralds covered the
chest. The waist was encircled by a jeweled belt, and from it hung a
panel about twelve inches long. It too was heavily encrusted with the
same kind of jewels. The tunic reached to the knees, and the lower edge
was trimmed with a band about four inches wide of heavy embroidery, in
silk of the same color as the jewels.

The entire effect gave one the impression that the garments
were—all—self-luminous. The feet were clad in sandal-like boots of
golden leather reaching almost to the knees, very ornate and laced with
sapphire blue cords. A band of gold about an inch and a

<span id="page_79">p. 79</span>

half wide rested half way down upon the forehead, binding the figure's
wavy golden hair which hung to about six inches below the shoulders.

The complexion was very fair with a soft pink tint, and the eyes were a
deep violet blue. The fingers of the left hand rested lightly over the
heart, and the upraised right hand held—a blazing crystal rod of power
and authority. The lower end was shaped to a point, and on the top
rested a sphere, about three inches in diameter—that gave off rays of
sparkling white light.

One knew—unmistakably—that the figure portrayed was in the act of
wielding—gigantic power—and was a manipulator—of some Mighty Cosmic
Force. The entire appearance suggested fullest youth and yet—the wisdom
of the ages spoke through the eyes—of a hoary past.

The feminine figure's robe of authority was a deep violet, banded with
golden embroidery similar to that of her companion. The underdress was a
soft, golden, shimmering material that came almost to the floor. The
thread used in weaving the tapestry to represent the garments must have
been the same which had actually composed the material in the original
clothing. This—Being—wore a jeweled girdle with its panel reaching about
two inches below the knees, and encrusted with the same kind of jewels
as those of the masculine figure.

<span id="page_80">p. 80</span>

The toe of her right sandal was just visible beneath the edge of the
dress and was made of golden leather. Her head-dress was a plain band of
gold exactly like his and the eyes were the same violet blue but lighter
in shade, her golden hair falling to the knees.

On the chest suspended from a golden chain—hung a large seven-pointed
star—cut from a single diamond. In her left hand she held a crystal
sphere about six inches in diameter, and in her right uplifted like that
of the other figure, was a scepter—of a most strange design. About two
thirds of the lower portion was made of gold terminating in a
spear-shaped point, the upper third composed—of a crystal-like
substance—radiantly luminous. This formed into a design at the
top—similar to a fleur de lis—except that the middle point was much
longer, and tapered to a slender apex formed by its four facets.

The curved leaf on the right of the central portion was—a beautiful
pink—and that on the left—a deep sapphire blue—but the middle one
was—crystal white. All were—transparent and glowed—with Light. The gold
and crystal like portions blended with each other perfectly—for there
was no line of demarcation between the two substances. Her scepter
symbolized—the three activities—of the Creative Force.

The crystal ball in her left hand—revealed—the

<span id="page_81">p. 81</span>

unmanifested Perfection of the future—in Cosmic Activity. Both scepters
represented—the drawing and directing—of the Creative Power—into
universal substance—for special manifestation. They were radiant and
beautiful even in the tapestry, and I could but wonder what they must
have been—in Reality. Saint Germain stood patiently waiting while I
studied the whole concept—so fascinated was I by the—magnificence—of the
entire work.

"These two Great Beings—were the founders of this retreat," he remarked,
as we turned and passed through the bronze door on our right, and
entered a large room which one realized instantly was used as a great
council hall for some kind of sacred, ceremonial purpose.

The whole atmosphere was one of magnificence and beauty. Words utterly
fail to convey—that which my eyes beheld—and my feelings experienced. It
took me some moments to become accustomed to the—dazzling sight—and
the—splendor—of my surroundings.

This room was at least two hundred feet long and a hundred feet
wide—with a ceiling about fifty feet high. A soft white light, which
Saint Germain explained was—an omnipresent force—that the Great Ones
always use for light, heat and power—flooded the entire place. About
twenty feet of the side-walls and far end of the room were formed
in—white onyx.

<span id="page_82">p. 82</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Where this
formation ended, the builders had cut through a great vein—of virgin
gold—more than two feet in width.

The main stretch of both side-walls was of a light, blue granite but
near the end from which we entered, the natural structure changed into
rose granite of a still finer quality. The surface of the walls, ceiling
and floor had been—highly polished—evidently by some remarkable process.

The arched ceiling rising some ten feet higher than the side-walls, was
inlaid with a most unique design. Directly in the center was—a disc of
gold—at least twelve feet in diameter. Filling it so that the points
touched the circumference—blazed a seven pointed star—composed entirely
of yellow diamonds—a solid mass of brilliant, golden Light.

Radiating from this—Central Sun—were two rings of color—each about
twelve inches wide—forming a definite band of Light around the star, and
of these the inner band was—rose pink—and the outer—an intense violet.
The background, against which this star lay, looked like—golden
frost—the star itself sending down long rays of gleaming, crystal Light.

Around this design were placed—seven smaller discs—each about two feet
in diameter—representing the planets of our system—and the seven rays of
color—within the spectrum of white Light. The surface of every disc
was—velvet-like in its softness

<span id="page_83">p. 83</span>

and only the clearest, most intense, positive shade of each color had
been used.

As I learned later, at certain times for special purposes—Great Cosmic
Beings—pour through these discs—their powerful currents—of force.
Here—it is received—by the Great Illumined and unselfish Ones—known
as—the Ascended Masters of Light—who again send it forth to the humanity
of our earth. This radiation affects—the seven ganglionic centers within
every human body on our planet—as well as all animal and plant life. The
background of the entire ceiling was the color of a very clear sky on a
brilliant moonlight night—yet the surface was highly refractive.

In the center at the far end of the hall about thirty-five feet from the
floor in the wall itself—was a large eye—at least—two feet across. This
represented the—"All-Seeing-Eye of the Creator"—forever watching
over—His Creation—and from Whom—nothing can be hidden.

A tremendous power was focused through—this eye—at certain times—for the
accomplishment—of specific results. I could but wonder—as I contemplated
it—what my sensations would be were I to see—That Power—in full
operation.

Perhaps forty feet from the far end on the east wall, stretching about
seventy feet in length and thirty feet in height—was a panel—of some
precipitated

<span id="page_84">p. 84</span>

material. It had been placed a little more than—five feet above the
floor level—and sunken into the side-wall for a depth of two
inches—making a concave surface around the entire edge.

The substance composing it—looked like beautiful velvet—of a deep indigo
blue—yet it was not a fabric of any kind. The nearest physical material
to which one could compare it would be that—of a mineral. This
substance—is not—in use in the outer world of mankind anywhere—but it
can be and is, sometimes precipitated—by the Great Ascended Masters of
Light—for a special purpose.

Saint Germain explained that—the panel had been precipitated—and served
as a—universal mirror—for the instruction of Initiates and Inner members
of a group of Highly Evolved Beings. These Great Ones
work—ceaselessly—helping the humanity of our earth—to become Perfected
men and women—and enable them to manifest—in their outer lives—the same
great—Perfection and Dominion—as did Jesus Christ.

There is—no—outer—organization—of these—Perfected Beings. Only
by—living—and expressing—this Perfection—through self-correction of
human weaknesses—and full adoration to the Divine Being Within—can an
individual draw himself—into association—with those working at
this—high—level of attainment.

<span id="page_85">p. 85</span>

"Upon this panel," said Saint Germain, "are projected scenes of earth,
pictures in the ethers—the akashic records—and activities taking place
on Venus or at any other point—which those instructing—wish to make
visible to the students. Such scenes are not only pictures of the past
and present—but can portray activities—into the far future. These you
shall see later."

We passed through the last door on our right, and entered a room whose
dimensions were about eighty feet long, forty wide and twenty high, with
an arched ceiling—similar to that in the large hall—from which we had
just come.

"The entire interior surface of this room is made of—frosted gold—and
the purple and green veining—you see on the walls—as if embossed—is
precipitated," he continued.

At the far end and on the side wall to our right, reaching from floor to
ceiling, was a framework made—of white metal—that looked like—frosted
silver. In this framework resting upon roller bearings, were containers
made of the same metal. The lids—of these containers—gave
classifications—in hieroglyphics—of the contents on the four spindles
within each—the hieroglyphics being embossed upon every lid.

The spindles were at least ten inches long—and around every one—had been
wound a ribbon—about

<span id="page_86">p. 86</span>

eight inches wide—made of pressed gold—alloyed with some material—that
made it tough and pliable and yet—no thicker—than a piece of ordinary
writing paper. The length—of the ribbons of gold—on the spindles
varied—from seven to fifty feet—and on each were characters—as if etched
into the gold—by something like a stylus. These characters—had been so
perfectly done—as to make the whole appear—like script.

"These records are the fulfilling of my promise to you," said Saint
Germain, as he indicated a particular section at the far end of the
side-wall. "They describe the city, country, and civilization which once
existed where the Sahara Desert is now—during the time in which you were
my son—and I the ruler—of that ancient empire. This room contains
records of many countries—and the rise and fall—of many civilizations."
Handing me one of the spindles he released the fastening, and I found—to
my astonishment—that I could read its contents.

"I am enabling you to do this," he continued, "by temporarily—raising
your consciousness—and calling forth the hidden memory—the former
record—of these experiences which you once lived through. The matter
of—knowing God and His Universe—is but a contacting—of the Life-record
in every form. All forms contain Life, and within the Light emanation of
every form—is recorded—its entire past—which any

<span id="page_87">p. 87</span>

one may train himself to discover and understand—if he be willing to
give—his attention and time to the self-discipline necessary—to still
the confusion—in the outer activity—of his every-day existence. This
eternal record within all things has existed—from the beginning.

"In ages past, humanity manifested Perfection in every way. This former
condition of the race has been chronicled by historians as the—Garden of
Eden—Eden or E-Don—meaning Divine Wisdom. As the conscious attention—of
the outer activity of the mind—was allowed to rest upon the world of the
physical senses—the 'Divine Wisdom'—the All-Knowing—activity of
consciousness—became clouded or covered over and the 'Cosmic Divine
Plan'—of the individual's life—became submerged. Perfection and
conscious control—by mankind over all form—was hidden and
forgotten—along with it.

"Man became sense-conscious—instead of God-conscious—and so
manifested—that—to which his attention was directed and—which he thought
most upon. He—deliberately and consciously—turned his back upon the
Perfection and Dominion—with which the Father—endowed him in the
beginning. He created his own experiences of lack, limitation, and
discord of every kind. He identified himself—with the part—instead of
the whole—and of course—imperfection—was the result.

<span id="page_88">p. 88</span>

"All mankind's limitation—is the result—of the individual's own misuse
of the—God-attribute—of freewill. He—compels—himself to live within his
own creations until—by the direct volition of the outer activity of his
mind—he again consciously looks back—to his Royal beginning—God—the
Great Source of All. When this occurs—man will begin to
remember—That—which he once was, and may become again—whensoever he
chooses to look once more at the—'Great, Cosmic, Blue-Print'—of Himself.

"The record, you have been enabled to read, described the Life and
people—as we saw it taking place seventy thousand years ago. You had
much to do with the work of making these records—in several lives—which
have not yet been revealed."

We crossed the council hall entering the opposite door, and found a room
similar in size to the one we had just left—with two smaller rooms
adjoining it on the north wall. In the larger room, covering almost the
entire wall surface, was more metal framework filled with containers
quite like those in the other room.

"These rooms," he continued, "contain only gold and jewels—that are to
be used for a special purpose—which will bless the entire world—when
mankind has transcended its—unbridled—selfishness." Here, he drew forth
a container—filled with gold coin—and

<span id="page_89">p. 89</span>

went on explaining. "This is Spanish Gold—lost at sea and we—seeing it
would not be recovered by other means—brought it here through the
activity of certain forces—which we govern. Later—in a time that is
rapidly approaching—it will again be sent forth for use in the outer
world.

"In these containers," indicating another section, "gold is stored from
the lost continents—of Mu and Atlantis—the ancient civilizations of the
Gobi and Sahara Deserts—Egypt—Chaldea—Babylonia—Greece—Rome—and others.
If all this gold were to be released into the outer activity of the
world—it would compel sudden re-adjustment—in every phase of human
experience. At present—it would—not—be the part of wisdom. The Infinite
Wisdom and Power of those—Great Cosmic Masters—who have been the
guardians of the race since its first appearance upon earth—is almost
beyond the comprehension of the human mind.

"No one—in this world—ever accumulated a great amount of wealth—without
the assistance and radiation of some—Ascended Master. There are
occasions—in which individuals can be used as a focus of great
wealth—for a specific purpose—and at such times—greatly added power is
radiated to them—for through it—they can receive personal assistance.
Such an experience is a—test—and opportunity—for their growth. All
unusual accomplishment—that

<span id="page_90">p. 90</span>

takes place in human activity—no matter what the particular channel may
be—is always attained—through the assistance of super-human Love,
Wisdom, and Power—from an Ascended Master—because he has transcended all
limitations of the physical world and—for this reason—more than ordinary
success is due to His greater power—through radiation.

"In 1887—the Ascended Host of Masters established a school—on the Inner
planes—for the specific purpose of instructing those who have misused
wealth—and revealing fully—the results—of their mistakes. Such—as
these—are taken and told the—Truth—concerning the—Universal
Law—governing all wealth, and the results that come from influencing
others to perpetuate their wrong ideas and mistakes. They are
given—complete freedom—to accept or reject—the proof—offered.
They—always—accept and abide by the instruction given."

We next entered the two smaller rooms which were also equipped with the
same kind of containers only—not as large. These were filled with jewels
of all kinds—diamonds, rubies, pearls, emeralds and sapphires classified
as to variety and quantity. Smilingly, he turned to me and said:

"Now—you know and understand—that the Great God Self—is—the only—Real
Owner and Controller of—all—wealth. That 'Presence' appoints—keepers of
His treasures—on every plane of life—whether it

<span id="page_91">p. 91</span>

be Light, Wisdom, Substance or physical riches. You are calm and poised
I see, while we are observing this phase of our activity—and that is
well. It reveals your Inner strength and ability to do—what is now ready
to be accomplished—as soon as you are prepared outwardly.

"You have been shown—proof—that it is we—who really govern the wealth of
the world—and use it but as a test—of the soul strength—of the
individual. It is always a—trust—given to those—who should be strong
enough to use it—only—constructively—but few, very few, really pass that
test under the temptation—existing in the world at large today. If we
choose—we can raise the humblest of God's children—who have sufficient
preparation, into wealth, power, and prominence, if by so doing, help
can be given to many others—through such accomplishment."

After examining other containers filled with more jewels, we turned and
re-entered the council hall. Looking toward the entrance through which
we had first come, I saw my loved ones—Lotus and our son—in charge of
one of the Ascended Masters—whom Saint Germain said was known as Amen
Bey. After greetings had been exchanged, we were conducted to seats
before—the panel on the east wall. In groups of from three to twelve
came the blessed ones of the—Ascended Host—until seventy of them were
seated.

A great hush fell upon all assembled, and for a few

<span id="page_92">p. 92</span>

moments the silence was breathless—expectant. A ball of—soft White
Light—began to form—in front of the panel—increasing rapidly in size and
brilliance—until it became an oval—at least seven feet in height. As
though born from within the Light itself—stepped a most Glorious
Being—tall, majestic, and powerful. He made the sign uniting the finite
with Infinity, and in a voice that—thrilled every atom of mind and
body—asked—if all were ready.

A blazing light—flashed forth from the substance that composed the
panel—until it looked like a mirror of Living Light. In a moment, this
changed—into a crystal clear atmosphere—and it then became a cosmic
screen upon which—living pictures—in all dimensions could be
portrayed—with no limit to the space—that could be observed. It was
self-evident—that everything—which had or ever could take place—in all
Eternity—might be made visible on this screen—if the Directing
Intelligence so desired.

The first scenes portrayed the continent of "Mu"—the activity and
accomplishment of its people, and the height to which that civilization
attained. This covered a period of thousands of years. Then came events
that surely must have been—a reign of terror—to the inhabitants of that
land. A cataclysm occurred which tore the surface of the earth—until all
collapsed within itself. The ancient land of Mu sank beneath the
waves—of what is now the Pacific

<span id="page_93">p. 93</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Ocean—where it
still rests wrapped in its mantle of water. Again—it will rise—and once
more absorb the Life and Light of the physical sun.

Next, came the growth to beauty, wisdom, and power of Atlantis, a great
continent covering a large part of what is now the Atlantic Ocean. At
that time, there existed solid land between Central America and what
today is Europe. The things accomplished in that age—were tremendous—but
again the people's misuse—of the Mighty God Energy—overwhelmed them and,
as things were thrown more and more out of balance—the tearing apart of
the earth's surface by cataclysmic action was re-experienced.

It left but a small remnant of Atlantis—merely an island in
mid-ocean—cut off from close contact with the rest of the civilized
world. The east and west portions of the land had sunk beneath the
Atlantic Ocean—leaving only the island called Poseidonis. It had been
the heart of the then known civilized world, and preparation was made—to
protect and preserve—its most important activities—as a central focus—to
carry forward certain unfinished work. In that period very great
attainment was reached both—spiritually and materially.

The mechanical development of this cycle reached a very high state of
achievement, and one of its most remarkable expressions was the
perfection of their aerial navigation. The air-transportation of our
modern

<span id="page_94">p. 94</span>

life is—as yet—very crude and primitive—compared to what was then on
Atlantis. The Great Masters of Light and Wisdom—made this possible—for
the people of Poseidonis because they inspired, instructed, protected,
and revealed knowledge of great advancement—in every phase of human
activity.

A large portion of these people became aware of the—Great Inner God
Power—within the individual but as before—the human side of their nature
or outer activities again usurped—the Great Energy. Selfishness and
misuse of this transcendent wisdom and power gained the ascendency to
even greater height than before. The Masters of the Ancient Wisdom—saw
the people were building another destructive momentum—and that a third
cataclysm was threatening. They warned the inhabitants—again and again
as previously—but only those who served the "Light" gave heed.

Great buildings were constructed—of imperishable material—where records
were placed—that have been preserved through the centuries. These remain
in a state of perfect preservation—now—on the bed of the Atlantic
Ocean—hermetically sealed. They will be brought to the light of day—by
the Great Ones—who directed their preparation—and control their
protection.

In them are recorded humanity's advance and accomplishment

<span id="page_95">p. 95</span>

of that period, so there has been no permanent loss to mankind of the
activities of the Atlantean civilization. Beside the preserving of such
records, great wealth, principally gold and jewels, was transferred at
that time to other points of safety. This has been and will continue to
be guarded over the centuries—and used at a future time for the uplift
and advancement of generations—yet unborn.

The final cataclysm spent its momentum, and the last remaining fragment
of a once world-empire sank to rest—for purification through the
centuries—beneath the present Atlantic Ocean. The remembrance of
Atlantis and her people, unlike the lost continent of Mu, has not been
entirely forgotten or obliterated in the history of mankind—for it has
been recorded in many ways through the centuries. Even though twelve
thousand years have elapsed since the sinking, fragments of information
concerning it—still drift to us from most unexpected channels. Myths and
legends abound in reference to Atlantis and—these are two avenues—which
preserve to mankind—certain actual conditions—that have been upon the
earth—in one age or another. As time goes on indisputable proof—of its
existence and the height of its attainment—will be revealed by
oceanography, geology, and other scientific data.

Then passed before our vision the ancient civilizations—of the Gobi and
Sahara Deserts—showing

<span id="page_96">p. 96</span>

the rise and fall of their principal activities. The decline in each of
these was due this time—not to cataclysmic action—but to being overrun
by hordes of primitive souls—taking embodiment in that cycle.

Next came pictures of Egypt—her rise and fall—the latter being due to
the deliberate misuse of knowledge and power—by a large number of the
humanity embodied in that land—whose predominant qualities—were pride of
their intellectual accomplishments—and rebellion against the
restraint—of their lower nature.

Egypt rose to her greatest height—by the right use of knowledge and
power. These always demand humility—obedience of the intellect to the
God-Self Within—absolute and unconditional control—of the human or lower
nature—in those who seek such gifts—if they are to avoid destruction.
The souls embodied in Egypt—during her decline—were not undeveloped—as
were those in the civilizations of the Gobi and Sahara Deserts. On the
contrary, they had attained the conscious use of knowledge and power,
and—deliberately—chose to misuse it. This activity has nothing
whatsoever to do with—Wisdom—for those who are the Eternal Inheritors of
the gifts from that Divine Goddess—must forever be past—all—temptation
to misuse knowledge and power. Wisdom—is the right use of all that
manifests—and he, who realizes this self-evident, Immutable Truth

<span id="page_97">p. 97</span>

becomes an open door to all good that abides in creation.

The reference to Egypt—as a land of darkness—is most unjust for out of
Egypt in her earlier cycle came—Very Great Light, and out of Egypt will
again come—Very Great Light.

The next scene portrayed the rise and fall of the Roman Empire. When the
darkness and degradation of those centuries had reached their lowest
point—lo! Jesus appeared—pouring out His Blazing Light and Love as the
Christ—and through His Transfiguration, Resurrection, and Ascension—such
an overwhelming flood of—God's Perfection—spread over the earth—that
never again can so vast a darkness encompass humanity—in any age. The
accomplishment—of His Life—stands Eternally Recorded—upon the atmosphere
of this planet—and acts as a magnet—drawing mankind unto—a Like
Perfection.

The coming of Jesus was—an initiation—to the people of our world and—a
Cosmic Command—to use the Power of Divine Love—in all their future
activities. This outpouring—of His Love—to the earth—at its darkest
cycle—became the birth of the Christ Child in the individual. He called
forth—once again—the Cosmic, Divine, Blue Print—and revealed the Decree
for the incoming age. That plan is Complete Dominion over all things
finite through the Full Stature of the Christ Within every human being.

<span id="page_98">p. 98</span>

Next, came the reign of Richard the Lion Heart of England. Humanity has
little or no knowledge of the real, spiritual activity that took
place—during those years. The same Light that inspired Richard's
enthusiasm and activities in the crusades, released—through his
followers and the people of that time—certain forces—that the Ascended
Host used at Inner levels of consciousness.

Then, came pictures of the recent world war in Europe and these
disclosed the activities—that generated it. Only a few individuals—know
the real cause—and no doubt it is for the best—more do not. It is too
destructive—for the consciousness to contemplate. Nothing can possibly
be gained by focusing—the attention upon war. This too perhaps was the
reason why the period from Richard to the world war was not portrayed.
Here, the activities of the Ascended Host were revealed—and we saw them
dissolve—the cause and greater part—of the accumulated momentum of the
world's recent conflict.

They accomplished it—by consciously focusing and directing—enormous—Rays
of Light—whose power to consume and transmute is—too stupendous—for
finite description. These Perfected Ones have been watching for the
Cosmic Moment to arrive when they might perform for humanity a Service
of Love that has been long awaited and of which mankind has as
yet—little or no comprehension.

<span id="page_99">p. 99</span>

These remarkable pictures continued and—revealed activities stretching
forth into the far future—and affecting the whole earth. They
showed—many changes to come—in the surface of the land itself. One of
the most important of these—concerned the progress of North America. The
Divine Plan—for the future of North America—is a condition of intense
activity in the greatest peace, beauty, success, prosperity, spiritual
illumination, and dominion. She is to carry—the Christ
Light—and—"Be"—the Guide for the rest of the earth—because America is to
be the heart center of the—"Golden Age"—that is now dimly touching our
horizon. The greater portion of the land of North America will stand for
a very long time. This has been known for thousands of years—yes—for
over two hundred thousand.

The pictures continued for nearly three hours—portraying many scenes and
activities that have entirely escaped the recording of historians—and
the world of science—because of their great antiquity. Wonderful and
beautiful—as our moving pictures are today—they are mere toys—when
compared with the living, breathing, actual existence—revealed upon this
cosmic screen. Here, it was possible to watch—the Cosmic Cause—go forth
of many events and conditions found upon earth—so that those
watching—received instruction of most extraordinary magnitude.

<span id="page_100">p. 100</span>

At the close of the instruction, Saint Germain presented us—to the Great
Ascended Master—Lanto—who had manifested from within—the Blazing
Light—and then to the seventy Masters assembled.

"We shall rejoice indeed," said Lanto, turning toward us, "when you are
again ready—to join in the conscious service of the glorious work at
hand. This opportunity comes to you through the mighty victories—you
have won over the human self and outer world. The time is nearing—when
you shall be privileged—to see how truly great those victories are. Each
day accept in its—Fulness—the Mighty Active 'Presence' of the Great God
within you—and there can exist no such thing as failure—anywhere along
the path. Everyone, who sincerely seeks the—'Light'—is always known to
the Ascended Masters. On New Year's eve, we will meet here again—when
there will be twelve guests from Venus. It is our wish that you be
present. Saint Germain and Amen Bey will be—your sponsors."

At a signal, all became silent and received Lanto's blessing of love
before returning to their respective fields of service. Most of them
simply disappeared from the room within a few moments, and the rest—left
by the way of the tube.

"My children, I see you are unaware of time. It is now three o'clock in
the morning," remarked Saint Germain, as he turned to say, good-bye—to

<span id="page_101">p. 101</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Lotus and our son
who—after embracing me left by way of the outer reception room—as we
passed through the first door on the right. "There is one thing more,"
he continued, "I want you to see before we go.

"Here is a group of most unusual musical instruments—that are used for a
special purpose—being constructed or created so as to have a tone of
special quality—for the work we do." Here, he turned to an organ
key-board, and went on explaining.

"This seems to be a pipeless organ but the pipes, which are much smaller
than ordinary, are placed within the case. The tone of the whole
instrument is—superior to anything the earth has ever known before in
music. These organs will come into use in the outer work as the
incoming—Golden Age—moves forward."

Next, we examined four magnificent harps—slightly larger than those in
ordinary use in the musical world today. Saint Germain seated himself at
one of these and played several chords—to give me some idea of their
tone. It was the most wonderful music, I have ever heard.

"This harp is a surprise for our Beloved Lotus," he said, "for on New
Year's eve in this retreat—you shall hear the organ and four harps
played by skilled artists." We finished the inspection of the room, and
left through the door on the northwest wall.

<span id="page_102">p. 102</span>

Instead of passing out of the retreat, as we had come in, Saint Germain
opened a small door on the left and entered—a glistening tunnel—whose
walls sparkled with a crystal-like formation—which became
instantly—illumined-by the White Light—that he always released by
manipulating the electronic substance about him. We walked rapidly
forward in the tunnel—came to a bronze door that opened at his touch—and
stood again under the starlit sky.

We remained in perfect silence for an instant—then rising to some five
hundred feet above the ground level—passed swiftly through the air and a
few moments later stood beside my physical body—on the southern slope of
Mount Shasta—where the panther still guarded. I had been away twenty-two
hours—and as I looked up—dawn was just creeping over the eastern
horizon.

"Here is your breakfast," announced Saint Germain, as he handed me—the
Crystal Cup—containing a clear, white, sparkling liquid. "This is both
strengthening and refreshing—so you will enjoy hiking home—because your
body needs the exertion and activity. I sense something in your mind
which is not at ease or at least is not clear to your consciousness."

"Yes," I replied. "I have a question that has been holding my attention
for some time, and it is concerning—

<span id="page_103">p. 103</span>

visualization. What is true visualization and what happens—when one does
visualize?"

"True visualization," he answered, "is God's attribute and Power of
Sight—acting in the mind of man. When one consciously pictures in his
mind a desire he wishes fulfilled—he is using one of the most powerful
means of bringing it into his visible, tangible experience. There is
much confusion and uncertainty in the minds of many, concerning what
actually happens—when one visualizes or makes a mental picture—of
something he desires. No form ever came into existence—anywhere in the
universe—unless some one had consciously held a picture of that form in
his thought—for every thought contains a picture of the idea within it.
Even an abstract thought has a picture of some kind—or at least a
picture—that is one's mental concept of it.

"I will give you an exercise by which one may develop, consciously
control, and direct his visualizing activities for definite
accomplishment. There are several steps to the process—which every
student can use at any and all times. The practice does bring visible,
tangible results—when really applied. The first step—is to determine
upon a definite plan or desire to be fulfilled. In this, see that it is
constructive, honorable, and worthy of your time and effort. Be sure to
examine your—motive—for bringing such a creation into expression. It
must be honest—both

<span id="page_104">p. 104</span>

toward yourself and the rest of the world, not merely to follow a whim
or gratify—appetites of the physical senses. Remember there is a vast
difference between use, desire, and appetite. Use—is the fulfilling of
the Great Universal Law of Service. Desire—is the expanding activity
of—God—through which manifestation is constantly sustained and is
Perfection—enlarging itself. Appetite—is but habit—established by the
continued gratification of the feeling nature—and is but energy—focused
and qualified by suggestions—from the outer activity of life.

"Be—very sure—that there is no lurking feeling within—that you would be
glad to benefit at the expense of another. A Real student—and only such
a one will get the benefit out of this kind of training—takes the reins
into his own hands and—determines—to discipline and consciously
control—the human self. He chooses what shall or shall not be in his
world and—through the process of picturing within his mind—designs and
brings into manifestation—a definitely determined plan of Life.

"The second step—is to state your plan in words—as concise and clear as
possible. Write this down. Thus, you make a record of your desire in the
outer, visible, tangible world. The third step—is to close the eyes
and—see—within your mind a mental picture of your desire or plan—in its
finished, perfect condition and activity.

<span id="page_105">p. 105</span>

"Contemplate the fact—that your ability to create and see a picture
within your own consciousness—is God's attribute of sight—acting in you.
The activity of—seeing—and the power to—create—are attributes of
your—God Self—which you know and feel is within you at all times. God's
Life and Power are acting within your consciousness to propel into your
outer world, the picture you are—seeing and feeling—within yourself.

"Keep reminding the intellect—that the ability to picture is an
attribute of God—the attribute of sight. The power to feel, experience,
and associate with the perfected picture is God's power. The substance
used in the world without—to make the forms in your picture and plan is
God's pure substance. Then you must—know—God is the Doer, the Doing, and
the Deed of every constructive form and action that ever has been sent
forth—into the world of manifestation. When you thus use all the
constructive processes—it is impossible for your plan—not—to come into
your visible world.

"Read your desire or plan over, as many times in the day as possible and
always just before retiring—because on going to sleep—immediately after
contemplating the picture in your own mind—a full impression is left
upon the human consciousness undisturbed—for a number of hours—enabling
it to be recorded deeply in the outer activity—and allowing

<span id="page_106">p. 106</span>

the force to be generated and accumulated—which propels it into the
outer experience Life. In this way, you can carry any desire or picture
into your consciousness—as it enters—the Great Silence—in sleep.
There—it becomes charged by God's Greatest Power and Activity—which is
always within—the Heart of the Great Silence.

"Under no circumstances—discuss either your desire or the fact that you
are visualizing—with anyone whatsoever. This is imperative. Do not talk
to yourself about it out loud—or even in a whisper—for you should
realize that the greater the accumulation of energy—generated by your
visualization, contemplation, and feeling the Reality of your
picture—the quicker it will come—into your outer experience.

"Thousands of desires, ambitions, or ideals would have manifested into
the outer experience of individuals—if they had not discussed them with
friends or acquaintances. When you decide to definitely bring about an
experience—through consciously directed visualization—you become The
Law—God—the Law of the 'One'—and to whom there is no opposite. You must
make your own decision—and stand back of your own decree—with all your
power. It means you must take an unshakable, determined stand. To do so,
know and feel that it is God desiring, God feeling, God knowing, God
manifesting and God controlling everything concerning it. This

<span id="page_107">p. 107</span>

is the Law of the 'One'—God—and God only. Until this is fully
understood, you cannot and never will get your manifestation—for the
moment a human element enters—you are taking it out of God's hands—and
of course it cannot express—because you are neutralizing it—by the human
qualities of time, space, place and a thousand and one other imaginary
conditions—which God knows nothing about.

"No one can ever know God—as long as he considers—a force—opposed to
God—for whenever he acknowledges that two forces can act, he has a
resultant quality of neutralizing activity. When you have
neutralization—you have no definite quality either way. You merely have
nothing or—no thing—in your manifestation. When you acknowledge God—The
One—you have only Perfection manifesting—instantly—for there is nothing
to oppose or neutralize it—no element of time. So is it—established unto
you—for there is none to oppose—what God decrees.

"Conditions can never improve for anyone until he desires—Perfection—and
stops acknowledging—a power opposed to God—or that there is something
either in or outside of him—that can prevent God's Perfection from
expressing. One's very acknowledgment of a condition—that is less than
all of God—is his deliberate choice of an imperfection and—that kind of
choice—is the fall of man. This is—deliberate and intentional—because he
is free—every

<span id="page_108">p. 108</span>

moment—to think whatsoever he chooses to think. Incidentally—it takes no
more energy to think a thought or picture of Perfection—than it does one
of imperfection.

"You are The Creator—localized—to design and create—Perfection in your
world and place—in the Universe. If Perfection and Dominion are to be
expressed—you must know and acknowledge only—The Law of—'The One.' The
One—exists and controls completely everywhere in the Universe. You are
the Self-Consciousness of Life—The One Supreme 'Presence' of the Great
Flame of Love and Light. You alone are the—Chooser—the Decreer—of the
qualities and forms you wish to pour your Life into, for you are the
only energizer of your world and—all it contains. When you think or
feel—part of your Life energy goes forth to sustain your creation.

"Cast out of mind then, all doubt or fear of the fulfillment of
that—which you are picturing. Should any such thoughts or feelings—which
are after all but human emanations, thoughts and feelings that do not
contain perfection, come to your consciousness instantly replace them by
the full acknowledgment of your self and world as—the Life of God—'The
One.' Further than that, be completely unconcerned about it—except
during the time you are visualizing. Have no set time in your mind for
results—except to know there is only—now—just the

<span id="page_109">p. 109</span>

immediate moment. Take this discipline—use it—and you can manifest a
resistless power in action—that cannot and never did fail.

"Always remember you are God picturing. You are God Intelligence
directing. You are God Power propelling. It is God's—Your
Substance—being acted upon. As you realize this and contemplate the
fulness of it often—everything in the Universe rushes to fulfill your
desire, your command, your picture—for it is all constructive and
therefore—agrees with the Original Divine Plan for Self-Conscious Life.
If the human side of us really agrees to the Divine Plan and accepts
it—there can be no such thing as delay or failure—for all energy has the
inherent quality of—Perfection—within it and rushes to serve its
Creator.

"As your desire or picture is constructive—you are God seeing His Own
Plan. When God Sees—it is an irrevocable decree or command—to appear
Now. In the creation of this earth and system of worlds, God said—'Let
there be Light'—and Light appeared. It did not take aeons of time to
create—Light. The same Mighty God is in you—now—and when you see or
speak—it is His attribute of sight and speech—which is acting in and
through you.

"If you realize what this truly means—you can command by His Full Power
and Authority—for you are His Life-Consciousness—and it is only the
Self-Consciousness

<span id="page_110">p. 110</span>

of your Life—that can command, picture, or desire a constructive and
Perfect Plan. Every constructive plan is His Plan. Therefore, you know
God is acting, commanding—'Let this desire or plan be fulfilled now'—and
It is Done."

Here, Saint Germain finished speaking, and bidding me a
smiling—"good-bye"—for the time being, disappeared from my sight. I
turned my footsteps toward home, and the panther trotted close by my
side. He had been fully twenty-four hours without food, and it was not
long until he dashed off through the woods and disappeared in the heavy
timber. I continued on my way and arrived home at eleven o'clock,
spending the rest of the day trying to realize—the full import of what I
had been privileged to experience—and how the entire concept of my world
had changed so unexpectedly.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IV. Mysteries of the Yellowstone](um08)
