[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](um11)  [Next](um13) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1878891014/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Unveiled Mysteries*, by Godfré Ray King, \[1934\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_216">p. 216</span>

### CHAPTER VIII

### *God's Omnipresent Power*

THE following day, I received a communication through which I became
engaged in a business activity that required all my time and attention.
The mere anticipation of it gave me great joy, and I entered in with
much enthusiasm. There came a refreshing, quickening sense, a thing I
had never before known in my business experience.

In the course of its progress, I came into close personal contact with a
man of very dominating character. His entire attitude in business was to
gain his desire by force—if intrigue failed or he was opposed in any
way.

He believed only in the power of his own intellect and human will, and
had neither knowledge of nor faith in—anything else. At no time, did he
hesitate to crush or ruin persons or things that stood in the way of his
success, and used all means to gain his own selfish ends.

I had met him some three years before the following experience took
place—and at that time had felt almost helpless in his presence—so
overpowering was the feeling of domination he continually sent out. Yet,
I knew in spite of my own reaction to him

<span id="page_217">p. 217</span>

that his control over others was—only force—focused into the outer
activity. I was somewhat disturbed, as I realized I would have to
associate with him. Immediately, I sought a way to deal with him by
application of the God-Law, when the "Inner Voice" said to me clearly:

"Why not let the 'Mighty God Within'—take full charge and handle this
condition? That 'Inner-Power' knows no domination, and is—Always
Invincible."

I was immensely grateful, and completely released everything into "Its"
management. I met this man with two others, and agreed to go with them
to inspect a mining property in a distant state. I felt it to be a very
valuable one. The owner was an elderly lady whose good husband had
passed on by an accident in the mine some months before.

He had left things in a precarious condition, and our dominating friend
had determined to buy the mine at his own price—not an honest one. After
a long trip by auto, we reached our destination about two o'clock the
second day. We met the owner whom I realized was a blessed soul—true and
honorable.

Then and there—I took the determined stand that she should have a square
deal, and receive full value for the property. She invited us to a
lovely luncheon, and we proceeded to examine the mine. We went through
the workings, tunnels, drifts, shafts and

<span id="page_218">p. 218</span>

stopings. The more I watched, the more certain I became something was
wrong. The very atmosphere seemed to breathe it to me.

I was certain—a rich strike had been made—which had not been reported to
the owner. I somehow knew the buyer had secretly placed one of the
workmen on duty to watch for such an activity and that during the weeks
of watching, he had gained the confidence of the superintendent. I
realized at heart he was a good man but—not awakened spiritually
speaking.

As we stood talking to him, my God-Self disclosed fully what had
occurred. A short time previously, as these two were on their inspection
of the work, they had come to a spot where the shots had broken into the
face of a tunnel leading directly into the heart of the mountain. The
blast had broken into—a very rich vein of gold bearing quartz. The
superintendent was about to rush out, and report it to the owner, when
the spying workman remarked:

"Wait! I know the man who is going to buy this mine. If you want to
continue your present position, don't mention that strike. I'll see to
it you not only stay here, as superintendent, but there'll be five
thousand in it for you. The old lady'll get enough to keep her anyway,"
and the superintendent fearing the loss of his position had agreed.

In our examination of the mine, we came to the end of the main tunnel,
and I felt strongly this was

<span id="page_219">p. 219</span>

the place, the rich strike had been made. It had been cleverly covered
up and disguised as a loose formation where it was dangerous to work.
Such was the report they had made to the woman who owned the mine. As I
stood at this place talking with the others, my Inner Sight was opened,
and I saw all that had taken place, the rich strike, the covering of it,
the offer to the superintendent, and his acceptance. I was grateful to
have my feeling verified—but knew I must wait. We returned to the
owner's residence, and negotiations began. The buyer opened the subject
by saying:

"Mrs. Atherton, what do you expect for this property?"

"I am holding it at two hundred fifty thousand dollars," she replied
courteously and gently.

"Absurd!" he shouted, "preposterous, ridiculous. It is not worth half
that amount." He carried on in this vein for some few moments,
blustering as was his habit. It had worked many times before, and he was
still following the old line of procedure. He argued and stormed and
ended by saying:

"Mrs. Atherton, you are in a position—where you must sell, I will be
generous and give you—a hundred and fifty thousand."

"I will consider it," she replied, so cowed by his attitude of
domination and bluster—that she began to accept his ideas and give in to
his arrogant impudence.

<span id="page_220">p. 220</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> He saw her waver
and immediately, began to high pressure the whole situation.

"I cannot wait," he went on, "my time is valuable. You must decide at
once or the deal is off."

He drew the papers from his pocket and placed them on the table. Mrs.
Atherton looked about helplessly, and I shook my head—no—to her but she
did not see me. The contract lay open, and she stepped across the room
taking a chair at the table—preparing to sign. I knew, if she were to be
protected, I must act at once, and going to where she sat, I addressed
our dominating friend.

"Just a moment, my good man," I said, "you will pay this dear lady what
her mine is worth—or you are not going to get it." He turned his wrath
upon me—with several very pungent invectives and attempted the same
tactics—as usual.

"I'd like to know who is going to prevent me having the mine at—my
price?" he retorted. I felt a surge of the—Mighty God-Power Within—come
forth like an avalanche, keeping me [unaffected](errata.htm#3) by his
tirade of vindictiveness, and I replied:

"God will prevent you."

With that answer, he burst out laughing. He carried on boisterously,
cynically, insultingly. I waited calmly.

"You fool," he began again in another tirade of anger—"you prate about
God. Not you nor God nor

<span id="page_221">p. 221</span>

anything can stop me. I get what I go after, and I get it regardless. No
one has ever stopped me yet." His arrogance seemed to have no limit, and
he revealed himself—mind and body—but the victim of his emotions. His
reason was unable to function, as is always the case under any
uncontrolled feeling—or it would have warned him to go no further—with
his insults.

I felt the expansion of the God-Power—again. 'This time it came stronger
and stronger—until in a tone like a clarion, the Mighty Inner-Voice of
my God-Self revealed the Truth of the whole transaction—and the
deception at the mine.

"Mrs. Atherton," I said, "there has been gross deceit practiced upon
you. Your workmen made a rich strike. This man had a spy among them who
has bribed your superintendent—to remain silent concerning it." The
superintendent and the others in the room went white and speechless, as
my Inner-Self continued to expose their treachery. The prospective buyer
seemed equal to any emergency, and interrupting me in his wild anger,
shouted:

"You lie. I'll brain you for such interference." He lifted his steel
cane and as I raised my hand to seize it—a White Flame suddenly shot
forth flashing—full in his face. He dropped to the floor as if struck by
lightning. Then My Mighty God-Self spoke again with All Authority of
Eternity, Majestic, Powerful:

<span id="page_222">p. 222</span>

"Let no one in this room move—until given permission." My outer self no
longer me—but "God in Action"—stepped to where the man lay, and went on:

"Great Soul in this man—I speak to you! Too long have you been held
prisoner—by his dominating personal self. Come forth—now! Take command
of his mind and body! Right the many deceptions he has practiced—in the
present life. Within the hour—this strong outer human creation of
discord and injustice—which he has built up shall be consumed—and never
again—shall it deceive or humanly dominate—another of God's children. To
the outer self, I say—Awaken! In peace, love, kindliness, generosity and
good will to all that lives."

Slowly, the color began to come back into the man's face, and he opened
his eyes in strange bewilderment. "God in me"—still in charge, took him
gently by the hand and putting an arm under his shoulder helped him to a
large easy chair. Again, It commanded:

"My Brother—look at me!"

As he raised his eyes to mine, a tremor passed over his body, and in a
voice scarcely audible said:

"Yes, I have seen. I understand—how wrong I have been. God forgive me."
He dropped his head in his hands and hid his face—silent and ashamed.
Tears began to drop through his fingers and he wept like a child.

<span id="page_223">p. 223</span>

"You will pay this dear lady, one million dollars," My God-Self
continued, "and give her a ten per cent interest in the mine beside—for
in the strike recently made is at least—ten million in gold ore." With
deep humility and a strange sweetness, he answered:

"Let it be done now." He requested his men this time, instead of
ordering them as was his former habit, to draw up the papers—as had been
directed. Mrs. Atherton and he both signed—completing the transaction.

I turned to the others in the room, and realized from the expression on
their faces all of them had been so lifted in consciousness—they had
seen beyond the human veil—each of them saying:

"Never, so help me God, will I ever attempt to deceive or do wrong to my
fellow man again." They had been raised to fully recognize and accept
the God-Self within—every one.

It was late afternoon, when this occurrence took place. Mrs. Atherton
extended a cordial invitation to remain as her guests over night, and
accompany her to Phoenix in the morning—for the recording of the papers
for the sale. After dinner that night, we gathered in the big living
room before a large open fire-place. Everyone sincerely sought more
understanding of the—Great Cosmic Laws of Life.

They asked—how it happened I had come into this

<span id="page_224">p. 224</span>

kind of knowledge, and I told them of the Master Saint Germain and the
way I had met him. I related some of my experiences on Mount Shasta, and
how in the course of our conversation in regard—to the Great Cosmic
Law—he had said:

"My Son, the Great Cosmic Law does not discriminate any more than does
the multiplication table, if one makes a mistake in its application—or
electricity, when one, who is ignorant of the—Law—governing its use,
tries to direct its force—without knowledge of the way to control it.

"The Great Immutable Decrees—which forever keep order in the Infinite
Realm of manifested Life—are all based upon the 'One Great Principle of
Creation'—LOVE. That is the Heart—the Source of All, and the very Hub
upon which—existence in form takes place.

"Love is Harmony—and without it in the beginning of a form—that form
could not come into existence at all. Love is the co-hesive Power of the
Universe, and without it—a Universe could not be.

"In your scientific world, Love expresses itself, as the attractive
force between the electrons. It is the directive Intelligence which
Wills them into form—the Power which keeps them whirling around a
central core—and the Breath within the core—that draws them to it. The
same thing is true of each vortex of force—everywhere in creation.

<span id="page_225">p. 225</span>

"A central core and the electrons whirling around it form an atom. This
core of Love is to the atom—what the magnetic pole is to the earth—and
what the spine is to the human body. Without a central core or Heart
Center—there is only the unformed—Universal Light—the electrons filling
Infinity and whirling around the—Great Central Sun.

"The electron is Pure Spirit or 'Light' of God. It remains forever
Uncontaminated and Perfect. It is—Eternally Self-sustained,
Indestructible, Self-luminous and Intelligent. If it were not, it could
not and would not obey 'The Law'—the directing activity of Love. It is
Immortal, Ever-Pure, Intelligent Light-Energy, and the only Real True
Substance out of which everything in the Universe is made—The Eternally
Perfect 'Life-Essence' of God.

"Inter-stellar space is filled with this pure 'Light-Essence.' It is not
dark and in chaos, as has been the ignorant, limited concept of puny
human intellects. This Great Sea of Universal Light—that exists
everywhere throughout Infinity—is constantly being drawn into form, and
given a quality of one kind or another, according to the way the
electrons are held around a central point or core by—Love.

"The number—of electrons which combine with each other—in a specific
atom—is the result of and determined by—conscious thought. The rate—at
which they whirl around the central core—is the

<span id="page_226">p. 226</span>

result of and determined by—feeling. The intensity—of the drawing and
whirling motion within the central core is the—'Breath of God' and
therefore, the most—Concentrated Activity of Divine Love. Speaking in
scientific terms it would be called—centripetal force. These are the
determining factors—which make the quality—of an atom.

"Thus, you will see the atom is an entity—a living, breathing
thing—created or brought into existence by the—Breath and Love of
God—through the—Will of Self-Conscious Intelligence. In this way, the
'Word is made flesh.' The machinery—that Self-Conscious Intelligence
uses to accomplish this manifestation of its Being—is thought and
feeling.

"Destructive thought and discordant feeling so rearrange the ratio and
rate of speed of the electrons—within the atom—that the duration of the
Breath of God—within the pole—is changed. The duration of the Breath—is
decreed by the Will of the Consciousness—using that particular kind of
atom. If that Conscious Directing Will is withdrawn—the electrons lose
their polarity—and fly apart seeking their way back—Intelligently mind
you—to the 'Great Central Sun' re-polarizing themselves. There they
receive Love only—the Breath of God is never-ending—and Order—the First
Law—is Eternally maintained.

"Some scientists have claimed and taught that planets collide in space.
No such thing is possible. To

<span id="page_227">p. 227</span>

do so—would be to throw the entire scheme of Creation into chaos. It
really is fortunate indeed—that the 'Mighty Laws of God' are not
limited—to the opinions—of some of the children of earth. It does not
matter what any scientist—mundane or otherwise thinks—God-Creation—is
ever moving forward—and expressing more and more—Perfection.

"The constructive thought and harmonious feeling within a human mind and
body are the Activities of Love and Order. These permit—the Perfect
Ratio and Speed of the electrons within the atom to remain permanent,
and thus, they stay polarized at their particular point in the Universe,
as long as the duration of the—Breath of God—within their core—is held
steady by the Will—of the Directing Self-Conscious Intelligence using
the body in which they exist. In this way, the quality of Perfection and
the maintenance of Life in a human body is—always—under the conscious
control of the Will of the individual occupying it. The Will of the
Individual is Supreme—over his temple—and even in cases of accident—no
one leaves his body-temple—until he wills to do so. Very often pain in
the body, fear, uncertainty, and many other things influence the
personality to change its decisions concerning what it has willed in the
past—but everything that happens to the body—is and will always be—under
the control of the individual's free will.

<span id="page_228">p. 228</span>

"To understand the above explanation—concerning the electron and the
conscious control the individual has—through his thought and feeling—to
govern the atomic structure of his own body—is to understand the—One
Principle Governing—form throughout Infinity. When man will make the
effort to prove this to himself—or within his own atomic flesh-body—he
will then proceed to Master Himself. When he has done—that—all else in
the Universe is his—willing co-worker—to accomplish whatsoever he
wills—through Love.

"Whoever makes himself—willingly obedient—unto the 'Law of Love,'
has—Perfection in his mind and world—Permanently maintained. Unto him
and him alone does—All Authority and Mastery—belong. He—Only—has the
right to Rule because he has first learned—to obey. When he has—obtained
obedience—from the atomic structure within his own mind and body—all
atomic structure outside of his mind and body will—obey him also.

"Thus, mankind through thought and feeling has the power—each individual
Within himself—to rise to the Highest or sink to the lowest. Each one
alone—determines his own pathway—of experience. By conscious control of
his attention—as to what he allows his mind to accept—he can walk and
talk with God—Face to Face—or looking away from God, become lower than
the animals, sinking his human

<span id="page_229">p. 229</span>

consciousness into—oblivion. In the latter case—the God-Flame Within
him—then withdraws from its human habitation. After aeons of time, it
tries a human journey once again—into the world of physical matter,
until—final victory—is accomplished consciously—and of its own
Free-Will."

"I told them of the limitless possibilities which Saint Germain had
shown me were before mankind for accomplishment, whenever they are
willing to accept The Great God—'Presence Within' every Individual—as
the directing and accomplishing power. The buyer of the mine asked me
why I used the word—acceptance—so often, and I recalled the words Saint
Germain had used in explaining it to me, for he said:

"Even in the outer activity of your Life, if you purchase a thing or are
offered something marvelous and perfect, if you do not—accept—it, it
would be impossible for you to use—or have the benefit from it. So it
is—with the 'Great God-Presence' Within us. Unless, we—accept—that our
Life is God-Life—and that all power and energy we have with which to do
anything is God-Power—and God-Energy—how can we have—GOD-Qualities and
accomplishment—in our world?

"As Sons of God, we are commanded to choose—whom we shall serve, the
Mighty 'Presence' of God Within us—or the outer human self. The

<span id="page_230">p. 230</span>

gratification of the outer human appetites and sense demands—has one and
only one result—misery, degradation, and destruction.

"All Constructive Desire is really the God-Self Within—pushing
Perfection forward—into the use and enjoyment of the outer self. The
Great Energy of Life—is flowing through us constantly. If we direct It
to constructive accomplishment—It brings joy and happiness. If directed
to sense gratification, there cannot be anything but misery as a result
because it is all the action of—Law—an Impersonal Life-Energy.

"Keep before the outer activity of your mind the constant reminder that
you are 'Life'—'God in Action' in you and your world. The personal self
is continually claiming things and power of its own—when the very Energy
by which it exists—is loaned it—by the God-Self. The outer personal
human activity does not even own—its skin. The very atoms of its body
are loaned to it—by the 'Supreme God-Presence' from the Great Sea of
Universal Substance.

"Train yourself to return all power and authority to the 'Great Glorious
God-Flame' which is your 'Real Self' and the 'Source' from which you
have always received every good thing." We talked until two o'clock in
the morning, and then, I had to suggest—we retire. No one wanted to
sleep but I said to them:

"You will sleep in the arms of God," and the next

<span id="page_231">p. 231</span>

morning, they were surprised to realize how quickly they had dropped off
to sleep.

We were up at seven, and on our way to Phoenix. The recording was
completed, and I explained I must leave—as my work with them was
finished for the time being. They were all deeply grateful and anxious
to know more. I promised to keep in touch with them and give further
help, as the Master Saint Germain should direct. As I was leaving the
buyer of the mine turned to me, and said:

"I don't care what anyone thinks of me—I want to embrace you—and thank
you from the bottom of my heart—for saving me from the ruin of my outer
self—and for revealing the 'Great Light.' I bowed my head in deep
humility, and replied:

"Thank God—I am but the channel. God alone is the Great 'Presence' and
Power—that does all things well." Mrs Atherton turned to me and
expressed her feeling:

"I do praise and thank the God in you—for the Mighty Protecting
'Presence,' and never in my Life shall I cease to thank God and you—for
the—Light—this experience has brought us all.

"I feel certain we shall all meet again," I replied and bidding
everyone, good-bye, turned my face once more toward Mount
Shasta—arriving at my lodge the evening of the second day.

Two weeks later, I felt a strong impulse to make

<span id="page_232">p. 232</span>

one more trip to my trysting place—with the Master Saint Germain. I
started at four in the morning, and reached the edge of the dense timber
about nine.

The plaintive cry of my panther friend came to my ears—before I had gone
twenty paces into the woods. I answered quickly. In a moment he came
bounding to my side with all the welcome of an old time friend, and we
proceeded onward to our meeting-place.

I noticed the panther was very restless, and acted as if laboring under
some inner agitation. This was most unusual—for he had always been very
quiet, when in my presence. I patted and stroked the beautiful head but
it made—no difference. I sat down and we ate lunch.

"Come on old boy," I said as we finished, "let's go for a walk." He gave
me a long steady look, the most pathetic expression I have ever seen. I
could not understand it.

We had gone some distance, when we came to a cliff about fifteen feet
high at the top of which—hung a projecting rock. Something caused me to
look at the panther. The expression in his eyes was wild and fierce. I
sensed a sort of tension in the atmosphere but did not realize—what it
was. I walked on a few paces farther, and felt a—chill pass over me.
Looking up suddenly, I saw a mountain lion crouched—ready to spring. The
next instant—it leaped toward me. I

<span id="page_233">p. 233</span>

threw myself against the cliff—and the lion landed beyond—where I had
stood. Like a flash of lightning—the panther sprang and the two locked
in mortal combat.

No words can describe the terror of the struggle—that followed. They
screamed, rolled, tore, and clawed each other. The lion was considerably
heavier, and it seemed for a time, as if it would gain the advantage.
However, the panther was the faster moving of the two, and finally broke
away. There was just an instant's pause until it saw a chance, and then
with one spring landed on the lion's back, and fastened its teeth—just
behind the ears.

The panther's grip was like steel, and after a few seconds of rolling
and twisting, the lion's struggles grew weaker. Finally they ceased
altogether. The panther came reeling toward me—his side terribly torn.
He looked up at me all the fierceness gone from his eyes—and his energy
ebbing fast. There passed an expression of contentment over the face,
and suddenly—giving a plaintive cry—he fell over dead at my feet.

I stood motionless, and wept silently at the loss of my friend—for I had
become almost as attached to him as to a human companion. The next
instant, I looked up, and beside me stood—Saint Germain.

"My Beloved Brother, be not sad or dismayed," he said, "your contact
with the panther had so

<span id="page_234">p. 234</span>

quickened its consciousness—that it could no longer remain in that
present body, and the Great Cosmic Law—demanded from it some service—to
you. This it gave in love by saving your life. All is truly well." He
touched the thumb of his right hand to my forehead.

"Be at peace," he continued, as the feeling of grief left me, and I felt
completely relieved. "The Great Cosmic Law is unerring. We cannot
receive without giving, and we cannot give without receiving. Thus, the
Great Balance of Life is maintained.

"I congratulate you sincerely on the service rendered at the mine, and
your serenity during the occurrence. All concerned with that
transaction—will—become great helpers to humanity.

"Soon, you will be called upon to render a far greater service—than any
you have given so far. In it, remember always it is God's Power and
Intelligence acting, and your mind and body—only the channel. Until you
meet with this experience, meditate constantly upon the 'Limitless Power
of God' which can express through you at—any time."

I asked him what the Ascended Master's attitude is in regard to the many
channels through whom partial Truth is given forth, and he replied:

"There are many sincere channels. Some have more understanding than
others. All are God's children serving to the best of their ability with
the

<span id="page_235">p. 235</span>

understanding they have at present. We may not judge anyone—but we
must—know and see only God—expressing in all. Our endeavor is to bless
all activity—wherever it is. We see the 'Inner-Light' radiating through
such activities, and this makes it impossible for us to be mistaken—as
to whether they—are or are not—giving forth Truth.

"It is the same with individuals. Those—who offer their service in the
Name of the Ascended Jesus Christ—will always receive more—than ordinary
sustaining power." We had walked some distance, when he said:

"Come, I will accompany you home. Place your arm about my shoulder." I
did so and felt my body lifted from the ground. In a few moments more, I
was in my room at the lodge with Saint Germain standing beside
me—smiling at my surprise.

"Meet me in seven days," he said, "at our appointed place for then—we
will finish our work in this part of the country." He smiled, bowed
graciously, and slowly faded from sight. The last thing that remained
visible—as he gradually disappeared—were his marvelous, beautiful
eyes—smiling back at me.

As I meditated each day upon the "Great God-Presence Within," for my
coming service, I realized more and more—how important it is—to keep the
attention focused upon "That Presence Only"—no

<span id="page_236">p. 236</span>

matter what appearances seem to indicate—in order to keep any outer
condition—from affecting me. In one of Saint Germain's conversations, he
had stressed particularly the all importance of keeping my outer self
harmonious, and in regard to this had said:

"My Son, you cannot realize—how very great is the necessity—for harmony
in the outer self—if the Fulness of the Inner Perfection and Power—is to
be expressed—in your outer life. The importance of keeping a Feeling of
peace, love, and serenity in the—personal self—cannot be emphasized too
strongly—for when this is done the "Mighty God-Presence Within" can
act—without limit—in an instant.

"The continual Outpouring of a Feeling of Peace and Divine Love to every
person and everything unconditionally—no matter whether you think it be
deserved or not—is the Magic Key—that unlocks the door and—releases
instantly—this 'Tremendous Inner God-Power.' Fortunate indeed is—he—who
has learned this 'Law' for—he then seeks to—BE—All Peace and Love.
Without It—humanity has nothing good, and—with It—they have all things
'Perfect.' Harmony is the Keynote—the 'One Great Law of Life.' Upon It
rests—All Perfect Manifestation—and without It all form disintegrates
and returns into the Great Sea of Universal Light."

The following seven days, I spent much time in

<span id="page_237">p. 237</span>

meditation. I felt a greater and greater peace growing within me—until
by the sixth day, it seemed as if my entire consciousness were like a
great calm sea.

On the morning of the seventh day, I left my lodge at four o'clock and
reached our meeting place at ten thirty. I sat down on a log to wait
with a feeling of wonderful exhilaration—which I knew to be the result
of my meditation. I was so deep within the contemplation of my God
Self—I did not hear anyone approaching—until a voice spoke to me.

I looked up, and saw an old man with white hair and beard, whom I
thought at first sight, was an old prospector, although his clothing was
too clean for that occupation. As he came up to me and held out his
hand, that too confirmed my feeling—he was not a laboring man. We
exchanged greetings, chatted for a few moments on generalities, then he
turned to me, and said:

"My Friend, I would like to tell you a story. It won't take long. I
haven't told it to anyone for a long time. I would like to try once
more.

By that time I began to have a feeling of intense interest. It occurred
to me he might be thirsty, and as I reached for a cup to get him a
drink—from the spring by which we stood—a crystal cup formed within my
hand—like the one Saint Germain had held out to me several times. The
old man looked up and with eyes shining and excited, almost shouted:

<span id="page_238">p. 238</span>

"It is he! It is he!"

I did not know what to do, so I insisted—he drink. As I looked within
the cup, I saw it was filled with the same clear—Sparkling Liquid—the
Master had given me. The old man grasped it eagerly, and—with an intense
expression of the deepest gratitude I have ever seen—drank the contents.
He immediately became very calm and quiet—but with it all a deep,
intense sincerity. I asked him again to tell me the story, and he began
by saying:

"My father was a British officer stationed in the Punjab of India where
we made our home. When I was sixteen, he financed a friend who went to
South Africa—to try his luck in the diamond mines, but my father never
heard from him afterward.

"The year I was twenty, a tall handsome stranger, a man of great wisdom,
visited my father at our home. He had come to bring a message from
father's friend.

"'I bring you news,' he explained, 'from the friend whom you financed
four years ago. He met with great success on that venture—in fact became
very wealthy. He has recently passed on at the mines, and left no
relatives. His entire fortune has been left to you and in case of your
passing—it is to go to your son. If you desire, I will take charge of
the matter and have it transferred—at once.'

"'I cannot leave India at the present time,' my father replied, 'for I
am on government duty here. I

<span id="page_239">p. 239</span>

appreciate greatly your offer to take care of the matter for me.' I was
standing nearby during their conversation, and when they had completed
arrangements the stranger turned to me.

"'My son,' he said, 'when you find the man who will offer you a—crystal
cup of Sparkling Liquid—you will have met the one—who can assist you in
raising the body. I cannot tell you more than this, except that you will
find him—on a great mountain in North America. This may seem vague to
you now but—it is all I can say.'

"The stranger left, and a month later my father, who had ridden out to
adjust certain government matters with the natives, was shot, and passed
on before he could be brought home. I was an only son, and after another
month, mother and I prepared for our return to England. Just before we
left the same stranger came again, and said he was ready to transfer
father's fortune to me. I explained, father had been shot.

"'Yes,' the stranger replied, 'when I left two months ago, I knew your
father would pass on before my return. I have arranged for the fortune
to be transferred to you, or rather to the Bank of England—for you. Here
is money you may wish to use on the journey home, also the papers of
transfer, and the credentials you will need at the bank. Present them,
and you will receive custody of your wealth. Much

<span id="page_240">p. 240</span>

of it is in diamonds of the first quality.' I thanked him, and offered
to pay for his services and kindness but he replied:

"'Your kind intent is greatly appreciated but that is—already adjusted.
I will be happy to accompany you to the steamer at Bombay.'

"The trip revealed to me his great wisdom and beside him—I felt like an
infant. I know now—he enveloped me in a Radiation which has stayed with
me—throughout the years. He arranged for transportation, accompanied us
to the boat, and his last words to me were:

"'Remember—the "Crystal Cup." Seek and you shall find.'

"After a most wonderful voyage, we arrived at Southampton—went on to
London, and presented my credentials to the Bank of England. The
official to whom I presented them remarked:

"'Yes, we were expecting you today. Here are your bank and checking
books.'

"I looked at them to see how much my fortune amounted to and was amazed
to learn—a hundred thousand pounds—had been placed to my credit. Five
years later, my mother passed on. I transferred one half of my wealth to
a bank in New York and began the search for 'the man with the Crystal
Cup.'

"I can never repeat the disappointments, the trials,

<span id="page_241">p. 241</span>

the sorrow I have been through but in the face of everything, somehow—I
could never give up. The thing which seems so strange to me is—while I
have grown old in outer appearance, my energy and strength are as great
as ever—sometimes I think greater—than in my fullest youth.

"In years, I am seventy. Today, I just wanted to follow this trail, and
praise God I have found you. My desire was so great—it was almost
irresistible."

"But my good man," I asked, "what am I to do for you?"

"You will know," he replied, "for I know I have made no mistake. In the
heart of this majestic mountain is a Great Power. I feel it. Ask God—to
show you what to do."

Suddenly, I felt the "Mighty God-Power" surging forth so strong—it
almost lifted me from the ground. Making the sign—Saint Germain had
taught me, I called to God for "Light" and raising my hand in salutation
said:

"Mighty God in man and the Universe! We seek Thy Light! We seek Thy
Wisdom! We seek Thy Power! Let Thy Will be done in and for this, My
Brother, who has sought and found me to do for him—I know not what. Thou
knowest! Manifest Thy Will through my mind and body, and let what ever
is to be done for this Brother—Thy Son—come forth."

As my hand came down, it held the—Crystal Cup—

<span id="page_242">p. 242</span>

filled with "Living Liquid-Light." I offered it to him, and my—Mighty
God-Self spoke—again.

"Drink without fear. Thy search is ended."

He drank the contents without a moment's hesitation. I stepped forward
quickly—and took both his hands in mine. Slowly and steadily—every
vestige of age—disappeared from him, and the God in me continued:

"Behold! Thou art forever Free from all earthly limitation. Ascend
now—unto the 'Ascended Host of Light'—who await Thee."

Very slowly, he began to rise from the ground, and as he did so, his
human garments disappeared, and he became clothed in raiment of
Glistening White. I let go his hands. Then in a voice of deepest Love,
he said:

"I shall return to thee—Beloved Brother. Well shalt thou be repaid for
this—Transcendent Service. Thou wert the—only one—through
whom—this—could be done for me. Some day, thou shalt see why," and with
a happy smile, he disappeared on—a Radiant Pathway of "Light."

As the Mighty God-Power Within me receded, I was so astounded—I fell on
my knees and offered the deepest prayer of my Life in grateful humility
and praise for the—privilege—of giving such service.

I rose and the Master Saint Germain received me into his wondrous
embrace.

<span id="page_243">p. 243</span>

"My Beloved Brother!" he said, "I am greatly pleased. Noble and faithful
was your attendance upon the Great God Within you. Beautifully did you
receive your Mighty 'God in Action.' I do indeed congratulate you. You
will ever be held within Our Embrace, even though outwardly you may not
always be aware of it.

"You have become a worthy 'Messenger' of the Great White Brotherhood and
the Ascended Host. Hold close to your—Mighty God Self. Thus, you will
ever be ready for service—wherever and for whatever—is required. My Love
enfolds you—until we meet again. I will keep you informed."

Slowly, I wended my way back to the lodge, every step praise and
gratitude to the "One Mighty God" that molds us all into "Eternal
Perfection."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IX. Venus Visits the Royal Teton](um13)
