[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](um12.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1878891014/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Unveiled Mysteries*, by Godfré Ray King, \[1934\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_244">p. 244</span>

### CHAPTER IX

### *Venus Visits the Royal Teton*

ANY weeks had passed, and the morning of December, thirty-first,
nineteen hundred thirty, came and with it—the Master, Saint Germain.

"Be ready at seven o'clock tonight," he instructed, "and I will call for
you. Focus your attention as much as possible on the—Glory of God Within
yourself—that you may receive the full benefit intended—on this Divine
Occasion. Remember your Twin Ray and son—for the three of you will be
honored guests—of the Brotherhood of the Royal Teton—at their New Year
Assembly tonight."

I spent the remainder of the day in deep meditation. He arrived at seven
o'clock and as I had already placed my physical body in bed—I stepped
forth—in the one he had prepared for me.

"Tonight," he continued, "an experiment is to be tried—which has not
been accomplished—for over seventy thousand years. We feel perfectly
confident of success on this occasion, as all are now well prepared.
Come."

We must have travelled at great speed, although I did not realize it,
and soon stood on the apex of

<span id="page_245">p. 245</span>

the Royal Teton, where the heavy covering of snow made it glisten in the
moonlight like millions of diamonds. As we approached the entrance to
the tube, I noticed a clearing around it for a radius of at least a
hundred feet. As we stepped within it, the atmosphere felt warm and
comfortable. We passed on through the entrance—which had been opened for
those attending the New Year celebration.

Saint Germain and I entered the great audience chamber, and met Lotus
and our son—who had already arrived with their escort—Amen Bey. Our joy
on this occasion was very great—for we had not been together on the
physical plane for some two years, and during that time, while working
out of the body, each had been occupied with his own individual
activities—which necessitated our being in different channels at the
Inner levels.

The great room was brilliantly lighted, and the glorious fragrance of
roses and lotus blossoms filled the air. The sweetest, most delightful
music floated in from everywhere. Many had already come and others were
arriving every few moments.

We noticed a large object—covered with a golden cloth—had been placed in
the center of the room—but as no explanation was offered concerning it,
we remained silent. Saint Germain presented us to the guests, and then
led the way into a room filled with rare musical instruments. We saw a
great pipe organ

<span id="page_246">p. 246</span>

and four harps made of a substance like pearl with posts of gold, the
sounding boards and upper parts being constructed of white metal. The
high strings on the harps were silver wound, the bass ones gold and—the
material of which they were made—gave forth a tone—that combined the
sounds produced by metal, wood and the human voice. The tone of these
instruments can only be known by being heard, for they were different
from anything which has ever been used in the outer world of music in
the West. The sound—produced by this unusual material—more nearly
resembles some of the wonderful tones of the esraj, an instrument used
in India.

We saw four violins—also made of a substance that looked like pearl—but
the resonance is far beyond that—of any known wood. The strings were
wound with both gold and silver and produced a beauty of tone almost
beyond description. We heard all these instruments—played later that
evening.

Returning to the Great Audience Hall, Saint Germain showed Lotus and our
son—the beautiful portraits—which had been recently transferred from the
temple of Mitla in Oaxaca, Mexico. He escorted them through the record
room—where they were shown the evidence—of my former observations with
him.

For the work being done during this New Year celebration, all members of
the Royal Teton were

<span id="page_247">p. 247</span>

clothed—in plain golden robes of gorgeous material—with the emblem of
the Brotherhood on the left breast—embroidered so it looked like dark
blue velvet, the same shade as the great panel—that formed—the Cosmic
Mirror.

There were seventy men, thirty-five ladies, and—the Presiding Master,
Lanto—who is the Blessed Brother—in charge of this Retreat. When all had
assembled who belonged to this branch, he stepped forward and addressed
them saying:

"It is now eleven o'clock and time for our meditation. Tonight, let us
pour out adoration unto the 'Great Light,' feel at 'One' with our
own—Divinity—for thirty minutes, and during the following thirty minutes
know the 'Oneness' of Venus with our earth. All take their accustomed
stations, and form an elliptic in the center of the room."

For one hour, it seemed as though a hundred and six golden figures were
united in one breath—so completely were they in unison. At the close of
the meditation—a joyous burst of music filled the immense hall,
and—Lanto stepped before—the Great Mirror.

He extended his hands and—a Tremendous Blaze of "Light"—flashed forth
upon it, revealing a group of people—far in the distance—surrounded by
golden, rose, and violet "Light," Dazzling in its Beauty and Radiance.
They drew nearer, and the same glorious, wondrous colors filled the
great audience chamber—

<span id="page_248">p. 248</span>

giving everyone a tremendous feeling of uplift and power.

Presently, Twelve Guests from Venus—stood in our midst—robed in White,
Scintillating Garments—surpassing all power of description. There were
seven gentlemen and five ladies—all extremely handsome.

Six of the men were at least six feet four inches in height—the seventh
fully two inches taller than the rest. The ladies were about five feet
ten. All had light brown hair with the exception of the Tall Master and
his was—a glorious pure gold. Their brilliant, piercing, violet-blue
eyes were beautiful and fascinating.

The Tall Master gave the salutation of the East, touching his heart and
forehead with the finger tips of his right hand—and bowed low—before
Lanto. The others also came forward, greeted him, and were presented to
those assembled. Lanto gave a brief address of welcome, only the
following part of which is permitted to be recorded:

"In the 'Presence' of the One Supreme God—and those of the 'Great White
Brotherhood' assembled here—these Twelve Guests from Venus are made
'Members of the Brotherhood of the Royal Teton.'"

The Tall Master was made Presiding Master for the evening. He
acknowledged the welcome, stepped to the center of the room, and caused
the golden cloth to be removed from the objects it covered.

<span id="page_249">p. 249</span>

Lo! before us stood—the three crystal caskets—still containing the
sustained bodies of Lotus, our son, and myself. They looked—as if the
forms had just gone to sleep, glowing with perfect health. The Presiding
Master turned to us and said:

"Are you ready?" and we three answered, in the affirmative.

"Then, take your places by the containers," he directed.

We obeyed and immediately—a Marvelous Radiance gathered and drew close
around the bodies and ourselves—the intensity increasing rapidly—until
we must have been invisible to the outer sight. In a few moments—the
Radiance diminished—and to our amazement—the caskets were empty. We
stood there—clothed in those bodies we had laid aside so long ago—which
had been sustained and purified by the "Flame of Life"—during these many
centuries.

The transformation was amazing and—the feeling cannot be described—for
we were as much surprised—as is the reader. However, the human side of
anyone, even at its best, knows so little of the Tremendous
Wonders—existing everywhere around us all the time, and the Infinite
Possibilities within every plane of Life—that all things are possible,
and—the closer we live—in Love and recognition of our Divinity, the more
of these Wonders throughout Creation—will be revealed in our individual
lives.

<span id="page_250">p. 250</span>

The experiment had proved a success and, as we moved about among the
Brothers and Sisters, all congratulated the Master and ourselves upon
the accomplishment. They greatly rejoiced that—so strange an experiment
had become a mighty Truth—many commenting upon how much those bodies
resembled the ones of the Visitors from Venus.

The crystal caskets were then removed to their room, and the wonderful
musical instruments—brought into the audience chamber. Saint Germain
played the first number on the great organ, a composition he called
"Hearts Of The Future." It seemed to me the most delicate, colorful, yet
powerful music that ever came from an organ on earth. While he
played—the most beautiful colors—gorgeous past description—poured
through the atmosphere of the enormous room.

A group played the next number. The Master Saint Germain at the organ,
three of the Lady Masters from Venus, and Lotus played four harps, two
of the Brothers from Venus, our son, and I played four violins. When all
were in readiness the words—"Souls In Ecstacy"—flashed out above the
organ, as Saint Germain played the prelude. All entered deeply into the
fulness and joy of that marvelous music. The Volume and Power swelled
into such Magnitude—it seemed as though the Beauty and Glory of that Joy
must send forth enough God-Consciousness—

<span id="page_251">p. 251</span>

to lift all mankind—yes—even the earth itself—into Everlasting
Perfection.

There were four more numbers—played with the same Tremendous Power to
lift and harmonize everywhere—until we felt as if—the very mountain
would float away. At the close of the music, the instruments were
returned to their room, and the Presiding Master seated all in proper
order—before the Great Mirror. He took his place at the point of earth's
triangle—and scenes of wonder from Venus—began to appear—he—explaining
every detail that did not explain itself.

The pictures revealed much of their system of education—showing
astronomical instruments—whose perfection would make the scientific
world of today speechless—with admiration and astonishment—and
geologist's equipment for examining the interior of the stratas of the
planets—of both Venus and earth. We saw inventors and several of their
tremendous discoveries—surpassing our fondest imagination.

"Many of these inventions," explained the Master, "will come into use on
earth in—the Golden Crystal Age—we have now entered."

Some of the principal inventions—that are to be utilized on earth—were
explained and could humanity have seen them—it would take heart and be
tremendously encouraged—in regard to the future. It may be these
pictures from Venus—will be taken

<span id="page_252">p. 252</span>

up and described in a separate work later—providing permission can be
obtained.

The scenes from Venus finished, and those concerning the earth came on
the screen. Many changes were shown to take place in the next seventy
years. These affected Europe, Asia, India, North and South America, and
revealed to us—that regardless of all appearances at the present
time—the sinister force attempting to create chaos and destruction
throughout the world—will be completely destroyed. When that is
accomplished—the mass of humanity—will turn to the "Great God Presence"
within each heart and also governing the Universe. "Peace Shall Reign On
Earth—and Man Send Out Good Will To Man." This Revelation was
stupendous. The closing scenes followed next—and these concerned
principally the United States in the next century. The progress and
advancement she will make is almost—unbelievable.

These things are true for the "Great God Law" makes no mistakes and—the
Revelations of that New Year's night—are God's Eternally True Records.

Certain great souls were shown who would awaken, be Raised, and added to
the—Host of Ascended Ones—to carry forward this great progress. The
Presiding Master—then reminded those present—of the "Blessed Kumaras"
and in a voice filled with Love and Adoration gave the following
explanation—in tribute to them.

<span id="page_253">p. 253</span>

"The Seven Kumaras, whom some Inner students have known as—'Lords of The
Flame' from Venus—were the Only Ones from this entire system of
planets—who of their own free will and infinite Love—offered to guard
the children of earth and assist their upward progress. They came and
gave Transcendent Help here—at the most critical period of earth's
growth. It was the time of initiation—that is most dangerous in the Life
of a planet and its humanity, but through their protection and guidance,
the goal was attained—and mankind has been enabled to reach—the 'Greater
Heights.'

"Many of the Brothers understand—that every twenty-five hundred
years—the Kumaras release a greatly increased Outpouring of Cosmic
Love—Wisdom—and Energy. This Blazing Light and Transcendent
Radiance—flooding the earth and its inhabitants—interpenetrating all—is
a Tremendous Lifting Process, and gives a forward impulse to the growth
of the entire earth, as well as its humanity.

"Just preceding each of these Great Outpourings extraordinary physical
disturbances occur, and general unrest is felt throughout—by the people.
Such disturbance is due to the discord that has accumulated during the
last—of the preceding period. The generation of such inharmony is
due—always—to the wandering away from the fundamental 'Principle of
Life'—and the human sense disturbance

<span id="page_254">p. 254</span>

thus created—[pollutes](errata.htm#4.md) the outer activity of mankind, the
earth, and its atmosphere.

"It is to cleanse this, and bring humanity back to—the Original Purity
of Life—that cataclysmic action takes place. It is following these
periods, the Kumaras release an Enormous Outpouring of 'LIGHT'—to
illumine and strengthen earth's children, ultimately enabling them to
make—the Supreme Attainment.

"We are approaching another such period, and this time the release of
the Great Cosmic Love, Wisdom and Energy—the Mighty Rays of Light—will
not only quicken the minds of the race but the atomic structure of earth
as well—making it more 'Luminous' in our solar system. Never, since
these Great Lords of the Flame came to earth—have conditions permitted
such a Great Outpouring to take place—as will occur ere long. Many—who
have seemed to become hardened by their former activities, will awaken,
as it were almost over night, and feel—the Nearness of the Great God
'Presence'—within each heart. Many, who have been meek and humble but
holding close to the 'Inner Presence,' will suddenly blaze forth amazing
themselves as well as others—by the Transcendent Light, they will
manifest. All will be done by the Power of God-Love, and humanity will
truly begin to realize—that it is the height of folly—for one part of
God's Creation—to war against another part.

<span id="page_255">p. 255</span>

"The desire to bless others instead of themselves—will almost
involuntarily—enter into the hearts of mankind, and send forth a
'Light'-that will illumine the rest of the 'Way to Perfection.'

"Selfishness alone—holds the children of this sphere in the bondage and
misery—which have been allowed to express upon earth—but when the 'Light
of the Christ' expands the 'Love in the Heart,' selfishness flees and
returns to the sea of forgetfulness.

"Great, natural, physical changes will take place. Two Great Centers of
'Light'—will pour forth their blessing to humanity—one—the Glorious
Glistening 'Presence' of Shamballa in its Dazzling Radiance—and the
other—will appear in the United States—not however where any so far have
been led to believe—but at a point—which has not yet been indicated
to—outer channels—of the world.

"During the present activity of assistance and intense outpouring of
'Light' by the Great Ascended Host—who minister to the children of
earth, hundreds of humanity—will find their present physical
bodies—being quickened by the rapid raising—of the vibratory rate and,
as this is completed will realize—that human, physical limitation and
discord have dropped away like an old worn out garment, and that
they—the Children of Light—stand forever at 'One' with the 'Flame of
Life-Everlasting' and the

<span id="page_256">p. 256</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> 'Perfection of
Eternal Youth and Beauty' a Visible Tangible Reality.

"Beloved children of earth, you stand upon the Threshold of the Ages.
Its door is being held open by the 'Great Ones of Love' who ever invite
you to walk consciously by their side in the—'Light.' No matter what the
activities in the world without—walk with the 'Light' and in the
'Light'—regardless of appearances. Then, will you find a Master of the
'Light,' who has trod this self same path before you, ever watches and
stands by your side revealing—the 'True Way.'

"The cycle changes—and we enter a New Dispensation—that brings with it a
safer, more powerful, and yet rapid means by which the one climbing the
Path to Attainment is enabled to hold—Permanent Contact with the 'Great
Cosmic Light.'

"In this New Order, the discipline for the neophyte—will be the focusing
and maintaining—of his attention entirely—upon the three highest centers
of the body, and he will do all his work at these points. Only the
centers in the heart, throat, and head will receive conscious
consideration and attention.

"The entire effort of the aspirant will be—to hold his attention upon
these—for only by looking away from the lower centers—will he ever be
able—to rise out of misery and limitation. The center at the top of the
head is the highest focus in the human

<span id="page_257">p. 257</span>

body, and there the Silver Cord of 'Liquid White Light' from the Great
Source of Creation—enters.

"When the attention of the mind is held steadfast upon this, the Door of
the Soul is opened and—the Three Fold Activity of the Pure White
Light—encircles the waist just below the solar plexus—cutting off
forever—the destructive activities of the animal nature in man. This
permits his soul to leap forth into its Complete Divine Activity—united
once more with the Perfection of Its Source—and Eternally
thereafter—Master of all human creation—which means the discords of
earth.

"Sincere students should meditate frequently upon the Perfect Action of
the 'Golden Light' within the head—for It will illumine and teach the
outer mind—all good things. This is the 'Light of the God Within.' One
should feel It filling his entire consciousness—his body and world. This
is the 'Light that lighteth every man that cometh into the world,' and
there is no human being in existence—who has not some of this 'Light'
within him.

"There are many throughout the earth—who are rapidly awakening, and
feeling the Mighty Surge of this 'Inner Light' pouring itself out
through them and thus—finding greater expression. If these will rigidly
keep themselves harmonious—unflinchingly hold their attention upon the
God Self Within—accept and visualize the Full Activity of Its Dazzling

<span id="page_258">p. 258</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Radiance—they can
encircle themselves in the Three-Fold Activity of the White Light. This
cuts off—the discordant creation of the outer world.

"Beloved Brothers and Sisters, it will be our great joy and privilege to
meet with you in January and July of each year, here in your Retreat
because of—the Nearness and Outpouring of the All-controlling
God-Light—which will soon be flooding America from shore to shore.

"Now, while the crystal containers are being brought in, let us meditate
deeply upon the—'Oneness of Venus and the earth—the Omnipresence of
Divinity—abiding in form.'"

We remained in deep silence for about ten minutes, and then the
Presiding Master instructed us three—to take our places beside the
caskets. He made the Sign of the heart and head, crossed his hands upon
his chest, and called unto the "God-Presence":

"Thou Mighty Creator of the Universe and all it contains—Thou One
Omnipresent God—we await the Manifestation of Thy Great Beneficent
Presence."

A soft rose-colored "Luminous Essence" enveloped ourselves and the
containers, drawing close about us. Suddenly—A Great Shaft of Dazzling
White Light entered the enveloping Radiance—remained three or four
minutes, and gradually faded from sight.

<span id="page_259">p. 259</span>

As we looked into the containers, the three bodies were resting within
them. Observing each other, we were again clothed in the bodies—the
Master, Saint Germain—had prepared for us—and because of which, we were
enabled to visit the Great Assembly in the Royal Teton.

The Presiding Master blessed those assembled—the "Brotherhood of the
Royal Teton" and all upon earth—promising to be with them again the
following July.

The Twelve from Venus—then took their stations upon the circle in the
floor of the audience hall.

The entire mountain trembled with the Mighty God Power—which they
drew—and the "Light" thus focused took the form of an enormous eagle—its
body violet and the head and feet of gold. The entire room became filled
with a "Blazing White Light" forming one end of a "Great Pathway of
Luminous Essence" on which the Twelve Radiant Beings returned to their
home on Venus.

The Supreme Vision—those assembled gazed upon—surpasses anything words
can describe. As the Great Vibratory Activity was lowered—a Wondrous
Crystal Radiance illumined the Cosmic Mirror—and the words: "Peace and
Illumination to all the earth and its inhabitants. Blessings from
Venus"—appeared across its surface.

Each guest touched his heart and forehead, crossed

<span id="page_260">p. 260</span>

his hands upon his chest and bowed in acceptance of—the Mighty
Outpouring. All passed before Lanto, and received individual instruction
for the work of nineteen thirty-one—then sat in deep silence and
adoration unto the "Great Light." At the end of the meditation, a
glorious burst of music filled the great hall and heads were bowed to
receive His Blessing. His voice—clear, beautiful and resonant rang out:

"There is nothing Supreme but—God. There is nothing Eternal and Real
but—The Christ. There is nothing True but—The Light. These Three are
'The One.' All else is shadow. Remember—shadows hide—shadows mislead—and
shadows make mankind stumble.

"He, who walks the Pathway of Light—stands True to the Christ and looks
always Godward, lives in a world of his own—untouched by the seething
vortex about him—yet ever working in it, while the shadows last. These
he turns his Light upon, and thus compels them to pass into the sea of
forgetfulness.

"There is no happiness apart from facing and adoring the One Great
God—The Source of All. There is nothing permanent but—Christ. There is
no way to proceed through the Universe but on the 'Pathway of Light.'

"If you will arm yourselves with this Eternal Understanding of
Life—swear allegiance only to your Source—God—stand True to the
Christ—and carry

<span id="page_261">p. 261</span>

the Light—you will accept as your code of honor the Obligation 'To Love
and Bless Life'—no matter in what form it may be expressing, wherever
you meet it.

"This is the Eternal Plan of Existence—and whosoever knows—That—may
proceed anywhere in the Universe, explore all it contains, and yet be
untouched by whatever shadows mankind has created, in its forgetfulness
of—Whence It sprang.

"GOD alone is Great—and only unto 'The Source of All Greatness' does All
Glory belong. He, who knows only his Source and refuses aught else is
Wise indeed, for he becomes Permanent Happiness, and is—Master wherever
he moves.

"Then and then alone—may be become Creator of Worlds. Upon these he
bestows his happiness, and in this activity really lives the Divine Plan
for All.

"Members of the Brotherhood of the Royal Teton—Reveal thou This Plan to
the wayward children of earth. Shed Thy Radiance upon their self-created
shadows, and point them 'The Way' to 'The Great Central Sun'—Our
Transcendent Source. My Light enfolds you—My Power upholds you—and My
Love breathes through you to those who seek their home in 'The Light.'

"Beloved Humanity—may this same Mighty Radiance shed its Light to
illumine, heal, and bless you with That Divine Love which will ever hold
All

<span id="page_262">p. 262</span>

close in the Eternal Embrace of 'The One Supreme Light.'

"America—God bless you and clothe you—now—with the 'Everlasting
Shadowless Light.'"

 

 

FINIS

 

 

 

 
