[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Classics](../../index) 
[Petronius](../index)  [Index (Latin)](../satyrlat/index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sat13)  [Next](sat15) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# CHAPTER THIRTEEN

\[C <span id="C"></span>[(Latin)](../satyrlat/satl100) \] We chose out a
retired spot on the stern-deck, and as it was not even yet daylight,
Eumolpus dozed off; but neither Giton nor myself could get a single wink
of sleep. I reflected with anxiety on the fact that I had made a
companion of Eumolpus, a still more redoubtable rival than Ascyltos, and
the thought gave me no peace. But reason presently getting the better of
my chagrin, "It is certainly unfortunate," I said to myself, "that our
friend finds the boy so much to his liking; but then are not all
Nature's finest productions common to all mankind? The sun shines on the
just and on the unjust. The moon, with her countless train of attendant
stars, lights the very beasts of the wilderness to their prey. What can
be more beautiful than water? Yet it flows freely for all and sundry. Is
Love alone to be furtively snatched and not won in the open field? Nay!
for my own part, I would rather not have any good thing that all the
world may not covet. One rival, and that an old man, will hardly do me
much harm; even should he wish to presume, he will but lose his labor,
for want of breath."

Reassured by the unlikelihood of his success, I calmed my anxieties, and
wrapping my head in my cloak, tried to persuade myself I was asleep. But
all of a sudden, as if Fortune were resolved to destroy my composure, a
lamentable voice sounded on the poop-deck, crying, "What! has he fooled
me then?" It was a man's voice, and one not unfamiliar to my ears, and
my heart began to beat wildly. Nor was this all; for now a woman,
equally indignant, blazed out in an even fiercer tone, "If only some god
would put Giton in my power, what a welcome I would give the vagabond!"
Stunned by the unexpectedness of the words, we both turned pale as
death. I was particularly terrified, and felt as if I were being
tortured by a horrible nightmare. When I found my voice at last, I asked
Eumolpus, who was just dropping off to sleep, plucking at the skirt of
his tunic with trembling hands, "By all you deem holy, father, whose
ship is this? and who are aboard her? tell me that."

He was furious at being disturbed. "So this was the reason," he
grumbled, "you chose out the quietest nook on the deck for us to occupy,
that you might not allow us one moment's rest? What the better are you,
when I've told you Lichas a Tarentine commands the ship, and that
Tryphaena is his passenger to Tarentum?" I shuddered horror-struck at
this thunderclap, and baring my throat, "Oh! Destiny," I ejaculated,
"now truly is your triumph complete!" Giton for his part fell in a dead
faint on my bosom. Presently, when a copious sweat had relieved the
tension of our spirits, I grasped Eumolpus round the knees, and cried,
"Have pity on two dying wretches, and in the name of what we both hold
dear, end our life; death draws nigh, and unless you refuse to deal it,
will haply be a boon."

Overwhelmed by my odious suspicion, Eumolpus swore by gods and goddesses
he knew nothing whatever of what had happened, and had never entertained
a thought of treachery; but that in absolute innocence of heart and
simple good faith he had led his comrades aboard the ship he had long
ago chosen for his own conveyance overseas. "Come now, what plot is
there afoot?" he demanded; "what Hannibal have we on board with us?
Lichas of Tarentum, a most respectable man, and not merely owner of this
vessel, which he commands himself, but of sundry landed estates besides
and a house of commerce, is carrying a cargo to sell in the way of
business. So this is the Cyclops, the pirate king, we owe our
passage-money to; then besides him, there is Tryphaena, the fairest of
fair women, who is sailing from port to port on pleasure bent."

\[CI <span id="CI"></span>[(Latin)](../satyrlat/satl101) \] "Why!
these," retorted Giton, "are the very persons we wish to avoid," and
gave the amazed Eumolpus a short account of the reasons for their
hostility and the extremity of the risk we ran. So confounded was he at
the news, he knew not what advice to offer, but besought each of us to
say what he thought. "Imagine us entrapped," he went on, "in the
Cyclops' cave; some means or other of escape must be discovered, unless
we prefer a leap overboard and a sudden end to all our troubles."

"Better," interposed Giton, "persuade the pilot to steer the ship into
some harbor, of course making it worth his while, and tell him your
brother is so subject to seasickness he is at death's door. You can
easily color this excuse with woebegone looks and streaming tears, so
that the officer may grant you the favor out of sheer compassion." But
Eumolpus at once declared this scheme to be impracticable; "for big
ships," he pointed out, "require to be laboriously warped into
landlocked harbors; besides, how utterly improbable it will sound that
the boy should have come to such a desperate pass so quickly as all
this. Another point. Most likely Lichas will want to visit a sick
passenger as a mark of civility. How singularly pleasant for us, look
you, to have the captain, whom we particularly wish to avoid, coming to
see us of his own motion! But again, granted the vessel could be turned
from her main course, and that Lichas should never think of inspecting
the sick boy, how are we to get off the ship without every soul on board
seeing us? With faces muffled, or faces bare? If muffled, who but will
spring forward to help the poor patients ashore? If bare, what does this
amount to but simply giving ourselves away?"

\[CII <span id="CII"></span>[(Latin)](../satyrlat/satl102) \] "Nay! why
not," I interposed, "make a bold stroke, slip down a rope into the
ship's boat and cutting the painter leave the rest to Fortune? Not that
I expect Eumolpus to join in the venture; why should we involve an
innocent man in troubles that in no way concern him? Enough for me if
good luck attend us two on our descent into the boat." "Not at all a bad
idea," said Eumolpus, "if only it were feasible; but who could help
noticing your attempt,--first and foremost the pilot, who is on watch
all night, observing every motion of the stars? Possibly you might elude
his vigilance during an instant's sleepiness, if escape were practicable
by any other part of the vessel; but as things are, you are bound to
escape by the stern, past the very helm, for that is where the rope is
made fast that secures the boat. Besides, I wonder this never occurred
to you, Encolpius, that one of the crew is on watch in the boat night
and day, a sentinel you cannot get rid of, except by killing the man or
pitching him neck and crop overboard. As to the feasibility of this,
well! consult your own courage. About my accompanying you myself, I
shirk no danger that gives the faintest hope of success. But to throw
away one's life as a thing of no importance is, I am sure, what you do
not approve of.

"Now consider how you like this plan; I will clap you in a couple of
hides, cording you up among my clothes as part of my luggage, of course
leaving sufficient openings for you to breathe and eat through. Then I
will raise an outcry to the effect that my slaves have both jumped
overboard, because they were afraid of a more terrible punishment. So
when we get into port, I will convey you ashore as baggage without
exciting any suspicion whatever."

"Oh! you would pack us up in bales, as if we were solid inside, eh?--and
not liable to evacuations at all? as if we never sneezed or snored? The
same sort of trick turned out such a success once before, didn't it?
Granted we could endure the bondage for a day, what if a calm or a
contrary gale prolonged the time further? what would become of us then?
Why! even clothes, if kept too long tightly packed, cut at the folds,
and papers grow illegible, when tied up in bundles. Young and unused to
hardship, how shall we endure swathing bands and ligaments, like graven
images? We must find some better way of escape than this. Listen to what
I have hit on. Eumolpus, as a man of letters, of course carries ink
about him; let us black ourselves with it from head to foot. Then as
Ethiopian slaves we shall be at your service, light-hearted and free
from fear of consequences, besting our enemies by this change of
complexion."

"Why certainly," cried Giton, "circumcise us too, that we may pass for
Jews, and bore our ears to imitate Arabs, and chalk our faces that Gaul
may claim us as her sons! As if a change of color could modify the whole
appearance; why! a host of alterations must be united to make the
illusion convincing. Grant our dyed faces would keep their black;
suppose no touch of water to make the color run, no blot of ink to stick
to our clothes, an accident that will often happen even when no mucilage
is added; pray, can we give ourselves the hideous swollen lips of the
African? can we transform our hair to wool with curling-tongs? can we
scar our brows with rows of ugly wrinkles? render ourselves bow-legged
and flat-footed? give our beards that outlandish look? A dye may
disfigure the person, it cannot change it. Now hear a desperate man's
remedy; let us wind our clothes around our heads, and plunge into the
deep."

\[CIII <span id="CIII"></span>[(Latin)](../satyrlat/satl103) \] "Gods
and men forbid," cried Eumolpus, "you should end your days in so base a
fashion. Better, far better, do as I advise. My servant, as the razor
incident showed you, is a barber; let him instantly shave you both,--not
heads only but eyebrows as well. I will second his efforts, marking your
foreheads with writing, so cleverly executed you will have all the look
of a pair of branded slaves. My lettering will at one and the same time
divert the suspicions of your pursuers, and under the guise of a
degrading punishment, conceal your real features."

This plan was approved, and our metamorphosis effected without delay. We
stole to the side of the ship, and submitted our heads and eyebrows too
to the barber's tender mercies. Eumolpus then proceeded to cover both
our foreheads with enormous capital letters, and with a liberal hand
sprawl the well-known sign of runaways all over our faces. It so
happened that one of the passengers, who was leaning over the side
unburdening his seasick stomach, privately noted the barber busied with
this unseasonable moonlight work, and with a curse at the sinister omen
of an act so nearly resembling the last despairing vow of shipwrecked
mariners, hurried back to his berth. Feigning indifference to the
sufferer's imprecation, we fell into the same melancholy train of
thought as before, and settling down in silence, spent the remaining
hours of darkness in an uneasy doze.

\[CIV <span id="CIV"></span>[(Latin)](../satyrlat/satl104) \] Next day,
directly Eumolpus learned Tryphaena was risen, he entered Lichas's
cabin; here, after some conversation about the prosperous voyage
promised by the fine weather, Lichas remarked, turning towards
Tryphaena, "Priapus appeared to me in a dream last night, and said,
'Encolpius, the man you are in search of, I hereby tell you, has by me
been brought on board your ship.'" Tryphaena started violently; "You
might think we had slept together," she exclaimed; "for I too saw a
vision, that image of Neptune I noticed in the Temple Court at Baiae,
telling me, 'You will find Giton on Lichas's ship.'"

"This will show you plainly," interrupted Eumolpus, "that Epicurus was a
man inspired, who most elegantly expresses his opinion of these figments
of the imagination:

"Dreams that delude our minds with shadows vain  
Are not heaven-sent. But each man's proper brain  
Forges these nothings; and the mind at play  
Doth nightly reenact the deeds of day,  
While the tired body sleeps. The conqueror  
Who cities shakes, loosing the dogs of War,  
Sees brandished spears, and routs, and deaths of Kings.  
And blood, and all the horrors battle brings.  
What sees the lawyer?--ranged a dreadful show,  
The bench, the bar, the judges all a-row!  
The miser dreams of gold, lost treasure finds.  
In woodland ways his horn the huntsman winds.  
The sailor's vision scenes of wreck describes.  
The harlot wheedles; the adultress bribes.  
The sleeping hound the flying hare pursues;  
And each unhappy wretch old griefs renews."

Lichas, however, after duly expiating Tryphaena's dream, said, "Who is
to hinder us searching the ship anyway, that we may not appear to scorn
the revelation the gods vouchsafe?"

The passenger who had so unfortunately surprised our furtive maneuvers
during the night, Hesus he was called, now suddenly broke in with the
question, "Who were the fellows then that were shaved by moonlight last
night, an abominable thing to do, upon my word! For they tell me it's
wicked for any man alive, when aboard ship, to cut either nails or hair,
except when the wind is at odds with the waves."

\[CV <span id="CV"></span>[(Latin)](../satyrlat/satl105) \] Lichas flew
into a passion of anger and consternation at the words, blustering, "Has
anyone dared to cut his hair on my ship, and at dead of night too?
Produce the culprits instantly, that I may know whose head must fall to
purify my vessel from the taint."

"It was I," Eumolpus confessed, "ordered it. If I have brought down ill
luck, I shall not escape my share, for am I not to travel in the same
ship? But the fact is the offenders had such monstrously long and shaggy
hair I ordered the wretches' unkempt locks to be shorn, that I might not
seem to be turning our good ship into a jail, as also that the letters
branded on their brows might be legible to all men's eyes, being no
longer overshadowed and hidden by the hair. Amongst other knavish
tricks, they have been spending my money on a light-o'-love they kept
between them, from whose side I dragged them away only last night
reeking with wine and filthy perfumes. Indeed at this very minute they
stink of the relics of their debauch--and it is all at my expense!"

Accordingly, by way of expiation to the tutelary spirit of the ship, it
was decreed we should each of us receive forty stripes. Without further
delay the savage sailors fall upon us, anxious to appease the deity with
our wretched blood. For myself, I digested three lashes with Spartan
fortitude; but Giton, at the very first blow, set up such a yell his
well remembered voice penetrated straight to Tryphaena's ears.

Nor was the mistress the only one startled by his cries; all her maids
as well, attracted by the familiar tones, gather round the triangles.
Already had his wondrous beauty begun to disarm the sailors and
deprecate their rage with its mute appeal, when Tryphaena's women all
chime in with the cry, "Giton! it's Giton! stay, oh! stay your savage
hands. Help, help, mistress! it's Giton!" Tryphaena turns only too ready
an ear to their words, and flies headlong to his side. Lichas, who knew
me perfectly, just as well as if he had heard my voice too, now runs up,
and looking neither at hands nor face, but instantly lowering his eyes
to my middle, politely laid his hands on those parts, and greeted me by
my name. Why wonder any longer at Ulysses' nurse, after twenty years,
identifying the scar that proved his birth, when this most observing
master mariner, spite of every lineament of face and form being
disguised, yet pounced shrewdly on the sole and only attribute that
betrayed the fugitive. Tryphaena burst into tears, supposing our
disfigurement real and that we had been branded on the brow as slaves
and inquired in soft tones of pity, what dungeon we had fallen into on
our wanderings, or whose hands had been barbarous enough to inflict so
terrible a punishment. Doubtless they had merited some mark of ignominy,
the runaways, whom her favors had only turned into enemies--but not such
a one as this!

\[CVI <span id="CVI"></span>[(Latin)](../satyrlat/satl106) \] Frenzied
with indignation, Lichas sprang forward, crying, "Oh! the simplicity of
the woman! to actually believe these scars were made and the letters
really imprinted, with the branding-iron! I only wish the marks they
have disfigured their faces with were permanent! This would be some
satisfaction to us at any rate. As a matter of fact, the whole thing's a
farce, and the lettering a delusion and a snare!"

Tryphaena was by way of showing some compassion, inasmuch as all was not
lost for her pleasures; but Lichas, remembering his wife's seduction and
the insults he had received in the portico of the Temple of Hercules,
and showing a countenance fiercely contorted with passion, cries, "This
will show you, I imagine, Tryphaena, the immortal gods do govern human
lives. Have they not brought the culprits all unwitting on board our
ship, yea! and warned us of the fact by dreams coinciding in every
particular with the truth? Look you now, how can we pardon offenders
whom God himself puts into our hands for chastisement? For my part, I'm
not a cruel man; but I dare not spare them, lest I suffer for it
myself."

Impressed by these superstitious arguments, Tryphaena changed her mind,
and declared she would make no further objection to our punishment, but
would gladly second so just a piece of retribution. She had received,
she added, as cruel wrong as Lichas himself; for had not her good name
been publicly traduced before a vulgar mob? \[CVII <span
id="CVII"></span>[(Latin)](../satyrlat/satl107) \]

'Twas terror first gave origin to gods,  
When the forked lightning, flashing from the sky  
Would o'erwhelm towns and lofty Athos fire.  
Next, rising Sun, and waxing, waning Moon,  
Offerings received. So idols filled the world,  
And not a month but had its proper god.  
Far spread the taint; blind superstition led  
The rustic swain to pay his first-fruits' toll  
To Ceres, and with grapes Bacchus to crown,  
And Pales venerate, the shepherds' god;  
So Neptune ruled the waves, Pallas the schools.  
Each man of mark, each founder of a State,  
New gods invents, his rival to outstrip.

Lichas, seeing Tryphaena eager as himself for revenge, ordered our
punishment to be renewed and increased. On hearing this Eumolpus
endeavored to mitigate his anger by the following speech: "The unhappy
beings whose destruction your vengeance claims, imploring your
compassion, Lichas, they have chosen me, as one not unknown to you, to
the office of mediator, to reconcile them once more to those they
formerly held so dear.

You cannot really suppose the young men fell into this trap by mere
chance; for surely the very first thing an intending passenger asks, is
the name of the person he is to intrust his safety to. Relent then; be
satisfied with the penalties already exacted and suffer free men to
proceed to their destination without further injury. The harshest and
most unforgiving of masters stay their cruelty, when slaves return home
penitent; and do we not all of us spare enemies who surrender? What more
do you want or desire? Prostrate before you lie these youths, men of
birth and breeding though they be, and what is more than this, friends
once bound to you in the ties of closest intimacy. Had they embezzled
your money, had they betrayed your trust, by great Hercules! even then
your resentment might be satisfied with the pains and penalties you
behold. Lo! the marks of servitude upon their brows, and their
faces--free men's faces--wearing voluntarily the degrading badge of
punishment!"

But Lichas cut short the plea of mercy. "Nay! you confuse the issue," he
interrupted; "you should keep each point separate and distinct. First of
all, if they came here of their own free will, why did they shave their
heads? The man who adopts a disguise is after no good, but is trying to
deceive. Secondly, if they were seeking forgiveness and reconciliation
through your good offices, why did you take every possible pains to keep
your clients concealed? It is plain enough the culprits did fall into
the trap accidentally, and that you are merely trying on an artful
subterfuge to slip out of reach of our resentment.

"Then for your special pleading, your noisy claim about their being men
of birth and breeding, have a care you don't injure your case by
over-confidence. Whatever is the injured party to do, when the guilty
run blindly to their own punishment? But, you urge, they were our
friends; the more thoroughly, I say, have they earned their
chastisement. The man who wrongs mere strangers, is called a robber; he
who betrays his friends, is little better than a murderer."

Eumolpus, to rebut this damaging reasoning, replies, "There is nothing,
I gather, tells more heavily against the unfortunate young men than the
fact of their having cut off their hair by night; this is taken to prove
they did not come on board voluntarily, but by mischance. I only trust
my explanation may seem as simple and straightforward as the act itself
was simply and innocently done. They purposed, before ever they
embarked, to have eased their heads of an annoying and needless burden,
but the wind springing up sooner than was expected forced them to put
off their visit to the barber; nor did they for an instant imagine it
mattered where they carried out the intention they had formed, knowing
nothing of the omen involved or the rules aboard ship."

"What made them take the guise of suppliants and shave their heads," was
Lichas's only answer, "unless possibly because bald heads are more
likely to win compassion? But there, what use trying to get at the truth
through an interpreter? What have you to say for yourself, you thief?
What salamander has burnt off your eyebrows? what god have you vowed
your locks to? Answer me, villain." \[CVIII <span
id="CVIII"></span>[(Latin)](../satyrlat/satl108) \] As for me, I stood
dumfounded, silenced by my terror of punishment, unable in my confusion
to find a word, so plain was the case against me. Besides, I was so
disfigured, what with my cropped head and my eyebrows as bare as my
forehead, I could do nothing and say nothing becomingly. But when
presently my tearful face was wiped with a wet sponge, and the ink being
thus moistened and smeared all over my countenance, my features were all
confounded together in one sooty cloud, his anger turned into disgust.
Eumolpus stoutly declared he would not stand by and see freeborn men
degraded against all right and justice, and protested against our savage
foeman's threats not only in word but in act. His protests were seconded
by his hired servant and by one or two passengers very much exhausted by
seasickness, and whose interference was more of an inducement to further
violence than an accession of strength. I asked for no mercy for myself,
but shaking my fists in Tryphaena's face, I cried out in a bold, loud
voice, I would use all my strength upon her, if she laid a finger on
Giton, cursed woman that she was, the only person on the ship that
really wanted flogging.

This insolence made Lichas still more angry, for he was furious at
seeing me thus abandon my own cause to protest on Giton's behalf. Nor
was Tryphaena less enraged at the affront, and the whole ship's company
was split into two opposing factions. On the one side the barber servant
is busied distributing his razors amongst us, after first arming himself
with one of them, on the other Tryphaena's slaves are tucking up their
sleeves the better to use their fists. Even the maids did their part,
encouraging the combatants with their cries, the pilot alone protesting
and declaring he would leave the helm, if they did not make an end of
this frantic uproar all about a couple of lecherous blackguards.

Even this threat failed to mitigate the fury of the disputants, our
adversaries fighting for revenge, and ourselves for dear life. Numbers
fall on either side, though no one is actually killed; still more retire
wounded and bleeding, like soldiers after a pitched battle, without
anyone showing the smallest loss of determination.

At this crisis the gallant Giton suddenly clapped his razor menacingly
to his virile parts, threatening to amputate the cause of so many
calamities; but Tryphaena forbade the perpetration of the horrid deed,
readily granting him quarter. I myself repeatedly laid a similar weapon
to my throat, though without any more intention of really killing myself
than Giton had of carrying out his threat. At the same time he was able
to enact the comedy with the more reckless realism, knowing as he did
that the razor in his hand was the identical one he had once already cut
his throat with.

Both sides kept the field with equal resolution, till the pilot, seeing
it was likely to be no everyday fight, arranged after no little
difficulty that Tryphaena should act as peacemaker and effect a truce.
So after mutual pledges had been exchanged in the time-honored fashion,
holding forth an olive branch she had hastily snatched from the image of
the tutelary deity of the vessel, she advanced boldly to the parley.

"What direful rage," she cries, "turns peace to war?  
What crime is ours? No faithless Paris here  
Rides in our ship, nor Menelaus' bride,  
Nor with a brother's gore Medea dyed.  
'Tis slighted love inspires the feud, and craves  
For blood and murderous deeds amidst these waves;  
Why die before our time? your wrath forbear,  
Nor make the harmless sea your passions share!"

\[CIX <span id="CIX"></span>[(Latin)](../satyrlat/satl109) \] This
effusion, pronounced by Tryphaena in a broken voice, did something to
stop the fray, the combatants at length turning their thoughts to a
peaceful solution and ceasing from active hostilities. Eumolpus, the
leader on our side, at once seized the opportunity for reconciliation
thus offered, and after first indulging in a fierce invective against
Lichas and all his doings, put his seal to a treaty of peace, which ran
as follows:

"From the bottom of your heart, you, Tryphaena, do promise and undertake
to fore-go all complaint of the wrong done you by Giton; and never, by
reason of any act of his committed aforetime, to upbraid, or punish, or
in any wise molest him. Furthermore, that you will do nothing to the boy
against his free will and pleasure, neither embracing, nor kissing, the
said Giton, nor fornicating with him, except under forfeiture of one
hundred denars for such offense.

"Item: from the bottom of your heart, you, Lichas, do promise that you
will in no wise annoy Encolpius with word or look of contumely, nor
inquire where he may sleep at night; or if you so do, that you will
incontinently count down two hundred denars for each offense."

A truce being agreed to upon these terms, we laid down our arms, and in
order that no vestige of rancor might be left, once the oath was taken,
it was resolved we should kiss away all memory of past injuries. All
being unanimous for peace, our swelling passions soon subside, and a
banquet served with emulous alacrity crowns our reconciliation with the
pledge of good-fellowship. The whole ship resounds with singing, and a
sudden calm having arrested her progress, one might be seen harpooning
the fish that leapt above the waves, while another would he hauling in
the struggling prey enticed by his cunningly baited hooks. Sea-birds too
came and settled on the main yard; these a practised sportsman touched
with his jointed fowling-rods, and conveyed them glued to the limed
tackle into our very hands. The down flew dancing in the air, while the
larger feathers fell into the sea and tossed lightly to and fro on the
foam-capped waves.

Lichas seemed already on the point of making it up with me, and
Tryphaena was throwing the last drops of her wine amorously over Giton,
when Eumolpus, who was as drunk as anybody, took it into his head to
start jeering at people who were bald-headed and branded. Eventually
coming to the end of his exceedingly pointless witticisms, he once more
dropped into poetry, and treated us to the following little "Lament for
Vanished Locks":

Beauty is fallen! thy hair's soft vernal grace  
To wintry baldness gives untimely place.  
Thy injured temples mourn their ravished shade;  
Waste, like a stubble field, thy brow is laid.  
Fallacious gods! your treacherous gifts how vain!  
You only give us joy, to give us pain.  
Unhappy youth! but late thy curling gold  
E'en Phoebus self might envy to behold;  
But now for smoothness, nor the liquid air,  
Nor watered pumpkin can with thee compare.  
The laughter-loving maids you fly, and fear;  
And death with hasty steps will soon be here.  
His fatal night already clouds thy morn,  
Beauty is fallen! and thy gay locks are shorn.

\[CX <span id="CX"></span>[(Latin)](../satyrlat/satl110) \] He was still
longing, I verily believe, to give us more of this stuff or perhaps
something worse, when Tryphaena's maid led Giton away below and dressed
the lad up in one of her mistress's heads of hair. She next produced
eyebrows out of a make-up box, and cleverly following the lines of the
lost features, soon restored him to all his pristine comeliness.
Tryphaena saw Giton once more under his true colors, and bursting into
tears, gave the boy the first genuine and heartfelt kiss she had
bestowed on him since his misfortunes. Rejoiced as I was to see the lad
restored to his former beauty, I could not help continually hiding my
own face, feeling how extraordinarily I must be disfigured, since Lichas
did not deign to give me so much as a word. However I was rescued before
long from these sad thoughts by the kind offices of the same maid
servant, who now called me aside and decked me out with an equally
elegant substitute for my lost ringlets. Indeed my face looked prettier
than ever, as it happened to be a flaxen wig.

But Eumolpus, champion of the distressed and author of the existing
harmony, fearing that our cheerfulness should flag for lack of amusing
anecdotes, commenced a series of gibes at women's frailty,--how lightly
they fell in love, how quickly they forgot even their own sons for a
lover's sake, asserting there was never yet a woman so chaste she might
not be wrought to the wildest excesses by a lawless passion. Without
alluding to the old plays and world-renowned examples of women's folly,
he need only instance a case that had occurred, he said, within his own
memory, which if we pleased he would now relate. This offer concentrated
the attention of all on the speaker, who began as follows:

\[CXI <span id="CXI"></span>[(Latin)](../satyrlat/satl111) \] "There was
once upon a time at Ephesus a lady of so high repute for chastity that
women would actually come to that city from neighboring lands to see and
admire. This fair lady, having lost her husband, was not content with
the ordinary signs of mourning, such as walking with hair disheveled
behind the funeral car and beating her naked bosom in presence of the
assembled crowd; she was fain further to accompany her lost one to his
final resting-place, watch over his corpse in the vault where it was
laid according to the Greek mode of burial, and weep day and night
beside it. So deep was her affliction, neither family nor friends could
dissuade her from these austerities and the purpose she had formed of
perishing of hunger. Even the Magistrates had to retire worsted after a
last but fruitless effort. All mourned as virtually dead already a woman
of such singular determination, who had already passed five days without
food.

"A trusty handmaid sat by her mistress's side, mingling her tears with
those of the unhappy woman, and trimming the lamp which stood in the
tomb as often as it burned low. Nothing else was talked of throughout
the city but her sublime devotion, and men of every station quoted her
as a shining example of virtue and conjugal affection.

"Meantime, as it fell out, the Governor of the Province ordered certain
robbers to be crucified in close proximity to the vault where the matron
sat bewailing the recent loss of her mate. Next night the soldier who
was set to guard the crosses to prevent anyone coming and removing the
robbers' bodies to give them burial, saw a light shining among the tombs
and heard the widow's groans. Yielding to curiosity, a failing common to
all mankind, he was eager to discover who it was, and what was afoot.
Accordingly he descended into the tomb, where beholding a lovely woman,
he was at first confounded, thinking he saw a ghost or some supernatural
vision. But presently the spectacle of the husband's dead body lying
there, and the woman's tear-stained and nail-torn face, everything went
to show him the reality, how it was a disconsolate widow unable to
resign herself to the death of her helpmate. He proceeded therefore to
carry his humble meal into the tomb, and to urge the fair mourner to
cease her indulgence in grief so excessive, and to leave off torturing
her bosom with unavailing sobs. Death, he declared, was the common end
and last home of all men, enlarging on this and the other commonplaces
generally employed to console a wounded spirit. But the lady, only
shocked by this offer of sympathy from a stranger's lips, began to tear
her breast with redoubled vehemence, and dragging out handfuls of her
hair, she laid them on her husband's corpse.

"The soldier, however, refusing to be rebuffed, renewed his adjuration
to the unhappy lady to eat. Eventually the maid, seduced doubtless by
the scent of the wine, found herself unable to resist any longer, and
extended her hand for the refreshment offered; then with energies
restored by food and drink, she set herself to the task of breaking down
her mistress's resolution. 'What good will it do you,' she urged, 'to
die of famine, to bury yourself alive in the tomb, to yield your life to
destiny before the Fates demand it?

"'Think you to pleasure thus the dead and gone?

"'Nay! rather return to life, and shaking off this womanly weakness,
enjoy the good things of this world as long as you may. The very corpse
that lies here before your eyes should be a warning to make the most of
existence.'

"No one is really loath to consent, when pressed to eat or live. The
widow therefore, worn as she was with several days' fasting, suffered
her resolution to be broken, and took her fill of nourishment with no
less avidity than her maid had done, who had been the first to give way.

\[CXII <span id="CXII"></span>[(Latin)](../satyrlat/satl112) \] "Now you
all know what temptations assail poor human nature after a hearty meal.
The soldier resorted to the same cajolements which had already been
successful in inducing the lady to eat, in order to overcome her virtue.
The modest widow found the young soldier neither ill-looking nor wanting
in address, while the maid was strong indeed in his favor and kept
repeating:

"Why thus unmindful of your past delight,  
Against a pleasing passion will you fight?"

"But why make a long story? The lady showed herself equally complaisant
in this respect also, and the victorious soldier gained both his ends.
So they lay together not only that first night of their nuptials, but a
second likewise, and a third, the door of the vault being of course kept
shut, so that anyone, friend or stranger, that might come to the tomb,
should suppose this most chaste of wives had expired by now on her
husband's corpse. Meantime the soldier, entranced with the woman's
beauty and the mystery of the thing, purchased day by day the best his
means allowed him, and as soon as ever night was come, conveyed the
provisions to the tomb.

"Thus it came about that the relatives of one of the malefactors,
observing this relaxation of vigilance, removed his body from the cross
during the night and gave it proper burial. But what of the unfortunate
soldier, whose self-indulgence had thus been taken advantage of, when
next morning he saw one of the crosses under his charge without its
body! Dreading instant punishment, he acquaints his mistress with what
had occurred, assuring her he would not await the judge's sentence, but
with his own sword exact the penalty of his negligence. He must die
therefore; would she give him sepulture, and join the friend to the
husband in that fatal spot?

"But the lady was no less tender-hearted than virtuous. 'The Gods
forbid,' she cried, 'I should at one and the same time look on the
corpses of two men, both most dear to me. I had rather hang a dead man
on the cross than kill a living.' So said, so done; she orders her
husband's body to be taken from its coffin and fixed upon the vacant
cross. The soldier availed himself of the ready-witted lady's expedient,
and next day all men marveled how in the world a dead man had found his
own way to the cross."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter Fourteen](sat15)
