[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Classics](../../index) 
[Petronius](../index)  [Index (Latin)](../satyrlat/index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sat17) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# CHAPTER SEVENTEEN

As soon as ever I could get home, I went to bed, utterly worn out with
fatigue; but I was unable to sleep a wink. My various disasters kept on
running through my head, and quite convinced I was the most unfortunate
wretch alive, I ejaculated, "Fortune has ever been my bitterest foe; it
only needed Love's torments as well to make me utterly miserable. Doomed
wretch! Fortune and Love now join their forces to conspire my ruin.
Cruel Cupid has never spared me; whether lover or loved, I am
perpetually on the rack! There is Chrysis now! she loves me madly and
never ceases to tease me. Chrysis who looked down on me, when she was
acting as her mistress's go-between, and scorned me as a slave, because
I wore slave's clothes; she, I say, that same Chrysis who once loathed
my humble condition, is now bent on following it up even at the risk of
life itself. She swore she would never leave me alone, that time she
declared the vehemence of her passion for me.

"But Circe has my whole heart; all other women I despise. Indeed who so
fair as she? What was Ariadne's beauty, or Leda's, compared to hers?
What had Helen of Troy, or Venus herself, to boast against her? If
Paris, umpire of the rival goddesses, had seen her at the trial with her
dancing eyes, he would have given up all to her, Helen and the goddesses
three! Could I but kiss that mouth, could I press that divine, that
heavenly bosom, maybe my powers of body would return, and those parts of
me revive that now lie torpid and, I verily believe, bewitched. No
insults exhaust my patience. I have been thrashed,--'tis nothing; I have
been kicked out,--'tis a merry jest; if only I may be restored to
favor."

These and the like thoughts of lovely Circe's charms so roused my fancy
that I disordered my bed with the repeated efforts of a sort of
imaginary voluptuousness. But all my struggles remained unavailing. At
last continual disappointment wore my patience out, and I cursed the
evil enchantment that oppressed me. \[CXXXIX <span
id="CXXXIX"></span>[(Latin)](../satyrlat/satl139) \] Presently however,
recovering my self-control, and drawing what consolation I might from
remembering how many heroes of antiquity had been persecuted by the
anger of the gods, I broke out into these lines:

"Not I alone have Heaven's just anger felt,  
The gods with others have severely dealt;  
By Juno's rage the heavens Alcides bore,  
And lost fair Hylas on the Pontic Shore.  
Laomedon did Jove's resentment feel,  
And Telephus bled by the fatal steel.  
Fate's sure decrees no mortal power can shun,  
Nor can the swiftest from Heaven's vengeance run."

Tortured by these anxieties, I tossed about wakefully the whole night
long. At peep of day Giton, informed of the fact of my having slept at
home, entered my room, and after chiding me severely for my licentious
way of life, told me the whole household were complaining bitterly of my
goings on, how I paid scarcely any attention to business, and was like a
ruin myself over the fatal intrigue I was now engaged in. I gathered
from all this he was well posted in my affairs, and guessed some one had
been to the house to inquire for me. I asked my companion if anyone had
been in quest of me.

"No one today," Giton replied; "but yesterday there was a woman,
stylishly dressed enough, came in, and after a long talk with me and
boring me to death with her forced conversation, ended by saying you
deserved the gallows and would surely get a slave's scourging, if the
individual you had wronged persisted in his complaint." This news
tormented me extremely, and I launched out into fresh recriminations
against Fortune. My invective was still in full swing when Chrysis came
in, and throwing her arms wildly round my neck, exclaimed, "I have you
in my arms, my heart's desire! My love, my joy! Never, never will you
end this fire of mine, but by quenching it in my blood."

I was not a little disconcerted by this amorous display on her part, and
resorted to a string of flattering speeches to get rid of her, fearing
the madwoman's cries might reach Eumolpus's ears, who in the arrogance
of success had now adopted the domineering ways of a real master. So I
used every means to calm her excitement,--feigning love, whispering soft
nothings; in a word, so cleverly did I play the fond adorer she thought
me genuinely smitten with her charms. I explained what peril we should
both be in, if she were caught with me in my bedroom, Eumolpus being
only too ready to punish the smallest indiscretion. Hearing this, she
left me hurriedly, all the more so as she saw Giton coming back, who had
quitted the room shortly before she joined me.

Hardly was she gone before one of the newly engaged servants rushed in
to tell me the master was excessively angry at my two days' neglect of
my duties. The best thing I could do, he said, was to get some plausible
excuse ready; for it was hardly possible his angry passions could
subside without somebody getting a thrashing.

Giton seeing me so vexed and disheartened, did not say one word to me
about the woman; he merely spoke of Eumolpus, recommending me to treat
the matter jocularly with him, rather than look gloomy about it. I was
glad enough to take his advice, and approached the old man with so gay
an air that, instead of showing severity, he received me banteringly,
rallying me about my success in love and complimenting me on my grace
and elegance, which made me such a favorite with all the ladies. "It is
no news to me," he went on, "that a most beautiful woman is dying of
love for you; now this may very likely be useful to us on occasion,
Encolpius. Well then! play the fond lover, you; I will keep up the same
role I have been acting all along."

\[CXL <span id="CXL"></span>[(Latin)](../satyrlat/satl140) \] He was
still speaking when a matron entered, a lady of the highest distinction,
Philomela by name, who in earlier days had won many a fat legacy by the
charms of her youth; but who being old now and past her prime, used to
put her son and daughter in the way of childless old men, and so
continued to extend her old trade by the efforts of these successors.
Well! this woman came to Eumolpus and proceeded to commend her children
to his judicious guardianship, and confide herself and her hopes to his
kindly good nature, asseverating he was the only man in all the world to
train young people by the daily inculcation of healthy precepts; in
fine, that she was leaving her children under Eumolpus's roof, that they
might hear his words of wisdom, the only heritage worth having that
could be bestowed on youth. And she was as good as her word; for leaving
behind her a very attractive looking girl along with her brother, a
stripling, in the old man's chamber, she left the house under pretext of
visiting the Temple to say her prayers.

Eumolpus, who was so careful a soul he was ready to take even me at my
age for a minion, was not long in inviting the girl to sacrifice to the
rearward Venus. But then he had informed everybody he was gouty and
crippled in the loins, and if he failed to keep up the pretense, he ran
considerable risk of spoiling the whole play. So, to maintain the
imposture intact, he begged the girl to take a seat on that kindly good
nature her mother had appealed to, ordering Corax at the same time to
slip under the bed he lay on himself, and resting his hands on the
floor, to hoist him up and down with his back. The servant obeyed, and
gently seconded the child's artful movements with a corresponding,
rhythmical seesaw. Then when the crisis was coming, Eumolpus shouted out
loud and clear to Corax to work faster. Thus the old fellow, suspended
between his servant and his mistress, enjoyed himself as if in a swing.
This exercise he repeated more than once, to the accompaniment of peals
of laughter, in which he himself joined. Nor was I idle; but fearing my
hand might get out of practise from disuse, I assailed the brother,
where he stood admiring his sister's gymnastics through the keyhole, to
see if he were amenable to outrage. He made no bones about accepting my
caresses; but once more, alas! I found the god unpropitious to my
efforts.

However I was not so much cast down by failure this time as I had been
on previous occasions; for very soon afterwards my vigor came back to
me, and suddenly feeling myself in better condition, I exclaimed, "The
great gods of higher heaven it is have made me a man again! Mercury, who
conveys and reconveys the souls of men, has of his loving kindness given
me back what an unfriendly hand had docked me of, to show you I am
really more graciously endowed than ever was Protesilaus or any of the
mighty men of yore." So saying, I lifted my tunic, and offered Eumolpus
a view of all my glories. For an instant he stood panic-stricken; then,
to make assurance doubly sure, he put out both hands and felt the good
gift the gods had given me.

This great boon restoring our cheerfulness, we made merry over
Philomela's artfulness and her children's proficiency, little likely to
profit them much with us however; for it was solely and entirely in
hopes of a legacy she had abandoned the boy and girl to our tender
mercies. So reflecting on this sordid fashion of getting round childless
old men, I was led on to think of the present state of our own fortunes,
and took occasion to warn Eumolpus that this game of biting might easily
end in biters being bit.

"Our every act," I added, "should be governed by caution. Socrates,
wisest of mankind as both men and gods allow, was wont to boast he had
never so much as glanced into a tavern, nor trusted his eyes to look at
any crowded and disorderly assemblage. Nothing in the world is more
advisable than always to speak within the bounds of prudence.

"All this is true," I insisted, "and no class of men is more liable to
come to mischance than those who covet other folks' goods. How should
mountebanks, and swindlers, live, unless they were now and again to toss
a little purse or a jingling bag of money as baits to the crowd? Just as
dumb beasts are enticed by food, so men are to be caught only with
something solid in the way of expectations to bite at. \[CXLI <span
id="CXLI"></span>[(Latin)](../satyrlat/satl141) \] The ship from Africa
with your money and your slaves has not arrived, as you promised. Our
fortune-hunters are tired out, and already stint their generosity.
Either I am much mistaken, or the jade Fortune has begun to repent of
her favors to you."

"I have thought out a scheme," Eumolpus replied, "that will mightily
embarrass our fortune-hunting friends," and drawing his tablets from his
wallet, he read out his last wishes as follows:

"All who shall receives legacies under my will, my own freedmen
excepted, will inherit the said bequests subject to this condition, to
wit that they do cut up my body into pieces and eat the same before the
eyes of the public there present.

"They need not be over and above shocked, I tell them; for we know that
to this day some nations observe the custom by which the dead are eaten
by their relatives--so much so indeed that sick folk amongst them are
often reproached for spoiling their flesh by being so long ill. I remind
my friends of these facts, that they may not refuse to follow my
directions, but rather consume my dead body with the same heartiness
with which they prayed the living breath might leave it."

Just as he was reading the initial clauses, several of Eumolpus's most
intimate friends came into his room, and seeing the document in his
hand, begged him eagerly to let them hear its contents. He consented
instantly, and read it out from beginning to end. On hearing the
extraordinary stipulation about being obliged to eat his corpse, they
were very much cast down. But the glamour of his wealth so dazzled the
wretched creatures and stifled their consciences, making mere cringing
cowards of them in his presence, that they durst enter no protest
against the enormity. One of them, however Gorgias, was ready to comply,
provided he had not too long to wait.

At this Eumolpus continued, turning to Gorgias, "I have no apprehensions
of your stomach's turning rebellious; it will obey orders, once you
promise it, in return for one hour's nausea, a plethora of good things.
Just shut your eyes, and pretend it's not human flesh you've bolted, but
a cool ten million. Besides, we'll find some condiments, never fear, to
disguise the flavor. Indeed, no meat really tastes good by itself, but
is always masked in some artful way, and the recalcitrant stomach
reconciled to it. Why! if you want examples to fortify your
resolutions--the Saguntines, when hard pressed by Hannibal, ate human
flesh; and they had no legacy to expect. The men of Perusia did the same
thing in the extremity of famine, looking for no other benefit from the
horrid diet but just to escape starvation. When Numantia was taken by
Scipio, mothers were found grasping their children's half-eaten bodies
to their bosoms. In fine, seeing it is merely the idea of cannibalism
that can cause disgust, you must fight with all your heart to banish
this repugnance from your minds, to the end you may receive the enormous
legacies I put you down for."

These insolent extravagances Eumolpus reeled off with such reckless
inconsequence as made the fortune hunters begin to distrust his
promises. Instantly they began to scrutinize more closely our words and
actions, and everything they saw only increasing their suspicions, they
soon set us down for a gang of common cheats and swindlers. Hereupon
such as had gone to more than ordinary expense for our entertainment,
resolved to have at us and take their just revenge.

But now Chrysis, who was in all their secrets, warned me of what the
Crotonians' intentions towards us were. This news scared me so terribly
I fled instantly with Giton, leaving Eumolpus to his fate; and a few
days later I learned that the Crotonians, furious at the old fox having
lived sumptuously at their expense for so long, had massacred him in the
Massilian fashion. To show you what this means, I must tell you that
whenever the Massilians were visited by the Plague, one of the poorer
inhabitants would volunteer himself as an expiatory victim, on condition
of being maintained a full year at the public cost and fed on choice
food. Later on, the unhappy man, bedecked with festal wreaths and sacred
robes, was carried in procession through the whole city, and made the
butt of general execration, to the end that all the calamities of all
the State might be concentrated on his devoted head. This done, he was
hurled headlong from a rock.

THE END
