[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Atlantis](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](tlc02)  [Next](tlc04) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B00213KMTI/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Lost Continent*, by Cutcliffe Hyne, \[1900\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_1">p. 1</span>

### PREFATORY

#### THE LEGATEES OF DEUCALION

WE were both of us not a little stiff as the result of sleeping out in
the open all that night, for even in Grand Canary the dew-fall and the
comparative chill of darkness are not to be trifled with. For myself, on
these occasions I like a bit of a run as an early refresher. But here on
this rough ground in the middle of the island there were not three yards
of level to be found, and so as Coppinger proceeded to go through some
sort of dumb-bell exercises with a couple of lumps of bristly lava, I
followed his example. Coppinger has done a good deal of roughing it in
his time, but being a doctor of medicine among other things—he takes out
a new degree of some sort on an average every other year—he is great on
health theories, and practises them like a religion.

There had been rain two days before, and as there was still a bit of
stream trickling along at the bottom of the barranca, we went down there
and had a wash, and brushed our teeth. Greatest luxury imaginable, a
tooth-brush, on this sort of expedition.

"Now," said Coppinger when we had emptied our

<span id="page_2">p. 2</span>

pockets, "there's precious little grub left, and it's none the better
for being carried in a local Spanish newspaper."

"Yours is mostly tobacco ashes."

"It'll get worse if we leave it. We've a lot more bad scrambling ahead
of us."

That was obvious. So we sat down beside the stream there at the bottom
of the barranca, and ate up all of what was left. It was a ten-mile
tramp in to the *fonda* at Santa Brigida, where we had set down our
traps; and as Coppinger wanted to take a lot more photographs and
measurements before we left this particular group of caves, it was
likely we should be pretty sharp set before we got our next meal and our
next taste of the *patron's* splendid old country wine. My faith, if
only they knew down in the English hotels in Las Palmas what magnificent
wines one could get—with diplomacy—up in some of the mountain villages,
the old vintages would become a thing of the past in a week.

Now, to tell the truth, the two mummies he had gathered already quite
satisfied my small ambition. The goat-skins in which they were sewn up
were as brittle as paper, and the poor old things themselves gave out
dust like a puff-ball whenever they were touched. But you know what
Coppinger is. He thought he'd come upon traces of an old Guanche
university, or sacred college, or something of that kind, like the one
there is on the other side of the island, and he wouldn't be satisfied
till he'd ransacked every cave in the whole face of the cliff. He'd
plenty of stuff left for the flash-light thing, and twenty-eight

<span id="page_3">p. 3</span>

more films in his kodak, and said we might as well get through with the
job then as make a return journey all on purpose. So he took the
crowbar, and I shouldered the rope, and away we went up to the ridge of
the cliff where we had got such a baking from the sun the day before.

Of course these caves were not easy to come at, or else they would have
been raided years before. Coppinger, who on principle makes out he knows
all about these things, says that in the old Guanche days they had
ladders of goat-skin rope which they could pull up when they were at
home, and so keep out undesirable callers; and as no other plan occurs
to me, perhaps he may be right. Anyway the mouths of the caves were in a
more or less level row thirty feet below the ridge of the cliff, and
fifty feet above the bottom; and Spanish curiosity doesn't go in much
where it cannot walk.

Now laddering such caves from below would have been cumbersome, but a
light knotted rope is easily carried, and though it would have been hard
to climb up this, our plan was to descend on each cave mouth from above,
and then slip down to the foot of the cliffs, and start again *ab
initio* for the next.

Coppinger is plucky enough, and he has a good head on a height, but
there is no getting over the fact that he is portly and nearer fifty
than forty-five. So you can see he must have been pretty keen. Of course
I went first each time, and got into the cave mouth, and did what I
could to help him in; but when you have to walk down a vertical cliff
face fly-fashion, with only a thin bootlace of a rope for

<span id="page_4">p. 4</span>

support, it is not much real help the man below can give, except offer
you his best wishes.

I wanted to save him as much as I could, and as the first three caves I
climbed to were small and empty, seeming to be merely store-places, I
asked him to take them for granted, and save himself for the rest. But
he insisted on clambering down to each one in person, and as he decided
that one of my granaries was a prison, and another a pot-making factory,
and another a school-room for young priests, he naturally said he hadn't
much reliance on my judgment, and would have to go through the whole lot
himself. You know what these thorough-going archæologists are for
imagination.

But as the day went on and the sun rose higher, Coppinger began clearly
to have had enough of it, though he was very game, and insisted on going
on much longer than was safe. I must say I didn't like it. You see, the
drop was seldom less than eighty feet from the top of the cliffs.
However, at last he was forced to give it up. I suggested marching off
to Santa Brigida forthwith, but he wouldn't do that. There were three
more cave openings to be looked into, and if I wouldn't do them for him,
he would have to make another effort to get there himself. He tried to
make out he was conferring a very great favor on me by offering to take
a report solely from my untrained observation, but I flatly refused to
look at it in that light. I was pretty tired also; I was soaked with
perspiration from the heat; my head ached from the violence of the sun;
and my hands were cut raw with the rope.

<span id="page_5">p. 5</span>

Coppinger might be tired, but he was still enthusiastic. He tried to
make me enthusiastic also. "Look here," he said, "there's no knowing
what you may find up there, and if you do lay hands on anything,
remember it's your own. I shall have no claim whatever."

"Very kind of you, but I've got no use for any more mummies done up in
goat-skin bags."

"Bah! That's not a burial cave up there. Don't you know the difference
yet in the openings? Now be a good fellow. It doesn't follow that
because we have drawn all the rest blank, you won't stumble across a
good find for yourself up there."

"Oh, very well," I said, as he seemed so set on it; and away I stumbled
over the fallen rocks, and along the ledge, and then scrambled up by
that fissure in the cliff which saved us the two-mile round which we had
had to take at first. I wrenched out the crowbar, and jammed it down in
a new place, and then away I went over the side, with hands smarting
worse at every new grip of the rope. It was an awkward job swinging into
the cave mouth, because the rock above overhung, or else (what came to
the same thing) it had broken away below; but I managed it somehow,
although I landed with an awkward thump on my back, and at the same time
I didn't let go the rope. It wouldn't do to have lost the rope then:
Coppinger couldn't have flicked it in to me from where he was below.

Now from the first glance I could see that this cave was of different
structure to the others. They were for the most part mere dens, rounded
out anyhow:

<span id="page_6">p. 6</span>

this had been faced up with cutting-tools, so that all the angles were
clean, and the sides smooth and flat. The walls inclined inward to the
roof, reminding me of an architecture I had seen before but could not
recollect where, and, moreover, there were several rooms connected up
with passages. I was pleased to find that the other cave-openings which
Coppinger wanted me to explore were merely the windows or the doorways
of two of these other rooms.

Of inscriptions or markings on the walls there was not a trace, though I
looked carefully, and, except for bats, the place was entirely bare. I
lit a cigarette and smoked it through—Coppinger always thinks one is
slurring over work if it is got through too quickly—and then I went to
the entrance where the rope was, and leaned out, and shouted down my
news.

He turned up a very anxious face. " Have you searched it thoroughly?" he
bawled back.

"Of course I have. What do you think I've been doing all this time?"

"No, don't come down yet. Wait a minute. I say, old man, do wait a
minute. I'm making fast the kodak and the flash-light apparatus on the
end of the rope. Pull them up, and just make me half a dozen exposures,
there's a good fellow."

"Oh, all right," I said, and hauled the things up, and got them inside.
The photographs would be absolutely dull and uninteresting, but that
wouldn't matter to Coppinger. He rather preferred them that way. One has
to be careful about halation in photographing these dark interiors, but
there was a

<span id="page_7">p. 7</span>

sort of ledge like a seat by the side of each doorway, and so I lodged
the camera on that to get a steady stand, and snapped off the
flash-light from behind and above.

I got pictures of four of the chambers this way, and then came to one
where the ledge was higher and wider. I put down the camera, wedged it
level with scraps of stone, and then sat down myself to recharge the
flash-light machine. But the moment my weight got on that ledge there
was a sharp crackle, and down I went half a dozen inches.

Of course I was up again pretty sharply, and snapped up the kodak just
as it was going to slide off to the ground. I will confess, too, I was
feeling pleased. Here, at any rate, was a Guanche cupboard of sorts, and
as they had taken the trouble to hermetically seal it with cement, the
odds were that it had something inside worth hiding. At first there was
nothing to be seen but a lot of dust and rubble, so I lit a bit of
candle and cleared this away. Presently, however, I began to find that I
was shelling out something that was not cement. It chipped away, in
regular layers, and when I took it to the daylight I found that each
layer was made up of two parts. One side was shiny stuff that looked
like talc, and on this was smeared a coating of dark toffee-colored
material, that might have been wax. The toffee-colored surface was
worked over with some kind of pattern.

Now I do not profess to any knowledge on these matters, and as a
consequence took what Coppinger had told me about Guanche habits and
acquirements

<span id="page_8">p. 8</span>

as more or less true. For instance, he had repeatedly impressed upon me
that this old people could not write, and having this in my memory, I
did not guess that the patterns scribed through the wax were letters in
some obsolete character, which, if left to myself, probably I should
have done. But still at the same time I came to the conclusion that the
stuff was worth looting, and so set to work quarrying it out with the
heel of my boot and a pocket-knife.

The sheets were all more or less stuck together, and so I did not go in
for separating them further. They fitted exactly to the cavity in which
they were stored, but by smashing down its front I was able to get at
the foot of them, and then I hacked away through the bottom layers with
the knife till I got the bulk out in one solid piece. It measured some
twenty inches by fifteen, by fifteen, but it was not so heavy as it
looked, and when I had taken the remaining photographs I lowered it down
to Coppinger on the end of the rope.

There was nothing more to do in the caves then, so I went down myself
next. The lump of sheets was on the ground, and Coppinger was on all
fours beside it. He was pretty nearly mad with excitement.

"What is it?" I asked him.

"I don't know yet. But it is the most valuable find ever made in the
Canary Islands, and it's yours, you unappreciative beggar; at least what
there is left of it. Oh, man, man, you've smashed up the beginning, and
you've smashed up the end of some history that is probably priceless.
It's my own fault.

<span id="page_9">p. 9</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> I ought to have
known better than set an untrained man to do important exploring work."

"I should say it's your fault if anything's gone wrong. You said there
was no such thing as writing known to these ancient Canarios, and I took
your word for it. For anything I knew the stuff might have been
something to eat."

"It isn't Guanche work at all," said he, testily. "You ought to have
known that from the talc. Great Heavens, man, have you no eyes? Haven't
you seen the general formation of the island? Don't you know there's no
talc here?"

"I'm no geologist. Is this imported literature then?"

"Of course. It's Egyptian: that's obvious at a glance. Though how it's
got here I can't tell yet. It isn't stuff you can read off like a
newspaper. The character's a variant on any of those that have been
discovered so far. And as for this waxy stuff spread over the talc, it's
unique. It's some sort of a mineral, I think: perhaps asphalt. It
doesn't scratch up like animal wax. I'll analyze that later. Why they
once invented it and then let such a splendid notion drop out of use is
just a marvel. I could stay gloating over this all day."

"Well," I said, "if it's all the same for you, I'd rather gloat over a
meal. It's a good ten miles hard going to the fonda, and I'm as hungry
as a hawk already. Look here, do you know it is four o'clock already? It
takes longer than you think, climbing down to each of these caves, and
then getting up again for the next."

<span id="page_10">p. 10</span>

Coppinger spread his coat on the ground, and wrapped the lump of sheets
with tender care, but would not allow it to be tied with a rope for fear
of breaking more of the edges. He insisted on carrying it himself, too,
and did so for the larger part of the way to Santa Brigida, and it was
only when he was within an ace of dropping himself with sheer tiredness
that he condescended to let me take my turn. He was tolerably ungracious
about it too. "I suppose you may as well carry the stuff," he snapped,
"seeing that after all it's your own."

Personally, when we got to the fonda, I had as good a dinner as was
procurable, and a bottle of that old Canary wine, and turned in to bed
after a final pipe. Coppinger dined also, but I have reason to believe
he did not sleep much. At any rate I found him still poring over the
find next morning, and looking very heavy-eyed, but brimming with
enthusiasm.

"Do you know," he said, "that you've blundered upon the most valuable
historical manuscript that the modern world has ever yet seen? Of
course, with your clumsy way of getting it out, you've done an infinity
of damage. For instance, those top sheets you shelled away and spoiled,
contained probably an absolutely unique account of the ancient
civilization of Yucatan."

"Where's that, anyway?"

"In the middle of the Gulf of Mexico. It's all ruins to-day, but once it
was a very prosperous colony of the Atlanteans."

"Never heard of them. Oh yes, I have though.

<span id="page_11">p. 11</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> They were the
people Herodotus .wrote about, didn't he? But I thought they were
mythical."

"They were very real, and so was Atlantis, the continent where they
lived, which lay just north of the Canaries here."

"What's that crocodile sort of thing with wings drawn in the margin?"

"Some sort of beast that lived in those bygone days. The pages are full
of them. That's a cave-tiger. And that's some sort of colossal bat.
Thank goodness he had the sense to illustrate fully, the man who wrote
this, or we should never have been able to reconstruct the tale, or at
any rate we could not have understood half of it. Whole species have
died out since this was written, just as a whole continent has been
swept away and three civilizations quenched. The worst of it is, it was
written by a highly educated man who somewhat naturally writes a very
bad fist. I've hammered at it all the night through, and have only
managed to make out a few sentences here and there,"—he rubbed his hands
appreciatively. "It will take me a year's hard work to translate this
properly."

"Every man to his taste. I'm afraid my interest in the thing wouldn't
last as long as that. But how did it get there? Did your ancient
Egyptian come to Grand Canary for the good of his lungs, and write it
because he felt dull up in that cave?"

"I made a mistake there. The author was not an Egyptian. It was the
similarity of the inscribed character which misled me. The book was
written by one Deucalion, who seems to have been a priest

<span id="page_12">p. 12</span>

or general—or perhaps both—and he was an Atlantean. How it got there I
don't know yet. Probably that was told in the last few pages, which a
certain vandal smashed up with his pocket-knife, in getting them away
from the place where they were stowed."

"That's right, abuse me. Deucalion, you say? There was a Deucalion in
the Greek mythology. He was one of the two who escaped from the Flood:
their Noah, in fact."

"The swamping of the continent of Atlantis might very well correspond to
the Flood."

"Is there a Pyrrha then? She was Deucalion's wife."

"I haven't come across her yet. But there's a Phorenice, who may be the
same. She seems to have been the reigning Empress, as far as I can make
out at present."

I looked with interest at illustrations in the margin. They were quite
understandable, although the perspective was all wrong. "Weird beasts
they seem to have had knocking about the country in those days. Whacking
big size, too, if one may judge. By Jove! that'll be a cave-tiger trying
to pull down a mammoth. I shouldn't care to have lived in those days."

"Probably they had some way of fighting the creatures. However, that
will show itself as I get along with the translation." He looked at his
watch—"I suppose I ought to be ashamed of myself, but I haven't been to
bed. Are you going out?"

"I shall drive back to Las Palmas. I promised a man to have a round at
golf this afternoon."

"Very well, see you at dinner. I hope they've

<span id="page_13">p. 13</span>

sent back my dress-shirts from the wash. Oh, Lord! I am sleepy."

I left him going up to bed, and went outside and ordered a carriage to
take me down, and there I may say we parted for a considerable time. A
cable was waiting for me in the hotel at Las Palmas to go home for
business forthwith, and there was a Liverpool boat in the harbor which I
just managed to catch as she was steaming out. It was a close thing, and
the boatmen made a small fortune out of my hurry.

Now Coppinger was only an hotel acquaintance, and as I was up to the
eyes in work when I got back to England, I'm afraid I didn't think very
much more about him at the time. One doesn't with people one just meets
casually abroad like that. And it must have been at least a year later
that I saw by a paragraph in one of the papers, that he had given the
lumps of sheets to the British Museum, and that the estimated worth of
them was ten thousand pounds at the lowest valuation.

Well, this was a bit of revelation, and as he had so repeatedly
impressed on me that the things were mine by right of discovery, I wrote
rather a pointed note to him mentioning that he seemed to have been
making rather free with my property. Promptly came back a stilted letter
beginning, "Doctor Coppinger regrets," and so on, and with it the
English translation of the wax-upon-talc MSS. He "quite admitted" my
claim, and "trusted that the profits of publication would be a
sufficient reimbursement for any damage received."

<span id="page_14">p. 14</span>

Now I had no idea that he would take me unpleasantly like this, and
wrote back a pretty warm reply to that effect; but the only answer. I
got to this was through a firm of solicitors, who stated that all
further communications with Dr. Coppinger must be made through them.

I will say here publicly that I regret the line he has taken over the
matter; but as the affair has gone so far, I am disposed to follow out
his proposition. Accordingly the old history is here printed; the credit
(and the responsibility) of the translation rests with Dr. Coppinger;
and whatever revenue accrues from readers, goes to the finder of the
original talc-upon-wax sheets, myself.

If there is a further alteration in this arrangement, it will be
announced publicly at a later date. But at present this appears to be
most unlikely.

 

 

<span id="img_ftr"></span> ![](img/ftr.jpg)

 

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter I. My Recall](tlc04)
