[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Atlantis](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](tlc12)  [Next](tlc14) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B00213KMTI/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Lost Continent*, by Cutcliffe Hyne, \[1900\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_161">p. 161</span>

### CHAPTER X

#### A WOOING

A MURMUR quickly sprang up round me, which grew into shouts. "Kneel,"
one whispered, "kneel, sir, or you will be seen." And another cried:
"Kneel, you without beard, and do obeisance to the only Goddess, or by
the old Gods I will make myself her priest and butcher you!" And so the
shouts arose into a roar.

But presently the word "Deucalion" began to be bandied about, and there
came a moderation in the zeal of these enthusiasts. Deucalion, the man
who had left Atlantis twenty years before to rule Yucatan, they might
know little enough about, but Deucalion who rode not many days back
beside the Empress in the golden castle beneath the canopy of snakes,
was a person they remembered; and when they weighed up his possible
ability for vengeance, the shouts died away from them limply.

So when the silence had grown again, and Phorenice turned and saw me
standing alone among all the prostrate worshippers, I stepped out from
the crowd and passed between two of the great stones, and went across
the circle to where she stood beside

<span id="page_162">p. 162</span>

the altar. I did not prostrate myself. At the prescribed distance I made
the salutation which she herself had ordered when she made me her chief
minister, and then hailed her with formal decorum as Empress.

"Deucalion, man of ice," she retorted.

"I still adhere to the old Gods!"

"I was not referring to that," said she, and looked at me with a
sidelong smile.

But here Ylga came up to us with a face that was white and a hand that
shook, and made supplication for my life. "If he will not leave the old
Gods yet," she pleaded, "surely you will pardon him? He is a strong man,
and does not become a convert easily. You may change him later. But
think, Phorenice, he is Deucalion; and if you slay him here for this one
thing, there is no other man within all the marches of Atlantis who
could so worthily serve—"

The Empress took the words from her. "You slut," she cried out, "I have
you near me to appoint my wardrobe and carry my fan, and do you dare to
put a meddling finger in my policies? Back with you, outside this
circle, or I'll have you whipped. Aye, and I'll do more. I'll serve you
as Zaemon served my captain, Tarca. Shall I point a finger at you, and
smite your pretty skin with a sudden leprosy?"

The girl bowed her shoulders and went away cowed, and Phorenice turned
to me. "My lord," she said, "I am like a young bird in the nest that has
suddenly found its wings. Wings have so many uses that I am curious to
try them all."

<span id="img_16200"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![“‘BACK WITH YOU,
OUTSIDE THIS CIRCLE’”](tn/16200.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/16200.jpg)  
“‘BACK WITH YOU, OUTSIDE THIS CIRCLE’”  
</span>

<span id="page_163">p. 163</span>

"May each new flight they take be for the good of Atlantis."

"Oh," she said, with an eye-flash, "I know what you have most at heart.
But we will go back to the pyramid, and talk this out at more leisure. I
pray you now, my lord, conduct me back to my riding beast."

It appeared then that I was to be condoned for not offering her worship,
and so putting public question on her deification. It appeared also that
Ylga's interference was looked upon as untimely, and, though I could not
understand the exact reasons for either of these things, I accepted them
as they were, seeing that they forwarded the scheme that Zaemon had
bidden me carry out.

So when the Empress lent me her fingers—warm, delicate fingers they
were, though so skilful to grasp the weapons of war—I took them gravely,
and led her out of the great circle, which she had polluted with her
trickeries. I had expected to see our Lord the Sun take vengeance on the
profanation while it was still in act; but none had come: and I knew
that He would choose His own good time for retribution, and appoint what
instrument He thought best, without my raising a puny arm to guard His
mighty honor.

So I led this lovely, sinful woman back to the huge red mammoth which
stood there tamely in waiting, and the smell of the sacrifice came after
us as we walked. She mounted the stair to the golden castle on the
shaggy beast's back, and bade me mount also and take seat beside her.
But the place of the fan-girl

<span id="page_164">p. 164</span>

behind was empty, and what we said as we rode back through the streets
there was none to overhear.

She was eager to know what had befallen me after the attack on the gate,
and I told the tale, laying stress on the worthiness of Naïs, and
uttering an opinion that with care the girl might be won back to
allegiance again. Only the commands that Zaemon laid upon me, when he
and I spoke together in the sacred tongue, did I withhold, as it is not
lawful to repeat these matters save only in the High Council of the
Priests itself as they sit before the Ark of the Mysteries.

You seem to have an unusual kindliness for this rebel Naïs," said
Phorenice.

"She showed herself to me as more clever and thoughtful than the common
herd."

"Aye," she answered, with a sigh that I think was real enough in its
way, "an Empress loses much that meaner woman gets as her common due."

"In what particular?"

"She misses the honest wooing of her equals."

"If you set up for a Goddess—" I said.

"Pah! I wish to be no Goddess to you, Deucalion. That was for the common
people; it gives me more power with them; it helps my schemes. All you
Seven higher priests know that trick of calling down the fire, and it
pleased me to filch it. Can you not be generous, and admit that a woman
may be as clever in finding out these natural laws as your musty elder
priests?"

"Remains that you are Empress."

"Nor Empress either. Just think that there is a woman seated beside you
on this cushion, Deucalion,

<span id="page_165">p. 165</span>

and look upon her, and say what words come first to your lips. Have done
with ceremonies, and have done with statecraft. Do you wish to wait on
as you are till all your manhood withers? It is well not to hurry unduly
in these matters: I am with you there. Yet who but a fool watches a
fruit grow ripe, and then leaves it till it is past its prime?"

I looked on her glorious beauty, but as I live it left me cold. But I
remembered the command that had been laid upon me, and forced a smile.
"I may have been fastidious," I said, "but I do not regret waiting this
long."

"Nor I. But I have played my life as a maid time enough. I am a woman,
ripe and full-blooded, and the day has come when I should be more than
what I have been."

I let my hand clench on hers. "Take me to husband then, and I will be a
good man to you. But, as I am bidden speak to Phorenice the woman now,
and not to the Empress, I offer fair warning that I will be no puppet."

She looked at me sidelong. "I have been master so long that I think it
will come as enjoyment to be mastered sometimes. No, Deucalion, I
promise that—you shall be no puppet. Indeed, it would take a lusty lung
to do the piping if you were to dance against your will."

"Then as man and wife we will live together in the royal pyramid, and we
will rule this country with all the wit that it has pleased the High
Gods to bestow on us. These miserable differences shall be swept aside;
the rebels shall go back to their

<span id="page_166">p. 166</span>

homes, and hunt, and fight the beasts in the provinces, and the Priests’
Clan shall be pacified. Phorenice, you and I will throw ourselves brain
and soul into the government, and we will make Atlantis rise as a nation
that shall once more surpass all the world for peace and prosperity."

Petulantly she drew her hand away from mine. "Oh, your conditions, and
your Atlantis! You carry a crudeness in these colonial manners of yours,
Deucalion, that palls on one after the first blunt flavor has worn away.
Am I to do all the wooing? Is there no little thrill of love under all
your ice?"

"In truth, I do not know what love may be. I have had little enough
speech with women all these busy years."

"We were a pair, then, when you landed, though I have heard sighs and
protestations from every man that carries a beard in all Atlantis. Some
of them tickled my fancy for the day, but none of them have moved me
deeper. No, I also have not learned what this love may be from my own
personal feelings. But, sir, I think that you will teach me soon, if you
go on with your coldness."

"From what I have seen, love is for the poor and the weak, and for those
of flighty emotions."

"Then I would that another woman were Empress, and that I were some
ill-dressed creature of the gutter that a strong man could pick up by
force and carry away to his home for sheer passion. Ah! How I could
revel in it! How I could respond if he caught my whim!" She laughed.
"But I should

<span id="page_167">p. 167</span>

lead him a sad life of it if my liking were not so strong as his."

"We are as we are made, and we cannot change our inwards which move us."

She looked at me with a sullen glance. "If I do not change yours, my
Deucalion, there will be more trouble brewed for this poor Atlantis that
you set such store upon. There will be ill doings in this coming
household of ours if my love grows for you, and yours remains still
unborn."

I believe she would have had me fondle her there in the golden castle on
the mammoth's shaggy back, before the city streets packed with curious
people. She had little enough appetite for privacy at any time. But for
the life of me I could not do it. The Gods know I was earnest enough
about my task, and They know also how it repelled me. But I was a true
priest that day, and I had put away all personal liking to carry out the
commands which the council had laid upon me. If I had known how to set
about it, I would have fallen in with her mood. But where any of those
shallow, bedizened triflers about the court would have been glibly in
his element, I stuck for lack of a dozen words.

There was no help for it but to leave all, save what I actually felt,
unsaid. Diplomacy I was trained in, and on most matters I had a glib
enough tongue. But to palter with women was a lightness I had always
neglected, and if I had invented would-be pretty speeches out of my
clumsy inexperience, Phorenice would have seen through the fraud on the
instant. She had been nurtured during these

<span id="page_168">p. 168</span>

years of her rule on a pap of these silly protestations, and could weigh
their value with an expert's exactness.

Nor was it a case where honest confession would have served my purpose
better. If I had put my position to her in plain words, it would have
made relations worse. And so perforce I had to hold my tongue, and
submit to be considered a clown.

"I had always heard," said she, "that you colonists in Yucatan were far
ahead of those in Egypt in all the arts and graces. But you, sir, do
small credit to your viceroyalty. Why, I have had gentry front the Nile
come here, and you might almost think they had never left their native
shores."

"They must have made great strides these last twenty years, then. When
last I was sent to Egypt to report, the blacks were clearly masters of
the land, and our people lived there only on sufferance. Their pyramids
were puny, and their cities nothing more than forts."

"Oh," she said, mockingly, "they are mere exiles still, but they
remember their manners. My poor face seemed to please them; at least
they all went into raptures over it. And for ten pleasant words one of
them cut off his own right hand. We made the bargain, my Egyptian
gallant and I, and the hand lies dried on some shelf in my apartment
to-day as a pleasant memento."

But here, by a lucky chance for me, an incident occurred which saved me
from further baiting. The rebels outside the walls were conducting their
day's attack with vigor and some intelligence. More than

<span id="page_169">p. 169</span>

once during our procession the lighter missiles from their war engines
had sang up through the air and split against a building, and thrown
splinters which wounded those which thronged the streets. Still there
had been nothing to ruffle the nerves of any one at all used to the haps
of warfare, or in any way to hinder our courtship. But presently, it
seems, they stopped hurling stones from their war engines, and took to
loading them with carcasses of wood lined with the throwing fire.

Now against stone buildings these did little harm, save only that they
scorched horribly any poor wretch that was within splash of them when
they burst; but when they fell upon the rude wooden booths and rush
shelters of the poorer folk, they set them ablaze instantly. There was
no putting out these fires.

These things also would have given to either Phorenice or myself little
enough of concern, as they are the trivial and common incidents of every
siege; but the mammoth on which we rode had not been so properly
schooled. When the first blue whiff of smoke came to us down the
windings of the street, the huge red beast hoisted its trunk, and began
to sway its head uneasily. When the smoke drifts grew more dense, and
here and there a tongue of flame showed pale beneath the sunshine, it
stopped abruptly and began to trumpet.

The guards who led it tugged manfully at the chains which hung from the
jagged metal collar round its neck, so that the spikes ran deep into its
flesh, and reminded it keenly of its bondage. But the beast's terror at
the fire, which was native to its

<span id="page_170">p. 170</span>

constitution, mastered all its new-bought habits of obedience. From time
unknown men have hunted the mammoth in the savage ground, and the
mammoth has hunted men; and the men have always used fire as a shield,
and mammoths have learned to dread fire as the most dangerous of all
enemies.

Phorenice's brow began to darken as the great beast grew more restive,
and she shook her red curls viciously. "Some one shall lose a head for
this blundering," said she. "I ordered to have this beast trained to
stand indifferent to drums, shouting, arrows, stones, and fire, and the
trainers assured me that all was done, and brought examples."

I slipped my girdle. "Here," I said, "quick. Let me lower you to the
ground."

She turned on me with a gleam. "Are you fearful for my neck then,
Deucalion?"

"I have no mind to be bereaved before I have tasted my wedded life."

"Pish! There is little enough of danger. I will stay and ride it out. I
am not one of your nervous women, sir. But go you, if you please."

"There is little enough chance for that now."

Blood flowed from the mammoth's neck where the spikes of the collar tore
it, and with each drop, so did the tameness seem to ooze out from it
also. With wild squeals and trumpetings it turned and charged viciously
down the way it had come, scattering like straws the spearmen who tried
to stop it, and mowing a great swathe through the crowd with its
monstrous progress. Many must have been trodden under foot, many killed
by its murderous trunk, but only their

<span id="page_171">p. 171</span>

cries came to us. The golden castle, with its canopy of royal snakes,
was swayed and tossed so that we two occupants had much ado not to be
shot off like stones from a catapult. But I took a brace with my feet
against the front and one arm around a pillar, and clapped the spare arm
round Phorenice, so as to offer myself to her as a cushion.

She lay there contentedly enough, with her lovely face just beneath my
chin, and the faint scent of her hair coming in to me with every breath
I took; and the mammoth charged madly on through the narrow streets. We
had outstripped the taint of smoke, and the original cause of fear, but
the beast seemed to have forgotten everything in, its mad panic. It held
furiously on with enormous strides, carrying its trunk aloft, and
deafening us with its screams and trumpetings. We left behind us quickly
all those who had trod in that glittering pageant, and we were carried
helplessly on through the wards of the city.

The beast was utterly beyond all control. So great was its pace that
there was no alternative but to try and cling on to the castle. Up there
we were beyond its reach. To have leaped off, even if we had avoided
having brains dashed out or limbs smashed by the fall, would have been
to put ourselves at once at a frightful disadvantage. The mammoth would
have scented us immediately, and turned (as is the custom of these
beasts), and we should have been trampled into pulp in a dozen seconds.

The thought came to me that here was the High Gods’ answer to
Phorenice's sacrilege. The mammoth was appointed to carry out Their
vengeance

<span id="page_172">p. 172</span>

by dashing her to pieces, and I, their priest, was to be human witness
that justice had been done. But no direct revelation had been given me
on this matter, and so I took no initiative, but hung on to the swaying
castle, and held the Empress against bruises in my arms.

There was no guiding the brute: in its insanity of madness it doubled
many times upon its course, the windings of the streets confusing it.
But by degrees we left the large palaces and pyramids behind, and got
among the quarters of artisans, where weavers and smiths gaped at us
from their doors as we thundered past. And then we came upon the
merchants’ quarters where men live over their storehouses that do
traffic with the people over seas, and then down an open space there
glittered before us a mirror of water.

"Now here," thought I, "this mad beast will come to sudden stop, and as
like as not will swerve round sharply and charge back again towards the
heart of the city." And I braced myself to withstand the shock, and took
fresh grip upon the woman who lay against my breast. But with louder
screams and wilder trumpetings the mammoth held straight on, and
presently came to the harbor's edge, and sent the spray sparkling in
sheets among the sunshine as it went with its clumsy gait into the
water.

But at this point the pace was very quickly slackened. The great sewers,
which science devised for the health of the city in the old King's time,
vomit their drainings into this part of the harbor, and the solid matter
which they carry is quickly deposited as an impalpable sludge. Into this
the

<span id="page_173">p. 173</span>

huge beast began to sink deeper and deeper before it could halt in its
rush, and when with frightened bellowings it had come to a stop, it was
bogged irretrievably. Madly it struggled, wildly it screamed and
trumpeted. The harbor water and the slime were churned into one stinking
compost, and the golden castle in which we clung lurched so wildly that
we were torn from it and shot far away into the water.

Still there, of course, we were safe, and I was pleased enough to be rid
of the bumpings.

Phorenice laughed as she swain. "You handle yourself like a sore man,
Deucalion. I owe you something for lending me the cushion of your body.
By my face! There's more of the gallant about you when it comes to the
test than one would guess to hear you talk. How did you like the ride,
sir? I warrant it came to you as a new experience."

"I'd liefer have walked."

"Pish, man! you'll never be a courtier. You should have sworn that with
me in your arms you could have wished the bumping had gone on forever.
Ho, the boat there! Hold your arrows. Deucalion, hail me those fools in
that boat. Tell them that, if they hurt so much as a hair of my mammoth,
I'll kill them all by torture. He'll exhaust himself directly, and when
his flurry's done we'll leave him where he is, to consider his evil ways
for a day or so, and then haul him out with windlasses, and tame him
afresh. Pho! I could not feel myself to be Phorenice if I had no fine,
red, shaggy mammoth to take me out for my rides."

<span id="page_174">p. 174</span>

The boat was a ten-slave galley, which was churning up from the farther
side of the harbor as hard as well-plied whips could make oars drive
her; but at the sound of my shouts the soldiers on her foredeck stopped
their arrow-shots, and the steersman swerved her off on a new course to
pick us up. Till then we had been swimming leisurely across an angle of
the harbor, so as to avoid landing where the sewers outpoured; but we
stopped now, treading the water, and were helped over the side by most
respectful hands.

The galley belonged to the captain of the port, a mincing figure of a
mariner, whose highest appetite in life was to lick the feet of the
great; and he began to fawn and prostrate himself at once, and to wish
that his eyes had been blinded before he saw the Empress in such deadly
peril.

"The peril may pass," said she. "It's nothing mortal that will ever kill
me. But I've spoiled my pretty clothes, and shed a jewel or two, and
that's annoying enough, as you say, good man."

The silly fellow repeated a wish that he might be blinded before the
Empress was ever put to such discomfort again.

But it seemed she could be cloyed with flattery. "If you are tired of
your eyes," said she, "let me tell you that you have gone the way to
have them plucked out from their sockets. Kill my mammoth, would you,
because he has shown himself a trifle frolicsome? You and your sort want
more education, my man. I shall have to teach you that port-captains and
such small creatures are very easy to

<span id="page_175">p. 175</span>

come by, and very small value when got, but that my mammoth is
mine—mine, do you understand?—the property of Goddess Phorenice, and as
such is sacred."

The port-captain abased himself before her. "I am an ignorant fellow,"
said he, "and heaven was robbed of its brightest ornament when Phorenice
came down to Atlantis. But if reparation is permitted me, I have two
prisoners in the cabin of the boat here who shall be sacrificed to the
mammoth forthwith. Doubtless it would please him to make sport with
them, and spill out the last lees of his rage upon their bodies."

"Prisoners you've got, have you? How taken?"

"Under cover of last night they were trying to pass in between the two
forts which guard the harbor mouth. But their boat fouled the chain, and
by the light of the torches the sentries spied them. They were caught
with ropes and put in a dungeon. There is an order not to abuse
prisoners before they have brought before a judgment."

"It was my order. Did these prisoners offer to buy their lives with
news?"

"The man has not spoken. Indeed, I think he got his death-wound in being
taken. The woman fought like a cat also, so they said in the fort, but
she was caught without hurt. She says she has got nothing that would be
of use to tell. She says she has tired of living like a savage outside
the city, and moreover that, inside, there is a man for whose nearness
she craves most mightily."

"Tut!" said Phorenice. "Is this a romance we

<span id="page_176">p. 176</span>

have swum to? You see what affectionate creatures we women are,
Deucalion." The galley was brought up against the royal quay and made
fast to its golden rings. I handed the Empress ashore, but she turned
again and faced the boat, her garments still yielding up a slender drip
of water. "Produce your woman prisoner, master captain, and let us see
whether she is a runaway wife, or a lovesick girl mad after her
sweetheart. Then I will deliver judgment on her, and as like as not will
surprise you all with my clemency. I am in a mood for tender romance
to-day."

The port-captain went into the little hutch of a cabin with a white
face. It was plain that Phorenice's pleasantries scared him. "The man
appears to be dead, your Majesty. I see that his wounds—"

"Bring out the woman, you fool. I asked for her. Keep your carrion where
it is."

I saw the fellow stoop for his knife to cut a lashing, and presently who
should he bring out to the daylight but the girl I had saved from the
cave-tigers in the circus, and who has so strangely drawn me to her
during the hours that we had spent afterwards in companionship. It was
clear, too, that the Empress recognized her also. Indeed, she made no
secret about the matter, addressing her by name and mockingly making
inquiries about the ménage of the rebels, and the success of the
prisoner's amours.

"This good port-captain tells me that you made a most valiant attempt to
return, Naïs, and for an excuse you told that it was your love for some
man in

<span id="page_177">p. 177</span>

the city here which drew you. Come now, we are willing to overlook much
of your faults if you will give us a reasonable chance. Point me out
your man, and if he is a proper fellow, I will see that he weds you
honestly. Yes, and I will do more for you, Naïs, since this day brings
me to a husband. Seeing that all your estate is confiscate as a penalty
for your late rebellion, I will charge myself with your dowry and give
it back to you. So come, name me the man."

The girl looked at her with a sullen brow. "I spoke a lie," she said;
"there is no man."

I tried myself to give her advocacy. "The lady doubtless spoke what came
to her lips. When a woman is in the grip of a rude soldiery, any excuse
which can save her for the moment must serve. For myself, I should think
it like enough that she would confess to having come back to her old
allegiance, if she were asked."

"Sir," said the Empress, "keep your peace. Any interest you may show in
this matter will go far to offend me. You have spoken of Naïs in your
narrative before; and although your tongue was shrewd and you did not
say much, I am a woman and I could read between the lines. Now regard,
my rebel, I have no wish to be unduly hard upon you, though once you
were my fan-girl, and so your running away to these ill-kempt
malcontents, who beat their heads against my city walls, is all the more
naughty. But you must meet me half-way. You must give an excuse for a
leniency. Point me out the man you would wed, and he shall be your
husband to-morrow."

<span id="page_178">p. 178</span>

"There is no man."

"Then name me one at random. Why, my pretty Naïs, not ten months ago
there were a score who would have leaped at the chance of having you for
a wife. Drop your coyness, girl, and name me one of those. I warrant you
that I will be your ambassadress and will put the matter to him with
such delicacy that he will not make you blush by refusal."

The prisoner moistened her lips. "I am a maiden, and I have a maiden's
modesty. I will die as you choose, but I will not do this indecency."

"Well, I am a maiden too, and though because I am Empress also,
questions of State have to stand before questions of my private modesty,
I can have a sympathy for yours—although in truth I did not obtrude
unduly when you were my fan-girl, Naïs. No, come to think of it, you
liked a tender glance and a pretty phrase as well as any when you were f
an-girl. You have grown wild and shy among these savage rebels, but I
will not punish you for that.

"Let me call your favorites to memory now. There was Tarca, of course;
but Tarca had a difference with that ill-dressed father of yours, and
wears a leprosy on half his face instead of that beard he used to trim
so finely. And then there is Tatho; but Tatho is away over-seas. Eron,
too, you liked once; but he lost an arm in fighting t’other day, and I
would not marry you to less than a whole man. Ah, by my face! I have it,
the dainty exquisite, Rota! He is the husband! How well I remember the
way he used to dress in a change of garb each day to catch your

<span id="page_179">p. 179</span>

proud fancy, girl. Well, you shall have Rota. He shall lead you to wife
before this hour to-morrow."

Again the prisoner moistened her lips. "I will not have Rota, and spare
me the others. I know why you mock me, Phorenice."

"Then there are three of us here who share one knowledge." She turned
her eyes upon me. Gods! who ever saw the like of Phorenice's eyes, and
who ever saw them lit with such a fire as burned within them then? "My
lord, you are marrying me for policy; I am marrying you for policy, and
for another reason which has grown stronger of late, and which you may
guess at. Do you wish still to carry out the match?"

I looked once at Naïs, and then I looked steadily back at Phorenice. The
command given by the mouth of Zaemon from the high council of the Sacred
Mountain had to outweigh all else, and I answered that such was my
desire.

"Then," said she, glowering at me with her eyes, "you shall build me up
the pretty body of Naïs beneath a throne of granite as a wedding gift.
And you shall do it too with your own proper hands, my Deucalion, while
I watch your devotion."

And to Naïs she turned with a cruel smile. "You lied to me, my girl, and
you spoke truth to the soldiers in the harbor forts. There is a man here
in the city you came after, and he is the one man you may not have.
Because you know me well, and my methods very thoroughly, your love for
him must be very deep or you would not have come. And so, being here,
you shall be put beyond mischief's reach.

<span id="page_180">p. 180</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> I am not one of
those who see luxury in fostering rivals.

"You came for attention at the hands of Deucalion. By my face! you shall
have it. I will watch myself while he builds you up living."

 

 

<span id="img_ftr"></span> ![](img/ftr.jpg)

 

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XI. An Affair With the Barbarous Fishers](tlc14)
