<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [New Thought](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](elms07)  [Next](elms09) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Edinburgh Lectures on Mental Science*, by Thomas Troward, \[1909\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_40">p. 40</span>

### VI.

### THE LAW OF GROWTH.

<span class="smallcaps">A correct</span> understanding of the law of
growth is of the highest importance to the student of Mental Science.
The great fact to be realized regarding Nature is that it is natural. We
may pervert the order of Nature, but it will prevail in the long run,
returning, as Horace says, by the back door even though we drive it out
with a pitchfork; and the beginning, the middle, and the end of the law
of Nature is the principle of growth from a vitality inherent in the
entity itself. If we realize this from the outset we shall not undo our
own work by endeavouring to *force* things to become that which by their
own nature they are not. For this reason when the Bible says that "he
who believeth shall not make haste," it is enunciating a great natural
principle that success, depends on our using, and not opposing, the
universal law of growth. No doubt the greater the vitality we put into
the germ, which we have agreed to call the spiritual prototype, the
quicker it will germinate; but this is simply because by a more
realizing conception we put more growing-power into the seed than we do
by a feebler conception.

<span id="page_41">p. 41</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Our mistakes
always eventually resolve themselves into distrusting the law of growth.
Either we fancy we can hasten it by some exertion of our own from
*without*, and are thus led into hurry and anxiety, not to say sometimes
into the employment, of grievously wrong methods; or else we give up all
hope and so deny the germinating power of the seed we have planted. The
result in either case is the same, for in either case we are in effect
forming a fresh spiritual prototype of an opposite character to our
desire, which therefore neutralizes the one first formed, and
disintegrates it and usurps its place. The law is always the same, that
our Thought forms a spiritual prototype which, if left undisturbed, will
reproduce itself in external circumstances; the only difference is in
the sort of prototype we form, and thus evil is brought to us by
precisely the same law as good.

These considerations will greatly simplify our ideas of life. We have no
longer to consider two forces, but only one, as being the cause of all
things; the difference between good and evil resulting simply from the
direction in which this force is made to flow. It is a universal law
that if we reverse the action of a cause we at the same time reverse the
effect. With the same apparatus we can commence by mechanical motion
which will generate

<span id="page_42">p. 42</span>

electricity, or we can commence with electricity which will generate
mechanical motion; or to take a simple arithmetical instance: if 10 ÷ 2
= 5, then 10 ÷ 5 = 2; and therefore if we once recognize the power of
thought to produce any results at all, we shall see that the law by
which negative thought produces negative results is the same by which
positive thought produces positive results. Therefore all our distrust
of the law of growth, whether shown in the anxious endeavour to bring
pressure to bear from without, or in allowing despair to take the place
of cheerful expectation, is reversing the action of the original cause
and consequently reversing the nature of the results. It is for this
reason that the Bible, which is the most deeply occult of all books,
continually lays so much stress upon the efficiency of faith and the
destructive influence of unbelief; and in like manner, all books on
every branch of spiritual science emphatically warn us against the
admission of doubt or fear. They are the inversion of the principle
which builds up, and they are therefore the principle which pulls down;
but the Law itself never changes, and it is on the unchangeableness of
the law that all Mental Science is founded. We are accustomed to realize
the unchangeableness of natural law in our every day life, and it should
therefore not be difficult to realize that the same unchangeableness of
law which obtains on the visible side of nature obtains on the invisible
side as well. The variable factor is, not the law, but

<span id="page_43">p. 43</span>

our own volition; and it is by combining this variable factor with the
invariable one that we can produce the various results we desire. The
principle of growth is that of inherent vitality in the seed itself, and
the operations of the gardener have their exact analogue in Mental
Science. We do not *put* the self-expansive vitality into the seed, but
we must sow it, and we may also, so to speak, water it by quiet
concentrated contemplation of our desire as an actually accomplished
fact. But we must carefully remove from such contemplation any idea of a
strenuous effort on our part to *make* the seed grow. Its efficacy is in
helping to keep out those negative thoughts of doubt which would plant
tares among our wheat, and therefore, instead of anything of effort,
such contemplation should be accompanied by a feeling of pleasure and
restfulness in foreseeing the certain accomplishment of our desires.
This is that making our requests known to God *with thanksgiving* which
St. Paul recommends, and it has its reason in that perfect wholeness of
the Law of Being which only needs our recognition of it to be used by us
to any extent we wish.

Some people possess the power of visualization, or making mental
pictures of things, in a greater degree than others, and by such this
faculty may advantageously be employed to facilitate their realization
of the working of the Law. But those who do not possess

<span id="page_44">p. 44</span>

this faculty in any marked degree, need not be discouraged by their want
of it, for visualization is not the only way of realizing that the law
is at work on the invisible plane. Those whose mental bias is towards
physical science should realize this Law of Growth as the creative force
throughout all nature; and those who have a mathematical turn of mind
may reflect that all solids are generated from the movement of a point,
which, as our old friend Euclid tells us, is that which has no parts nor
magnitude, and is therefore as complete an abstraction as any spiritual
nucleus could be. To use the apostolic words, we are dealing with the
substance of things not seen, and we have to attain that habit of mind
by which we shall see its reality and feel that we are mentally
manipulating the only substance there ultimately is, and of which all
visible things are only different modes. We must therefore regard our
mental creations as spiritual realities and then implicitly trust the
Law of Growth to do the rest.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: VII.—Receptivity](elms09)

</div>
