[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sacred Time
Index](../index)  [Sacred Calendars](index)  [Islam](../../isl/index)  
[Phase of the Moon](pom) [Jewish Date](jdate)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Names of the Months

Important note: The Islamic day and month displayed here are
approximate. The start of a month in the canonical Islamic calendar is
based on the first physical sighting of the new moon at a given
location, which depends on a number of factors which are difficult or
impossible to compute, including weather and visual acuity of the
observer. The date displayed above is computed based on the actual time
of the new moon, which may occur a day or so before it is actually
visible. Also, note that this date is computed relative to Universal
Time, which is essentially equivalent to Greenwich Mean Time.

The starting point for the Islamic calendar was fixed at the date of the
new moon during the first lunar month in the year in which Mohammed and
his followers left Mecca for Medina (the Hegira). The abbreviation A.H.
stands for 'Anno Hegirae' (Latin for the *Year of the Hegira*). The
Hegira (which is actually pronounced *Hijra*) is often translated as
'the flight'; however this translation has been questioned by Islamic
scholars; it probably means 'to break off from the relations or abandon
one's own tribe.' The Hegira is believed to have occured on 20 September
622 C.E.

The Islamic calendar was created in 639 C.E. (A.H. 17) by the Second
Caliph 'Umar ibn Al-Khattab (592-644 C.E.). The civil epoch (the zero
date for the Islamic calendar) is July 16, 662 C.E., when the new moon
was first visible in Arabia in the first lunar month (it actually became
new the day before).

The day begins at sunset in the Islamic calendar.

The Islamic calendar is strictly based on lunar cycles. For this reason,
each year is about 11 days short of a solar year. Hence the start of
each month will be different from one year to the next. The Islamic
calendar is used to determine important religious holidays such as the
start and end of Ramadan. Therefore the date of these festivals rotate
backwards through the solar year. This has been attributed to the fact
that the Islamic calendar originated in the desert regions close to the
equator. Seasonal differences are not as marked as in higher latitudes.
Therefore it was less important that holidays synchronize with the solar
year.
