[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Philosophy](../../index)  [Spinoza](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](tpt04)  [Next](tpt06) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0486202496/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*A Theologico-Political Treatise*, by Benedict de Spinoza, \[1883\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER III.—OF THE VOCATION OF THE HEBREWS, AND WHETHER THE GIFT OF PROPHECY WAS PECULIAR TO THEM.

\(1\) Every man's true happiness and blessedness consist solely in the
enjoyment of what is good, not in the pride that he alone is enjoying
it, to the exclusion of others. (2) He who thinks himself the more
blessed because he is enjoying benefits which others are not, or because
he is more blessed or more fortunate than his fellows, is ignorant of
true happiness and blessedness, and the joy which he feels is either
childish or envious and malicious. (3) For instance, a man's true
happiness consists only in wisdom, and the knowledge of the truth, not
at all in the fact that he is wiser than others, or that others lack
such knowledge: such considerations do not increase his wisdom or true
happiness.

\(4\) Whoever, therefore, rejoices for such reasons, rejoices in
another's misfortune, and is, so far, malicious and bad, knowing neither
true happiness nor the peace of the true life.

\(5\) When Scripture, therefore, in exhorting the Hebrews to obey the
law, says that the Lord has chosen them for Himself before other nations
(Deut. x:15); that He is near them, but not near others (Deut. iv:7);
that to them alone He has given just laws (Deut. iv:8); and, lastly,
that He has marked them out before others (Deut. iv:32); it speaks only
according to the understanding of its hearers, who, as we have shown in
the last chapter, and as Moses also testifies (Deut. ix:6, 7), knew not
true blessedness. (6) For in good sooth they would have been no less
blessed if God had called all men equally to salvation, nor would God
have been less present to them for being equally present to others;
their laws, would have been no less just if they had been ordained for
all, and they themselves would have been no less wise. (7) The miracles
would have shown God's power no less by being wrought for other nations
also; lastly, the Hebrews would have been just as much bound to worship
God if He had bestowed all these gifts equally on all men.

\(8\) When God tells Solomon (1 Kings iii:12) that no one shall be as
wise as he in time to come, it seems to be only a manner of expressing
surpassing wisdom; it is little to be believed that God would have
promised Solomon, for his greater happiness, that He would never endow
anyone with so much wisdom in time to come; this would in no wise have
increased Solomon's intellect, and the wise king would have given equal
thanks to the Lord if everyone had been gifted with the same faculties.

\(9\) Still, though we assert that Moses, in the passages of the
Pentateuch just cited, spoke only according to the understanding of the
Hebrews, we have no wish to deny that God ordained the Mosaic law for
them alone, nor that He spoke to them alone, nor that they witnessed
marvels beyond those which happened to any other nation; but we wish to
emphasize that Moses desired to admonish the Hebrews in such a manner,
and with such reasonings as would appeal most forcibly to their childish
understanding, and constrain them to worship the Deity. (10) Further, we
wished to show that the Hebrews did not surpass other nations in
knowledge, or in piety, but evidently in some attribute different from
these; or (to speak like the Scriptures, according to their
understanding), that the Hebrews were not chosen by God before others
for the sake of the true life and sublime ideas, though they were often
thereto admonished, but with some other object. (11) What that object
was, I will duly show.

\(12\) But before I begin, I wish in a few words to explain what I mean
by the guidance of God, by the help of God, external and inward, and,
lastly, what I understand by fortune.

\(13\) By the help of God, I mean the fixed and unchangeable order of
nature or the chain of natural events: for I have said before and shown
elsewhere that the universal laws of nature, according to which all
things exist and are determined, are only another name for the eternal
decrees of God, which always involve eternal truth and necessity.

\(14\) So that to say that everything happens according to natural laws,
and to say that everything is ordained by the decree and ordinance of
God, is the same thing. (15) Now since the power in nature is identical
with the power of God, by which alone all things happen and are
determined, it follows that whatsoever man, as a part of nature,
provides himself with to aid and preserve his existence, or whatsoever
nature affords him without his help, is given to him solely by the
Divine power, acting either through human nature or through external
circumstance. (16) So whatever human nature can furnish itself with by
its own efforts to preserve its existence, may be fitly called the
inward aid of God, whereas whatever else accrues to man's profit from
outward causes may be called the external aid of God.

\(17\) We can now easily understand what is meant by the election of
God. (18) For since no one can do anything save by the predetermined
order of nature, that is by God's eternal ordinance and decree, it
follows that no one can choose a plan of life for himself, or accomplish
any work save by God's vocation choosing him for the work or the plan of
life in question, rather than any other. (19) Lastly, by fortune, I mean
the ordinance of God in so far as it directs human life through external
and unexpected means. (20) With these preliminaries I return to my
purpose of discovering the reason why the Hebrews were said to be
elected by God before other nations, and with the demonstration I thus
proceed.

\(21\) All objects of legitimate desire fall, generally speaking, under
one of these three categories:

    1. The knowledge of things through their primary causes.  
    2. The government of the passions, or the acquirement of the habit
of  
       virtue.  
    3. Secure and healthy life.

\(22\) The means which most directly conduce towards the first two of
these ends, and which may be considered their proximate and efficient
causes are contained in human nature itself, so that their acquisition
hinges only on our own power, and on the laws of human nature. (23) It
may be concluded that these gifts are not peculiar to any nation, but
have always been shared by the whole human race, unless, indeed, we
would indulge the dream that nature formerly created men of different
kinds. (24) But the means which conduce to security and health are
chiefly in external circumstance, and are called the gifts of fortune
because they depend chiefly on objective causes of which we are
ignorant; for a fool may be almost as liable to happiness or unhappiness
as a wise man. (25) Nevertheless, human management and watchfulness can
greatly assist towards living in security and warding off the injuries
of our fellow-men, and even of beasts. (26) Reason and experience show
no more certain means of attaining this object than the formation of a
society with fixed laws, the occupation of a strip of territory and the
concentration of all forces, as it were, into one body, that is the
social body. (27) Now for forming and preserving a society, no ordinary
ability and care is required: that society will be most secure, most
stable, and least liable to reverses, which is founded and directed by
far-seeing and careful men; while, on the other hand, a society
constituted by men without trained skill, depends in a great measure on
fortune, and is less constant. (28) If, in spite of all, such a society
lasts a long time, it is owing to some other directing influence than
its own; if it overcomes great perils and its affairs prosper, it will
perforce marvel at and adore the guiding Spirit of God (in so far, that
is, as God works through hidden means, and not through the nature and
mind of man), for everything happens to it unexpectedly and contrary to
anticipation, it may even be said and thought to be by miracle. (29)
Nations, then, are distinguished from one another in respect to the
social organization and the laws under which they live and are governed;
the Hebrew nation was not chosen by God in respect to its wisdom nor its
tranquillity of mind, but in respect to its social organization and the
good fortune with which it obtained supremacy and kept it so many years.
(30) This is abundantly clear from Scripture. Even a cursory perusal
will show us that the only respects in which the Hebrews surpassed other
nations, are in their successful conduct of matters relating to
government, and in their surmounting great perils solely by God's
external aid; in other ways they were on a par with their fellows, and
God was equally gracious to all. (31) For in respect to intellect (as we
have shown in the last chapter) they held very ordinary ideas about God
and nature, so that they cannot have been God's chosen in this respect;
nor were they so chosen in respect of virtue and the true life, for here
again they, with the exception of a very few elect, were on an equality
with other nations: therefore their choice and vocation consisted only
in the temporal happiness and advantages of independent rule. (32) In
fact, we do not see that God promised anything beyond this to the
patriarchs \[Endnote 4\] or their successors; in the law no other reward
is offered for obedience than the continual happiness of an independent
commonwealth and other goods of this life; while, on the other hand,
against contumacy and the breaking of the covenant is threatened the
downfall of the commonwealth and great hardships. (33) Nor is this to be
wondered at; for the ends of every social organization and commonwealth
are (as appears from what we have said, and as we will explain more at
length hereafter) security and comfort; a commonwealth can only exist by
the laws being binding on all. (34) If all the members of a state wish
to disregard the law, by that very fact they dissolve the state and
destroy the commonwealth. (35) Thus, the only reward which could be
promised to the Hebrews for continued obedience to the law was security
\[Endnote 5\] and its attendant advantages, while no surer punishment
could be threatened for disobedience, than the ruin of the state and the
evils which generally follow therefrom, in addition to such further
consequences as might accrue to the Jews in particular from the ruin of
their especial state. (36) But there is no need here to go into this
point at more length. (37) I will only add that the laws of the Old
Testament were revealed and ordained to the Jews only, for as God chose
them in respect to the special constitution of their society and
government, they must, of course, have had special laws. (38) Whether
God ordained special laws for other nations also, and revealed Himself
to their lawgivers prophetically, that is, under the attributes by which
the latter were accustomed to imagine Him, I cannot sufficiently
determine. (39) It is evident from Scripture itself that other nations
acquired supremacy and particular laws by the external aid of God;
witness only the two following passages:

\(40\) In Genesis xiv:18, 19, 20, it is related that Melchisedek was
king of Jerusalem and priest of the Most High God, that in exercise of
his priestly functions he blessed Abraham, and that Abraham the beloved
of the Lord gave to this priest of God a tithe of all his spoils. (41)
This sufficiently shows that before He founded the Israelitish nation
God constituted kings and priests in Jerusalem, and ordained for them
rites and laws. (42) Whether He did so prophetically is, as I have said,
not sufficiently clear; but I am sure of this, that Abraham, whilst he
sojourned in the city, lived scrupulously according to these laws, for
Abraham had received no special rites from God; and yet it is stated
(Gen. xxvi:5), that he observed the worship, the precepts, the statutes,
and the laws of God, which must be interpreted to mean the worship, the
statutes, the precepts, and the laws of king Melchisedek. (43) Malachi
chides the Jews as follows (i:10-11.): "Who is there among you that will
shut the doors? \[of the Temple\]; neither do ye kindle fire on mine
altar for nought. (44) I have no pleasure in you, saith the Lord of
Hosts. (45) For from the rising of the sun, even until the going down of
the same My Name shall be great among the Gentiles; and in every place
incense shall be offered in My Name, and a pure offering; for My Name is
great among the heathen, saith the Lord of Hosts." (46) These words,
which, unless we do violence to them, could only refer to the current
period, abundantly testify that the Jews of that time were not more
beloved by God than other nations, that God then favoured other nations
with more miracles than He vouchsafed to the Jews, who had then partly
recovered their empire without miraculous aid; and, lastly, that the
Gentiles possessed rites and ceremonies acceptable to God. (47) But I
pass over these points lightly: it is enough for my purpose to have
shown that the election of the Jews had regard to nothing but temporal
physical happiness and freedom, in other words, autonomous government,
and to the manner and means by which they obtained it; consequently to
the laws in so far as they were necessary to the preservation of that
special government; and, lastly, to the manner in which they were
revealed. In regard to other matters, wherein man's true happiness
consists, they were on a par with the rest of the nations.

\(48\) When, therefore, it is said in Scripture (Deut. iv:7) that the
Lord is not so nigh to any other nation as He is to the Jews, reference
is only made to their government, and to the period when so many
miracles happened to them, for in respect of intellect and virtue—that
is, in respect of blessedness—God was, as we have said already, and are
now demonstrating, equally gracious to all. (49) Scripture itself bears
testimony to this fact, for the Psalmist says (cxlv:18), "The Lord is
near unto all them that call upon Him, to all that call upon Him in
truth." (50) So in the same Psalm, verse 9, "The Lord is good to all,
and His tender mercies are over all His works." In Ps. xxxiii:16, it is
clearly stated that God has granted to all men the same intellect, in
these words, He fashioneth their hearts alike." The heart was considered
by the Hebrews, as I suppose everyone knows, to be the seat of the soul
and the intellect.

\(51\) Lastly, from Job xxxviii:28, it is plain that God had ordained
for the whole human race the law to reverence God, to keep from evil
doing, or to do well, and that Job, although a Gentile, was of all men
most acceptable to God, because he exceeded all in piety and religion.
(52) Lastly, from Jonah iv:2, it is very evident that, not only to the
Jews but to all men, God was gracious, merciful, long- suffering, and of
great goodness, and repented Him of the evil, for Jonah says: "Therefore
I determined to flee before unto Tarshish, for I know that Thou art a
gracious God, and merciful, slow to anger, and of great kindness," &c.,
and that, therefore, God would pardon the Ninevites. (53) We conclude,
therefore (inasmuch as God is to all men equally gracious, and the
Hebrews were only, chosen by him in respect to their social organization
and government), that the individual Jew, taken apart from his social
organization and government, possessed no gift of God above other men,
and that there was no difference between Jew and Gentile. (54) As it is
a fact that God is equally gracious, merciful, and the rest, to all men;
and as the function of the prophet was to teach men not so much the laws
of their country, as true virtue, and to exhort them thereto, it is not
to be doubted that all nations possessed prophets, and that the
prophetic gift was not peculiar to the Jews. (55) Indeed, history, both
profane and sacred, bears witness to the fact. (56) Although, from the
sacred histories of the Old Testament, it is not evident that the other
nations had as many prophets as the Hebrews, or that any Gentile prophet
was expressly sent by God to the nations, this does not affect the
question, for the Hebrews were careful to record their own affairs, not
those of other nations. (57) It suffices, then, that we find in the Old
Testament Gentiles, and uncircumcised, as Noah, Enoch, Abimelech,
Balaam, &c., exercising prophetic gifts; further, that Hebrew prophets
were sent by God, not only to their own nation but to many others also.
(58) Ezekiel prophesied to all the nations then known; Obadiah to none,
that we are aware of, save the Idumeans; and Jonah was chiefly the
prophet to the Ninevites. (59) Isaiah bewails and predicts the
calamities, and hails the restoration not only of the Jews but also of
other nations, for he says (chap. xvi:9), "Therefore I will bewail Jazer
with weeping;" and in chap. xix. he foretells first the calamities and
then the restoration of the Egyptians (see verses 19, 20, 21, 25),
saying that God shall send them a Saviour to free them, that the Lord
shall be known in Egypt, and, further, that the Egyptians shall worship
God with sacrifice and oblation; and, at last, he calls that nation the
blessed Egyptian people of God; all of which particulars are specially
noteworthy.

\(60\) Jeremiah is called, not the prophet of the Hebrew nation, but
simply the prophet of the nations (see Jer:i.5). (61) He also mournfully
foretells the calamities of the nations, and predicts their restoration,
for he says (xlviii:31) of the Moabites, "Therefore will I howl for
Moab, and I will cryout for all Moab" (verse 36), "and therefore mine
heart shall sound for Moab like pipes;" in the end he prophesies their
restoration, as also the restoration of the Egyptians, Ammonites, and
Elamites. (62) Wherefore it is beyond doubt that other nations also,
like the Jews, had their prophets, who prophesied to them.

\(63\) Although Scripture only, makes mention of one man, Balaam, to
whom the future of the Jews and the other nations was revealed, we must
not suppose that Balaam prophesied only once, for from the narrative
itself it is abundantly clear that he had long previously been famous
for prophesy and other Divine gifts. (64) For when Balak bade him to
come to him, he said (Num. xxii:6), "For I know that he whom thou
blessest is blessed, and he whom thou cursest is cursed." (65) Thus we
see that he possessed the gift which God had bestowed on Abraham.
Further, as accustomed to prophesy, Balaam bade the messengers wait for
him till the will of the Lord was revealed to him. (66) When he
prophesied, that is, when he interpreted the true mind of God, he was
wont to say this of himself: "He hath said, which heard the words of God
and knew the knowledge of the Most High, which saw the vision of the
Almighty falling into a trance, but having his eyes open." (67) Further,
after he had blessed the Hebrews by the command of God, he began (as was
his custom) to prophesy to other nations, and to predict their future;
all of which abundantly shows that he had always been a prophet, or had
often prophesied, and (as we may also remark here) possessed that which
afforded the chief certainty to prophets of the truth of their prophecy,
namely, a mind turned wholly to what is right and good, for he did not
bless those whom he wished to bless, nor curse those whom he wished to
curse, as Balak supposed, but only those whom God wished to be blessed
or cursed. (68) Thus he answered Balak: "If Balak should give me his
house full of silver and gold, I cannot go beyond the commandment of the
Lord to do either good or bad of my own mind; but what the Lord saith,
that will I speak." (69) As for God being angry with him in the way, the
same happened to Moses when he set out to Egypt by the command of the
Lord; and as to his receiving money for prophesying, Samuel did the same
(1 Sam. ix:7, 8); if in anyway he sinned, "there is not a just man upon
earth that doeth good and sinneth not," Eccles. vii:20. (Vide 2 Epist.
Peter ii:15, 16, and Jude 5:11.)

\(70\) His speeches must certainly have had much weight with God, and
His power for cursing must assuredly have been very great from the
number of times that we find stated in Scripture, in proof of God's
great mercy to the Jews, that God would not hear Balaam, and that He
changed the cursing to blessing (see Deut. xxiii:6, Josh. xxiv:10, Neh.
xiii:2). (71) Wherefore he was without doubt most acceptable to God, for
the speeches and cursings of the wicked move God not at all. (72) As
then he was a true prophet, and nevertheless Joshua calls him a
soothsayer or augur, it is certain that this title had an honourable
signification, and that those whom the Gentiles called augurs and
soothsayers were true prophets, while those whom Scripture often accuses
and condemns were false soothsayers, who deceived the Gentiles as false
prophets deceived the Jews; indeed, this is made evident from other
passages in the Bible, whence we conclude that the gift of prophecy was
not peculiar to the Jews, but common to all nations. (73) The Pharisees,
however, vehemently contend that this Divine gift was peculiar to their
nation, and that the other nations foretold the future (what will
superstition invent next?) by some unexplained diabolical faculty. (74)
The principal passage of Scripture which they cite, by way of confirming
their theory with its authority, is Exodus xxxiii:16, where Moses says
to God, "For wherein shall it be known here that I and Thy people have
found grace in Thy sight? is it not in that Thou goest with us? so shall
we be separated, I and Thy people, from all the people that are upon the
face of the earth." (75) From this they would infer that Moses asked of
God that He should be present to the Jews, and should reveal Himself to
them prophetically; further, that He should grant this favour to no
other nation. (76) It is surely absurd that Moses should have been
jealous of God's presence among the Gentiles, or that he should have
dared to ask any such thing. (77) The act is, as Moses knew that the
disposition and spirit of his nation was rebellious, he clearly saw that
they could not carry out what they had begun without very great miracles
and special external aid from God; nay, that without such aid they must
necessarily perish: as it was evident that God wished them to be
preserved, he asked for this special external aid. (78) Thus he says
(Ex. xxxiv:9), "If now I have found grace in Thy sight, O Lord, let my
Lord, I pray Thee, go among us; for it is a stiffnecked people." (79)
The reason, therefore, for his seeking special external aid from God was
the stiffneckedness of the people, and it is made still more plain, that
he asked for nothing beyond this special external aid by God's
answer—for God answered at once (verse 10 of the same chapter)—"Behold,
I make a covenant: before all Thy people I will do marvels, such as have
not been done in all the earth, nor in any nation." (80) Therefore Moses
had in view nothing beyond the special election of the Jews, as I have
explained it, and made no other request to God. (81) I confess that in
Paul's Epistle to the Romans, I find another text which carries more
weight, namely, where Paul seems to teach a different doctrine from that
here set down, for he there says (Rom. iii:1): "What advantage then hath
the Jew? or what profit is there of circumcision? (82) Much every way:
chiefly, because that unto them were committed the oracles of God."

\(83\) But if we look to the doctrine which Paul especially desired to
teach, we shall find nothing repugnant to our present contention; on the
contrary, his doctrine is the same as ours, for he says (Rom. iii:29)
"that God is the God of the Jews and of the Gentiles, and" (ch. ii:25,
26) "But, if thou be a breaker of the law, thy circumcision is made
uncircumcision. (84) Therefore if the uncircumcision keep the
righteousness of the law, shall not his uncircumcision be counted for
circumcision?" (85) Further, in chap. iv:verse 9, he says that all
alike, Jew and Gentile, were under sin, and that without commandment and
law there is no sin. (86) Wherefore it is most evident that to all men
absolutely was revealed the law under which all lived—namely, the law
which has regard only to true virtue, not the law established in respect
to, and in the formation of a particular state and adapted to the
disposition of a particular people. (87) Lastly, Paul concludes that
since God is the God of all nations, that is, is equally gracious to
all, and since all men equally live under the law and under sin, so also
to all nations did God send His Christ, to free all men equally from the
bondage of the law, that they should no more do right by the command of
the law, but by the constant determination of their hearts. (88) So that
Paul teaches exactly the same as ourselves. (89) When, therefore, he
says "To the Jews only were entrusted the oracles of God," we must
either understand that to them only were the laws entrusted in writing,
while they were given to other nations merely in revelation and
conception, or else (as none but Jews would object to the doctrine he
desired to advance) that Paul was answering only in accordance with the
understanding and current ideas of the Jews, for in respect to teaching
things which he had partly seen, partly heard, he was to the Greeks a
Greek, and to the Jews a Jew.

\(90\) It now only remains to us to answer the arguments of those who
would persuade themselves that the election of the Jews was not
temporal, and merely in respect of their commonwealth, but eternal; for,
they say, we see the Jews after the loss of their commonwealth, and
after being scattered so many years and separated from all other
nations, still surviving, which is without parallel among other peoples,
and further the Scriptures seem to teach that God has chosen for Himself
the Jews for ever, so that though they have lost their commonwealth,
they still nevertheless remain God's elect.

\(91\) The passages which they think teach most clearly this eternal
election, are chiefly: (1.) Jer. xxxi:36, where the prophet testifies
that the seed of Israel shall for ever remain the nation of God,
comparing them with the stability of the heavens and nature;

(2.) Ezek. xx:32, where the prophet seems to intend that though the Jews
wanted after the help afforded them to turn their backs on the worship
of the Lord, that God would nevertheless gather them together again from
all the lands in which they were dispersed, and lead them to the
wilderness of the peoples—as He had led their fathers to the wilderness
of the land of Egypt—and would at length, after purging out from among
them the rebels and transgressors, bring them thence to his Holy
mountain, where the whole house of Israel should worship Him. Other
passages are also cited, especially by the Pharisees, but I think I
shall satisfy everyone if I answer these two, and this I shall easily
accomplish after showing from Scripture itself that God chose not the
Hebrews for ever, but only on the condition under which He had formerly
chosen the Canaanites, for these last, as we have shown, had priests who
religiously worshipped God, and whom God at length rejected because of
their luxury, pride, and corrupt worship.

\(92\) Moses (Lev. xviii:27) warned the Israelites that they be not
polluted with whoredoms, lest the land spue them out as it had spued out
the nations who had dwelt there before, and in Deut. viii:19, 20, in the
plainest terms He threatens their total ruin, for He says, "I testify
against you that ye shall surely perish. (93) As the nations which the
Lord destroyeth before your face, so shall ye perish." In like manner
many other passages are found in the law which expressly show that God
chose the Hebrews neither absolutely nor for ever. (94) If, then, the
prophets foretold for them a new covenant of the knowledge of God, love,
and grace, such a promise is easily proved to be only made to the elect,
for Ezekiel in the chapter which we have just quoted expressly says that
God will separate from them the rebellious and transgressors, and
Zephaniah (iii:12, 13), says that "God will take away the proud from the
midst of them, and leave the poor." (95) Now, inasmuch as their election
has regard to true virtue, it is not to be thought that it was promised
to the Jews alone to the exclusion of others, but we must evidently
believe that the true Gentile prophets (and every nation, as we have
shown, possessed such) promised the same to the faithful of their own
people, who were thereby comforted. (96) Wherefore this eternal covenant
of the knowledge of God and love is universal, as is clear, moreover,
from Zeph. iii:10, 11: no difference in this respect can be admitted
between Jew and Gentile, nor did the former enjoy any special election
beyond that which we have pointed out.

\(97\) When the prophets, in speaking of this election which regards
only true virtue, mixed up much concerning sacrifices and ceremonies,
and the rebuilding of the temple and city, they wished by such
figurative expressions, after the manner and nature of prophecy, to
expound matters spiritual, so as at the same time to show to the Jews,
whose prophets they were, the true restoration of the state and of the
temple to be expected about the time of Cyrus.

\(98\) At the present time, therefore, there is absolutely nothing which
the Jews can arrogate to themselves beyond other people.

\(99\) As to their continuance so long after dispersion and the loss of
empire, there is nothing marvellous in it, for they so separated
themselves from every other nation as to draw down upon themselves
universal hate, not only by their outward rites, rites conflicting with
those of other nations, but also by the sign of circumcision which they
most scrupulously observe.

\(100\) That they have been preserved in great measure by Gentile
hatred, experience demonstrates. (101) When the king of Spain formerly
compelled the Jews to embrace the State religion or to go into exile, a
large number of Jews accepted Catholicism. (102) Now, as these renegades
were admitted to all the native privileges of Spaniards, and deemed
worthy of filling all honourable offices, it came to pass that they
straightway became so intermingled with the Spaniards as to leave of
themselves no relic or remembrance. (103) But exactly the opposite
happened to those whom the king of Portugal compelled to become
Christians, for they always, though converted, lived apart, inasmuch as
they were considered unworthy of any civic honours.

\(104\) The sign of circumcision is, as I think, so important, that I
could persuade myself that it alone would preserve the nation for ever.
(105) Nay, I would go so far as to believe that if the foundations of
their religion have not emasculated their minds they may even, if
occasion offers, so changeable are human affairs, raise up their empire
afresh, and that God may a second time elect them.

\(106\) Of such a possibility we have a very famous example in the
Chinese. (107) They, too, have some distinctive mark on their heads
which they most scrupulously observe, and by which they keep themselves
apart from everyone else, and have thus kept themselves during so many
thousand years that they far surpass all other nations in antiquity.
(108) They have not always retained empire, but they have recovered it
when lost, and doubtless will do so again after the spirit of the
Tartars becomes relaxed through the luxury of riches and pride.

\(109\) Lastly, if any one wishes to maintain that the Jews, from this
or from any other cause, have been chosen by God for ever, I will not
gainsay him if he will admit that this choice, whether temporary or
eternal, has no regard, in so far as it is peculiar to the Jews, to
aught but dominion and physical advantages (for by such alone can one
nation be distinguished from another), whereas in regard to intellect
and true virtue, every nation is on a par with the rest, and God has not
in these respects chosen one people rather than another.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IV.—Of the Divine Law.](tpt06)
