[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Philosophy](../../index)  [Spinoza](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](tpt10)  [Next](tpt12) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0486202496/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*A Theologico-Political Treatise*, by Benedict de Spinoza, \[1883\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER VII.—OF THE INTERPRETATION OF SCRIPTURE

\(1\) When people declare, as all are ready, to do, that the Bible is
the Word of God teaching man true blessedness and the way of salvation,
they evidently do not mean what they, say; for the masses take no pains
at all to live according to Scripture, and we see most people
endeavouring to hawk about their own commentaries as the word of God,
and giving their best efforts, under the guise of religion, to
compelling others to think as they do: we generally see, I say,
theologians anxious to learn how to wring their inventions and sayings
out of the sacred text, and to fortify, them with Divine authority. (2)
Such persons never display, less scruple or more zeal than when they,
are interpreting Scripture or the mind of the Holy Ghost; if we ever see
them perturbed, it is not that they fear to attribute some error to the
Holy Spirit, and to stray from the right path, but that they are afraid
to be convicted of error by, others, and thus to overthrow and bring
into contempt their own authority. (3) But if men really believed what
they verbally testify of Scripture, they would adopt quite a different
plan of life: their minds would not be agitated by so many contentions,
nor so many hatreds, and they would cease to be excited by such a blind
and rash passion for interpreting the sacred writings, and excogitating
novelties in religion. (4) On the contrary, they would not dare to
adopt, as the teaching of Scripture, anything which they could not
plainly deduce therefrom: lastly, those sacrilegious persons who have
dared, in several passages, to interpolate the Bible, would have shrunk
from so great a crime, and would have stayed their sacrilegious hands.

\(5\) Ambition and unscrupulousness have waxed so powerful, that
religion is thought to consist, not so much in respecting the writings
of the Holy Ghost, as in defending human commentaries, so that religion
is no longer identified with charity, but with spreading discord and
propagating insensate hatred disguised under the name of zeal for the
Lord, and eager ardour.

\(6\) To these evils we must add superstition, which teaches men to
despise reason and nature, and only to admire and venerate that which is
repugnant to both: whence it is not wonderful that for the sake of
increasing the admiration and veneration felt for Scripture, men strive
to explain it so as to make it appear to contradict, as far as possible,
both one and the other: thus they dream that most profound mysteries lie
hid in the Bible, and weary themselves out in the investigation of these
absurdities, to the neglect of what is useful. (7) Every result of their
diseased imagination they attribute to the Holy Ghost, and strive to
defend with the utmost zeal and passion; for it is an observed fact that
men employ their reason to defend conclusions arrived at by reason, but
conclusions arrived at by the passions are defended by the passions.

\(8\) If we would separate ourselves from the crowd and escape from
theological prejudices, instead of rashly accepting human commentaries
for Divine documents, we must consider the true method of interpreting
Scripture and dwell upon it at some length: for if we remain in
ignorance of this we cannot know, certainly, what the Bible and the Holy
Spirit wish to teach.

(9)I may sum up the matter by saying that the method of interpreting
Scripture does not widely differ from the method of interpreting
nature—in fact, it is almost the same. (10) For as the interpretation of
nature consists in the examination of the history of nature, and
therefrom deducing definitions of natural phenomena on certain fixed
axioms, so Scriptural interpretation proceeds by the examination of
Scripture, and inferring the intention of its authors as a legitimate
conclusion from its fundamental principles. (11) By working in this
manner everyone will always advance without danger of error—that is, if
they admit no principles for interpreting Scripture, and discussing its
contents save such as they find in Scripture itself—and will be able
with equal security to discuss what surpasses our understanding, and
what is known by the natural light of reason.

\(12\) In order to make clear that such a method is not only correct,
but is also the only one advisable, and that it agrees with that
employed in interpreting nature, I must remark that Scripture very often
treats of matters which cannot be deduced from principles known to
reason: for it is chiefly made up of narratives and revelation: the
narratives generally contain miracles—that is, as we have shown in the
last chapter, relations of extraordinary natural occurrences adapted to
the opinions and judgment of the historians who recorded them: the
revelations also were adapted to the opinions of the prophets, as we
showed in Chap. II., and in themselves surpassed human comprehension.
(13) Therefore the knowledge of all these—that is, of nearly the whole
contents of Scripture, must be sought from Scripture alone, even as the
knowledge of nature is sought from nature. (14) As for the moral
doctrines which are also contained in the Bible, they may be
demonstrated from received axioms, but we cannot prove in the same
manner that Scripture intended to teach them, this can only be learned
from Scripture itself.

\(15\) If we would bear unprejudiced witness to the Divine origin of
Scripture, we must prove solely on its own authority that it teaches
true moral doctrines, for by such means alone can its Divine origin be
demonstrated: we have shown that the certitude of the prophets depended
chiefly on their having minds turned towards what is just and good,
therefore we ought to have proof of their possessing this quality before
we repose faith in them. (16) From miracles God's divinity cannot be
proved, as I have already shown, and need not now repeat, for miracles
could be wrought by false prophets. (17) Wherefore the Divine origin of
Scripture must consist solely in its teaching true virtue. (18) But we
must come to our conclusion simply on Scriptural grounds, for if we were
unable to do so we could not, unless strongly prejudiced accept the
Bible and bear witness to its Divine origin.

\(19\) Our knowledge of Scripture must then be looked for in Scripture
only.

\(20\) Lastly, Scripture does not give us definition of things any more
than nature does: therefore, such definitions must be sought in the
latter case from the diverse workings of nature; in the former case,
from the various narratives about the given subject which occur in the
Bible.

\(21\) The universal rule, then, in interpreting Scripture is to accept
nothing as an authoritative Scriptural statement which we do not
perceive very clearly when we examine it in the light of its history.
(22) What I mean by its history, and what should be the chief points
elucidated, I will now explain.

\(23\) The history of a Scriptural statement comprises -

\(23\) I. The nature and properties of the language in which the books
of the Bible were written, and in which their authors were, accustomed
to speak. (24) We shall thus be able to investigate every expression by
comparison with common conversational usages.

\(25\) Now all the writers both of the Old Testament and the New were
Hebrews: therefore, a knowledge of the Hebrew language is before all
things necessary, not only for the comprehension of the Old Testament,
which was written in that tongue, but also of the New: for although the
latter was published in other languages, yet its characteristics are
Hebrew.

\(26\) II. An analysis of each book and arrangement of its contents
under heads; so that we may have at hand the various texts which treat
of a given subject. (27) Lastly, a note of all the passages which are
ambiguous or obscure, or which seem mutually contradictory.

\(28\) I call passages clear or obscure according as their meaning is
inferred easily or with difficulty in relation to the context, not
according as their truth is perceived easily or the reverse by reason.
(29) We are at work not on the truth of passages, but solely on their
meaning. (30) We must take especial care, when we are in search of the
meaning of a text, not to be led away by our reason in so far as it is
founded on principles of natural knowledge (to say nothing of
prejudices): in order not to confound the meaning of a passage with its
truth, we must examine it solely by means of the signification of the
words, or by a reason acknowledging no foundation but Scripture.

\(31\) I will illustrate my meaning by an example. (32) The words of
Moses, "God is a fire" and "God is jealous," are perfectly clear so long
as we regard merely the signification of the words, and I therefore
reckon them

among the clear passages, though in relation to reason and truth they
are most obscure: still, although the literal meaning is repugnant to
the natural light of reason, nevertheless, if it cannot be clearly
overruled on grounds and principles derived from its Scriptural
"history," it, that is, the literal meaning, must be the one retained:
and contrariwise if these passages literally interpreted are found to
clash with principles derived from Scripture, though such literal
interpretation were in absolute harmony with reason, they must be
interpreted in a different manner, i.e. metaphorically.

\(33\) If we would know whether Moses believed God to be a fire or not,
we must on no account decide the question on grounds of the
reasonableness or the reverse of such an opinion, but must judge solely
by the other opinions of Moses which are on record.

\(34\) In the present instance, as Moses says in several other passages
that God has no likeness to any visible thing, whether in heaven or in
earth, or in the water, either all such passages must be taken
metaphorically, or else the one before us must be so explained. (35)
However, as we should depart as little as possible from the literal
sense, we must first ask whether this text, God is a fire, admits of any
but the literal meaning—that is, whether the word fire ever means
anything besides ordinary natural fire. (36) If no such second meaning
can be found, the text must be taken literally, however repugnant to
reason it may be: and all the other passages, though in complete
accordance with reason, must be brought into harmony with it. (37) If
the verbal expressions would not admit of being thus harmonized, we
should have to set them down as irreconcilable, and suspend our judgment
concerning them. (38) However, as we find the name fire applied to anger
and jealousy (see Job xxxi:12) we can thus easily reconcile the words of
Moses, and legitimately conclude that the two propositions God is a
fire, and God is jealous, are in meaning identical.

\(39\) Further, as Moses clearly teaches that God is jealous, and
nowhere states that God is without passions or emotions, we must
evidently infer that Moses held this doctrine himself, or at any rate,
that he wished to teach it, nor must we refrain because such a belief
seems contrary to reason: for as we have shown, we cannot wrest the
meaning of texts to suit the dictates of our reason, or our preconceived
opinions. (40) The whole knowledge of the Bible must be sought solely
from itself.

\(41\) III. Lastly, such a history should relate the environment of all
the prophetic books extant; that is, the life, the conduct, and the
studies of the author of each book, who he was, what was the occasion,
and the epoch of his writing, whom did he write for, and in what
language. (42) Further, it should inquire into the fate of each book:
how it was first received, into whose hands it fell, how many different
versions there were of it, by whose advice was it received into the
Bible, and, lastly, how all the books now universally accepted as
sacred, were united into a single whole.

\(43\) All such information should, as I have said, be contained in the
"history" of Scripture. (44) For, in order to know what statements are
set forth as laws, and what as moral precepts, it is important to be
acquainted with the life, the conduct, and the pursuits of their author:
moreover, it becomes easier to explain a man's writings in proportion as
we have more intimate knowledge of his genius and temperament.

\(45\) Further, that we may not confound precepts which are eternal with
those which served only a temporary purpose, or were only meant for a
few, we should know what was the occasion, the time, the age, in which
each book was written, and to what nation it was addressed.(46) Lastly,
we should have knowledge on the other points I have mentioned, in order
to be sure, in addition to the authenticity of the work, that it has not
been tampered with by sacrilegious hands, or whether errors can have
crept in, and, if so, whether they have been corrected by men
sufficiently skilled and worthy of credence. (47) All these things
should be known, that we may not be led away by blind impulse to accept
whatever is thrust on our notice, instead of only that which is sure and
indisputable.

\(48\) Now when we are in possession of this history of Scripture, and
have finally decided that we assert nothing as prophetic doctrine which
does not directly follow from such history, or which is not clearly
deducible from it, then, I say, it will be time to gird ourselves for
the task of investigating the mind of the prophets and of the Holy
Spirit. (49) But in this further arguing, also, we shall require a
method very like that employed in interpreting nature from her history.
(50) As in the examination of natural phenomena we try first to
investigate what is most universal and common to all nature—such, for
instance, as motion and rest, and their laws and rules, which nature
always observes, and through which she continually works—and then we
proceed to what is less universal; so, too, in the history of Scripture,
we seek first for that which is most universal, and serves for the basis
and foundation of all Scripture, a doctrine, in fact, that is commended
by all the prophets as eternal and most profitable to all men. (51) For
example, that God is one, and that He is omnipotent, that He alone
should be worshipped, that He has a care for all men, and that He
especially loves those who adore Him and love their neighbour as
themselves, &c. (52) These and similar doctrines, I repeat, Scripture
everywhere so clearly and expressly teaches, that no one was ever in
doubt of its meaning concerning them.

\(53\) The nature of God, His manner of regarding and providing for
things, and similar doctrines, Scripture nowhere teaches professedly,
and as eternal doctrine; on the contrary, we have shown that the
prophets themselves did not agree on the subject; therefore, we must not
lay down any doctrine as Scriptural on such subjects, though it may
appear perfectly clear on rational grounds.

\(54\) From a proper knowledge of this universal doctrine of Scripture,
we must then proceed to other doctrines less universal, but which,
nevertheless, have regard to the general conduct of life, and flow from
the universal doctrine like rivulets from a source; such are all
particular external manifestations of true virtue, which need a given
occasion for their exercise; whatever is obscure or ambiguous on such
points in Scripture must be explained and defined by its universal
doctrine; with regard to contradictory instances, we must observe the
occasion and the time in which they were written. (55) For instance,
when Christ says, "Blessed are they that mourn, for they shall be
comforted" we do not know, from the actual passage, what sort of
mourners are meant; as, however, Christ afterwards teaches that we
should have care for nothing, save only for the kingdom of God and His
righteousness, which is commended as the highest good (see Matt. vi;33),
it follows that by mourners He only meant those who mourn for the
kingdom of God and righteousness neglected by man: for this would be the
only cause of mourning to those who love nothing but the Divine kingdom
and justice, and who evidently despise the gifts of fortune. (56) So,
too, when Christ says: "But if a man strike you on the right cheek, turn
to him the left also," and the words which follow.

\(57\) If He had given such a command, as a lawgiver, to judges, He
would thereby have abrogated the law of Moses, but this He expressly
says He did not do (Matt. v:17). (58) Wherefore we must consider who was
the speaker, what was the occasion, and to whom were the words
addressed. (59) Now Christ said that He did not ordain laws as a
legislator, but inculcated precepts as a teacher: inasmuch as He did not
aim at correcting outward actions so much as the frame of mind. (60)
Further, these words were spoken to men who were oppressed, who lived in
a corrupt commonwealth on the brink of ruin, where justice was utterly
neglected. (61) The very doctrine inculcated here by Christ just before
the destruction of the city was also taught by Jeremiah before the first
destruction of Jerusalem, that is, in similar circumstances, as we see
from Lamentations iii:25-30.

\(62\) Now as such teaching was only set forth by the prophets in times
of oppression, and was even then never laid down as a law; and as, on
the other hand, Moses (who did not write in times of oppression,
but—mark this—strove to found a well-ordered commonwealth), while
condemning envy and hatred of one's neighbour, yet ordained that an eye
should be given for an eye, it follows most clearly from these purely
Scriptural grounds that this precept of Christ and Jeremiah concerning
submission to injuries was only valid in places where justice is
neglected, and in a time of oppression, but does not hold good in a
well-ordered state.

\(63\) In a well-ordered state where justice is administered every one
is bound, if he would be accounted just, to demand penalties before the
judge (see Lev:1), not for the sake of vengeance (Lev. xix:17, 18), but
in order to defend justice and his country's laws, and to prevent the
wicked rejoicing in their wickedness. (64) All this is plainly in
accordance with reason. (65) I might cite many other examples in the
same manner, but I think the foregoing are sufficient to explain my
meaning and the utility of this method, and this is all my present
purpose. (66) Hitherto we have only shown how to investigate those
passages of Scripture which treat of practical conduct, and which,
therefore, are more easily examined, for on such subjects there was
never really any controversy among the writers of the Bible.

\(67\) The purely speculative passages cannot be so easily, traced to
their real meaning: the way becomes narrower, for as the prophets
differed in matters speculative among themselves, and the narratives are
in great measure adapted to the prejudices of each age, we must not, on
any, account infer the intention of one prophet from clearer passages in
the writings of another; nor must we so explain his meaning, unless it
is perfectly plain that the two prophets were at one in the matter.

\(68\) How we are to arrive at the intention of the prophets in such
cases I will briefly explain. (69) Here, too, we must begin from the
most universal proposition, inquiring first from the most clear
Scriptural statements what is the nature of prophecy or revelation, and
wherein does it consist; then we must proceed to miracles, and so on to
whatever is most general till we come to the opinions of a particular
prophet, and, at last, to the meaning of a particular revelation,
prophecy, history, or miracle. (70) We have already pointed out that
great caution is necessary not to confound the mind of a prophet or
historian with the mind of the Holy Spirit and the truth of the matter;
therefore I need not dwell further on the subject. (71) I would,
however, here remark concerning the meaning of revelation, that the
present method only teaches us what the prophets really saw or heard,
not what they desired to signify or represent by symbols. (72) The
latter may be guessed at but cannot be inferred with certainty from
Scriptural premises.

\(73\) We have thus shown the plan for interpreting Scripture, and have,
at the same time, demonstrated that it is the one and surest way of
investigating its true meaning. (74) I am willing indeed to admit that
those persons (if any such there be) would be more absolutely certainly
right, who have received either a trustworthy tradition or an assurance
from the prophets themselves, such as is claimed by the Pharisees; or
who have a pontiff gifted with infallibility in the interpretation of
Scripture, such as the Roman Catholics boast. (75) But as we can never
be perfectly sure, either of such a tradition or of the authority of the
pontiff, we cannot found any certain conclusion on either: the one is
denied by the oldest sect of Christians, the other by the oldest sect of
Jews. (76) Indeed, if we consider the series of years (to mention no
other point) accepted by the Pharisees from their Rabbis, during which
time they say they have handed down the tradition from Moses, we shall
find that it is not correct, as I show elsewhere. (77) Therefore such a
tradition should be received with extreme suspicion; and although,
according to our method, we are bound to consider as uncorrupted the
tradition of the Jews, namely, the meaning of the Hebrew words which we
received from them, we may accept the latter while retaining our doubts
about the former.

\(78\) No one has ever been able to change the meaning of a word in
ordinary use, though many have changed the meaning of a particular
sentence. (79) Such a proceeding would be most difficult; for whoever
attempted to change the meaning of a word, would be compelled, at the
same time, to explain all the authors who employed it, each according to
his temperament and intention, or else, with consummate cunning, to
falsify them.

\(80\) Further, the masses and the learned alike preserve language, but
it is only the learned who preserve the meaning of particular sentences
and books: thus, we may easily imagine that the learned having a very
rare book in their power, might change or corrupt the meaning of a
sentence in it, but they could not alter the signification of the words;
moreover, if anyone wanted to change the meaning of a common word he
would not be able to keep up the change among posterity, or in common
parlance or writing.

\(81\) For these and such-like reasons we may readily conclude that it
would never enter into the mind of anyone to corrupt a language, though
the intention of a writer may often have been falsified by changing his
phrases or interpreting them amiss. (82) As then our method (based on
the principle that the knowledge of Scripture must be sought from itself
alone) is the sole true one, we must evidently renounce any knowledge
which it cannot furnish for the complete understanding of Scripture.
(83) I will now point out its difficulties and shortcomings, which
prevent our gaining a complete and assured knowledge of the Sacred Text.

\(84\) Its first great difficulty consists in its requiring a thorough
knowledge of the Hebrew language. (85) Where is such knowledge to be
obtained? (86) The men of old who employed the Hebrew tongue have left
none of the principles and bases of their language to posterity; we have
from them absolutely nothing in the way of dictionary, grammar, or
rhetoric.

\(87\) Now the Hebrew nation has lost all its grace and beauty (as one
would expect after the defeats and persecutions it has gone through),
and has only retained certain fragments of its language and of a few
books. (88) Nearly all the names of fruits, birds, and fishes, and many
other words have perished in the wear and tear of time. (89) Further,
the meaning of many nouns and verbs which occur in the Bible are either
utterly lost, or are subjects of dispute. (90) And not only are these
gone, but we are lacking in a knowledge of Hebrew phraseology. (91) The
devouring tooth of time has destroyed turns of expression peculiar to
the Hebrews, so that we know them no more.

\(92\) Therefore we cannot investigate as we would all the meanings of a
sentence by the uses of the language; and there are many phrases of
which the meaning is most obscure or altogether inexplicable, though the
component words are perfectly plain.

\(93\) To this impossibility of tracing the history of the Hebrew
language must be added its particular nature and composition: these give
rise to so many ambiguities that it is impossible to find a method which
would enable us to gain a certain knowledge of all the statements in
Scripture, \[Endnote 7\]. (94) In addition to the sources of ambiguities
common to all languages, there are many peculiar to Hebrew. (95) These,
I think, it worth while to mention.

\(96\) Firstly, an ambiguity often arises in the Bible from our
mistaking one letter for another similar one. (97) The Hebrews divide
the letters of the alphabet into five classes, according to the five
organs of the month employed in pronouncing them, namely, the lips, the
tongue, the teeth, the palate, and the throat. (98) For instance, Alpha,
Ghet, Hgain, He, are called gutturals, and are barely distinguishable,
by any sign that we know, one from the other. (99) El, which signifies
to, is often taken for hgal, which signifies above, and vice versa.
(100) Hence sentences are often rendered rather ambiguous or
meaningless.

\(101\) A second difficulty arises from the multiplied meaning of
conjunctions and adverbs. (102) For instance, vau serves promiscuously
for a particle of union or of separation, meaning, and, but, because,
however, then: ki, has seven or eight meanings, namely, wherefore,
although, if, when, inasmuch as, because, a burning, &c., and so on with
almost all particles.

\(103\) The third very fertile source of doubt is the fact that Hebrew
verbs in the indicative mood lack the present, the past imperfect, the
pluperfect, the future perfect, and other tenses most frequently
employed in other languages; in the imperative and infinitive moods they
are wanting in all except the present, and a subjunctive mood does not
exist. (104) Now, although all these defects in moods and tenses may be
supplied by certain fundamental rules of the language with ease and even
elegance, the ancient writers evidently neglected such rules altogether,
and employed indifferently future for present and past, and vice versa
past for future, and also indicative for imperative and subjunctive,
with the result of considerable confusion.

\(105\) Besides these sources of ambiguity there are two others, one
very important. (106) Firstly, there are in Hebrew no vowels; secondly,
the sentences are not separated by any marks elucidating the meaning or
separating the clauses. (107) Though the want of these two has generally
been supplied by points and accents, such substitutes cannot be accepted
by us, inasmuch as they were invented and designed by men of an after
age whose authority should carry no weight. (108) The ancients wrote
without points (that is, without vowels and accents), as is abundantly
testified; their descendants added what was lacking, according to their
own ideas of Scriptural interpretation; wherefore the existing accents
and points are simply current interpretations, and are no more
authoritative than any other commentaries.

\(109\) Those who are ignorant of this fact cannot justify the author of
the Epistle to the Hebrews for interpreting (chap. xi;21) Genesis
(xlvii:31) very differently from the version given in our Hebrew text as
at present pointed, as though the Apostle had been obliged to learn the
meaning of Scripture from those who added the points. (110) In my
opinion the latter are clearly wrong. (111) In order that everyone may
judge for himself, and also see how the discrepancy arose simply from
the want of vowels, I will give both interpretations. (112)Those who
pointed our version read, "And Israel bent himself over, or (changing
Hqain into Aleph, a similar letter) towards, the head of the bed." (113)
The author of the Epistle reads, "And Israel bent himself over the head
of his staff," substituting mate for mita, from which it only differs in
respect of vowels. (114) Now as in this narrative it is Jacob's age only
that is in question, and not his illness, which is not touched on till
the next chapter, it seems more likely that the historian intended to
say that Jacob bent over the head of his staff (a thing commonly used by
men of advanced age for their support) than that he bowed himself at the
head of his bed, especially as for the former reading no substitution of
letters is required. (115) In this example I have desired not only to
reconcile the passage in the Epistle with the passage in Genesis, but
also and chiefly to illustrate how little trust should be placed in the
points and accents which are found in our present Bible, and so to prove
that he who would be without bias in interpreting Scripture should
hesitate about accepting them, and inquire afresh for himself. (116)
Such being the nature and structure of the Hebrew language, one may
easily understand that many difficulties are likely to arise, and that
no possible method could solve all of them. (117) It is useless to hope
for a way out of our difficulties in the comparison of various parallel
passages (we have shown that the only method of discovering the true
sense of a passage out of many alternative ones is to see what are the
usages of the language), for this comparison of parallel passages can
only accidentally throw light on a difficult point, seeing that the
prophets never wrote with the express object of explaining their own
phrases or those of other people, and also because we cannot infer the
meaning of one prophet or apostle by the meaning of another, unless on a
purely practical question, not when the matter is speculative, or if a
miracle, or history is being narrated. (118) I might illustrate my point
with instances, for there are many inexplicable phrases in Scripture,
but I would rather pass on to consider the difficulties and
imperfections of the method under discussion.

\(119\) A further difficulty attends the method, from the fact that it
requires the history of all that has happened to every book in the
Bible; such a history we are often quite unable to furnish. (120) Of the
authors, or (if the expression be preferred), the writers of many of the
books, we are either in complete ignorance, or at any rate in doubt, as
I will point out at length. (121) Further, we do not know either the
occasions or the epochs when these books of unknown authorship were
written; we cannot say into what hands they fell, nor how the numerous
varying versions originated; nor, lastly, whether there were not other
versions, now lost. (122) I have briefly shown that such knowledge is
necessary, but I passed over certain considerations which I will now
draw attention to.

\(123\) If we read a book which contains incredible or impossible
narratives, or is written in a very obscure style, and if we know
nothing of its author, nor of the time or occasion of its being written,
we shall vainly endeavour to gain any certain knowledge of its true
meaning. (124) For being in ignorance on these points we cannot possibly
know the aim or intended aim of the author; if we are fully informed, we
so order our thoughts as not to be in any way prejudiced either in
ascribing to the author or him for whom the author wrote either more or
less than his meaning, and we only take into consideration what the
author may have had in his mind, or what the time and occasion demanded.
(125) I think this must be tolerably evident to all.

\(126\) It often happens that in different books we read histories in
themselves similar, but which we judge very differently, according to
the opinions we have formed of the authors. (127) I remember once to
have read in some book that a man named Orlando Furioso used to drive a
kind of winged monster through the air, fly over any countries he liked,
kill unaided vast numbers of men and giants, and such like fancies,
which from the point of view of reason are obviously absurd. (128) A
very similar story I read in Ovid of Perseus, and also in the books of
Judges and Kings of Samson, who alone and unarmed killed thousands of
men, and of Elijah, who flew through the air, said at last went up to
heaven in a chariot of fire, with horses of fire. (129) All these
stories are obviously alike, but we judge them very differently. (130)
The first only sought to amuse, the second had a political object, the
third a religious object.(131) We gather this simply from the opinions
we had previously formed of the authors. (132) Thus it is evidently
necessary to know something of the authors of writings which are obscure
or unintelligible, if we would interpret their meaning; and for the same
reason, in order to choose the proper reading from among a great
variety, we ought to have information as to the versions in which the
differences are found, and as to the possibility of other readings
having been discovered by persons of greater authority.

\(133\) A further difficulty attends this method in the case of some of
the books of Scripture, namely, that they are no longer extant in their
original language. (133) The Gospel according to Matthew, and certainly
the Epistle to the Hebrews, were written, it is thought, in Hebrew,
though they no longer exist in that form. (134) Aben Ezra affirms in his
commentaries that the book of Job was translated into Hebrew out of
another language, and that its obscurity arises from this fact. (135) I
say nothing of the apocryphal books, for their authority stands on very
inferior ground.

\(136\) The foregoing difficulties in this method of interpreting
Scripture from its own history, I conceive to be so great that I do not
hesitate to say that the true meaning of Scripture is in many places
inexplicable, or at best mere subject for guesswork; but I must again
point out, on the other hand, that such difficulties only arise when we
endeavour to follow the meaning of a prophet in matters which cannot be
perceived, but only imagined, not in things, whereof the understanding
can give a clear idea, and which are conceivable through themselves:,
\[Endnote 8\], matters which by their nature are easily perceived cannot
be expressed so obscurely as to be unintelligible; as the proverb says,
"a word is enough to the wise." (137) Euclid, who only wrote of matters
very simple and easily understood, can easily be comprehended by anyone
in any language; we can follow his intention perfectly, and be certain
of his true meaning, without having a thorough knowledge of the language
in which he wrote; in fact, a quite rudimentary acquaintance is
sufficient. (138) We need make no researches concerning the life, the
pursuits, or the habits of the author; nor need we inquire in what
language, nor when he wrote, nor the vicissitudes of his book, nor its
various readings, nor how, nor by whose advice it has been received.

\(139\) What we here say of Euclid might equally be said of any book
which treats of things by their nature perceptible: thus we conclude
that we can easily follow the intention of Scripture in moral questions,
from the history we possess of it, and we can be sure of its true
meaning.

\(140\) The precepts of true piety are expressed in very ordinary
language, and are equally simple and easily understood. (141) Further,
as true salvation and blessedness consist in a true assent of the
soul—and we truly assent only to what we clearly understand—it is most
plain that we can follow with certainty the intention of Scripture in
matters relating to salvation and necessary to blessedness; therefore,
we need not be much troubled about what remains: such matters, inasmuch
as we generally cannot grasp them with our reason and understanding, are
more curious than profitable.

\(142\) I think I have now set forth the true method of Scriptural
interpretation, and have sufficiently explained my own opinion thereon.
(143) Besides, I do not doubt that everyone will see that such a method
only requires the aid of natural reason. (144) The nature and efficacy
of the natural reason consists in deducing and proving the unknown from
the known, or in carrying premises to their legitimate conclusions; and
these are the very processes which our method desiderates. (145) Though
we must admit that it does not suffice to explain everything in the
Bible, such imperfection does not spring from its own nature, but from
the fact that the path which it teaches us, as the true one, has never
been tended or trodden by men, and has thus, by the lapse of time,
become very difficult, and almost impassable, as, indeed, I have shown
in the difficulties I draw attention to.

\(146\) There only remains to examine the opinions of those who differ
from me. (147) The first which comes under our notice is, that the light
of nature has no power to interpret Scripture, but that a supernatural
faculty is required for the task. (148) What is meant by this
supernatural faculty I will leave to its propounders to explain. (149)
Personally, I can only suppose that they have adopted a very obscure way
of stating their complete uncertainty about the true meaning of
Scripture. (150) If we look at their interpretations, they contain
nothing supernatural, at least nothing but the merest conjectures.

\(151\) Let them be placed side by side with the interpretations of
those who frankly confess that they have no faculty beyond their natural
ones; we shall see that the two are just alike—both human, both long
pondered over, both laboriously invented. (152) To say that the natural
reason is insufficient for such results is plainly untrue, firstly, for
the reasons above stated, namely, that the difficulty of interpreting
Scripture arises from no defect in human reason, but simply from the
carelessness (not to say malice) of men who neglected the history of the
Bible while there were still materials for inquiry; secondly, from the
fact (admitted, I think, by all) that the supernatural faculty is a
Divine gift granted only to the faithful. (153) But the prophets and
apostles did not preach to the faithful only, but chiefly to the
unfaithful and wicked. (154) Such persons, therefore, were able to
understand the intention of the prophets and apostles, otherwise the
prophets and apostles would have seemed to be preaching to little boys
and infants, not to men endowed with reason. (155) Moses, too, would
have given his laws in vain, if they could only be comprehended by the
faithful, who need no law. (156) Indeed, those who demand supernatural
faculties for comprehending the meaning of the prophets and apostles
seem truly lacking in natural faculties, so that we should hardly
suppose such persons the possessors of a Divine supernatural gift.

\(157\) The opinion of Maimonides was widely different. (158) He
asserted that each passage in Scripture admits of various, nay,
contrary, meanings; but that we could never be certain of any particular
one till we knew that the passage, as we interpreted it, contained
nothing contrary or repugnant to reason. (159) If the literal meaning
clashes with reason, though the passage seems in itself perfectly clear,
it must be interpreted in some metaphorical sense. (160) This doctrine
he lays down very plainly in chap. xxv. part ii. of his book, "More
Nebuchim," for he says: "Know that we shrink not from affirming that the
world hath existed from eternity, because of what Scripture saith
concerning the world's creation. (161) For the texts which teach that
the world was created are not more in number than those which teach that
God hath a body; neither are the approaches in this matter of the
world's creation closed, or even made hard to us: so that we should not
be able to explain what is written, as we did when we showed that God
hath no body, nay, peradventure, we could explain and make fast the
doctrine of the world's eternity more easily than we did away with the
doctrines that God hath a beatified body. (162) Yet two things hinder me
from doing as I have said, and believing that the world is eternal.
(163) As it hath been clearly shown that God hath not a body, we must
perforce explain all those passages whereof the literal sense agreeth
not with the demonstration, for sure it is that they can be so
explained. (164) But the eternity of the world hath not been so
demonstrated, therefore it is not necessary to do violence to Scripture
in support of some common opinion, whereof we might, at the bidding of
reason, embrace the contrary."

\(165\) Such are the words of Maimonides, and they are evidently
sufficient to establish our point: for if he had been convinced by
reason that the world is eternal, he would not have hesitated to twist
and explain away the words of Scripture till he made them appear to
teach this doctrine. (166) He would have felt quite sure that Scripture,
though everywhere plainly denying the eternity of the world, really
intends to teach it. (167) So that, however clear the meaning of
Scripture may be, he would not feel certain of having grasped it, so
long as he remained doubtful of the truth of what, was written. (168)
For we are in doubt whether a thing is in conformity with reason, or
contrary thereto, so long as we are uncertain of its truth, and,
consequently, we cannot be sure whether the literal meaning of a passage
be true or false.

\(169\) If such a theory as this were sound, I would certainly grant
that some faculty beyond the natural reason is required for interpreting
Scripture. (170) For nearly all things that we find in Scripture cannot
be inferred from known principles of the natural reason, and, therefore,
we should be unable to come to any conclusion about their truth, or
about the real meaning and intention of Scripture, but should stand in
need of some further assistance.

\(171\) Further, the truth of this theory would involve that the masses,
having generally no comprehension of, nor leisure for, detailed proofs,
would be reduced to receiving all their knowledge of Scripture on the
authority and testimony of philosophers, and, consequently, would be
compelled to suppose that the interpretations given by philosophers were
infallible.

\(172\) Truly this would be a new form of ecclesiastical authority, and
a new sort of priests or pontiffs, more likely to excite men's ridicule
than their veneration. (173) Certainly our method demands a knowledge of
Hebrew for which the masses have no leisure; but no such objection as
the foregoing can be brought against us. (174) For the ordinary Jews or
Gentiles, to whom the prophets and apostles preached and wrote,
understood the language, and, consequently, the intention of the prophet
or apostle addressing them; but they did not grasp the intrinsic reason
of what was preached, which, according to Maimonides, would be necessary
for an understanding of it.

\(175\) There is nothing, then, in our method which renders it necessary
that the masses should follow the testimony of commentators, for I point
to a set of unlearned people who understood the language of the prophets
and apostles; whereas Maimonides could not point to any such who could
arrive at the prophetic or apostolic meaning through their knowledge of
the causes of things.

\(176\) As to the multitude of our own time, we have shown that
whatsoever is necessary to salvation, though its reasons may be unknown,
can easily be understood in any language, because it is thoroughly
ordinary and usual; it is in such understanding as this that the masses
acquiesce, not in the testimony of commentators; with regard to other
questions, the ignorant and the learned fare alike.

\(177\) But let us return to the opinion of Maimonides, and examine it
more closely. In the first place, he supposes that the prophets were in
entire agreement one with another, and that they were consummate
philosophers and theologians; for he would have them to have based their
conclusions on the absolute truth. (178) Further, he supposes that the
sense of Scripture cannot be made plain from Scripture itself, for the
truth of things is not made plain therein (in that it does not prove any
thing, nor teach the matters of which it speaks through their
definitions and first causes), therefore, according to Maimonides, the
true sense of Scripture cannot be made plain from itself, and must not
be there sought.

\(179\) The falsity of such a doctrine is shown in this very chapter,
for we have shown both by reason and examples that the meaning of
Scripture is only made plain through Scripture itself, and even in
questions deducible from ordinary knowledge should be looked for from no
other source.

\(180\) Lastly, such a theory supposes that we may explain the words of
Scripture according to our preconceived opinions, twisting them about,
and reversing or completely changing the literal sense, however plain it
may be. (181) Such licence is utterly opposed to the teaching of this
and the preceding chapters, and, moreover, will be evident to everyone
as rash and excessive.

\(182\) But if we grant all this licence, what can it effect after all?
Absolutely nothing. (183) Those things which cannot be demonstrated, and
which make up the greater part of Scripture, cannot be examined by
reason, and cannot therefore be explained or interpreted by this rule;
whereas, on the contrary, by following our own method, we can explain
many questions of this nature, and discuss them on a sure basis, as we
have already shown, by reason and example. (184) Those matters which are
by their nature comprehensible we can easily explain, as has been
pointed out, simply by means of the context.

\(185\) Therefore, the method of Maimonides is clearly useless: to which
we may add, that it does away with all the certainty which the masses
acquire by candid reading, or which is gained by any other persons in
any other way. (186) In conclusion, then, we dismiss Maimonides' theory
as harmful, useless, and absurd.

\(187\) As to the tradition of the Pharisees, we have already shown that
it is not consistent, while the authority of the popes of Rome stands in
need of more credible evidence; the latter, indeed, I reject simply on
this ground, for if the popes could point out to us the meaning of
Scripture as surely as did the high priests of the Jews, I should not be
deterred by the fact that there have been heretic and impious Roman
pontiffs; for among the Hebrew high-priests of old there were also
heretics and impious men who gained the high- priesthood by improper
means, but who, nevertheless, had Scriptural sanction for their supreme
power of interpreting the law. (See Deut. xvii:11, 12, and xxxiii:10,
also Malachi ii:8.)

\(188\) However, as the popes can show no such sanction, their authority
remains open to very grave doubt, nor should anyone be deceived by the
example of the Jewish high-priests and think that the Catholic religion
also stands in need of a pontiff; he should bear in mind that the laws
of Moses being also the ordinary laws of the country, necessarily
required some public authority to insure their observance; for, if
everyone were free to interpret the laws of his country as he pleased,
no state could stand, but would for that very reason be dissolved at
once, and public rights would become private rights.

\(189\) With religion the case is widely different. Inasmuch as it
consists not so much in outward actions as in simplicity and truth of
character, it stands outside the sphere of law and public authority.
(190) Simplicity and truth of character are not produced by the
constraint of laws, nor by the authority of the state, no one the whole
world over can be forced or legislated into a state of blessedness; the
means required for such a consummation are faithful and brotherly
admonition, sound education, and, above all, free use of the individual
judgment.

\(191\) Therefore, as the supreme right of free thinking, even on
religion, is in every man's power, and as it is inconceivable that such
power could be alienated, it is also in every man's power to wield the
supreme right and authority of free judgment in this behalf, and to
explain and interpret religion for himself. (192) The only reason for
vesting the supreme authority in the interpretation of law, and judgment
on public affairs in the hands of the magistrates, is that it concerns
questions of public right. (193) Similarly the supreme authority in
explaining religion, and in passing judgment thereon, is lodged with the
individual because it concerns questions of individual right. (194) So
far, then, from the authority of the Hebrew high-priests telling in
confirmation of the authority of the Roman pontiffs to interpret
religion, it would rather tend to establish individual freedom of
judgment. (195) Thus in this way also, we have shown that our method of
interpreting Scripture is the best. (196) For as the highest power of
Scriptural interpretation belongs to every man, the rule for such
interpretation should be nothing but the natural light of reason which
is common to all—not any supernatural light nor any external authority;
moreover, such a rule ought not to be so difficult that it can only be
applied by very skilful philosophers, but should be adapted to the
natural and ordinary faculties and capacity of mankind. (197) And such I
have shown our method to be, for such difficulties as it has arise from
men's carelessness, and are no part of its nature.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VIII.—Of the Authorship of the Pentateuch and the Other
Historical Books of the Old Testament](tpt12)
