[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Philosophy](../../index)  [Spinoza](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](tpt24)  [Next](tpt26) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0486202496/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*A Theologico-Political Treatise*, by Benedict de Spinoza, \[1883\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### \[17:0\] CHAPTER XVII—IT IS SHOWN THAT NO ONE CAN, OR NEED, TRANSFER ALL HIS RIGHTS TO THE SOVEREIGN POWER. OF THE HEBREW REPUBLIC, AS IT WAS DURING THE LIFETIME OF MOSES, AND AFTER HIS DEATH, TILL THE FOUNDATION OF THE MONARCHY; AND OF ITS EXCELLENCE. LASTLY, OF THE CAUSES WHY THE THEOCRATIC REPUBLIC FELL, AND WHY IT COULD HARDLY HAVE CONTINUED WITHOUT DISSENSION.

\[17:1\] (1) The theory put forward in the last chapter, of the
universal rights of the sovereign power, and of the natural rights of
the individual transferred thereto, though it corresponds in many
respects with actual practice, and though practice may be so arranged as
to conform to it more and more, must nevertheless always remain in many
respects purely ideal. (2) No one can ever so utterly transfer to
another his power and, consequently, his rights, as to cease to be a
man; nor can there ever be a power so sovereign that it can carry out
every possible wish. (3) It will always be vain to order a subject to
hate what he believes brings him advantage, or to love what brings him
loss, or not to be offended at insults, or not to wish to be free from
fear, or a hundred other things of the sort, which necessarily follow
from the laws of human nature. (4) So much, I think, is abundantly shown
by experience: for men have never so far ceded their power as to cease
to be an object of fear to the rulers who received such power and right;
and dominions have always been in as much danger from their own subjects
as from external enemies. (5) If it were really the case, that men could
be deprived of their natural rights so utterly as never to have any
further influence on affairs \[Endnote 29\], except with the permission
of the holders of sovereign right, it would then be possible to maintain
with impunity the most violent tyranny, which, I suppose, no one would
for an instant admit.

(17:6) We must, therefore, grant that every man retains some part of his
right, in dependence on his own decision, and no one else's.

\(7\) However, in order correctly to understand the extent of the
sovereign's right and power, we must take notice that it does not cover
only those actions to which it can compel men by fear, but absolutely
every action which it can induce men to perform: for it is the fact of
obedience, not the motive for obedience, which makes a man a subject.

(17:8) Whatever be the cause which leads a man to obey the commands of
the sovereign, whether it be fear or hope, or love of his country, or
any other emotion—the fact remains that the man takes counsel with
himself, and nevertheless acts as his sovereign orders. (9) We must not,
therefore, assert that all actions resulting from a man's deliberation
with himself are done in obedience to the rights of the individual
rather than the sovereign: as a matter of fact, all actions spring from
a man's deliberation with himself, whether the determining motive be
love or fear of punishment; therefore, either dominion does not exist,
and has no rights over its subjects, or else it extends over every
instance in which it can prevail on men to decide to obey it. (10)
Consequently, every action which a subject performs in accordance with
the commands of the sovereign, whether such action springs from love, or
fear, or (as is more frequently the case) from hope and fear together,
or from reverence. compounded of fear and admiration, or, indeed, any
motive whatever, is performed in virtue of his submission to the
sovereign, and not in virtue of his own authority.

(17:11) This point is made still more clear by the fact that obedience
does not consist so much in the outward act as in the mental state of
the person obeying; so that he is most under the dominion of another who
with his whole heart determines to obey another's commands; and
consequently the firmest dominion belongs to the sovereign who has most
influence over the minds of his subjects; if those who are most feared
possessed the firmest dominion, the firmest dominion would belong to the
subjects of a tyrant, for they are always greatly feared by their ruler.
(12) Furthermore, though it is impossible to govern the mind as
completely as the tongue, nevertheless minds are, to a certain extent,
under the control of the sovereign, for he can in many ways bring about
that the greatest part of his subjects should follow his wishes in their
beliefs, their loves, and their hates. (13) Though such emotions do not
arise at the express command of the sovereign they often result (as
experience shows) from the authority of his power, and from his
direction; in other words, in virtue of his right; we may, therefore,
without doing violence to our understanding, conceive men who follow the
instigation of their sovereign in their beliefs, their loves, their
hates, their contempt, and all other emotions whatsoever.

(17:14) Though the powers of government, as thus conceived, are
sufficiently ample, they can never become large enough to execute every
possible wish of their possessors. (15) This, I think, I have already
shown clearly enough. (16) The method of forming a dominion which should
prove lasting I do not, as I have said, intend to discuss, but in order
to arrive at the object I have in view, I will touch on the teaching of
Divine revelation to Moses in this respect, and we will consider the
history and the success of the Jews, gathering therefrom what should be
the chief concessions made by sovereigns to their subjects with a view
to the security and increase of their dominion.

\[17:2\] (17) That the preservation of a state chiefly depends on the
subjects' fidelity and constancy in carrying out the orders they
receive, is most clearly taught both by reason and experience; how
subjects ought to be guided so as best to preserve their fidelity and
virtue is not so obvious. (18) All, both rulers and ruled, are men, and
prone to follow after their lusts. (19) The fickle disposition of the
multitude almost reduces those who have experience of it to despair, for
it is governed solely by emotions, not by reason: it rushes headlong
into every enterprise, and is easily corrupted either by avarice or
luxury: everyone thinks himself omniscient and wishes to fashion all
things to his liking, judging a thing to be just or unjust, lawful or
unlawful, according as he thinks it will bring him profit or loss:
vanity leads him to despise his equals, and refuse their guidance: envy
of superior fame or fortune (for such gifts are never equally
distributed) leads him to desire and rejoice in his neighbour's
downfall. (20) I need not go through the whole list, everyone knows
already how much crime. results from disgust at the present—desire for
change, headlong anger, and contempt for poverty—and how men's minds are
engrossed and kept in turmoil thereby.

(17:21) To guard against all these evils, and form a dominion where no
room is left for deceit; to frame our institutions so that every man,
whatever his disposition, may prefer public right to private advantage,
this is the task and this the toil. (22) Necessity is often the mother
of invention, but she has never yet succeeded in framing a dominion that
was in less danger from its own citizens than from open enemies, or
whose rulers did not fear the latter less than the former. (23) Witness
the state of Rome, invincible by her enemies, but many times conquered
and sorely oppressed by her own citizens, especially in the war between
Vespasian and Vitellius. (24) (See Tacitus, Hist. bk. iv. for a
description of the pitiable state of the city.)

(17:25) Alexander thought prestige abroad more easy to acquire than
prestige at home, and believed that his greatness could be destroyed by
his own followers. (26) Fearing such a disaster, he thus addressed his
friends: "Keep me safe from internal treachery and domestic plots, and I
will front without fear the dangers of battle and of war. (27) Philip
was more secure in the battle array than in the theatre: he often
escaped from the hands of the enemy, he could not escape from his own
subjects. (28) If you think over the deaths of kings, you will count up
more who have died by the assassin than by the open foe." (Q. Curtius,
chap. vi.)

(17:29) For the sake of making themselves secure, kings who seized the
throne in ancient times used to try to spread the idea that they were
descended from the immortal gods, thinking that if their subjects and
the rest of mankind did not look on them as equals, but believed them to
be gods, they would willingly submit to their rule, and obey their
commands. (30) Thus Augustus persuaded the Romans that he was descended
from AEneas, who was the son of Venus, and numbered among the gods. (31)
"He wished himself to be worshipped in temples, like the gods, with
flamens and priests." (Tacitus, Ann. i. 10.)

(17:32) Alexander wished to be saluted as the son of Jupiter, not from
motives of pride but of policy, as he showed by his answer to the
invective of Hermolaus: "It is almost laughable," said he, that
Hermolaus asked me to contradict Jupiter, by whose oracle I am
recognized. (33) Am I responsible for the answers of the gods? (34) It
offered me the name of son; acquiescence was by no means foreign to my
present designs. (35) Would that the Indians also would believe me to be
a god! (36) Wars are carried through by prestige, falsehoods that are
believed often gain the force of truth." (Curtius, viii,. Para, 8.) (37)
In these few words he cleverly contrives to palm off a fiction on the
ignorant, and at the same time hints at the motive for the deception.

(17:38) Cleon, in his speech persuading the Macedonians to obey their
king, adopted a similar device: for after going through the praises of
Alexander with admiration, and recalling his merits, he proceeds, "the
Persians are not only pious, but prudent in worshipping their kings as
gods: for kingship is the shield of public safety," and he ends thus,
"I, myself, when the king enters a banquet hall, should prostrate my
body on the ground; other men should do the like, especially those who
are wise " (Curtius, viii. Para. 66). (39) However, the Macedonians were
more prudent—indeed, it is only complete barbarians who can be so openly
cajoled, and can suffer themselves to be turned from subjects into
slaves without interests of their own. (40) Others, notwithstanding,
have been able more easily to spread the belief that kingship is sacred,
and plays the part of God on the earth, that it has been instituted by
God, not by the suffrage and consent of men; and that it is preserved
and guarded by Divine special providence and aid. (41) Similar fictions
have been promulgated by monarchs, with the object of strengthening
their dominion, but these I will pass over, and in order to arrive at my
main purpose, will merely recall and discuss the teaching on the subject
of Divine revelation to Moses in ancient times.

\[17:3\] (42) We have said in Chap. V. that after the Hebrews came up
out of Egypt they were not bound by the law and right of any other
nation, but were at liberty to institute any new rites at their
pleasure, and to occupy whatever territory they chose. (43) After their
liberation from the intolerable bondage of the Egyptians, they were
bound by no covenant to any man; and, therefore, every man entered into
his natural right, and was free to retain it or to give it up, and
transfer it to another. (44) Being, then, in the state of nature, they
followed the advice of Moses, in whom they chiefly trusted, and decided
to transfer their right to no human being, but only to God; without
further delay they all, with one voice, promised to obey all the
commands of the Deity, and to acknowledge no right that He did not
proclaim as such by prophetic revelation. (45) This promise, or
transference of right to God, was effected in the same manner as we have
conceived it to have been in ordinary societies, when men agree to
divest themselves of their natural rights. (46) It is, in fact, in
virtue of a set covenant, and an oath (see Exod. xxxiv:10), that the
Jews freely, and not under compulsion or threats, surrendered their
rights and transferred them to God. (47) Moreover, in order that this
covenant might be ratified and settled, and might be free from all
suspicion of deceit, God did not enter into it till the Jews had had
experience of His wonderful power by which alone they had been, or could
be, preserved in a state of prosperity (Exod. xix:4, 5). (48) It is
because they believed that nothing but God's power could preserve them
that they surrendered to God the natural power of self-preservation,
which they formerly, perhaps, thought they possessed, and consequently
they surrendered at the same time all their natural right.

\[17:4\] (49) God alone, therefore, held dominion over the Hebrews,
whose state was in virtue of the covenant called God's kingdom, and God
was said to be their king; consequently the enemies of the Jews were
said to be the enemies of God, and the citizens who tried to seize the
dominion were guilty of treason against God; and, lastly, the laws of
the state were called the laws and commandments of God. (50) Thus in the
Hebrew state the civil and religious authority, each consisting solely
of obedience to God, were one and the same. (51) The dogmas of religion
were not precepts, but laws and ordinances; piety was regarded as the
same as loyalty, impiety as the same as disaffection. (52) Everyone who
fell away from religion ceased to be a citizen, and was, on that ground
alone, accounted an enemy: those who died for the sake of religion, were
held to have died for their country; in fact, between civil and
religious law and right there was no distinction whatever. (53) For this
reason the government could be called a Theocracy, inasmuch as the
citizens were not bound by anything save the revelations of God.

(17:54) However, this state of things existed rather in theory than in
practice, for it will appear from what we are about to say, that the
Hebrews, as a matter of fact, retained absolutely in their own hands the
right of sovereignty: this is shown by the method and plan by which the
government was carried on, as I will now explain.

(17:55) Inasmuch as the Hebrews did not transfer their rights to any
other person but, as in a democracy, all surrendered their rights
equally, and cried out with one voice, "Whatsoever God shall speak (no
mediator or mouthpiece being named) that will we do," it follows that
all were equally bound by the covenant, and that all had an equal right
to consult the Deity, to accept and to interpret His laws, so that all
had an exactly equal share in the government. \[17:5\] (56) Thus at
first they all approached God together, so that they might learn His
commands, but in this first salutation, they were so thoroughly
terrified and so astounded to hear God speaking, that they thought their
last hour was at hand: full of fear, therefore, they went afresh to
Moses, and said, "Lo, we have heard God speaking in the fire, and there
is no cause why we should wish to die: surely this great fire will
consume us: if we hear again the voice of God, we shall surely die. (57)
Thou, therefore, go near, and hear all the words of our God, and thou
(not God) shalt speak with us: all that God shall tell us, that will we
hearken to and perform."

(17:58) They thus clearly abrogated their former covenant, and
absolutely transferred to Moses their right to consult God and interpret
His commands: for they do not here promise obedience to all that God
shall tell them, but to all that God shall tell Moses (see Deut. v:20
after the Decalogue, and chap. xviii:15, 16). (59) Moses, therefore,
remained the sole promulgator and interpreter of the Divine laws, and
consequently also the sovereign judge, who could not be arraigned
himself, and who acted among the Hebrews the part, of God; in other
words, held the sovereign kingship: he alone had the right to consult
God, to give the Divine answers to the people, and to see that they were
carried out. (60) I say he alone, for if anyone during the life of Moses
was desirous of preaching anything in the name of the Lord, he was, even
if a true prophet, considered guilty and a usurper of the sovereign
right (Numb. xi:28) \[Endnote 30\]. (61) We may here notice, that though
the people had elected Moses, they could not rightfully elect Moses's
successor; for having transferred to Moses their right of consulting
God, and absolutely promised to regard him as a Divine oracle, they had
plainly forfeited the whole of their right, and were bound to accept as
chosen by God anyone proclaimed by Moses as his successor. (62) If Moses
had so chosen his successor, who like him should wield the sole right of
government, possessing the sole right of consulting God, and
consequently of making and abrogating laws, of deciding on peace or war,
of sending ambassadors, appointing judges—in fact, discharging all the
functions of a sovereign, the state would have become simply a monarchy,
only differing from other monarchies in the fact, that the latter are,
or should be, carried on in accordance with God's decree, unknown even
to the monarch, whereas the Hebrew monarch would have been the only
person to whom the decree was revealed. (63) A difference which
increases, rather than diminishes the monarch's authority. (64) As far
as the people in both cases are concerned, each would be equally
subject, and equally ignorant of the Divine decree, for each would be
dependent on the monarch's words, and would learn from him alone, what
was lawful or unlawful: nor would the fact that the people believed that
the monarch was only issuing commands in accordance with God's decree
revealed to him, make it less in subjection, but rather more. \[17:6\]
(65) However, Moses elected no such successor, but left the dominion to
those who came after him in a condition which could not be called a
popular government, nor an aristocracy, nor a monarchy, but a Theocracy.
(66) For the right of interpreting laws was vested in one man, while the
right and power of administering the state according to the laws thus
interpreted, was vested in another man (see Numb. xxvii:21) \[Endnote
31\].

(17:67) In order that the question may be thoroughly understood, I will
duly set forth the administration of the whole state.

\(68\) First, the people were commanded to build a tabernacle, which
should be, as it were, the dwelling of God—that is, of the sovereign
authority of the state. (69) This tabernacle was to be erected at the
cost of the whole people, not of one man, in order that the place where
God was consulted might be public property. (70) The Levites were chosen
as courtiers and administrators of this royal abode; while Aaron, the
brother of Moses, was chosen to be their chief and second, as it were,
to God their King, being succeeded in the office by his legitimate sons.

(17:71) He, as the nearest to God, was the sovereign interpreter of the
Divine laws; he communicated the answers of the Divine oracle to the
people, and entreated God's favour for them. (72) If, in addition to
these privileges, he had possessed the right of ruling, he would have
been neither more nor less than an absolute monarch; but, in respect to
government, he was only a private citizen: the whole tribe of Levi was
so completely divested of governing rights that it did not even take its
share with the others in the partition of territory. (73) Moses provided
for its support by inspiring the common people with great reverence for
it, as the only tribe dedicated to God.

(17:74) Further, the army, formed from the remaining twelve tribes, was
commanded to invade the land of Canaan, to divide it into twelve
portions, and to distribute it among the tribes by lot. (75) For this
task twelve captains were chosen, one from every tribe, and were,
together with Joshua and Eleazar, the high priest, empowered to divide
the land into twelve equal parts, and distribute it by lot. (76) Joshua
was chosen for the chief command of the army, inasmuch as none but he
had the right to consult God in emergencies, not like Moses, alone in
his tent, or in the tabernacle, but through the high priest, to whom
only the answers of God were revealed. (77) Furthermore, he was
empowered to execute, and cause the people to obey God's commands,
transmitted through the high priests; to find, and to make use of, means
for carrying them out; to choose as many, army captains as he liked; to
make whatever choice he thought best; to send ambassadors in his own
name; and, in short, to have the entire control of the war. (78) To his
office there was no rightful successor—indeed, the post was only filled
by the direct order of the Deity, on occasions of public emergency. (79)
In ordinary times, all the management of peace and war was vested in the
captains of the tribes, as I will shortly point out. (80) Lastly, all
men between the ages of twenty and sixty were ordered to bear arms, and
form a citizen army, owing allegiance, not to its general-in- chief, nor
to the high priest, but to Religion and to God. (81) The army, or the
hosts, were called the army of God, or the hosts of God. (82) For this
reason God was called by the Hebrews the God of Armies; and the ark of
the covenant was borne in the midst of the army in important battles,
when the safety or destruction of the whole people hung upon the issue,
so that the people might, as it were, see their King among them, and put
forth all their strength.

(17:83) From these directions, left by Moses to his successors, we
plainly see that he chose administrators, rather than despots, to come
after him; for he invested no one with the power of consulting God,
where he liked and alone, consequently, no one had the power possessed
by himself of ordaining and abrogating laws, of deciding on war or
peace, of choosing men to fill offices both religious and secular: all
these are the prerogatives of a sovereign. (84) The high priest, indeed,
had the right of interpreting laws, and communicating the answers of
God, but he could not do so when he liked, as Moses could, but only when
he was asked by the general-in-chief of the army, the council, or some
similar authority. (85) The general-in-chief and the council could
consult God when they liked, but could only receive His answers through
the high priest; so that the utterances of God, as reported by the high
priest, were not decrees, as they were when reported by Moses, but only
answers; they were accepted by Joshua and the council, and only then had
the force of commands and decrees

(17:86) The high priest, both in the case of Aaron and of his son
Eleazar, was chosen by Moses; nor had anyone, after Moses' death, a
right to elect to the office, which became hereditary . (87) The
general-in-chief of the army was also chosen by Moses, and assumed his
functions in virtue of the commands, not of the high priest, but of
Moses: indeed, after the death of Joshua, the high priest did not
appoint anyone in his place, and the captains did not consult God afresh
about a general-in-chief, but each retained Joshua's power in respect to
the contingent of his own tribe, and all retained it collectively, in
respect to the whole army. (88) There seems to have been no need of a
general-in-chief, except when they were obliged to unite their forces
against a common enemy. (89) This occurred most frequently during the
time of Joshua, when they had no fixed dwelling. place, and possessed
all things in common. \[17:7\] (90) After all the tribes had gained
their territories by right of conquest, and had divided their allotted
gains, they, became separated, having no longer their possessions in
common, so that the need for a single commander ceased, for the
different tribes should be considered rather in the light of
confederated states than of bodies of fellow-citizens. (91) In respect
to their God and their religion, they, were fellow-citizens; but, in
respect to the rights which one possessed with regard to another, they
were only confederated: they, were, in fact, in much the same position
(if one excepts the Temple common to all) as the United States of the
Netherlands . (92) The division of property, held in common is only
another phrase for the possession of his share by each of the owners
singly, and the surrender by the others of their rights over such share.
(93) This is why Moses elected captains of the tribes—namely, that when
the dominion was divided, each might take care of his own part;
consulting God through the high priest on the affairs of his tribe,
ruling over his army, building and fortifying cities, appointing judges,
attacking the enemies of his own dominion, and having complete control
over all civil and military affairs. (94) He was not bound to
acknowledge any superior judge save God \[Endnote 32\], or a prophet
whom God should expressly send. (95) If he departed from the worship of
God, the rest of the tribes did not arraign him as a subject, but
attacked him as an enemy. (95) Of this we have examples in Scripture.
(96) When Joshua was dead, the children of Israel (not a fresh
general-in-chief) consulted God; it being decided that the tribe of
Judah should be the first to attack its enemies, the tribe in question
contracted a single alliance with the tribe of Simeon, for uniting their
forces, and attacking their common enemy, the rest of the tribes not
being included in the alliance (Judges i:1, 2, 3). (97) Each tribe
separately made war against its own enemies, and, according to its
pleasure, received them as subjects or allies, though it had been
commanded not to spare them on any conditions, but to destroy them
utterly. (98) Such disobedience met with reproof from the rest of the
tribes, but did not cause the offending tribe to be arraigned: it was
not considered a sufficient reason for proclaiming a civil war, or
interfering in one another's affairs. (99) But when the tribe of
Benjamin offended against the others, and so loosened the bonds of peace
that none of the confederated tribes could find refuge within its
borders, they attacked it as an enemy, and gaining the victory over it
after three battles, put to death both guilty and innocent, according to
the laws of war: an act which they subsequently bewailed with tardy
repentance.

(17:100) These examples plainly confirm what we have said concerning the
rights of each tribe. (101) Perhaps we shall be asked who elected the
successors to the captains of each tribe; on this point I can gather no
positive information in Scripture, but I conjecture that as the tribes
were divided into families, each headed by its senior member, the senior
of all these heads of families succeeded by right to the office of
captain, for Moses chose from among these seniors his seventy
coadjutors, who formed with himself the supreme council. (102) Those who
administered the government after the death of Joshua were called
elders, and elder is a very common Hebrew expression in the sense of
judge, as I suppose everyone knows; however, it is not very important
for us to make up our minds on this point. (103) It is enough to have
shown that after the death of Moses no one man wielded all the power of
a sovereign; as affairs were not all managed by one man, nor by a single
council, nor by the popular vote, but partly by one tribe, partly by the
rest in equal shares, it is most evident that the government, after the
death of Moses, was neither monarchic, nor aristocratic, nor popular,
but, as we have said, Theocratic. (104) The reasons for applying this
name are:

(17:105) I. Because the royal seat of government was the Temple, and in
respect to it alone, as we have shown, all the tribes were
fellow-citizens,

\(106\) II. Because all the people owed allegiance to God, their supreme
Judge, to whom only they had promised implicit obedience in all things.

(17:107) III. Because the general-in-chief or dictator, when there was
need of such, was elected by none save God alone. (108) This was
expressly commanded by Moses in the name of God (Deut. xix:15), and
witnessed by the actual choice of Gideon, of Samson, and of Samuel;
wherefrom we may conclude that the other faithful leaders were chosen in
the same manner, though it is not expressly told us.

(17:109) These preliminaries being stated, it is now time to inquire the
effects of forming a dominion on this plan, and to see whether it so
effectually kept within bounds both rulers and ruled, that the former
were never tyrannical and the latter never rebellious.

(17:110) Those who administer or possess governing power, always try to
surround their high-handed actions with a cloak of legality, and to
persuade the people that they act from good motives; this they are
easily able to effect when they are the sole interpreters of the law;
for it is evident that they are thus able to assume a far greater
freedom to carry out their wishes and desires than if the interpretation
if the law is vested in someone else, or if the laws were so
self-evident that no one could be in doubt as to their meaning. \[17:8\]
(111) We thus see that the power of evil- doing was greatly curtailed
for the Hebrew captains by the fact that the whole interpretation of the
law was vested in the Levites (Deut. xxi:5), who, on their part, had no
share in the government, and depended for all their support and
consideration on a correct interpretation of the laws entrusted to them.
(112) Moreover, the whole people was commanded to come together at a
certain place every seven years and be instructed in the law by the
high-priest; further, each individual was bidden to read the book of the
law through and through continually with scrupulous care. (Deut. xxxi:9,
10, and vi:7.) (113) The captains were thus for their own sakes bound to
take great care to administer everything according to the laws laid
down, and well known to all, if they, wished to be held in high honour
by, the people, who would regard them as the administrators of God's
dominion, and as God's vicegerents; otherwise they could not have
escaped all the virulence of theological hatred. (114) There was another
very important check on the unbridled license of the captains, in the
fact, that the army was formed from the whole body, of the citizens,
between the ages of twenty and sixty, without exception, and that the
captains were not able to hire any foreign soldiery. (115) This I say
was very, important, for it is well known that princes can oppress their
peoples with the single aid of the soldiery in their pay; while there is
nothing more formidable to them than the freedom of citizen soldiers,
who have established the freedom and glory of their country, by their
valour, their toil, and their blood. (116) Thus Alexander, when he was
about to make wax on Darius, a second time, after hearing the advice of
Parmenio, did not chide him who gave the advice, but Polysperchon, who
was standing by. (117) For, as Curtius says (iv. Para. 13), he did not
venture to reproach Parmenio again after having shortly, before reproved
him too sharply. (118) This freedom of the Macedonians, which he so
dreaded, he was not able to subdue till after the number of captives
enlisted in the army, surpassed that of his own people: then, but not
till then, he gave rein to his anger so long checked by, the
independence of his chief fellow-countrymen.

(17:119) If this independence of citizen soldiers can restrain the
princes of ordinary states who are wont to usurp the whole glory of
victories, it must have been still more effectual against the Hebrew
captains, whose soldiers were fighting, not for the glory of a prince,
but for the glory of God, and who did not go forth to battle till the
Divine assent had been given.

(17:120) We must also remember that the Hebrew captains were associated
only by the bonds of religion: therefore, if any one of them had
transgressed, and begun to violate the Divine right, he might have been
treated by the rest as an enemy and lawfully subdued.

(17:121) An additional check may be found in the fear of a new prophet
arising, for if a man of unblemished life could show by certain signs
that he was really a prophet, he ipso facto obtained the sovereign right
to rule, which was given to him, as to Moses formerly, in the name of
God, as revealed to himself alone; not merely through the high priest,
as in the case of the captains. (122) There is no doubt that such an one
would easily be able to enlist an oppressed people in his cause, and by
trifling signs persuade them of anything he wished: on the other hand,
if affairs were well ordered, the captain would be able to make
provision in time; that the prophet should be submitted to his approval,
and be examined whether he were really of unblemished life, and
possessed indisputable signs of his mission: also, whether the teaching
he proposed to set forth in the name of the Lord agreed with received
doctrines, and the general laws of the country; if his credentials were
insufficient, or his doctrines new, he could lawfully be put to death,
or else received on the captain's sole responsibility and authority.

(17:123) Again, the captains were not superior to the others in nobility
or birth, but only administered the government in virtue of their age
and personal qualities. (124) Lastly, neither captains nor army had any
reason for preferring war to peace. (125) The army, as we have stated,
consisted entirely of citizens, so that affairs were managed by the same
persons both in peace and war. (126) The man who was a soldier in the
camp was a citizen in the market-place, he who was a leader in the camp
was a judge in the law courts, he who was a general in the camp was a
ruler in the state. (127) Thus no one could desire war for its own sake,
but only for the sake of preserving peace and liberty; possibly the
captains avoided change as far as possible, so as not to be obliged to
consult the high priest and submit to the indignity of standing in his
presence.

(17:128) So much for the precautions for keeping the captains within
bounds. \[17:9\] (129) We must now look for the restraints upon the
people: these, however, are very clearly indicated in the very
groundwork of the social fabric.

(17:130) Anyone who gives the subject the slightest attention, will see
that the state was so ordered as to inspire the most ardent patriotism
in the hearts of the citizens, so that the latter would be very hard to
persuade to betray their country, and be ready to endure anything rather
than submit to a foreign yoke. (131) After they had transferred their
right to God, they thought that their kingdom belonged to God, and that
they themselves were God's children. (132) Other nations they looked
upon as God's enemies, and regarded with intense hatred (which they took
to be piety, see Psalm cxxxix:21, 22): nothing would have been more
abhorrent to them than swearing allegiance to a foreigner, and promising
him obedience: nor could they conceive any greater or more execrable
crime than the betrayal of their country, the kingdom of the God whom
they adored.

(17:133) It was considered wicked for anyone to settle outside of the
country, inasmuch as the worship of God by which they were bound could
not be carried on elsewhere: their own land alone was considered holy,
the rest of the earth unclean and profane.

(17:134) David, who was forced to live in exile, complained before Saul
as follows: "But if they be the children of men who have stirred thee up
against me, cursed be they before the Lord; for they have driven me out
this day from abiding in the inheritance of the Lord, saying, Go, serve
other gods." (I Sam. xxvi:19.) (135) For the same reason no citizen, as
we should especially remark, was ever sent into exile: he who sinned was
liable to punishment, but not to disgrace.

(17:136) Thus the love of the Hebrews for their country was not only
patriotism, but also piety, and was cherished and nurtured bv daily
rites till, like their hatred of other nations, it must have passed into
their nature. (137) Their daily worship was not only different from that
of other nations (as it might well be, considering that they were a
peculiar people and entirely apart from the rest), it was absolutely
contrary. (138) Such daily reprobation naturally gave rise to a lasting
hatred, deeply implanted in the heart: for of all hatreds none is more
deep and tenacious than that which springs from extreme devoutness or
piety, and is itself cherished as pious. (139) Nor was a general cause
lacking for inflaming such hatred more and more, inasmuch as it was
reciprocated; the surrounding nations regarding the Jews with a hatred
just as intense.

(17:140) How great was the effect of all these causes, namely, freedom
from man's dominion; devotion to their country; absolute rights over all
other men; a hatred not only permitted but pious; a contempt for their
fellow-men; the singularity of their customs and religious rites; the
effect, I repeat, of all these causes in strengthening the hearts of the
Jews to bear all things for their country, with extraordinary constancy
and valour, will at once be discerned by reason and attested by
experience. (141) Never, so long as the city was standing, could they
endure to remain under foreign dominion; and therefore they called
Jerusalem "a rebellious city" (Ezra iv:12). (142) Their state after its
reestablishment (which was a mere shadow of the first, for the high
priests had usurped the rights of the tribal captains) was, with great
difficulty, destroyed by the Romans, as Tacitus bears witness (Hist.
ii:4):— "Vespasian had closed the war against the Jews, abandoning the
siege of Jerusalem as an enterprise difficult and arduous rather from
the character of the people and the obstinacy of their superstition,
than from the strength left to the besieged for meeting their
necessities." (143) But besides these characteristics, which are merely
ascribed by an individual opinion, there was one feature peculiar to
this state and of great importance in retaining the affections of the
citizens, and checking all thoughts of desertion, or abandonment of the
country: namely, self-interest, the strength and life of all human
action. (144) This was peculiarly engaged in the Hebrew state, for
nowhere else did citizens possess their goods so securely, as did the
subjects of this community, for the latter possessed as large a share in
the land and the fields as did their chiefs, and were owners of their
plots of ground in perpetuity; for if any man was compelled by poverty
to sell his farm or his pasture, he received it back again intact at the
year of jubilee: there were other similar enactments against the
possibility of alienating real property.

(17:145) Again, poverty w as nowhere more endurable than in a country
where duty towards one's neighbour, that is, one's fellow-citizen, was
practised with the utmost piety, as a means of gaining the favour of God
the King. (146) Thus the Hebrew citizens would nowhere be so well off as
in their own country; outside its limits they met with nothing but loss
and disgrace.

(17:147) The following considerations were of weight, not only in
keeping them at home, but also in preventing civil war and removing
causes of strife; no one was bound to serve his equal, but only to serve
God, while charity and love towards fellow-citizens was accounted the
highest piety; this last feeling was not a little fostered by the
general hatred with which they regarded foreign nations and were
regarded by them. (148) Furthermore, the strict discipline of obedience
in which they were brought up, was a very important factor; for they
were bound to carry on all their actions according to the set rules of
the law: a man might not plough when he liked, but only at certain
times, in certain years, and with one sort of beast at a time; so, too,
he might only sow and reap in a certain method and season—in fact, his
whole life was one long school of obedience (see Chap. V. on the use of
ceremonies); such a habit was thus engendered, that conformity seemed
freedom instead of servitude, and men desired what was commanded rather
than what was forbidden. (149) This result was not a little aided by the
fact that the people were bound, at certain seasons of the year, to give
themselves up to rest and rejoicing, not for their own pleasure, but in
order that they might worship God cheerfully.

(17:150) Three times in the year they feasted before the Lord; on the
seventh day of every week they were bidden to abstain from all work and
to rest; besides these, there were other occasions when innocent
rejoicing and feasting were not only allowed but enjoined. (151) I do
not think any better means of influencing men's minds could be devised;
for there is no more powerful attraction than joy springing from
devotion, a mixture of admiration and love. (152) It was not easy to be
wearied by constant repetition, for the rites on the various festivals
were varied and recurred seldom. (153) We may add the deep reverence for
the Temple which all most religiously fostered, on account of the
peculiar rites and duties that they were obliged to perform before
approaching thither. (154) Even now, Jews cannot read without horror of
the crime of Manasseh, who dared to place au idol in the Temple. (155)
The laws, scrupulously preserved in the inmost sanctuary, were objects
of equal reverence to the people. (156) Popular reports and
misconceptions were, therefore, very little to be feared in this
quarter, for no one dared decide on sacred matters, but all felt bound
to obey, without consulting their reason, all the commands given by the
answers of God received in the Temple, and all the laws which God had
ordained.

(17:157) I think I have now explained clearly, though briefly,, the main
features of the Hebrew commonwealth. (158) I must now inquire into the
causes which led the people so often to fall away from the law, which
brought about their frequent subjection, and, finally, the complete
destruction of their dominion. (159) Perhaps I shall be told that it
sprang from their hardness of heart; but this is childish, for why
should this people be more hard of heart than others; was it by nature?

\[17:A\] (160) But nature forms individuals, not peoples; the latter are
only distinguishable by the difference of their language, their customs,
and their laws; while from the two last—i.e., customs and laws,—it may
arise that they have a peculiar disposition, a peculiar manner of life,
and peculiar prejudices. (161) If, then, the Hebrews were harder of
heart than other nations, the fault lay with their laws or customs.

(17:162) This is certainly true, in the sense that, if God had wished
their dominion to be more lasting, He would have given them other rites
and laws, and would have instituted a different form of government.
(163) We can, therefore, only say that their God was angry with them,
not only, as Jeremiah says, from the building of the city, but even from
the founding of their laws.

(17:164) This is borne witness to by Ezekiel xx:25: "Wherefore I gave
them also statutes that were not good, and judgments whereby they should
not live; and I polluted them in their own gifts, in that they caused to
pass through the fire all that openeth the womb; that I might make them
desolate, to the end that they might know that I am the Lord."

(17:165) In order that we may understand these words, and the
destruction of the Hebrew commonwealth, we must bear in mind that it had
at first been intended to entrust the whole duties of the priesthood to
the firstborn, and not to the Levites (see Numb. viii:17). (166) It was
only when all the tribes, except the Levites, worshipped the golden
calf, that the firstborn were rejected and defiled, and the Levites
chosen in their stead (Deut. x:8). (167) When I reflect on this change,
I feel disposed to break forth with the words of Tacitus. (168) God's
object at that time was not the safety of the Jews, but vengeance. (169)
I am greatly astonished that the celestial mind was so inflamed with
anger that it ordained laws, which always are supposed to promote the
honour, well-being, and security of a people, with the purpose of
vengeance, for the sake of punishment; so that the laws do not seem so
much laws—that is, the safeguard of the people—as pains and penalties.

(17:170) The gifts which the people were obliged to bestow on the
Levites and priests—the redemption of the firstborn, the poll-tax due to
the Levites, the privilege possessed by the latter of the sole
performance of sacred rites—all these, I say, were a continual reproach
to the people, a continual reminder of their defilement and rejection.
(171) Moreover, we may be sure that the Levites were for ever heaping
reproaches upon them: for among so many thousands there must have been
many importunate dabblers in theology. (172) Hence the people got into
the way of watching the acts of the Levites, who were but human; of
accusing the whole body of the faults of one member, and continually
murmuring.

(17:173) Besides this, there was the obligation to keep in idleness men
hateful to them, and connected by no ties of blood. (174) Especially
would this seem grievous when provisions were dear. What wonder, then,
if in times of peace, when striking miracles had ceased, and no men of
paramount authority were forthcoming, the irritable and greedy temper of
the people began to wax cold, and at length to fall away from a worship,
which, though Divine, was also humiliating, and even hostile, and to
seek after something fresh; or can we be surprised that the captains,
who always adopt the popular course, in order to gain the sovereign
power for themselves by enlisting the sympathies of the people, and
alienating the high priest, should have yielded to their demands, and
introduced a new worship? (175) If the state had been formed according
to the original intention, the rights and honour of all the tribes would
have been equal, and everything would have rested on a firm basis. (176)
Who is there who would willingly violate the religious rights of his
kindred? (177) What could a man desire more than to support his own
brothers and parents, thus fulfilling the duties of religion? (178) Who
would not rejoice in being taught by them the interpretation of the
laws, and receiving through them the answers of God?

(17:179) The tribes would thus have been united by a far closer bond, if
all alike had possessed the right to the priesthood. (180) All danger
would have been obviated, if the choice of the Levites had not been
dictated by anger and revenge. (181) But, as we have said, the Hebrews
had offended their God, Who, as Ezekiel says, polluted them in their own
gifts by rejecting all that openeth the womb, so that He might destroy
them.

(17:182) This passage is also confirmed by their history. As soon as the
people in the wilderness began to live in ease and plenty, certain men
of no mean birth began to rebel against the choice of the Levites, and
to make it a cause for believing that Moses had not acted by the
commands of God, but for his own good pleasure, inasmuch as he had
chosen his own tribe before all the rest, and had bestowed the high
priesthood in perpetuity on his own brother. (183) They, therefore,
stirred up a tumult, and came to him, crying out that all men were
equally sacred, and that he had exalted himself above his fellows
wrongfully. (184) Moses was not able to pacify them with reasons; but by
the intervention of a miracle in proof of the faith, they all perished.
(185) A fresh sedition then arose among the whole people, who believed
that their champions had not been put to death by the judgment of God,
but by the device of Moses. (186) After a great slaughter, or
pestilence, the rising subsided from inanition, but in such a manner
that all preferred death to life under such conditions.

(17:187) We should rather say that sedition ceased than that harmony was
re- established. (188) This is witnessed by Scripture (Deut. xxxi:21),
where God, after predicting to Moses that the people after his death
will fall away from the Divine worship, speaks thus: "For I know their
imagination which they go about, even now before I have brought them
into the land which I sware;" and, a little while after (xxxi:27), Moses
says: For I know thy rebellion and thy stiff neck: behold while I am yet
alive with you this day, ye have been rebellious against the Lord; and
how much more after my death!"

(17:189) Indeed, it happened according to his words, as we all know.
(190) Great changes, extreme license, luxury, and hardness of heart grew
up; things went from bad to worse, till at last the people, after being
frequently conquered, came to an open rupture with the Divine right, and
wished for a mortal king, so that the seat of government might be the
Court, instead of the Temple, and that the tribes might remain
fellow-citizens in respect to their king, instead of in respect to
Divine right and the high priesthood.

(17:191) A vast material for new seditions was thus produced, eventually
resulting in the ruin of the entire state. Kings are above all things
jealous of a precarious rule, and can in nowise brook a dominion within
their own. (192) The first monarchs, being chosen from the ranks of
private citizens, were content with the amount of dignity to which they
had risen; but their sons, who obtained the throne by right of
inheritance, began gradually to introduce changes, so as to get all the
sovereign rights into their own hands. (193) This they were generally
unable to accomplish, so long as the right of legislation did not rest
with them, but with the high priest, who kept the laws in the sanctuary,
and interpreted them to the people. (194) The kings were thus bound to
obey the laws as much as were the subjects, and were unable to abrogate
them, or to ordain new laws of equal authority; moreover, they were
prevented by the Levites from administering the affairs of religion,
king and subject being alike unclean. (195) Lastly, the whole safety of
their dominion depended on the will of one man, if that man appeared to
be a prophet; and of this they had seen an example, namely, how
completely Samuel had been able to command Saul, and how easily, because
of a single disobedience, he had been able to transfer the right of
sovereignty to David. (196) Thus the kings found a dominion within their
own, and wielded a precarious sovereignty.

(17:197) In order to surmount these difficulties, they allowed other
temples to be dedicated to the gods, so that there might be no further
need of consulting the Levites; they also sought out many who prophesied
in the name of God, so that they might have creatures of their own to
oppose to the true prophets. (198) However, in spite of all their
attempts, they never attained their end. (199) For the prophets,
prepared against every emergency, waited for a favourable opportunity,
such as the beginning of a new reign, which is always precarious, while
the memory of the previous reign remains green. (200) At these times
they could easily pronounce by Divine authority that the king was
tyrannical, and could produce a champion of distinguished virtue to
vindicate the Divine right, and lawfully to claim dominion, or a share
in it. (201) Still, not even so could the prophets effect much. (202)
They could, indeed, remove a tyrant; but there were reasons which
prevented them from doing more than setting up, at great cost of civil
bloodshed, another tyrant in his stead. (203) Of discords and civil wars
there was no end, for the causes for the violation of Divine right
remained always the same, and could only be removed by a complete
remodelling of the state.

(17:204) We have now seen how religion was introduced into the Hebrew
commonwealth, and how the dominion might have lasted for ever, if the
just wrath of the Lawgiver had allowed it. (205) As this was impossible,
it was bound in time to perish. (206) I am now speaking only of the
first commonwealth, for the second was a mere shadow of the first,
inasmuch as the people were bound by the rights of the Persians to whom
they were subject. (207) After the restoration of freedom, the high
priests usurped the rights of the secular chiefs, and thus obtained
absolute dominion. (208) The priests were inflamed with an intense
desire to wield the powers of the sovereignty and the high priesthood at
the same time. (209) I have, therefore, no need to speak further of the
second commonwealth. (210) Whether the first, in so far as we deem it to
have been durable, is capable of imitation, and whether it would be
pious to copy it as far as possible, will appear from what fellows.
(211) I wish only to draw attention, as a crowning conclusion, to the
principle indicated already—namely, that it is evident, from what we
have stated in this chapter, that the Divine right, or the right of
religion, originates in a compact: without such compact, none but
natural rights exist. (212) The Hebrews were not bound by their religion
to evince any pious care for other nations not included in the compact,
but only for their own fellow-citizens.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XVIII.—From the Commonwealth of the Hebrews, and Their
History, Certain Political Doctrines Are Deduced](tpt26)
