[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Philosophy](../../index)  [Spinoza](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](tpt23)  [Next](tpt25.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0486202496/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*A Theologico-Political Treatise*, by Benedict de Spinoza, \[1883\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### \[16:0\] CHAPTER XVI—OF THE FOUNDATIONS OF A STATE; OF THE NATURAL AND CIVIL RIGHTS OF INDIVIDUALS; AND OF THE RIGHTS OF THE SOVEREIGN POWER.

\(1\) Hitherto our care has been to separate philosophy from theology,
and to show the freedom of thought which such separation insures to
both. (2) It is now time to determine the limits to which such freedom
of thought and discussion may extend itself in the ideal state. (3) For
the due consideration of this question we must examine the foundations
of a State, first turning our attention to the natural rights of
individuals, and afterwards to religion and the state as a whole.

(16:4) By the right and ordinance of nature, I merely mean those natural
laws wherewith we conceive every individual to be conditioned by nature,
so as to live and act in a given way. (5) For instance, fishes are
naturally conditioned for swimming, and the greater for devouring the
less; therefore fishes enjoy the water, and the greater devour the less
by sovereign natural right. \[16:1\] (6) For it is certain that nature,
taken in the abstract, has sovereign right to do anything, she can; in
other words, her right is co- extensive with her power. (7) The power of
nature is the power of God, which has sovereign right over all things;
and, inasmuch as the power of nature is simply the aggregate of the
powers of all her individual components, it follows that every,
individual has sovereign right to do all that he can; in other words,
the rights of an individual extend to the utmost limits of his power as
it has been conditioned. (8) Now it is the sovereign law and right of
nature that each individual should endeavour to preserve itself as it
is, without regard to anything but itself; therefore this sovereign law
and right belongs to every individual, namely, to exist and act
according to its natural conditions. (9) We do not here acknowledge any
difference between mankind and other individual natural entities, nor
between men endowed with reason and those to whom reason is unknown; nor
between fools, madmen, and sane men. (10) Whatsoever an individual does
by the laws of its nature it has a sovereign right to do, inasmuch as it
acts as it was conditioned by nature, and cannot act otherwise. \[16:2\]
(11) Wherefore among men, so long as they are considered as living under
the sway of nature, he who does not yet know reason, or who has not yet
acquired the habit of virtue, acts solely according to the laws of his
desire with as sovereign a right as he who orders his life entirely by
the laws of reason.

(16:12) That is, as the wise man has sovereign right to do all that
reason dictates, or to live according to the laws of reason, so also the
ignorant and foolish man has sovereign right to do all that desire
dictates, or to live according to the laws of desire. (13) This is
identical with the teaching of Paul, who acknowledges that previous to
the law—that is, so long as men are considered of as living under the
sway of nature, there is no sin.

(16:14) The natural right of the individual man is thus determined, not
by sound reason, but by desire and power. (15) All are not naturally
conditioned so as to act according to the laws and rules of reason; nay,
on the contrary, all men are born ignorant, and before they can learn
the right way of life and acquire the habit of virtue, the greater part
of their life, even if they have been well brought up, has passed away.
(16) Nevertheless, they are in the meanwhile bound to live and preserve
themselves as far as they can by the unaided impulses of desire. (17)
Nature has given them no other guide, and has denied them the present
power of living according to sound reason; so that they are no more
bound to live by the dictates of an enlightened mind, than a cat is
bound to live by the laws of the nature of a lion.

(16:18) Whatsoever, therefore, an individual (considered as under the
sway of nature) thinks useful for himself, whether led by sound reason
or impelled by the passions, that he has a sovereign right to seek and
to take for himself as he best can, whether by force, cunning, entreaty,
or any other means; consequently he may regard as an enemy anyone who
hinders the accomplishment of his purpose.

(16:19) It follows from what we have said that the right and ordinance
of nature, under which all men are born, and under which they mostly
live, only prohibits such things as no one desires, and no one can
attain: it does not forbid strife, nor hatred, nor anger, nor deceit,
nor, indeed, any of the means suggested by desire.

(16:20) This we need not wonder at, for nature is not bounded by the
laws of human reason, which aims only at man's true benefit and
preservation; her limits are infinitely wider, and have reference to the
eternal order of nature, wherein man is but a speck; it is by the
necessity of this alone that all individuals are conditioned for living
and acting in a particular way. (21) If anything, therefore, in nature
seems to us ridiculous, absurd, or evil, it is because we only know in
part, and are almost entirely ignorant of the order and interdependence
of nature as a whole, and also because we want everything to be arranged
according to the dictates of our human reason; in reality that which
reason considers evil, is not evil in respect to the order and laws of
nature as a whole, but only in respect to the laws of our reason.

(16:22) Nevertheless, no one can doubt that it is much better for us to
live according to the laws and assured dictates of reason, for, as we
said, they have men's true good for their object. (23) Moreover,
everyone wishes to live as far as possible securely beyond the reach of
fear, and this would be quite impossible so long as everyone did
everything he liked, and reason's claim was lowered to a par with those
of hatred and anger; there is no one who is not ill at ease in the midst
of enmity, hatred, anger, and deceit, and who does not seek to avoid
them as much as he can. \[16:3\] (24) When we reflect that men without
mutual help, or the aid of reason, must needs live most miserably, as we
clearly proved in Chap. V., we shall plainly see that men must
necessarily come to an agreement to live together as securely and well
as possible if they are to enjoy as a whole the rights which naturally
belong to them as individuals, and their life should be no more
conditioned by the force and desire of individuals, but by the power and
will of the whole body. (25) This end they will be unable to attain if
desire be their only guide (for by the laws of desire each man is drawn
in a different direction); they must, therefore, most firmly decree and
establish that they will be guided in everything by reason (which nobody
will dare openly to repudiate lest he should be taken for a madman), and
will restrain any desire which is injurious to a man's fellows, that
they will do to all as they would be done by, and that they will defend
their neighbour's rights as their own.

(16:26) How such a compact as this should be entered into, how ratified
and established, we will now inquire.

\(27\) Now it is a universal law of human nature that no one ever
neglects anything which he judges to be good, except with the hope of
gaining a greater good, or from the fear of a greater evil; nor does
anyone endure an evil except for the sake of avoiding a greater evil, or
gaining a greater good. (28) That is, everyone will, of two goods,
choose that which he thinks the greatest; and, of two evils, that which
he thinks the least. (29) I say advisedly that which he thinks the
greatest or the least, for it does not necessarily follow that he judges
right. (30) This law is so deeply implanted in the human mind that it
ought to be counted among eternal truths and axioms.

(16:31) As a necessary consequence of the principle just enunciated, no
one can honestly promise to forego the right which he has over all
things \[Endnote 26\], and in general no one will abide by his promises,
unless under the fear of a greater evil, or the hope of a greater good.
(32) An example will make the matter clearer. (33) Suppose that a robber
forces me to promise that I will give him my goods at his will and
pleasure. (34) It is plain (inasmuch as my natural right is, as I have
shown, co-extensive with my power) that if I can free myself from this
robber by stratagem, by assenting to his demands, I have the natural
right to do so, and to pretend to accept his conditions. (35) Or again,
suppose I have genuinely promised someone that for the space of twenty
days I will not taste food or any nourishment; and suppose I afterwards
find that was foolish, and cannot be kept without very great injury to
myself; as I am bound by natural law and right to choose the least of
two evils, I have complete right to break my compact, and act as if my
promise had never been uttered. (36) I say that I should have perfect
natural right to do so, whether I was actuated by true and evident
reason, or whether I was actuated by mere opinion in thinking I had
promised rashly; whether my reasons were true or false, I should be in
fear of a greater evil, which, by the ordinance of nature, I should
strive to avoid by every means in my power.

(16:37) We may, therefore, conclude that a compact is only made valid by
its utility, without which it becomes null and void. (38) It is,
therefore, foolish to ask a man to keep his faith with us for ever,
unless we also endeavour that the violation of the compact we enter into
shall involve for the violator more harm than good. (39) This
consideration should have very great weight in forming a state. (40)
However, if all men could be easily led by reason alone, and could
recognize what is best and most useful for a state, there would be no
one who would not forswear deceit, for everyone would keep most
religiously to their compact in their desire for the chief good, namely,
the shield and buckler of the commonwealth. (41) However, it is far from
being the case that all men can always be easily led by reason alone;
everyone is drawn away by his pleasure, while avarice, ambition, envy,
hatred, and the like so engross the mind that, reason has no place
therein. (42) Hence, though men make—promises with all the appearances
of good faith, and agree that they will keep to their engagement, no one
can absolutely rely on another man's promise unless there is something
behind it. (43) Everyone has by nature a right to act deceitfully. and
to break his compacts, unless he be restrained by the hope of some
greater good, or the fear of some greater evil.

(16:44) However, as we have shown that the natural right of the
individual is only limited by his power, it is clear that by
transferring, either willingly or under compulsion, this power into the
hands of another, he in so doing necessarily cedes also a part of his
right; and further, that the Sovereign right over all men belongs to him
who has sovereign power, wherewith he can compel men by force, or
restrain them by threats of the universally feared punishment of death;
such sovereign right he will retain only so long as he can maintain his
power of enforcing his will; otherwise he will totter on his throne, and
no one who is stronger than he will be bound unwillingly to obey him.

(16:45) In this manner a society can be formed without any violation of
natural right, and the covenant can always be strictly kept—that is, if
each individual hands over the whole of his power to the body politic,
the latter will then possess sovereign natural right over all things;
that is, it will have sole and unquestioned dominion, and everyone will
be bound to obey, under pain of the severest punishment. (46) A body
politic of this kind is called a Democracy, which may be defined as a
society which wields all its power as a whole. (47) The sovereign power
is not restrained by any laws, but everyone is bound to obey it in all
things; such is the state of things implied when men either tacitly or
expressly handed over to it all their power of self-defence, or in other
words, all their right. (48) For if they had wished to retain any right
for themselves, they ought to have taken precautions for its defence and
preservation; as they have not done so, and indeed could not have done
so without dividing and consequently ruining the state, they placed
themselves absolutely at the mercy of the sovereign power; and,
therefore, having acted (as we have shown) as reason and necessity
demanded, they are obliged to fulfil the commands of the sovereign
power, however absurd these may be, else they will be public enemies,
and will act against reason, which urges the preservation of the state
as a primary duty. (49) For reason bids us choose the least of two
evils.

(16:50) Furthermore, this danger of submitting absolutely to the
dominion and will of another, is one which may be incurred with a light
heart: for we have shown that sovereigns only possess this right of
imposing their will, so long as they have the full power to enforce it:
if such power be lost their right to command is lost also, or lapses to
those who have assumed it and can keep it. (51) Thus it is very rare for
sovereigns to impose thoroughly irrational commands, for they are bound
to consult their own interests, and retain their power by consulting the
public good and acting according to the dictates of reason, as Seneca
says, "violenta imperia nemo continuit diu." (52) No one can long retain
a tyrant's sway.

(16:53) In a democracy, irrational commands are still less to be feared:
for it is almost impossible that the majority of a people, especially if
it be a large one, should agree in an irrational design: and, moreover,
the basis and aim of a democracy is to avoid the desires as irrational,
and to bring men as far as possible under the control of reason, so that
they may live in peace and harmony: if this basis be removed the whole
fabric falls to ruin.

(16:54) Such being the ends in view for the sovereign power, the duty of
subjects is, as I have said, to obey its commands, and to recognize no
right save that which it sanctions.

\[16:4\] (55) It will, perhaps, be thought that we are turning subjects
into slaves: for slaves obey commands and free men live as they like;
but this idea is based on a misconception, for the true slave is he who
is led away by his pleasures and can neither see what is good for him
nor act accordingly: he alone is free who lives with free consent under
the entire guidance of reason.

(16:56) Action in obedience to orders does take away freedom in a
certain sense, but it does not, therefore, make a man a slave, all
depends on the object of the action. (57) If the object of the action be
the good of the state, and not the good of the agent, the latter is a
slave and does himself no good: but in a state or kingdom where the weal
of the whole people, and not that of the ruler, is the supreme law,
obedience to the sovereign power does not make a man a slave, of no use
to himself, but a subject. (58) Therefore, that state is the freest
whose laws are founded on sound reason, so that every member of it may,
if he will, be free \[Endnote 27\]; that is, live with full consent
under the entire guidance of reason.

(16:59) Children, though they are bound to obey all the commands of
their parents, are yet not slaves: for the commands of parents look
generally to the children's benefit.

\(60\) We must, therefore, acknowledge a great difference between a
slave, a son, and a subject; their positions may be thus defined. (61) A
slave is one who is bound to obey his master's orders, though they are
given solely in the master's interest: a son is one who obeys his
father's orders, given in his own interest; a subject obeys the orders
of the sovereign power, given for the common interest, wherein he is
included.

(16:62) I think I have now shown sufficiently clearly the basis of a
democracy: I have especially desired to do so, for I believe it to be of
all forms of government the most natural, and the most consonant with
individual liberty. (63) In it no one transfers his natural right so
absolutely that he has no further voice in affairs, he only hands it
over to the majority of a society, whereof he is a unit. Thus all men
remain as they were in the state of nature, equals.

(16:64) This is the only form of government which I have treated of at
length, for it is the one most akin to my purpose of showing the
benefits of freedom in a state.

\(65\) I may pass over the fundamental principles of other forms of
government, for we may gather from what has been said whence their right
arises without going into its origin. (66) The possessor of sovereign
power, whether he be one, or many, or the whole body politic, has the
sovereign right of imposing any commands he pleases: and he who has
either voluntarily, or under compulsion, transferred the right to defend
him to another, has, in so doing, renounced his natural right and is
therefore bound to obey, in all things, the commands of the sovereign
power; and will be bound so to do so long as the king, or nobles, or the
people preserve the sovereign power which formed the basis of the
original transfer. (67) I need add no more.

\[16:5\] (68) The bases and rights of dominion being thus displayed, we
shall readily be able to define private civil right, wrong, justice, and
injustice, with their relations to the state; and also to determine what
constitutes an ally, or an enemy, or the crime of treason.

(16:69) By private civil right we can only mean the liberty every man
possesses to preserve his existence, a liberty limited by the edicts of
the sovereign power, and preserved only by its authority: for when a man
has transferred to another his right of living as he likes, which was
only limited by his power, that is, has transferred his liberty and
power of self-defence, he is bound to live as that other dictates, and
to trust to him entirely for his defence. (70) Wrong takes place when a
citizen, or subject, is forced by another to undergo some loss or pain
in contradiction to the authority of the law, or the edict of the
sovereign power.

(16:71) Wrong is conceivable only in an organized community: nor can it
ever accrue to subjects from any act of the sovereign, who has the right
to do what he likes. (72) It can only arise, therefore, between private
persons, who are bound by law and right not to injure one another. (73)
Justice consists in the habitual rendering to every man his lawful due:
injustice consists in depriving a man, under the pretence of legality,
of what the laws, rightly interpreted, would allow him. (74) These last
are also called equity and iniquity, because those who administer the
laws are bound to show no respect of persons, but to account all men
equal, and to defend every man's right equally, neither envying the rich
nor despising the poor.

\[16:6\](75.md) The men of two states become allies, when for the sake of
avoiding war, or for some other advantage, they covenant to do each
other no hurt, but on the contrary, to assist each other if necessity
arises, each retaining his independence. (76) Such a covenant is valid
so long as its basis of danger or advantage is in force: no one enters
into an engagement, or is bound to stand by his compacts unless there be
a hope of some accruing good, or the fear of some evil: if this basis be
removed the compact thereby becomes void: this has been abundantly shown
by experience. (77) For although different states make treaties not to
harm one another, they always take every possible precaution against
such treaties being broken by the stronger party, and do not rely on the
compact, unless there is a sufficiently obvious object and advantage to
both parties in observing it. (78) Otherwise they would fear a breach of
faith, nor would there be any wrong done thereby: for who in his proper
senses, and aware of the right of the sovereign power, would trust in
the promises of one who has the will and the power to do what he likes,
and who aims solely at the safety and advantage of his dominion? (79)
Moreover, if we consult loyalty and religion, we shall see that no one
in possession of power ought to abide by his promises to the injury of
his dominion; for he cannot keep such promises without breaking the
engagement he made with his subjects, by which both he and they are most
solemnly bound. (80) An enemy is one who lives apart from the state, and
does not recognize its authority either as a subject or as an ally. It
is not hatred which makes a man an enemy, but the rights of the state.
(81) The rights of the state are the same in regard to him who does not
recognize by any compact the state authority, as they are against him
who has done the state an injury: it has the right to force him as best
it can, either to submit, or to contract an alliance.

\[16:7\] (82) Lastly, treason can only be committed by subjects, who by
compact, either tacit or expressed, have transferred all their rights to
the state: a subject is said to have committed this crime when he has
attempted, for whatever reason, to seize the sovereign power, or to
place it in different hands. (83) I say, has attempted, for if
punishment were not to overtake him till he had succeeded, it would
often come too late, the sovereign rights would have been acquired or
transferred already.

(16:84) I also say, has attempted, for whatever reason, to seize the
sovereign power, and I recognize no difference whether such an attempt
should be followed by public loss or public gain. (85) Whatever be his
reason for acting, the crime is treason, and he is rightly condemned: in
war, everyone would admit the justice of his sentence. (86) If a man
does not keep to his post, but approaches the enemy without the
knowledge of his commander, whatever may be his motive, so long as he
acts on his own motion, even if he advances with the design of defeating
the enemy, he is rightly put to death, because he has violated his oath,
and infringed the rights of his commander. (87) That all citizens are
equally bound by these rights in time of peace, is not so generally
recognized, but the reasons for obedience are in both cases identical.
(88) The state must be preserved and directed by the sole authority of
the sovereign, and such authority and right have been accorded by
universal consent to him alone: if, therefore, anyone else attempts,
without his consent, to execute any public enterprise, even though the
state might (as we said) reap benefit therefrom, such person has none
the less infringed the sovereigns right, and would be rightly punished
for treason.

(16:89) In order that every scruple may be removed, we may now answer
the inquiry, whether our former assertion that everyone who has not the
practice of reason, may, in the state of nature, live by sovereign
natural right, according to the laws of his desires, is not in direct
opposition to the law and right of God as revealed. (90) For as all men
absolutely (whether they be less endowed with reason or more) are
equally bound by the Divine command to love their neighbour as
themselves, it may be said that they cannot, without wrong, do injury to
anyone, or live according to their desires.

(16:91) This objection, so far as the state of nature is concerned, can
be easily answered, for the state of nature is, both in nature and in
time, prior to religion. (92) No one knows by nature that he owes any
obedience to God \[Endnote 28\], nor can he attain thereto by any
exercise of his reason, but solely by revelation confirmed by signs.
(93) Therefore, previous to revelation, no one is bound by a Divine law
and right of which he is necessarily in ignorance. (94) The state of
nature must by no means be confounded with a state of religion, but must
be conceived as without either religion or law, and consequently without
sin or wrong: this is how we have described it, and we are confirmed by
the authority of Paul. (95) It is not only in respect of ignorance that
we conceive the state of nature as prior to, and lacking the Divine
revealed law and right; but in respect of freedom also, wherewith all
men are born endowed.

(16:96) If men were naturally bound by the Divine law and right, or if
the Divine law and right were a natural necessity, there would have been
no need for God to make a covenant with mankind, and to bind them
thereto with an oath and agreement.

(16:97) We must, then, fully grant that the Divine law and right
originated at the time when men by express covenant agreed to obey God
in all things, and ceded, as it were, their natural freedom,
transferring their rights to God in the manner described in speaking of
the formation of a state.

\(98\) However, I will treat of these matters more at length presently.

\[16:8\] (99) It may be insisted that sovereigns are as much bound by
the Divine law as subjects: whereas we have asserted that they retain
their natural rights, and may do whatever they like.

(16:100) In order to clear up the whole difficulty, which arises rather
concerning the natural right than the natural state, I maintain that
everyone is bound, in the state of nature, to live according to Divine
law, in the same way as he is bound to live according to the dictates of
sound reason; namely, inasmuch as it is to his advantage, and necessary
for his salvation; but, if he will not so live, he may do otherwise at
his own risk. (101) He is thus bound to live according to his own laws,
not according to anyone else's, and to recognize no man as a judge, or
as a superior in religion. (102) Such, in my opinion, is the position of
a sovereign, for he may take advice from his fellow-men, but he is not
bound to recognize any as a judge, nor anyone besides himself as an
arbitrator on any question of right, unless it be a prophet sent
expressly by God and attesting his mission by indisputable signs. (103)
Even then he does not recognize a man, but God Himself as His judge.

\[16:9\] (104) If a sovereign refuses to obey God as revealed in His
law, he does so at his own risk and loss, but without violating any
civil or natural right. (105) For the civil right is dependent on his
own decree; and natural right is dependent on the laws of nature, which
latter are not adapted to religion, whose sole aim is the good of
humanity, but to the order of nature—that is, to God's eternal decree
unknown to us.

(16:106) This truth seems to be adumbrated in a somewhat obscurer form
by those who maintain that men can sin against God's revelation, but not
against the eternal decree by which He has ordained all things.

\(107\) We may be asked, what should we do if the sovereign commands
anything contrary to religion, and the obedience which we have expressly
vowed to God? should we obey the Divine law or the human law? (108) I
shall treat of this question at length hereafter, and will therefore
merely say now, that God should be obeyed before all else, when we have
a certain and indisputable revelation of His will: but men are very
prone to error on religious subjects, and, according to the diversity of
their dispositions, are wont with considerable stir to put forward their
own inventions, as experience more than sufficiently attests, so that if
no one were bound to obey the state in matters which, in his own opinion
concern religion, the rights of the state would be dependent on every
man's judgment and passions. (109) No one would consider himself bound
to obey laws framed against his faith or superstition; and on this
pretext he might assume unbounded license. (110) In this way, the rights
of the civil authorities would be utterly set at nought, so that we must
conclude that the sovereign power, which alone is bound both by Divine
and natural right to preserve and guard the laws of the state, should
have supreme authority for making any laws about religion which it
thinks fit; all are bound to obey its behests on the subject in
accordance with their promise which God bids them to keep.

(16:111) However, if the sovereign power be heathen, we should either
enter into no engagements therewith, and yield up our lives sooner than
transfer to it any of our rights; or, if the engagement be made, and our
rights transferred, we should (inasmuch as we should have ourselves
transferred the right of defending ourselves and our religion) be bound
to obey them, and to keep our word: we might even rightly be bound so to
do, except in those cases where God, by indisputable revelation, has
promised His special aid against tyranny, or given us special exemption
from obedience. (112) Thus we see that, of all the Jews in Babylon,
there were only three youths who were certain of the help of God, and,
therefore, refused to obey Nebuchadnezzar. (113) All the rest, with the
sole exception of Daniel, who was beloved by the king, were doubtless
compelled by right to obey, perhaps thinking that they had been
delivered up by God into the hands of the king, and that the king had
obtained and preserved his dominion by God's design. (114) On the other
hand, Eleazar, before his country had utterly fallen, wished to give a
proof of his constancy to his compatriots, in order that they might
follow in his footsteps, and go to any lengths, rather than allow their
right and power to be transferred to the Greeks, or brave any torture
rather than swear allegiance to the heathen. (115) Instances are
occurring every day in confirmation of what I here advance. (116) The
rulers of Christian kingdoms do not hesitate, with a view to
strengthening their dominion, to make treaties with Turks and heathen,
and to give orders to their subjects who settle among such peoples not
to assume more freedom, either in things secular or religious, than is
set down in the treaty, or allowed by the foreign government. (117) We
may see this exemplified in the Dutch treaty with the Japanese, which I
have already mentioned.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XVII.—It Is Shown That No One Can, Or Need, Transfer All
His Rights To The Sovereign Power...](tpt25.md)
