[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Philosophy](../../index)  [Spinoza](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](tpt27)  [Next](tpt29.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0486202496/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*A Theologico-Political Treatise*, by Benedict de Spinoza, \[1883\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### \[20:0\] CHAPTER XX—THAT IN A FREE STATE EVERY MAN MAY THINK WHAT HE LIKES, AND SAY WHAT HE THINKS.

\[20:1\] (1) If men's minds were as easily controlled as their tongues,
every king would sit safely on his throne, and government by compulsion
would cease; for every subject would shape his life according to the
intentions of his rulers, and would esteem a thing true or false, good
or evil, just or unjust, in obedience to their dictates. (2) However, we
have shown already (Chapter XVII.) that no man's mind can possibly lie
wholly at the disposition of another, for no one can willingly transfer
his natural right of free reason and judgment, or be compelled so to do.
(3) For this reason government which attempts to control minds is
accounted tyrannical, and it is considered an abuse of sovereignty and a
usurpation of the rights of subjects, to seek to prescribe what shall be
accepted as true, or rejected as false, or what opinions should actuate
men in their worship of God. (4) All these questions fall within a man's
natural right, which he cannot abdicate even with his own consent.

(20:5) I admit that the judgment can be biassed in many ways, and to an
almost incredible degree, so that while exempt from direct external
control it may be so dependent on another man's words, that it may fitly
be said to be ruled by him; but although this influence is carried to
great lengths, it has never gone so far as to invalidate the statement,
that every man's understanding is his own, and that brains are as
diverse as palates.

(20:6) Moses, not by fraud, but by Divine virtue, gained such a hold
over the popular judgment that he was accounted superhuman, and believed
to speak and act through the inspiration of the Deity; nevertheless,
even he could not escape murmurs and evil interpretations. (7) How much
less then can other monarchs avoid them! (8) Yet such unlimited power,
if it exists at all, must belong to a monarch, and least of all to a
democracy, where the whole or a great part of the people wield authority
collectively. (9) This is a fact which I think everyone can explain for
himself.

(20:10) However unlimited, therefore, the power of a sovereign may be,
however implicitly it is trusted as the exponent of law and religion, it
can never prevent men from forming judgments according to their
intellect, or being influenced by any given emotion. (11) It is true
that it has the right to treat as enemies all men whose opinions do not,
on all subjects, entirely coincide with its own; but we are not
discussing its strict rights, but its proper course of action. (12) I
grant that it has the right to rule in the most violent manner, and to
put citizens to death for very trivial causes, but no one supposes it
can do this with the approval of sound judgment. (13) Nay, inasmuch as
such things cannot be done without extreme peril to itself, we may even
deny that it has the absolute power to do them, or, consequently, the
absolute right; for the rights of the sovereign are limited by his
power.

\[20:2\] (14) Since, therefore, no one can abdicate his freedom of
judgment and feeling; since every man is by indefeasible natural right
the master of his own thoughts, it follows that men thinking in diverse
and contradictory fashions, cannot, without disastrous results, be
compelled to speak only according to the dictates of the supreme power.
(15) Not even the most experienced, to say nothing of the multitude,
know how to keep silence. (16) Men's common failing is to confide their
plans to others, though there be need for secrecy, so that a government
would be most harsh which deprived the individual of his freedom of
saying and teaching what he thought; and would be moderate if such
freedom were granted. (17) Still we cannot deny that authority may be as
much injured by words as by actions; hence, although the freedom we are
discussing cannot be entirely denied to subjects, its unlimited
concession would be most baneful; we must, therefore, now inquire, how
far such freedom can and ought to be conceded without danger to the
peace of the state, or the power of the rulers; and this, as I said at
the beginning of Chapter XVI., is my principal object. (18) It follows,
plainly, from the explanation given above, of the foundations of a
state, that the ultimate aim of government is not to rule, or restrain,
by fear, nor to exact obedience, but contrariwise, to free every man
from fear, that he may live in all possible security; in other words, to
strengthen his natural right to exist and work—without injury to himself
or others.

(20:19) No, the object of government is not to change men from rational
beings into beasts or puppets, but to enable them to develope their
minds and bodies in security, and to employ their reason unshackled;
neither showing hatred, anger, or deceit, nor watched with the eyes of
jealousy and injustice. (20) In fact, the true aim of government is
liberty.

(20:21) Now we have seen that in forming a state the power of making
laws must either be vested in the body of the citizens, or in a portion
of them, or in one man. (22) For, although mens free judgments are very
diverse, each one thinking that he alone knows everything, and although
complete unanimity of feeling and speech is out of the question, it is
impossible to preserve peace, unless individuals abdicate their right of
acting entirely on their own judgment. \[20:3\] (23) Therefore, the
individual justly cedes the right of free action, though not of free
reason and judgment; no one can act against the authorities without
danger to the state, though his feelings and judgment may be at variance
therewith; he may even speak against them, provided that he does so from
rational conviction, not from fraud, anger, or hatred, and provided that
he does not attempt to introduce any change on his private authority.

(20:24) For instance, supposing a man shows that a law is repugnant to
sound reason, and should therefore be repealed; if he submits his
opinion to the judgment of the authorities (who, alone, have the right
of making and repealing laws), and meanwhile acts in nowise contrary to
that law, he has deserved well of the state, and has behaved as a good
citizen should; but if he accuses the authorities of injustice, and
stirs up the people against them, or if he seditiously strives to
abrogate the law without their consent, he is a mere agitator and rebel.

(20:25) Thus we see how an individual may declare and teach what he
believes, without injury to the authority of his rulers, or to the
public peace; namely, by leaving in their hands the entire power of
legislation as it affects action, and by doing nothing against their
laws, though he be compelled often to act in contradiction to what he
believes, and openly feels, to be best.

(20:26) Such a course can be taken without detriment to justice and
dutifulness, nay, it is the one which a just and dutiful man would
adopt. (27) We have shown that justice is dependent on the laws of the
authorities, so that no one who contravenes their accepted decrees can
be just, while the highest regard for duty, as we have pointed out in
the preceding chapter, is exercised in maintaining public peace and
tranquillity; these could not be preserved if every man were to live as
he pleased; therefore it is no less than undutiful for a man to act
contrary to his country's laws, for if the practice became universal the
ruin of states would necessarily follow.

(20:28) Hence, so long as a man acts in obedience to the laws of his
rulers, he in nowise contravenes his reason, for in obedience to reason
he transferred the right of controlling his actions from his own hands
to theirs. (29) This doctrine we can confirm from actual custom, for in
a conference of great and small powers, schemes are seldom carried
unanimously, yet all unite in carrying out what is decided on, whether
they voted for or against. (30) But I return to my proposition.

(20:31) From the fundamental notions of a state, we have discovered how
a man may exercise free judgment without detriment to the supreme power:
from the same premises we can no less easily determine what opinions
would be seditious. (32) Evidently those which by their very nature
nullify the compact by which the right of free action was ceded. (33)
For instance, a man who holds that the supreme power has no rights over
him, or that promises ought not to be kept, or that everyone should live
as he pleases, or other doctrines of this nature in direct opposition to
the above- mentioned contract, is seditious, not so much from his actual
opinions and judgment, as from the deeds which they involve; for he who
maintains such theories abrogates the contract which tacitly, or openly,
he made with his rulers. (34) Other opinions which do not involve acts
violating the contract, such as revenge, anger, and t he like, are not
seditious, unless it be in some. corrupt state, where superstitious and
ambitious persons, unable to endure men of learning, are so popular with
the multitude that their word is more valued than the law.

(20:35) However, I do not deny that there are some doctrines which,
while they are apparently only concerned with abstract truths and
falsehoods, are yet propounded and published with unworthy motives. (36)
This question we have discussed in Chapter XV., and shown that reason
should nevertheless remain unshackled. (37) If we hold to the principle
that a man's loyalty to the state should be judged, like his loyalty to
God, from his actions only—namely, from his charity towards his
neighbours; we cannot doubt that the best government will allow freedom
of philosophical speculation no less than of religious belief. (38) I
confess that from such freedom inconveniences may sometimes arise, but
what question was ever settled so wisely that no abuses could possibly
spring therefrom? (39) He who seeks to regulate everything by law, is
more likely to arouse vices than to reform them. (40) It is best to
grant what cannot be abolished, even though it be in itself harmful.
(41) How many evils spring from luxury, envy, avarice, drunkenness, and
the like, yet these are tolerated—vices as they are—because they cannot
be prevented by legal enactments. (42) How much more then should free
thought be granted, seeing that it is in itself a virtue and that it
cannot be crushed! (43) Besides, the evil results can easily be checked,
as I will show, by the secular authorities, not to mention that such
freedom is absolutely necessary for progress in science and the liberal
arts: for no man follows such pursuits to advantage unless his judgment
be entirely free and unhampered.

(20:44) But let it be granted that freedom may be crushed, and men be so
bound down, that they do not dare to utter a whisper, save at the
bidding of their rulers; nevertheless this can never be carried to the
pitch of making them think according to authority, so that the necessary
consequences would be that men would daily be thinking one thing and
saying another, to the corruption of good faith, that mainstay of
government, and to the fostering of hateful flattery and perfidy, whence
spring stratagems, and the corruption of every good art.

(20:45) It is far from possible to impose uniformity of speech, for the
more rulers strive to curtail freedom of speech, the more obstinately
are they resisted; not indeed by the avaricious, the flatterers, and
other numskulls, who think supreme salvation consists in filling their
stomachs and gloating over their money-bags, but by those whom good
education, sound morality, and virtue have rendered more free. (46) Men,
as generally constituted, are most prone to resent the branding as
criminal of opinions which they believe to be true, and the proscription
as wicked of that which inspires them with piety towards God and man;
hence they are ready to forswear the laws and conspire against the
authorities, thinking it not shameful but honourable to stir up
seditions and perpetuate any sort of crime with this end in view. (47)
Such being the constitution of human nature, we see that laws directed
against opinions affect the generous minded rather than the wicked, and
are adapted less for coercing criminals than for irritating the upright;
so that they cannot be maintained without great peril to the state.

(20:48) Moreover, such laws are almost always useless, for those who
hold that the opinions proscribed are sound, cannot possibly obey the
law; whereas those who already reject them as false, accept the law as a
kind of privilege, and make such boast of it, that authority is
powerless to repeal it, even if such a course be subsequently desired.

(20:49) To these considerations may be added what we said in Chapter
XVIII. in treating of the history of the Hebrews. (50) And, lastly, how
many schisms have arisen in the Church from the attempt of the
authorities to decide by law the intricacies of theological controversy!
(51) If men were not allured by the hope of getting the law and the
authorities on their side, of triumphing over their adversaries in the
sight of an applauding multitude, and of acquiring honourable
distinctions, they would not strive so maliciously, nor would such fury
sway their minds. (52) This is taught not only by reason but by daily
examples, for laws of this kind prescribing what every man shall believe
and forbidding anyone to speak or write to the contrary, have often been
passed, as sops or concessions to the anger of those who cannot tolerate
men of enlightenment, and who, by such harsh and crooked enactments, can
easily turn the devotion of the masses into fury and direct it against
whom they will. (53) How much better would it be to restrain popular
anger and fury, instead of passing useless laws, which can only be
broken by those who love virtue and the liberal arts, thus paring down
the state till it is too small to harbour men of talent. (54) What
greater misfortune for a state can be conceived then that honourable men
should be sent like criminals into exile, because they hold diverse
opinions which they cannot disguise? (55) What, I say, can be more
hurtful than that men who have committed no crime or wickedness should,
simply because they are enlightened, be treated as enemies and put to
death, and that the scaffold, the terror of evil-doers, should become
the arena where the highest examples of tolerance and virtue are
displayed to the people with all the marks of ignominy that authority
can devise?

(20:56) He that knows himself to be upright does not fear the death of a
criminal, and shrinks from no punishment; his mind is not wrung with
remorse for any disgraceful deed: he holds that death in a good cause is
no punishment, but an honour, and that death for freedom is glory.

(20:57) What purpose then is served by the death of such men, what
example in proclaimed? the cause for which they die is unknown to the
idle and the foolish, hateful to the turbulent, loved by the upright.
(58) The only lesson we can draw from such scenes is to flatter the
persecutor, or else to imitate the victim.

(20:58) If formal assent is not to be esteemed above conviction, and if
governments are to retain a firm hold of authority and not be compelled
to yield to agitators, it is imperative that freedom of judgment should
be granted, so that men may live together in harmony, however diverse,
or even openly contradictory their opinions may be. (59) We cannot doubt
that such is the best system of government and open to the fewest
objections, since it is the one most in harmony with human nature. (60)
In a democracy (the most natural form of government, as we have shown in
Chapter XVI.) everyone submits to the control of authority over his
actions, but not over his judgment and reason; that is, seeing that all
cannot think alike, the voice of the majority has the force of law,
subject to repeal if circumstances bring about a change of opinion. (61)
In proportion as the power of free judgment is withheld we depart from
the natural condition of mankind, and consequently the government
becomes more tyrannical.

\[20:4\] (62) In order to prove that from such freedom no inconvenience
arises, which cannot easily be checked by the exercise of the sovereign
power, and that men's actions can easily be kept in bounds, though their
opinions be at open variance, it will be well to cite an example. (63)
Such an one is not very, far to seek. (64) The city of Amsterdam reaps
the fruit of this freedom in its own great prosperity and in the
admiration of all other people. (65) For in this most flourishing state,
and most splendid city, men of every, nation and religion live together
in the greatest harmony, and ask no questions before trusting their
goods to a fellow- citizen, save whether he be rich or poor, and whether
he generally acts honestly, or the reverse. (66) His religion and sect
is considered of no importance: for it has no effect before the judges
in gaining or losing a cause, and there is no sect so despised that its
followers, provided that they harm no one, pay every man his due, and
live uprightly, are deprived of the protection of the magisterial
authority.

(20:67) On the other hand, when the religious controversy between
Remonstrants and Counter-Remonstrants began to be taken up by
politicians and the States, it grew into a schism, and abundantly showed
that laws dealing with religion and seeking to settle its controversies
are much more calculated to irritate than to reform, and that they give
rise to extreme licence: further, it was seen that schisms do not
originate in a love of truth, which is a source of courtesy and
gentleness, but rather in an inordinate desire for supremacy, (68) From
all these considerations it is clearer than the sun at noonday, that the
true schismatics are those who condemn other men's writings, and
seditiously stir up the quarrelsome masses against their authors, rather
than those authors themselves, who generally write only for the learned,
and appeal solely to reason. (69) In fact, the real disturbers of the
peace are those who, in a free state, seek to curtail the liberty of
judgment which they are unable to tyrannize over.

(20:70) I have thus shown:—

\(71\) I. That it is impossible to deprive men of the liberty of saying
what they think.

\(72\) II. That such liberty can be conceded to every man without injury
to the rights and authority of the sovereign power, and that every man
may retain it without injury to such rights, provided that he does not
presume upon it to the extent of introducing any new rights into the
state, or acting in any way contrary, to the existing laws.

(20:73) III. That every man may enjoy this liberty without detriment to
the public peace, and that no inconveniences arise therefrom which
cannot easily be checked.

\(74\) IV. That every man may enjoy it without injury to his allegiance.

\(75\) V. That laws dealing with speculative problems are entirely
useless.

\(76\) VI. Lastly, that not only may such liberty be granted without
prejudice to the public peace, to loyalty, and to the rights of rulers,
but that it is even necessary, for their preservation. (77) For when
people try to take it away, and bring to trial, not only the acts which
alone are capable of offending, but also the opinions of mankind, they
only succeed in surrounding their victims with an appearance of
martyrdom, and raise feelings of pity and revenge rather than of terror.
(78) Uprightness and good faith are thus corrupted, flatterers and
traitors are encouraged, and sectarians triumph, inasmuch as concessions
have been made to their animosity, and they have gained the state
sanction for the doctrines of which they are the interpreters. (79)
Hence they arrogate to themselves the state authority and rights, and do
not scruple to assert that they have been directly chosen by God, and
that their laws are Divine, whereas the laws of the state are human, and
should therefore yield obedience to the laws of God—in other words, to
their own laws. (80) Everyone must see that this is not a state of
affairs conducive to public welfare. (81) Wherefore, as we have shown in
Chapter XVIII., the safest way for a state is to lay down the rule that
religion is comprised solely in the exercise of charity and justice, and
that the rights of rulers in sacred, no less than in secular matters,
should merely have to do with actions, but that every man should think
what he likes and say what he thinks.

(20:82) I have thus fulfilled the task I set myself in this treatise.
\[20:5\] (83) It remains only to call attention to the fact that I have
written nothing which I do not most willingly submit to the examination
and approval of my country's rulers; and that I am willing to retract
anything which they shall decide to be repugnant to the laws, or
prejudicial to the public good. (84) I know that I am a man, and as a
man liable to error, but against error I have taken scrupulous care, and
have striven to keep in entire accordance with the laws of my country,
with loyalty, and with morality.

End of Part 4 of 4.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Author's Endnotes](tpt29.md)
