[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Women](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bog24)  [Next](bog26) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Book of the Goddess*, by Anna Livia Plurabelle, \[© 2002 Anna Livia
Plurabelle, All rights reserved\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### 4. Worship Her by restoring balance to Her planet.

The Goddess in her form Gaia is the spirit of the fourth principle.

Life on this planet has been tossed out of balance by the patriarchy
with its arbitrary division between the human world and the natural
world.

This has led to technology without love, women and men set apart and men
set above women, the rending of mind from body and spirit from mind, war
without end, and labor without fair recompense.

Technology and Science are not inventions of the patriarchy. The
understanding of nature and how to use that understanding to improve our
lives was invented by the civilization of the Goddess. This was done as
an act of love for the body of the Goddess we inhabit, Gaia.

Because the love of Gaia was the basis for the civilization of the
Goddess, the 'original sin' of the patriarchs was to spurn this love, by
declaring that the body of Gaia, our wide-hipped Mother, was theirs to
ravage and plunder.

When the patriarchy seized technology and purged it of love, the first
thing they did was invent warfare, so that they could take from the
innocent, and accumulate wealth and power.

Unless you love what you do, your life will be empty of pleasure and you
will be burdened on the path of the Goddess. This is the principle of
creative love. A thing made without love is a hollow shadow.

Unless you pay fair recompense for labor, the Goddess will shun your
enterprise. Labor must have voice in the counsels of the workplace.
Trade which exploits one of the parties in the transaction, or which
plunders Gaia's body, will lead to disaster and ruin for all involved.

Unless we love the Earth and learn to live in balance, She will scourge
our civilization like She has done before and will do again. Gaia is not
dependent on humanity for existence; we do not own Her and we are not
her shepherd. She existed long before humans walked on the Earth. She
has Her own cycles and balances, and if we continue on the path of
unbalance, we are expendable.

The Invocation of Gaia (time of day: noon): "Blessed Gaia, our first and
best home, Gaia of the green hills and wide plains, Gaia of the ocean
depths. I walk in beauty. I walk in peace. I walk in balance on the path
of the Goddess. Blessed be."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Fifth Principle: Demeter](bog26)
