[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Women](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bog23)  [Next](bog25) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Book of the Goddess*, by Anna Livia Plurabelle, \[© 2002 Anna Livia
Plurabelle, All rights reserved\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### 3. Tolerate other religions and do not compel others to join the circle of the Goddess: the Goddess will draw those to Her who are ready and hear Her call.

The Goddess in her form Selene is the spirit of the third principle.

Patriarchy developed religions based on the severing of the link with
Gaia. This led to the denying of the body, the split of mind and body,
and mind and spirit. Only some teachings which were muttered in the
darkness by acolytes who barely understood what they were saying
preserved even a seed of the truth. Religion is a binding up of our
threefold essences, and none of these can function without the other
two, and these essences are empty without the presence of the Goddess.
Selene, the triform goddess of the Waxing, the Full and the Waning moon
symbolizes this triple essence.

To mystify the masses so that they would not attempt to rebuild the
civilization of the Goddess, the patriarchs developed religions of their
own. Many of these religions are used by those in power as spiritual
weapons. To this end they promote hatred of other religions by their
followers, even though the doctrines in their holy books preach love and
tolerance.

We stand apart from the crusades and holy wars of the patriarchal
religions. We say to them, if you profess belief in love and tolerance,
why promote hate and intolerance in practice?

We have no need to compel others to join our circle. We do not cloak our
intentions in sugary platitudes or tell the masses they are doomed
forever unless they adopt our principles. Rather, we state our case
honestly and let those who are ready to join us find their own way to
the Goddess.

This is the Invocation of Selene (moonrise): "Blessed Selene, unite my
mind, body and spirit and fill me with your presence. Through your
unfailing love, give me the strength to create peace and tolerance, and
show others the way to the path of the Goddess. Blessed be."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Fourth Principle: Gaia](bog25)
