<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [Dunsany](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](tago12)  [Next](tago14) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002M3T6JE/internetsacredte)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Time and the Gods*, by Lord Dunsany, \[1905\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="an_f11"></span>

NIGHT AND MORNING

Once in an arbour of the gods above the fields of twilight Night
wandering alone came suddenly on Morning. Then Night drew from his face
his cloak of dark grey mists and said: "See, I am Night," and they two
sitting in that arbour of the gods, Night told wondrous stories of old
mysterious happenings in the dark. And Morning sat and wondered, gazing
into the face of Night and at his wreath of stars. And Morning told how
the rains of Snamarthis smoked in the plain, but Night told how
Snamarthis held riot in the dark, with revelry and drinking and tales
told by kings, till all the hosts of Meenath crept against it and the
lights went out and there arose the din of arms or ever Morning came.
And Night told how Sindana the beggar had dreamed that he was a King,
and Morning told how she had seen Sindana find suddenly an army in the
plain, and how he had gone to it thinking he was King and the army had
believed him, and Sindana now ruled over Marthis and Targadrides,
Dynath, Zahn, and Tumeida. And most Night loved to tell of Assarnees,
whose ruins are scant memories on the desert's edge, but Morning told of
the twin cities of Nardis and Timaut that lorded over the plain. And
Night told terribly of what Mynandes found when he walked through his
own city in the dark. And ever at the elbow of regal Night whispers
arose saying: "Tell Morning *this*."

And ever Night told and ever Morning wondered. And Night spake on, and
told what the dead had done when they came in the darkness on the King
that had led them into battle once. And Night knew who slew Darnex and
how it was done. Moreover, he told why the seven Kings tortured
Sydatheris and what Sydatheris said just at the last, and how the Kings
went forth and took their lives.

And Night told whose blood had stained the marble steps that lead to the
temple in Ozahn, and why the skull within it wears a golden crown, and
whose soul is in the wolf that howls in the dark against the city. And
Night knew whither the tigers go out of the Irasian desert and the place
where they meet together, and who speaks to them and what she says and
why. And he told why human teeth had bitten the iron hinge in the great
gate that swings in the walls of Mondas, and who came up out of the
marsh alone in the darktime and demanded audience of the King and told
the King a lie, and how the King, believing it, went down into the
vaults of his palace and found only toads and snakes, who slew the King.
And he told of ventures in palace towers in the quiet, and knew the
spell whereby a man might send the light of the moon right into the soul
of his foe. And Night spoke of the forest and the stirring of shadows
and soft feet pattering and peering eyes, and of the fear that sits
behind the trees taking to itself the shape of something crouched to
spring.

But far under that arbour of the gods down on the earth the mountain
peak Mondana looked Morning in the eyes and forsook his allegiance to
Night, and one by one the lesser hills about Mondana's knees greeted the
Morning. And all the while in the plains the shapes of cities came
looming out of the dusk. And Kongros stood forth with all her pinnacles,
and the winged figure of Poesy carved upon the eastern portal of her
gate, and the squat figure of Avarice carved facing it upon the west;
and the bat began to tire of going up and down her streets, and already
the owl was home. And the dark lions went up out of the plain back to
their caves again. Not as yet shone any dew upon the spider's snare nor
came the sound of any insects stirring or bird of the day, and full
allegiance all the valleys owned still to their Lord the Night. Yet
earth was preparing for another ruler, and kingdom by kingdom she stole
away from Night, and there marched through the dreams of men a million
heralds that cried with the voice of the cock: "Lo! Morning come behind
us." But in that arbour of the gods above the fields of twilight the
star wreath was paling about the head of Night, and ever more wonderful
on Morning's brow appeared the mark of power. And at the moment when the
camp fires pale and the smoke goes grey to the sky, and camels sniff the
dawn, suddenly Morning forgot Night. And out of that arbour of the gods,
and away to the haunts of the dark, Night with his swart cloak slunk
away; and Morning placed her hand upon the mists and drew them upward
and revealed the earth, and drove the shadows before her, and they
followed Night. And suddenly the mystery quitted haunting shapes, and an
old glamour was gone, and far and wide over the fields of earth a new
splendour arose.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Usury](tago14)

</div>
