<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [Dunsany](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](tago13)  [Next](tago15) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002M3T6JE/internetsacredte)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Time and the Gods*, by Lord Dunsany, \[1905\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="an_f12"></span>

USURY

The men of Zonu hold that Yahn is God, who sits as a usurer behind a
heap of little lustrous gems and ever clutches at them with both his
arms. Scarce larger than a drop of water are the gleaming jewels that
lie under the grasping talons of Yahn, and every jewel is a life. Men
tell in Zonu that the earth was empty when Yahn devised his plan, and on
it no life stirred. Then Yahn lured to him shadows whose home was beyond
the Rim, who knew little of joys and nought of any sorrow, whose place
was beyond the Rim before the birth of Time. These Yahn lured to him and
showed them his heap of gems; and in the jewels there was light, and
green fields glistened in them, and there were glimpses of blue sky and
little streams, and very faintly little gardens showed that flowered in
orchard lands. And some showed winds in the heaven, and some showed the
arch of the sky with a waste plain drawn across it, with grasses bent in
the wind and never aught but the plain. But the gems that changed the
most had in their centre the ever changing sea. Then the shadows gazed
into the Lives and saw the green fields and the sea and earth and the
gardens of earth. And Yahn said: "I will loan you each a Life, and you
may do your work with it upon the Scheme of Things, and have each a
shadow for his servant in green fields and in gardens, only for these
things you shall polish these Lives with experience and cut their edges
with your griefs, and in the end shall return them again to me."

And thereto the shadows consented, that they might have gleaming Lives
and have shadows for their servants, and this thing became the Law. But
the shadows, each with his Life, departed and came to Zonu and to other
lands, and there with experience they polished the Lives of Yahn, and
cut them with human griefs until they gleamed anew. And ever they found
new scenes to gleam within these Lives, and cities and sails and men
shone in them where there had been before only green fields and sea, and
ever Yahn the usurer cried out to remind them of their bargain. When men
added to their Lives scenes that were pleasant to Yahn, then was Yahn
silent, but when they added scenes that pleased not the eyes of Yahn,
then did he take a toll of sorrow from them because it was the Law.

But men forgot the usurer, and there arose some claiming to be wise in
the Law, who said that after their labour, which they wrought upon their
Lives, was done, those Lives should be theirs to possess; so men took
comfort from their toil and labour and the grinding and cutting of their
griefs. But as their Lives began to shine with experience of many
things, the thumb and forefinger of Yahn would suddenly close upon a
Life, and the man became a shadow. But away beyond the Rim the shadows
say:

"We have greatly laboured for Yahn, and have gathered griefs in the
world, and caused his Lives to shine, and Yahn doeth nought for us. Far
better had we stayed where no cares are, floating beyond the Rim."

And there the shadows fear lest ever again they be lured by specious
promises to suffer usury at the hands of Yahn, who is overskilled in
Law. Only Yahn sits and smiles, watching his hoard increase in
preciousness, and hath no pity for the poor shadows whom he hath lured
from their quiet to toil in the form of men.

And ever Yahn lures more shadows and sends them to brighten his Lives,
sending the old Lives out again to make them brighter still; and
sometimes he gives to a shadow a Life that was once a king's and sendeth
him with it down to the earth to play the part of a beggar, or sometimes
he sendeth a beggar's Life to play the part of a king. What careth Yahn?

The men of Zonu have been promised by those that claim to be wise in the
Law that their Lives which they have toiled at shall be theirs to
possess for ever, yet the men of Zonu fear that Yahn is greater and
overskilled in the Law. Moreover it hath been said that Time will bring
the hour when the wealth of Yahn shall be such as his dreams have lusted
for. Then shall Yahn leave the earth at rest and trouble the shadows no
more, but sit and gloat with his unseemly face over his hoard of Lives,
for his soul is a usurer's soul. But others say, and they swear that
this is true, that there are gods of Old, who be far greater than Yahn,
who made the Law wherein Yahn is overskilled, and who will one day drive
a bargain with him that shall be too hard for Yahn. Then Yahn shall
wander away, a mean forgotten god, and perchance in some forsaken land
shall haggle with the rain for a drop of water to drink, for his soul is
a usurer's soul. And the Lives—who knoweth the gods of Old or what Their
will shall be?

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Mlideen](tago15)

</div>
