[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Legends & Sagas](../index.md) 
[Celtic Folklore](../celt/index.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# PROLEGOMENA TO THE STUDY OF OLD WELSH POETRY

#### by EDWARD ANWYL

from

Transactions of the Honourable Society of Cymmrodorian

##### \[1903\]

It will probably be readily admitted by those acquainted with Celtic
studies that the most difficult subject in the sphere of Welsh
literature is the critical interpretation and translation of the oldest
Welsh poetry, and this is a problem of interest not only to Welshmen,
but to a wider circle, as part of the larger question of the origins of
the vernacular literature of Western Europe. The difficulty referred to
is due in no small degree to the obsolete character of the vocabulary,
but it is also due to the difficulty of correcting the text on the one
hand, and that of classifying and interpreting the allusions to persons
and places on the other. Much work has been done by students of Celtic
in these various directions, but, in the absence of some short
introductory treatment, the novice often fails to appreciate the
problems for solution, and the significance of the various scattered
pieces of research that are intended as answers to them. Further, the
progress of these studies has been hampered in the past by an inadequate
study of the historical grammar of the Welsh language, and of the
peculiarities of the earlier syntactical constructions as distinguished
from those of later times. The great work of Zeuss, though of abiding
value, needs supplementing, especially on the poetical side of old Welsh
grammar.

The present writer has given a preliminary statistical account of
several of the older verbal forms in an Appendix to *Welshmen*, by the
Rev. T. Stephens, but it would be well if all the grammatical forms
could be similarly tabulated. Another important line of research which
is indispensable to the elucidation of the older poetry, is a close
study of the older prose remains of Welsh in order to determine, if
possible, their structure, literary affinities, and topographical
relations. The present writer has also contributed a preliminary
discussion of some of these points, especially in relation to the 'Four
Branches of the Mabinogi', to the *Zeitschrift für Celtische
Philologie*. The present paper is a development of the same study, and
is the outcome of a consideration of the inter-relations of the oldest
prose and poetic writings of the Welsh people.

in dealing with these subjects, again, it has to be borne in mind that,
whatever may be the origins of these forms of literature, they come to
us in what may be termed a mediaeval dress. just as the 'Four Branches
of the Mabinogi' in their present form reflect the ideas of the Feudal
System, so, too, many of the poems attributed to Taliesin and others
reflect the monastic studies of the Middle Ages. Hence, in order to
elucidate them, it is not necessary merely to guess at the underlying
fragments of ancient mythology and legend, but also to study the medium
through which these are presented. It is necessary, also, to form some
idea of that conception of poetry and of the poet which made them
possible. Celtic studies are here in special need of correlation on the
literary side with researchers into the origins and early developments
of the other literatures of Western Europe.

Again, apart from the comparison of Irish and Welsh literature, it is
important that, as far as possible, the various stories commonly called
'Mabinogion', the older body of poetry, Gildas, the chronicle called
'Nennius' in its various recensions, the lives of the Welsh saints, and
Geoffrey of Monmouth's *History of the Kings of Britain*, should be
studied together. Along with these should also be closely investigated
the oldest genealogies. These investigations may give us a clue to the
families from whose spheres of influence portions of the older
literature emanated, the districts where they were originally evolved,
or to which they were transferred, and the probable literary centres of
the ancient Welsh. Already very valuable and suggestive work in this
direction has been done by Professor Zimmer in his *Nennius Vindicatus*,
whereby he has brought into view the probable existence of old British
or Welsh centres of literary activity in the North at Dumbarton or
Carlisle, in Gwynedd, and in the Builth district.

In dealing with the old stories and old poems of Wales it is important
to discover, wherever possible, the motives that appear to have led to
their formation and development. It is from this point of view that the
genealogies deserve careful study, in order to see what compositions may
conceivably owe their origin to family or ecclesiastical pride. In the
elucidation of the old genealogies a great debt of gratitude is due
especially to Mr Egerton Phillimore and Mr Anscombe. A single name may
at times prove an invaluable clue in these intricate and delicate
researches.

The body of Welsh poetry here dealt with is commonly known as that of
'The Four Ancient Books of Wales', being *The Black Book of Carmarthen*,
*The Book of Aneurin*, *The Book of Taliesin*, and *The Red Book of
Hergest*. The interrelations of most of the poems contained in Skene's
edition are sufficiently clear to reveal the fact that they represent in
many respects a common tradition; nor does it require much research to
show that, within the collection as a whole, there are various strata,
which may often be distinguished with respect to their place of origin
and their time of composition. The historical allusions, for example, of
the 'Hoianau' poem (contained in the *Black Book of Carmarthen*) make it
clear that it belongs to the twelfth century; while the orthography of
'Gorchan Maelderw' in the *Book of Aneurin* makes it quite clear that
that poem, together with the analogous parts of the 'Gododdin', is
earlier, at any rate, than the *Book of Llandav*. Again, the occasional
lapses into an older mode of spelling, as in Poem xxiii of the Book of
Taliesin, called 'Trawsganu Kynan Garwyn m. Brochwel Ysgythrog', where
we have trefbret for trefret, pympðnt for pymhðnt, dymet for dyuet,
suggest that the poem was copied from a manuscript in which the spelling
was uniformly of an older type. Again, the reference in l. 885 of the
'Gododdin' to the death of Dyvynwal Vrych (Donald Brec), who died in
642, shows that the line, at any rate in the form there found, is
subsequent to that date. Similarly, in l. 934 of the same poem, the
reference to Gynt (= gentes, i.e. the Scandinavians) shows that, at
least in that form, the line is subsequent to the Scandinavian
incursions. We know, too, from the existence of a verse of the same
series in an eleventh century MS. of St Augustine's 'De Trinitate',
which is in the Library of Corpus Christi College, Cambridge, that
verses of this same series of stanzas were known at that time. We have
another instance in the *Book of Taliesin*. Even if we had no other
reasons for forming that opinion, the existence of a reference to Bede
in poem xvi, l. 38, would be a proof that the poem containing the
reference was later than his time, that is, unless the line or the
reference was interpolated. Again reverting to the 'Gododdin', the
references to Elfin (l. 376) and to Beli (in l. 385) make it suspicious
that they refer by an anachronism to Elfin, King of Alclud (Dumbarton),
who died in 722 A.D., and to Beli his son. If this be so, then the other
verses in praise of Eithinyn, such as those beginning 'Kywyrein ketwyr
kywrennin' and those of corresponding characteristics, must have been
written, at least, during the lifetime of Beli, the son. Moreover, it is
obvious from the rhyme alone that all the old poems were composed after
the old declensional and conjugational endings had been entirely lost.

If, again, we consider topographical allusions, we note that the
numerous references to places in Powys and the neighbouring parts of
England in the so-called 'Llywarch Hen' poems, make it highly probable
that we have here a body of poetry which, in its nucleus and its
imitators, flourished in the literary centres of Powys. A few allusions,
such as those to Llyn Geirionydd, Nant Ffrancon, and Dyganhwy, in some
of the Taliesin poems, create a presumption that the poet who wrote them
was not unconnected either with the court of Gwynedd or with some
Carnarvonshire or Anglesey monastery. We are tempted also to suspect
that the body of old poetry, which forms the nucleus of the Book of
Taliesin and the similar poetry of the *Book of Aneurin*, was either
itself preserved in Dyganhwy, Bangor Deiniol, Bangor Seiriol, or
Clynnog, or was based on some annals, containing references to events in
the North, which we do not now fully possess. The reference in the Welsh
Laws to the preservation of 'Breiniau Gwyr Arfon' by Bangor Deiniol and
Bangor Beuno makes it not improbable that, in these and kindred
monasteries, there were preserved brief annals and records, which
afforded material to the bards and monks. There is extant in the Welsh
Laws an interesting specimen of such a record, giving an account of the
relations between the men of Arfon and the men of Strathclyde in the
time of Rhun, son of Maelgwn Gwynedd. These brief annals were probably
in close relation to the genealogies of the ruling families, and these
families in the Cunedda districts, as well as those of other 'men of the
North', may in some cases, owing to intermarriage, have comprised the
names of some of the earlier inhabitants.

Professor Zimmer has suggested in his Nennius Vindicatus that in the
original work of Nennius and in the North Wales recension, older annals
from the North have played a part, notably in the account of the
struggles between the Britons of the North and the men of Deira and
Bernicia; it is highly probable, too, that chronicles of similar type
have supplied the personal and local names which have been incorporated
in the poems of the Four Ancient Books. As we shall see presently, these
poems are not merely historical in character: they are an attempt at
artistic treatment of historical themes which would be of special
interest to certain Welsh families.

It is probably in brief annals such as these, too, combined with oral
narrative, that we are to look for the materials which have been
combined into the form of triads. These triads have obvious points of
contact with the old poetry on the one hand, and with the prose
narratives on the other. These chronicles need not by any means have
belonged in all cases to the North; some of them may equally well have
been evolved in the courts or in the leading monasteries of Gwynedd,
Powys, Gwent and Dyfed, or even in the smaller territories of local
dynasties. It is not improbable, too, that the pedigrees and the
chronicles associated with them were the channels through which the
names of ancient gods and goddesses, from whom certain families claimed
descent, passed into later legend in association with historical names,
as we find them for example in the 'Four Branches of the Mabinogi'.

The identification of the Northern localities of the old poetry has been
ably prosecuted by Mr Skene, Mr Egerton Phillimore and others, but many
names are still unidentified. Nor do Mr Skene's identifications in all
cases carry conviction. In spite of his valuable service in bringing
into prominence the Northern local background of many of the poems, he
has often been too hasty in identifying place-names owing to a
superficial similarity of sound. The great merit of his work consists in
the fact that it enables us to realize dimly how long the descendants of
'Gwyr y Gogledd' regarded themselves, while in Wales and of Wales, as
belonging to a larger Wales and to Britain as a whole, regarded not in
mere isolation but as a part of the civilized world of the Roman Empire.
It was probably this underlying and unsuppressed imperial instinct that
made them dwell with evident delight on such imperial figures as Macsen,
Helen and Arthur. The Welsh narratives scarcely ever confine the scenes
of the exploits of their secular or ecclesiastical heroes to Wales, and
the Welsh ruling families long regarded themselves as the survivors of
Roman civilization. The after-glow of the Roman Empire long lingered in
Britain. Evidence of the impression which Rome and the Latin tongue had
made on Wales is afforded, not only by the number and quality of Latin
words in Welsh, by the frequency of Latin names, but also by the
attempts of Welshmen in remote corners of Wales to write the
inscriptions of tomb-stones in Latin, in spite of their manifest
ignorance of Latin spelling and grammar. There were probably men in
Wales over a thousand years ago who expected a speedy end to the Welsh
language.

in dealing with the early literature of Wales it is well to remember
that ecclesiastical documents such as the Lives of the Welsh Saints, and
more secular documents such as the Mabinogion, should be studied
together. The ruling families of the monasteries and the ruling families
of the courts were most closely related, and it is difficult, if not
impossible, to separate the ecclesiastical literary centres of early
times from the secular. In both these types of centres there was an
equal pride in the exploits of the ancient families to which the saints
and the ruling dynasties belonged, and the perpetuation in song of the
exploits of the 'Men of the North' and others would be as natural for a
monastic as for a courtly bard.

No one who studies early Welsh history and literature can fail to remark
the prominence of families and traditions from the North in post-Roman
times. It is not improbable that when Cunedda came into Wales from Manaw
Gododdin, he came by the express invitation of the Brythons, who found
themselves in need of experienced military support against the
incursions of Irishmen from the West and the recrudescence of activity
on the part of the mixed Goidelic and pre-Celtic population. After the
withdrawal of the Roman fleets from the British seas, Britain was
exposed to inroads of Irish pirates from the West as well as of Teutonic
pirates from the East, alike eager for the plunder of one of the finest
provinces of the Roman Empire. Except in the North, Britain at the time
of the departure of the Romans was, from all indications, in a state of
profound peace and quiet civilization. Hence the Brythons of Wales, in
the face of invasion from the West, naturally turned for aid to the
experienced military Brythons of the North, and gratefully accepted
their continuance at the head of affairs in Wales. Though the Elegy on
Cunedda Wledig in the Book of Taliesin (poem xlvi) is undoubtedly much
later than his time, as is shown, for example, in the rhymes Cunedaf and
gðynaf, yet it may possibly be modelled on some older composition, or
may be based on some annalistic document. In dealing with the early
vernacular literature of Wales we have always to bear in mind its
aristocratic character, and its relation to the ideas and traditions of
the ruling families, who long preserved their interest in the district
from which their fathers had come.

Behind the heroic traditions of the Northern families, however, we are
driven, by the parallel study of the old poems and the Mabinogion, to
consider whether some of the traditions of still older families may not
have survived, linked it may be with their genealogies. Through
intermarriage with the older strata of the population the men of the
North would enter into the inheritance of these legends, which would in
course of time be incorporated with theirs, though still regarded as
belonging to an older epoch. It is possibly this distinction that is
perpetuated in the apparently scrupulous care taken in the 'Four
Branches of the Mabinogi' and, indeed, throughout the *Mabinogion*, to
draw clear lines of demarcation between the various legendary periods,
in accordance with a tendency discernible in Nennius and even in
Geoffrey, in spite of his anachronisms. It looks as if there was a kind
of traditional framework, into which the narrative of early British
events was supposed to fit. The literary men of the courts and of the
monasteries were doubtless equally assiduous in filling in this
framework with all kinds of local stories, now attributed to this hero,
now to that, largely derived from the never-failing staple of
aetiological myth. Nor must we forget the possibility that even the men
of the North may have brought with them some such tales as, for example,
stories of Manawyd or Manawyddan, the eponymous hero of Manaw Gododdin,
or that places in Wales, according to the wont of settlers, may have
been renamed after places in the North or after the heroes of the
Northern legends. The difficulty of tracing the topographical relations
of these legends is increased when we remember that the geography of
legends tends to expand with the expansion of men's ideas and
territorial interests, a tendency of which we have a conspicuous example
in the Arthurian geography of Geoffrey of Monmouth. It is not improbable
that this phenomenon is an important feature even of the 'Four Branches
of the Mabinogi' as we have them in their present form.

Another point which should always be borne in mind in dealing with Welsh
as well as other legends is, that to historical names non-historical
stories may become attached, and that the stories so attached may be far
more ancient than the names. In dealing with the old stories of Wales,
whether in prose or poetry, it would be well to reduce them to their
simplest terms, thus bringing to view their typical plots. If this were
systematically done with the stories of the other branches of the Celtic
family, and, indeed, over a wider area, it would be easy to institute a
kind of synoptic comparison of these plots. The writer is well aware how
much admirable work has already been done in this direction by
distinguished students of Celtic, such as Principal Rhys, and other
students of folklore, but it would nevertheless be a great convenience
if the various types of stories could be succinctly tabulated for the
purpose of comparison, according to their characteristic plots,
expressed in the briefest possible terms. Such a concise treatment would
be of great value in comparing the ancient stories of Wales with those,
for instance, of Ireland.

If we now turn to the older poetry of Wales, we see that much of it
reflects the period of heroic struggle against the English. This is the
case in the *Book of Aneurin*, in a few poems of the *Book of Taliesin*,
in one or two poems (notably that in praise of Geraint) in the *Black
Book of Carmarthen*, and in some of the Llywarch Hen poems of the *Red
Book of Hergest*. While the *Book of Aneurin* and the poems of the *Book
of Taliesin* mainly commemorate the Northern struggles against the men
of Deira and Bernicia, those of the *Red Book of Hergest* and the
corresponding portions of the *Black Book of Carmarthen* commemorate the
struggle in the Severn Valley and the adjacent districts. Some of the
heroes of the conflict in both cases belong to the same cycle, and,
whatever may be the age of the actual compositions as we have them, they
are probably based on older annals and lists of famous battles, but they
are unfortunately much too vague to supply us with definite historical
information. It must be remembered, too, that a critical analysis of the
'Gododdin' shews it not to be one poem, but to be composed of portions
of several poems. An analysis of the 'Gododdin' (which itself contains
repetitions) side by side with 'Gorchan Maelderw' shews clearly that
these two poems consist of more or less identical portions of one and
the same series of poems. In the greater part of the 'Gododdin' and the
Gorchanau of the *Book of Aneurin* ('Gorchan Tutvwlch', 'Gorchan
Adebon', 'Gorchan Cynvelyn' and 'Gorchan Maelderw') the copyist changed
the orthography of the MS. from which he was copying into that of the
early part of the thirteenth century, but, fortunately, he has, here and
there, been careless in the performance of this task, and, in a large
part of 'Gorchan Maelderw' he has left the spelling of the MS. before
him practically unaltered, thus revealing a part of the poem in its
pre-Norman dress, and even in a form which comes very near to that of
the glosses of the eighth and ninth centuries. It is evident, too, that
what was here copied was merely a string of fragments, so that the
original poems from which they are taken, and which were the originals
also of the larger fragments that are now in the 'Gododdin', were older
still, though how much older it would be difficult to say. It is
interesting to note that 'Gorchan Maelderw' is attributed in the MS. to
Taliesin, whereas the very same portions in the 'Gododdin' are
attributed in the same manuscript to Aneurin. It should also be observed
that in 'Gorchan Maelderw' and in certain portions of the latter half of
the 'Gododdin', the account of the battle of Catraeth, with which the
poem deals, differs somewhat from that of the earlier portion. In
'Gorchan Maelderw' and its cognate portions of the 'Gododdin', all the
Britons are represented as being killed, except one, and he appears to
be Cynon ab Clydno Eiddin. In the earlier portion of the 'Gododdin'
those who are represented as escaping out of the general slaughter are
said to be Cynon, together with 'deu gatki aeron' (Kyndilic and Kynan)
and Aneurin, into whose mouth the narrative of the battle and the
praises of the warriors (living and dead) who fought at the battle, are
put. Moreover, Aneurin, where he is represented as escaping, is so
represented in two ways: one way is that after being wounded ('om
gwaetffreu') he escapes through the power of his song; the other, where
he is represented as being freed from an underground dungeon by Ceneu
son of Llywarch. It is clear from both the 'Gododdin' and 'Gorchan
Maelderw' that the leading theme of these two poems is the praise of
Cynon ab Clydno Eiddin, probably a much more important personage in
early Welsh history and legend than his present fame might lead us to
suspect. Of his early fame it may be noted that there is some reflection
in Owain and Luned. Some indication, too, of this earlier prominence is
given by the number of Englynion on him in 'Englynion y Beddau'. We
should probably not be far wrong in regarding this group of poems as
being one section of the poetry composed in honour of the Coel family
(Coeling) and especially the 'Cynverching' (family of Cynvarch) branch
of that stock, the branch to which Urien Rheged belonged. It should be
borne in mind that it was the duty of a family bard not merely to
glorify the living, but also to preserve and to enhance the fame of the
dead ancestors of his living patrons, and this he could hardly do better
than by amplifying and embellishing in verse the chronicles of the
battles in which they showed their prowess. Owing to the close
relationship, too, between the families of the Welsh saints and those of
the princes, the above-mentioned motive would operate even among the
monastic bards. The importance of the Coel family is well illustrated in
a statement made in 'Bonedd Gwyr y Gogledd' (*Hengwrt* MS. 536).
'Trychan cledyf kynuerchyn a ttrychan ysgðyt kynnðdyon a ttrychan wayð
coeling pa neges bynhac yd elynt iddi yn duun. Nyt amethei (hon) honno.'

As the 'Gododdin' is now given in the *Book of Aneurin*, the verses
have, in several cases, been transposed from their original order, so
that what we now have are *disjecta membra*; and in some places there
appear to be irrelevant interpolations. The earlier part of the
'Gododdin' appears to have affinities with 'Gorchan Tutvwlch'; for, in
both, Tutvwlch and Kyfwlch are jointly commemorated along with Cynon.
'Gorchan Cynfelyn', which mentions Eithinyn, a 'Gododdin' hero, differs
from 'Gorchan Maelderw' in referring to the escape of three men from
Catraeth, one of whom is Cynon, and the other two Cadreith and Catleu o
gatnant, together with Aneurin, who, after being wounded, is ransomed,
by the sons of Coel (reading meib) for pure gold, steel and silver. The
Cynfelyn here commemorated is probably Cynfelyn Drwsgl, the brother of
Cynon ab Clydno Eiddin. Possibly the chief centres from which these
poems emanated were Dyganhwy, Bangor Seiriol (in Anglesey, the land of
Caw's descendants), Bangor Deiniol, Bangor Beuno (not far from which was
a Cefn Clutno) and Llanbadarn. The latter centre is here mentioned
because one of the 'Englynion y Beddau' represents Cynon ab Clydno
Eiddin as having been buried there. Cor Seiriol in Penmon and Cor Beuno
in Clynnog both appear to have acquired a high reputation for their
learning. Elaeth Frenin ab Meyrig (the supposed author of 'Kygogion
Elaeth' in the *Black Book of Carmarthen*) was a monk at Bangor Seiriol,
and Nidan ab Gwrfyw ab Pasgen ab Urien Rheged is said to have been some
time an abbot there. It may well be that it is to the old monastic
schools, even more than to the courts of the princes, that we are to
look in the early period for the development of Welsh literature, and it
is not impossible, were more known of these schools, that they were the
direct successors of still earlier teachers. In dealing with the earlier
poetry it should not be forgotten that even the 'Gododdin' contains
numerous religious allusions.

The poem of the *Book of Aneurin* called 'Gorchan Maelderw' is of great
interest, because, in one of the portions of it written in an archaic
orthography, the name of Arthur unmistakably occurs in the words 'bei ef
Arthur' (even if he were Arthur). These words suggest that even then,
within the cycle of the Catraeth poems, Arthur's praise and fame were
great. Indeed, from every point of view the indications (as in the Black
Book poems) point to the conclusion that, within the circle of
traditions connected with the struggle against the English, Arthur,
though rarely mentioned, was throughout a commanding figure.

Let us now turn for a moment to poems of another series. The early
poetry of Powys, which is attributed to Llywarch Hen, bases its chief
claim to antiquity on the undoubted fact that several of the poems are
similar in form to some 'englynion' of the ninth century, which are
found in the *Juvencus Codex* of the Cambridge University Library. Some
of these poems, such as those in praise of Geraint ab Erbin, are also
found in the *Black Book of Carmarthen*. Hence, it may be concluded that
the nucleus of this poetry formed part of that heroic tradition which
commemorated the leaders of the struggle against the English in parts of
the Severn Valley, being, in fact, the East Wales analogue of the
tradition of the struggle in the North found in the 'Gododdin' and
kindred poems. It is of interest to observe that in the poems of both
series Arthur appears as a prominent figure. The poems of the Powys and
Severn struggles appear to have as their prose counterpart a chronicle
such as that which Professor Zimmer in his *Nennius Vindicatus* has
shewn to underlie the Builth recension of Nennius, while the poems of
the 'Gododdin' series appear to have closer affinities with the
chronicles which underlie the Venedotian recension. From one courtly or
monastic literary centre to another the story of Arthur and his
associated companions, such as Cai, Bedwyr, Owain ab Urien, Caradog
Vreichvras, Cynon ab Clydno Eiddin, seems to have spread through the Wye
and Severn Valleys, and notably the Usk Valley (until Caerleon on Usk
became a great Arthurian locality) and even much further afield. Nennius
already speaks of Arthur, at Carn Cabal near Builth, hunting the 'Porcus
Troyt', and of the grave of Arthur's son in Erging. We know, too, from
Giraldus Cambrensis, that the highest point of the Breconshire Beacons
was known in his time as Kadeir Arthur, the throne of Arthur.

The bulk of the Llywarch Hen poetry, as we have it in the *Red Book of
Hergest*, is marked by a meditative pathos, and it is to this pathos
that it owes much of its charm. These poems appear to have been written
by someone acquainted with the traditional story of Llywarch Hen and
with the narrative of the struggle of the Welsh against the English
around Pengwern. The poet's favourite vein of reflection is over the
departure of the brilliance and joy of the past. In this vein he
represents Llywarch Hen as mourning over the loss of youth with its joy
and vigour, over the death of his children, over the loss of his former
lords, Urien and Cynddylan, and also over the former glories of the
ancient palaces of Pengwern and the neighbourhood. As compared with the
spirit of the 'Gododdin' and kindred poetry, it may be said that the
Llywarch Hen compositions appeal to the sense of pathos and of contrast
in a broader and more catholic way. In both types there is a strong
appeal to the sense of contrast, but in the 'Gododdin' the contrast
depicted is between the confident gaiety and exuberant hilarity which
preceded the battle of Catraeth, and the disastrous event of the
contest, between the host that went to battle and the fragment of it
that returned. In the Llywarch Hen poetry the contrast is between the
glory of the past and the ruin of the present. Neither group of poems is
the bare unreflecting primitive poetry of narrative: it is a poetry
which seeks to appeal to minds thoroughly alive to the pathos and
tragedy of life as exemplified in the events and the results of the
great struggle of the Britons.' It is the 'lacrimae rerum' in this body
of poetry that give it an abiding interest. What influence (if any) the
study of Vergil, the universal school book of the Roman Empire and of
the Middle Ages, may have had in giving this direction of pathos to
Welsh poetry it is now impossible to say.

The poetry with which we have hitherto dealt, though not without
religious allusions, is in the main of a humanistic character, but in
addition to these poems the body of poetry now under consideration
comprises a number of poems that are primarily religious, and others
which contain a strong tincture of mediaeval theology combined with
other elements. The most curious poetry of the latter type is that
mainly, though not exclusively, found in the *Book of Taliesin*, where
theology, mediaeval natural history and various legends are presented
together through a medium which reveals a very curious conception of the
poetic art. In this body of poetry, some of which contains materials
derived from the Northern traditional stock, the poet is depicted not as
mourning over the disastrous battles of the past or lamenting the
departed greatness of his race, so much as rising supernaturally above
human limitations of time and place, and reviewing the famous events of
the heroic and legendary past, in which he himself is represented as
having been present. This idea is partly the result of the thought that
the materials of the body had been in existence from time immemorial,
partly a development from the favourite mediaeval idea of metamorphosis,
the latter idea being part and parcel of the universal magical
conceptions of the time. The composer of the poems, in recounting his
supposed past experiences, seems to have quarried in some ancient
chronicles containing lists of the battles of Urien Rheged and others,
and of the localities in which they were fought. Nor is it unlikely that
some older lines were bodily adopted and incorporated from ancient
heroic Poems and elegies. These old traditions appear to have had a
special charm for some of the poets of the *Book of Taliesin*, and they
would seem to have been particularly fond of traditions and legends
which flourished in Anglesey and Carnarvonshire. The references to
Geirionydd and Nant Ffrancon appear to indicate the neighbourhood of the
Conwy valley and Dyganhwy as one of the poets' gathering-ground of
legend. To this district we may perhaps link the Hiraethog district and
the valley of the Dyfrdwy beyond. From the Carnarvonshire side the poet
probably obtained a stock of Don and Beli legends, from Dyganhwy and the
neighbourhood the local legends of Taliesin, while from the Hiraethog
and the Dee district came the legends of Bran and Branwen, with the
topographical associations of which I have dealt in my articles on the
'Four Branches of the Mabinogi' in the *Zeitschrift für Celtische
Philologie*. The Branwen legend was also associated with Merionethshire
and Anglesey, and the legend of Pryderi with Merionethshire. In the
'Four Branches of the Mabinogi' it may be noted that the topographical
associations of the Don family are mainly with the West side of
Carnarvonshire. The district of the Conwy valley and the nearest parts
of Anglesey and Carnarvonshire probably felt a certain local interest in
Seithennin, the father of St Tudno, in Urien Rheged (the ancestor of
Grwst of Llanrwst and of Nidan, at one time head of the monastery of
Penmon), in Lleenawg, from whose name Castell Lleiniog on the Anglesey
side of the Menai Straits seems to be called, in Dona of Llanddona, a
descendant of Brochwel Ysgythrog, in Maelgwn Gwynedd, whose court was at
Dyganhwy and possibly in Arthur, if the name Bwrdd Arthur is ancient.
The composer of many of these Taliesin poems is not content, however, to
build merely on a basis of traditional and local legend, but interweaves
his fantastic imaginings into a tissue of mediaeval natural philosophy,
largely derived from the stock manuals of the dark ages, the works of
Isidore of Seville and Bede, who were the chief successors of the
encyclopaedists Martianus Capella and Cassiodorus. The poet expresses
his respect for Bede in the line

Nyt ðy dyðeit geu llyfreu beda.

i.e., The books of Bede do not speak falsehood.

The conception of a poet revealed in many of these poems seems very
strange to us at the present day, but it bears a very strong resemblance
to the mediaeval conception of Vergil (known in mediaeval Welsh as
'Fferyll', and mentioned under that name in one of the Taliesin poems).
The magical connotation of the name 'Fferyll' may be seen from the fact
that it is the origin of the Welsh 'fferyllydd', chemist. According to
the mediaeval conception of Vergil, as we see from Professor
Comparetti's account of Vergil in the Middle Ages, he was not only a man
of supreme learning, but was also endowed with super-human powers.
Fortunately, owing to the general atmosphere of these poems, the bent of
the composers towards natural history has preserved for us some
interesting old Welsh terms, such as 'adfant', the upper world; 'difant'
(whence 'difancoll'), the lower world; 'elfydd', the earth; 'annwfn',
the under world, 'anghar', 'affwys' and 'affan', apparently of the same
meaning. The latter may, however, be borrowed through Latin from Greek
{greek afaué<u>s</u>}; from Latin are certainly derived the terms
'aches', the flood tide; and 'reges', the ebb tide, from 'accessus' and
'recessus' respectively. How greatly interested the Britons were in the
tides we see from several passages in the *Book of Taliesin* and the
*Black Book of Carmarthen*, from the *De Mirabilibus Britanniae*, and
from a treatise *De Mirabilibus*, formerly attributed to St Augustine,
and now believed to be the work of a Briton. The term 'llafanad', formed
by means of a Welsh ending -ad from 'llafan' (a parallel form of
'llafn', like mediaeval 'gauar' and 'gafyr'), which comes from Latin
'lamina', may be roughly translated 'element', but it probably reflected
originally a conception of existence, whereby its various substances
tended to form 'laminations' or layers. It may be noted, too, that the
familiar terms of 'Macrocosm' and 'Microcosm' appear in these poems as
'Y Byt Mawr' and 'Y Byt Bychan'. The use of these and other terms
suggests affinities between the medium of ideas through which the
traditions and legends are presented, and an obscure type of
philosophical doctrine which lived on as a kind of undergrowth in the
Roman Empire and the Dark Ages, a body of doctrine believed by some to
have had a share in the formation of the Jewish Kabbala. One of its best
known representatives is the Poemander of Hermes Trismegistus.

It should be noted that in an interesting dialogue between the soul and
the body found in the *Black Book of Carmarthen*, the Taliesin doctrine
of 'Y saith llafanad' is put into the mouth of the body. In this account
the body is formed by the meeting together of the seven 'laminations',
of which fire, earth, wind, mist, flowers, are named, but the other two,
water and air (see the Book of Taliesin, poem lv) are omitted, around
the pure substance ('put').

This super-human conception of the poet shows itself, as we have seen in
his attitude towards the past, but it is no less visible in his attitude
towards the future. The prophetic powers of the poet come here
especially into view. Here again we have an interesting point of contact
with the mediaeval conception of Vergil as a prophet. In Wales, the role
of the prophetic bard is that of prophesying to the remnants of the
Britons ultimate victory over their enemies, under the leadership of
some of the leaders of the past, notably, Cynan and Cadwaladr. These
vaticinations were put sometimes into the mouth of Tallesin, sometimes
into the mouth of Myrddin Wyllt. The earliest 'Myrddin' prophecy is that
put into the mouth of Merlinus Ambrosius in Nennius, in a narrative
which has evident affinities with that of 'Lludd and Llevelys'. This
prophecy was afterwards developed by Geoffrey of Monmouth, and became
extremely popular. In 1180 a commentary was written upon it by Alanus de
Insulis, and in 1208 a translation of the prophecies was made into
Icelandic. A version appeared also in French and became very popular. In
1379 an Italian translation was made which also attained popularity. In
1478 a German version was published, and in 1498 a version appeared in
Spanish. It should be noted that the favourite Myrddin of Welsh poetry
is Myrddin Wylltt, who is not associated with the Nennius story at all,
but with Rhydderch Hael and Gwenddoleu, as we see in the 'Hoianau' and
'Afallenau'.

As already stated, the framework of the Welsh Myrddin poems is the story
of Myrddin Wyllt, as may be seen in the twelfth-century poems of the
'Afallenau' and 'Hoianau' of the *Black Book of Carmarthen*. In his
madness after the Battle of Arderydd, Myrddin utters his
prognostications as to the future of the Welsh people. His companion in
his wanderings is a little pig, and we catch sight also of a lady who
appears to stand in much the same relation to Myrddin as the Sibyl to
Virgil in the legend of the Middle Ages. Her name is Chwimleian or
Chwipleia, and she appears to be the same as Viviane of the Breton
stories. In the *Book of Taliesin*, poem vi, called 'Arymes Prydein', is
a Myrddin vaticination, as well as poem xlvii, which begins with the
line

Dygogan awen dygobryssyn,

and poems i and liii. In the *Red Book of Hergest* (as given in Skene)
the type in question is represented by poems xviii, xix, xx, xxi, as
well as poems i and ii, 'Kyvoessi Myrdin a Gwendyd' and 'Gwasgargert
Myrtin' respectively. Poems of a prophetic type long continued popular
in England and in Wales. When we turn to distinctively religious poems
and hymns there are many points of contact, as might have been expected,
with the general trend of mediaeval thought, as seen, for example, in a
collection like Mone's Latin Hymns of the Middle Ages. In the *Black
Book of Carmarthen* we have in the first place a 'Dialogue between the
Soul and the Body' (Skene, vol. ii, poems v, vi and vii). This poem ends
with a description of the Day of Judgment on Mount Olivet, a favourite
subject of mediaeval hymnology. Poem ix of the same manuscript is meant
to be a warning to the wicked of his fate. In poems x, xi and xii, there
are reflections of mediaeval theology. In poem xi, it is interesting to
note the Divine names Eloy and Adonay, probably taken from a list given
by Isidore of Seville. In this poem, too, we have the names 'Paul ac
Anhun' (Antony), which suggest the monastic atmosphere of the writer.
Poem xiii gives some interesting non-scriptural stories about job, Eve
and the infant Christ. In poems xx and xxi we have compositions
attributed to 'Elaeth' or 'Elaeth Frenin', who is said to have become a
monk. Poem xxv is of similar type, while in xxvii there are references
to Sanffreid (St Bridget), Gwosprid (St Osbert) and St Peter. The whole
of this poem is a curious combination, in the style of the Llywarch Hen
poetry, of a hymn with an account of the preparations for a journey. In
poem xxix we have one of those Welsh mediaeval poems where religious
emotion is blended with an enquiring interest in natural phenomena.

The Book of Taliesin also affords several specimens of religious poems
of the above type, side by side with others which have a curious
admixture of legend, natural history or magical imagination. In poem i
(as printed in the *Book of Taliesin*) from l. 21 to the end there are
clear indications of the religious milieu in which this type of poetry
arose. Poem ii (162 lines) is called 'Marwnat Y Vil Veib', and reflects
in its heavenly and earthly hierarchy the Pseudo-Dionysian theology
which dominated the church of that time. The poem contains some curious
scraps of Latin and of geography. Poem v (173 lines) is a description of
the Day of Judgment and of the punishment of Christ's crucifiers. In
poem xxii we have a meditation on the 'Plagues of Egypt' (*Plaeu yr
Eifft*), while poem xxiv is an account of Moses' Rod (*Llath Moesen*).
There is another poem (No. li) of the same cycle on the twelve tribes of
Israel (*Deudec tref yr Israel*). Poem xxvi is a short poem on the
Trinity, and xxix is of interest not only on account of its scriptural
allusions, but also on account of its reference to Alexander the Great,
a feature which indicates its affinity with poems xxvi and xxviii, and
with the mediaeval Alexander literature generally. This literature was
especially popular in France and Ireland. Poem xli appears to refer to
the cruelty of Erof (for Erodd = Herod); while poems lv and lvi, to
which reference has already been made, are called 'Kanu y Byt Mawr' (the
Macrocosm) and 'Kanu y Byt Bychan' (the Microcosm). These two latter
poems are clearly based on the writings of Isidore of Seville, Bede and
similar authors. Further researches into the books read in the
monasteries in the early Middle Ages, such as may be seen for example in
the Catalogues of the Ancient Libraries of Canterbury and Dover, will
undoubtedly throw much light on the religious and other poems of the
*Four Ancient Books*. Before these poems can be safely used for the
purpose of comparative mythology it is necessary to elucidate the
mediaeval medium through which they are presented, just as in the study
of the 'Four Branches of the Mabinogi', and other old stories, it is
important to bear in mind the re-casting which they have undergone to
suit mediaeval ideas. In the mediaeval matrix of many of these poems,
however, there are embedded many highly interesting portions of early
legend, whose topographical affinities have now been ascertained with
some measure of success. An important problem which remains is that of
classifying these legends according to their various interrelations and
affinities. In this work some help may be given by 'Englynion y Beddau'
and other poems.

In dealing with the old poetry of Wales and its kindred literature it is
well to keep apart the framework of persons, incidents and localities in
which the stories are placed, and the essential features of the stories
themselves. Stories far older than the framework may here as elsewhere
have become attached in course of time to the historical names of
Northern or Welsh native families, Even in dealing with the
topographical connections of the legends we have to proceed with great
caution, inasmuch as certain places may have been called after
characters in the stories. Families, too, in their emigrations, in
accordance with the methods of emigrants everywhere, may have renamed
certain places after places in their old homes, and legends themselves
with their associated names often travel far afield.

The existence of the poems with which we are now dealing in their
present form shows that they have a literary history behind them: they
have recognized metres, a recognized poetic vocabulary and a sense of
taste and style, and the more they are understood the more vividly do
they reflect the ideals and interests which guided the minds of the
Welsh people when Europe was emerging from the night of barbarism.

Note

The verses called 'Englynion y Beddau', which have affinities with the
traditions and legends of several districts, also belong to the poetry
of reflective meditation over the past. They are probably a development
from a smaller nucleus. In the topographical elucidation of the old
legends they are of real service.
