[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Native
American](../../index)  [California](../index)  [Index](index.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_36">p. 36</span>

# A SABOBA ORIGIN-MYTH.

## By George Wharton James

#### Journal of the American Folk-Lore Society, Vol. XV., No. 61, pp. 36-9.

#### \[1902\]

###### Scanned at Intangible Textual Heritage, September, 2003. J. Lelievre, redactor. This text is in the public domain. These files may be used for any non-commercial purpose, provided this notice of attribution is left intact.

WHEN Powers was studying the tribes of California, he found the
aboriginal peoples south of the Tehachipi so mixed up and "unsortable"
that he gave up the task in despair. Consequently practically little of
value is known of the mythology, history, or tribal legends of these
South Tehachipi peoples.

On Christmas Day, 1899, an earthquake was felt in southern California,
especially in the town of San Jacinto and Hemet. The centre of the
earthquake was undoubtedly Mount San Jacinto, and Saboba also suffered.
Indeed, it was in this Indian village that the only loss of life was
experienced. Here, six Indian women were sleeping in an adobe house when
the shock occurred. One of the heavy walls fell upon them, and thus, in
their sleep, they were made "good Indians." In the same shock another
house fell in, and in so doing, seriously wounded the aged husband of
one of the women. José Pedro Losero, the oldest male Saboba, as his wife
was the oldest female, was the sufferer. As soon as he learned that his
wife was dead he told the doctor who had set his broken leg and
collarbone that he did not desire to live. For over seventy years he and
his wife had lived happily together, and now she was gone, he had no
wish to live. Resolutely he set his face towards the setting sun, blind
though he was, as if he would penetrate the mysteries of the beyond, and
in a few days he had passed into that region--mysterious alike to the
cultured white man as to the untutored Indian.

It was from José Pedro that I learned the following legend of the advent
of his tribe and people upon American shores.

"Before my people came here they lived far, far away in the land that is
in the heart of the Setting Sun. But Siwash, our great God, told Uuyot,
the warrior captain of my people, that we must come away from this land
and sail away and away in a direction that he would give us. Under
Uuyot's orders my people built big boats and then with Siwash himself
leading them, and with Uuyot as captain, they launched these into the
ocean and rowed away from the shore. There was no light on the ocean,
Everything was covered with a dark fog, and it was only by singing as
they rowed that the boats were enabled to keep together.

"It was still dark and foggy when the boats landed on the shores of this
land, and my ancestors groped about in the darkness, wondering why they
had been brought hither. Then, suddenly, the heavens opened, and
lightnings flashed and thunders roared and rains fell, and a great
earthquake shook all the earth. Indeed, all the elements of the earth,
ocean, and heaven, seemed to be mixed up together, and,

<span id="page_37">p. 37</span>

with terror in their hearts and silence on their tongues, my people
stood still awaiting what would happen further. Though no voice had
spoken they knew something was going to happen, and they were breathless
in their anxiety to know what it was.

"Then they turned to Uuyot and asked him what the raging of the elements
meant. Gently he calmed their fears and bade them be silent and wait. As
they waited, a terrible clap of thunder rent the very heavens, and the
vivid lightnings revealed the frightened people huddling together as a
pack of sheep. But Uuyot stood alone, brave and fearless, facing the
storm and daring the anger of Those Above. With a loud voice he cried
out 'Wit-i-a-ko!' which signified 'Who's there? What do you want?'

"But there was no response. The heavens were silent! the earth was
silent! The ocean was silent! All nature was silent!

"Then with a voice full of tremulous sadness and loving yearning for his
people Uuyot said: 'My children, my own sons and daughters, something is
wanted of us by Those Above. What it is I know not. Let us gather
together and bring "pivat," and with it make the big smoke and then
dance and dance until we are told what is wanted." So the people brought
pivat--a native tobacco that grows in Southern California--and Uuyot
brought the big ceremonial pipe which he had made out of rock, and he
soon made the big smoke and blew the smoke up into the heavens while he
urged the people to dance. They danced hour after hour until they grew
tired, and Uuyot smoked all the time, but still he urged them to dance.

"Then he called out again to Those Above, 'Wit-i-a-ko!' but still could
obtain no response. This made him sad and disconsolate, and when the
people saw Uuyot despondent and downhearted they became panic-stricken,
and ceased to dance, and began to cling around him for comfort and
protection. But poor Uuyot had none to give. He himself was saddest and
most forsaken. of all, and he got up and bade the people leave him
alone, as he wished to walk to and fro by himself. Then he made the
people smoke and dance, and when they rested they knelt in a circle and
prayed. But he walked away by himself, feeling keenly the refusal of
Those Above to speak to him. His heart was deeply wounded.

"But as the people prayed and danced and sang, a gentle light came
stealing into the sky from the far, far east. Little by little the
darkness was driven away. First the light was gray, then yellow, then
white, and at last the glistening brilliancy of the sun filled all the
land and covered the sky with glory. The sun had arisen for the first
time, and in its light and warmth my people knew they had the favor of
Those Above, and they were contented.

"But when Siwash, the God of Earth looked round, and saw every

<span id="page_38">p. 38</span>

thing revealed by the sun, he was discontented, for the earth was bare
and level and monotonous, and there was nothing to cheer the sight. So
he took some of the people and of them he made high mountains, and of
some, smaller mountains. Of some he made rivers and creeks, and lakes
and waterfalls, and of others, coyotes, foxes, deer, antelopes, bears,
squirrels, porcupines, and all the other animals. Then he made out of
the other people all the different kinds of snakes and reptiles and
insects and birds and fishes. Then he wanted trees and plants and
flowers and he turned some of the people into these things. Of every man
or woman that he seized he made something according to its value.

"When he was done he had used up so many people he was scared. So he set
to work and made a new lot of people, some to live here, some to live
there, and some to live everywhere. And he gave to each family its own
language and tongue and its own place to live, and he told them where to
live and the sad distress that would come upon them if they mixed up
their tongues by intermarriage. Each family was to live in its own
place, and while all the different families were to be friendly and live
as brothers, tied together by kinship, amity, and concord, there was to
be no mixing of bloods.

"Thus were settled the original inhabitants on the coast of southern
California by Siwash, the God of the Earth, and under the captaincy of
Uuyot.

"But at length the time came when Uuyot must die. His work on the earth
was ended and Those Above told him he must prepare to leave his earthly
friends and children. He was told to go up into the San Bernardino
Mountains, into a small valley there, and lie down in a certain spot to
await his end. He died peacefully and calmly, as one who went to sleep.
He was beloved of the Gods above and Siwash, the God of Earth, so that
no pain came to [him](errata.htm#0.md) to make his death distressful.

"As soon as he was dead the ants came and ate all the flesh from his
bones. But the spirit messengers of Those Above looked after him and
they buried him so that the mark of his burying place could never be
wiped out. The powers of evil might strive, but this place would always
remain clearly shown. A lake of water soon covered the place of his
burial, and it assumed the shape of a colossal human being. It was the
shape of Uuyot, and from that day to this it has remained there. It has
been seen by all the people of all the ages, and will never be wiped out
of existence. The legs and outstretched arms, as well as the great body,
are distinctly to be seen, and even now, in the Great Bear Valley Lake,
which is the site of Uuyot's burial, the eyes of the clear-seeing man
may witness the interesting sight.

<span id="page_39">p. 39</span>

"But it was not all at once that the people could see that Uuyot was
buried in this spot. Before they knew it as a fact they sat in a great
circle around the place. They sat and wept and wailed and mourned for
Uuyot. They made their faces black and then they cut off their hair to
show their deep sorrow, and they sat and waited, and wept and wailed,
until Those Above showed them the buried body of their great leader and
captain.

"And to this day the places where that great circle of people sat may be
seen. The marks of their bodies are left in the ground and they will
remain there forever, or so long as the body of Uuyot is to be seen.

"Ah! my people were strong and powerful then. There were many of them.
Uuyot had led them to be a great people. They made a solid ring around
the whole earth. Alas! that ring is broken now.

George Wharton James.

NOTE OF EDITOR. In this story Siwash is apparently the same as the
Siwash "Indian," of the Chinook jargon, which has travelled down the
coast.
