[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](hl13)  [Next](hl15.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# XI.

Go and learn from the tariff of donkey-drivers, ten miles for one zouz,
eleven for two zouzim.

Chaggigah, fol. 9, col. 2.

{p. 120}

When Israel went up to Jerusalem to attend the festivals, they had to
stand in the Temple court closely crowded together, yet when prostrated
there was a wide space between each of them (Rashi says about four
ells), so that they could not hear each other's confession, which might
have caused them to blush. They had, however, when prostrated, to extend
eleven ells behind the Holy of Holies.

Yoma, fol. 21, col. I,

In the days of Joel, the son of Pethuel, there was a great dearth,
because (as is said in Joel i. 4) "That which the palmerworm hath left
hath the locust eaten," etc. That year the month of Adar (about March)
passed away and no rain came. When some rain fell, during the following
mouth, the prophet said unto Israel, "Go ye forth and sow." They
replied, "Shall he who has but a measure or two of wheat or barley eat
and live or sow it and die?" Still the prophet urged, "Go forth and
sow." Then they obeyed the prophet, and in eleven days the seed had
grown and ripened; and it is with reference to that generation that it
is said (Ps. cxxvi. 5), "They that sow in tears shall reap in joy."

Taanith, fol. 5, col. 1.

What is a female in her minority? One who is between eleven years and
one day, and twelve years and one day. When younger or older than these
ages she is to be treated in the usual manner.

Yevamoth, fol. 100, col. 2.

Whoever gives a prutah to a poor man has six blessings bestowed upon.
him, and he that speaks a kind word to him realizes eleven blessings in
himself (see Isa. lviii. 7, 8).

Bava Bathra, fol. 9, col. 2.

On the next page of the same tract it is said, "For one prutah given as
alms to, a poor man one is made partaker of the beatific vision." (See
also Midrash Tillim on Ps. xvii. 15.)

The prutah was the smallest coin then current. It is estimated to have
been equal to about one-twentieth of an English penny. In some quarters
of Poland the Jews have small thin bits of brass, with the Hebrew word
prutah impressed upon them, for the uses in charity on the part of those
among them that cannot afford to give a kreutzer to a poor man. The
poor, when they have collected a number of these, change them into
larger coin at the almoner's appointed by the congregation. Thus even
the poor are enabled to give alms to the poor. (See my "Genesis," p.
277, No. 31.)

{p. 121}

Rabbi Yochanan said eleven sorts of spices were mentioned to Moses on
Sinai. Rav Hunna asked, 'What Scripture text proves this?" (Exod. xxx.
34), "Take unto thee sweet spices" (the plural implying two), "stacte,
myrrh, and galbanum" (these three thus making up five), "sweet spices"
(the repetition doubling the five into ten), "with pure frankincense"
(which makes up eleven).

Kerithoth, fol. 6, col. 2.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XII.](hl15.md)
