[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](hl18)  [Next](hl20.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# XVI.

Rabbi Cheyah bar Abba says, "I once visited a householder at Ludkia, and
they placed before him a golden table so loaded with silver plate,
basins, cups, bottles and glasses, besides all sorts of dishes,
delicacies, and spices,

{p. 139}

that it took sixteen men to carry it. When they set the table in its
place they said (Ps. xxiv. i), 'The earth is the Lord's and the fullness
thereof,' and upon removing it, they said (Ps. cxv. 16), 'The heaven,
even the heavens, are the Lord's, but the earth hath He given to the
children of men.' I said, 'Son, how hast thou come to deserve all this?'
'I was,' replied he, 'a butcher by trade, and I always set apart for the
Sabbath the best of the cattle.' 'How happy art thou,' I remarked (adds
Rabbi Cheyah), 'to have merited such a reward, and blessed be God who
has thus rewarded thee.'"

Shabbath, fol. 119, col. 1.

Rash Lakish said, "I have seen the flow of milk and honey at Tzipori; it
was sixteen miles by sixteen miles,"

Meggillah, fol. 6, col. 1.

Rashi explains the above as follows:--The goats fed upon figs from which
honey distilled, and this mingled with the milk which dropped from the
goats as they walked along. On the spot arose a lake which covered an
area of sixteen miles square. (See also Kethuboth, fol. 111, col. 2.)

A cedar tree once fell down in our place, the trunk of which was so wide
that sixteen wagons were drawn abreast upon it.

Bechoroth, fol. 57, col. 2.

Who can estimate the loss the world sustains in its ignorance of the
trees of the Talmud? What a sapling in comparison with this giant cedar
of Lebanon must the far-famed Mammoth tree have been which was lately
cut down in California, and was the largest known to the present
generation!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XVII.](hl20.md)
