[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](hl20)  [Next](hl22.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# XVIII.

On the deposition of Rabbon Gamliel, Rabbi Eleazar ben Azariah was
chosen as his successor to the presidential chair of the academy. On
being told of his elevation, he consulted with his wife as to whether or
not he should accept the appointment. "What if they should depose thee
also?" asked his wife. He replied, "Use the precious bowl while thou
hast it, even if it be broken the next." But

{p. 140}

she rejoined, "Thou art only eighteen years old, and how canst thou at
such an age expect folks to venerate thee?" By a miracle eighteen of his
locks turned suddenly gray, so that he could say, "I am as one of
seventy."

Berachoth, fol. 27, col. 2.

The Rabbis have taught that Shimon Happikoli had arranged the eighteen
benedictions before Rabbon Gamliel at Javneh. Rabbon Gamliel appealed to
the sages, "Is there not a man who knows how to compose an imprecation
against the Sadducees?" Then Samuel the Little stood up and extemporized
it.

Ibid., fol. 28, col. 2.

The "imprecation against the Sadducees" stands twelfth among the
collects of the Shemoneh Esreh. It is popularly known as
"Velamaleshinim" from its opening words, and is given thus in modern
Ashkenazi liturgies:--"Oh, let the slanderers have no hope, all the
wicked be annihilated speedily, and all the tyrants be cut off, hurled
down and reduced speedily; humble Thou them quickly in our days. Blessed
art Thou, O Lord, who destroyest enemies and humblest tyrants." There
has been much misconception with regard to this collect against
heretics. There is every reason to believe it was composed without any
reference whatever to the Christians. One point of interest, however, in
connection with it is worth relating here. Some have sought to identify
the author of it, Samuel the Little, with the Apostle Paul, grounded the
conclusion on his original Hebrew name, Saul. They take Paulus as equal
to *pusillus*, which means "very little" or "the less," and answers to
the word *Hakaton*, a term of similar import. Samuel, however, died a
good Jew (see Semachoth, chap. 8), and Rabbon Gamliel Hazaken and Rabbi
Eleazar ben Azariah pronounced a funeral oration at his burial. "His key
and his diary were placed on his coffin, because he had no son to
succeed him." (See also *Sanhedrin*, fol. 11, col. 1.)

Eighteen denunciations did Isaiah make against the people of Israel, and
he recovered not his equanimity until he was able to add, "The child
shall behave himself proudly against the ancient, and the base against
the honorable" (Isa. iii. 5).

Chaggigah, fol. 14, col. 1.

The Rabbis have related that there was once a family in Jerusalem the
members of which died off regularly at eighteen years of age. Rabbi
Yochanan ben Zacchai shrewdly guessed that they were descendants of Eli,
regarding whom it is said (1 Sam. ii. 25), "And all the increase of
thine house shall die in the flower of their age;"

{p. 141}

and he accordingly advised them to devote themselves to the study of the
law, as the certain and only means of neutralizing the curse. They acted
upon the advice of the Rabbi; their lives were in consequence prolonged;
and they thenceforth went by the name of their spiritual father.

Rosh Hashanah, fol. 18, col. 1.

Eighteen handbreadths was the height of the golden candlestick.

Menachoth, fol. 28, col. 2.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XX.](hl22.md)
