[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](hl24)  [Next](hl26.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# XXIV.

Rabbi, Yehoshua ben Levi said, "In twenty-four cases doth the tribunal
excommunicate for the honor of a Rabbi, and all are explained in our
Mishna." Rabbi Elazer interposed and asked, "Where are they?" The reply
was, "Go and seek, and thou shalt find." He went accordingly and sought,
but found only three--the case of the man who lightly esteems the
washing of hands; of him who whispers evil behind the bier of a disciple
of the wise; and of him who behaves haughtily toward the Most High.

Berachoth, fol. 19, col. 1.

There are three degrees of excommunication, *i. e.*, separation,
exclusion, and execration. That mentioned in the above extract is of the
lowest degree, and lasts never less than thirty days. The second degree
of excommunication is a prolongation of the first by thirty days more.
The third or highest degree lasts for an indefinite time. See Moed
Katon, fol. 17, col. 1; Shevuoth, fol. 36, col. 1; and consult Index II.
appended.

A certain matron once said to Rabbi Yehuda ben Elaei, "Thy face is like
that of one who breeds pigs and lends

{p. 145}

money on usury." He replied, "These offices are forbidden me by the
rules of my religion, but between my residence and the academy there are
twenty-four latrinæ; these I regularly visit as I need."

Berachoth, fol. 55, col. 1.

The Rabbi meant to say that paying attention to the regular action of
his excretory organs was the secret of his healthy looks, and to imply
that a disordered stomach is the root of most diseases,--a physiological
opinion well worthy of regard by us moderns.

Rav Birim says that the venerable Rav Benaah once went to all the
interpreters of dreams in Jerusalem, twenty-four in number. Every one of
them gave a different interpretation, and each was fulfilled; which
substantiates the saying that it is the interpretation and not the dream
that comes true.

Ibid., fol. 55, col. 2.

Twenty-four fasts were observed by the men of the Great Synagogue, in
order that the writers of the books, phylacteries, and Mezuzahs might
not grow rich, lest in becoming rich they might be tempted not to write
any more.

P'sachim, fol. 50, col. 2.

When Solomon was desirous of conveying the Ark into the Temple, the
doors shut themselves of their own accord against him. Here cited
twenty-four psalms, yet they opened not. In vain he cried, "Lift up your
heads, O ye gates" (Ps. xxiv. 9). But when he prayed, "O Lord God, turn
not Thy face away from Thine anointed; remember the mercies of David,
Thy servant" (2 Chron. vi. 42), then the gates flew open at once. Then
the enemies of David turned black in the face, for all knew by this that
God had pardoned David's transgression with Bathseheba.

Moed Katon, fol. 9, col. 1.

In the Midrash Rabbah (Devarim, chap. 15) the same story is told, with
this additional circumstance among others, that a sacred respect was
paid to the gates when the Temple was sacked at the time of the
Captivity. When the glorious vessels and furniture of the Temple were
being carried away into Babylon, the gates, which were so zealous for
the glory of God, were buried on the spot (see Lam. ii. 9), there to
await the restoration of Israel. This romantic episode is alluded to in
the closing service for the Day of Atonement.

There are twenty-four species of unclean birds, but the clean birds are
innumerable.

Chullin, fol. 63, col. 2.

{p. 146}

In twenty-four places priests are called Levites, and this is one of
them (Ezek. xliv. 15), "But the priests, the Levites, the sons of
Zadok."

Tamid, fol. 27, col. 1.

There are twenty-four extremities of members in the human body which do
not suffer defilement in the case of diseased flesh (see Lev. xiii. 10,
24). The tip-ends of the fingers and toes, the edges of the ears, the
tip of the nose, etc.

Negaim, chap. 6, mish. 7.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XV.](hl26.md)
