[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](hl45)  [Next](hl47.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# LXX.

Everybody knows why a bride enters the nuptial chamber, but against him
who sullies his lips by talking about it, the decree for good, though of
seventy years' standing,

\[\*. A prayer consisting of eighteen Collects, which is repeated three
times each day.\]

{p. 160}

shall be reversed into a decree for evil. Rav Chasda says, "Whosoever
disgraces his mouth (by evil communication), Gehenna shall be deepened
for him; for it is said in Prov. xxii. 14, 'A deep pit for the mouth of
strange words (immoral talk).'" Rav Nachman bar Yitzchak says, "The same
punishment will be inflicted on him who listens to it and is silent; for
it is said (Prov. xxii. 14), 'And he that is abhorred of the Lord shall
fall therein.'"

Shabbath, fol. 33, col. 1.

(Jer. xxiii. 29), "Like a hammer that breaketh the rock in pieces," so
is every utterance which proceedeth from the mouth of God, divided
though it be into seventy languages.

Ibid., fol. 88, col. 2.

Rabbi Eliezer asked, "For whose benefit were those seventy bullocks
intended?" See Num. xxix. 12-36. For the seventy nations into which the
Gentile world is divided; and Rashi plainly asserts that the seventy
bullocks were intended to atone for them, that rain might descend all
over the world, for on the Feast of Tabernacles judgment is given
respecting rain, etc. Woe to the Gentile nations for their loss, and
they know not what they have lost! for as long as the Temple existed,
the altar made atonement for them; but now, who is to atone for them?

Succah, fol. 55, col. 2.

Choni, the Maagol, once saw in his travels an old man planting a
carob-tree, and he asked him when he thought the tree would bear fruit.
"After seventy years," was the reply. "What!" said Choni, "dost thou
expect to live seventy years and eat the fruit of thy labor?" "I did not
find the world desolate when I entered it," said the old man; "and as my
fathers planted for me before I was born, so I plant for those that will
come after me."

Taanith, fol. 23, col.

Mordecai was one of those who sat in the hall of the Temple, and he knew
seventy languages.

Meggillah, fol. 13, col. 2.

The Rabbis have taught during a prosperous year in Israel, a place that
is sown with a single measure of seed produces five myriad cors of
grain. In the tilled districts

{p. 161}

of Zoan, one measure of seed produces seventy cors; for we are told that
Rabbi Meir said he himself had witnessed in the vale of Bethshean an
instance of one measure of seed producing seventy cors. And there is no
better land any where than the land of Egypt; for it is said, "As the
garden of the Lord, like the land of Egypt." And there is no better land
in all Egypt than Zoan, where several kings have resided; for it is
written (Isa. xxx. 4), "His princes were in Zoan." In all Israel there
was no more unsuitable soil than Hebron, for it was a burying-place, and
yet Hebron was seven times more prolific than Zoan; for it is written
(Num. xiii. 22), "Now Hebron was built seven years before Zoan in
Egypt." For it is said (Gen. x. 6), "And the sons of Ham, Cush, Mizraim
(that is, Egypt), Phut, and Canaan" (that is, Israel). It must,
therefore, mean that it was seven times more prolific (the verb meaning
both to build and to produce) than Zoan. This is only in the unsuitable
soil of the land of Israel, Hebron, but in the suitable soil (the
increase) is five hundred times. All this applies to a year of average
return, but in one of special prosperity, it is written (Gen. xxvi. 12),
"Then Isaac sowed in that land, and received in the same year an
hundredfold, and the Lord blessed him." (The word years, is conveniently
overlooked in working out the argument.)

Kethuboth, fol. 112, col. 1.

The astrologers in Egypt said to Pharaoh, "What! shall a slave whose
master bought him for twenty pieces of silver rule over us?" Pharaoh
replied, "But I find him endowed with kingly qualities." "If that is the
case," they answered, "he must know seventy languages." Then came the
angel Gabriel, and taught him seventy languages.

Soteh, fol. 36, col. 2.

When the leviathan makes the deep boil, the sea does not recover its
calm for seventy years; for it is said (Job xli. 32), "One would think
the deep is to be hoary," and we cannot take the word "hoary" to imply a
term of less than seventy years.

Bava Bathra, fol. 75, col. 1.

Abba Chalepha Keruya once remarked to Rav Cheyah bar Abba, "The sum
total of Jacob's family thou findest

{p. 162}

reckoned at seventy, whereas the numbers added up make only sixty-nine.
How is that?" Rav Cheyah made answer that the particle in verse 15,
implies that Dinah must have been one of twin-sisters. "But," objected
the other, "the same particle occurs also in connection with Benjamin,
to say nothing of other instances." "Alas!" said Rav Cheyah, "I am
possessed of a secret worth knowing, and thou art trying to worm it out
of me." Then interposed Rav Chama bar Chanena, "The number may be made
up by reckoning Jochebed in, for of her it is said (Num. xxvi. 59) 'that
her mother bare her to Levi in Egypt;' her birth took place in Egypt,
though she was conceived on the journey."

Bava Bathra, fol. 123, cols. 1, 2.

Rav Yehudah says in the name of Shemuel:--There is yet another festival
in Rome, which is observed only once in seventy years, and this is the
manner of its celebration. They take an able-bodied man, without
physical defect, and cause him to ride upon the back of a lame one. They
dress up the former in the garments of Adam (such as God made for him in
Paradise), and cover his face with the skin of the face of Rabbi
Ishmael, the high priest, and adorn his neck with a precious stone. They
illuminate the streets, and then lead the two men through the city, a
herald proclaiming before them, "The account of our Lord was false; it
is the brother of our Lord that is the deceiver! He that sees this
festival sees it, and he that does not see it now will never see it.
What advantage to the deceiver is his deception, and to the crafty his
craftiness?" The proclamation finishes up thus--"Woe to this one when
the other shall rise again!"

Avodah Zarah, fol. 11, col. 2.

The Targum Varushalmi informs us that the Lord God wrought for Adam and
his wife robes of honor from the cast-off skin of the serpent. We learn
elsewhere that Nimrod came into possession of Adam's coat through Ham,
who stole it from Noah while in the Ark. The glib tongue of tradition
also tells how Esau slew Nimrod and appropriated the garment, and wore
it for luck when hunting; but that on the day when he went to seek
venison at the request of his dying parent, in his hurry he forgot the
embroidered robe of Adam, and had bad luck in consequence. Then Jacob
borrowed the left-off garment, and kept it for himself. The mask alluded
to is accounted for

{p. 163}

thus:--The daughter of a Roman emperor took a fancy to have the skin of
Rabbi Ishmael's face, and it accordingly, when he was dead, was taken
off, and so embalmed as to retain its features, expression, and
complexion, and the Jews say that it is still preserved among the relics
at Rome. The able-bodied man in this prophetic mystery-play represents
Esau, and the limping man is intended for Jacob. Rome (or Esau) is
uppermost in that ceremonial, but the time is coming when Jacob will
rise and invest himself in the blessings he so craftily obtained the
reversion of.

Rabbi Yochanan said:--None were elected to sit in the High Council of
the Sanhedrin except men of stature, of wisdom, of imposing appearance,
and of mature age; men who knew witchcraft and seventy languages, in
order that the High Council of the Sanhedrin should have no need of an
interpreter.

Sanhedrin, fol. 17, col. 1.

Yehudah and Chiskiyah, the sons of Rabbi Cheyah, once sat down to a meal
before Rabbi (the Holy) without speaking a word. "Give the boys some
wine," said Rabbi, "that they may have boldness to speak." When they had
partaken of the wine, they said, "The son of David will not come until
the two patriarchal houses of Israel are no more," that is, the head of
the Captivity in Babylon and the Prince in the land of Israel; for it is
written (Isa. viii. 14), "And he shall be for a sanctuary, and for a
stone of stumbling and a rock of offense to both the houses of Israel."
"Why, children," said Rabbi (who was patriarch of Tiberias), "you are
thrusting thorns into my eyes." Rabbi Cheyah said, "Do not be offended
at them. Wine is given with seventy, and so is a secret (the numerical
value of each of these words is seventy); when wine enters the secret
oozes out."

Ibid., fol. 38, col. 1.

A certain star appears once in seventy years and deceives the sailors
(who guide their vessels by the position of the heavenly bodies; and
this star appears sometimes in the north and sometimes in the
south.--*Rashi*.)

Horayoth, fol. 10, col. 1.

As eating olive berries causes one to forget things that he has known
for seventy years, so olive oil brings back to the memory things which
happened seventy years before.

Ibid., fol. 13, col. 2

{p. 164}

The outside of the shell of the purple mollusk resembles the sea in
color; its bodily conformation is like that of a fish; it rises once in
seventy years; its blood is used to dye wool purple, and therefore this
color is dear.

Menachoth, fol. 44, col. 1.

The bearing-time of the flat-headed otter lasts seventy years; a
parallel may be found in the carob-tree, from the planting to the
ripening of the pods of which is seventy years.

Berachoth, fol. 8, col. 1.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: LXXI.](hl47.md)
