[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](hl46)  [Next](hl48.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# LXXI.

The Sanhedrin consisted of seventy-one members. It is recorded that
Rabbi Yossi said, "Seldom was there contention in Israel, but the
judicial court of seventy-one sat in the Lishkath-hagazith, *i. e.*,
Paved Hall, and two (ordinary) courts of justice consisting of
twenty-three, one of which sat at the entrance of the Temple-Mount, and
the other at the entrance of the ante-court; and also (provincial)
courts of justice, also comprising twenty-three members, which held
their sessions in all the cities of Israel. When an Israelite had a
question to propose, he asked it first of the court in his own city. If
they understood the case, they settled the matter; but if not, they
applied to the court of the next city. If the neighboring justices could
not decide, they went together and laid the case in debate before the
court which held its session at the entrance of the Temple-Mount. If
these courts, in turn, failed to solve the problem, they appealed to the
court that sat in the entrance of the ante-court, where a discussion was
entered into upon the moot points of the case; if no decision could be
arrived at, they all referred to the (supreme) court of seventy-one,
where the matter was finally decided by the majority of votes."

As the disciples of Shammai and Hillel multiplied who had not studied
the law thoroughly, contentions increased in Israel to such an extent
that the law lost its unity and became as two.

Sanhedrin, fol. 88, col. 2.

The Sanhedrin sat in a semicircle, in order that they might see one
another; and two notaries stood before them, the one on the right and
the other on the left, to record the pros and cons in the various
processes. Rabbi Yehudah says there were three such notaries,

{p. 165}

one for the pros, one for the cons, and one to record both the pros and
the cons. (*Sanhedrin*, fol. 36, col. 2.)

The witnesses (in capital cases) were questioned on seven points, as
follows:--In what Shemitah (or septennial cycle) did it occur? In which
year (of the cycle)? In what month? Upon what day? At what hour? In what
place? . . . The more one questioned the more he was commended. (See
Deut. xiii. 15; A. V., ver. 14.) (*Ibid.*, fol. 40, col. 1.)

In connection with the foregoing subject, let its string together some
of the gems of forensic wisdom to be met with in the Talmud. A score or
so of bona fide quotations, respecting judges, criminals and criminal
punishment, and witnesses, will serve to illustrate this part of our
subject.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: JUDGES.](hl48.md)
