[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](hl89)  [Next](hl91.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# One Hundred Thousand.

That mule had a label attached to his neck on which it was stated that
its breeding cost a hundred thousand zouzim.

Bechoroth, fol. 8, col. 2.

Rabbi Yossi said, "I have seen Sepphoris (Cyprus) in the days of its
prosperity, and there were in it a hundred and eighty thousand marts for
sauces."

Bava Bathra, fol. 75, col. 2.

Rav Assi said three hundred thousand swordsmen went up to the Royal
Mount and there slaughtered the people for three days and three nights,
and yet while on the one side of the mount they were mourning, on the
other they were merry; those on the one side did not know the affairs of
those on the other.

Gittin, fol. 57, col. 1.

A certain disciple prayed before Rabbi Chanina, and said, "O God! who
art great, mighty, formidable, magnificent,

{p. 224}

strong, terrible, valiant, powerful, real and honored!" He waited until
he had finished, and then said to him, "Hast thou ended all the praises
of thy God? Need we enumerate so many? As for us, even the three terms
of praise which we usually repeat, we should not dare to utter had not
Moses, our master, pronounced them in the law (Deut. x. 17), and had not
the men of the Great Synagogue ordained them for prayer; and yet thou
hast repeated so many and still seemest inclined to go on. It is as if
one were to compliment a king because of his silver, who is master of a
thousand thousands of gold denarii. Wouldst thou think that becoming?"

Berachoth, fol. 33, col. 2.

Rabbi Yossi ben Kisma relates, "I once met a man in my travels and we
saluted one another. In reply to a question of his I said, 'I am from a
great city of sages and scribes.' Upon this he offered me a
thousand thousand golden denarii, and precious stones and pearls, if I
would agree to go and dwell in his native place. But I replied, saying,
'If thou wert to give me all the gold and silver, all the precious
stones and pearls in the world, I would not reside anywhere else than in
the place where the law is studied.'"

Avoth, chap. 6.

Thousands on thousands in Israel were named after Aaron; for had it not
been for Aaron these thousands of thousands would not have been born.
Aaron went about making peace between quarreling couples, and those who
were born after the reconciliation were regularly named after him.

Avoth d'Rab. Nathan, chap. 12.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: One Million.](hl91.md)
