[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc01024)  [Next](cc01026.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 1: Genesis, Part I*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xxvi"></span>

<span id="xxvi-p1"></span>CHAPTER 20.

<span id="xxvi.i"></span>

<span id="xxvi.i-p1"></span><span id="xxvi.i-p1.1"></span>[Genesis
20:1-18](../../../bib/kjv/gen020.htm#001.md)<span id="xxvi.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xxvi.i-p2"></span>**1.** And Abraham journeyed from thence
toward the south country, and dwelled between Kadesh and Shur, and
sojourned in Gerar.

<span id="xxvi.i-p3"></span>**1.** Postea profectus est inde Abraham ad
terram Meridianam, et habitavit inter Cades et Sur, peregrinatusque est
in Gerar.

<span id="xxvi.i-p4"></span>**2.** And Abraham said of Sarah his wife,
She *is* my sister: and Abimelech king of Gerar sent, and took Sarah.

<span id="xxvi.i-p5"></span>**2.** Et dixit Abraham de Sarah uxore sua,
Soror mea est. Et misit Abimelech rex Gerar, et accepit Sarah.

<span id="xxvi.i-p6"></span>**3.** But God came to Abimelech in a dream
by night, and said to him, Behold, thou *art but* a dead man, for the
woman which thou hast taken; for she *is* a man’s wife.

<span id="xxvi.i-p7"></span>**3.** Et venit Jehova ad Abimelech in
somnio noctis, et dixit et, Ecce es mortuus, propter uxorem quam
accepisti: quum ipsa maritata sit marito.

<span id="xxvi.i-p8"></span>**4.** But Abimelech had not come near her:
and he said, Lord, wilt thou slay also a righteous nation?

<span id="xxvi.i-p9"></span>**4.** Abimelech autem non appropinquaverat
ad eam: itaque dixit, Jehova, num gentem etiam justam occides?

<span id="xxvi.i-p10"></span>**5.** Said he not unto me, She *is* my
sister? and she, even she herself said, He *is* my brother: in the
integrity of my heart and innocency of my hands have I done this.

<span id="xxvi.i-p11"></span>**5.** Numquid non ipse dixit mihi, Soror
mea est: et ipsa etiam dixit, Frater meus est? in integritate cordis
mei, et in munditia manuum mearum feci hoc.

<span id="xxvi.i-p12"></span>**6.** And God said unto him in a dream,
Yea, I know that thou didst this in the integrity of thy heart; for I
also withheld thee from sinning against me: therefore suffered I thee
not to touch her.

<span id="xxvi.i-p13"></span>**6.** Et dixit ad eum Deus in somnio,
Etiam ego novi quod in integritate cordis tui fecisti hoc, et prohibui
etiam ego to, ne peccares mihi: idcirco non permisi tibi, ut tangeres
eam.

<span id="xxvi.i-p14"></span>**7.** Now therefore restore the man *his*
wife; for he *is* a prophet, and he shall pray for thee, and thou shalt
live: and if thou restore *her* not, know thou that thou shalt surely
die, thou, and all that *are* thine.

<span id="xxvi.i-p15"></span>**7.** Et nunc redde uxorem viro, quia
propheta est, et orabit pro to, et vives: quodsi tu non reddideris,
scito quod moriendo morieris tu et omne quod est tibi.

<span id="xxvi.i-p16"></span>**8.** Therefore Abimelech rose early in
the morning, and called all his servants, and told all these things in
their ears: and the men were sore afraid.

<span id="xxvi.i-p17"></span>**8.** Et surrexit Abimelech mane, et
vocavit omnes servos suos, et loquutus est omnia verba ista in auribus
eorum, et timuerunt viri valde.

<span id="xxvi.i-p18"></span>**9.** Then Abimelech called Abraham, and
said unto him, What hast thou done unto us? and what have I offended
thee, that thou hast brought on me and on my kingdom a great sin? thou
hast done deeds unto me that ought not to be done.

<span id="xxvi.i-p19"></span>**9.** Et vocavit Abimelech Abraham, et
dixit ei, Quid fecisti nobis? et quid peccavi tibi, quia induxisti super
me et super regnum meum peccatum grande? opera quae non debent fieri,
fecisti mecum.

<span id="xxvi.i-p20"></span>**10.** And Abimelech said unto Abraham,
What sawest thou, that thou hast done this thing?

<span id="xxvi.i-p21"></span>**10.** Et dixit Abimelech ad Abraham, Quid
vidisti quia fecisti rem hanc?

<span id="xxvi.i-p22"></span>**11.** And Abraham said, Because I
thought, Surely the fear of God *is* not in this place; and they will
slay me for my wife’s sake.

<span id="xxvi.i-p23"></span>**11.** Et dixit Abraham, Quia dixi, Vere
non est timor Dei in loco isto: et occident me propter uxorem meam.

<span id="xxvi.i-p24"></span>**12.** And yet indeed *she is* my sister;
she *is* the daughter of my father, but not the daughter of my mother;
and she became my wife.

<span id="xxvi.i-p25"></span>**12.** Et etiam vere soror mea filia
patris mei est, veruntamea non filia matris meae: et fuit mihi in uxorem
meam.

<span id="xxvi.i-p26"></span>**13.** And it came to pass, when God
caused me to wander from my father’s house, that I said unto her, This
*is* thy kindness which thou shalt shew unto me; at every place whither
we shall come, say of me, He *is* my brother.

<span id="xxvi.i-p27"></span>**13.** Et fuit, quando circumduxerunt me
Angeli de domo patris mei, dixi ei, Haec est misericordia tua quam
facies mecum, in omni loco ad quem veniemus, dic de me, Frater meus est.

<span id="xxvi.i-p28"></span>**14.** And Abimelech took sheep, and oxen,
and menservants, and womenservants, and gave *them* unto Abraham, and
restored him Sarah his wife.

<span id="xxvi.i-p29"></span>**14.** Et cepit Abimelech pecudes, et
boves, et servos, et ancillas, et dedit Abraham: et restituit ei Sarah,
uxorem ejus.

<span id="xxvi.i-p30"></span>**15.** And Abimelech said, Behold, my land
*is* before thee: dwell where it pleaseth thee.

<span id="xxvi.i-p31"></span>**15.** Et dixit Abimelech, Ecce, terra mea
coram to, in *loco* bono coram oculis tuis habita.

<span id="xxvi.i-p32"></span>**16.** And unto Sarah he said, Behold, I
have given thy brother a thousand *pieces* of silver: behold, he *is* to
thee a covering of the eyes, unto all that *are* with thee, and with all
*other* : thus she was reproved.

<span id="xxvi.i-p33"></span>**16.** Et ad Sarah dixit, Ecce, dedi mille
argenteos fratri tuo: ecce, est tibi operimentum oculorum, omnibus qui
sunt tecum: et in omnibus correcta fuit.

<span id="xxvi.i-p34"></span>**17.** So Abraham prayed unto God: and God
healed Abimelech, and his wife, and his maidservants; and they bare
*children*

<span id="xxvi.i-p35"></span>**17.** Et oravit Abraham ad Deum, et
sanavit Deus Abimelech et uxorem ejus, et ancillas ejus, et pepererunt:

<span id="xxvi.i-p36"></span>**18.** For the LORD had fast closed up all
the wombs of the house of Abimelech, because of Sarah Abraham’s wife.

<span id="xxvi.i-p37"></span>**18.** Quia claudendo clauserat Jehova
super omnum vulvam domus Abimelech propter Sarah uxorem Abraham.

<span id="xxvi.i-p38"></span> 

<span id="xxvi.i-p39"></span><span id="xxvi.i-p39.1"></span>

<span id="xxvi.i-p40"></span>**1.** *And Abraham journeyed from thence*
. What Moses related respecting the destruction of Sodom, was a
digression. He now returns to the continuation of his history, and
proceeds to show what happened to Abraham; how he conducted himself, and
how the Lord protected him; till the promised seed, the future source of
the Church, should be born unto him. He also says, that Abraham came
into the South country; not that he traveled beyond the limits of the
inheritance given to him, but left his former abode, and went towards
the South. Moreover; the region which he points out fell chiefly,
afterwards, to the lot of the tribe of Judah. It is, however, unknown
what was his intention in removing, or what necessity impelled him to
change his place: we ought, however, to be persuaded, that he had not
transferred his abode to another place for any insufficient cause;
especially since a son, whom he had not even dared to wish for, had been
lately promised him, through Sarah. Some imagine that he fled from the
sad spectacle which was continually presented before his eyes; for he
saw the plain, which had lately appeared so pleasant to the view, and so
replenished with varied abundance of fruits, transformed into a
misshapen chaos. And certainly, it was possible that the whole
neighborhood might be affected with the smell of sulphur, as well as
tainted with other corruptions, in order that men might the more clearly
perceive this memorable judgment of God. Therefore, there is nothing
discordant with facts, in the supposition, that Abraham, seeing the
place was under the curse of the Lord, was, by his detestation of it,
drawn elsewhere. It is also credible, that (as it happened to him in
another place) he was driven away by the malice and injuries of those
among whom he dwelt. For the more abundantly the Lord had manifested his
grace towards him, the more necessary was it, in return, for his
patience to be exercised, in order that he might reflect upon his
conditions as a pilgrim upon earth. Moses also expressly declares, that
he dwelt as a stranger in the land of Gerar. Thus we see, that this holy
family was driven hither and thither as refuse, while a fixed abode was
granted to the wicked. But it is profitable to the pious to be thus
unsettled on earth; lest, by setting their minds on a commodious and
quiet habitation, they should lose the inheritance of heaven.

<span id="xxvi.i-p41"></span><span id="xxvi.i-p41.1"></span>

<span id="xxvi.i-p42"></span>**2.** *And Abraham said of Sarah his wife*
. In this history, the Holy Spirit presents to us a remarkable instance,
both of the infirmity of man, and of the grace of God. It is a common
proverb, that even fools become wise by suffering evil. But Abraham,
forgetful of the great danger which had befallen him in Egypt, once more
strikes his foot against the same stone; although the Lord had purposely
chastised him, in order that the warning might be useful to him,
throughout his whole life. Therefore we perceive, in the example of the
holy patriarch, how easily the oblivion, both of the chastisements and
the favors of God, steals over us. For it is impossible to excuse his
gross negligence, in not calling to mind, that he had once tempted God;
and that he would have had himself alone to blame, if his wife had
become the property of another man. But if we thoroughly examine
ourselves scarcely any one will be found who will not acknowledge, that
he has often offended in the same way. It may be added, that Abraham was
not free from the charge of ingratitude; because, if he had rejected
that his wife had been wonderfully preserved to him by the Lord, he
would never again, knowingly and willingly, have cast himself into
similar danger. For he makes the former favor divinely offered unto him,
so far as he is able, of none effect. We must, however, notice the
nature of the sin, on which we have touched before. For Abraham did not,
for the sake of providing for his own safety prostitute his wife, (as
impious men cavil.) But, as he had before been anxious to preserve his
life, till he should receive the seed divinely promised to him; so now,
seeing his wife with child, in the hope of enjoying so great a blessing,
he thought nothing of his wife’s danger.  <span
id="fr_427"></span>[428](#fn_427.md) Therefore if we thoroughly weigh all
things, he sinned through unbelief, by attributing less than he ought to
the providence of God. Whence also, we are admonished, how dangerous a
thing it is, to trust our own counsels. For Abraham’s disposition is
right, while fixing his attention on the promise of God; but inasmuch as
he does not patiently wait for God’s helps but turns aside to the use of
unlawful means, he is, in this respect, worthy of censure.

<span id="xxvi.i-p44"></span>*And Abimelech sent* . There is no doubt
that the Lord purposed to punish his servant, for the counsel he had so
rashly taken. And such fruits of distrust do all receive, who rely not,
as they ought, on the providence of God. Some perverse men quarrel with
this passage; because nothing seems to them more improbable than that a
decrepit old woman should be desired by the king, and taken from the
bosom of her husband. But we answer, first, that it is not known what
her appearance was, except that Moses before declared her to be a person
of singular beauty. And it is possible that she was not much worn with
age. For we often see some women in their fortieth year more wrinkled
than others in their seventieth. But here another thing is to be
considered, that, by the unwonted favor of God, her comeliness was
preeminent among her other endowments. It might also be, that king
Abimelech was less attracted by the elegance of her form, than by the
rare virtues with which he saw her, as a matron, to be endued. Lastly,
we must remember, that this whole affair was directed by the hand of
God, in order that Abraham might receive the due reward of his folly.
And as we find that they who are exceedingly acute in discerning the
natural causes of things, are yet most blind in reference to the divine
judgments; let this single fact suffice us, that Abimelech, being a
minister to execute the divine chastisement, acted under a secret
impulse.

<span id="xxvi.i-p45"></span><span id="xxvi.i-p45.1"></span>

<span id="xxvi.i-p46"></span>**3.** *But God came to Abimelech in a
dream by night* . Here Moses shows that the Lord acted with such
gentleness, that in punishing his servant, he yet, as a father, forgave
him: just as he deals with us, so that, while chastising us with his
rod, his mercy and his goodness far exceed his severity. Hence also we
infer, that he takes greater care of the pious than carnal sense can
understand; since he watches over them while they sleep. This also is to
be carefully noticed; that however we may be despised by the worlds we
are yet precious to him, since for our sake he reproves even kings, as
it is written in <span id="xxvi.i-p46.1"></span>[Ps
105:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa105.htm#014.md)<span id="xxvi.i-p46.1"></span>.
But as this subject was more fully discussed in the twelfth chapter,
(<span id="xxvi.i-p46.2"></span>[Ge
12:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen012.htm#001)<span id="xxvi.i-p46.2"></span>.md)
let the readers there seek what I now purposely omit. Whereas, God is
said to have come, this is to be applied to the perception of the king,
to whom undoubtedly the majesty of God was manifested; so that he might
clearly perceive himself to be divinely reproved and not deluded with a
vain spectre.

<span id="xxvi.i-p47"></span>*Behold, thou art but a dead man* .
Although God reproved king Abimelech, for the sake of Abraham, whom he
covered with his special protection; he yet intends to show, generally,
his high displeasure against adultery. And, in truth, here is no express
mention of Abraham; but rather a general announcement is made, for the
purpose of maintaining conjugal fidelity. ‘Thou shalt die, because thou
hast seized upon a women who was joined to a husband.’ Let us therefore
learn, that a precept was given in these words, to mankind, which
forbids any one to touch his neighbor’s wife. And, truly, since nothing
in the life of man is more sacred than marriage, it is not to be
wondered at, that the Lord should require mutual fidelity to be
cherished between husbands and wives and should declare that he will be
the Avenger of it, as often as it is violated. He now addresses himself,
indeed, only to one man; but the warning ought to sound in the ears of
all, that adulterers — although they may exult with impunity for a time
— shall yet feel that God, who presides over marriage, will take
vengeance on them. (<span id="xxvi.i-p47.1"></span>[Heb
13:4](../../../bib/kjv/heb013.htm#004)<span id="xxvi.i-p47.1"></span>..md)

<span id="xxvi.i-p48"></span><span id="xxvi.i-p48.1"></span>

<span id="xxvi.i-p49"></span>**4.** *But Abimelech had not come near
her* . Though Abraham had deprived himself of his wife, the Lord
interposed in time to preserve her uninjured. When Moses previously
relates, that she was taken away by Pharaoh, he does not say whether her
chastity was assailed or not; but since the Lord then also declared
himself the vindicator of her whom he now saved from dishonor, we ought
not to doubt that her integrity was preserved both times. For why did he
now forbid the king of Gerar to touch her, if he had previously suffered
her to be corrupted in Egypt? We see, however, that when the Lord so
defers his aid as not to stretch out his hand to the faithful, till they
are in extreme peril, he shows the more clearly how admirable is his
Providence.

<span id="xxvi.i-p50"></span>*Wilt thou slay also a righteous nation?*
The explanation given by some, that Abimelech here compares himself with
the men of Sodom, is perhaps too refined. The following meaning appears
to me more simple; namely ‘O Lord, although thou dost severely punish
adultery, shall thy wrath pour itself out on unoffending men, who have
rather fallen into error, than sinned knowingly and willingly?’
Moreover, Abimelech seems so to clear himself, as if he were entirely
free from blame: and yet the Lord both admits and approves his excuse.
We must, however, mark in what way, and to what extent he boasts that
his heart and hands are guiltless. For he does not arrogate to himself a
purity which is altogether spotless; but only denies that he was led by
lust, either tyrannically or purposely, to abuse another man’s wife. We
know how great is the difference between a *crime* and a *fault* ;
 <span id="fr_428"></span>[429](#fn_428.md) thus Abimelech does not exempt
himself from every kind of charge, but only shows that he had been
conscious of no such wickedness as required this severe punishment. The
‘simplicity of heart,’ of which he speaks, is nothing else than that
ignorance which stands opposed to consciousness of guilt; and ‘the
righteousness of his hands,’ is nothing but that selfgovernment, by
which men abstain from force and acts of injustice. Besides, the
interrogation which Abimelech used proceeded from a common feeling of
religion. For nature itself dictates, that God preserves a just
discrimination in inflicting punishments.

<span id="xxvi.i-p52"></span><span id="xxvi.i-p52.1"></span>

<span id="xxvi.i-p53"></span>**6.** *Yea, I know that thou didst this in
the integrity of thy heart* . We infer from this answer of God, (as I
have lately remarked,) that Abimelech did not testify falsely concerning
his own integrity. Yet, while God allows that his excuse is true, He
nevertheless chastises him. Let us hence learn, that even they who are
pure, according to human judgment, are not entirely free from blame. For
no error may be deemed so excusable, as to be without some deteriorating
admixture. Wherefores it is not for any one to absolve himself by his
own judgment; rather let us learn to bring all our conduct to the
standard of God. For Solomon does not say in vain, that

<span id="xxvi.i-p54"></span>‘the ways of men seem right to
themselves,  
but the Lord pondereth the hearts,’ (<span id="xxvi.i-p54.2"></span>[Pr
21:2](../../../bib/kjv/pro021.htm#002)<span id="xxvi.i-p54.2"></span>..md)

<span id="xxvi.i-p55"></span>But if even they who are unconscious to
themselves of any evil, do not escape censure; what will be our
condition, if we are held inwardly bound by our own conscience?

<span id="xxvi.i-p56"></span>*I also withheld thee* . This declaration
implies that God had respect, not only to Abraham, but also to the king.
For because he had no intention of defiling another man’s wife, God had
compassion on him. And it frequently happens, that the Spirit restrains,
by his bridle, those who are gliding into error; just as, on the other
hand, he drives those headlong, by infatuations and a spirit of stupor,
who, with depraved affections and lusts, knowingly transgress. And as
God brought to the heathen king, who had not been guilty of deliberate
wickedness, a timely remedy, in order that his guilt should not be
increased; so He proves himself daily to be the faithful guardian of his
own people, to prevent them from rushing forward, from lighter faults to
desperate crimes.

<span id="xxvi.i-p57"></span><span id="xxvi.i-p57.1"></span>

<span id="xxvi.i-p58"></span>**7.** *Now therefore, restore the man his
wife* . God does not now speak of Abraham as of a common man, but as of
one who is so peculiarly dear unto himself, that He undertakes the
defense of his conjugal bed, by a kind of privilege. He calls Abraham a
prophet, for the sake of honor; as if he were charging Abimelech with
having injured a man of great and singular excellence; that he might not
wonder at the greatness of the punishment inflicted upon him. And
although the word prophet is properly the name of an office; yet I think
it has here a more comprehensive import, and that it is put for a chosen
man, and one who is familiar with God. For since at that time, no
Scripture was in existence, God not only made himself known by dreams
and visions but chose also to himself rare and excellent men, to scatter
abroad the seed of piety, by which the world would become more
inexcusable. But since Abraham is a prophet, he is constituted, as it
were, a mediator between God and Abimelech. Christ, even then, was the
only Mediator; but this was no reason why some men should not pray for
others; especially they who excelled in holiness, and were accepted by
God; as the Apostle teaches, that

<span id="xxvi.i-p59"></span>‘the fervent prayers of a righteous man
avail much.’  
(<span id="xxvi.i-p59.2"></span>[Jas
5:16](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#016)<span id="xxvi.i-p59.2"></span>..md)

<span id="xxvi.i-p60"></span>And we ought not, at this day, to neglect
such intercession, provided it does not obscure the grace of Christ, nor
lead us away from Him. But that, under this pretext, the Papists resort
to the patronage of the dead, is absurd. For as the Lord does not here
send the king of Gerar to Noah, or to any one of the dead fathers, but
into the presence of the living Abraham; so the only precept we have on
this subject is, that, by mutually praying for each other, we should
cultivate charity among ourselves.

<span id="xxvi.i-p61"></span>*And if thou restore her not* . Hence we
are to learn, the intention of those threats and denunciations with
which God terrifies men; namely, forcibly to impel those to repentance,
who are too backward. In the beginning of this discourse, it had been
absolutely declared, ‘Thou art a dead man;’ now the condition is added,
‘Unless thou restore her.’ Yet the meaning of both expressions is the
same; though at first God speaks more sharply, that he may inspire the
offender with the greater terror. But now, when he is subdued, God
expresses his intention more clearly, and leaves him the hope of pardon
and salvation. Thus is the knot untied, with which many entangle
themselves, when they perceive that God does not always, or instantly,
execute the punishments which he has denounced; because they deem it a
sign, either that God has changed his purpose, or that he pretends a
different thing by his word, from that which he has secretly decreed. He
threatens destruction to the Ninevites, by Jonah, and afterwards spared
them. (<span id="xxvi.i-p61.1"></span>[Jon
3:4](../../../bib/kjv/jon003.htm#004)<span id="xxvi.i-p61.1"></span>..md)
The unskilful do not perceive how they can escape from one of two
absurdities; namely, that God has retracted his sentence; or that he had
feigned himself to be about to do what he really did not intend. But if
we hold fast this principle, that the inculcation of repentance is
included in all threats, the difficulty will be solved. For although
God, in the first instance, addresses men as lost; and, therefore,
penetrates them with the present fear of death, still the end is to be
regarded. For if he invites them to repentance, it follows, that the
hope of pardon is left them, provided they repent.

<span id="xxvi.i-p62"></span><span id="xxvi.i-p62.1"></span>

<span id="xxvi.i-p63"></span>**8.** *Therefore Abimelech rose early in
the morning* . Moses teaches how efficacious the oracle had been. For
Abimelech, alarmed at the voice of God, arose in the morning, not only
that he himself might quickly obey the command enjoined upon him but
that he might also exhort his own people to do the same. An example of
such ready obedience is shown us in a heathen king, that we may no more
make excuses for our torpor, when we are so little profited by the
Divine remonstrances. God appeared to *him* in a dream; but since he
daily cries aloud in *our* ears, by Moses, by the prophets and by the
apostles, and finally, by his only-begotten Son, it were absurd to
suppose that so many testimonies should avail less than the vision of a
single dream.

<span id="xxvi.i-p64"></span><span id="xxvi.i-p64.1"></span>

<span id="xxvi.i-p65"></span>**9.** *Then Abimelech called Abraham* .
There are those who suppose that the king of Gerar did not make a
complaint against Abraham; but rather declared his own repentance. If,
however we fairly weigh his words we find confession mixed with
expostulation. Although he complains that Abraham had acted unjustly, he
yet does not so transfer the blame to him, as to free himself from all
fault. And he may, with justice, impute part of the blame to Abraham, as
he does; provided he also acknowledges his own sin. Let we therefore
know, that this king did not act as hypocrites are in the habit of
doing. For, as soon as ever a pretext is furnished for inculpating
others, they confidently absolve themselves: they even esteem it a
lawful purgation for themselves, if they can draw others into a
participation of their crime. But Abimelech, while he complains that he
had been deceived, and had fallen through impudence, yet does not,
meanwhile, scruple to condemn himself as guilty of a great sin, ‘It is
not,’ he says, ‘through thee, that I and my whole kingdom have been
prevented from falling into the greatest wickedness.’ No one therefore
may exonerate himself from blame, under the pretense that he had been
induced by others to sin. It is, however to be noted, that adultery is
here called a great sin; because it binds not one man only, but a whole
people, as in a common crime. The king of Gerar could not indeed have
spoken thus, had he not acknowledged the sacred right of marriage. But,
at the present time, Christians — at least they who boast of the name —
are not ashamed jocularly to extenuate so great a crime, from which even
a heathen shrinks with the greatest horror. Let us however know, that
Abimelech was a true herald of that divine judgment, which miserable men
in vain endeavor to elude by their cavils. And let that expression of
Paul ever recur to our memory, ‘Be not deceived; because of those things
cometh the wrath of God upon the disobedient.’ (<span
id="xxvi.i-p65.1"></span>[1Co 5:9](../../../bib/kjv/co1005.htm#009.md)<span
id="xxvi.i-p65.1"></span>; <span id="xxvi.i-p65.2"></span>[Eph
5:6](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#006)<span id="xxvi.i-p65.2"></span>..md)
It is not without reason, that he makes this sin common to the whole
nation; for when crimes are committed with impunity, a whole region is,
in a certain sense, polluted. And it is especially notorious, that the
anger of God is provoked against the whole body of the people, in the
person of the king. Hence, with so much the greater earnestness and
care, must we beseech God to govern, by his Spirit, those whom he has
placed in authority over us; and then, to preserve the country, in which
he has granted us a dwelling-place, exempt and pure from all iniquity.

<span id="xxvi.i-p66"></span><span id="xxvi.i-p66.1"></span>

<span id="xxvi.i-p67"></span>**10.** *What sawest thou that thou hast
done this thing* ? By this question the king provides against the
future. He thinks that Abraham had not practiced this dissimulation
inconsiderately; and, since God was grievously offended, he fears to
fall again into the same danger. He therefore testifies, by an inquiry
so earnest, that he wishes to remedy the evil. Now, it is no common sign
of a just and meek disposition in Abimelech, that he allows Abraham a
free defense. We know how sharply, and fiercely, they expostulate, who
think themselves aggrieved: so much the greater praise, then, was due to
the moderation of this king, towards an unknown foreigner. Meanwhile,
let us learn, by his example, whenever we expostulate with our brethren,
who may have done us any wrong, to permit them freely to answer us.

<span id="xxvi.i-p68"></span><span id="xxvi.i-p68.1"></span>

<span id="xxvi.i-p69"></span>**11.** *And Abraham said* . There are two
points contained in this answer. For, first, he confesses that he had
been induced by fear to conceal his marriage. He then denies that he had
lied for the purpose of excusing himself. Now, although Abraham declares
with truth, that he had not concealed his marriage with any fraudulent
intention, nor for the purpose of injuring any one; yet he was worthy of
censure, because, through fear, he had submitted, so far as he was
concerned, to the prostitution of his wife. Wherefore, much cannot be
said in his excuse: since he ought to have been more courageous and
resolute in fulfilling the duty of a husband, by vindicating, the honor
of his wife whatever danger might threaten him. Besides, it was a sign
of distrust, to resort to an unlawful subtlety. With regard to his
suspicion; although he had everywhere perceived that a monstrous
licentiousness prevailed; it was, nevertheless, unjust to form a
judgment so unfavourable of a people whom he had not yet known; for he
supposes them all to be homicides. But as I have treated, at some
length, on these subjects, in the tenth chapter (<span
id="xxvi.i-p69.1"></span>[Ge 10:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#001.md)<span
id="xxvi.i-p69.1"></span>); it may now suffice to have alluded to them,
by the way. Meanwhile, we come to the conclusion, that Abraham does not
contend for the justice of his cause before God; but only shows his
earnestness to appease Abimelech. His particular form of expression is,
however, to be noticed; for wherever the fear of God does not reign, men
easily rush onwards to every kind of wickedness; so that they neither
spare human blood, nor restrain themselves from rapine, violence, and
contumelies. And doubtless it is the fear of God alone, which unites us
together in the bonds of our common humanity which keeps us within the
bounds of moderation, and represses cruelty; otherwise we should devour
each other like wild beasts. It will, indeed, sometimes happen, that
they who are destitute of the fear of God, may cultivate the appearance
of equity. For God, in order that he may preserve mankind from
destruction, holds in check, with his secret rein, the lusts of the
ungodly. It must, however, be always taken into the account, that the
door is opened to all kinds of wickedness, when piety and the fear of
God have vanished. Of this, at the present day, too clear a proof is
manifest, in the horrible deluge of crime, which almost covers the whole
earth. For, from what other cause than this arise such a variety of
deceptions and frauds, such perfidy and cruelty, that all sense of
justice is extinguished by the contempt of God? Now, whenever we have a
difficult contest with the corruptions of our own age, let us reflect on
the times of Abraham, which, although they were filled with impiety and
other crimes yet did not divert the holy man from the course of duty.

<span id="xxvi.i-p70"></span><span id="xxvi.i-p70.1"></span>

<span id="xxvi.i-p71"></span>**12.** *And yet indeed she is my sister* .
Some suppose Sarah to have been Abraham’s own sister, yet not by the
same mothers but born from a second wife. As, however, the name sister
has a wider signification among the Hebrews, I willingly adopt a
different conjecture; namely, that she was his sister in the second
degree; thus it will be true that they had a common father, that is, a
grandfather, from whom they had descended by brothers. Moreover, Abraham
extenuates his offense, and draws a distinction between his silence and
a direct falsehood; and certainly he professed with truth, that he was
the brother of Sarah. Indeed it appears that he feigned nothing in words
which differed from the facts themselves; yet when all things have been
sifted, his defense proves to be either frivolous, or, at least, too
feeble. For since he had purposely used the name of sister as a pretext,
lest men should have some suspicion of his marriage; he sophistically
afforded them an occasion of falling into error. Wherefore, although he
did not lie in words, yet with respect to the matter of fact, his
dissimulation was a lie, by implication. He had, however, no other
intention than to declare that he had not dealt fraudulently with
Abimelech; but that, in an affair of great anxiety, he had caught at an
indirect method of escape from death, by the pretext of his previous
relationship to his wife.

<span id="xxvi.i-p72"></span><span id="xxvi.i-p72.1"></span>

<span id="xxvi.i-p73"></span>**13.** *When God caused me to wander*
 <span id="fr_429"></span>[430](#fn_429.md) Because the verb is here put in
the plural number, I freely expound the passage as referring to the
angels, who led Abraham through his various wanderings. Some, with too
much subtlety, infer from it a Trinity of Persons: as if it had been
written: *The gods caused me to wander* . I grant, indeed, that the
*noun* <span id="xxvi.i-p74.2"></span>םיהלא ( *Elohim* ,) is frequently
taken for God in the Scripture: but then the *verb* with which it is
connected is always singular. Wherever a plural verb is added then it
signifies angels or princes.  <span id="fr_430"></span>[431](#fn_430.md)
There are those who think that Abraham, because he was speaking with one
who was not rightly instructed, spoke thus in conformity with the common
custom of the heathen; but, in my opinion, most erroneously. For to what
purpose did he, by erecting altars, make it manifest that he was devoted
to the service of the only true God, if it were lawful for him
afterwards to deny, in words, the very God whom he had worshipped? On
which subject we have before spoken, as the case required. Abraham,
however, does not complain respecting, the angels, that he had been led
astray by their fallacious guidance: but he points out what his own
condition formerly was; namely, that having left his own country, he had
not only migrated into a distant land, but had been constantly compelled
to change his abode. Wherefore there is no wonder, that necessity drove
him into new designs. Should any one inquire, why he makes angels the
guides of his pilgrimage? the answer is ready; Although Abraham knew
that he was wandering by the will and providence of God alone, he yet
refers to angels, who, as he elsewhere acknowledges, were given him to
be the guides of his journey. The sum of the address is of this
tendency; to teach Abimelech, that Abraham was alike free from malicious
cunning, and from falsehood: and then, that because he was passing a
wandering and unquiet life; Sarah, by agreement, had always said the
same thing which she had done in Gerar. This wretched anxiety of the
holy man might so move Abimelech to compassion as to cause his anger to
cease.

<span id="xxvi.i-p76"></span><span id="xxvi.i-p76.1"></span>

<span id="xxvi.i-p77"></span>**14.** *And Abimelech took sheep* .
Abraham had before received possessions and gifts in Egypt; but with
this difference, that whereas Pharaoh had commanded him to depart
elsewhere; Abimelech offers him a home in his kingdom. It therefore
appears that both kings were stricken with no common degree of fear. For
when they perceived that they were reproved by the Lord, because they
had been troublesome to Abraham; they found no method of appeasing God,
except that of compensating, by acts of kindness, for the injury they
had brought on the holy man. The latter difference alluded to flowed
hence; that Pharaohs being more severely censured, was so terrified,
that he could scarcely bear the sight of Abraham: whereas Abimelech,
although alarmed, was yet soon composed by an added word of consolation,
when the Lord said to him, He is a prophet, and he shall pray for thee.
For there is no other remedy for the removal of fear, than the Lord’s
declaration that he will be propitious. It is indeed of little advantage
for the sinner to present to God only what fear extorts. But it is a
true sign of penitence, when, with a composed mind and quiet conscience,
he yields himself, as obedient and docile, to God. And seeing that
Abimelech allowed Abraham a habitation in his realm, a blessing of no
trivial kind followed this act of humanity; because Isaac was born
there, as we shall see in the next chapter (<span
id="xxvi.i-p77.1"></span>[Ge 20:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen020.htm#001.md)<span
id="xxvi.i-p77.1"></span>.)

<span id="xxvi.i-p78"></span><span id="xxvi.i-p78.1"></span>

<span id="xxvi.i-p79"></span>**16.** *He is to thee a covering of the
eyes* . Because there is, in these words, some obscurity, the passage is
variously explained. The beginning of the verse is free from difficulty.
For when Abimelech had given a thousand pieces of silver; in order that
his liberality might not be suspected, he declare6 that he had given
them to Abraham; and that since Abraham had been honorably received, his
wife was not to be regarded as a harlot. But what follows is more
obscure, ‘He shall be a veil to thee.’ Many interpreters refer this to
the gift; in which they seem to me to be wrong. The Hebrews, having no
neuter gender, use the feminine instead of it. But Moses, in this place,
rather points to the husband; and this best suits the sense. For Sarah
is taught that the husband to whom she is joined was as a veil, with
which she ought to be covered lest she should be exposed to others. Paul
says, that the veil which the woman carries on her head, is the symbol
of subjection. (<span id="xxvi.i-p79.1"></span>[1Co
11:10](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#010)<span id="xxvi.i-p79.1"></span>..md)
This also belongs to unmarried persons, as referring to the end for
which the sex is ordained; but it applies more aptly to married women;
because they are veiled, as by the very ordinance of marriage. I
therefore thus explain the words, ‘Thou, if thou hadst no husband,
wouldst be exposed to many dangers; but now, since God has appointed for
thee a guardian of thy modesty, it behoves thee to conceal thyself under
that veil. Why then hast thou of thine own accords thrown off this
covering?’ This was a just censure; because Sarah, pretending that she
was in the power of her husband, had deprived herself of the divine
protection.

<span id="xxvi.i-p80"></span>*Thus she was reproved* . Interpreters
distort this clause also. The natural exposition seems to me to be, that
the Lord had suffered Sarah to be reproved by a heathen king, that he
might the more deeply affect her with a sense of shame. For Moses draws
especial attention to the person of the speaker; because it seemed a
disgrace that the mother of the faithful should be reprehended by such a
master. Others suppose that Moses speaks of the profit which she had
received; seeing that she, instructed by such a lesson, would henceforth
learn to act differently. But Moses seems rather to point out that kind
of correction of which I have spoken; namely, that Sarah was humbled, by
being delivered over to the discipline of a heathen man.

<span id="xxvi.i-p81"></span><span id="xxvi.i-p81.1"></span>

<span id="xxvi.i-p82"></span>**17.** *So Abraham prayed* . In two
respects the wonderful favor of God towards Abraham was apparent; firsts
that, with outstretched hand, He avenged the injury done to him; and,
secondly, that, through Abraham’s prayer, He became pacified towards the
house of Abimelech. It was necessary to declare, that the house of
Abimelech had been healed in answer to Abraham’s prayers; in order that,
by such a benefit, the inhabitants might be the more closely bound to
him. A question, however, may be agitated respecting the kind of
punishment described in the expression, the whole house was barren. For
if Abraham had gone into the land of Gerar, after Sarah had conceived,
and if the whole of what Moses has here related was fulfilled before
Isaac was born, how was it possible that, in so short a time, this
sterility should be manifest? If we should say, that the judgment of God
was then made plain, in a manner to us unknown, the answer would not be
inappropriate. Yet I am not certain, that the series of the history has
not been inverted. The more probable supposition may seem to be, that
Abraham had already been resident in Gerar, when Isaac was promised to
him; but that the part, which had before been omitted, is now inserted
by Moses. Should any one object, that Abraham dwelt in Mamre till the
destruction of Sodom, there would be nothing absurd in the belief, that
what Moses here relates had taken place previously. Yet, since the
correct notation of time does little for the confirmation of our faith,
I leave both opinions undecided.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_427"></span>[428](cc01025.htm#fr_427.md) <span
id="xxvi.i-p42.1"></span>

<span id="xxvi.i-p43"></span> There seems too much of special pleading
in the reasoning of Calvin, both on this occasion, and on that referred
to, of a similar kind, in the twelfth chapter. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_428"></span>[429](cc01025.htm#fr_428.md) <span
id="xxvi.i-p50.1"></span>

<span id="xxvi.i-p51"></span> “<span id="xxvi.i-p51.1"></span>Inter
scelus et delictum.” — “Between an act of abandoned wickedness and a
mere fault.” — *Ed*

<span id="fn_429"></span>[430](cc01025.htm#fr_429.md) <span
id="xxvi.i-p73.1"></span>

<span id="xxvi.i-p74"></span> “<span id="xxvi.i-p74.1"></span>Quando
circumduxerunt me angeli.” — “When the angels led me about.”

<span id="fn_430"></span>[431](cc01025.htm#fr_430.md) <span
id="xxvi.i-p74.3"></span>

<span id="xxvi.i-p75"></span> The reasoning of Calvin is not conclusive.
There are cases, though but few, in which Elohim, as here, when joined
to a verb plural, signifies, not angels nor princes, but the true God.
See <span id="xxvi.i-p75.2"></span>[Ge
35:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen035.htm#007.md)<span id="xxvi.i-p75.2"></span>.
Calvin, however, in this passage also, translates the word, “angels.”
Still there seems no sufficient reason for departing from our own
received version. Dathe agrees with it. “<span
id="xxvi.i-p75.3"></span>Deinde cum Deus me ex patria mea migrare
juberet.” It is also confirmed by the *Septuagint* version. — See the
Commentary of Professor Bush, in loco. — *Ed*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 21](cc01026.md)
