[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc01011)  [Next](cc01013.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 1: Genesis, Part I*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xiii"></span>

<span id="xiii-p1"></span>CHAPTER 7.

<span id="xiii.i"></span>

<span id="xiii.i-p1"></span><span id="xiii.i-p1.1"></span>[Genesis
7:1-24](../../../bib/kjv/gen007.htm#001.md)<span id="xiii.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.i-p2"></span>**1.** And the LORD said unto Noah, Come
thou and all thy house into the ark; for thee have I seen righteous
before me in this generation.

<span id="xiii.i-p3"></span>**1.** Et dixit Jehova ad Noah, Ingredere
tu, et omnis domus tua arcam: quia to vidi justum coram me in aetate
ista.

<span id="xiii.i-p4"></span>**2.** Of every clean beast thou shalt take
to thee by sevens, the male and his female: and of beasts that *are* not
clean by two, the male and his female.

<span id="xiii.i-p5"></span>**2.** Ex omni animali mundo capies tibi
septena septena, virum et foemellam ejus: et ex animali quod non mundum
est, bina, virum et foemellam ejus.

<span id="xiii.i-p6"></span>**3.** Of fowls also of the air by sevens,
the male and the female; to keep seed alive upon the face of all the
earth.

<span id="xiii.i-p7"></span>**3.** Etiam ex volatili coeli septena,
masculum et foemellam: ut vivum conservetur semen in superficie omnis
terrae.

<span id="xiii.i-p8"></span>**4.** For yet seven days, and I will cause
it to rain upon the earth forty days and forty nights; and every living
substance that I have made will I destroy from off the face of the
earth.

<span id="xiii.i-p9"></span>**4.** Quia post dies adhuc septem ego pluam
super terram quadraginta dies, et quadraginta noctes, et delebo omnem
substantiam quam feci, a superficie terrae.

<span id="xiii.i-p10"></span>**5.** And Noah did according unto all that
the LORD commanded him.

<span id="xiii.i-p11"></span>**5.** Et fecit Noah secundum omnia quae
praeceperat ei Jehova.

<span id="xiii.i-p12"></span>**6.** And Noah *was* six hundred years old
when the flood of waters was upon the earth.

<span id="xiii.i-p13"></span>**6.** Noah autem erat sexcentorum annorum
quando diluvium fuit aquarum super terram.

<span id="xiii.i-p14"></span>**7.** And Noah went in, and his sons, and
his wife, and his sons’ wives with him, into the ark, because of the
waters of the flood.

<span id="xiii.i-p15"></span>**7.** Et ingressus Noah, et filii ejus, et
uxor ejus, et uxores filiorum ejus cum eo in arcam, propter aquas
diluvii.

<span id="xiii.i-p16"></span>**8.** Of clean beasts, and of beasts that
*are* not clean, and of fowls, and of every thing that creepeth upon the
earth,

<span id="xiii.i-p17"></span>**8.** Ex animali mundo, et ex animali quod
non erat mundum, et ex volatili, et ex omni quod reptat super terram,

<span id="xiii.i-p18"></span>**9.** There went in two and two unto Noah
into the ark, the male and the female, as God had commanded Noah.

<span id="xiii.i-p19"></span>**9.** Bina bina ingressa sunt ad Noah in
arcam, masculus et foemella, quemadmodum praeceperat Deus ipsi Noah.

<span id="xiii.i-p20"></span>**10.** And it came to pass after seven
days, that the waters of the flood were upon the earth.

<span id="xiii.i-p21"></span>**10.** Et fuit, post septem dies aquae
diluvii fuerunt super terram.

<span id="xiii.i-p22"></span>**11.** In the six hundredth year of Noah’s
life, in the second month, the seventeenth day of the month, the same
day were all the fountains of the great deep broken up, and the windows
of heaven were opened.

<span id="xiii.i-p23"></span>**11.** In anno sexcentesimo annorum vitae
Noah, in mense secundo, in septimadecima die mensis, die ipsa, rupti
sunt omnes fontes voraginis magnaaae, et fenestrae coeli apertae sunt.

<span id="xiii.i-p24"></span>**12.** And the rain was upon the earth
forty days and forty nights.

<span id="xiii.i-p25"></span>**12.** Et fuit pluvia super terram
quadraginta dies et quadraginta noctes.

<span id="xiii.i-p26"></span>**13.** In the selfsame day entered Noah,
and Shem, and Ham, and Japheth, the sons of Noah, and Noah’s wife, and
the three wives of his sons with them, into the ark;

<span id="xiii.i-p27"></span>**13.** Ipso eodem die ingressus est Noah,
et Sem, et Cham, et Jepheth, filii Noah, et uxor Noah, tresque uxores
filiorum ejus cum illis, in arcam:

<span id="xiii.i-p28"></span>**14.** They, and every beast after his
kind, and all the cattle after their kind, and every creeping thing that
creepeth upon the earth after his kind, and every fowl after his kind,
every bird of every sort.

<span id="xiii.i-p29"></span>**14.** Ipsi, et omnis bestia juxta speciem
suam, et omne animal juxta speciem suam, et omne reptile quod reptat
super terram, secundum speciem suam, et omne volatile juxta speciem
suam, omnis abis, et omne alatum.

<span id="xiii.i-p30"></span>**15.** And they went in unto Noah into the
ark, two and two of all flesh, wherein *is* the breath of life.

<span id="xiii.i-p31"></span>**15.** Ingressa sunt igitur ad Noah in
arcam, bina bina ex omni carne in qua erat spiritus vitae.

<span id="xiii.i-p32"></span>**16.** And they that went in, went in male
and female of all flesh, as God had commanded him: and the LORD shut him
in.

<span id="xiii.i-p33"></span>**16.** Et quae ingressa sunt, masculus et
foemina ex omni carne ingressa sunt, quemadmodum praeceperat ei Deus: et
clausit Jehova super eum.

<span id="xiii.i-p34"></span>**17.** And the flood was forty days upon
the earth; and the waters increased, and bare up the ark, and it was
lift up above the earth.

<span id="xiii.i-p35"></span>**17.** Et factum est diluvium quadraginta
dies super terram, et multilicatae sunt aquae, elevaveruntque arcam:
itaque elevata est a terra.

<span id="xiii.i-p36"></span>**18.** And the waters prevailed, and were
increased greatly upon the earth; and the ark went upon the face of the
waters.

<span id="xiii.i-p37"></span>**18.** Et praevaluerunt aquae, et
multiplicatae sunt valde super terram, et fluitabat arca super faciem
aquarum.

<span id="xiii.i-p38"></span>**19.** And the waters prevailed
exceedingly upon the earth; and all the high hills, that *were* under
the whole heaven, were covered.

<span id="xiii.i-p39"></span>**19.** Roboraverunt itaque se aquae valde
super terram, et operti sunt omnes montes excelsi qui erant sub universo
coelo.

<span id="xiii.i-p40"></span>**20.** Fifteen cubits upward did the
waters prevail; and the mountains were covered.

<span id="xiii.i-p41"></span>**20.** Quindecim cubitis superne
roboraverunt se aquae, ita ut operti sint montes.

<span id="xiii.i-p42"></span>**21.** And all flesh died that moved upon
the earth, both of fowl, and of cattle, and of beast, and of every
creeping thing that creepeth upon the earth, and every man:

<span id="xiii.i-p43"></span>**21.** Et mortua est omnis caro quae
reptabat super terram, tam de volatili quam de animali et bestia, et
omni reptili quod reptat super terram, et omni homine.

<span id="xiii.i-p44"></span>**22.** All in whose nostrils *was* the
breath of life, of all that *was* in the dry *land* , died.

<span id="xiii.i-p45"></span>**22.** Omnia in quorum nare erat anhelitus
spiritus vitae, ex omnibus quae erant in sicco, mortua sunt.

<span id="xiii.i-p46"></span>**23.** And every living substance was
destroyed which was upon the face of the ground, both man, and cattle,
and the creeping things, and the fowl of the heaven; and they were
destroyed from the earth: and Noah only remained *alive* , and they that
*were* with him in the ark.

<span id="xiii.i-p47"></span>**23.** Et delevit omnem substantiam vivam,
quae erat super faciem terrae, ab homine usque ad jumentum, usque ad
reptile, et usque ad volatile coeli: et deleta sunt e terra, et remansit
tantum Noah, et qui cum eo erant in arca.

<span id="xiii.i-p48"></span>**24.** And the waters prevailed upon the
earth an hundred and fifty days.

<span id="xiii.i-p49"></span>**24.** Et roboraverunt se aquae super
terram quinquaginta et centum dies.

<span id="xiii.i-p50"></span> 

<span id="xiii.i-p51"></span><span id="xiii.i-p51.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.i-p52"></span>**1.** *And* *the* *Lord* *said* *unto*
*Noah* . I have no doubt that Noah was confirmed, as he certainly needed
to be, by oracles frequently repeated. He had already sustained, during
one hundred years, the greatest and most furious assaults; and the
invincible combatant had achieved memorable victories; but the most
severe contest of all was, to bid farewell to the world, to renounce
society and to bury himself in the ark. The face of the earth was, at
that time, lovely; and Moses intimates that it was the season in which
the herbs shoot forth and the trees begin to flourish. Winter, which
binds the joy of sky and earth in sharp and rugged frost, has now passed
away; and the Lord has chosen the moment for destroying the world, in
the very season of spring. For Moses states that the commencement of the
deluge was in the second month. I know, however, that different opinions
prevail on this subject; for there are three who begin the year from the
autumnal equinox; but that mode of reckoning the year is more approved,
which makes it commence in the month of March. However this might be, it
was no light trial for Noah to leave of his own accord, the life to
which he had been accustomed during six hundred years, and to seek a new
mode of life in the abyss of death. He is commanded to forsake the
world, that he may live in a sepulcher which he had been labouriously
digging for himself through more than a hundred years. Why was this?
Because, in a little while, the earth was to be submerged in a deluge of
waters. Yet nothing of the kind is apparent: all indulge in feasts,
celebrate nuptials, build sumptuous houses; in short, everywhere,
daintiness and luxury prevail; as Christ himself testifies, that that
age was intoxicated with its own pleasures, (<span
id="xiii.i-p52.1"></span>[Lu
17:26](../../../bib/kjv/luk017.htm#026)<span id="xiii.i-p52.1"></span>..md)
Wherefore, it was not without reason, that the Lord encouraged and
fortified the mind of his servant afresh, by the renewal of the promise,
lest he should faint; as if he would says ‘Hitherto thou hast labored
with fortitude amid so many causes of offense; but now the case
especially demands that thou shouldst take courage, in order to reap the
fruit of thy labor: do not, however, wait till the waters burst forth on
every side from the opened veins of the earth, and till the higher
waters of heaven, with opposing violence, rush from their opened
cataracts; but while everything is yet tranquil, enter into the ark, and
there remain till the seventh day, then suddenly shall the deluge
arise.’ And although oracles are not now brought down from heaven, let
us know that continual meditation on the word is not ineffectual; for as
new difficulties perpetually arise before us, so God, by one and another
promise, establishes our faith, so that our strength being renewed, we
may at length arrive at the goal. Our duty, indeed, is, attentively to
hear God speaking to us; and neither through depraved fastidiousness, to
reject those exercises, by which He cherishes, or excites, or confirms
our faith, according as he knows it to be still tender, or languishing,
or weak; nor yet to reject them as superfluous. For thee have I seen
righteous. When the Lord assigns as his reason for preserving Noah, that
he knew him to be righteous, he seems to attribute the praise of
salvation to the merit of works; for if Noah was saved because he was
righteous, it follows, that we shall deserve life by good works. But
here it behaves us cautiously to weigh the design of God; which was to
place one man in contrast with the whole world, in order that, in his
person, he might condemn the unrighteousness of all men. For he again
testifies, that the punishment which he was about to inflict on the
world was just, seeing that only one man was left who then cultivated
righteousness, for whose sake he was propitious to his whole family.
Should any one object, that from this passage, God is proved to have
respect to works in saving men, the solution is ready; that this is not
repugnant to gratuitous acceptance, since God accepts those gifts which
he himself has conferred upon his servants. We must observe, in the
first place, that he loves men freely, inasmuch as he finds nothing in
them but what is worthy of hatred, since all men are born the children
of wrath, and heirs of eternal malediction. In this respect he adopts
them to himself in Christ, and justifies them by his mere mercy. After
he has, in this manner, reconciled them unto himself, he also
regenerates them, by his Spirit, to new life and righteousness. Hence
flow good works, which must of necessity be pleasing to God himself.
Thus he not only loves the *faithful* but also their *works* . We must
again observe, that since some fault always adheres to our works, it is
not possible that they can be approved, except as a matter of
indulgence. The grace, therefore, of Christ, and not their own dignity
or merit, is that which gives worth to our works. Nevertheless, we do
not deny that they come into the account before God: as he here
acknowledges and accepts the righteousness of Noah which had proceeded
from his own grace; and in this manner (as Augustine speaks) he will
crown his own gifts. We nay further notice the expression, “I have seen
thee righteous before me;” by which words, he not only annihilates all
that hypocritical righteousness which is destitute of interior sanctity
of heart, but vindicates his own authority; as if he would declare, that
he alone is a competent judge to estimate righteousness. The clause, in
this generation, is added, as I have said, for the sake of
amplification; for so desperate was the depravity of that age, that it
was regarded as a prodigy, that Noah should be free from the common
infection.

<span id="xiii.i-p53"></span><span id="xiii.i-p53.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.i-p54"></span>**2.** *Of* *every* *clean* *beast* . He
again repeats what he had before said concerning animals, and not
without occasion. For there was no little difficulty in collecting from
woods, mountains, and caves, so great a multitude of wild beasts, many
species of which were perhaps altogether unknown; and there was, in most
of them, the same ferocity which we now perceive. Wherefore, God
encourages the holy man, lest being alarmed with that difficulty, and
having cast aside all hope of success, he should fail. Here, however, at
first sight, appears some kind of contradiction, because whereas he
before had spoken of *pairs* of animals, he now speaks of *sevens* . But
the solution is at hand; because, previously, Moses does not state the
number, but only says that females were added as companions to the
males; as if he had said, Noah himself was commanded not to gather the
animals promiscuously together, but to select *pairs* out of them for
the propagation of offspring. Now, however, the discourse is concerning
the actual number. Moreover, the expression, by sevens, is to be
understood not of seven pairs of each kind, but of three pairs, to which
one animal is added for the sake of sacrifice.  <span
id="fr_275"></span>[276](#fn_275.md) Besides, the Lord would have a
threefold greater number of clean animals than of others preserved,
because there would be a greater necessity of them for the use of man.
In which appointment, we must consider the paternal goodness of God
towards us, by which he is inclined to have regard to us in all things.

<span id="xiii.i-p56"></span><span id="xiii.i-p56.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.i-p57"></span>**3.** *To* *keep* *seed* *alive* *upon*
*the* *face* *of* *all* *the* *earth* . That is, that hence offspring
might be born. But this is referred to Noah; for although, properly
speaking, God alone gives life, yet God here refers to those duties
which he had enjoined upon his servant: and it is with respect to his
appointed office, that God commands him to collect animals that he may
keep seed alive. Nor is this extraordinary, seeing that the ministers of
the gospel are said, in a sense, to confer spiritual life. In the clause
which next follows, upon the face of all the earth, there is a twofold
consolation: that the waters, after they had covered the earth for a
time, would again cease, so that the dry surface of the earth should
appear; and then, that not only should Noah himself survive, but, by the
blessing of God, the number of animals should be so increased, as to
spread far and wide through the whole world. Thus, in the midst of ruin,
future restoration is promised to him. Moses is very earnest in showing
that God took care, by every means, to retain Noah in obedience to his
word, and that the holy man entirely acquiesced. This doctrine is very
useful, especially when God either promises or threatens anything
incredible, since men do not willingly receive what seems to them
improbable. For nothing was less accordant with the judgment of the
flesh, than that the world should be destroyed by its Creator; because
this was to subvert the whole order of nature which he had established.
Wherefore, unless Noah had been well admonished of this terrible
judgment of God, he never would have ventured to believe it; lest he
should conceive of God as acting in contradiction to himself. The word
<span id="xiii.i-p57.1"></span>םוקיה ( *hayekom* ,) which Moses here
uses has its origin from a word signifying to stand; but it properly
means whatever lives and flourishes.

<span id="xiii.i-p58"></span><span id="xiii.i-p58.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.i-p59"></span>**5.** *And* *Noah* *did* *according* *to*
*all* *that* *the* *Lord* *commanded* . This is not a bare repetition of
the former sentence; but Moses commends Noah’s uniform tenor of
obedience in keeping all God’s commandments; as if he would say, that in
whatever particular it pleased God to try his obedience, he always
remained constant. And, certainly, it is not becoming to obey one or
another commandment of God only, so that when we have performed a
defective obedience, we should feel at liberty to withdraw; for we must
keep in memory the declaration of James,

<span id="xiii.i-p60"></span>‘He who forbade thee to kill, forbade thee
also to steal, and to commit adultery,’ (<span
id="xiii.i-p60.1"></span>[Jas
2:11](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#011)<span id="xiii.i-p60.1"></span>..md)

<span id="xiii.i-p61"></span><span id="xiii.i-p61.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.i-p62"></span>**6.** *And* *Noah* *was* *six* *hundred*
*years* *old* . It is not without reason that he again mentions the age
of Noah. For old age has this among other evils, that it renders men
more indolent and morose; whence the faith of Noah was the more
conspicuous, because it did not fail him in that advanced period of
life. And as it was a great excellence, not to languish through
successive centuries, so big promptitude deserves no little
commendation; because, being commanded to enter the ark, he immediately
obeyed. When Moses shortly afterwards subjoins, that he had entered on
account of the waters of the deluge, the words ought not to be
expounded, as if he were compelled, by the rushing of the waters, to
flee into the ark; but that he, being moved with fear by the word,
perceived by faith the approach of that deluge which all others
ridiculed. Wherefore, his faith is again commended in this place,
because, indeed, he raised his eyes above heaven and earth.

<span id="xiii.i-p63"></span><span id="xiii.i-p63.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.i-p64"></span>**8.** *Of* *clean* *beasts* . Moses now
explains, — what had before been doubtful, — in which manner the animals
were gathered together into the ark, and says that they came of their
own accord. If this should seem to any one absurd, let him recall to
mind what was said before, that in the beginning every kind of animals
presented themselves to Adam, that he might give them names. And, truly,
we dread the sight of wild beasts from no other cause than this, that
seeing we have shaken off the yoke of God, we have lost that authority
over them with which Adam was endued. Now, it was a kind of restoration
of the former state of things when God brought to Noah those animals
which he intended should be preserved through Noah’s labor and service.
For Noah retained the untamed animals in his ark, in the very same way
in which hens and geese are preserved in a coop. And it is not
superfluously added, that the animals themselves came, as God had
instructed Noah; for it shows that the blessing of God rested on the
obedience of Noah, so that his labor should not be in vain. It was
impossible, humanly speaking, that in a moment such an assemblage of all
animals should take place; but because Noah, simply trusting the event
with God, executed what was enjoined upon him; God, in return, gave
power to his own precept, that it might not be without effect. Properly
speaking, this was a promise of God annexed to his commands. And,
therefore, we must conclude, that the faith of Noah availed more, than
all snares and nets, for the capture of animals; and that, by the very
same gate, lions, and wolves, and tigers, meekly entered, with oxen, and
with lambs, into the ark. And this is the only method by which we may
overcome all difficulties; while, — being persuaded, that what is
impossible to us is easy to God, — we derive alacrity from hope. It has
before been stated that the animals entered in by pairs. We have also
related the different opinions of interpreters respecting the month in
which the deluge took place. For since the Hebrews begin their year in
sacred things from March, but in earthly affairs from September; or, —
which is the same thing, — since the two equinoxes form with them a
double commencement of the year, some think that the *sacred* year, and
some the *political* , is here intended. But because the former method
of reckoning the years was Divinely appointed, and is also more
agreeable to nature, it seems probable that the deluge began about the
time of spring.

<span id="xiii.i-p65"></span><span id="xiii.i-p65.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.i-p66"></span>**11.** *The* *same* *day* *were* *all*
*the* *fountains* *of* *the* *great* *deep* *broken* *up* . Moses
recalls the period of the first creation to our memory; for the earth
was originally covered with water; and by the singular kindness of God,
they were made to recede, that some space should be left clear for
living creatures. And this, philosophers are compelled to acknowledge,
that it is contrary to the course of nature for the waters to subside,
so that some portion of the earth might rise above them. And Scripture
records this among the miracles of God, that he restrains the force of
the sea, as with barriers, lest it should overwhelm that part of the
earth which is granted for a habitation to men. Moses also says, in the
first chapter, that some waters were suspended above in the heaven; and
David, in like manner, declares, that they are held enclosed as in a
bottle. Lastly, God raised for men a theater in the habitable region of
the earth; and caused, by his secret power, that the subterraneous
waters should not break forth to overwhelm us, and the celestial waters
should not conspire with them for that purpose. Now, however, Moses
states, that when God resolved to destroy the earth by a deluge, those
barriers were torn up. And here we must consider the wonderful counsel
of God; for he might have deposited, in certain channels or veins of the
earth, as much water as would have sufficed for all the purposes of
human life; but he has designedly placed us between two graves, lest, in
fancied security, we should despise that kindness on which our life
depends. For the element of water, which philosophers deem one of the
principles of life, threatens us with death from above and from beneath,
except so far as it is restrained by the hand of God. In saying that the
fountains were broken up, and the cataracts opened, his language is
metaphorical, and means, that neither did the waters flow in their
accustomed manner, nor did the rain distil from heaven; but that the
distinctions which we see had been established by God, being now
removed, there were no longer any bars to restrain the violent
irruption.

<span id="xiii.i-p67"></span><span id="xiii.i-p67.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.i-p68"></span>**12.** *And* *the* *rain* *was* *upon*
*the* *earth* . Although the Lord burst open the floodgates of the
waters, yet he does not allow them to break forth in a moment, so as
immediately to overwhelm the earth, but causes the rain to continue
forty days; partly, that Noah, by long meditation, might more deeply fix
in his memory what he had previously learned, by instruction, through
the word; partly, that the wicked, even before their death, might feel
that those warnings which they had held in derision, were not empty
threats. For they who had so long scorned the patience of God, deserved
to feel that they were gradually perishing under that righteous judgment
of his, which, during a hundred years, they had treated as a fable. And
the Lord frequently so tempers his judgments, that men may have leisure
to consider with more advantage those judgments which, by their sudden
eruption, might overcome them with astonishment. But the wonderful
depravity of our nature shows itself in this, that if the anger of God
is suddenly poured forth, we become stupefied and senseless; but if it
advances with measured pace, we become so accustomed to it as to despise
it; because we do not willingly acknowledge the hand of God without
miracles; and because we are easily hardened, by a kind of superinduced
insensibility, at the sight of God’s works.

<span id="xiii.i-p69"></span><span id="xiii.i-p69.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.i-p70"></span>**13.** *In* *the* *self-same* *day*
*entered* *Noah* *,* *and* *Shem* *,* *etc* . A repetition follows,
sufficiently particular, considering the brevity with which Moses runs
through the history of the deluge, yet by no means superfluous. For it
was the design of the Spirit to retain our minds in the consideration of
a vengeance too terrible to be adequately described by the utmost
severity of language. Besides, nothing is here related but what is
difficult to be believed; wherefore Moses the more frequently inculcates
these things, that however remote they may be from our apprehension,
they may still obtain credit with us. Thus the narration respecting the
animals refers to this point; that by the faith of holy Noah they were
drawn from their woods and caverns and were collected in one place from
their wandering courses, as if they had been led by the hand of God. We
see, therefore, that Moses does not insist upon this point without an
object; but he does it to teach us that each species of animals was
preserved, not by chance, nor by human industry, but because the Lord
reached out and offered to Noah himself, from hand to hand, (as they
say,) whatever animal he intended to keep alive.

<span id="xiii.i-p71"></span><span id="xiii.i-p71.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.i-p72"></span>**16.** *And* *the* *Lord* *shut* *him*
*in* . This is not added in vain, nor ought it to be lightly passed
over. That door must have been large, which could admit an elephant. And
truly, no pitch would be sufficiently firm and tenacious, and no joining
sufficiently solid, to prevent the immense force of the water from
penetrating through its many seams, especially in an irruption so
violent, and in a shock so severe. Therefore, Moses, to cut off occasion
for the vain speculations which our own curiosity would suggest,
declares in one word, that the ark was made secure from the deluge, not
by human artifice, but by divine miracle. It is, indeed, not to be
doubted that Noah had been endued with new ability and sagacity, that
nothing might be defective in the structure of the ark. But lest even
this favor should be without success, it was necessary for something
greater to be added. Wherefore, that we might not measure the mode of
preserving the ark by the capacity of our own judgment, Moses teaches
use that the waters were not restrained from breaking in upon the ark,
by pitch or bitumen only, but rather by the secret power of God, and by
the interposition of his hand.

<span id="xiii.i-p73"></span><span id="xiii.i-p73.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.i-p74"></span>**17.** *And* *the* *flood* *was* *forty*
*days* *,* *etc* . Moses copiously insists upon this fact, in order to
show that the whole world was immersed in the waters. Moreover, it is to
be regarded as the special design of this narrations that we should not
ascribe to fortune, the flood by which the world perished; how ever
customary it may be for men to cast some veil over the works of God,
which may obscure either his goodness or his judgments manifested in
them. But seeing it is plainly declared, that whatever was flourishing
on the earth was destroyed, we hence infer, that it was an indisputable
and signal judgment of God; especially since Noah alone remained secure,
because he had embraced, by faith, the word in which salvation was
contained. He then recalls to memory what we before have said; namely
how desperate had been the impiety, and how enormous the crimes of men,
by which God was induced to destroy the whole world; whereas, on account
of his great clemency, he would have spared his own workmanship, had he
seen that any milder remedy could have been effectually applied. These
two things, directly opposed to each other, he connects together; that
the whole human race was destroyed, but that Noah and his family safely
escaped. Hence we learn how profitable it was for Noah, disregarding the
world, to obey God alone: which Moses states not so much for the sake of
praising the man, as for that of inviting us to imitate his example.
Moreover, lest the multitude of sinners should draw us away from God; we
must patiently bear that the ungodly should hold us up to ridicule, and
should triumph over us, until the Lord shall show by the final issue,
that our obedience has been approved by him. In this sense, Peter
teaches that Noah’s deliverance from the universal deluge was a figure
of baptism, (<span id="xiii.i-p74.1"></span>[1Pe
3:21](../../../bib/kjv/pe1003.htm#021)<span id="xiii.i-p74.1"></span>;.md)
as if he had said, the method of the salvation, which we receive through
baptism, degrees with this deliverance of Noah. Since at this time also
the world is full of unbelievers as it was then; therefore it is
necessary for us to separate ourselves from the greater multitude, that
the Lord may snatch us from destruction. In the same manner, the Church
is fitly, and justly, compared to the ark. But we must keep in mind the
similitude by which they mutually correspond with each other; for that
is derived from the word of God alone; because as Noah believing the
promise of God, gathered himself his wife and his children together, in
order that under a certain appearance of death, he might emerge out of
death; so it is fitting that we should renounce the world and die, in
order that the Lord may quicken us by his word. For nowhere else is
there any security of salvation. The Papists, however, act ridiculously
who fabricate for us an ark without the word.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_275"></span>[276](cc01012.htm#fr_275.md) <span
id="xiii.i-p54.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.i-p55"></span> Le Clerc objects to this interpretation,
and supposes that seven of each sex, of unclean animals, were admitted
into the ark. Perhaps a skeptical objection to the use of the seventh
animal, as a sacrifice, inclined him to adopt this interpretation.
Commentators, however, have generally preferred the solution here given.
— *Ed*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 8](cc01013.md)
