[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc01026)  [Next](cc01028.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 1: Genesis, Part I*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xxviii"></span>

<span id="xxviii-p1"></span>CHAPTER 22.

<span id="xxviii.i"></span>

<span id="xxviii.i-p1"></span><span id="xxviii.i-p1.1"></span>[Genesis
22:1-24](../../../bib/kjv/gen022.htm#001.md)<span
id="xxviii.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xxviii.i-p2"></span>**1.** And it came to pass after these
things, that God did tempt Abraham, and said unto him, Abraham: and he
said, Behold, *here* I *am*

<span id="xxviii.i-p3"></span>**1.** Et fuit, posthaec Deus tentavit
Abraham, et dixit ad eum, Abraham: qui dixit, Ecce ego.

<span id="xxviii.i-p4"></span>**2.** And he said, Take now thy son,
thine only *son* Isaac, whom thou lovest, and get thee into the land of
Moriah; and offer him there for a burnt offering upon one of the
mountains which I will tell thee of.

<span id="xxviii.i-p5"></span>**2.** Et dixit, Tolle nunc filium tuum,
unicum tuum, quem dilexisti Ishac, et vade ad terram Moriah, et offer
eum ibi in holocaustum super unum e montibus, quem dixero tibi.

<span id="xxviii.i-p6"></span>**3.** And Abraham rose up early in the
morning, and saddled his ass, and took two of his young men with him,
and Isaac his son, and clave the wood for the burnt offering, and rose
up, and went unto the place of which God had told him.

<span id="xxviii.i-p7"></span>**3.** Et surrexit Abraham mane, et
stravit asinum suum, et cepit duos pueros suos secum, et Ishac filium
suum: et scidit ligna holocausti: et surrexit, perrexitque ad locum,
quem dixerat ei Deus.

<span id="xxviii.i-p8"></span>**4.** Then on the third day Abraham
lifted up his eyes, and saw the place afar off.

<span id="xxviii.i-p9"></span>**4.** Die tertia levavit Abraham oculos
suos, et vidit locum procul.

<span id="xxviii.i-p10"></span>**5.** And Abraham said unto his young
men, Abide ye here with the ass; and I and the lad will go yonder and
worship, and come again to you.

<span id="xxviii.i-p11"></span>**5.** Et dixit Abraham ad pueros suos,
Manete hic cum asino: et ego et puer pergemus usque illuc, et
adorabimus, revertemurque ad vos.

<span id="xxviii.i-p12"></span>**6.** And Abraham took the wood of the
burnt offering, and laid *it* upon Isaac his son; and he took the fire
in his hand, and a knife; and they went both of them together.

<span id="xxviii.i-p13"></span>**6.** Et accepit Abraham ligna
holocausti, et posuit super Ishac filium suum, et accepit in manu sua
ignem et gladium, et perrexerunt ambo pariter

<span id="xxviii.i-p14"></span>**7.** And Isaac spake unto Abraham his
father, and said, My father: and he said, Here *am* I, my son. And he
said, Behold the fire and the wood: but where *is* the lamb for a burnt
offering?

<span id="xxviii.i-p15"></span>**7.** Dixit autem Ishac ad Abraham
patrem suum, dixit, inquam, Pater mi. Et dixit, Ecce ego fili mi. Et
dixit, Ecce ignis et ligna, et ubi pecus in holocaustum?

<span id="xxviii.i-p16"></span>**8.** And Abraham said, My son, God will
provide himself a lamb for a burnt offering: so they went both of them
together.

<span id="xxviii.i-p17"></span>**8.** Et dixit Abraham, Deus prospiciet
sibi pecudem in holocaustum, fili mi. Itaque perrexerunt ambo pariter.

<span id="xxviii.i-p18"></span>**9.** And they came to the place which
God had told him of; and Abraham built an altar there, and laid the wood
in order, and bound Isaac his son, and laid him on the altar upon the
wood.

<span id="xxviii.i-p19"></span>**9.** Et venerunt ad locum, quem dixerat
ei Deus: et aedificavit ibi Abraham altare, et ordinavit ligna, et
ligavit Ishac filium suum, et posuit eum super altare super ligna.

<span id="xxviii.i-p20"></span>**10.** And Abraham stretched forth his
hand, and took the knife to slay his son.

<span id="xxviii.i-p21"></span>**10.** Et misit Abraham manum suam, et
accepit gladium ut jugularet filium suum.

<span id="xxviii.i-p22"></span>**11.** And the angel of the LORD called
unto him out of heaven, and said, Abraham, Abraham: and he said, Here
*am* I.

<span id="xxviii.i-p23"></span>**11.** Et clamavit ad eum angelus
Jehovae de coelo, et dixit, Abraham, Abraham. Et dixit, Ecce ego.

<span id="xxviii.i-p24"></span>**12.** And he said, Lay not thine hand
upon the lad, neither do thou any thing unto him: for now I know that
thou fearest God, seeing thou hast not withheld thy son, thine only
*son* from me.

<span id="xxviii.i-p25"></span>**12.** Et dixit, Ne extendas manum tuam
in puerum, et ne facias ei quicquam: quia nunc cognovi quod times Deum,
nec prohibuisti filium tuum unicum a me.

<span id="xxviii.i-p26"></span>**13.** And Abraham lifted up his eyes,
and looked, and behold behind *him* a ram caught in a thicket by his
horns: and Abraham went and took the ram, and offered him up for a burnt
offering in the stead of his son.

<span id="xxviii.i-p27"></span>**13.** Tunc levavit Abraham oculos suos,
et vidit, et ecce aries post eum detentus in perplexitate spinarum
cornibus suis: et perrexit Abraham, et accepitarietem, obtulitque eum in
holocaustum pro filio suo.

<span id="xxviii.i-p28"></span>**14.** And Abraham called the name of
that place Jehovahjireh: as it is said *to* this day, In the mount of
the LORD it shall be seen.

<span id="xxviii.i-p29"></span>**14.** Et vocavit Abraham nomen loci
ipsius, Jehova videbit: idcirco dicitur hodie, In monte Jehova videbit.

<span id="xxviii.i-p30"></span>**15.** And the angel of the LORD called
unto Abraham out of heaven the second time,

<span id="xxviii.i-p31"></span>**15.** Et clamavit angelus Jehovae ad
Abraham secundo e coelo,

<span id="xxviii.i-p32"></span>**16.** And said, By myself have I sworn,
saith the LORD, for because thou hast done this thing, and hast not
withheld thy son, thine only *son* :

<span id="xxviii.i-p33"></span>**16.** Et dixit, Per me juravi, dixit
Jehova, certe pro eo quod fecistirem hanc, et non prohibuisti filium
tuum unicum tuum:

<span id="xxviii.i-p34"></span>**17.** That in blessing I will bless
thee, and in multiplying I will multiply thy seed as the stars of the
heaven, and as the sand which *is* upon the sea shore; and thy seed
shall possess the gate of his enemies;

<span id="xxviii.i-p35"></span>**17.** Quod benedicendo benedicam tibi,
et multplicando multplicabo semen tuum sicut stellas coeli, et sicut
arenam, quae est juxta litus maris: et haereditabit semen tuum portam
inimicorum suorum.

<span id="xxviii.i-p36"></span>**18.** And in thy seed shall all the
nations of the earth be blessed; because thou hast obeyed my voice.

<span id="xxviii.i-p37"></span>**18.** Et benedicentur in semine tuo
omnes gentes terrae, eo quod obedivisti voci meae.

<span id="xxviii.i-p38"></span>**19.** So Abraham returned unto his
young men, and they rose up and went together to Beersheba; and Abraham
dwelt at Beersheba.

<span id="xxviii.i-p39"></span>**19.** Postea reversus est Abraham ad
pueros suos, et surrexerunt, perrexeruntque pariter in Beer-sebah, et
habitavit Abraham in Beer-sebah.

<span id="xxviii.i-p40"></span>**20.** And it came to pass after these
things, that it was told Abraham, saying, Behold, Milcah, she hath also
born children unto thy brother Nahor;

<span id="xxviii.i-p41"></span>**20.** Et fuit, posthaec nuntiatum fuit
ipsi Abraham, dicendo, Ecce, peperit Milchah etiam ipsa filios nachor
fratri tuo.

<span id="xxviii.i-p42"></span>**21.** Huz his firstborn, and Buz his
brother, and Kemuel the father of Aram,

<span id="xxviii.i-p43"></span>**21.** Hus primogenitum suum, et Buz
fratrem ejus, et Cemuel patrem Aram,

<span id="xxviii.i-p44"></span>**22.** And Chesed, and Hazo, and
Pildash, and Jidlaph, and Bethuel.

<span id="xxviii.i-p45"></span>**22.** Et Chesed, et Hazo, et Pildas, et
Idlaph, et Bethuel:

<span id="xxviii.i-p46"></span>**23.** And Bethuel begat Rebekah: these
eight Milcah did bear to Nahor, Abraham’s brother.

<span id="xxviii.i-p47"></span>**23.** Et Bethuel genuit Ribcah: octo
istos peperit Milchah ipsi nachor fratri Abraham.

<span id="xxviii.i-p48"></span>**24.** And his concubine, whose name
*was* Reumah, she bare also Tebah, and Gaham, and Thahash, and Maachah.

<span id="xxviii.i-p49"></span>**24.** Et concubina ejus, cujus nomen
Reumah, peperit etiam ipsa Tebah, et Gaham, et Thahas, et Mahachah.

<span id="xxviii.i-p50"></span> 

<span id="xxviii.i-p51"></span><span id="xxviii.i-p51.1"></span>

<span id="xxviii.i-p52"></span>**1.** *And it came to pass* . This
chapter contains a most memorable narrative. For although Abraham,
through the whole course of his life, gave astonishing proofs of faith
and obedience, yet none more excellent can be imagined than the
immolation of his son. For other temptations with which the Lord had
exercised him, tended, indeed, to his mortification; but this inflicted
a wound far more grievous than death itself. Here, however, we must
consider something greater and higher than the paternal grief rind
anguish, which, being produced by the death of an only son, pierced
through the breast of the holy man. It was sad for him to be deprived of
his only son, sadder still that this eon should be torn away by a
violent death, but by far the most grievous that he himself should be
appointed as the executioner to slay him with his own hand. Other
circumstances, which will be noted in their proper place, I now omit.
But all these things, if we compare them with the spiritual conflict of
conscience which he endured, will appear like the mere play, or shadows
of conflicts. For the great source of grief to him was not his own
bereavement, not that he was commanded to slay his only heir, the hope
of future memorial and of name, the glory and support of his family; but
that, in the person of this son, the whole salvation of the world seemed
to be extinguished and to perish. His contest, too, was not with his
carnal passions, but, seeing that he wished to devote himself wholly to
God, his very piety and religion filled him with distracting thoughts.
For God, as if engaging in personal contest with him, requires the death
of the boy, to whose person He himself had annexed the hope of eternal
salvation. So that this latter command was, in a certain sense, the
destruction of faith. This foretaste of the story before us, it was
deemed useful to give to the readers, that they may reflect how
deserving it is of diligent and constant meditation.

<span id="xxviii.i-p53"></span>*After these things God did tempt
Abraham* . The expression, after these things, is not to be restricted
to his last vision; Moses rather intended to comprise in one word the
various events by which Abraham had been tossed up and down; and again,
the somewhat more quiet state of life which, in his old age, he had
lately begun to obtain. He had passed an unsettled life in continued
exile up to his eightieth year; having been harassed with many
contumelies and injuries, he had endured with difficulty a miserable and
anxious existence, in continual trepidation; famine had driven him out
of the land whither he had gone, by the command and under the auspices
of God, into Egypt. Twice his wife had been torn from his bosom; he had
been separated from his nephew; he had delivered this nephew, when
captured in war, at the peril of his own life. He had lived childless
with his wife, when yet all his hopes were suspended upon his having
offspring. Having at length obtained a son, he was compelled to
disinherit him, and to drive him far from home. Isaac alone remained,
his special but only consolation; be was enjoying peace at home, but now
God suddenly thundered out of heaven, denouncing the sentence of death
upon this son. The meaning, therefore, of the passage is, that by this
temptation, as if by the last act, the faith of Abraham was far more
severely tried than before.

<span id="xxviii.i-p54"></span>*God did tempt Abraham* . James, in
denying that any one is tempted by God, (<span
id="xxviii.i-p54.1"></span>[Jas
1:13](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#013.md)<span
id="xxviii.i-p54.1"></span>,) refutes the profane calumnies of those
who, to exonerate themselves from the blame of their sins, attempt to
fix the charge of them upon God. Wherefore, James truly contends, that
those sins, of which we have the root in our own concupiscence, ought
not to be charged upon another. For though Satan instils his poison, and
fans the flame of our corrupt desires within us, we are yet not carried
by any external force to the commission of sin; but our own flesh
entices us, and we willingly yield to its allurements. This, however is
no reason why God may not be said to tempt us in his own way, just as he
tempted Abraham, — that is, brought him to a severe test, — that he
might make full trial of the faith of his servant.

<span id="xxviii.i-p55"></span>*And said unto him* . Moses points out
the kind of temptation; namely, that God would shake the faith which the
holy man had placed in His *word* , by a counter assault of the word
itself. He therefore addresses him by name, that there may be no doubt
respecting the Author of the command. For unless Abraham had been fully
persuaded that it was the voice of God which commanded him to slay his
son Isaac, he would have been easily released from anxiety; for, relying
on the certain promise of God, he would have rejected the suggestion as
the fallacy of Satan; and thus, without any difficulty, the temptation
would have been shaken off. But now all occasion of doubt is removed; so
that, without controversy, he acknowledges the oracle, which he hears,
to be from God. Meanwhile, God, in a certain sense, assumes a double
character, that, by the appearance of disagreement and repugnance in
which He presents Himself in his word, he may distract and wound the
breast of the holy man. For the only method of cherishing constancy of
faith, is to apply all our senses to the word of God. But so great was
then the discrepancy of the word, that it would wound and lacerate the
faith of Abraham. Wherefore, there is great emphasis in the word,
“said,”  <span id="fr_444"></span>[445](#fn_444.md) because God indeed made
trial of Abraham’s faith, not in the usual manner, but by drawing him
into a contest with his own word.  <span
id="fr_445"></span>[446](#fn_445.md) Whatever temptations assail us, let us
know that the victory is in our own hands, so long as we are endued with
a firm faith; otherwise, we shall be, by no means, able to resist. If,
when we are deprived of the sword of the Spirit, we are overcome, what
would be our condition were God himself to attack us with the very
sword, with which he had been wont to arm us? This, however, happened to
Abraham. The manner in which Abraham, by faith, wrestled with this
temptation, we shall afterwards see, in the proper place.

<span id="xxviii.i-p58"></span>*And he said, Behold, here I am* . It
hence appears that the holy man was, in no degree, afraid of the wiles
of Satan. For the faithful are not in such haste to obey God, as to
allow a foolish credulity to carry them away, in whatever direction the
breath of a doubtful vision may blow. But when it was once clear to
Abraham, that he was called by God, he testified, by this answer, his
prompt desire to yield obedience. For the expression before us is as
much as if he said, Whatever God may have been pleased to command, I am
perfectly ready to carry into effect. And, truly, he does not wait till
God should expressly enjoin this or the other thing, but promises that
he will be simply, and without exception, obedient in all things. This,
certainly, is true subjection, when we are prepared to act, before the
will of God is known to us. We find, indeed, all men ready to boast that
they will do as Abraham did; but when it comes to the trial, they shrink
from the yoke of God. But the holy man, soon afterwards, proves, by his
very act, how truly and seriously he had professed, that he, without
delay, and without disputation, would subject himself to the hand of
God.

<span id="xxviii.i-p59"></span><span id="xxviii.i-p59.1"></span>

<span id="xxviii.i-p60"></span>**2.** *Take now thy son* . Abraham is
commanded to immolate his son. If God had said nothing more than that
his son should die, even this message would have most grievously wounded
his mind; because, whatever favor he could hope for from God, was
included in this single promise, In Isaac shall thy seed be called.
Whence he necessarily inferred, that his own salvation, and that of the
whole human race, would perish, unless Isaac remained in safety. For he
was taught, by that word, that God would not be propitious to man
without a Mediator. For although the declaration of Paul, that ‘all the
promises of God in Christ are yea and Amen,’ was not yet written, (<span
id="xxviii.i-p60.1"></span>[2Co
1:20](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#020.md)<span
id="xxviii.i-p60.1"></span>,) it was nevertheless engraven on the heart
of Abraham. Whence, however, could he have had this hope, but from
Isaac? The matter had come to this; that God would appear to have done
nothing but mock him. Yet not only is the death of his son announced to
him, but he is commanded with his own hand to slay him, as if he were
required, not only to throw aside, but to cut in pieces, or cast into
the fire, the charter of his salvation, and to have nothing left for
himself, but death and hell. But it may be asked, how, under the
guidance of faith, he could be brought to sacrifice his son, seeing that
what was proposed to him, was in opposition to that word of God, on
which it is necessary for faith to rely? To this question the Apostle
answers, that his confidence in the word of God remained unshaken;
because he hoped that God would be able to cause the promised
benediction to spring up, even out of the dead ashes of his son. (<span
id="xxviii.i-p60.2"></span>[Heb
11:19](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#019.md)<span
id="xxviii.i-p60.2"></span>.) His mind, however, must of necessity have
been severely crushed, and violently agitated, when the *command* and
the *promise* of God were conflicting within him. But when he had come
to the conclusion, that the God with whom he knew he had to do, could
not be his adversary; although he did not immediately discover how the
contradiction might be removed, he nevertheless, by hope, reconciled the
command with the promise; because, being indubitably persuaded that God
was faithful, he left the unknown issue to Divine Providence. Meanwhile,
as with closed eyes, he goes whither he is directed. The truth of God
deserves this honor; not only that it should far transcend all human
means, or that it alone, even without means, should suffice us, but also
that it should surmount all obstacles. Here, then, we perceive, more
clearly, the nature of the temptation which Moses has pointed out. It
was difficult and painful to Abraham to forget that he was a father and
a husband; to cast off all human affections; and to endure, before the
world, the disgrace of shameful cruelty, by becoming the executioner of
his son. But the other was a far more severe and horrible thing; namely,
that he conceives God to contradict Himself and His own word; and then,
that he supposes the hope of the promised blessing to be cut off from
him, when Isaac is torn away from his embrace. For what more could he
have to do with God, when the only pledge of grace is taken away? But as
before, when he expected seed from his own dead body, he, by hope, rose
above what it seemed possible to hope for; so now, when, in the death of
his son, he apprehends the quickening power of God, in such a manner, as
to promise himself a blessing out of the ashes of his son, he emerges
from the labyrinth of temptation; for, in order that he might obey God,
it was necessary that he should tenaciously hold the promise, which, had
it failed, faith must have perished. But with him the promise always
flourished; because he both firmly retained the love with which God had
once embraced him, and subjected to the power of God everything which
Satan raised up to disturb his mind. But he was unwilling to measure, by
his own understanding, the method of fulfilling the promise, which he
knew depended on the incomprehensible power of God. It remains for every
one of us to apply this example to himself. The Lord, indeed, is so
indulgent to our infirmity, that he does not thus severely and sharply
try our faith: yet he intended, in the father of all the faithful, to
propose an example by which he might call us to a general trial of
faith. For the faith, which is more precious than gold and silver, ought
not to lie idle, without trial; and experience teaches, that each will
be tried by God, according to the measure of his faith. At the same
time, also, we may observe, that God tempts his servants, not only when
he subdues the affections of the flesh, but when he reduces all their
senses to nothing, that he may lead them to a complete renunciation of
themselves.

<span id="xxviii.i-p61"></span>*Thine only son Isaac, whom thou lovest*
. As if it were not enough to command in one word the sacrifice of his
son, he pierces, as with fresh strokes, the mind of the holy man. By
calling him his *only* son, he again irritates the wound recently
indicted, by the banishment of the other son; he then looks forward into
futurity, because no hope of offspring would remain. If the death of a
firstborn son is wont to be grievous, what must the mourning of Abraham
be? Each word which follows is emphatical, and serves to aggravate his
grief. ‘Slay’ (he says) ‘him whom alone thou lowest.’ And he does not
here refer merely to his paternal love, but to that which sprung from
faith. Abraham loved his son, not only as nature dictates, and as
parents commonly do, who take delight in their children, but as
beholding the paternal love of God in him: lastly, Isaac was the mirror
of eternal life, and the pledge of all good things. Wherefore God seems
not so much to assail the paternal love of Abraham, as to trample upon
His own benevolence. There is equal emphasis in the name *Isaac* by
which Abraham was taught, that nowhere besides did any joy remain for
him. Certainly, when he who had been given as the occasion of joy, was
taken away, it was just as if God should condemn Abraham to eternal
torment. We must always remember that Isaac was not a son of the common
order, but one in whose person the Mediator was promised.

<span id="xxviii.i-p62"></span>*Get thee into the land of Moriah* . The
bitterness of grief is not a little increased by this circumstance. For
God does not require him to put his son immediately to death, but
compels him to revolve this execution in his mind during three whole
days, that in preparing himself to sacrifice his son, he may still more
severely torture all his own senses. Besides, he does not even name the
place where he requires that dire sacrifice to be offered, Upon one of
the mountains, (he says,) that I will tell thee of. So before, when he,
commanded him to leave his country he held his mind in suspense. But in
this affair, the delay which most cruelly tormented the holy man, as if
he had been stretched upon the rack, was still less tolerable. There
was, however, a twofold use of this suspense. For there is nothing to
which we are more prone than to be wise beyond our measure. Therefore,
in order that we may become docile and obedient to God, it is profitable
for us that we should be deprived of our own wisdom, and that nothing
should be left us, but to resign ourselves to be led according to his
will. Secondly, this tended also to make him persevere, so that he
should not obey God by a merely sudden impulse. For, as he does not turn
back in his journey, nor revolve conflicting counsels; it hence appears,
that his love to God was confirmed by such constancy, that it could not
be affected by any change of circumstances. Jerome explains the land of
Moriah to be ‘the land of vision,’ as if the name had been derived
from<span id="xxviii.i-p62.1"></span> האר ( *rahah* .) But all who are
skilled in the Hebrew language condemn this opinion. Nor am I better
satisfied with those who interpret it the *myrrh* of God.  <span
id="fr_446"></span>[447](#fn_446.md) It is certainly acknowledged by the
consent of the greater part, that it is derived from the word <span
id="xxviii.i-p63.2"></span>הרי ( *yarah* ,) which signifies to teach or
from <span id="xxviii.i-p63.3"></span>ארי ( *yarai* ,) which signifies
to *fear* . There is, however, even at this time, a difference among
interpreters, some thinking that the doctrine of God is here specially
inculcated. Let us follow the most probable opinion; namely, that it is
called the land of divine worship, either because God had appointed it
for the offering of the sacrifice, in order that Abraham might not
dispute whether some other place should not rather be chosen; or because
the place for the temple was already fixed there; and I rather adopt
this second explanation; that God there required a present worship from
his servant Abraham, because already in his secret counsel, he had
determined in that place to fix his ordinary worship. And sacrifices
properly receive their name from the word which signifies *fear* ,
because they give proof of reverence to God. Moreover, it is by no means
doubtful that this is the place where the temple was. afterwards built.
 <span id="fr_447"></span>[448](#fn_447.md)

<span id="xxviii.i-p65"></span><span id="xxviii.i-p65.1"></span>

<span id="xxviii.i-p66"></span>**3.** *And Abraham rose up early in the
morning.* This promptitude shows the greatness of Abraham’s faith.
Innumerable thoughts might come into the mind of the holy man; each of
which would have overwhelmed his spirit, unless he had fortified it by
faith. And there is no doubt that Satan, during the darkness of the
night, would heap upon him a vast mass of cares. Gradually to overcome
them, by contending with them, was the part of heroical courage. But
when they were overcome, then immediately to gird himself to the
fulfillment of the command of God, and even to rise early in the morning
to do it, was a remarkable effort. Other men, prostrated by a message so
dire and terrible, would have fainted, and have lain torpid, as if
deprived of life; but the first dawn of morning was scarcely early
enough for Abraham’s haste. Therefore, in a few words, Moses highly
extols his faith, when he declares that it surmounted, in so short a
space of time, the very temptation which was attended with many
labyrinths.

<span id="xxviii.i-p67"></span><span id="xxviii.i-p67.1"></span>

<span id="xxviii.i-p68"></span>**4.** *And saw the place* . He saw,
indeed, with his eyes, the place which before had been shown him in
secret vision. But when it is said, that he lifted up his eyes, Moses
doubtless signifies, that he had been very anxious during the whole of
the three days. In commanding his servants to remain behind, he does it
that they may not lay their hands upon him, as upon a delirious and
insane old man. And herein his magnanimity appears, that he ties his
thoughts so well composed and tranquil, as to do nothing in an agitated
manner. When, however, he says, that he will return with the boy, he
seems not to be free from dissimulation and falsehood. Some think that
he uttered this declaration prophetically; but since it is certain that
he never lost sight of what had been promised concerning the raising up
of seed in Isaac, it may be, that he, trusting in the providence of God,
figured to himself his son as surviving even in death itself. And seeing
that he went, as with closed eyes, to the slaughter of his son, there is
nothing improbable in the supposition, that he spoke confusedly, in a
matter so obscure.

<span id="xxviii.i-p69"></span><span id="xxviii.i-p69.1"></span>

<span id="xxviii.i-p70"></span>**7.** *My father* . God produces here a
new instrument of torture, by which he may, more and more, torment the
breast of Abraham, already pierced with so many wounds. And it is not to
be doubted, that God designedly both framed the tongue of Isaac to this
tender appellation, and directed it to this question, in order that
nothing might be wanting to the extreme severity of Abraham’s grief. Yet
the holy man sustains even this attack with invincible courage; and is
so far from being disturbed in his proposed course, that he shows
himself to be entirely devoted to God, hearkening to nothing which
should either shake his confidence, or hinder his obedience. But it is
important to notice the manner in which he unties this inextricable
knot; namely, by taking refuge in Divine Providence, God will provide
himself a lamb. This example is proposed for our imitation. Whenever the
Lord gives a command, many things are perpetually occurring to enfeeble
our purpose: means fail, we are destitute of counsel, all avenues seem
closed. In such straits, the only remedy against despondency is, to
leave the event to God, in order that he may open a way for us where
there is none. For as we act unjustly towards Gods when we hope for
nothing from him but what our senses can perceive, so we pay Him the
highest honor, when, in affairs of perplexity, we nevertheless entirely
acquiesce in his providence.

<span id="xxviii.i-p71"></span><span id="xxviii.i-p71.1"></span>

<span id="xxviii.i-p72"></span>**8.** *So they went both of them
together* . Here we perceive both the constancy of Abraham, and the
modesty of his son. For Abraham is not rendered more remiss by this
obstacles and the son does not persist in replying to his father’s
answer. For he might easily have objected, Wherefore have we brought
wood and the knife without a lamb, if God has commanded sacrifices to be
made to him? But because he supposes that the victim has been omitted,
for some valid reason, and not through his father’s forgetfulness, he
acquiesces, and is silent.

<span id="xxviii.i-p73"></span><span id="xxviii.i-p73.1"></span>

<span id="xxviii.i-p74"></span>**9.** *And they came to the place* .
Moses purposely passes over many things, which, nevertheless, the reader
ought to consider. When he has mentioned the building of the altar, he
immediately afterwards adds, that Isaac was bound. But we know that he
was then of middle age, so that he might either be more powerful than
his father, or, at least, equal to resist him, if they had to contend by
force; wherefore, I do not think that force was employed against the
youth, as against one struggling and unwilling to die: but rather, that
he voluntarily surrendered himself. It was, however, scarcely possible
that he would offer himself to death, unless he had been already made
acquainted with the divine oracle: but Moses, passing by this, only
recites that he was bound. Should any one object, that there was no
necessity to bind one who willingly offered himself to death; I answer,
that the holy man anticipated, in this way, a possible danger; lest any
thing might happen in the midst of the act to interrupt it. The
simplicity of the narrative of Moses is wonderful; but it has greater
force than the most exaggerated tragical description. The sum of the
whole turns on this point; that Abraham, when he had to slay his son,
remained always like himself; and that the fortitude of his mind was
such as to render his aged hand equal to the task of offering a
sacrifice, the very sight of which was enough to dissolve and to destroy
his whole body.

<span id="xxviii.i-p75"></span><span id="xxviii.i-p75.1"></span>

<span id="xxviii.i-p76"></span>**11.** *And the angel of the Lord called
unto him* . The inward temptation had been already overcome, when
Abraham intrepidly raised his hand to slay his son; and it was by the
special grace of God that he obtained so signal a victory. But now Moses
subjoins, that suddenly beyond all hope, his sorrow was changed into
joy. Poets, in their fables, when affairs are desperate, introduce some
god who, unexpectedly, appears at the critical juncture. It is possible
that Satan, by figments of this kind, has endeavored to obscure the
wonderful and stupendous interpositions of God, when he has unexpectedly
appeared for the purpose of bringing assistance to his servants. This
history ought certainly to be known and celebrated among all people;
yet, by the subtlety of Satan, not only has the truth of God been
adulterated and turned into a lie, but also distorted into materials for
fable, in order to render it the more ridiculous. But it is our
business, with earnest minds to consider how wonderfully God, in the
very article of death, both recalled Isaac from death to life, and
restored to Abraham his son, as one who had risen from the tomb. Moses
also describes the voice of the angel, as having sounded out of heaven,
to give assurance to Abraham that he had come from God, in order that he
might withdraw his hand, under the direction of the same faith by which
he had stretched it out. For, in a cause of such magnitude, it was not
lawful for him either to undertake or to relinquish anything, except
under the authority of God. Let us, therefore, learn from his example,
by no means, to pursue what our carnal sense may declare to be,
probably, our right course; but let God, by his sole will, prescribe to
us our manner of acting and of ceasing to act. And truly Abraham does
not charge God with inconstancy, because he considers that there had
been just cause for the exercising of his faith.

<span id="xxviii.i-p77"></span><span id="xxviii.i-p77.1"></span>

<span id="xxviii.i-p78"></span>**12.** *Now I know that thou fearest
God* . The exposition of Augustine, ‘I have caused thee to know,’ is
forced. But how can any thing become known to God, to whom all things
have always been present? Truly, by condescending to the manner of men,
God here says that what he has proved by experiment, is now made known
to himself. And he speaks thus with us, not according to his own
infinite wisdom, but according to our infirmity. Moses, however, simply
means that Abraham, by this very act, testified how reverently he feared
God. It is however asked, whether he had not already, on former
occasions, given many proofs of his piety? I answer that when God had
willed him to proceed thus far, he had, at length, completed his true
trial; in other persons a much lighter trial might have been sufficient.
 <span id="fr_448"></span>[449](#fn_448.md) And as Abraham showed that he
feared God, by not sparing his own, and only begotten son; so a common
testimony of the same fear is required from all the pious, in acts of
self-denial. Now since God enjoins upon us a continual warfare, we must
take care that none desires his release before the time.

<span id="xxviii.i-p80"></span><span id="xxviii.i-p80.1"></span>

<span id="xxviii.i-p81"></span>**13.** *And, behold, behind him a ram* .
What the Jews feign respecting this ram, as having been created on the
sixth day of the world, is like the rest of their fictions. We need not
doubt that it was presented there by miracle, whether it was then first
created, or whether it was brought from some other place; for God
intended to give that to his servant which would enable him, with joy
and cheerfulness, to offer up a pleasant sacrifice: and at the same time
he admonishes him to return thanks. Moreover, since a ram is substituted
in the place of Isaac, God shows us, as in a glass, what is the design
of our mortification; namely, that by the Spirit of God dwelling within
us, we, though dead, may yet be living sacrifices. I am not ignorant
that more subtle allegories may be elicited; but I do not see on what
foundation they rest.

<span id="xxviii.i-p82"></span><span id="xxviii.i-p82.1"></span>

<span id="xxviii.i-p83"></span>**14.** *And Abraham called the name of
that place* . He not only, by the act of thanksgiving, acknowledges, at
the time, that God has, in a remarkable manner, provided for him; but
also leaves a monument of his gratitude to posterity. In most extreme
anxiety, he had fled for refuge to the providence of God; and he
testifies that he had not done so in vain. He also acknowledges that not
even the ram had wandered thither accidentally, but had been placed
there by God. Whereas, in process of time, the name of the place was
changed, this was done purposely, and not by mistake. For they who have
translated the active verb, ‘He will see,’ passively, have wished, in
this manner, to teach that God not only looks upon those who are his,
but also makes his help manifest to them; so that, in turn, he may be
seen by them. The former has precedence in order; namely, that God, by
his secret providence, determines and ordains what is best for us; but
on this, the latter is suspended; namely, that he stretches out his hand
to us, and renders himself visible by true experimental tokens.

<span id="xxviii.i-p84"></span><span id="xxviii.i-p84.1"></span>

<span id="xxviii.i-p85"></span>**15.** *And the angel of the Lord called
unto Abraham* . What God had promised to Abraham before Isaac was born,
he now again confirms and ratifies, after Isaac was restored to life,
and arose from the altar, — as if it had been from the sepulcher, — to
achieve a more complete triumph. The angel speaks in the person of God;
in order that, as we have before said, the embassy of those who bear his
name, may have the greater authority, by their being clothed with his
majesty. These two things, however, are thought to be hardly consistent
with each other; that what before was gratuitously promised, should here
be deemed a reward. For we know that grace and reward are incompatible.
Now, however, since the benediction which is promised in the seed,
contains the hope of salvation, it may seem to follow that eternal life
is given in return for good works. And the Papists boldly seize upon
this, and similar passages, in order to prove that works are deserving
of all the good things which God confers upon us. But I most readily
retort this subtle argument upon those who bring it. For if that promise
was before gratuitous, which is now ascribed to a reward; it appears
that whatever God grants to good works, ought to be received as from
grace. certainly, before Isaac was born, this same promise had been
already given; and now it receives nothing more than confirmation. If
Abraham deserved a compensation so great, on account of his own virtue,
the grace of God, which anticipated him, will be of none effect.
Therefore, in order that the truth of God, founded upon his gratuitous
kindness, may stand firm, we must of necessity conclude, that what is
freely given, is yet called the reward of works. Not that God would
obscure the glory of his goodness, or in any way diminish it; but only
that he may excite his own people to the love of well-doing, when they
perceive that their acts of duty are so far pleasing to him, as to
obtain a reward; while yet he pays nothing as a debt, but gives to his
own benefits the title of a reward. And in this there is no
inconsistency. For the Lord here shows himself doubly liberal; in that
he, wishing to stimulate us to holy living, transfers to our works what
properly belongs to his pure beneficence. The Papists, therefore,
wrongfully distort those benignant invitations of God, by which he would
correct our torpor, to a different purpose, in order that man may
arrogate to his own merits, what is the mere gift of divine liberality.

<span id="xxviii.i-p86"></span><span id="xxviii.i-p86.1"></span>

<span id="xxviii.i-p87"></span>**17.** *Thy seed shall possess the gate
of his enemies.* He means that the offspring of Abraham should be
victorious over their enemies; for in the gates were their bulwarks, and
in them they administered judgment. Now, although God often suffered the
enemies of the Jews tyrannically to rule over them; yet he so moderated
their revenge, that this promise always prevailed in the end. Moreover,
we must remember what has before been stated from Paul, concerning the
unity of the seed; for we hence infer, that the victory is promised, not
to the sons of Abraham promiscuously, but to Christ, and to his members,
so far as they adhere together under one Head. For unless we retain some
mark which may distinguish between the legitimate and the degenerate
sons of Abraham, this promise will indiscriminately comprehend, as well
the Ishmaelites and Idumeans, as the people of Israel: but the unity of
a people depends on its head. Therefore the prophets, whenever they wish
to confirm this promise of God, assume the principle, that they who have
hitherto been divided, shall be united, under David, in one body. What
further pertains to this subject may be found in the twelfth chapter
<span id="xxviii.i-p87.1"></span>[Ge
12:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen012.htm#001.md)<span id="xxviii.i-p87.1"></span>

<span id="xxviii.i-p88"></span><span id="xxviii.i-p88.1"></span>

<span id="xxviii.i-p89"></span>**19.** *And they rose up, and went
together to Beer-sheba* . Moses repeats, that Abraham, after having
passed through this severe and incredible temptation, had a quiet abode
in Beersheba. This narration is inserted, together with what follows
concerning the increase of Abraham’s kindred, for the purpose of showing
that the holy man, when he had been brought up again from the abyss of
death, was made happy, in more ways than one. For God would so revive
him, that he should be like a new man. Moses also records the progeny of
Nahor, but for another reason; namely, because Isaac was to take his
wife from it. For the mention of women in Scripture is rare; and it is
credible that many daughters were born to Nahor, of whom one only,
Rebekah, is here introduced. He distinguishes the sons of the concubine
from the others; because they occupied a less honorable place. Not that
the concubine was regarded as a harlot; but because she was an inferior
wife, and not the mistress of the house, who had community of goods with
her husband. The fact, however, that it entered into Nahor’s mind to
take a second wife, does not render polygamy lawful; it only shows, that
from the custom of other men, he supposed that to be lawful for him,
which had really sprung from the worst corruption.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_444"></span>[445](cc01027.htm#fr_444.md) <span
id="xxviii.i-p55.1"></span>

<span id="xxviii.i-p56"></span> “<span id="xxviii.i-p56.1"></span>Quare
magna subest emphasis verbo loquendi.”

<span id="fn_445"></span>[446](cc01027.htm#fr_445.md) <span
id="xxviii.i-p56.2"></span>

<span id="xxviii.i-p57"></span> God’s usual manner of trying the faith
of his people is, by causing the dispensations of his providence
apparently to contradict his word, and requiring them still to rely upon
that word, notwithstanding the apparent inconsistency. But in Abraham’s
trial, He proposed a test far more severe. For His own command, or word,
was in direct contradiction to what he had before spoken; His injunction
respecting the slaying of Isaac could, by no human method of reasoning,
be reconciled to his promises respecting the future destinies of
Abraham’s family, of the Church, and of the world. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_446"></span>[447](cc01027.htm#fr_446.md) <span
id="xxviii.i-p62.2"></span>

<span id="xxviii.i-p63"></span> This extraordinary interpretation is
supposed to be sanctioned by <span id="xxviii.i-p63.1"></span>[Canticles
4:6](../../../bib/kjv/sol004.htm#006.md)<span id="xxviii.i-p63.1"></span>,
“I will get me to the mountain of myrrh, and to the hill of
frankincense.” — Vide Poli Syn. in loc. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_447"></span>[448](cc01027.htm#fr_447.md) <span
id="xxviii.i-p63.4"></span>

<span id="xxviii.i-p64"></span> It may be doubted whether the
interpretation of *Jerome*, which Calvin rejects, is not preferable to
that which he adopts. From the subsequent explanation in verse 14, it
seems highly probable, that ‘the land of vision’ is the true explanation
of the term in question. But even this admits of a double construction.
The *Septuagint* calls it ‘the high land,’ as if it were merely
conspicuous on account of its elevation — the land that might be seen
afar off. But a more suitable interpretation seems to be, that it was
the land favored by the vision of divine glory, the spot on which the
angel of Jehovah appeared to David, and on which the temple was built by
Solomon. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_448"></span>[449](cc01027.htm#fr_448.md) <span
id="xxviii.i-p78.1"></span>

<span id="xxviii.i-p79"></span> “<span
id="xxviii.i-p79.1"></span>Respondeo, quando hucusque eum progredi
volebat Deus, tune vera demum probatione, quae in aliis multo levior
sufficeret, defunctum esse.” — “<span id="xxviii.i-p79.2"></span>Je
respond que Dieu vouloit qu’il poursuyvist jusques la; et que lors
finalement, il s’est acquitte de son espreuve, laquelle eust este
beaucoup legere en d’auctres, et eust bien suffi.” — *French Tr*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 23](cc01028.md)
