[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc01017)  [Next](cc01019.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 1: Genesis, Part I*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xix"></span>

<span id="xix-p1"></span>CHAPTER 13.

<span id="xix.i"></span>

<span id="xix.i-p1"></span><span id="xix.i-p1.1"></span>[Genesis
13:1-20](../../../bib/kjv/gen013.htm#001.md)<span id="xix.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xix.i-p2"></span>**1.** And Abram went up out of Egypt, he,
and his wife, and all that he had, and Lot with him, into the south.

<span id="xix.i-p3"></span>**1.** Et ascendit Abram ex Aegypto, ipse et
uxor ejus, et omnia quae erant ei, et Lot cum eo ad Meridiem.

<span id="xix.i-p4"></span>**2.** And Abram *was* very rich in cattle,
in silver, and in gold.

<span id="xix.i-p5"></span>**2.** Et Abram dives erat valde pecore,
argento et auro.

<span id="xix.i-p6"></span>**3.** And he went on his journeys from the
south even to Bethel, unto the place where his tent had been at the
beginning, between Bethel and Hai;

<span id="xix.i-p7"></span>**3.** Et perrexit per profectiones suas a
Meridie usque ad Bethel, usque ad locum ubi fuerat tabernaculum ejus in
principio, inter Bethel et Hai;

<span id="xix.i-p8"></span>**4.** Unto the place of the altar, which he
had made there at the first: and there Abram called on the name of the
LORD.

<span id="xix.i-p9"></span>**4.** Ad locum altaris quod fecerat in
principio: et invocavit ibi Abram nomen Jehovae.

<span id="xix.i-p10"></span>**5.** And Lot also, which went with Abram,
had flocks, and herds, and tents.

<span id="xix.i-p11"></span>**5.** Et etiam ipsi Lot ambulanti cum Abram
erant pecudes, et boves, et tabernacula.

<span id="xix.i-p12"></span>**6.** And the land was not able to bear
them, that they might dwell together: for their substance was great, so
that they could not dwell together.

<span id="xix.i-p13"></span>**6.** Et non ferebat eos terra, ut
habitarent pariter: quia erat substantia eorum multa, et non poterant
habitare pariter.

<span id="xix.i-p14"></span>**7.** And there was a strife between the
herdmen of Abram’s cattle and the herdmen of Lot’s cattle: and the
Canaanite and the Perizzite dwelled then in the land.

<span id="xix.i-p15"></span>**7.** Et fuit contentio inter pastores
pecudum Abram, et pastores pecudum Lot: et Chenaanaeus et Pherizaeus
tunc habitabant in terra.

<span id="xix.i-p16"></span>**8.** And Abram said unto Lot, Let there be
no strife, I pray thee, between me and thee, and between my herdmen and
thy herdmen; for we *be* brethren.

<span id="xix.i-p17"></span>**8.** Et dixit Abram ad Lot, Ne nunc sit
contentio inter me et to, et inter pastores meos et pastores tuos: quia
viri fratres sumus.

<span id="xix.i-p18"></span>**9.** *Is* not the whole land before thee?
separate thyself, I pray thee, from me: if *thou wilt take* the left
hand, then I will go to the right; or if *thou depart* to the right
hand, then I will go to the left.

<span id="xix.i-p19"></span>**9.** Numquid non omnis terra est coram to?
separa to nunc ame: si ieris ad sinistram, dextram tenebo: et si ad
dextram ieris, sinistram tenebo.

<span id="xix.i-p20"></span>**10.** And Lot lifted up his eyes, and
beheld all the plain of Jordan, that it *was* well watered every where,
before the LORD destroyed Sodom and Gomorrah, *even* as the garden of
the LORD, like the land of Egypt, as thou comest unto Zoar.

<span id="xix.i-p21"></span>**10.** Et levavit Lot oculos suos, et vidit
omnem planitiem Jarden, quod tota esset irrigua, antequam disperderet
Jehova Sedom et Hamorah, sicuti hortus Jehovae, sicut terra Aegypti,
ingrediente to in Sohar.

<span id="xix.i-p22"></span>**11.** Then Lot chose him all the plain of
Jordan; and Lot journeyed east: and they separated themselves the one
from the other.

<span id="xix.i-p23"></span>**11.** Et elegit sibi Lot omnem planitiem
Jarden, et profectus est Lot ad Oreientem, et separaverunt se alter ab
altero.

<span id="xix.i-p24"></span>**12.** Abram dwelled in the land of Canaan,
and Lot dwelled in the cities of the plain, and pitched *his* tent
toward Sodom.

<span id="xix.i-p25"></span>**12.** Abram habitavit in terra Chanaan, et
Lot habitavit in urbibus planitiei, et tetendit tabernaculum Sedom
usque.

<span id="xix.i-p26"></span>**13.** But the men of Sodom *were* wicked
and sinners before the LORD exceedingly.

<span id="xix.i-p27"></span>**13.** Viri autem Sedom erant mali, et
scelerati coram Jehova valde.

<span id="xix.i-p28"></span>**14.** And the LORD said unto Abram, after
that Lot was separated from him, Lift up now thine eyes, and look from
the place where thou art northward, and southward, and eastward, and
westward:

<span id="xix.i-p29"></span>**14.** Et Jehova dixit ad Abram, postquam
separavit se Lot ab eo, Leva nunc oculos tuos, et vide a loco ubi es, ad
Aquilonem, Meridiem, Orientem, et Occidentem.

<span id="xix.i-p30"></span>**15.** For all the land which thou seest,
to thee will I give it, and to thy seed for ever.

<span id="xix.i-p31"></span>**15.** Quia omnem terram quam tu vides,
tibi dabo et semini tuo usque in saeculum.

<span id="xix.i-p32"></span>**16.** And I will make thy seed as the dust
of the earth: so that if a man can number the dust of the earth, *then*
shall thy seed also be numbered.

<span id="xix.i-p33"></span>**16.** Et ponam semen tuum sicut pulverem
terrae: quia si poterit quisquam numerare pulverem terrae, etiam semen
tuum numerabit.

<span id="xix.i-p34"></span>**17.** Arise, walk through the land in the
length of it and in the breadth of it; for I will give it unto thee.

<span id="xix.i-p35"></span>**17.** Surge, ambula per terram in
longitudinem ejus, et in latitudinem ejus: quia tibi dabo eam.

<span id="xix.i-p36"></span>**18.** Then Abram removed *his* tent, and
came and dwelt in the plain of Mamre, which *is* in Hebron, and built
there an altar unto the LORD.

<span id="xix.i-p37"></span>**18.** Et tetendit tabernaculum Abram, et
venit, et habitavit in quercubus Mamre, quae sunt in Hebron: et
aedificavit ibi altare Jehovae.

<span id="xix.i-p38"></span> 

<span id="xix.i-p39"></span><span id="xix.i-p39.1"></span>

<span id="xix.i-p40"></span>**1.** *And* *Abram* *went* *up* *out* *of*
*Egypt* . In the commencement of the chapter, Moses commemorates the
goodness of God in protecting Abram; whence it came to pass, that he not
only returned in safety, but took with him great wealth. This
circumstance is also to be noticed, that when he was leaving Egypt,
abounding in cattle and treasures, he was allowed to pursue his journey
in peace; for it is surprising that the Egyptians would suffer what
Abram had acquired among them, to be transferred elsewhere. Moses next
shows that riches proved no sufficient obstacle to prevent Abram from
having respect continually to his proposed end, and from moving towards
it with unremitting pace. We know how greatly even a moderate share of
wealth, hinders many from raising their heads towards heaven; while they
who really possess abundance, not only lie torpid in indolence, but are
entirely buried in the earth. Wherefore, Moses places the virtue of
Abram in contrast with the common vice of others; when he relates that
he was not to be prevented by any impediments, from seeking again the
land of Canaan. For he might (like many others) have been able to
flatter himself with some fair pretext: such as, that since God, from
whom he had received extraordinary blessings, had been favorable and
kind to him in Egypt, it was right for him to remain there. But he does
not forget what had been divinely commanded him; and, therefore, as one
unfettered, he hastens to the place whither he is called. Wherefore, the
rich are deprived of all excuse, if they are so rooted in the earth,
that they do not attend the call of God. Two extremes, however, are here
to be guarded against. Many place angelical perfection in poverty; as if
it were impossible to cultivate piety and to serve God, unless riches
are cast away. Few indeed imitate Crates the Theban, who cast his
treasures into the sea; because he did not think that he could be saved
unless they were lost. Yet many fanatics repel rich men from the hope of
salvation; as if poverty were the only gate of heaven; which yet,
sometimes, involves men in more hindrances than riches. But Augustine
wisely teaches us, that the rich and poor are collected together in the
same inheritance of life; because poor Lazarus was received into the
bosom of rich Abraham. On the other hand, we must beware of the opposite
evil; lest riches should cast a stumblingblock in our way, or should so
burden us, that we should the less readily advance towards the kingdom
of heaven.

<span id="xix.i-p41"></span><span id="xix.i-p41.1"></span>

<span id="xix.i-p42"></span>**3.** *And* *he* *went* *on* *his*
*journeys* . In these words Moses teaches us, that Abram did not rest
till he had returned to Bethel. For although he pitched his tent in many
places, yet he nowhere so fixed his foot, as to make it his permanent
abode. He does not speak of the south in reference to Egypt; he merely
means that he had come into the southern part of Judea; and that,
therefore, he had, by a long and troublesome journey, arrived at the
place where he had determined to remain. Moses next subjoins, that an
altar had before been there erected by him and that he then also began
anew to call upon the name of the Lord: whereby we may learn, that the
holy man was always like himself in worshipping God, and giving evidence
of his piety. The explanation given by some, that the inhabitants of the
place had been brought to the pure worship of God, is neither probable,
nor to be deduced from the words of Moses. And we have stated elsewhere
what is the force of the expression, ‘To invoke in the name,’ or, ‘To
call upon the name of the Lord;’ namely, to profess the true and pure
worship of God. For Abram invoked God, not twelve times only, during the
whole course of his life; but whenever he publicly celebrated him, and
by a solemn rite, made it manifest that he had nothing in common with
the superstitions of the heathen, then he is also said to have called
upon God. Therefore, although he always worshipped God, and exercised
himself in daily prayers; yet, because he did not daily testify his
piety by outward profession before men, this virtue is here especially
commended by Moses. It was therefore proper that invocation should be
conjoined with the altar; because by the sacrifices offered, he plainly
testified what God he worshipped in order that the Canaanites might know
that he was not addicted to their common idolatries.

<span id="xix.i-p43"></span><span id="xix.i-p43.1"></span>

<span id="xix.i-p44"></span>**5.** *And* *Lot* *also* *,* *which* *went*
*with* *Abram* . Next follows the inconvenience which Abram suffered
through his riches: namely, that he was torn from his nephew, whom he
tenderly loved, as if it had been from his own bowels. Certainly had the
option been given him he would rather have chosen to cast away his
riches, than to be parted from him whom he had held in the place of an
only son: yet he found no other method of avoiding contentions. Shall we
impute this evil to his own excessive moroseness or to the forwardness
of his nephew? I suppose, however, that we must rather consider the
design of God. There was a danger lest Abram should be too much
gratified with his own success inasmuch as prosperity blinds many.
Therefore God allays the sweetness of wealth with bitterness; and does
not permit the mind of his servant to be too much enchanted with it. And
whenever a fallacious estimate of riches impels us to desire them
inordinately, because we do not perceive the great disadvantages which
they bring along with them; let the recollection of this history avail
to restrain such immoderate attachment to them. Further, as often as the
rich find any trouble arising from their wealth; let them learn to
purify their minds by this medicine, that they may not become
excessively addicted to the good things of the present life. And truly,
unless the Lord were occasionally to put the bridle on men, to what
depths would they not fall, when they overflow with prosperity? On the
other hand, if we are straitened with poverty, let us know, that, by
this method also, God corrects the hidden evils of our flesh. Finally,
let those who abound remember, that they are surrounded with thorns and
must take care lest they be pricked; and let those whose affairs are
contracted and embarrassed know, that God is caring for them, in order
that they may not be involved in evil and noxious snares. This
separation was sad to Abram’s mind; but it was suitable for the
correction of much latent evil, that wealth might not stifle the armor
of his zeal. But if Abram had need of such an antidote, let us not
wonder, if God, by inflicting some stroke, should repress our excesses.
For he does not always wait till the faithful shall have fallen; but
looks forward for them into the future. So he does not actually correct
the avarice or the pride of his servant Abram: but, by an anticipated
remedy, he causes that Satan shall not infect his mind with any of his
allurements.

<span id="xix.i-p45"></span><span id="xix.i-p45.1"></span>

<span id="xix.i-p46"></span>**7.** *And* *there* *was* *a* *strife* .
What I hinted respecting riches, is also true respecting a large retinue
of attendants. We see with what ambition many desire a great crowd of
servants, almost amounting to a whole people. But since the family of
Abram cost him so dear; let us be well content to have few servants, or
even to be entirely without them, if it seem right to the Lord that it
should be so. It was scarcely possible to avoid great confusion, in a
house where there was a considerable number of men. And experience
confirms the truth of the proverbs that a crowd is commonly turbulent.
Now, if repose and tranquility be an inestimable good; let us know, that
we best consult for our real welfare, when we have a small house, and
privately pass our time, without tumult, in our families. We are also
warned, by the example before us, to beware lest Satan, by indirect
methods, should lead us into contention. For when he cannot light up
mutual enmities between us, he would involve us in other men’s quarrels.
Lot and Abram were at concord with each other; but a contention raised
between their shepherds, carried them reluctantly away; so that they
were compelled to separate from each other. There is no doubt that Abram
faithfully instructed his own people to cultivate peace; yet he did not
so far succeed in his desire and effort, as to prevent his witnessing
the most destructive fire of discord kindled in his house. Wherefore, it
is nothing wonderful, if we see tumults often arising in churches, where
there is a still greater number of men. Abram had about three hundred
servants; it is probable that the family of Lot was nearly equal to it:
 <span id="fr_352"></span>[353](#fn_352.md) what then may be expected to
take place between five or six thousand men, — especially free men, —
when they contend with each other? As, however, we ought not to be
disturbed by such scandals; so we must, in every way, take care that
contentions do not become violent. For unless they be speedily met, they
will soon break out into pernicious dissension.

<span id="xix.i-p48"></span>*The* *Canaanite* *and* *the* *Perizzite* .
Moses adds this for the sake of aggravating the evil. For he declares
the heat of the contention to have been so great, that it could neither
be extinguished nor assuaged, even by the fear of impending destruction.
They were surrounded by as many enemies as they had neighbors. Nothing,
therefore, was wanting in order to their destruction, but a suitable
occasion; and this they themselves were affording by their quarrels. To
such a degree does blind fury infatuate men, when once the vehemence of
contention has prevailed, that they carelessly despise death, when
placed before their eyes. Now, although we are not continually
surrounded by Canaanites, we are yet in the midst of enemies, as long as
we sojourn in the world. Wherefore, if we are influenced by any desire
for the salvation of ourselves, and of our brethren, let us beware of
contentions which will deliver us over to Satan to be destroyed.

<span id="xix.i-p49"></span><span id="xix.i-p49.1"></span>

<span id="xix.i-p50"></span>**8.** *And* *Abram* *said* *unto* *Lot* .
Moses first states, that Abram no sooner perceived the strifes which had
arisen, than he fulfilled the duty of a good householder, by attempting
to restore peace among his domestics; and that afterwards, by his
moderation, he endeavored to remedy the evil by removing it. And
although the servants alone were contending, he yet does not say in
vain, Let there be no strife between me and thee: because it was
scarcely possible but that the contagion of the strife should reach from
the domestics to their lords, although they were in other respects
perfectly agreed. He also foresaw that their friendship could not long
remain entire, unless he attempted, in time, to heal the insidious evil.
Moreover, he calls to mind the bond of consanguinity between them; not
because this alone ought to avail to promote mutual peace, but that he
might more easily bend and mollify the mind of his nephew. For when the
fear of God is less effectual with us than it ought to be; it is useful
to call in other helps also, which may retain us in our duty. Now
however since we all are adopted as sons of God, with the condition
annexed, that we should be mutually brethren to each other: this sacred
bond is less valued by us than it ought to be, if it does not prove
sufficient to allay our contentions.

<span id="xix.i-p51"></span><span id="xix.i-p51.1"></span>

<span id="xix.i-p52"></span>**9.** *Is* *not* *the* *whole* *land*
*before* *thee* *?* Here is that moderation of which I have spoken;
namely, that Abram for the sake of appeasing strifes voluntarily
sacrifices his own right. For as ambition and the desire of victory
 <span id="fr_353"></span>[354](#fn_353.md) is the mother of all
contentions; so when every one meekly and moderately departs, in some
degree, from his just claim, the best remedy is found for the removal of
all cause of bitterness. Abram might indeed, with an honorable pretext,
have more pertinaciously defended the right which he relinquished, but
he shrinks from nothing for the sake of restoring peace: and therefore
he leaves the option to his nephew.

<span id="xix.i-p54"></span><span id="xix.i-p54.1"></span>

<span id="xix.i-p55"></span>**10.** *And* *Lot* *lifted* *up* *his*
*eyes* . As the equity of Abram was worthy of no little praise; so the
inconsideration of Lot, which Moses here describes, is deserving of
censure. He ought rather to have contended with his uncle for the palm
of modesty; and this the very order of nature suggested; but just as if
he had been, in every respect, the superior, he usurps for himself the
better portion; and makes choice of that region which seemed the more
fertile and agreeable. And indeed it necessarily follows, that whosoever
is too eagerly intent upon his own advantage, is wanting in humanity
towards others. There can be no doubt that this injustice would pierce
the mind of Abram; but he silently bore it, lest by any means, he should
give occasion of new offense. And thus ought we entirely to act,
whenever we perceive those with whom we are connected, to be not
sufficiently mindful of their duty: otherwise there will be no end of
tumults. When the neighboring plain of Sodom is compared to the paradise
of God, many interpreters explain it as simply meaning, that it was
excellent, and in the highest degree fertile; because the Hebrews call
anything excellent, divine. I however think, that the place where Adam
resided at the beginning, is pointed out. For Moses does not propose a
general similitude, but says, ‘that region was watered;’ just as he
related the same thing respecting the first abode of man; namely, that a
river, divided into four parts, watered it; he also adds the same thing
respecting a part of Egypt. Whence it more clearly appears, that in one
particular only, this place is compared with two others.

<span id="xix.i-p56"></span><span id="xix.i-p56.1"></span>

<span id="xix.i-p57"></span>**13.** *But* *the* *men* *of* *Sodom* . Lot
thought himself happy that so rich a habitation had fallen to his share:
but he learns at length, that the choice to which he had hastened, with
a rashness equal to his avarice, had been unhappily granted to him;
since he had to deal with proud and perverse neighbors, with whose
conduct it was much harder to bear, than it was to contend with the
sterility of the earth. Therefore, seeing that he was led away solely by
the pleasantness of the prospect, he pays the penalty of his foolish
cupidity. Let us then learn by this example, that our eyes are not to be
trusted; but that we must rather be on our guard lest we be ensnared by
them, and be encircled, unawares, with many evils; just as Lot, when he
fancied that he was dwelling in paradise, was nearly plunged into the
depths of hell. But it seems wonderful, that Moses, when he wishes to
condemn the men of Sodom for their extreme wickedness, should say that
they were wicked before the Lord; and not rather before men; for when we
come to God’s tribunal, every mouth must be stopped, and all the world
must be subject to condemnation; wherefore Moses may be thought to speak
thus by way of extenuation. But the case is otherwise: for he means that
they were not merely under the dominion of those common vices which
everywhere prevail among men, but were abandoned to most execrable
crimes, the cry of which rose even to heaven, (as we shall afterwards
see,) and demanded vengeance from God. That God, however, bore with them
for a time: and not only so, but suffered them to inhabit a most fertile
region, though they were utterly unworthy of light and of life, affords,
as we hence learn, no ground to the wicked of self-congratulation, when
God bears also with them for a time, or when, by treating them kindly,
and even liberally, he, by his indulgence, strives with their
ingratitude. Yet although they exult in their luxury, and even become
outrageous against God, let the sons of God be admonished not to envy
their fortune; but to wait a little while, till God, arousing them from
their intoxication, shall call them to his dreadful judgment. Therefore,
Ezekiel, speaking of the men of Sodom, declares it to have been the
cause of their destruction, that, being saturated with bread and wine,
and filled with delicacies, they had exercised a proud cruelty against
the poor, (<span id="xix.i-p57.1"></span>[Eze
16:49](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#049)<span id="xix.i-p57.1"></span>..md)

<span id="xix.i-p58"></span><span id="xix.i-p58.1"></span>

<span id="xix.i-p59"></span>**14.** *And* *the* *Lord* *said* *unto*
*Abram* . Moses now relates that after Abram was separated from his
nephew, divine consolation was administered for the appeasing of his
mind. There is no doubt that the wound inflicted by that separation was
very severe, since he was obliged to send away one who was not less dear
to him than his own life. When it is said, therefore, that the Lord
spoke, the circumstance of time requires to be noted; as if he had said,
that the medicine of God’s word was now brought to alleviate his pain.
And thus he teaches us, that the best remedy for the mitigation and the
cure of sadness, is placed in the word of God.

<span id="xix.i-p60"></span>*Lift* *up* *now* *thine* *eyes* . Seeing
that the Lord promises the land to the seed of Abram, we perceive the
admirable design of God, in the departure of Lot. He had assigned the
land to Abram alone; if Lot had remained with him, the children of both
would have been mixed together. The cause of their dissension was indeed
culpable; but the Lord, according to his infinite wisdom, turns it to a
good issue, that the posterity of Lot should possess no part of the
inheritance. This is the reason why he says ‘All the land which is
before thee, I assign to thee and to thy seed. Therefore, there is no
reason why thou, to whom a reward so excellent is hereafter to be given,
shouldst be excessively sorrowful and troubled on account of this
solitude and privation.’ For although the same thing had been already
promised to Abram; yet God now adapts his promise to the relief of the
present sorrow. And thus it is to be remembered that not only was a
promise here repeated which might cherish and confirm Abram’s faith; but
that a special oracle was given from which Abram might learn, that the
interests of his own seed were to be promoted, by the separation of Lot
from him. The speculation of Luther here (as in other places) has no
solidity; namely, that God spoke through some prophet. In promising the
land “for ever,” he does not simply denote perpetuity; but that period
which was brought to a close by the advent of Christ. Concerning the
meaning of the word <span id="xix.i-p60.1"></span>םלוע ( *olam* ,) the
Jews ignorantly contend: but whereas it is taken in various senses in
Scripture, it comprises in this place (as I have lately hinted) the
whole period of the law; just as the covenant which the Lord made with
his ancient people is, in many places, called eternal; because it was
the office of Christ by his coming to renovate the world. But the change
which Christ introduced was not the *abolition* of the old promises, but
rather their *confirmation* . Seeing, therefore, that God has not now
one peculiar people in the land of Canaan, but a people diffused
throughout all regions of the earth; this does not contradict the
assertion, that the eternal possession of the land was rightly promised
to the seed of Abram, until the future renovation.

<span id="xix.i-p61"></span><span id="xix.i-p61.1"></span>

<span id="xix.i-p62"></span>**16.** *And* *I* *will* *make* *thy* *seed*
*as* *the* *dust* . Omitting those subtleties, by means of which others
argue about nothing, I simply explain the words to signify, that the
seed of Abram is compared to the dust, because of its immense multitude;
and truly the sense of the term is to be sought for only in Moses’ own
words. It was, however, necessary to be here added, that God would raise
up for him a seed, of which he was hitherto destitute. And we see that
God always keeps him under the restraint of his own word; and will have
him dependent upon his own lips. Abram is commanded to look at the dust;
but when he turns his eyes upon his own family, what similitude is there
between his solitariness and the countless particles of dust? This
authority the Lord therefore requires us to attribute to his own word,
that it alone should be sufficient for us. It may also give occasion to
ridicule, that God commands Abram to travel till he should have examined
the whole land. To what purpose shall he do this, except that he may
more clearly perceive himself to be a stranger; and that, being
exhausted by continual and fruitless disquietude, he may despair of any
stable and permanent possession? For how shall he persuade himself that
he is lord of that land in which he is scarcely permitted to drink
water, although he has with great labor dug the wells? But these are the
exercises of faith, in order that it may perceive, in the word, those
things which are far off, and which are hidden from carnal sense. For
faith is the beholding of absent things, (<span
id="xix.i-p62.1"></span>[Heb 11:1](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#001.md)<span
id="xix.i-p62.1"></span>,) and it has the word as a mirror, in which it
may discover the hidden grace of God. And the condition of the pious, at
this days is not dissimilar: for since they are hated by all, are
exposed to contempt and reproach, wander without a home, are sometimes
driven hither and thither, and suffer from nakedness and poverty, it is
nevertheless their duty to lay hold on the inheritance which is
promised. Let us therefore walk through the world, as persons debarred
from all repose, who have no other resource than the mirror of the word.

<span id="xix.i-p63"></span><span id="xix.i-p63.1"></span>

<span id="xix.i-p64"></span>**18.** *And* *Abram* *removed* *his* *tent*
 <span id="fr_354"></span>[355](#fn_354.md) Here Moses relates that the
holy man, animated by the renewed promise of Gods traversed the land
with great courage as if by a look alone he could subdue it to himself.
Thus we see how greatly the oracle had profited him: not that he had
heard anything from the mouth of God to which he had been unaccustomed,
but because he had obtained a medicine so seasonable and suitable to his
present grief, that he rose with collected energy towards heaven. At
length Moses records that the holy man, having, performed his circuit,
returned to the oak, or valley of Mare, to dwell there. But, again, he
commends his piety in raising an altar, and calling upon God. I have
already frequently explained what this means: for he himself bore an
altar in his heart; but seeing that the land was full of profane altars
on which the Canaanites and other nations polluted the worship of God,
Abram publicly professed that he worshipped the true God; and that not
at random, but according to the method revealed to him by the word.
Hence we infer, that the altar of which mention is made was not built
rashly by his hand, but that it was consecrated by the same word of God.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_352"></span>[353](cc01018.htm#fr_352.md) <span
id="xix.i-p46.1"></span>

<span id="xix.i-p47"></span> “<span id="xix.i-p47.1"></span>Familiam Lot
minime fuisse parem verisimile est.” The words are capable of two
opposite renderings, according to the different sense in which minime is
taken. It may either mean “by no means,” or “at least.” The Old English
translation renders it in the former method. “It is very likely that the
household of Lot was much less.” The French version adopts the latter
meaning. “<span id="xix.i-p47.2"></span>Il est bien vraye — semblable
que la familie de Lot n’a pas este moindre.” Neither of the versions
give a very probable meaning. The context seems almost to demand the
translation which the Editor has ventured to prefer. — *Ed*

<span id="fn_353"></span>[354](cc01018.htm#fr_353.md) <span
id="xix.i-p52.1"></span>

<span id="xix.i-p53"></span> <span id="xix.i-p53.1"></span>Φιλονεικία

<span id="fn_354"></span>[355](cc01018.htm#fr_354.md) <span
id="xix.i-p64.1"></span>

<span id="xix.i-p65"></span> “<span id="xix.i-p65.1"></span>Et tetendit
Abram tabernaculum.” Abram pitched his tent. This seems to be the true
meaning of the word <span id="xix.i-p65.2"></span>להאיו; yet the term
pitched does not so well agree with the context as the term removed; in
the use of which word our translators have followed the Septuagint,
(<span id="xix.i-p65.3"></span>ἀποσκηνώσας,) and the Vulgate, (<span
id="xix.i-p65.4"></span>movens igitur tabernaculum.) The Arabic
(according to the Latin translation) brings out the same sense, by a
periphrasis, “Abram fixed his tent in divers places till he came and
dwelt in the land of Mamre.” And this is probably the true solution of
the difficulty. — *Ed*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 14](cc01019.md)
