[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc01018)  [Next](cc01020.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 1: Genesis, Part I*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xx"></span>

<span id="xx-p1"></span>CHAPTER 14.

<span id="xx.i"></span>

<span id="xx.i-p1"></span><span id="xx.i-p1.1"></span>[Genesis
14:1-24](../../../bib/kjv/gen014.htm#001.md)<span id="xx.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xx.i-p2"></span>**1.** And it came to pass in the days of
Amraphel king of Shinar, Arioch king of Ellasar, Chedorlaomer king of
Elam, and Tidal king of nations;

<span id="xx.i-p3"></span>**1.** Et fuit in diebus Amraphel regis
Sinhar, Arioch rex Elasar, Cedorlaomer rex Helam, et Thidhal rex
gentium,

<span id="xx.i-p4"></span>**2.** *That these* made war with Bera king of
Sodom, and with Birsha king of Gomorrah, Shinab king of Admah, and
Shemeber king of Zeboiim, and the king of Bela, which is Zoar.

<span id="xx.i-p5"></span>**2.** Fecerunt bellum cum Berah rege Sedom,
et Birsah rege Hamorah, Sinab rege Admah, et Semeber rege Seboim, et
rege Belah: ipsa est Sohar.

<span id="xx.i-p6"></span>**3.** All these were joined together in the
vale of Siddim, which is the salt sea.

<span id="xx.i-p7"></span>**3.** Omnes isti conjuncti sunt in valle
Siddim: ipsa est *vallis* Maris salis.

<span id="xx.i-p8"></span>**4.** Twelve years they served Chedorlaomer,
and in the thirteenth year they rebelled.

<span id="xx.i-p9"></span>**4.** Duodecim annos servierant Cedorlaomer,
et decimotertio anno defecerant.

<span id="xx.i-p10"></span>**5.** And in the fourteenth year came
Chedorlaomer, and the kings that *were* with him, and smote the Rephaims
in Ashteroth Karnaim, and the Zuzims in Ham, and the Emims in Shaveh
Kiriathaim,

<span id="xx.i-p11"></span>**5.** Decimoquarto autem anno venit
Cedorlaomer, et reges qui erant cum eo, et percusserunt Rephaim in
Astheroth Carnaim, et Zuzim in Ham, et Emim in Saveh Ciriathaim,

<span id="xx.i-p12"></span>**6.** And the Horites in their mount Seir,
unto Elparan, which *is* by the wilderness.

<span id="xx.i-p13"></span>**6.** Et Hori in monte suo Sehir, usque ad
planitiem Pharan, quae est juxta desertum.

<span id="xx.i-p14"></span>**7.** And they returned, and came to
Enmishpat, which *is* Kadesh, and smote all the country of the
Amalekites, and also the Amorites, that dwelt in Hazezontamar.

<span id="xx.i-p15"></span>**7.** Reversi sunt autem, et venerunt ad Hen
— misphat, ipsa est Cades: et percusserunt omnem agrum Amalecitae, et
etiam Emoraeum habitantem in Haseson — thamar.

<span id="xx.i-p16"></span> **8.** And there went out the king of Sodom,
and the king of Gomorrah, and the king of Admah, and the king of
Zeboiim, and the king of Bela (the same *is* Zoar;) and they joined
battle with them in the vale of Siddim;

<span id="xx.i-p17"></span>**8.** Et egressus est rex Sedom, et rex
Hamorah, et rex Admah, et rex Seboim, et rex Belah, ipsa est Sohar, et
ordinaverunt cum eis praelium in valle Siddim,

<span id="xx.i-p18"></span>**9.** With Chedorlaomer the king of Elam,
and with Tidal king of nations, and Amraphel king of Shinar, and Arioch
king of Ellasar; four kings with five.

<span id="xx.i-p19"></span>**9.** Cum Cedorlaomer rege Hela, et Thidhal
rege gentium et Amraphel rege Sinhar, et Arioch rege Elasar: quatuor
reges cum quinque.

<span id="xx.i-p20"></span>**10.** And the vale of Siddim *was full of*
slimepits; and the kings of Sodom and Gomorrah fled, and fell there; and
they that remained fled to the mountain.

<span id="xx.i-p21"></span>**10.** Vallis autem Siddim plena erat puteis
caementi: et fugerunt rex Sedom et Hamorah, projeceruntque se illuc, et
residui in montem fugerunt.

<span id="xx.i-p22"></span>**11.** And they took all the goods of Sodom
and Gomorrah, and all their victuals, and went their way.

<span id="xx.i-p23"></span>**11.** Et ceperunt omnen substantiam Sedom
et Hamorah, omnemque escam eorum, et abierunt.

<span id="xx.i-p24"></span>**12.** And they took Lot, Abram’s brother’s
son, who dwelt in Sodom, and his goods, and departed.

<span id="xx.i-p25"></span>**12.** Ceperunt quoque Lot et substantiam
ejus, filium fratris Abram, et abierunt, quia ipse habitabat in Sedom.

<span id="xx.i-p26"></span>**13.** And there came one that had escaped,
and told Abram the Hebrew; for he dwelt in the plain of Mamre the
Amorite, brother of Eshcol, and brother of Aner: and these *were*
confederate with Abram.

<span id="xx.i-p27"></span>**13.** Et venit quidam qui evaserat, et
nuntiavit Abram Ebraeo, qui habitabat in quercubus Mamre Emori fratris
Eschol, fratris Haner et ipsi erant foederati cum Abram.

<span id="xx.i-p28"></span>**14.** And when Abram heard that his brother
was taken captive, he armed his trained *servents* , born in his own
house, three hundred and eighteen, and pursued *them* unto Dan.

<span id="xx.i-p29"></span>**14.** Audiens autem Abram quod captivus
dusctus esset frater suus, armavit a se institutos pueros domus suae,
octodecim et trecentos, et persequutus est usque ad Daniel

<span id="xx.i-p30"></span>**15.** And he divided himself against them,
he and his servants, by night, and smote them, and pursued them unto
Hobah, which *is* on the left hand of Damascus.

<span id="xx.i-p31"></span>**15.** Et divisit se super eos nocte, ipse
et servi ejus, et percussit eos: persequutusque est eos usque ad IIovah,
quae est a laeva Dammesec.

<span id="xx.i-p32"></span>**16.** And he brought back all the goods,
and also brought again his brother Lot, and his goods, and the women
also, and the people.

<span id="xx.i-p33"></span>**16.** Et reduxit omnem substantiam, et
etiam Lot fratrem suum, et substantiam ejus reduxit, atque etiam
mulieres et populum.

<span id="xx.i-p34"></span>**17.** And the king of Sodom went out to
meet him after his return from the slaughter of Chedorlaomer, and of the
kings that *were* with him, at the valley of Shaveh, which *is* the
king’s dale.

<span id="xx.i-p35"></span>**17.** Et egressus est rex Sedom in occursum
ejus, postquam reversus est ipse a caedendo Cedorlaomer, et reges qui
erant secum, ad Vallem Saveh: ipsa est Vallis regis.

<span id="xx.i-p36"></span>**18.** And Melchizedek king of Salem brought
forth bread and wine: and he *was* the priest of the most high God.

<span id="xx.i-p37"></span>**18.** Et Melchisedec rex Salem protulit
panem et vinum: et ipse *erat* sacerdos Deo altissimo.

<span id="xx.i-p38"></span>**19.** And he blessed him, and said, Blessed
*be* Abram of the most high God, possessor of heaven and earth:

<span id="xx.i-p39"></span>**19.** Et benedixit ei, et dixit, Benedictus
Abram Deo excelso, possessori coeli et terrae.

<span id="xx.i-p40"></span>**20.** And blessed be the most high God,
which hath delivered thine enemies into thy hand. And he gave him tithes
of all.

<span id="xx.i-p41"></span>**20.** Et benedictus Deus excelsus, qui
tradidit hostes tuos in manum tuam: et dedit ei decimam de omnibus.

<span id="xx.i-p42"></span>**21.** And the king of Sodom said unto
Abram, Give me the persons, and take the goods to thyself.

<span id="xx.i-p43"></span>**21.** Et dixit rex Sedom ad Abram, Da mihi
animas, et substantiam tolle tibi.

<span id="xx.i-p44"></span>**22.** And Abram said to the king of Sodom,
I have lift up mine hand unto the LORD, the most high God, the possessor
of heaven and earth,

<span id="xx.i-p45"></span>**22.** Et dixit Abram ad regem Sedom, Levavi
manum meam ad Jehovam Deum excelsum, possessorem coeli et terrae,

<span id="xx.i-p46"></span>**23.** That I will not *take* from a thread
even to a shoelatchet, and that I will not take any thing that *is*
thine, lest thou shouldest say, I have made Abram rich:

<span id="xx.i-p47"></span>**23.** Si a filo usque ad corrigiam
calceamenti, si accepero ex omnibus quae sunt tibi: ne dicas, Ego ditavi
Abram.

<span id="xx.i-p48"></span>**24.** Save only that which the young men
have eaten, and the portion of the men which went with me, Aner, Eshcol,
and Mamre; let them take their portion.

<span id="xx.i-p49"></span>**24.** Praeter ea tantum quae comederunt
pueri, et partem virorum qui profecti sunt mecum, Aner, Eschol, et
Mamre: ipsi accipiant partem suam.

<span id="xx.i-p50"></span> 

<span id="xx.i-p51"></span><span id="xx.i-p51.1"></span>

<span id="xx.i-p52"></span>**1.** *And* *it* *came* *to* *pass* *in*
*the* *days* *of* *Amraphel* . The history related in this chapter is
chiefly worthy of remembrance, for three reasons: first, because Lot,
with a gentle reproof, exhorted the men of Sodom to repentance; they
had, however, become altogether unteachable, and desperately perverse in
their wickedness. But Lot was beaten with these scourges, because,
having been allured and deceived by the richness of the soil, he had
mixed himself with unholy and wicked men. Secondly, because God, out of
compassion to him, raised up Abram as his avenger and liberator, to
rescue him, when a captive, from the hand of the enemy; in which act the
incredible goodness and benevolence of God towards his own people, is
rendered conspicuous; since, for the sake of one man, he preserves, for
a time, many who were utterly unworthy. Thirdly, because Abram was
divinely honored with a signal victory, and was blessed by the mouth of
Melchizedek, in whose person, as appears from other passages of
Scripture, the kingdom and priesthood of Christ was shadowed forth. As
it respects the sum of the history, it is a horrible picture both of the
avarice and pride of man.

<span id="xx.i-p53"></span>The human race had yet their three
progenitors, Shem, Ham, and Japheth, living among them; by the very
sight of whom they were admonished, that they all sprung from one
family, and one ark. Moreover, the memory of their common origin was a
sacred pledge of fraternal connection, which should have bound them to
assist each other, by mutual good offices. Nevertheless, ambition so
prevailed, that they assailed one another on all sides, with sword and
armor, and each attempted to subdue the rest. Wherefore, while we see,
at the present day, princes raging furiously, and shaking the earth to
the utmost of their power; let us remember that the evil is of ancient
date; since the lust of dominion has, in all ages, been too prevalent
among men. Let us, however, also remark, that no fault is worse than
that loftiness of mind, which many deem a most heroical disposition. The
ambition of Chedorlaomer was the torch of the whole war: for he,
inflamed with the desire of triumphing, drew three others into a hostile
confederacy. And pride compelled the men of Sodom and their allies to
take arms, for the purpose of shaking off the yoke.

<span id="xx.i-p54"></span>That Moses, however, records the names of so
many kings, while Shem was yet living, (although derided by profane men
as fabulous,) will not appear absurd, if we only reflect that this great
propagation of the human race, was a remarkable miracle of God. For when
the Lord said to Noah himself, and to his sons, Increase and multiply,
he intended to raise them to the hope of a far more excellent
restoration than would have taken place, in the ordinary course of
nature. This benediction is indeed perpetual, and shall flourish even to
the end of the world: but it was necessary that its extraordinary
efficacy should then appear; in order that these earliest fathers might
know, that a new world had been divinely inclosed within the ark. By the
Poets, Deucalion with his wife, is feigned to have sown the race of men
after the deluge, by throwing stones behind him.  <span
id="fr_355"></span>[356](#fn_355.md) But it followed of necessity, that the
miserable minds of men should be deluded with such trifles, when they
departed from the pure truth of God; and Satan has made use of this
artifice, for the purpose at discrediting the veracity of the miracles
of God. For since the memory of the deluge, and the unwonted propagation
of a new world, could not be speedily obliterated, he scattered abroad
clouds and smoke; introducing puerile conceits, in order that what had
before been held for certain truth, might now be regarded as a fable. It
is however to be observed, that all are called kings by Moses, who held
the priority in any town, or in any considerable assembly of men. It is
asked, whether those kings who followed Chedorlaomer dwelt at a great
distance; because Tidal is called the king of nations? There are those
who imagine that he reigned over different nations far and wide; as if
he was a king of kings. The ancient interpreter fetches Arioch from
Pontus;  <span id="fr_356"></span>[357](#fn_356.md) which is most absurd. I
rather think the true reason of the name was, that he had a band
composed of deserters and vagrants, who, having left their own country,
had resorted to him. Therefore, since they were not one body — natives
of his own country — but gathered together from a promiscuous multitude,
he was properly called king of nations. In saying that the battle was
fought in the vale of Siddim, or in the open plain, which, when Moses
wrote, had become the Salt Sea, it is not to be doubted that the Dead
Sea, or the lake Asphaltites, is meant. For he knew whom he was
appointed to instruct, and therefore he always accommodated his words to
the rude capacity of the people; and this is his common custom in
reference to the names of places, as I have previously intimated.
Before, however, the battle was fought, Moses declares that the
inhabitants of the region were partially beaten. It is probable that all
had been scattered, because they had no leader, under whose auspices
they might fight, until five kings advanced to meet them with a
disciplined army. Now, though Chedorlaomer had rendered so many people
tributary to him by tyranny rather than by lawful authority, and on that
account his ambition is to be condemned; yet his subjects are justly
punished for having rashly rebelled. For although liberty is by no means
to be despised, yet the subjection which is once imposed upon us cannot,
without implied rebellion against God, be shaken off; because ‘every
power is ordained by God,’ notwithstanding, in its commencement, it may
have flowed from the lust of dominion, (<span id="xx.i-p56.2"></span>[Ro
13:1](../../../bib/kjv/rom013.htm#001)<span id="xx.i-p56.2"></span>..md)
Therefore some of the rebels are slaughtered like cattle; and others,
though they have clothed themselves in armor, and are prepared to
resist, are yet driven to flight; thus, unhappily to all concerned,
terminates the contumacious refusal to pay tribute. And such narratives
are to be noticed that we may learn from them, that all who strive to
produce anarchy, fight against God.

<span id="xx.i-p57"></span><span id="xx.i-p57.1"></span>

<span id="xx.i-p58"></span>**10.** *And* *the* *kings* *of* *Sodom*
*and* *Gomorrah* *fled* . Some expound that they had fallen into pits:
but this is not probable, since they were by no means ignorant of the
neighboring places: such an event would rather have happened to foreign
enemies. Others say, that they went down into them for the sake of
preserving their lives. I, however, understand them to have exchanged
one kind of death for another, as is common in the moment of
desperation; as if Moses had said, the swords of the enemy were so
formidable to them, that, without hesitation, they threw themselves
headlong into the pits. For he immediately afterwards subjoins, that
they who escaped fled to the mountains. Whence we infer, that they who
had rushed into the pits had perished. Only let us know, that they fell,
not so much deceived through ignorance of the place, as disheartened by
fear.

<span id="xx.i-p59"></span><span id="xx.i-p59.1"></span>

<span id="xx.i-p60"></span>**12.** *And* *they* *took* *Lot* . It is
doubtful whether Lot remained at home while others went to the battle,
and was there captured by the enemy; or whether he had been compelled to
take arms with the rest of the people. As, however, Moses does not
mention him till he speaks of the plundering of the city, the conjecture
is probable, that at the conclusion of the battle, he was taken at home,
unarmed. We here see, first, that sufferings are common to the good and
the evil; then, that the more closely we are connected with the wicked
and the ungodly, when God pours down his vengeance on them, the more
quickly does the scourge come upon us.

<span id="xx.i-p61"></span><span id="xx.i-p61.1"></span>

<span id="xx.i-p62"></span>**13.** *And* *there* *came* *one* *that*
*had* *escaped* . This is the second part of the chapter, in which Moses
shows, that when God had respect to his servant Lot, he gave him Abram
as his deliverer, to rescue him from the hands of the enemy. But here
various questions arise; as, whether it was lawful for Abram, a private
person, to arm his family against kings, and to undertake a public war.
I do not, however, doubt, that as he went to the war endued with the
power of the Spirit, so also he was guarded by a heavenly command, that
he did not transgress the bounds of his vocation. And this ought not to
be regarded as a new thing, but as his special calling; for he had
already been created king of that land. And although the possession of
it was deferred to a future time; yet God would give some remarkable
proof of the power which he had granted him, and which was hitherto
unknown to men.  <span id="fr_357"></span>[358](#fn_357.md) A similar
prelude of what was to follow, we read in the case of Moses, when he
slew the Egyptian, before he openly presented himself as the avenger and
deliverer of his nation. And for this reason the subject ought to be
noticed, that they who wish to defend themselves by armed force,
whenever any force is used against them, may note from this fact, frame
a rule for themselves. We shall hereafter see this same Abram bearing
patiently and with a submissive mind, injuries which had at least, an
equal tendency to provoke his spirit. Moreover, that Abram attempted
nothing rashly, but rather, that his design was approved by God, will
appear presently, from the commendation of Melchizedek. We may therefore
conclude, that this war was undertaken by him, under the special
direction of the Spirit. If any one should take exception, that he
proceeded further than was lawful, when he spoiled the victors of their
prey and captives, and restored them wholly to the men of Sodom, who
had, by no means been committed to his protection; I answer, since it
appears that God was his Guide and Ruler in this affair, — as we infer
from His approbation, — it is not for us to dispute respecting His
secret judgment. God had destined the inhabitants of Sodom, when their
neighbors were ruined and destroyed, to a still more severe judgment;
because they were themselves the worst of all. He, therefore, raised up
his servant Abram, after they had been admonished by a chastisement
sufficiently severe, to deliver them, in order that they might be
rendered the more inexcusable. Therefore, this peculiar suggestion of
the Holy Spirit ought no more to be drawn into a precedent, than the
whole war which Abram had carried on. With respect to the messenger who
had related to Abram the slaughter at Sodom, I do not accept what some
suppose, that he was a pious man. We may rather conjecture that, as a
fugitive from home, who had been deprived of all his goods, he came to
Abram to elicit something from his humanity. That Abram is called a
Hebrew, I do not explain from the fact of his having passed over the
river, as is the opinion of some; but from his being of the progeny of
Eber. For it is a name of descent. And the Holy Spirit here again
honorably announces that race as blessed by God.

<span id="xx.i-p64"></span>*And* *these* *were* *confederate* *with*
*Abram* . It appears, that in the course of time, Abram was freely
permitted to enter into covenant and friendship with the princes of the
land: for the heroical virtues of the man, caused them to regard him as
one who was not, by any means, to be despised. Nay, as he had so great a
family, he might also have been numbered among kings, if he had not been
a stranger and a sojourner. But God purposed thus to provide for his
peace, by a covenant relating to temporal things in order that he never
might be mingled with those nations. Moreover, that this whole
transaction was divinely ordered we may readily conjecture from the
fact, that his associates did not hesitate, at great risk, to assail
four kings, who (according to the state of the times) were sufficiently
strong, and were flushed with the confidence of victory. Surely they
would scarcely ever have been thus favorable to a stranger, except by a
secret impulse of God.

<span id="xx.i-p65"></span><span id="xx.i-p65.1"></span>

<span id="xx.i-p66"></span>**14.** *When* *Abram* *heard* *that* *his*
*brother* *was* *taken* *captive* . Moses briefly explains the cause of
the war which was undertaken; namely, that Abram might rescue his
relation from captivity. Meanwhile, what I have before said is to be
remembered, that he did not rashly fly to arms; but took them as from
the hand of God, who had constituted him lord of that land. With
reference to the words themselves, I know not why the ancient
interpreter has rendered them, ‘Abram numbered his trained servants.’
For the word <span id="xx.i-p66.1"></span>קיר ( *rik* ) signifies to
unsheathe, or to draw out.  <span id="fr_358"></span>[359](#fn_358.md) Now
Moses calls these servants <span id="xx.i-p67.2"></span>םיכינח (
*chanichim* ,) not as having been educated and trained for military
service, as many suppose; but rather (in my opinion) as having been
brought up under his own authority, and imbued from childhood with his
discipline; so that they fought the more courageously, being stimulated
by his faith, and going forth under his auspices;  <span
id="fr_359"></span>[360](#fn_359.md) and were ready to undergo every kind
of danger for his sake. But in this great household troop, we must
notice, not only the diligence of the holy patriarch, but the special
blessing of God, by which it had been increased beyond the common and
usual manner.

<span id="xx.i-p69"></span><span id="xx.i-p69.1"></span>

<span id="xx.i-p70"></span>**15.** *And* *he* *divided* *himself*
*against* *them* . Some explain the words to mean that Abram alone, with
his domestic troops, rushed upon the enemy. Others, that he and his
three confederates divided their bands, in order to strike greater
terror into the foe. A third class suppose the phrase to be a Hebraism,
for making an irruption into the midst of the enemy. I rather embrace
the second exposition; namely, that he invaded the enemy on different
sides, and suddenly inspired them with terror. For the circumstance of
time favors this view, because he attacked them by night. And although
examples of similar bravery occur in profane history; yet it ought to be
ascribed to the faith of Abram, that with a small band, he dared to
assail a numerous army elated with victory. But that he came off
conqueror with little trouble, and with intrepidity pursued those who
far exceeded him in number, we must ascribe to the favor of God.

<span id="xx.i-p71"></span><span id="xx.i-p71.1"></span>

<span id="xx.i-p72"></span>**17.** *And* *the* *king* *of* *Sodom*
*went* *out* . Although the king of Sodom knew that Abram had taken arms
only on account of his nephew, yet he went to meet him with due honor,
in order to show his gratitude. For it is a natural duty to acknowledge
benefits conferred upon us, even when not intentionally rendered, but
only from unexpected circumstances and occasions, or (as we say) by
accident. Moreover, the whole affair yields greater glory to God,
because the victory of Abram was celebrated in this manner. He also
marks the place where the king of Sodom met Abram, namely, “the king’s
dale,” which I think was so called, rather after some particular king,
than because those kings met there for their pleasure.  <span
id="fr_360"></span>[361](#fn_360.md)

<span id="xx.i-p74"></span><span id="xx.i-p74.1"></span>

<span id="xx.i-p75"></span>**18.** *And* *Melchizedek* *king* *of*
*Salem* *brought* *forth* . This is the last of the three principal
points of this history, that Melchizedek, the chief father of the
Church, having entertained Abram at a feast, blessed him, in virtue of
his priesthood, and received tithes from him. There is no doubt that by
the coming of this king to meet him, God also designed to render the
victory of Abram famous and memorable to posterity. But a more exalted
and excellent mystery was, at the same time, adumbrated: for seeing that
the holy patriarch, whom God had raised to the highest rank of honor,
submitted himself to Melchizedek, it is not to be doubted that God had
constituted him the only head of the whole Church;  <span
id="fr_361"></span>[362](#fn_361.md) for, without controversy, the solemn
act of benediction, which Melchizedek assumed to himself, was a symbol
of preeminent dignity. If any one replies, that he did this as a priest;
I ask, was not Abram also a priest? Therefore God here commends to us
something peculiar in Melchizedek, in preferring him before the father
of all the faithful. But it will be more satisfactory to examine the
passage word by word, in regular order, that we may thence better gather
the import of the whole. That he received Abram and his companions as
guests belonged to his *royalty* ; but the benediction pertained
especially to his *sacerdotal office* . Therefore, the words of Moses
ought to be thus connected: Melchizedek king of Salem brought forth
bread and wine; and seeing he was the priest of God, he blessed Abram;
thus to each character is distinctly attributed what is its own. He
refreshed a wearied and famishing army with royal liberality; but
because he was a priest, he blessed, by the rite of solemn prayer, the
firstborn son of God, and the father of the Church. Moreover, although I
do not deny that it was the most ancient custom, for those who were
kings to fulfill also the office of the priesthood; yet this appears to
have been, even in that age, extraordinary in Melchizedek. And truly he
is honored with no common eulogy, when the Spirit ratifies his
priesthood. We know how, at that time, religion was everywhere corrupted
since Abram himself, who was descended from the sacred race of Shem and
Eber, had been plunged in the profound vortex of superstitions with his
father and grandfather. Therefore many imagine Melchizedek to have been
Shem; to whose opinion I am, for many reasons, hindered from
subscribing. For the Lord would not have designated a man, worthy of
eternal memory, by a name so new and obscure, that he must remain
unknown. Secondly, it is not probable that Shem had migrated from the
east into Judea; and nothing of the kind is to be gathered from Moses.
Thirdly, if Shem had dwelt in the land of Canaan, Abram would not have
wandered by such winding courses, as Moses has previously related,
before he went to salute his ancestor. But the declaration of the
Apostle is of the greatest weight; that this Melchizedek, whoever he
was, is presented before us, without any origin, as if he had dropped
from the clouds, and that his name is buried without any mention of his
death. (<span id="xx.i-p76.3"></span>[Heb
7:3](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#003)<span id="xx.i-p76.3"></span>..md) But
the admirable grace of God shines more clearly in a person unknown;
because, amid the corruptions of the world, he alone, in that land, was
an upright and sincere cultivator and guardian of religion. I omit the
absurdities which Jerome, in his Epistle to Evagrius, heaps together;
lest, without any advantage, I should become troublesome, and even
offensive to the reader. I readily believe that Salem is to be taken for
Jerusalem; and this is the generally received interpretation. If,
however, any one chooses rather to embrace a contrary opinion, seeing
that the town was situated in a plain, I do not oppose it. On this point
Jerome thinks differently: nevertheless, what he elsewhere relates, that
in his own times some vestiges of the palace of Melchizedek were still
extant in the ancient ruins, appears to me improbable.

<span id="xx.i-p77"></span>It now remains to be seen how Melchizedek
bore the image of Christ, and became, as it were, his representative,
<span id="xx.i-p77.1"></span>ἀντίτυπος ( *avtitupos.*  <span
id="fr_362"></span>[363](#fn_362) .md) These are the words of David,

<span id="xx.i-p79"></span>“The Lord sware, and will not repent, Thou
art a priest forever, after the order of Melchizedek,” (<span
id="xx.i-p79.1"></span>[Ps 110:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa110.htm#004.md)<span
id="xx.i-p79.1"></span>.)

<span id="xx.i-p80"></span>First, he had placed him on a royal throne,
and now he gives him the honor of the priesthood. But under the Law,
these two offices were so distinct, that it was unlawful for kings to
usurp the office of the priesthood. If, therefore, we concede as true,
what Plato declares, and what occasionally occurs in the poets, that it
was formerly received, by the common custom of nations, that the same
person should be both king and priest; this was by no means the case
with David and his posterity, whom the Law peremptorily forbade to
intrude on the priestly office. It was therefore right, that what was
divinely appointed under the old law, should be abrogated in the person
of this priest. And the Apostle does not contend without reason, that a
more excellent priesthood than that old and shadowy one, was here
pointed out; which priesthood is confirmed by an oath. Moreover, we
never find that king and priest, who is to be preeminent over all, till
we come to Christ. And as no one has arisen except Christ, who equalled
Melchizedek in dignity, still less who excelled him; we hence infer that
the image of Christ was presented to the fathers, in his person. David,
indeed, does not propose a similitude framed by himself; but declares
the reason for which the kingdom of Christ was divinely ordained, and
even confirmed with an oath; and it is not to be doubted that the same
truth had previously been traditionally handed down by the fathers. The
sum of the whole is, that Christ would thus be the king next to God, and
also that he should be anointed priest, and that for ever; which it is
very useful for us to know, in order that we may learn that the royal
power of Christ is combined with the office of priest. The same Person,
therefore who was constituted the only and eternal Priest, in order that
he might reconcile us to God, and who, having made expiation, might
intercede for us, is also a King of infinite power to secure our
salvation, and to protect us by his guardian care. Hence it follows,
that relying on his advocacy, we may stand boldly in the presence of
God, who will, we are assured, be propitious to us; and that trusting in
his invincible arm, we may securely triumph over enemies of every kind.
But they who separate one office from the other, rend Christ asunder,
and subvert their own faith, which is deprived of half its support. It
is also to be observed, that Christ is called an eternal King, like
Melchizedek. For since the Scripture, by assigning no end to his life,
leaves him as if he were to survive through all ages; it certainly
represents or shadows forth to us, in his person, a figure, not of a
temporal, but of an eternal kingdom. But whereas Christ, by his death,
has accomplished the office of Priest, it follows that God was, by that
one sacrifice, once appeased in such a manner, that now reconciliation
is to be sought in Christ alone. Therefore, they do him grievous wrong,
and wrest from him by abominable sacrilege, the honor divinely conferred
upon him by an oaths who either institute other sacrifices for the
expiation of sins, or who make other priests.  <span
id="fr_363"></span>[364](#fn_363.md) And I wish this had been prudently
weighed by the ancient writers of the Church. For then would they not so
coolly, and even so ignorantly, have transferred to the bread and wine
the similitude between Christ and Melchizedek, which consists in things
very different. They have supposed that Melchizedek is the image of
Christ, because he offered bread and wine. For they add, that Christ
offered his body, which is life-giving bread, and his blood, which is
spiritual drink. But the Apostle, while in his Epistle to the Hebrews,
he most accurately collects, and specifically prosecutes, every point of
similarity between Christ and Melchizedek, says not a word concerning
the bread and wine. If the subtleties of Tertullian, and of others like
him, were true, it would have been a culpable negligence, not to bestow
a single syllable upon the principal point, while discussing the
separate parts, which were of comparatively trivial importance. And
seeing the Apostle disputes at so great length, and with such
minuteness, concerning the priesthood; how gross an instance of
forgetfulness would it have been, not to touch upon that memorable
sacrifice, in which the whole force of the priesthood was comprehended?
He proves the honor of Melchizedek from the benediction given, and
tithes received: how much better would it have suited this argument to
have said, that he offered not lambs or calves, but the life of the
world, (that is, the body and blood of Christ,) in a figure? By these
arguments the fictions of the ancients are abundantly refuted.
Nevertheless, from the very words of Moses a sufficiently lucid
refutation may be taken. For we do not there read that *anything* was
offered to God; but in one continued discourse it is stated, ‘He offered
bread and wine; and seeing he was priest of the Most High God, he
blessed him.’ Who does not see that the same relative pronoun is common
to both verbs; and therefore that Abram was both refreshed with the
wine, and honored with the benediction? Utterly ridiculous truly are the
Papists, who distort the offering  <span
id="fr_364"></span>[365](#fn_364.md) of bread and wine to the sacrifice of
their mass. For in order to bring Melchizedek into agreement with
themselves, it will be necessary for them to concede that *bread* and
*wine* are offered in the mass. Where, then, is transubstantiation,
which leaves nothing except the bare *species* of the elements? Then,
with what audacity do they declare that the body of Christ is immolated
in their sacrifices? Under what pretext, since the Son of God is called
the only successor of Melchizedek, do they substitute innumerable
successors for him? We see, then, how foolishly they not only deprave
this passage, but babble without the color of reason.

<span id="xx.i-p83"></span><span id="xx.i-p83.1"></span>

<span id="xx.i-p84"></span>**19.** *And* *he* *blessed* *him* . Unless
these two members of the sentence, ‘He was the priest of God,’ and ‘He
blessed,’ cohere together, Moses here relates nothing uncommon. For men
mutually bless each other; that is, they wish well to each other. But
here the priest of God is described, who, according to the right of his
office, sanctifies one inferior and subject to himself. For he would
never have dared to bless Abram, unless he had known, that in this
respect he excelled him. In this manner the Levitical priests are
commanded to bless the people; and God promises that the blessing should
be efficacious and ratified, (<span id="xx.i-p84.1"></span>[Nu
6:23](../../../bib/kjv/num006.htm#023)<span id="xx.i-p84.1"></span>..md) So
Christ, when about to ascend up to heaven, having lifted up his hands,
blessed the Apostles, as a minister of the grace of God, (<span
id="xx.i-p84.2"></span>[Lu 24:51](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#051.md)<span
id="xx.i-p84.2"></span>;) and then was exhibited the truth of this
figure. For he testifies that the office of blessing the Church, which
had been adumbrated in Melchizedek, was assigned him by his Father.

<span id="xx.i-p85"></span>*Blessed* *be* *Abram* *of* *the* *most*
*high* *God* . The design of Melchizedek is to confirm and ratify the
grace of the Divine vocation to holy Abram; for he points out the honor
with which God had peculiarly dignified him by separating him from all
others, and adopting him as his own son. And he calls God, by whom Abram
had been chosen, the Possessor of heaven and earth, to distinguish him
from the fictitious idols of the Gentiles. Afterwards, indeed, God
invests himself with other titles; that, by some peculiar mark, he may
render himself more clearly known to men, who, because of the vanity of
their mind, when they simply hear of God as the Framer of heaven and
earth, never cease to wander, till at length they are lost in their own
speculations. But because God was already known to Abram, and his faith
was founded upon many miracles, Melchizedek deems it sufficient to
declare that, by the title of Creator,  <span
id="fr_365"></span>[366](#fn_365.md) He whom Abram worshipped, is the true
and only God. And although Melchizedek himself maintained the sincere
worship of the true God, he yet calls Abram blessed of God, in respect
of the eternal covenant: as if he would say, that, by a kind of
hereditary right, the grace of God resided in one family and nation,
because Abram alone had been chosen out of the whole world. Then is
added a special congratulation on the victory obtained; not such as is
wont to pass between profane men, who puff each other up with inflated
encomiums; but Melchizedek gives thanks unto God, and regards the
victory which the holy man had gained as a seal of his gratuitous
calling.

<span id="xx.i-p87"></span><span id="xx.i-p87.1"></span>

<span id="xx.i-p88"></span>**20.** *And* *he* *gave* *him* *tithes* *of*
*all* . There are those who understand that the tithes were given to
Abram; but the Apostle speaks otherwise, in declaring that Levi had paid
tithes in the loins of Abram, (<span id="xx.i-p88.1"></span>[Heb
7:9](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#009)<span id="xx.i-p88.1"></span>,.md)
when Abram offered tithes to a more excellent Priest. And truly what the
expositors above-mentioned mean, would be most absurd; because, if
Melchizedek was the priest of God, it behaved him to receive tithes
rather than to give them. Nor is it to be doubted but Abram offered the
gift to God, in the person of Melchizedek, in order that, by such
first-fruits, he might dedicate all his possessions to God. Abram
therefore voluntarily gave tithes to Melchizedek, to do honor to his
priesthood. Moreover, since it appears that this was not done wrongfully
nor rashly, the Apostle properly infers, that, in this figure, the
Levitical priesthood is subordinate to the priesthood of Christ. For
other reasons, God afterwards commanded tithes to be given to Levi under
the Law; but, in the age of Abram, they were only a holy offering, given
as a pledge and proof of gratitude. It is however uncertain whether he
offered the title of the spoils or of the goods which he possessed at
home. But, since it is improbable that he should have been liberal with
other persons’ goods, and should have given a very a tenth part of the
prey, of which he had resolved not to touch even a thread, I rather
conjecture, that these tithes were taken out of his own property. I do
not, however, admit that they were paid annually, as some imagine, but
rather, in my judgment, he dedicated this present to Melchizedek once,
for the purpose of acknowledging him as the high priest of God: nor
could he, at that time, (as we say,) hand it over;  <span
id="fr_366"></span>[367](#fn_366.md) but there was a solemn stipulation, of
which the effect shortly after followed.

<span id="xx.i-p90"></span><span id="xx.i-p90.1"></span>

<span id="xx.i-p91"></span>**21.** *And* *the* *king* *of* *Sodom*
*said* . Moses having, by the way, interrupted the course of his
narrative concerning the king of Sodom, by the mention of the king of
Salem, now returns to it again; and says that the king of Sodom came to
meet Abram, not only for the sake of congratulating him, but of giving
him a due reward. He therefore makes over to him the whole prey, except
the men; as if he would says ‘It is a great thing that I recover the
men; let all the rest be given to thee as a reward for this benefit.’
And thus to have shown himself grateful to man, would truly have been
worthy of commendation; had he not been ungrateful to God, by whose
severity and clemency he remained alike unprofited. It was even possible
that this man, when poor and deprived of all his goods, might, with a
servile affectation of modesty, try to gain the favor of Abram, by
asking to have nothing but the captives and the empty city for himself.
Certainly we shall afterwards see that the men of Sodom were unmindful
of the benefit received, when they proudly and contemptuously vexed
righteous Lot.

<span id="xx.i-p92"></span><span id="xx.i-p92.1"></span>

<span id="xx.i-p93"></span>**22.** *And* *Abram* *said* *to* *the*
*king* *of* *Sodom* *,* *I* *have* *lift* *up* *mine* *hand* *,* *etc*
 <span id="fr_367"></span>[368](#fn_367.md) This ancient ceremony was very
appropriate to give expression to the force and nature of an oath. For
by raising the hand towards heaven, we show that we appeal to God as a
witness, and also as an avenger, if we fail to keep our oath. Formerly,
indeed, they raised their hands in giving votes; whence the Greeks
derive the word (<span id="xx.i-p94.1"></span>χειροτονεῖν,)  <span
id="fr_368"></span>[369](#fn_368.md) which signifies to decree: but in the
rite of swearing, the reason for doing so was different. For men hereby
declared, that they regarded themselves as in the presence of God, and
called upon him to be both the Guardian of truth, and the Avenger of
perjury. Yet it may seem strange that Abram should so easily have put
himself forward to swear; for he knew that a degree of reverence was due
to the name of God, which should constrain us to use it but sparingly,
and only from necessity. I answer, there were two reasons for his
swearing. First, since inconstant men are wont to measure others by
their own standard, they seldom place confidence in bare assertions. The
king of Sodom, therefore, would have thought that Abram did not
seriously remit his right, unless the name of God had been interposed.
And, secondly, it was of great consequence, to make it manifest to all,
that he had not carried on a mercenary war. The histories of all times
sufficiently declare, that even they who have had just causes of war
have, nevertheless, been invited to it by the thirst of private gain.
And as men are acute in devising pretexts, they are never at a loss to
find plausible reasons for war, even though covetousness may be their
only real stimulant. Therefore, unless Abram had resolutely refused the
spoils of war, the rumor would immediately have spread, that, under the
pretense of rescuing his nephew, he had been intent upon grasping the
prey. Against which it was necessary for him carefully to guard, not so
much for his own sakes as for the glory of God, which would otherwise
have received some mark of disparagement. Besides, Abram wished to arm
himself with the name of God, as with a shield, against all the
allurements of avarice. For the king of Sodom would not have desisted
from tempting his mind by various methods, if the occasion for using
bland insinuations had not been promptly cut off.

<span id="xx.i-p96"></span><span id="xx.i-p96.1"></span>

<span id="xx.i-p97"></span>**23.** *That* *I* *will* *not* *take* *from*
*a* *thread* *even* *to* *a* *shoe* *-* *latchet* . The Hebrews have an
elliptical form of making oath, in which the imprecation of punishment
is understood. In some places, the full expression of it occurs in the
Scriptures, “The Lord do so to me and more also,” (<span
id="xx.i-p97.1"></span>[1Sa 14:44](../../../bib/kjv/sa1014.htm#044.md)<span
id="xx.i-p97.1"></span>.) Since however, it is a dreadful thing to fall
into the hands of the living God, in order that the obligation of oaths
may be the more binding, this abrupt form of speech admonishes men to
reflect on what they are doing; for it is just as if they should put a
restraint upon themselves, and should stop suddenly in the midst of
their discourse. This indeed is most certain, that men never rashly
swear, but they provoke the vengeance of God against them, and make Him
their adversary.

<span id="xx.i-p98"></span>*Lest* *thou* *shouldst* *say* . Although
these words seem to denote a mind elated, and too much addicted to fame,
yet since Abram is on this point commended by the Spirit, we conclude
that this was a truly holy magnanimity. But an exception is added namely
that he will not allow his own liberality to be injurious to his allies,
nor make them subject to his laws. For this also is not the least part
of virtue, to act rightly, yet in such a manner, that we do not bind
others to our example, as to a rule. Let every one therefore regard what
his own vocation demands, and what pertains to his own duty, in order
that men may not prejudge one another according to their own will. For
it is a moroseness too imperious, to wish that what we ourselves follow
as right, and consonant with our duty, should be prescribed as a law to
others.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_355"></span>[356](cc01019.htm#fr_355.md) <span
id="xx.i-p54.1"></span>

<span id="xx.i-p55"></span> See Ovid’s Metamorphosis 1.

<span id="fn_356"></span>[357](cc01019.htm#fr_356.md) <span
id="xx.i-p55.1"></span>

<span id="xx.i-p56"></span> “<span id="xx.i-p56.1"></span>Arioch rex
Ponti.” — *Vulgate*

<span id="fn_357"></span>[358](cc01019.htm#fr_357.md) <span
id="xx.i-p62.1"></span>

<span id="xx.i-p63"></span> “<span id="xx.i-p63.1"></span>Dieu a voulu
donner un patron singulier de la puissance qu’il luy avoit bailee,
laquelle estoit encore incognue aux hommes.” — *French Tr*

<span id="fn_358"></span>[359](cc01019.htm#fr_358.md) <span
id="xx.i-p66.2"></span>

<span id="xx.i-p67"></span> “<span id="xx.i-p67.1"></span>Comme s’il
disoit, Il tira hors de sa maison trois cens dixhuit serviteurs.” — “As
if he had said, He drew out of his house three hundred and eighteen
servants.” — *French Tr*

<span id="fn_359"></span>[360](cc01019.htm#fr_359.md) <span
id="xx.i-p67.3"></span>

<span id="xx.i-p68"></span> “<span id="xx.i-p68.1"></span>Animosius sub
fide et auspiciis ejus bellarent.”

<span id="fn_360"></span>[361](cc01019.htm#fr_360.md) <span
id="xx.i-p72.1"></span>

<span id="xx.i-p73"></span> “<span id="xx.i-p73.1"></span>Quan quod
animi causa reges illuc convenirent.”

<span id="fn_361"></span>[362](cc01019.htm#fr_361.md) <span
id="xx.i-p75.1"></span>

<span id="xx.i-p76"></span> “<span id="xx.i-p76.1"></span>Non dubium est
quin illum constituerit unicum totius ecclesiae caput.” — “<span
id="xx.i-p76.2"></span>Il ne faut pas douter que Dieu ne l’ait constitue
chef unique de toute l’Egilise.” — *French Tr*

<span id="fn_362"></span>[363](cc01019.htm#fr_362.md) <span
id="xx.i-p77.2"></span>

<span id="xx.i-p78"></span> “<span id="xx.i-p78.1"></span>Il faut voir
comment Melchisedech a cu la figure de Christ engravee ea soy, et est
comme la representation et correspondance.” — *French Tr*

<span id="fn_363"></span>[364](cc01019.htm#fr_363.md) <span
id="xx.i-p80.1"></span>

<span id="xx.i-p81"></span> “<span id="xx.i-p81.1"></span>Ceux qui
dressent d’autres sacrifices pour nettoyer les pechez, on forgent
d’autres sacrificateurs.” Those who prepare other sacrifices to cleanse
from sins, or make others sacrificing priests. — *French Tr*

<span id="fn_364"></span>[365](cc01019.htm#fr_364.md) <span
id="xx.i-p81.2"></span>

<span id="xx.i-p82"></span> <span id="xx.i-p82.1"></span>*Oblationem*;
yet the word ought not to be rendered oblation, because this term in
English always implies that the offering is made to God; whereas Calvin
speaks of the bread and wine simply as being presented by Melchizedek to
Abram. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_365"></span>[366](cc01019.htm#fr_365.md) <span
id="xx.i-p85.1"></span>

<span id="xx.i-p86"></span> “<span id="xx.i-p86.1"></span>Creationis
elogio testari,” etc. — “<span id="xx.i-p86.2"></span>De donner a Dieu
ce titre de Possesseur du ciel et de la terre.” To give to God this
title of Possessor of heaven and earth. — *French Tr*

<span id="fn_366"></span>[367](cc01019.htm#fr_366.md) <span
id="xx.i-p88.2"></span>

<span id="xx.i-p89"></span> “<span id="xx.i-p89.1"></span>Nec tunc
potuit de manu (quod aiunt) in manum tradere.” — “<span
id="xx.i-p89.2"></span>Ne luy a peu lors builler de main a main, comme
on dit.” Nor was he then able to commit it to him, from hand to hand, as
they say. — *French Tr*

<span id="fn_367"></span>[368](cc01019.htm#fr_367.md) <span
id="xx.i-p93.1"></span>

<span id="xx.i-p94"></span> A portion of the 22d verse, which is
commented upon without being given in the original, is here inserted, in
order to make the whole more clear to the reader; it also appears in the
French Translation. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_368"></span>[369](cc01019.htm#fr_368.md) <span
id="xx.i-p94.2"></span>

<span id="xx.i-p95"></span> Literally, to stretch forth the hand.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 15](cc01020.md)
