[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc01016)  [Next](cc01018) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 1: Genesis, Part I*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xviii"></span>

<span id="xviii-p1"></span>CHAPTER 12.

<span id="xviii.i"></span>

<span id="xviii.i-p1"></span><span id="xviii.i-p1.1"></span>[Genesis
12:1-20](../../../bib/kjv/gen012.htm#001)<span id="xviii.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.i-p2"></span>**1.** Now the LORD had said unto Abram,
Get thee out of thy country, and from thy kindred, and from thy father’s
house, unto a land that I will shew thee:

<span id="xviii.i-p3"></span>**1.** Dixerat autem Jehova ad Abram, Abi e
terra tua, et e cognatione tua, et e domo patris tui, ad terram quam
ostendam tibi.

<span id="xviii.i-p4"></span>**2.** And I will make of thee a great
nation, and I will bless thee, and make thy name great; and thou shalt
be a blessing:

<span id="xviii.i-p5"></span>**2.** Et faciam to in gentem magnam, et
benedicam tibi, et magnificabo nomen tuum, et eris benedictio.

<span id="xviii.i-p6"></span>**3.** And I will bless them that bless
thee, and curse him that curseth thee: and in thee shall all families of
the earth be blessed.

<span id="xviii.i-p7"></span>**3.** Et benedicam benedicentibus tibi: et
maledicentibus tibi maledicam: et benedicentur in to omnes familae
terrae.

<span id="xviii.i-p8"></span>**4.** So Abram departed, as the LORD had
spoken unto him; and Lot went with him: and Abram *was* seventy and five
years old when he departed out of Haran.

<span id="xviii.i-p9"></span>**4.** Abiit ergo Abram quemadmodum
loquutus fuerat ad eum Jehova: et perrexit cum eo Lot: Abram autem erat
filius quinque annorum et septuaginta annorum, quando egressus est de
Charan

<span id="xviii.i-p10"></span>**5.** And Abram took Sarai his wife, and
Lot his brother’s son, and all their substance that they had gathered,
and the souls that they had gotten in Haran; and they went forth to go
into the land of Canaan; and into the land of Canaan they came.

<span id="xviii.i-p11"></span>**5.** Et cepit Abram Sarai uxorem suam,
et Lot filium fratris sui, et omnem substantiam quam acquisierant, et
animas quas fecerant in Charan, et egressi sunt ut pergerent in terram
Chenaan, et venerunt ad terram Chenaan.

<span id="xviii.i-p12"></span>**6.** And Abram passed through the land
unto the place of Sichem, unto the plain of Moreh. And the Canaanite
*was* then in the land.

<span id="xviii.i-p13"></span> **6.** Et transivit Abram in terram
usquead locum Sechem, usque ad quercum Moreh: Chenaanaeus autem tunc
erat in terra.

<span id="xviii.i-p14"></span>**7.** And the LORD appeared unto Abram,
and said, Unto thy seed will I give this land: and there builded he an
altar unto the LORD, who appeared unto him.

<span id="xviii.i-p15"></span>**7.** Et visus est Jehova Abrae, et
dixit, Semini tuo dabo terram hanc: et aedificavit ibi altare Jehovae
qui apparuerat sibi.

<span id="xviii.i-p16"></span>**8.** And he removed from thence unto a
mountain on the east of Bethel, and pitched his tent, *having* Bethel on
the west, and Hai on the east: and there he builded an altar unto the
LORD, and called upon the name of the LORD.

<span id="xviii.i-p17"></span>**8.** Et transtulit se inde ad montem ab
Oriente ipsi Bethel, tetenditque tabernaculum suum: Bethel erat ab
Occidente, et Hai ab Oriente: et aedificavit ibi altare Jehova, et
invocavit nomen Jehovae.

<span id="xviii.i-p18"></span>**9.** And Abram journeyed, going on still
toward the south.

<span id="xviii.i-p19"></span>**9.** Profectus est et Abram eundo et
proficiscendo ad Meridiem.

<span id="xviii.i-p20"></span>**10.** And there was a famine in the
land: and Abram went down into Egypt to sojourn there; for the famine
*was* grievous in the land.

<span id="xviii.i-p21"></span>**10.** Et fuit fames in terra, et
descendit Abram in Aegyptum ut peregrinaretur ibi: quia gravis fames
erat in terra.

<span id="xviii.i-p22"></span>**11.** And it came to pass, when he was
come near to enter into Egypt, that he said unto Sarai his wife, Behold
now, I know that thou *art* a fair woman to look upon:

<span id="xviii.i-p23"></span>**11.** Et fuit, quando appropinquavit ut
ingrederetur Aegyptum, dixit ad Sarai uxorem suam, Ecce, nunc novi quod
mulier pulchra aspectu sis:

<span id="xviii.i-p24"></span>**12.** Therefore it shall come to pass,
when the Egyptians shall see thee, that they shall say, This *is* his
wife: and they will kill me, but they will save thee alive.

<span id="xviii.i-p25"></span>**12.** Erit itaque, quum viderint to
Aegyptii, dicent, Uxor ejus est: et occident me, et to servabunt vivam.

<span id="xviii.i-p26"></span>**13.** Say, I pray thee, thou *art* my
sister: that it may be well with me for thy sake; and my soul shall live
because of thee.

<span id="xviii.i-p27"></span>**13.** Dic nunc quod soror mea sis, ut
bene sit mihi propter to, et vivat anima mea propter to.

<span id="xviii.i-p28"></span>**14.** And it came to pass, that, when
Abram was come into Egypt, the Egyptians beheld the woman that she *was*
very fair.

<span id="xviii.i-p29"></span>**14.** Et fuit quum ingredere tur Abram
Aegyptum, viderunt Aegruptii mulierem quod pulchra esset valde.

<span id="xviii.i-p30"></span>**15.** The princes also of Pharaoh saw
her, and commended her before Pharaoh: and the woman was taken into
Pharaoh’s house.

<span id="xviii.i-p31"></span>**15.** Quum igitur vidissent eam
principes Pharaonis, landaverunt eam Pharaoni: et sublata est mulier in
domum Pharaonis.

<span id="xviii.i-p32"></span>**16.** And he entreated Abram well for
her sake: and he had sheep, and oxen, and he asses, and menservants, and
maidservants, and she asses, and camels.

<span id="xviii.i-p33"></span>**16.** Et ipsi Abram benefecit propter
eam: fueruntque ei pecudes, et boves, et asini, et servi, et ancillae,
et asinae, et cameli.

<span id="xviii.i-p34"></span>**17.** And the LORD plagued Pharaoh and
his house with great plagues because of Sarai Abram’s wife.

<span id="xviii.i-p35"></span>**17.** Percussit autem Jehova Pharaonem
percussionibus magnis et domum ejus, causa Sarai uxoris Abram.

<span id="xviii.i-p36"></span>**18.** And Pharaoh called Abram, and
said, What *is* this *that* thou hast done unto me? why didst thou not
tell me that she *was* thy wife?

<span id="xviii.i-p37"></span>**18.** Vocavitque Pharao Abram, et dixit,
Cur hoc, fecisti mihi? utquid non indicasti mihi quod uxor tua esset?

<span id="xviii.i-p38"></span>**19.** Why saidst thou, She *is* my
sister? so I might have taken her to me to wife: now therefore behold
thy wife, take *her* , and go thy way.

<span id="xviii.i-p39"></span>**19.** Utquid dixisti, Soror mea est? et
tuli eam mihi in uxorem: et nunc ecce uxor tua, cape et vade.

<span id="xviii.i-p40"></span>**20.** And Pharaoh commanded *his* men
concerning him: and they sent him away, and his wife, and all that he
had.

<span id="xviii.i-p41"></span>**20.** Et praecepit super eum Pharao
viris, et demiserunt eum et uxorem ejus, et omnia quae erant ei.

<span id="xviii.i-p42"></span> 

<span id="xviii.i-p43"></span><span id="xviii.i-p43.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.i-p44"></span>**1.** *Now* *the* *Lord* *had* *said*
*unto* *Abram* . That an absurd division of these chapters may not
trouble the readers, let them connect this sentence with the last two
verses of the previous chapter. Moses had before said, that Terah and
Abram had departed from their country to dwell in the land of Canaan. He
now explains that they had not been impelled by levity as rash and
fickle men are wont to be; nor had been drawn to other regions by
disgust with their own country, as morose persons frequently are; nor
were fugitives on account of crime; nor were led away by any foolish
hope, or by any allurements, as many are hurried hither and thither by
their own desires; but that Abram had been divinely commanded to go
forth and had not moved a foot but as he was guided by the word of God.
They who explain the passage to mean, that God spoke to Abram after the
death of his father, are easily refuted by the very words of Moses: for
if Abram was already without a country, and was sojourning as a stranger
elsewhere, the command of God would have been superfluous, ‘Depart from
thy land, from thy country, and from thy father’s house.’ The authority
of Stephen is also added, who certainly deserves to be accounted a
suitable interpreter of this passage: now he plainly testifies, that God
appeared to Abraham when he was in Mesopotamia, before he dwelt in
Charran; he then recites this oracle which we are now explaining; and at
length concludes, that, for this reason, Abraham migrated from Chaldea.
Nor is that to be overlooked which God afterwards repeats, (<span
id="xviii.i-p44.2"></span>[Ge
15:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#007)<span id="xviii.i-p44.2"></span>,)
‘I am the Lord that brought thee out of Ur of the Chaldees;’ for we
thence infer, that the Divine Hand was not for the first time stretched
out to him after he had dwelt in Charran, but while he yet remained at
home in Chaldea.  <span id="fr_338"></span>[339](#fn_338) Truly this
command of Gods respecting which doubts are foolishly entertained, ought
to be deemed by us sufficient to disprove the contrary error. For God
could not have spoken thus, except to a man who had been, up to that
time, settled in his nest, having his affairs underanged, and living
quietly and tranquilly among his relatives, without any change in his
mode of life; otherwise, the answer would have been readily given ‘I
have left my country, I am far removed from my kindred.’ In short, Moses
records this oracle, in order that we may know that this long journey
was undertaken by Abram, and his father Terah, at the command of God.
Whence it also appears, that Terah was not so far deluded by
superstitions as to be destitute of the fear of God. It was difficult
for the old man, already broken and failing in health, to tear himself
away from his own country. Some true religion, therefore, although
smothered, still remained in his mind. Therefore, when he knew that the
place, from which his son was commanded to depart, was accursed, it was
his wish not to perish there; but he joined himself as an associate with
him whom the Lord was about to deliver. What a witness, I demand, will
he prove, in the last day, to condemn our indolence! Easy and plausible
was the excuse which he might have alleged; namely that he would remain
quietly at home, because he had received no command. But he, though
blind in the darkness of unbelief, yet opened his eyes to the beam of
light which shot across his path; while we remain unmoved when the
Divine vocation directly shines upon us. Moreover, this calling of Abram
is a signal instance of the gratuitous mercy of God. Had Abram been
beforehand with God by any merit of works? Had Abram come to him, or
conciliated his favor? Nay, we must ever recall to mind, (what I have
before adduced from the passage in Joshua,) that he was plunged in the
filth of idolatry; and now God freely stretches forth his hand to bring
back the wanderer. He deigns to open his sacred mouth, that he may show
to one, deceived by Satan’s wiles, the way of salvation. And it is
wonderful, that a man, miserable and lost, should have the preference
given him, over so many holy worshippers of God; that the covenant of
life should be placed in his possession; that the Church should be
revived in him, and he himself constituted the father of all the
faithful. But this is done designedly, in order that the manifestation
of the grace of God might become the more conspicuous in his person. For
he is an example of the vocation of us all; for in him we perceive,
that, by the mere mercy of God, those things which are not are raised
from nothing, in order that they may begin to be something.

<span id="xviii.i-p46"></span>*Get* *thee* *out* *of* *thy* *country* .
This accumulation of words may seem to be superfluous. To which also may
be added, that Moses, in other places so concise, here expresses a plain
and easy matter in three different forms of speech. But the case is
quite otherwise. For since exile is in itself sorrowful, and the
sweetness of their native soil holds nearly all men bound to itself, God
strenuously persists in his command to leave the country, for the
purpose of thoroughly penetrating the mind of Abram. If he had said in a
single word, Leave thy country, this indeed would not lightly have
pained his mind; but Abram is still more deeply affected, when he hears
that he must renounce his kindred and his father’s house. Yet it is not
to be supposed, that God takes a cruel pleasure in the trouble of his
servants; but he thus tries all their affections, that he may not leave
any lurking-places undiscovered in their hearts. We see many persons
zealous for a short time, who afterwards become frozen; whence is this,
but because they build without a foundation? Therefore God determined,
thoroughly to rouse all the senses of Abram, that he might undertake
nothing rashly or inconsiderately; lest, repenting soon afterwards, he
should veer with the wind, and return. Wherefore, if we desire to follow
God with constancy, it behaves us carefully to meditate on all the
inconveniences, all the difficulties, all the dangers which await us;
that not only a hasty zeal may produce fading flowers, but that from a
deep and well-fixed root of piety, we may bring forth fruit in our whole
life.

<span id="xviii.i-p47"></span>*Unto* *a* *land* *that* *I* *will* *show*
*thee* . This is another test to prove the faith of Abram. For why does
not God immediately point out the land, except for the purpose of
keeping his servant in suspense, that he may the better try the truth of
his attachment to the word of God? As if he would say, ‘I command thee
to go forth with closed eyes, and forbid thee to inquire whither I am
about to lead thee, until, having renounced thy country, thou shalt have
given thyself wholly to me.’ And this is the true proof of our
obedience, when we are not wise in our own eyes, but commit ourselves
entirely unto the Lord. Whensoever, therefore, he requires anything of
us, we must not be so solicitous about success, as to allow fear and
anxiety to retard our course. For it is better, with closed eyes, to
follow God as our guide, than, by relying on our own prudence, to wander
through those circuitous paths which it devises for us. Should any one
object, that this statement is at variance with the former sentence, in
which Moses declared that Terah and Abram departed from their own
country, that they might come into the land of Canaan: the solution is
easy, if we admit a *prolepsis*  <span id="fr_339"></span>[340](#fn_339)
(that is, an anticipation on something still future) in the expression
of Moses; such as follows in this very chapter, in the use of the name
Bethel; and such as frequently occurs in the Scriptures. They knew not
whither they were going; but because they had resolved to go
whithersoever God might call them, Moses, speaking in his own person,
mentions the land, which, though hitherto unknown to them both, was
afterwards revealed to Abram alone. It is therefore true, that they
departed with the design of coming to the land of Canaan; because,
having received the promise concerning a land which was to be shown
them, they suffered themselves to be governed by God, until he should
actually bestow what he had promised. Nevertheless it may be, that God,
having proved the devotedness of Abram, soon afterwards removed all
doubt from his mind. For we do not know at what precise moment of time,
God would intimate to him what it was his will to conceal only for a
season. It is enough that Abram declared himself to be truly obedient to
God, when, having cast all his care on God’s providence, and having
discharged, as it were, into His bosom, whatever might have impeded him,
he did not hesitate to leave his own country, uncertain where, at
length, he might plant his foot; for, by this method, the wisdom of the
flesh was reduced to order, and all his affections, at the same time,
were subdued. Yet it may be asked, why God sent his servant into the
land of Canaan rather than into the East, where he could have lived with
some other of the holy fathers? Some (in order that the change may not
seem to have been made for the worse) will have it, that he was led
thither, for the purpose of dwelling with his ancestor Shem, whom they
imagine to have been Melchizedek. But if such were the counsel of God,
it is strange that Abram bent his steps in a different direction; nay,
we do not read that he met with Melchizedek, till he was returning from
the battle in the plain of Sodom. But, in its proper place, we shall see
how frivolous is the imagination, that Melchizedek was Shem. As it
concerns the subject now in hand, we infer, from the result which at
length followed, that God’s design was very different from what these
men suppose. The nations of Canaan, on account of their deplorable
wickedness, were devoted to destruction. God required his servant to
sojourn among them for a time, that, by faith, he might perceive himself
to be the heir of that land, the actual possession of which was reserved
for his posterity to a long period after his own death. Wherefore he was
commanded to cross over into that country, for this sole reason, that it
was to be evacuated by its inhabitants, for the purpose of being given
to his seed for a possession. And it was of great importance, that
Abram, Isaac, and Jacob, should be strangers in that land, and should by
faith embrace the dominion over it, which had been divinely promised
them, in order that their posterity might, with the greater courage,
gird themselves to take possession of it.

<span id="xviii.i-p49"></span><span id="xviii.i-p49.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.i-p50"></span>**2.** *And* *I* *will* *make* *of* *thee*
*a* *great* *nation* . Hitherto Moses has related what Abram had been
commanded to do; now he annexes the promise of God to the command; and
that for no light cause. For as we are slothful to obey, the Lord would
command in vain, unless we are animated by a superadded confidence in
his grace and benediction. Although I have before alluded to this, in
the history of Noah, it will not be useless to inculcate it again, for
the passage itself requires something to be said; and the repetition of
a doctrine of such great moment ought not to seem superfluous. For it is
certain that faith cannot stand, unless it be founded on the promises of
God. But faith alone produces obedience. Therefore in order that our
minds may be disposed to follow God, it is not sufficient for him simply
to command what he pleases, unless he also promises his blessing. We
must mark the promise, that Abram, whose wife was still barren, should
become a great nation. This promise might have been very efficacious, if
God, by the actual state of things, had afforded ground of hope
respecting its fulfillment; but now, seeing thatthe barrenness of his
wife threatened him with perpetual privation of offspring, the bare
promise itself would have been cold, if Abram had not wholly depended
upon the word of God; wherefore, though he perceives the sterility of
his wife, he yet apprehends, by hope, that great nation which is
promised by the word of God. And Isaiah greatly extols this act of
favor, that God, by his blessing, increased his servant Abram whom he
found alone and solitary to so great a nations (<span
id="xviii.i-p50.1"></span>[Isa
2:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#002)<span id="xviii.i-p50.1"></span>.)
The noun <span id="xviii.i-p50.2"></span>יוג ( *goi* ,) “my nation,”
(<span id="xviii.i-p50.3"></span>[Ge
12:4](../../../bib/kjv/gen012.htm#004)<span id="xviii.i-p50.3"></span>,)
though detestable to the Jews,  <span id="fr_340"></span>[341](#fn_340)
is in this place, and in many others, taken as a term of honor. And it
is here used emphatically, to show that he should not only have
posterity from his own seed in great number, but a peculiar people,
separated from others, who should be called by his own name.

<span id="xviii.i-p52"></span>*I* *will* *bless* *thee* . This is partly
added, to explain the preceding sentence. For, lest Abram should
despair, God offers his own blessing, which was able to effect more in
the way of miracle, than is seen to be effected, in other cases, by
natural means. The benediction, however, here pronounced, extends
farther than to offspring; and implies, that he should have a prosperous
and joyous issue of all his affairs; as appears from the succeeding
context, “And will make thy name great, and thou shalt be a bleeping.”
For such happiness is promised him, as shall fill all men everywhere
with admiration, so that they shall introduce the name of Abram, as an
example, into their formularies of pronouncing benediction. Others use
the term in the sense of augmentation, ‘Thou shalt be a blessing,’ that
is, ‘All shall bless thee.’ But the former sense is the more suitable.
Some also expound it actively, as if it had been said, ‘My grace shall
not reside in thee, so that thou alone mayest enjoy it, but it shall
flow far unto all nations. I therefore now so deposit it with thee, that
it may overflow into all the world.’ But God does not yet proceed to
that communication, as I shall show presently.

<span id="xviii.i-p53"></span><span id="xviii.i-p53.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.i-p54"></span>**3.** *And* *I* *will* *bless* *them*
*that* *bless* *thee* . Here the extraordinary kindness of God manifests
itself, in that he familiarly makes a covenant with Abram, as men are
wont to do with their companions and equals. For this is the accustomed
form of covenants between kings and others, that they mutually promise
to have the same enemies and the same friends. This certainly is an
inestimable pledge of special love, that God should so greatly
condescend for our sake. For although he here addresses one man only, he
elsewhere declares the same affection towards his faithful people. We
may therefore infer this general doctrine, that God so embraced us with
his favor, that he will bless our friends, and take vengeance on our
enemies. We are, moreover, warned by this passage, that however desirous
the sons of God may be of peace, they will never want enemies.
Certainly, of all persons who ever conducted themselves so peaceably
among men as to deserve the esteem of all, Abram might be reckoned among
the chief, yet even he was not without enemies; because he had the devil
for his adversary, who holds the wicked in his hand, whom he incessantly
impels to molest the good. There is then, no reason why the ingratitude
of the world should dishearten us, even though many hate us without
cause, and, when provoked by no injury, study to do us harm; but let us
be content with this single consolation, that God engages on our side in
the war. Besides, God exhorts his people to cultivate fidelity and
humanity with all good men, and, further, to abstain from all injury.
For this is no common inducement to excite us to assist the faithful,
that if we discharge any duty towards them, God will repay it; nor ought
it less to alarm us, that he denounces war against us, if we hurt any
one belonging to him.

<span id="xviii.i-p55"></span>*In* *thee* *shall* *all* *families* *of*
*the* *earth* *be* *blessed* . Should any one choose to understand this
passage in a restricted sense, as if, by a proverbial mode of speech,
they who shall bless their children or their friends, shall be called
after the name of Abram, let him enjoy his opinion; for the Hebrew
phrase will bear the interpretation, that Abram shall be called a signal
example of happiness. But I extend the meaning further; because I
suppose the same thing to be promised in this place, which God
afterwards repeats more clearly, (<span id="xviii.i-p55.1"></span>[Ge
22:18](../../../bib/kjv/gen022.htm#018)<span
id="xviii.i-p55.1"></span>.) And the authority of Paul brings me to this
point; who says, that the promise to the seed of Abraham, that is, to
Christ, was given four hundred and thirty years before the law, (<span
id="xviii.i-p55.2"></span>[Ga
3:17](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#017)<span id="xviii.i-p55.2"></span>.)
But the computation of years requires us to understand, that the
blessing was promised him in Christ, when he was coming into the land of
Canaan. Therefore God (in my judgment) pronounces that all nations
should be blessed in his servant Abram because Christ was included in
his loins. In this manner, he not only intimates that Abram would be an
*example* , but a *cause* of blessing; so that there should be an
understood antithesis between Adam and Christ. For whereas, from the
time of the first man’s alienation from God, we are all born accursed,
here a new remedy is offered unto us. Nor is there any thing contrary to
this in the assertion, that we must by no means seek a blessing in Abram
himself, inasmuch as the expression is used in reference to Christ. Here
the Jews petulantly object, and heap together many testimonies of
Scripture, from which it appears that to bless or curse *in any one* ,
is nothing else than to wish good or evil to another, according to him
as a pattern. But their cavil may be set aside without difficulty. I
acknowledge, that what they say is often, but not always true. For when
it is said, that the tribe of Levi shall bless in the name of God, in
<span id="xviii.i-p55.3"></span>[De
10:8](../../../bib/kjv/deu010.htm#008)<span id="xviii.i-p55.3"></span>
<span id="xviii.i-p55.4"></span>[Isa
65:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#016)<span id="xviii.i-p55.4"></span>,
and in similar passages, it is sufficiently evident, that God is
declared to be the fountain of all good, in order that Israel may not
seek any portion of good elsewhere Seeing, therefore, that the language
is ambiguous, let them grant the necessity of choosing this, or the
other sense, as may be most suitable to the subject and the occasion.
Now Paul assumes it as an axiom which is received among all the pious,
and which ought to be taken for granted, that the whole human race is
obnoxious to a curse, and therefore that the holy people are blessed
only through the grace of the Mediator. Whence he concludes, that the
covenant of salvation which God made with Abram, is neither stable nor
firm except in Christ. I therefore thus interpret the present place;
that God promises to his servant Abram that blessing which shall
afterwards flow down to all people. But because this subject will be
more amply explained else where, I now only briefly touch upon it.

<span id="xviii.i-p56"></span><span id="xviii.i-p56.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.i-p57"></span>**4.** *So* *Abram* *departed* . They who
suppose that God was now speaking to Abram in Charran, lay hold of these
words in support of their error. But the cavil is easily refuted; for
after Moses has mentioned the cause of their departure, namely, that
Abram had been constrained by the command of God to leave his native
soil, he now returns to the thread of the history. Why Abram for a time
should have remained in Charran, we do not know, except that God laid
his hand upon him, to prevent him from immediately obtaining a sight of
the land, which, although yet unknown, he had nevertheless preferred to
his own country. He is now said to have departed from Charran, that he
might complete the journey he had begun; which also the next verse
confirms, where it is said, that he took Sarai his wife and Lot his
nephew with him. As under the conduct and auspices of his father Terah,
they had departed from Chaldea; so now when Abram is become the head of
the family, he pursues and completes what his father had begun. Still it
is possible, that the Lord again exhorted him to proceed, the death of
his father having intervened, and that he confirmed his former call by a
second oracle. It is however certain, that in this place the obedience
of faith is commended, and not as one act simply, but as a constant and
perpetual course of life. For I do not doubt, but Moses intended to say,
that Abram remained in Charran, not because he repented, as if he was
inclined to swerve from the straight course of his vocation, but as
having the command of God always fixed in his mind. And therefore I
would rather refer the clause, “As the Lord had spoken to him” to the
first oracle; so that Moses should say, ‘he stood firmly in his purpose,
and his desire to obey God was not broken by the death of his father.’
Moreover, we have here in one word, a rule prescribed to us, for the
regulation of our whole life, which is to attempt nothing but by Divine
authority. For, however men may dispute concerning virtues and duties,
no work is worthy of praise, or deserves to be reckoned among virtues,
except what is pleasing to God. And he himself testifies, that he makes
greater account of obedience than of sacrifice, (<span
id="xviii.i-p57.2"></span>[1Sa
15:22](../../../bib/kjv/sa1015.htm#022)<span
id="xviii.i-p57.2"></span>.) Wherefore, our life will then be rightly
constituted, when we depend upon the word of God, and undertake nothing
except at his command. And it is to be observed, that the question is
not here concerning some one particular work, but concerning the general
principle of living piously and uprightly. For the subject treated of,
is the vocation of Abram which is a common pattern of the life of all
the faithful. We are not indeed all indiscriminately commanded to desert
our country; this point, I grant, is special in the case of Abram; but
generally, it is God’s will that all should be in subjection to his
word, and should seek the law, for the regulation of their life, at his
mouth, lest they should be carried away by their own will, or by the
maxims of men. Therefore by the example of Abram, entire
self-renunciation is enjoined, that we may live and die to God alone.

<span id="xviii.i-p58"></span><span id="xviii.i-p58.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.i-p59"></span>**5.** *The* *souls* *that* *they* *had*
*gotten* *in* *Haran* . Souls signify male and female servants. And this
is the first mention of servitude; whence it appears, that not long
after the deluge the wickedness of man caused liberty which by nature,
was common to all, to perish with respect to a great part of mankind.
Whence servitude originated is not easy to determine, unless according
to the opinion which has commonly prevailed it arose from wars; because
the conquerors compelled those whom they took in battle to serve them;
and hence the name of bondman  <span id="fr_341"></span>[342](#fn_341)
is derived. But whether they who were first slaves had been subjugated
by the laws of war, or had been reduced to this state by want, it is
indeed certain, that the order of nature was violently infringed;
because men were created for the purpose of cultivating mutual society
between each other. And although it is advantageous that some should
preside over others, yet an equality, as among brethren ought to have
been retained. However, although slavery is contrary to that right
government which is most desirable, and in its commencement was not
without fault; it does not, on this account, follow, that the use of it,
which was afterwards received by custom, and excused by necessity, is
unlawful. Abram therefore might possess both servants bought with money,
and slaves born in his house. For that common saying, ‘What has not
prevailed from the beginning cannot be rendered valid by length of
time,’ admits (as is well known) of some exceptions; and we shall have
an example in point in the forty-eighth chapter <span
id="xviii.i-p60.2"></span>[Ge
48:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen048.htm#001)<span id="xviii.i-p60.2"></span>

<span id="xviii.i-p61"></span><span id="xviii.i-p61.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.i-p62"></span>**6.** *And* *Abram* *passed* *through*
*the* *land* . Here Moses shows that Abram did not immediately, on his
entering into the land, find a habitation in which he might rest. For
the expression passed through, and the position of the place (Sichem) to
which he passed, show that the length of his journey had been great.
Sichem is not far from Mount Gerizim, which is towards the desert of the
Southern region. Wherefore, it is just as Moses had said, that the faith
of Abram was again tried, when God suffered him as a wanderer to
traverse the whole land, before he gave him any fixed abode. How hard
would it seems when God had promised to be his Protector, that not even
a little corner is assigned him on which he may set his foot? But he is
compelled to wander in a circuitous route, in order that he may the
better exercise self denial. The word <span
id="xviii.i-p62.1"></span>ןולא ( *Elon* ) is by some translated an oak
forest, by some a valley;  <span id="fr_342"></span>[343](#fn_342)
others take it for the proper name of a place. I do not doubt that Moreh
is the proper name of the place; but I explain Elon to mean a plain, or
an oak, not that it was a single tree, but the singular is put for the
plural number;  <span id="fr_343"></span>[344](#fn_343) and this latter
interpretation I most approve.

<span id="xviii.i-p65"></span>*And* *the* *Canaanite* *was* *then* *in*
*the* *land* . This clause concerning the Canaanite is not added without
reason; because it was no slight temptation to be cast among that
perfidious and wicked nation, destitute of all humanity. What could the
holy man then think, but that he was betrayed into the hands of these
most abandoned men, by whom he might soon be murdered; or else that he
would have to spend a disturbed and miserable life amid continual
injuries and troubles? But it was profitable for him to be accustomed,
by such discipline, to cherish a better hope. For if he had been kindly
and courteously received in the land of Canaan, he would have hoped for
nothing better than to spend his life there as a guest. But now God
raises his thoughts higher in order that he may conclude, that at some
future time, the inhabitants being destroyed, he shall be the lord and
heir of the land. Besides, he is admonished, by the continual want of
repose, to look up towards heaven. For since the inheritance of the land
was specially promised to himself, and would only belong to his
descendants, for his sake; it follows, that the land, in which he was so
ill and inhumanly treated, was not set before him as his ultimate aim,
but that heaven itself was proposed to him as his final resting-place.

<span id="xviii.i-p66"></span><span id="xviii.i-p66.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.i-p67"></span>**7.** *And* *the* *Lord* *appeared*
*unto* *Abram* . He now relates that Abram was not left entirely
destitute, but that God stretched forth his hand to help him. We must,
however, mark, with what kind of assistance God succours him in his
temptations. He offers him his bare word, and in such a way, indeed,
that Abram might deem himself exposed to ridicule. For God declares he
will give the land to his seed: but where is the seed, or where the hope
of seed; seeing that he is childless and old, and his wife is barren?
This was therefore an insipid consolation to the flesh. But faith has a
different taste; the property of which is, to hold all the senses of the
pious so bound by reverence to the word, that a single promise of God is
quite sufficient. Meanwhile, although God truly alleviates and mitigates
the evils which his servants endure, he does it only so far as is
expedient for them, without indulging the desire of the flesh. Let us
hence learn, that this single remedy ought to be sufficient for us in
our sufferings: that God so speaks to us in his word, as to cause our
minds to perceive him to be propitious; and let us not give the reins to
the importunate desires of our flesh. God himself will not fail on his
part; but will, by the manifestation of his favor, raise us when we are
cast down.

<span id="xviii.i-p68"></span>*And* *there* *builded* *he* *an* *altar*
. This altar was a token of gratitude. As soon as God appeared to him he
raised an altar: to what end? That he might call upon the name of the
Lord. We see, therefore, that he was intent upon giving of thanks; and
that an altar was built by him in memory of kindness received. Should
any one ask, whether he could not worship God without an altar? I
answer, that the inward worship of the heart is not sufficient unless
external profession before men be added. Religion has truly its
appropriate seat in the heart; but from this root, public confession
afterwards arises, as its fruit. For we are created to this end, that we
may offer soul and body unto God. The Canaanites had their religion;
they had also altars for sacrifices: but Abram, that he might not
involve himself in their superstitions, erects a domestic altar, on
which he may offer sacrifice; as if he had resolved to place a royal
throne for God within his house. But because the worship of God is
spiritual, and all ceremonies which have no right and lawful end, are
not only vain and worthless in themselves, but also corrupt the true
worship of God by their counterfeited and fallacious appearance; we must
carefully observe what Moses says, that the altar was erected for the
purpose of calling upon God. The altar then is the external *form* of
divine worship; but *invocation* is its substance and truth. This mark
easily distinguishes pure worshippers from hypocrites, who are far too
liberal in outward pomp, but wish their religion to terminate in bare
ceremonies. Thus all their religion is vague, being directed to no
certain end. Their ultimate intention, indeed, is (as they confusedly
speak) to worship God: but piety approaches nearer to God; and therefore
does not trifle with external figures, but has respect to the truth and
the substance of religion. On the whole, ceremonies are no otherwise
acceptable to God, than as they have reference to the spiritual worship
of God.

<span id="xviii.i-p69"></span>To invoke the *name* of God, or to invoke
*in his name*, admits of a twofold exposition; namely, either to pray to
God, or to celebrate his name with praises. But because prayer and
thanksgiving are things conjoined, I willingly include both. We have
before said, in the fourth chapter (<span id="xviii.i-p69.1"></span>[Ge
4:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen004.htm#001)<span id="xviii.i-p69.1"></span>),
that the whole worship of God was not improperly described, by the
figure *synecdoche*, under this particular expression; because God
esteems no duty of piety more highly, and accounts no sacrifice more
acceptable, than the invocation of his name, as is declared in <span
id="xviii.i-p69.2"></span>[Ps
50:23](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#023)<span id="xviii.i-p69.2"></span>,
and <span id="xviii.i-p69.3"></span>[Ps
51:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#019)<span id="xviii.i-p69.3"></span>.
As often, therefore, as the word *altar* occurs, let the sacrifices also
come into our mind; for from the beginning, God would have mankind
informed, that there could be no access to himself without sacrifice.
Therefore Abram, from the general doctrine of religion, opened for
himself a celestial sanctuary, by sacrifices, that he might rightly
worship God.  <span id="fr_344"></span>[345](#fn_344) But we know that
God was never appeased by the blood of beasts. Wherefore it follows,
that the faith of Abram was directed to the blood of Christ.  <span
id="fr_345"></span>[346](#fn_345)

<span id="xviii.i-p72"></span>It may seem, however, absurd, that Abram
built himself an altar, at his own pleasure, though he was neither a
priest, nor had any express command from God. I answer, that Moses
removes this scruple in the context: for Abram is not said to have made
an altar simply to God, but to God who had *appeared* unto him. The
altar therefore had its foundation in that revelation; and ought not to
be separated from that of which it formed but a part and an appendage.
Superstition fabricates for itself such a God as it pleases and then
invents for him various kinds of worship; just as the Papists, at this
days most proudly boast that they worship God, when they are only
trifling with their foolish pageantry. But the piety of Abram is
commended, because, having erected an altar, he worshipped God who had
been manifested to him. And although Moses declares the design with
which Abram built the altar, when he relates that he there called upon
God, he yet, at the same time, intimates, that such a service was
pleasing to God: for this language implies the approval of the Holy
Spirit, who thereby pronounces that he had rightly called upon God.
Others, indeed confidently boasted that they worshipped God; but God, in
praising Abram only, rejects all the rites of the heathen as a vile
profanation of his name.

<span id="xviii.i-p73"></span><span id="xviii.i-p73.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.i-p74"></span>**8.** *And* *he* *removed* *from*
*thence* . When we hear that Abram moved from the place where he had
built an altar to God, we ought not to doubt that he was, by some
necessity, compelled to do so. He there found the inhabitants
unpropitious; and therefore transfers his tabernacle elsewhere. But if
Abram bore his continual wanderings patiently, our fastidiousness is
utterly inexcusable, when we murmur against God, if he does not grant us
a quiet nest. Certainly, when Christ has opened heaven to us, and daily
invites us thither to dwell with himself; we should not take it amiss,
if he chooses that we should be strangers in the world. The sum of the
passage is this, that Abram was without a settled residence:  <span
id="fr_346"></span>[347](#fn_346) which title Paul assigns to
Christians, (<span id="xviii.i-p75.2"></span>[1Co
4:11](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#011)<span id="xviii.i-p75.2"></span>.)
Moreover, there is a manifest prolepsis in the word Bethel; for Moses
gives the place this name, to accommodate his discourse to the men of
his own age.

<span id="xviii.i-p76"></span>*And* *there* *he* *builded* *an* *altar*
. Moses commends in Abram his unwearied devotedness to piety: for by
these words, he intimates, that whatever place he visited, he there
exercised himself in the external worship of God; both that he might
have no religious rites in common with the wicked, and that he might
retain his family in sincere piety. And it is probable, that, from this
cause, he would be the object of no little enmity; because there is
nothing which more enrages the wicked, than religion different from
their own, in which they conceive themselves to be not only despised,
but altogether condemned as blind. And we know that the Canaanites were
cruel and proud, and too ready to avenge insults. This was perhaps the
reason of Abram’s frequent removals: that his neighbors regarded the
altars which he built, as a reproach to themselves. It ought indeed to
be referred to the wonderful favor of God, that he was not often stoned.
Nevertheless, since the holy man knows that he is justly required to
bear testimony that he has a God peculiarly his own, whom he must not,
by dissimulation, virtually deny,  <span
id="fr_347"></span>[348](#fn_347) he therefore does not hesitate to
prefer the glory of God to his own life.

<span id="xviii.i-p78"></span><span id="xviii.i-p78.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.i-p79"></span>**9.** *And* *Abram* *journeyed* . This
was the third removal of the holy man within a short period, after he
seemed to have found some kind of abode. It is certain that he did not
voluntarily, and for his own gratification, run hither and thither, (as
light-minded persons are wont to do:) but there were certain necessities
which drove him forth, in order to teach him, by continual habit, that
he was not only a stranger, but a wretched wanderer in the land of which
he was the lord. Yet no common fruit was the result of so many changes;
because he endeavored, as much as in him lay, to dedicate to God, every
part of the land to which he had access, and perfumed it with the odour
of his faith.

<span id="xviii.i-p80"></span><span id="xviii.i-p80.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.i-p81"></span>**10.** *And* *there* *was* *a* *famine*
*in* *the* *land* . A much more severe temptation is now recorded, by
which the faith of Abram is tried to the quick. For he is not only led
around through various windings of the country, but is driven into
exile, from the land which God had given to him and to his posterity. It
is to be observed, that Chaldea was exceedingly fertile; having been,
from this cause, accustomed to opulence, he came to Charran, where, it
is conjectured, he lived commodiously enough, since it is clear he had
an increase of servants and of wealth. But now being expelled by hunger
from that land, where, in reliance on the word of God, he had promised
himself a happy life, supplied with all abundance of good things, what
must have been his thoughts, had he not been well fortified against the
devices of Satan? His faith would have been overturned a hundred times.
And we know, that whenever our expectation is frustrated, and things do
not succeed according to our wishes, our flesh soon harps on this
string, ‘God has deceived thee.’ But Moses shows, in a few words, with
what firmness Abram sustained this vehement assault. He does not indeed
magnificently proclaim his constancy in verbose eulogies; but, by one
little word, he sufficiently demonstrates, that it was great even to a
miracle, when he says, that he “went down into Egypt to sojourn there.”
For he intimates, that Abram, nevertheless, retained in his mind
possession of the land promised unto him; although, being ejected from
it by hunger, he fled elsewhere, for the sake of obtaining food. And let
us be instructed by this example, that the servants of God must contend
against many obstacles, that they may finish the course of their
vocation. For we must always recall to memory, that Abram is not to be
regarded as an individual member of the body of the faithful, but as the
common father of them all; so that all should form themselves to the
imitation of his example. Therefore, since the condition of the present
life is unstable, and obnoxious to innumerable changes; let us remember,
that, whithersoever we may be driven by famine, and by the rage of war,
and by other vicissitudes which occasionally happen beyond our
expectation, we must yet hold our right course; and that, though our
bodies may be carried hither and thither, our faith ought to stand
unshaken. Moreover, it is not surprising, when the Canaanites sustained
life with difficulty, that Abram should be compelled privately to
consult for himself. For he had not a single acre of land; and he had to
deal with a cruel and most wicked people, who would rather a hundred
times have suffered him to perish with hunger, than they would have
brought him assistance in his difficulty. Such circumstances amplify the
praise of Abram’s faith and fortitude: first, because, when destitute of
food for the body. he feeds himself upon the sole promise of God; and
then, because he is not to be torn away by any violence, except for a
short time, from the place where he was commanded to dwell. In this
respect he is very unlike many, who are hurried away, by every slight
occasion, to desert their proper calling.

<span id="xviii.i-p82"></span><span id="xviii.i-p82.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.i-p83"></span>**11.** *He* *said* *unto* *Sarai* *his*
*wife* . He now relates the counsel which Abram took for the
preservation of his life when he was approaching Egypt. Andy since this
place is like a rock, on which many strike; it is proper that we should
soberly and reverently consider how far Abram was deserving of excuse,
and how he was to be blamed. First, there seems to be something of
falsehood, mixed with the dissimulations which he persuades his wife to
practice. And although afterwards he makes the excuse, that he had not
lied nor feigned anything that was untrue: in this certainly he was
greatly culpable that it was not owing to his care that his wife was not
prostituted. For when he dissembles the fact, that she was his wife, he
deprives her chastity of its legitimate defense. And hence certain
perverse cavilers take occasion to object,  <span
id="fr_348"></span>[349](#fn_348) that the holy patriarch was a pander
to his own wife; and that, for the purpose of craftily taking care of
himself, he spared neither her modesty nor his own honor. But it is easy
to refute this virulent abuse; because, it may indeed be inferred, that
Abram had far higher ends in view, seeing that in other things, he was
endued with a magnanimity so great. Again, how did it happen, that he
rather sought to go into Egypt than to Charran, or into his own country,
unless that in his journeying, he had God before his eyes, and the
divine promise firmly rooted in his mind? Since, therefore, he never
allowed his senses to swerve from the word of God, we may even thence
gather the reason, why he so greatly feared for his own life, as to
attempt the preservation of it from one danger, by incurring a still
greater. Undoubtedly he would have chosen to die a hundred times, rather
than thus to ruin the character of his wife, and to be deprived of the
society of her whom alone he loved. But while he reflected that the hope
of salvation was centred in *himself* , that *he* was the fountain of
the Church of Gods that unless *he* lived, the benediction promised to
him, and to his seed, was vain; he did not estimate his own life
according to the private affection of the flesh; but inasmuch as he did
not wish the effect of the divine vocation to perish through his death,
he was so affected with concern for the preservation of his own life,
that he overlooked every thing besides. So far, then, he deserves
praise, that, having in view a lawful end of living, he was prepared to
purchase life at any price. But in devising this indirect method, by
which he subjected his wife to the peril of adultery, he seems to be by
no means excusable. If he was solicitous about his own life, which he
might justly be, yet he ought to have cast his care upon God. The
providence of God, I grant, does not indeed preclude the faithful from
caring for themselves; but let them do it in such a way, that they may
not overstep their prescribed bounds. Hence it follows, that Abram’s end
was right, but he erred in the way itself; for so it often happens to
us, that even while we are tending towards God, yet, by our
thoughtlessness in catching at unlawful means, we swerve from his word.
And this, especially, is wont to take place in affairs of difficulty;
because, while no way of escape appears, we are easily led astray into
various circuitous paths. Therefore, although they are rash judges, who
entirely condemn this deed of Abram, yet the special fault is not to be
denied, namely, that he, trembling at the approach of death, did not
commit the issue of the danger to God, instead of sinfully betraying the
modesty of his wife. Wherefore, by this example, we are admonished,
that, in involved and doubtful matters, we must seek the spirit of
counsel and of prudence from the Lord; and must also cultivate sobriety,
that we may not attempt anything rashly without the authority of his
word.

<span id="xviii.i-p85"></span>*I know that* *thou* *art* *a* *fair*
*woman* *to* *look* *upon*  <span id="fr_349"></span>[350](#fn_349) It
is asked whence had Sarai this beauty, seeing she was an old woman? For
though we grant that she previously had excelled in elegance of form,
certainly years had detracted from her gracefulness; and we know how
much the wrinkles of old age disfigure the best and most beautiful
faces. In the first place, I answer, there is no doubt that there was
then greater vivacity in the human race than there is now; we also know,
that vigor sustains the personal appearance. Again, her sterility
availed to preserve her beauty, and to keep her whole habit of body
entire; for there is nothing which more debilitates females than
frequent parturition. I do not however doubt, that the perfection of her
form was the special gift of God; but why he would not suffer the beauty
of the holy woman to be so soon worn down by age, we know not; unless it
were, that the loveliness of that form was intended to be the cause of
great and severe anxiety to her husband. Common experience also teaches
us, that they who are not content with a regular and moderate degree of
comeliness, find, to their great loss, at what a cost immoderate beauty
is purchased.

<span id="xviii.i-p87"></span><span id="xviii.i-p87.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.i-p88"></span>**12.** *Therefore* *it* *shall* *come*
*to* *pass* *,* *that* *when* *the* *Egyptians* *shall* *see* *thee* *,*
*etc* . It may seem that Abram was unjust to the Egyptians, in
suspecting evil of them, from whom he had yet received no injury. And,
since charity truly is not suspicious; he may appear to deal unfairly,
in not only charging them with lust, but also in suspecting them of
murder. I answer, that the holy man did, not without reason, fear for
himself from that nation, concerning which he had heard many
unfavourable reports. And already he had, in other places, experienced
so much of the wickedness of men, that he might justly apprehend
everything from the profane despisers of God. He does not however
pronounce anything absolutely concerning the Egyptians; but, wishing to
bring his wife to his own opinion, he gives her timely warning of what
might happen. And God, while he commands us to abstain from malicious
and sinister judgments, yet allows to be on our guard against unknown
persons; and this may take place without any injury to the brethren. Yet
I do not deny that this trepidation of Abram exceeded all bounds and
that an unreasonable anxiety caused him to involve himself in another
fault, as we have already stated.

<span id="xviii.i-p89"></span><span id="xviii.i-p89.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.i-p90"></span>**15.** *And* *commended* *her* *before*
*Pharaoh*  <span id="fr_350"></span>[351](#fn_350) Although Abram had
sinned by fearing too much and too soon, yet the event teaches, that he
had not feared without cause: for his wife was taken from him and
brought to the king. At first Moses speaks generally of the Egyptians,
afterwards he mentions the courtiers; by which course he intimates, that
the rumor of Sara’s beauty was everywhere spread abroad; but that it was
more eagerly received by the courtiers who indulge themselves in greater
license. Whereas he adds, that they told the king; we hence infer, how
ancient is that corruption which now prevails immeasurably in the courts
of kings. For as all things there are full of blandishments and
flatteries, so the nobles principally apply their minds to introduce,
from time to time, what may be gratifying to royalty. Therefore we see,
that whosoever among them desires to rise high in favor, is addicted not
only to servile batteries, but also to pandering for their master’s
lusts.

<span id="xviii.i-p92"></span>*And* *the* *woman* *was* *taken* *into*
*Pharaoh’s* *house* . Since she was carried off, and dwelt for some time
in the palace, many suppose that she was corrupted by the king. For it
is not credible, that a lustful man, when he had her in his power,
should have spared her modesty. This, truly, Abram had richly deserved,
who had neither relied upon the grace of God, nor had committed the
chastity of his wife to His faithfulness and care; but the plague which
immediately followed, sufficiently proves that the Lord was mindful of
her; and hence we may conclude, that she remained uninjured. And
although, in this place, Moses says nothing expressly on the subject,
yet, from a comparison with a similar subsequent history, we conjecture,
that the guardianship of God was not wanting to Abram at this time also.
When he was in similar danger, (<span id="xviii.i-p92.1"></span>[Ge
20:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen020.htm#001)<span id="xviii.i-p92.1"></span>,)
God did not suffer her to be violated by the king of Gerar; shall we
then suppose that she was now exposed to Pharaoh’s lust? Would God have
thought more about subjecting her, who had been once dishonored, to a
second disgrace, than about preserving her, who had hitherto lived
uprightly and chastely? Further, if God showed himself so propitious to
Abram, as to rescue his wife whom he exposed a second time to infamy;
how is it possible that He should have failed to obviate the previous
danger? Perhaps, also, greater integrity still flourished in that age;
so that the lusts of kings were not so unrestrained as they afterwards
became. Moreover, when Moses adds, that Abram was kindly treated for
Sarai’s sake; we hence conclude, that she was honorably entertained by
Pharaoh, and was not dealt with as a harlot. When, therefore, Moses
says, that she was brought into the king’s palace; I do not understand
this to have been for any other purpose,  <span
id="fr_351"></span>[352](#fn_351) than that the kings by a solemn rite,
might take her as his wife.

<span id="xviii.i-p94"></span><span id="xviii.i-p94.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.i-p95"></span>**17.** *And* *the* *Lord* *plagued*
*Pharaoh* . If Moses had simply related, that God had punished the king
for having committed adultery, it would not so obviously appear that he
had taken care of Sarai’s chastity; but when he plainly declares that
the house of the king was plagued because of Sarai, Abram’s wife, all
doubt is, in my judgment, removed; because God, on behalf of his
servant, interposed his mighty hand in time, lest Sarai should be
violated. And here we have a remarkable instance of the solicitude with
which God protects his servants, by undertaking their cause against the
most powerful monarchs; as this and similar histories show, which are
referred to in <span id="xviii.i-p95.1"></span>[Ps
105:12-15](../../../bib/kjv/psa105.htm#012)<span
id="xviii.i-p95.1"></span>: —

<span id="xviii.i-p96"></span>When they were but a few men in number;
yea, very few, and strangers in it. When they went from one nation to
another, from one kingdom to another people; he suffered no man to do
them wrong; yea, he reproved kings for their sakes; saying, Touch not
mine anointed, and do my prophets no harm.’

<span id="xviii.i-p97"></span>From which passage also a confirmation of
the opinion just given may be derived. For if God reproved Pharaoh, that
he should do Abram no harm; it follows, that he preserved Sarai’s honor
uninjured. Instructed by such examples, we may also learn, that however
the world may hold us in contempt, on account of the smallness of our
number, and our weakness; we are yet so precious in the sight of God,
that he will, for our sake, declare himself an enemy to kings, and even
to the whole world. Let us know, that we are covered by his protection,
in order that the lust and violence of those who are more powerful, may
not oppress us. But it is asked, whether Pharaoh was justly punished,
seeing that he neither intended, by guile nor by force, to gain
possession of another man’s wife? I answer, that the actions of men are
not always to be estimated according to our judgment, but are rather to
be weighed in the balances of God; for it often happens, that the Lord
will find in us what he may justly punish, while we seem to ourselves to
be free from fault, and while we absolve ourselves from all guilt. Let
kings rather learn, from this history, to bridle their own power, and
moderately to use their authority; and, lastly, to impose a voluntary
law of moderation upon themselves. For, although no fault openly appears
in Pharaoh; yet, since he has no faithful monitor among men, who dares
to repress his licentiousness, the Lord chastises him from heaven. As to
his family, it was indeed innocent; but the Lord has always just causes,
though hidden from us, why he should smite with his rod those who seem
to merit no such rebuke. That he spared his servant Abram, ought to be
ascribed to his paternal indulgence.

<span id="xviii.i-p98"></span><span id="xviii.i-p98.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.i-p99"></span>**18.** *And* *Pharaoh* *called* *Abram* .
Pharaoh justly expostulates with Abram, who was chiefly in fault. No
answer on the part of Abram is here recorded; and perhaps he assented to
the just and true reprehension. It is, however, possible that the
exculpation was omitted by Moses; whose design was to give an example of
the Divine providence in preserving Abram, and vindicating his marriage
relation. But, although Abram knew that he was suffering the due
punishment of his folly, or of his unreasonable caution; He,
nevertheless, relapsed, as we shall see in its proper place, a second
time into the same fault.

<span id="xviii.i-p100"></span><span id="xviii.i-p100.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.i-p101"></span>**20.** *And* *Pharaoh* *commanded* *his*
*men* . In giving commandment that Abram should have a safe-conduct out
of the kingdom, Pharaoh might seem to have done it, for the sake of
providing against danger; because Abram had stirred up the odium of the
nation against himself, as against one who had brought thither the
scourge of God along with him; but as this conjecture has little
solidity, I give the more simple interpretation, that leave of departure
was granted to Abram with the addition of a guard, lest he should be
exposed to violence. For we know how proud and cruel the Egyptians were;
and how obnoxious Abram was to envy, because having there become
suddenly rich, he would seem to be carrying spoil away with him.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_338"></span>[339](cc01017.htm#fr_338) <span
id="xviii.i-p44.3"></span>

<span id="xviii.i-p45"></span> Many learned commentators, Dr A. Clarke
among the number, suppose this to have been a second call from God, and
to have taken place when he was at Charran. But the objections adduced
by Calvin against such an interpretation are of great weight, and cannot
be easily set aside. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_339"></span>[340](cc01017.htm#fr_339) <span
id="xviii.i-p47.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.i-p48"></span> Prolepsis is the figure which anticipates
in the discourse something still future; as when the word Bethel is used
to designate the place which at the time was called Luz, and which did
not receive this name till it was given by Jacob. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_340"></span>[341](cc01017.htm#fr_340) <span
id="xviii.i-p50.4"></span>

<span id="xviii.i-p51"></span> The dislike which the Jews have to this
word arises from the fact that they confine its application to heathens,
barbarians, and Christians, in short, to all who are not of Israel
according to the flesh. They are not, however, warranted by Scripture in
so doing, as Calvin rightly argues. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_341"></span>[342](cc01017.htm#fr_341) <span
id="xviii.i-p59.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.i-p60"></span> “<span
id="xviii.i-p60.1"></span>Mancipii...A manucapium, quod ab hostibus manu
caperetur;” because taken by the hand by the enemy. — *Ed*

<span id="fn_342"></span>[343](cc01017.htm#fr_342) <span
id="xviii.i-p62.2"></span>

<span id="xviii.i-p63"></span> By others a plain. <span
id="xviii.i-p63.1"></span>Vide Poli Synopsis in loco. See our English
version, “Abram passed through the land unto the place of Sichem, unto
the plain of Moreh.” — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_343"></span>[344](cc01017.htm#fr_343) <span
id="xviii.i-p63.2"></span>

<span id="xviii.i-p64"></span> That is, an oak is put for an oak grove,
or forest. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_344"></span>[345](cc01017.htm#fr_344) <span
id="xviii.i-p69.4"></span>

<span id="xviii.i-p70"></span> The sentence seems obscure: “<span
id="xviii.i-p70.1"></span>Ergo Abram ex generali pietatis doctrina,
sacrificiis coeleste sibi sanctuarium aperuit, ut Deum rite coleret.”
The French translation throws little light upon it: ‘<span
id="xviii.i-p70.2"></span>Abram donc s’est fait ouverture au sanctuaire
celeste par une doctrine generale de piete, afin de bien servir Dieu.’
The word sacrifice is here entirely omitted. Nor does the Old English
translator seem to have given himself much trouble to render it
accurately: ‘Abram, out of a general doctrine of godliness, prepared a
heavenly was to himself to offer sacrifices, that he might worship God
aright.’ — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_345"></span>[346](cc01017.htm#fr_345) <span
id="xviii.i-p70.3"></span>

<span id="xviii.i-p71"></span> And consequently that he regarded all his
own sacrifices as typical of the great atoning sacrifice of the cross. —
*Ed*.

<span id="fn_346"></span>[347](cc01017.htm#fr_346) <span
id="xviii.i-p74.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.i-p75"></span> <span
id="xviii.i-p75.1"></span>Αστατόυμενος

<span id="fn_347"></span>[348](cc01017.htm#fr_347) <span
id="xviii.i-p76.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.i-p77"></span> “<span id="xviii.i-p77.1"></span>Ut
testetur se peculiarem habere Deum.” — “<span
id="xviii.i-p77.2"></span>Qu’il testife avoir un autre Dieu que celui
qui estoit la adore:” to testify that he has another God than that which
was there adored. — *French Tr*

<span id="fn_348"></span>[349](cc01017.htm#fr_348) <span
id="xviii.i-p83.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.i-p84"></span> “<span id="xviii.i-p84.1"></span>Atque
hinc latrandi materiam protervi quidam canes arripiunt.”

<span id="fn_349"></span>[350](cc01017.htm#fr_349) <span
id="xviii.i-p85.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.i-p86"></span> “ An aggravation of Abraham’s alarm arose
from the complexion of his wife, — ‘Thou art a fair woman.’ Though the
Egyptian ladies were not so dark as the Nubians and Ethiopians, they
were of a browner tinge than the Syrians and Arabians: we also find on
the monuments that ladies of high rank are usually represented in
lighter tints than their attendants.... There is ample evidence, that a
fair complexion was deemed a high recommendation in the age of the
Pharaohs. This circumstance, so fully confirmed by the monuments, is
recorded in no history but the book of Genesis; and it is a remarkable
confirmation of the veracity of the Pentateuch.” — Gliddon’s Ancient
Egypt, quoted in Hengstenberg’s Egypt and the Books of Moses, p.200. It
may here be proper to remark, that much learned labor has been expended
by the Anti-supernaturalist Divines on the Continent, in the fruitless
attempt to prove that the Pentateuch could not be the work of Moses, nor
of the age in which he lived; and, consequently, not an inspired
production. This has led to a deeper investigation of Egyptian
antiquities, the result of which has been to confirm, in every possible
way, the authenticity of the Mosaic records. Monuments as ancient as the
times of Moses, and bas-reliefs exhibiting different characters, and
persons engaged in different occupations, all show, that no writer of
comparatively modern times could have composed these books. We have here
an additional proof to many which had been given before, that a slight
acquaintance with facts may lead to scepticism; but that deep
investigation of them invariably confirms the testimony of Scripture. —
See note at p. 316. — *Ed*

<span id="fn_350"></span>[351](cc01017.htm#fr_350) <span
id="xviii.i-p90.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.i-p91"></span> “ She must therefore have been unveiled.
The monuments show, that, according to Egyptian customs, she could only
so appear in public. ‘We find from the monuments,’ says Taylor, ‘that
the Egyptian women, in the reign of the Pharaohs, exposed their faces,
and were permitted to enjoy as much liberty as the ladies of modern
Europe. But this custom was changed after the conquest of the country by
the Persians.’’ — Hengstenberg’s Egypt and the Books of Moses, p. 199.

<span id="fn_351"></span>[352](cc01017.htm#fr_351) <span
id="xviii.i-p92.2"></span>

<span id="xviii.i-p93"></span> “<span id="xviii.i-p93.1"></span>Non
interpretor fuisse factum, ut statim cum rege dormiret, sed ut rex
solemni ritu eam duceret uxorem.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 13](cc01018)
