[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc01008)  [Next](cc01010) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 1: Genesis, Part I*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="x"></span>

<span id="x-p1"></span>CHAPTER 4.

<span id="x.i"></span>

<span id="x.i-p1"></span><span id="x.i-p1.1"></span>[Genesis
4:1-26](../../../bib/kjv/gen004.htm#001)<span id="x.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="x.i-p2"></span>**1.** And Adam knew Eve his wife; and she
conceived, and bare Cain, and said, I have gotten a man from the LORD.

<span id="x.i-p3"></span>**1.** Et Adam cognovit Hava uxorem suam: quae
concepit, et peperit Cain: et dixit, Acquisivi virum a Jehova.

<span id="x.i-p4"></span>**2.** And she again bare his brother Abel. And
Abel was a keeper of sheep, but Cain was a tiller of the ground.

<span id="x.i-p5"></span>**2.** Et addidit parere fratrem ejus Ebel:
fuit autem Ebel pastor ovium, et Cain fuit cultor terrae:

<span id="x.i-p6"></span>**3.** And in process of time it came to pass,
that Cain brought of the fruit of the ground an offering unto the LORD.

<span id="x.i-p7"></span>**3.** Et fuit, a fine dierum adduxit Cain de
fructu terrae oblationem Jehovae.

<span id="x.i-p8"></span>**4.** And Abel, he also brought of the
firstlings of his flock and of the fat thereof. And the LORD had respect
unto Abel and to his offering:

<span id="x.i-p9"></span>**4.** Et Ebel etiam ipse adduxit de
primogenitis pecudum suarum, et de adipe earum: et respexit Jehova ad
Ebel, et ad oblationem ejus:

<span id="x.i-p10"></span>**5.** But unto Cain and to his offering he
had not respect. And Cain was very wroth, and his countenance fell.

<span id="x.i-p11"></span>**5.** Ad Cain vero et ad oblationem ejus non
respexit: iratus est itaque Cain valde, et concidit vultus ejus.

<span id="x.i-p12"></span>**6.** And the LORD said unto Cain, Why art
thou wroth? and why is thy countenance fallen?

<span id="x.i-p13"></span>**6.** Et dixit Jehova ad Cain, Utquid
excanduisti? et utquid concidit vultus tuus?

<span id="x.i-p14"></span>**7.** If thou doest well, shalt thou not be
accepted? and if thou doest not well, sin lieth at the door. And unto
thee *shall be* his desire, and thou shalt rule over him.

<span id="x.i-p15"></span>**7.** Annon si recte egeris, erit acceptatio?
et si non bene egeris, in foribus peccatum cubat: et ad to erit
appetitus ejus, et tu dominaberis ei.

<span id="x.i-p16"></span>**8.** And Cain talked with Abel his brother:
and it came to pass, when they were in the field, that Cain rose up
against Abel his brother, and slew him.

<span id="x.i-p17"></span>**8.** Et loquutus est Cain ad Ebel fratrem
suum: et accidit quum essent in agro, insurrexit Cain contra Ebel
fratrem suum, et occidit eum.

<span id="x.i-p18"></span>**9.** And the LORD said unto Cain, Where *is*
Abel thy brother? And he said, I know not: *Am* I my brother’s keeper?

<span id="x.i-p19"></span>**9.** Et dixit Jehova ad Cain, Ubi est Ebel
frater tuus? Et ait, nescio: nunquid custos fratris mei sum ego?

<span id="x.i-p20"></span>**10.** And he said, What hast thou done? the
voice of thy brother’s blood crieth unto me from the ground.

<span id="x.i-p21"></span>**10.** Et dixit, Quid fecisti? vox sanguinis
fratris tui clamat ad me e terra.

<span id="x.i-p22"></span>**11.** And now *art* thou cursed from the
earth, which hath opened her mouth to receive thy brother’s blood from
thy hand;

<span id="x.i-p23"></span>**11.** nuc itaque maledictus eris e terra,
quae aperuit os suum ut exciperet sanuinem fratris tui e manu tua.

<span id="x.i-p24"></span>**12.** When thou tillest the ground, it shall
not henceforth yield unto thee her strength; a fugitive and a vagabond
shalt thou be in the earth.

<span id="x.i-p25"></span>**12.** Quando coles terram, non addet ut det
vim suam tibi: vagus et profugus eris in terra.

<span id="x.i-p26"></span>**13.** And Cain said unto the LORD, My
punishment *is* greater than I can bear.

<span id="x.i-p27"></span>**13.** Et dixit Cain ad Jehovam, Major est
punitio mea quam ut feram.

<span id="x.i-p28"></span>**14.** Behold, thou hast driven me out this
day from the face of the earth; and from thy face shall I be hid; and I
shall be a fugitive and a vagabond in the earth; and it shall come to
pass, *that* every one that findeth me shall slay me.

<span id="x.i-p29"></span>**14.** Ecce, ejecisti me hodie a facie
terrae, et a facie tua abscondar, eroque vagus et profugus in terra: et
erit, ut quicunque invenerit me, occidat me.

<span id="x.i-p30"></span>**15.** And the LORD said unto him, Therefore
whosoever slayeth Cain, vengeance shall be taken on him sevenfold. And
the LORD set a mark upon Cain, lest any finding him should kill him.

<span id="x.i-p31"></span>**15.** Et dixit ei Jehova, Propterea
quicunque occiderit Cain, septuplum vindicabitur. Et posuit Jehova
signum in Cain, ne percuteret eum ullus qui inveniret eum.

<span id="x.i-p32"></span>**16.** And Cain went out from the presence of
the LORD, and dwelt in the land of Nod, on the east of Eden.

<span id="x.i-p33"></span>**16.** Et egressus est Cain a facie Jehovae,
et habitavit in terra Nod ad Orientem Heden.

<span id="x.i-p34"></span>**17.** And Cain knew his wife; and she
conceived, and bare Enoch: and he builded a city, and called the name of
the city, after the name of his son, Enoch.

<span id="x.i-p35"></span>**17.** Cognovit autem Cain uxorem suam: quae
concepit, et peperit Hanoch: aedificavitque civitatem, et vocavit nomen
civitatis nomine filii sui Hanoch.

<span id="x.i-p36"></span>**18.** And unto Enoch was born Irad: and Irad
begat Mehujael: and Mehujael begat Methusael: and Methusael begat
Lamech.

<span id="x.i-p37"></span>**18.** Porro natus est ipsi Hanoch Hirad, et
Hirad genuit Mehujael, et Mehujael genuit Methusael: et Methusael genuit
Lemech.

<span id="x.i-p38"></span>**19.** And Lamech took unto him two wives:
the name of the one *was* Adah, and the name of the other Zillah.

<span id="x.i-p39"></span>**19.** Et accepit sibi Lemech duas uxores:
nomen unius, Hada, et nomen secundae, Silla.

<span id="x.i-p40"></span>**20.** And Adah bare Jabal: he was the father
of such as dwell in tents, and *of such as have* cattle.

<span id="x.i-p41"></span>**20.** Et genuit Hada Jabel, ipse fuit pater
inhabitantis tentorium, et pecoris.

<span id="x.i-p42"></span>**21.** And his brother’s name *was* Jubal: he
was the father of all such as handle the harp and organ.

<span id="x.i-p43"></span>**21.** Et nomen fratris ejus, Jubal: ipse
fuit pater omnis contrectantis citharam et organum.

<span id="x.i-p44"></span>**22.** And Zillah, she also bare Tubalcain,
an instructer of every artificer in brass and iron: and the sister of
Tubalcain *was* Naamah.

<span id="x.i-p45"></span>**22.** Et Silla etiam ipsa peperit Thubal —
Cain, polientem omne opificium aereum et ferreum: et soror Thubal —
Cain, fuit Nahama.

<span id="x.i-p46"></span>**23.** And Lamech said unto his wives, Adah
and Zillah, Hear my voice; ye wives of Lamech, hearken unto my speech:
for I have slain a man to my wounding, and a young man to my hurt.

<span id="x.i-p47"></span>**23.** Et dixit Lemech uxoribus suis Hada et
Silla, Audite vocem meam uxores Lemech, auscultate semonem meum, Quoniam
virum occidero in vulnere meo, et adolescentem in livore meo.

<span id="x.i-p48"></span>**24.** If Cain shall be avenged sevenfold,
truly Lamech seventy and sevenfold.

<span id="x.i-p49"></span>**24.** Quia septuplo vindicabitur Cain, et
Lemech septuagies septies.

<span id="x.i-p50"></span>**25.** And Adam knew his wife again; and she
bare a son, and called his name Seth: For God, *said she,* hath
appointed me another seed instead of Abel, whom Cain slew.

<span id="x.i-p51"></span>**25.** Cognovit autem Adam rursum uxorem
suam: quae peperit filium, et vocavit nomen ejus Seth, Quia posuit mihi,
*inquit* , Deus semen alterum pro Ebel: quia occidit eum Cain.

<span id="x.i-p52"></span>**26.** And to Seth, to him also there was
born a son; and he called his name Enos: then began men to call upon the
name of the LORD.

<span id="x.i-p53"></span>**26.** Et ipsi Seth etiam natus est filius,
et vocavit nomen ejus Enos: tunc coeptum est invocari nomen Domini.

<span id="x.i-p54"></span> 

<span id="x.i-p55"></span><span id="x.i-p55.1"></span>

<span id="x.i-p56"></span>**1.** *And Adam* *knew* *his* *wife* *Eve* .
Moses now begins to describe the propagation of mankind; in which
history it is important to notice that this benediction of God,
“Increase and multiply,” was not abolished by sin; and not only so, but
that the heart of Adam was divinely confirmed so that he did not shrink
with horror from the production of offspring. And as Adam recognised, in
the very commencement of having offspring, the truly paternal moderation
of God’s anger, so was he afterwards compelled to taste the bitter
fruits of his own sin, when Cain slew Abel. But let us follow the
narration of Moses.  <span id="fr_221"></span>[222](#fn_221) Although
Moses does not state that Cain and Abel were twins it yet seems to me
probable that they were so; for, after he has said that Eve, by her
first conception, brought forth her firstborn, he soon after subjoins
that she also bore another; and thus, while commemorating a double
birth, he speaks only of one conception.  <span
id="fr_222"></span>[223](#fn_222) Let those who think differently enjoy
their own opinion; to me, however it appears accordant with reason, when
the world had to be replenished with inhabitants, that not only Cain and
Abel should have been brought forth at one births but many also
afterwards, both males and females.

<span id="x.i-p59"></span>*I* *have* *gotten* *a* *man* . The word which
Moses uses signifies both to acquire and to *possess* ; and it is of
little consequence to the present context which of the two you adopt. It
is more important to inquire why she says that she has received, <span
id="x.i-p59.1"></span>הוהי תא ( *eth Yehovah* .) Some expound it, ‘with
the Lord;’ that is, ‘by the kindness, or by the favor, of the Lord;’ as
if Eve would refer the accepted blessing of offspring to the Lord, as it
is said in <span id="x.i-p59.2"></span>[Ps
127:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa127.htm#003)<span id="x.i-p59.2"></span>,
“The fruit of the womb is the gift of the Lord.” A second interpretation
comes to the same point, ‘I have possessed a man from the Lord;’ and the
version of Jerome is of equal force, ‘Through the Lord.’  <span
id="fr_223"></span>[224](#fn_223) These three readings, I say, tend to
this point, that Eve gives thanks to God for having begun to raise up a
posterity through her, though she was deserving of perpetual barrenness,
as well as of utter destruction. Others, with greater subtlety, expound
the words, ‘I have gotten the man of the Lord;’ as if Eve understood
that she already possessed that conqueror of the serpent, who had been
divinely promised to her. Hence they celebrate the faith of Eve, because
she embraced, by faith, the promise concerning the bruising of the head
of the devil through her seed; only they think that she was mistaken in
the person or the individual, seeing that she would restrict to Cain
what had been promised concerning Christ. To me, however, this seems to
be the genuine sense, that while Eve congratulates herself on the birth
of a son, she offers him to God, as the first-fruits of his race.
Therefore, I think it ought to be translated, ‘I have obtained a man
from the Lord’, which approaches more nearly the Hebrew phrase.
Moreover, she calls a newborn infant a man, because she saw the human
race renewed, which both she and her husband had ruined by their own
fault.  <span id="fr_224"></span>[225](#fn_224)

<span id="x.i-p62"></span><span id="x.i-p62.1"></span>

<span id="x.i-p63"></span>**2.** *And* *she* *again* *bare* *his*
*brother* *Abel*  <span id="fr_225"></span>[226](#fn_225) It is well
known whence the name of Cain is deduced, and for what reason it was
given to him. For his mother said, <span id="x.i-p64.2"></span>יתינק (
*kaniti* ,) I have gotten a man; and therefore she called his name Cain.
 <span id="fr_226"></span>[227](#fn_226) The same explanation is not
given with respect to Abel.  <span id="fr_227"></span>[228](#fn_227) The
opinion of some, that he was so called by his mother out of contempt, as
if he would prove superfluous and almost useless, is perfectly absurd;
for she remembered the end to which her fruitfulness would lead; nor had
she forgotten the benediction, “Increase and multiply.” We should (in my
judgment) more correctly infer that whereas Eve had testified, in the
name given to her firstborn, the joy which suddenly burst upon her, and
celebrated the grace of God; she afterwards, in her other offspring,
returned to the recollection of the miseries of the human race. And
certainly, though the new blessing of God was an occasion for no common
joy; yet, on the other hand, she could not look upon a posterity devoted
to so many and great evils, of which she had herself been the cause,
without the most bitter grief. Therefore, she wished that a monument of
her sorrow should exist in the name she gave her second son; and she
would, at the same time, hold up a common mirror, by which she might
admonish her whole progeny of the *vanity* of man. That some censure the
judgment of Eve as absurd, because she regarded her just and holy sons
as worthy to be rejected in comparison with her other wicked and
abandoned son, is what I do not approve. For Eve had reason why she
should congratulate herself in her firstborn; and no blame attaches to
her for having proposed, in her second son, a memorial to herself and to
all others, of their own vanity, to induce them to exercise themselves
in diligent reflection on their own evils.

<span id="x.i-p67"></span>*And* *Abel* *was* *a* *keeper* *of* *sheep* .
Whether both the brothers had married wives, and each had a separate
home, Moses does not relate. This therefore, remains to us in
uncertainty, although it is probable that Cain was married before he
slew his brother; since Moses soon after adds, that he knew his wife,
and begot children: and no mention is there made of his marriage. Both
followed a kind of life in itself holy and laudable. For the cultivation
of the earth was commanded by God; and the labor of feeding sheep was
not less honorable than useful; in short, the whole of rustic life was
innocent and simple, and most of all accommodated to the true order of
nature. This, therefore, is to be maintained in the first place, that
both exercised themselves in labors approved by God, and necessary to
the common use of human life. Whence it is inferred, that they had been
well instructed by their father. The rite of sacrificing more fully
confirms this; because it proves that they had been accustomed to the
worship of God. The life of Cain, therefore, was, in appearance, very
well regulated; inasmuch as he cultivated the duties of piety towards
God, and sought a maintenance for himself and his, by honest and just
labor, as became a provident and sober father of a family. Moreover, it
will be here proper to recall to memory what we have before said, that
the first men, though they had been deprived of the sacrament of divine
love, when they were prohibited from the tree of life, had yet been only
so deprived of it, that a hope of salvation was still left to them, of
which they had the signs in sacrifices. For we must remember, that the
custom of sacrificing was not rashly devised by them, but was divinely
delivered to them. For since the Apostle refers the dignity of Abel’s
accepted sacrifice to *faith* , it follows, first, that he had not
offered it without the command of God, (<span id="x.i-p67.1"></span>[Heb
11:4](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#004)<span id="x.i-p67.1"></span>.)
Secondly, it has been true from the beginning, of the world, that
obedience is better than any sacrifices, (<span
id="x.i-p67.2"></span>[1Sa 15:22](../../../bib/kjv/sa1015.htm#022)<span
id="x.i-p67.2"></span>,) and is the parent of all virtues. Hence it also
follows that man had been taught by God what was pleasing to Him.
thirdly, since God has been always like himself, we may not say that he
was ever delighted with mere carnal and external worship. Yet he deemed
those sacrifices of the first age acceptable. It follows, therefore,
further, that they had been spiritually offered to him: that is, that
the holy fathers did not mock him with empty ceremonies, but
comprehended something more sublime and secret; which they could not
have done without divine instruction.  <span
id="fr_228"></span>[229](#fn_228) For it is interior truth alone  <span
id="fr_229"></span>[230](#fn_229) which, in the external signs,
distinguishes the genuine and rational worship of God from that which is
gross and superstitious. And, certainly, they could not sincerely devote
their mind to the worship of God, unless they had been assured of his
benevolence; because voluntary reverence springs from a sense of, and
confidence in, his goodness; but, on the other hand, whosoever regards
Godhostile to himself, is compelled to flee from him with very fear and
horror. We see then that God, when he takes away the tree of life, in
which he had first given the pledge of his grace, proves and declares
himself to be propitious to man by other means. Should anyone object,
that all nations have had their own sacrifices, and that in these there
was no pure and solid religion, the solution is ready: namely, that
mention is here made of such sacrifices as are lawful and approved by
God; of which nothing but an adulterated imitation afterwards descended
to the Gentiles. For although nothing but the word <span
id="x.i-p69.1"></span>החנמ ( *minchah* ,  <span
id="fr_230"></span>[231](#fn_230) ) is here placed, which properly
signifies a *gift* , and therefore is extended generally to every kind
of oblation; yet we may infer, for two reasons, that the command
respecting sacrifice was given to the fathers from the beginning; first,
for the purpose of making the exercise of piety common to all, seeing
they professed themselves to be the property of God, and esteemed all
they possessed as received from him; and, secondly, for the purpose of
admonishing them of the necessity of some expiation in order to their
reconciliation with God. When each offers something of his property,
there is a solemn giving of thanks, as if he would testify by his
present act that he owes to God whatever he possesses. But the sacrifice
of cattle and the effusion of blood contains something further, namely,
that the offerer should have death before his eyes; and should,
nevertheless, believe in God as propitious to him. Concerning the
sacrifices of Adam no mention is made.

<span id="x.i-p71"></span><span id="x.i-p71.1"></span>

<span id="x.i-p72"></span>**4.** *And* *the* *Lord* *had* *respect*
*unto* *Abel* *,* *etc* . God is said to have respect unto the man to
whom he vouchsafes his favor. We must, however, notice the order here
observed by Moses; for he does not simply state that the *worship* which
Abel had paid was pleasing to God, but he begins with the *person* of
the offerer; by which he signifies, that God will regard no works with
favor except those the doer of which is already previously accepted and
approved by him. And no wonder; for man sees things which are apparent,
but God looks into the heart, (<span id="x.i-p72.1"></span>[1Sa
16:7](../../../bib/kjv/sa1016.htm#007)<span id="x.i-p72.1"></span>;)
therefore, he estimates works no otherwise than as they proceed from the
fountain of the heart. Whence also it happens, that he not only rejects
but abhors the sacrifices of the wicked, however splendid they may
appear in the eyes of men. For if he, who is polluted in his soul, by
his mere touch contaminates, with his own impurities, things otherwise
pure and clean, how can that but be impure which proceeds from himself?
When God repudiates the feigned righteousness in which the Jews were
glorying, he objects, through his Prophet, that their hands were “full
of blood,” (<span id="x.i-p72.2"></span>[Isa
1:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#015)<span id="x.i-p72.2"></span>.) For
the same reason Haggai contends against the hypocrites. The external
appearance, therefore, of works, which may delude our too carnal eyes,
vanishes in the presence of God. Nor were even the heathens ignorant of
this; whose poets, when they speak with a sober and well-regulated mind
of the worship of God, require both a clean heart and pure hands. Hence,
even among all nations, is to be traced the solemn rite of washing
before sacrifices. Now seeing that in another place, the Spirit
testifies, by the mouth of Peter, that ‘hearts are purified by faith,’
(<span id="x.i-p72.3"></span>[Ac
15:9](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#009)<span id="x.i-p72.3"></span>;) and
seeing that the purity of the holy patriarchs was of the very same kind,
the apostle does not in vain infer, that the offering of Abel was, by
faith, more excellent than that of Cain. Therefore, in the first place,
we must hold, that all works done before faith, whatever splendor of
righteousness may appear in them, were nothing but mere sins, being
defiled from their roots, and were offensive to the Lord, whom nothing
can please without inward purity of heart. I wish they who imagine that
men, by their own motion of freewill, are rendered meet to receive the
grace of God, would reflect on this. Certainly, no controversy would
then remain on the question, whether God justifies men gratuitously, and
that by faith? For this must be received as a settled point, that, in
the judgment of God, no respect is had to works until man is received
into favor. Another point appears equally certain; since the whole human
race is hateful to God, there is no other way of reconciliation to
divine favor than through faith. Moreover, since faith is a gratuitous
gift of God, and a special illumination of the Spirit, then it is easy
to infer, that we are *prevented*  <span
id="fr_231"></span>[232](#fn_231) by his mere grace, just as if he had
raised us from the dead. In which sense also Peter says, that it is God
who purifies the hearts by faith. For there would be no agreement of the
fact with the statement, unless God had so formed faith in the hearts of
men that it might be truly deemed his gift. It may now be seen in what
way purity is the effect of faith. It is a vapid and trifling
philosophy, to adduce this as the cause of purity, that men are not
induced to seek God as their rewarder except by faith. They who speak
thus entirely bury the grace of God, which his Spirit chiefly commends.
Others also speak coldly, who teach that we are purified by faiths only
on account of the gift of regenerations in order that we may be accepted
of God. For not only do they omit half the truth, but build without a
foundation; since, on account of the curse on the human race, it became
necessary that gratuitous reconciliation should precede. Again, since
God never so regenerates his people in this world, that they can worship
him perfectly; no work of man can possibly be acceptable without
expiation. And to this point the ceremony of legal washing belongs, in
order that men may learn, that as often as they wish to draw near unto
God, purity must be sought elsewhere. Wherefore God will then at length
have respect to our obedience, when he looks upon us in Christ.

<span id="x.i-p74"></span><span id="x.i-p74.1"></span>

<span id="x.i-p75"></span>**5.** *But* *unto* *Cain* *and* *to* *his*
*offering* *he* *had* *not* *respect* . It is not to be doubted, that
Cain conducted himself as hypocrites are accustomed to do; namely, that
he wished to appease God, as one discharging a debt, by external
sacrifices, without the least intention of dedicating himself to God.
But this is true worship, to offer ourselves as spiritual sacrifices to
God. When God sees such hypocrisy, combined with gross and manifest
mockery of himself; it is not surprising that he hates it, and is unable
to bear it; whence also it follows, that he rejects with contempt the
works of those who withdraw *themselves* from him. For it is his will,
first to have us devoted to himself; he then seeks our works in
testimony of our obedience to him, but only in the second place. It is
to be remarked, that all the figments by which men mock both God and
themselves are the fruits of unbelief: To this is added pride, because
unbelievers, despising the Mediator’s grace, throw themselves fearlessly
into the presence of God. The Jews foolishly imagine that the oblations
of Cain were unacceptable, because he defrauded God of the full ears of
corn, and meanly offered him only barren or half-filled ears. Deeper and
more hidden was the evil; namely that impurity of heart of which I have
been speaking; just as, on the other hand, the strong scent of burning
fat could not conciliate the divine favor to the sacrifices of Abel;
but, being pervaded by the good odour of faith, they had a
sweet-smelling savor.

<span id="x.i-p76"></span>*And* *Cain* *was* *very* *wroth* . In this
place it is asked, whence Cain understood that his brother’s oblations
were preferred to his? The Hebrews, according to their manner, report to
divinations and imagine that the sacrifice of Abel was consumed by
celestial fire; but, since we ought not to allow ourselves so great a
license as to invent miracles, for which we have no testimony of
Scripture, let Jewish fables be dismissed.  <span
id="fr_232"></span>[233](#fn_232) It is, indeed, more probable, that
Cain formed the judgement which Moses records, from the events which
followed. He saw that it was better with his brother than with himself;
thence he inferred, that God was pleased with his brother, and
displeased with himself. We know also, that to hypocrites nothing seems
of greater value, nothing is more to their heart’s content, then earthly
blessing. moreover, in the person of Cain is portrayed to us the
likeness of a wicked man, who yet desires to be esteemed just, and even
arrogates to himself the first place among saints. Such persons truly,
by external works, strenuously labor to deserve well at the hands of
God; but, retaining a heart inwrapped in deceit, they present to him
nothing but a mask; so that, in their labourious and anxious religious
worship, there is nothing sincere, nothing but mere pretense. When they
afterwards see that they gain no advantage, they betray the venom of
their minds; for they not only complain against God, but break forth in
manifest fury, so that, if they were able, they would gladly tear him
don from his heavenly throne. Such is the innate pride of all
hypocrites, that, by the very appearance of obedience, they would hold
God as under obligation to them; because they cannot escape from his
authority, they try to sooth him with blandishments, as they would a
child; in the meantime, while they count much of their fictitious
trifles, they think that God does them great wrong if he does not
applaud them; but when he pronounces their offerings frivolous and of no
value in his sight, they first begin to murmur, and then to rage. Their
impiety alone hinders God from being reconciled unto them; but they wish
to bargain with God on their own terms. When this is denied, they burn
with furious indignation, which, though conceived against God, they cast
forth upon his children. Thus, when Cain was angry with God, his fury
was poured forth on his unoffending brother. When Moses says, “his
countenance fell,” (the word countenance is in Hebrew put in the plural
number for the singular,) he means, that not only was he seized with a
sudden vehement anger, but that, from a lingering sadness, he cherished
a feeling so malignant that he was wasting with envy.

<span id="x.i-p78"></span><span id="x.i-p78.1"></span>

<span id="x.i-p79"></span>**6.** *And* *the* *Lord* *said* *unto* *Cain*
. God now proceeds against Cain himself, and cites him to His tribunal,
that the wretched man may understand that his rage can profit him
nothing. He wishes honor to be given him for his sacrifices; but because
he does not obtain it, he is furiously angry. Meanwhile, he does not
consider that through his own fault he had failed to gain his wish; for
had he but been conscious of his inward evil, he would have ceased to
expostulate with God, and to rage against his guiltless brother. Moses
does not state in what manner God spoke. Whether a vision was presented
to him, or he heard an oracle from heaven, or was admonished by secret
inspiration, he certainly felt himself bound by a divine judgment. To
apply this to the person of Adam, as being the prophet and interpreter
of God in censuring his son, is constrained and even frigid. I
understand what it is which good men, not less pious than learned,
propose, when they sport with such fancies. Their intention is to honor
the external ministry of the word, and to cut off the occasion which
Satan takes to insinuate his illusions under the color of revelation.
 <span id="fr_233"></span>[234](#fn_233) Truly I confess, nothing is
more useful than that pious minds should be retained, under the order of
preaching, in obedience to the Scripture, that they may not seek the
mind of God in erratic speculations. But we may observe, that the word
of God was delivered from the beginning by oracles, in order that
afterwards, when administered by the hands of men, it might receive the
greater reverence. I also acknowledge that the office of teaching was
enjoined upon Adam, and do not doubt that he diligently admonished his
children: yet they who think that God only spoke through his ministers,
too violently restrict the words of Moses. Let us rather conclude, that,
before the heavenly teaching was committed to public records, God often
made known his will by extraordinary methods, and that here was the
*foundation* which supported reverence for the word; while the doctrine
delivered through the hands of men was like the *edifice* itself.
Certainly, though I should be silent, all men would acknowledge how
greatly such an imagination as that to which we refer, abates the force
of the divine reprimand. Therefore, as the voice of God had previously
so sounded in the ears of Adam, that he certainly perceived God to
speak; so is it also now directed to Cain.

<span id="x.i-p81"></span><span id="x.i-p81.1"></span>

<span id="x.i-p82"></span>**7.** *If* *thou* *does* *well* . In these
words God reproves Cain for having been unjustly angry, inasmuch as the
blame of the whole evil lay with himself. For foolish indeed was his
complaint and indignation at the rejection of sacrifices, the defects of
which he had taken no care to amend. Thus all wicked men, after they
have been long and vehemently enraged against God, are at length so
convicted by the Divine judgment, that they vainly desire to transfer to
others the cause of the evil. The Greek interpreters recede, in this
place, far from the genuine meaning of Moses. Since, in that age, there
were none of those marks or points which the Hebrews use instead of
vowels, it was more easy, in consequence of the affinity of words to
each other, to strike into an extraneous sense. I however, as any one,
moderately versed in the Hebrew language, will easily judge of their
error, I will not pause to refute it.  <span
id="fr_234"></span>[235](#fn_234) Yet even those who are skilled in the
Hebrew tongue differ not a little among themselves, although only
respecting a single word; for the Greeks change the whole sentence.
Among those who agree concerning the context and the substance of the
address, there is a difference respecting the word <span
id="x.i-p83.2"></span>תאש ( *seait* ,) which is truly in the imperative
mood, but ought to be resolved into a noun substantive. Yet this is not
the real difficulty; but, since the verb <span id="x.i-p83.3"></span>אשנ
( *nasa* ,  <span id="fr_235"></span>[236](#fn_235) ) signifies
sometimes to *exalt* , sometimes to *take away* or remit, sometimes to
*offer* , and sometimes to *accept* , interpreters very among
themselves, as each adopts this or the other meaning. Some of the Hebrew
Doctors refer it to the *countenance* of Cain, as if God promised that
he would lift it up though now cast down with sorrow. Other of the
Hebrews apply it to the remission of sins; as if it had been said, ‘Do
well, and thou shalt obtain pardon’. But because they imagine a
satisfaction, which derogates from free pardon, they dissent widely from
the meaning of Moses. A third exposition approaches more nearly to the
truth, that *exaltation* is to be taken for honor, in this way, ‘There
is no need to envy thy brother’s honor, because, if thou conductest
thyself rightly, God will also raise thee to the same degree of honor;
though he now, offended by thy sins, has condemned thee to ignominy.’
But even this does not meet my approbation. Others refine more
philosophically, and say, that Cain would find God propitious and would
be assisted by his grace, if he should by faith bring purity of heart
with his outward sacrifices. These I leave to enjoy their own opinion,
but I fear they aim at what has little solidity. Jerome translates the
word, ‘Thou shalt receive;’ understanding that God promises a reward to
that pure and lawful worship which he requires. Having recited the
opinions of others, let me now offer what appears to me more suitable.
In the first place, the word <span id="x.i-p84.1"></span>תאש means the
same thing as *acceptance* , and stands opposed to *rejection* .
Secondly, since the discourse has respect to the matter in hand,  <span
id="fr_236"></span>[237](#fn_236) I explain the saying as referring to
sacrifices, namely, that God will accept them when rightly offered. They
who are skilled in the Hebrew language know that here is nothing forced,
or remote from the genuine signification of the word. Now the very order
of things leads us to the same point: namely, that God pronounces those
sacrifices repudiated and rejected, as being of no value, which are
offered improperly; but that the oblation will be accepted, as pleasant
and of good odour, if it be pure and legitimate. We now perceive how
unjustly Cain was angry that his sacrifices were not honored seeing that
God was ready to receive them with outstretched hands, provided they
ceased to be faulty. At the same time, however; what I before said must
be recalled to memory, that the chief point of well-doing is, for pious
persons, relying on Christ the Mediator, and on the gratuitous
reconciliation procured by him, to endeavor to worship God sincerely and
without dissimulation. Therefore, these two things are joined together
by a mutual connection: that the faithful, as often as they enter into
the presence of God, are commended by the grace of Christ alone, their
sins being blotted out; and yet that they bring thither true purity of
heart.

<span id="x.i-p86"></span>*And* *if* *thou* *does* *not* *well* . On the
other hand, God pronounces a dreadful sentence against Cain, if he
harden his mill in wickedness and indulge himself in his crime; for the
address is very emphatical, because God not only repels his unjust
complaint, but shows that Cain could have no greater adversary than that
sin of his which he inwardly cherished. He so binds the impious man, by
a few concise words, that he can find no refuge, as if he had said, ‘Thy
obstinacy shall not profit thee; for, though thou shouldst have nothing
to do with me, thy sin shall give thee no rest, but shall drive thee on,
pursue thee, and urge thee, and never suffer thee to escape.’ Hence it
follows, that he not only raged in vain and to no profit; but was held
guilty by his own inward conviction, even though no one should accuse
him; for the expression, ‘Sin lieth at the door’, relates to the
interior judgement of the conscience, which presses upon the man
convinced of his sin, and besieges him on every side. Although the
impious may imagine that God slumbers in heaven, and may strive, as far
as possible, to repel the fear of his judgment; yet sin will be
perpetually drawing them back, though reluctant and fugitives, to that
tribunal from which they endeavor to retire. The declarations even of
heathens testify that they were not ignorant of this truth; for it is
not to be doubted that, when they say, ‘Conscience is like a thousand
witnesses,’ they compare it to a most cruel executioner. There is no
torment more grievous or severe than that which is hence perceived;
moreover, God himself extorts confessions of this kind. Juvenal says: —

<span id="x.i-p87"></span>“Heaven’s high revenge on human crimes
behold;  
Though earthly verdicts may be bought and sold,  
His judge the sinner in his bosom bears,  
And conscience racks him with tormenting cares.  <span
id="fr_237"></span>[238](#fn_237)

<span id="x.i-p89"></span>But the expression of Moses has peculiar
energy. Sin is said to *lie*, but it is at the *door*; for the sinner is
not immediately tormented with the fear of judgment; but, gathering
around him whatever delights he is able, in order to deceive himself; he
walks as in free space, and even revels as in pleasant meadows; when,
however, he comes to the door, there he meets with sin, keeping constant
guard; and then conscience, which before thought itself at liberty, is
arrested, and receives, double punishment for the delay.  <span
id="fr_238"></span>[239](#fn_238)

<span id="x.i-p91"></span>*And* *unto* *thee* *shall* *be* *his*
*desire* . Nearly all commentators refer this to sin, and think that, by
this admonition, those depraved hosts are restrained which solicit and
impel the mind of man. Therefore, according to their view, the meaning
will be of this kind, ‘If sin rises against thee to subdue thee, why
dost thou indulge it, and not rather labor to restrain and control it?
For it is thy part to subdue and bring into obedience those affections
in thy flesh which thou perceivest to be opposed to the will of God, and
rebellious against him.’ But I suppose that Moses means something
entirely different. I omit to notice that to the Hebrew word for sin is
affixed the mark of the feminine gender, but that here two masculine
relative pronouns are used. Certainly Moses does not treat particularly
of the sin itself which was committed, but of the guilt which is
contracted from it, and of the consequent condemnation. How, then, do
these words suit, ‘Unto thee shall be his desire?’  <span
id="fr_239"></span>[240](#fn_239) There will, however be no need for
long refutation when I shall produce the genuine meaning of the
expression. It rather seems to be a reproof, by which God charges the
impious man with ingratitude, because he held in contempt the honor of
primogeniture. The greater are the divine benefits with which any one of
us is adorned, the more does he betray his impiety unless he endeavors
earnestly to serve the Author of grace to whom he is under obligation.
When Abel was regarded as his brother’s inferior, he was, nevertheless,
a diligent worshipper of God. But the firstborn worshipped God
negligently and perfunctorily, though he had, by the Divine kindness,
arrived at so high a dignity; and, therefore, God enlarges upon his sin,
because he had not at least imitated his brother, whom he ought to have
surpassed as far in piety as he did in the degree of honor. Moreover,
this form of speech is common among the Hebrews, that the desire of the
inferior should be towards him to whose will he is subject; thus Moses
speaks of the woman, (<span id="x.i-p94.1"></span>[Ge
3:16](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#016)<span id="x.i-p94.1"></span>,)
that her desire should be to her husband. They, however, childishly
trifle, who distort this passage to prove the freedom of the will; for
if we grant that Cain was admonished of his duty in order that he might
apply himself to the subjugation of sin, yet no inherent power of man is
to be hence inferred; because it is certain that only by the grace of
the Holy Spirit can the affections of the flesh be so mortified that
they shall not prevail. Nor, truly, must we conclude, that as often as
God commands anything we shall have strength to perform it, but rather
we must hold fast the saying of Augustine, ‘Give what thou commandest,
and command what thou wilt.’

<span id="x.i-p95"></span><span id="x.i-p95.1"></span>

<span id="x.i-p96"></span>**8.** *And* *Cain* *talked* *with* *Abel*
*his* *brother* . Some understand this conversation to have been
general; as if Cain, perfidiously dissembling his anger, spoke in a
fraternal manner. Jerome relates the language used, ‘Come, let us go
without.’  <span id="fr_240"></span>[241](#fn_240) In my opinion the
speech is elliptical, and something is to be understood, yet what it is
remains uncertain. Nevertheless, I am not dissatisfied with the
explanation, that Moses concisely reprehends the wicked perfidy of the
hypocrite, who, by speaking familiarly, presented the appearance of
fraternal concord, until the opportunity of perpetrating the horrid
murder should be afforded. And by this example we are taught that
hypocrites are never to be more dreaded than when they stoop to converse
under the pretext of friendship; because when they are not permitted to
injure by open violence as much as they please, suddenly they assume a
feigned appearance of peace. But it is by no means to be expected that
they who are as savage beasts towards God, should sincerely cultivate
the confidence of friendship with men. Yet let the reader consider
whether Moses did not rather mean, that although Cain was rebuked by
God, he, nevertheless, contended with his brother, and thus this saying
of his would depend on what had preceded. I certainly rather incline to
the opinion that he did not keep his malignant feelings within his own
breast, but that he broke forth in accusation against his brother, and
angrily declared to him the cause of his dejection.

<span id="x.i-p98"></span>*When* *they* *were* *in* *the* *field* .
Hence we gather that although Cain had complained of his brother at
home, he had yet so covered the diabolical fury with which he burned,
that Abel suspected nothing worse; for he deferred vengeance to a
suitable time. Moreover, this single deed of guilt clearly shows whither
Satan will hurry men, when they harden their mind in wickedness, so that
in the end, their obstinacy is worthy of the utmost extremes of
punishment.

<span id="x.i-p99"></span><span id="x.i-p99.1"></span>

<span id="x.i-p100"></span>**9.** *Where* *is* *Abel* *?* They who
suppose that the father made this inquiry of Cain respecting his son
Abel, enervate the whole force of the instruction which Moses here
intended to deliver; namely, that God, both by secret inspiration, and
by some extraordinary method, cited the parricide  <span
id="fr_241"></span>[242](#fn_241) to his tribunal, as if he had
thundered from heaven. For, what I have before said must be firmly
maintained that, as God now speaks until us through the Scriptures, so
he formerly manifested himself to the Fathers through oracles; and also
in the same meaner, revealed his judgements to the reprobate sons of the
saints. So the angel spoke to Agar in the wood, after she had fallen
away from the Church,  <span id="fr_242"></span>[243](#fn_242) as we
shall see in the eighth verse of the sixteenth chapter: <span
id="x.i-p102.1"></span>[Ge 16:8](../../../bib/kjv/gen016.htm#008)<span
id="x.i-p102.1"></span>. It is indeed possible that God may have
interrogated Cain by the silent examinations of his conscience; and that
he, in return, may have answered, inwardly fretting, and murmuring. We
must, however, conclude, that he was examined, not barely by the
external voice of man, but by a Divine voice, so as to make him feel
that he had to deal directly with God. As often, then as the secret
compunctions of conscience invite us to reflect upon our sins, let us
remember that God himself is speaking, with us. For that interior sense
by which we are convicted of sin is the peculiar judgement-seat of God,
where he exercises his jurisdiction. Let those, therefore, whose
consciences accuse them, beware lest, after the example of Cain, they
confirm themselves in obstinacy. For this is truly to kick against God,
and to resist his Spirit; when we repel those thoughts, which are
nothing else than incentives to repentance. But it is a fault too
common, to add at length to former sins such perverseness, that he who
is compelled, whether he will or not, to feel sin in his mind, shall yet
refuse to yield to God. Hence it appears how great is the depravity of
the human mind; since, when convicted and condemned by our own
conscience, we still do not cease either to mock, or to rage against our
Judge. Prodigious was the stupor of Cain, who, having committed a crime
so great, ferociously rejected the reproof of God, from whose hand he
was nevertheless unable to escape. But the same thing daily happens to
all the wicked; every one of whom desires to be deemed ingenious in
catching at excuses. For the human heart is so entangled in winding
labyrinths, that it is easy for the wicked to add obstinate contempt of
God to their crimes; not because their contumacy is sufficiently firm to
withstand the judgment of God, (for, although they hide themselves in
the deep recesses of which I have spoken, they are, nevertheless, always
secretly burned, as with a hot iron,) but because, by a blind obstinacy
they render themselves callous. Hence, the force of the Divine judgment
is clearly perceived; for it so pierces into the iron hearts of the
wicked, that they are inwardly compelled to be their own judges; nor
does it suffer them so to obliterate the sense of guilt which it has
extorted, as not to leave the trace or scar of the searing. Cain, in
denying that he was the keeper of his brother’s life, although, with
ferocious rebellion, he attempts violently to repel the judgment of God,
yet thinks to escape by this cavil, that he was not required to give an
account of his murdered brother, because he had received no express
command to take care of him.

<span id="x.i-p103"></span><span id="x.i-p103.1"></span>

<span id="x.i-p104"></span>**10.** *What* *hast* *thou* *done* *?* *The*
*voice* *of* *thy* *brother’s* *blood* Moses shows that Cain gained
nothing by his tergiversation. God first inquired where his brother was;
he now more closely urges him, in order to extort an unwilling
confession of his guilt; for in no racks or tortures of any kind is
there so much force to constrain evildoers, as there was efficacy in the
thunder of the Divine voice to cast down Cain in confusion to the
ground. For God no longer asks whether he had done it; but, pronouncing
in a single word that he was the doer of it, he aggravates the atrocity
of the crime. We learn, then, in the person of one man, what an unhappy
issue of their cause awaits those, who desire to extricate themselves by
contending against God. For He, the Searcher of hearts, has no need of a
long, circuitous course of investigation; but, with one word, so
fulminates against those whom he accuses, as to be sufficient, and more
than sufficient, for their condemnation. Advocates place the first kind
of defense in the denial of the fact; where the fact cannot be denied,
they have recourse to the qualifying circumstances of the case.  <span
id="fr_243"></span>[244](#fn_243) Cain is driven from both these
defenses; for God both pronounces him guilty of the slaughter, and, at
the same time, declares the heinousness of the crime. And we are warned
by his example, that pretexts and subterfuges are heaped together in
vain, when sinners are cited to the tribunal of God.

<span id="x.i-p106"></span>*The* *voice* *of* *thy* *brother’s* *blood*
*crieth* . God first shows that he is cognizant of the deeds of men,
though no one should complain of or accuse them; secondly that he holds
the life of man too dear, to allow innocent blood to be shed with
impunity; thirdly, that he cares for the pious not only while they live,
but even after death. However earthly judges may sleep, unless an
accuser appeals to them; yet even when he who is injured is silent the
injuries themselves are alone sufficient to arouse God to inflict
punishment. This is a wonderfully sweet consolation to good men, who are
unjustly harassed, when they hear that their own sufferings, which they
silently endure, go into the presence of God of their own accord, to
demand vengeance. Abel was speechless when his throat was being cut, or
in whatever other manner he was losing his life; but after death the
voice of his blood was more vehement than any eloquence of the orator.
Thus oppression and silence do not hinder God from judging, or the cause
which the world supposes to be buried. This consolation affords us most
abundant reason for patience when we learn that we shall lose nothing of
our right, if we bear injuries with moderation and equanimity; and that
God will be so much the more ready to vindicate us, the more modestly we
submit ourselves to endure all things; because the placid silence of the
soul raises effectual cries, which fill heaven and earth. Nor does this
doctrine apply merely to the state of the present life, to teach us that
among the innumerable dangers by which we are surrounded, we shall be
safe under the guardianship of God; but it elevates us by the hope of a
better life; because we must conclude that those for whom God cares
shall survive after death. And, on the other hand, this consideration
should strike terror into the wicked and violent, that God declares,
that he undertakes the causes deserted by human patronage, not in
consequence of any foreign impulse, but from his own nature; and that he
will be the sure avenger of crimes, although the injured make no
complaint. Murderers indeed often exult, as if they had evaded
punishment; but at length God will show that innocent blood has not been
mute, and that he has not said in vain, ‘the death of the saints is
precious in his eyes,’ (<span id="x.i-p106.1"></span>[Ps
115:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa115.htm#017)<span id="x.i-p106.1"></span>.)
Therefore, as this doctrine brings relief to the faithful, lest they
should be too anxious concerning their life, over which they learn that
God continually watches; so does it vehemently thunder against the
ungodly who do not scruple wickedly to injure and to destroy those whom
God has undertaken to preserve.

<span id="x.i-p107"></span><span id="x.i-p107.1"></span>

<span id="x.i-p108"></span>**11.** *And* *now* *art* *thou* *cursed*
*from* *the* *earth* . Cain, having been convicted of the crime,
judgment is now pronounced against him. And first, God constitutes the
earth the minister of his vengeance, as having been polluted by the
impious and horrible parricide: as if he had said, ‘Thou didst just now
deny to me the murder which thou hast committed, but the senseless earth
itself will demand thy punishment.’ He does this, however, to aggravate
the enormity of the crime, as if a kind of contagion flowed from it even
to the earth, for which the execution of punishment was required. The
imagination of some, that cruelty is here ascribed to the earth, as if
God compared it to a wild beast, which had drunk up the blood of Abel,
is far from the true meaning. Clemency is rather, in my judgment, by
personification,  <span id="fr_244"></span>[245](#fn_244) imputed to it;
because, in abhorrence of the pollution, it had opened its mouth to
cover the blood which had been shed by a brother’s hand. Most detestable
is the cruelty of this man, who does not shrink from pouring forth his
neighbor’s blood, of which the bosom of the earth becomes the
receptacle. Yet we must not here imagine any miracle, as if the blood
had been absorbed by any unusual opening of the earth; but the speech is
figurative, signifying that there was more humanity in the earth than in
man himself. Moreover, they who think that, because Cain is now cursed
in stronger words than Adam had previously been, God had dealt more
gently with the first man, from a design to spare the human race; have
some color for their opinion. Adam heard the words, “Cursed is the
ground for thy sake:” but now the shaft of divine vengeance vibrates
against, and transfixes the person of Cain. The opinion of others, that
temporal punishment is intended, because it is said, Thou art cursed
from the “earth,” rather than from “heaven,” lest the posterity of Cain,
being cut off from the hope of salvation, should rush the more boldly on
their own damnation, seems to me not sufficiently confirmed. I rather
interpret the passage thus: Judgment was committed to the earth, in
order that Cain might understand that his judge had not to be summoned
from a distance; that there was no need for an angel to descend from
heaven, since the earth voluntarily offered itself as the avenger.

<span id="x.i-p110"></span><span id="x.i-p110.1"></span>

<span id="x.i-p111"></span>**12.** *When* *thou* *tillest* *the*
*ground* . This verse is the exposition of the former; for it expresses
more clearly what is meant by being cursed *from* the earth, namely,
that the earth defrauds its cultivators of the fruit of their toil.
Should any one object that this punishment had before been alike
inflicted on all mortals, in the person of Adam; my answer is, I have no
doubt that something of the benediction which had hitherto remained, was
now further withdrawn with respect to the murderer, in order that he
might privately feel the very earth to be hostile to him. For although,
generally, God causes his sun daily to rise upon the good and the evil,
(<span id="x.i-p111.1"></span>[Mt
5:45](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#045)<span id="x.i-p111.1"></span>,)
yet, in the meantime, (as often as he sees good,) he punished the sins,
sometimes of a whole nation, and sometimes of certain men, with rain and
hail, and clouds, so far, at least, as is useful to give determinate
proof of future judgment; and also for the purpose of admonishing the
world, by such examples, that nothing can succeed when God is angry with
and opposed to them. Moreover in the first murder, God designed to
exhibit a singular example of malediction, the memory of which should
remain in all ages.

<span id="x.i-p112"></span>*A* *fugitive* *and* *a* *vagabond* *shalt*
*thou* *be*  <span id="fr_245"></span>[246](#fn_245) Another punishment
is now also inflicted; namely, that he never could be safe, to whatever
place he might come. Moses uses two words, little differing from each
other, except that the former is derived from <span
id="x.i-p113.2"></span>עונ *noa* , which is to *wander* , the other from
<span id="x.i-p113.3"></span>דדנ *nadad* , which signifies to *flee* .
The distinction which some make, that <span id="x.i-p113.4"></span>ענ
*na* is he who never has a settled habitations but <span
id="x.i-p113.5"></span>דנ *nad* , he who knows not which way he ought to
turn; as it is defective in proof, is with me of no weight. The genuine
sense then of the words is, that wherever Cain might come, he should be
*unsettled* and a *fugitive* ; as robbers are wont to be, who have no
quiet and secure resting-place; for the face of every man strikes terror
into them; and, on the other hand, they have a horror of solitude. But
this seems to some by no means a suitable punishment for a murderer,
since it is rather the destined condition of the sons of God; for they,
more than all others, feel themselves to be strangers in the world. And
Paul complains that both he and his companions are without a certain
dwelling-place, (<span id="x.i-p113.6"></span>[1Co
4:11](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#011)<span id="x.i-p113.6"></span>
 <span id="fr_246"></span>[247](#fn_246) ) To which I answer, that Cain
was not only condemned to personal exile, but was also subjected to
still more severe punishment; namely, that he should find no region of
the earth where he would not be of a restless and fearful mind; for as a
good conscience is properly called ‘a brazen walls’ so neither a hundred
walls, nor as many fortresses, can free the wicked from disquietude. The
faithful are strangers upon the earth, yet, nevertheless, they enjoy a
tranquil temporary abode. Often, constrained by necessity, they wander
from place to place, but wheresoever the tempest bears them, they carry
with them a sedate mind; till finally by perpetual change of place, they
so run their course, and pass through the world, that they are
everywhere sustained by the supporting hand of God. Such security is
denied to the wicked, whom all creatures threaten; and should even all
creatures favor them, still the mind itself is so turbulent that it does
not suffer them to rest. In this manner, Cain, even if he bad not
changed his place, could not have shaken off the trepidation which God
had fixed in his mind; nor did the fact, that he was the first man who
built a city, prevent him from being always restless even in his own
nest.

<span id="x.i-p115"></span><span id="x.i-p115.1"></span>

<span id="x.i-p116"></span>**13.** *My* *punishment* *is* *greater* *,*
*etc* . Nearly all commentators agree that this is the language of
desperation; because Cain, confounded by the judgment of God, had no
remaining hope of pardon. And this, indeed, is true, that the reprobate
are never conscious of their evils, till a ruin, from which they cannot
escape, overtakes them; yea, truly, when the sinner, obstinate to the
last, mocks the patience of God, this is the due reward of his late
repentance that he feels a horrible torment for which there is no
remedy, — if, truly, that blind and astonished dread of punishments
which is without any hatred of sin, or any desire to return to God, can
be called repentance; — so even Judas confesses his sin, but,
overwhelmed with fear, flies as far as possible from the presence of
God. And it is certainly true, that the reprobates have no medium; as
long as any relaxation is allowed them, they slumber securely; but when
the anger of God presses upon them, they are broken rather than
corrected. Therefore their fear stuns them, so that they can think of
nothing but of hell and eternal destruction. However, I doubt not, that
the words have another meaning. For I rather take the term <span
id="x.i-p116.1"></span>ןוע *aoon* in its proper signification; and the
word <span id="x.i-p116.2"></span>אשנ *nasa* , I interpret by the word
*to* *bear* . ‘A greater punishment (he says) is imposed upon me than I
can bear.’ In this manner, Cain, although he does not excuse his sin,
having been driven from every shift; yet complains of the intolerable
severity of his judgement. So also the devils, although they feel that
they are justly tormented, yet do not cease to rage against God their
judge, and to charge him with cruelty. And immediately follows the
explanation of these words: ‘Behold, thou hast driven me from the face
of the earth, and I am hidden from thy face.’  <span
id="fr_247"></span>[248](#fn_247) In which expression he openly
expostulates with God, that he is treated more hardly than is just, no
clemency or moderation being shown him. For it is precisely as if he had
said, ‘If a safe habitation is denied me in the world, and thou dost not
deign to care for me, what dost thou leave me? Would it not be better to
die at once than to be constantly exposed to a thousand deaths?’ Whence
we infer, that the reprobate, however clearly they may be convicted,
make no end of storming; insomuch that through their impatience and
fury, they seize on occasions of contest; as if they were able to excite
enmity against God on account of the severity of their own sufferings.
This passage also clearly teaches what was the nature of that wandering
condition, or exile, which Moses had just mentioned; namely, that no
corner of the earth should be left him by God, in which he might quietly
repose. For, being excluded from the common rights of mankind, so as to
be no more reckoned among the legitimate inhabitants of the earth, he
declares that he is cast out from the face of the earth, and therefore
shall become a fugitive, because the earth will deny him a habitation;
hence it would be necessary, that he should occupy as a robber, what he
did not possess by right. To be ‘hidden from the face of God,’ is to be
not regarded by God, or not protected by his guardian care. This
confession also, which God extorted from the impious murderer, is a
proof that there is no peace for men, unless they acquiesce in the
providence of God, and are persuaded that their lives are the object of
his care; it is also a proof, that they can only quietly enjoy any of
God’s benefits so long as they regard themselves as placed in the world,
on this condition, that they pass their lives under his government. How
wretched then is the instability of the wicked, who know that not a foot
of earth is granted to them by God!

<span id="x.i-p118"></span><span id="x.i-p118.1"></span>

<span id="x.i-p119"></span>**14.** *Every* *one* *that* *findeth* *me* .
Since he is no longer covered by the protection of God, he concludes
that he shall be exposed to injury and violence from all men. And he
reasons justly; for the hand of God alone marvelously preserves us amid
so many dangers. And they have spoken prudently who have said, not only
that our life hangs on a thread, but also that we have been received
into this fleeting life, out of the womb, from a hundred deaths. Cain,
however, in this place, not only considers himself as deprived of God’s
protection, but also supposes all creatures to be divinely armed to take
vengeance of his impious murder. This is the reason why he so greatly
fears for his life from any one who may meet him; for as man is a social
animal, and all naturally desire mutual intercourse, this is certainly
to be regarded as a portentous fact, that the meeting with any man was
formidable to the murderer.

<span id="x.i-p120"></span><span id="x.i-p120.1"></span>

<span id="x.i-p121"></span>**15.** *Therefore* *,* *whosoever* *slayeth*
*Cain* . They who think that it was Cain’s wish to perish immediately by
one death, in order that he might not be agitated by continual dangers,
and that the prolongation of his life was granted him only as a
punishment, have no reason, that I can see, for thus speaking. But far
more absurd is the manner in which many of the Jews mutilate this
sentence. First, they imagine, in this clause, the use of the figure
<span id="x.i-p121.1"></span>ἀποσιώπησις, according to which something
not expressed is understood; then they begin a new sentence, ‘He shall
be punished sevenfold,’ which they refer to Cain. Still, however, they
do not agree together about the sense. Some trifle respecting Lamech, as
we shall soon declare. Others expound the passage of the deluge, which
happened in the seventh generation. But that is frivolous, since the
latter was not a private punishment of one family only, but a common
punishment of the human race. But this sentence ought to be read
continuously, thus, ‘Whosoever killeth Cain, shall on this account, be
punished sevenfold.’ And the causal particle <span
id="x.i-p121.2"></span>ןכל ( *lekon,* ) indicates that God would take
care to prevent any one from easily breaking in upon him to destroy him;
not because God would institute a privilege in favor of the murderer, or
would hearken to his prayers but because he would consult for posterity,
in order to the preservation of human life. The order of nature had been
awfully violated; what might be expected to happen in future, when the
wickedness and audacity of man should increase, unless the fury of
others had been restrained by a violent hand? For we know what pestilent
and deadly poison Satan presents to us in evil examples, if a remedy be
not speedily applied. Therefore, the Lord declares, if any will imitate
Cain, not only shall they have no excuse in his example, but shall be
more grievously tormented; because they ought, in his person, to
perceive how detestable is their wickedness in the sight of God.
Wherefore, they are greatly deceived who suppose that the anger of God
is mitigated when men can plead custom as an excuse for sinning; whereas
it is from that cause the more inflamed.

<span id="x.i-p122"></span>*And* *the* *Lord* *set* *a* *mark* . I have
lately said, that nothing was granted to Cain for the sake of favoring
him; but for the sake of opposing, in future, cruelty and unjust
violence. And therefore, Moses now says, that a mark was set upon Cain,
which should strike terror into all; because they might see, as in a
mirrors the tremendous judgment of God against bloody men. As Scripture
does not describe what kind of mark it was, commentators have
conjectured, that his body became tremulous. It may suffice for us, that
there was some visible token which should repress in the spectators the
desire and the audacity to inflict injury.

<span id="x.i-p123"></span><span id="x.i-p123.1"></span>

<span id="x.i-p124"></span>**16.** *And* *Cain* *went* *out* *from*
*the* *presence* *of* *the* *Lord* . Cain is said to have departed from
the presence of God, because, whereas he had hitherto lived in the earth
as in an abode belonging to God, now, like an exile removed far from
God’s sight, he wanders beyond the limits of His protection. Or
certainly, (which is not less probable,) Moses represents him as having
stood at the bar of judgment till he was condemned: but now, when God
ceased to speak with him, being freed from the sense of His presence, he
hastens elsewhere and seeks a new habitation, where he may escape the
eyes of God. The land of Nod  <span id="fr_248"></span>[249](#fn_248)
without doubt obtained its name from its inhabitant. From its being
situated on the eastern side of Paradise, we may infer the truth of what
was before stated, that a certain place, distinguished by its
pleasantness and rich abundance of fruits, had been given to Adam for a
habitation; for, of necessity, that place must be limited, which has
opposite aspects towards the various regions of the world.

<span id="x.i-p126"></span><span id="x.i-p126.1"></span>

<span id="x.i-p127"></span>**17.** *And* *Cain* *knew* *his* *wife* .
From the context we may gather that Cain, before he slew his brother,
had married a wife; otherwise Moses would now have related something
respecting his marriage; because it would be a fact worthy to be
recorded, that any one of his sisters could be found, who would not
shrink with horror from committing herself into the hand of one whom she
knew to be defiled with a brother’s blood; and while a free choice was
still given her, should rather choose spontaneously to follow an exile
and a fugitive, than to remain in her father’s family. Moreover, he
relates it as a prodigy that Cain, having shaken off the terror he had
mentioned, should have thought of having children:  <span
id="fr_249"></span>[250](#fn_249) for it is remarkable, that he who
imagined himself to have as many enemies as there were men in the world,
did not rather hide himself in some remote solitude. It is also contrary
to nature, that he being astounded with fear; and feeling that God was
opposed to him, could enjoy any pleasure. Indeed, it seems to me
doubtful, whether he had previously had any children; for there would be
nothing absurd in saying, that reference is here made especially to
those who were born after the crime was committed, as to a detestable
seed who would fully participate in the sanguinary disposition, and the
savage manners of their father. This, however, is without controversy,
that many persons, as well males as females, are omitted in this
narrative; it being the design of Moses only to follow one line of his
progeny, until he should come to Lamech. The house of Cain, therefore,
was more populous than Moses states; but because of the memorable
history of Lamech, which he is about to subjoin, he only adverts to one
line of descendents, and passes over the rest in silence.

<span id="x.i-p129"></span>*He* *built* *a* *city* . This, at first
sight, seems very contrary, both to the judgment of God, and to the
preceding sentence. For Adam and the rest of his family, to whom God had
assigned a fixed station, are passing their lives in hovels, or even
under the open heaven, and seek their precarious lodging under trees;
but the exile Cain, whom God had commanded to rove as a fugitive, not
content with a private house, builds himself a city. It is, however,
probable, that the man, oppressed by an accusing conscience, and not
thinking himself safe within the walls of his own house, had contrived a
new kind of defense: for Adam and the rest live dispersed through the
fields for no other reason, than that they are less afraid. Wherefore,
it is a sign of an agitated and guilty mind, that Cain thought of
building a city for the purpose of separating himself from the rest of
men; yet that pride was mixed with his diffidence and anxiety, appears,
from his having called the city after his son. Thus different affections
often contend with each other in the hearts of the wicked. Fear, the
fruit of his iniquity, drives him within the walls of a city, that he
may fortify himself in a manner before unknown; and, on the other hand,
supercilious vanity breaks forth. Certainly he ought rather to have
chosen that his name should be buried for ever; for how could his memory
be transmitted, except to beheld in execration? Yet, ambition impels him
to erect a monument to his race in the name of his city. What shall we
here say, but that he had hardened himself against punishment, for the
purpose of holding out,in inflated obstinacy, against God? Moreover
although it is lawful to defend our lives by the fortifications of
cities and of fortresses, yet the first origin of them is to be noted,
because it is always profitable for us to behold our faults in their
very remedies. When captious men sneeringly inquire, whence Cain had
brought his architects and workmen to build his city, and whence he sent
for citizens to inhabit it? I, in return, ask of them, what authority
they have for believing that the city was constructed of squared stones,
and with great skill, and at much expense, and that the building of it
was a work of long continuance? For nothing further can be gathered from
the words of Moses, than that Cain surrounded himself and his posterity
with walls formed of the rudest materials: and as it respects the
inhabitants; that in that commencement of the fecundity of mankind, his
offspring would have grown to so great a number when it had reached his
children of the fourth generation, that it might easily form the body of
one city.

<span id="x.i-p130"></span><span id="x.i-p130.1"></span>

<span id="x.i-p131"></span>**19.** *And* *Lamech* *took* *unto* *him*
*two* *wives* . We have here the origin of polygamy in a perverse and
degenerate race; and the first author of it, a cruel man, destitute of
all humanity. Whether he had been impelled by an immoderate desire of
augmenting his own family, as proud and ambitious men are wont to be, or
by mere lust, it is of little consequence to determine; because, in
either way he violated the sacred law of marriage, which had been
delivered by God. For God had determined, that “the two should be one
flesh,” and that is the perpetual order of nature. Lamech, with brutal
contempt of God, corrupts nature’s laws. The Lord, therefore, willed
that the corruption of lawful marriage should proceed from the house of
Cain, and from the person of Lamech, in order that polygamists might be
ashamed of the example.

<span id="x.i-p132"></span><span id="x.i-p132.1"></span>

<span id="x.i-p133"></span>**20.** *Jabal* *;* *he* *was* *the* *father*
*of* *such* *as* *dwell* *in* *tents* . Moses now relates that, with the
evils which proceeded from the family of Cain, some good had been
blended. For the invention of arts, and of other things which serve to
the common use and convenience of life, is a gift of God by no means to
be despised, and a faculty worthy of commendation. It is truly
wonderful, that this race, which had most deeply fallen from integrity,
should have excelled the rest of the posterity of Adam in rare
endowments.  <span id="fr_250"></span>[251](#fn_250) I, however,
understand Moses to have spoken expressly concerning these arts, as
having been invented in the family of Cain, for the purpose of showing
that he was not so accursed by the Lord but that he would still scatter
some excellent gifts among his posterity; for it is probable, that the
genius of others was in the meantime not inactive; but that there were,
among the sons of Adam, industrious and skillful men, who exercised
their diligence in the invention and cultivation of arts. Moses,
however, expressly celebrates the remaining benediction of God on that
race, which otherwise would have been deemed void and barren of all
good. Let us then know, that the sons of Cain, though deprived of the
Spirit of regeneration, were yet endued with gifts of no despicable
kind; just as the experience of all ages teaches us how widely the rays
of divine light have shone on unbelieving nations, for the benefit of
the present life; and we see, at the present time, that the excellent
gifts of the Spirit are diffused through the whole human race. Moreover,
the liberal arts and sciences have descended to us from the heathen. We
are, indeed, compelled to acknowledge that we have received astronomy,
and the other parts of philosophy, medicines and the order of civil
government, from them. Nor is it to be doubted, that God has thus
liberally enriched them with excellent favors that their impiety might
have the less excuse. But, while we admire the riches of his favor which
he has bestowed on them, let us still value far more highly that grace
of regeneration with which he peculiarly sanctifies his elect unto
himself.

<span id="x.i-p135"></span>Now, although the invention of the harp, and
of similar instruments of music, may minister to our pleasure, rather
than to our necessity, still it is not to be thought altogether
superfluous; much less does it deserve, in itself, to be condemned.
Pleasure is indeed to be condemned, unless it be combined with the fear
of God, and with the common benefit of human society. But such is the
nature of music, that it can be adapted to the offices of religion, and
made profitable to men; if only it be free from vicious attractions, and
from that foolish delight, by which it seduces men from better
employments, and occupies them in vanity. If, however, we allow the
invention of the harp no praise, it is well known how far and how widely
extends the usefulness of the art of the carpenter. Finally, Moses, in
my opinion, intends to teach that that race flourished in various and
preeminent endowments, which would both render it inexcusable, and would
prove most evident testimonies of the divine goodness. The name of “the
father of them that dwell in tents,” is given to him who was the first
inventor of that convenience, which others afterwards imitated.

<span id="x.i-p136"></span><span id="x.i-p136.1"></span>

<span id="x.i-p137"></span>**23.** *Hear* *my* *voice* *,* *ye* *wives*
*of* *Lamech* . The intention of Moses is to describe the ferocity of
this man, who was, however, the fifth in descent from the fratricide
Cain, in order to teach us, that, so far from being terrified by the
example of divine judgment which he had seen in his ancestor, he was
only the more hardened. Such is the obduracy of the impious, that they
rage against those chastisements of God, which ought at least to render
them gentle. The obscurity of this passage, which has procured for us a
variety of interpretations, mainly arises hence; that whereas Moses
speaks abruptly, interpreters have not considered what is the tendency
of his speech. The Jews have, according to their manner, invented a
foolish fable; namely, that Lamech was a hunter and blind, and had a boy
to direct his hand; that Cain, while he was concealed in the woods, was
shot through by his arrow, because the boy, talking him for a wild
beast, had directed his master’s hand towards him; that Lamech then took
revenge on the boy, who, by his imprudence, had been the cause of the
murder. And ignorance of the true state of the case has caused everyone
to allow himself to conjecture what he pleased. But to me the opinion of
those seems to be true and simple, who resolve the past tense into the
future, and understand its application to be indefinite; as if he had
boasted that he had strength and violence enough to slay any, even the
strongest enemy. I therefore lead thus, ‘I will slay a man for my wound,
and a young man for my bruise,’ or ‘in my bruise and wound.’ But, as I
have said, the occasion of his holding this conversation with his wives
is to be noticed. We know that sanguinary men, as they are a terror to
others, so are they everywhere hated by all. The wives, therefore, of
Lamech were justly alarmed on account of their husband, whose violence
was intolerable to the whole human race, lest, a conspiracy being
formed, all should unite to crush him, as one deserving of public odium
and execration. Now Moses, to exhibit his desperate barbarity, seeing
that the soothing arts of wives are often wont to mitigate cruel and
ferocious men, declares that Lamech cast forth the venom of his cruelty
into the bosom of his wives. The sum of the whole is this: He boasts
that he has sufficient courage and strength to strike down any who
should dare to attack him. The repetition occurring in the use of the
words ‘man’ and ‘young man’ is according to Hebrew phraseology, so that
none should think different persons to be denoted by them; he only
amplifies, in the second member of the sentence, his furious audacity,
when he glories that young men in the flower of their age would not be
equal to contend with him: as if he would say, Let each mightiest man
come forward, there is none whom I will not dispatch.’ So far was he
from calming his wives with the hope of his leading a more humane life,
that he breaks forth in threats of sheer indiscriminate slaughter
against every one, like a furious wild beast. Whence it easily appears,
that he was so imbued with ferocity as to have retained nothing human.
The nouns *wound* and *bruise* may be variously read. If they be
rendered ‘for my wound and bruise,’ then the sense will be, ‘I
confidently take upon my own head whatever danger there may be, let what
will happen it shall be at my expense; for I have a means of escape at
hand.’ Then what follows must be read in connection with it, If Cain
shall be avenged sevenfold, truly Lamech seventy and seven fold. If the
ablative case be preferred, ‘In my wound and bruise,’ there will still
be a double exposition. The first is, ‘Although I should be wounded, I
would still kill the man; what then will I not do when I am whole?’ The
other, and, in my judgment, the sounder and more consistent exposition,
is, ‘If any one provoke me by injury, or attempt any act of violence, he
shall feel that he has to deal with a strong and valiant man; nor shall
he who injures me escape with impunity.’  <span
id="fr_251"></span>[252](#fn_251) This example shows that men ever glide
from bad to worse. The wickedness of Cain was indeed awful; but the
cruelty of Lamech advanced so far that he was unsparing of human blood.
Besides, when he saw his wives struck with terror, instead of becoming
mild, he only sharpened and confirmed himself the more in cruelty. Thus
the brutality of cruel men increases in proportion as they find
themselves hated; so that instead of being, touched with penitence, they
are ready to bury one murder under ten others. Whence it follows that
they having once become imbued with blood, shed it, and drink its
without restraint.

<span id="x.i-p144"></span><span id="x.i-p144.1"></span>

<span id="x.i-p145"></span>**24.** *Cain* *shall* *be* *avenged*
*sevenfold* . It is not my intention to relate the ravings or the dreams
of every writer, nor would I have the reader to expect this from me;
here and there I allude to them, though sparingly, especially if there
be any color of deception; that readers, being often admonished, may
learn to take heed unto themselves. Therefore, with respect to this
passages which has been variously tortured, I will not record what one
or another may have delivered, but will content myself with a true
exposition of it. God had intended that Cain should be a horrible
example to warn others against the commission of murder; and for this
end had marked him with a shameful stigma. Yet lest any one should
imitate his crime, He declared whosoever killed him should be punished
with sevenfold severity. Lamech, impiously perverting this divine
declaration, mocks its severity; for he hence takes greater license to
sin, as if God had granted some singular privilege to murderers; not
that he seriously thinks so, but being destitute of all sense of piety,
he promises himself impunity, and in the meantime jestingly uses the
name of God as an excuse: just as Dionysus did, who boasted that the
gods favor sacrilegious persons, for the sake of obliterating the infamy
which he had contracted. Moreover, as the number seven in Scripture
designates a multitudes so sevenfold is taken for a very great increase.
Such is the meaning of the declaration of Christ,

<span id="x.i-p146"></span>‘I do not say that thou shalt remit the
offense seven times,  
but seventy times seven,’ (<span id="x.i-p146.2"></span>[Mt
18:22](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#022)<span id="x.i-p146.2"></span>.)

<span id="x.i-p147"></span><span id="x.i-p147.1"></span>

<span id="x.i-p148"></span>**25.** *Adam* *knew* *his* *wife* *again* .
Some hence infer that our first parents were entirely deprived of their
offspring when one of their sons had been slain, and the other was cast
far away into banishment. But it is utterly incredible that, when the
benediction of God in the propagation of mankind was in its greatest
force, Adam and Eve should have been through so many years unfruitful.
But rather before Abel was slain, the continual succession of progeny
had already rendered the house of Adam populous; for in him and his wife
especially the effect of that declaration ought to be conspicuous,
“Increase and multiply, and replenish the earth.” What, therefore, does
Moses mean? Truly, that our first parents, horror-struck at the impious
slaughter, abstained for a while from the conjugal bed. Nor could it
certainly be otherwise, than that they, in reaping this exceedingly sad
and bitter fruit of their apostasy from God, should sink down almost
lifeless. The reason why he now passes by others is that he designed to
trace the generation of pious descendants through the line of Seth. In
the following chapter, however, where he will say, that “Adam begat sons
and daughters,” he undoubtedly includes a great number who had been born
before Seth; to whom, however, but little regard is paid since they were
separated from that family which worshipped God in purity, and which
might truly be deemed the Church of God.

<span id="x.i-p149"></span>*God* , saith she *,* *has* *appointed* *me*
*another* *seed* *instead* *of* *Abel* . Eve means some peculiar seed;
for we have said that others had been born who had also grown up before
the death of Abel; but, since the human race is prone to evil, nearly
her whole family had, in various ways, corrupted itself; therefore, she
entertained slight hope of the remaining multitude, until God should
raise up to her a new seed, of which she might expect better things.
Wherefore, she regarded herself as bereaved not of one son only, but of
her whole offspring, in the person of Abel.

<span id="x.i-p150"></span><span id="x.i-p150.1"></span>

<span id="x.i-p151"></span>**26.** *Then* *began* *men* *to* *call*
*upon* *the* *name* *of* *the* *Lord* . In the verb ‘to call upon,’
there is a *synecdochee* , for it embraces generally the whole worship
of God. But religion is here properly designated by that which forms its
principal part. For God prefers this service of piety and faith to all
sacrifices, (<span id="x.i-p151.1"></span>[Ps
50:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#014)<span id="x.i-p151.1"></span>.)
Yea, this is the spiritual worship of God which faith produces. This is
particularly worthy of notice, because Satan contrives nothing with
greater care than to adulterate, with every possible corruption, the
pure invocation of God, or to draw us away from the only God to the
invocation of creatures. Even from the beginning of the world he has not
ceased to move this stone, that miserable men might weary themselves in
vain in a preposterous worship of God. But let us know, that the entire
pomp of adoration is nothing worth, unless this chief point of
worshipping God aright be maintained. Although the passage may be more
simply explained to mean, that then the name of God was again
celebrated; yet I approve the former sense, because it is more full,
contains a useful doctrine, and also agrees with the accustomed
phraseology of Scripture. It is a foolish figment, that God then began
to be called by other names; since Moses does not here censure depraved
superstitions, but commends the piety of one family which worshipped God
in purity and holiness, when religions among other people, was polluted
or extinct. And there is no doubt, that Adam and Eve, with a few other
of their children were themselves true worshippers of God; but closes
means, that so great was then the deluge of impiety in the world that
religion was rapidly hastening to destruction; because it remained only
with a few men, and did not flourish in any one race. We may readily
conclude that Seth was an upright and faithful servant of God. And after
he begat a son, like himself, and had a rightly constituted family, the
face of the Church began distinctly to appear, and that worship of God
was set up which might continue to posterity. Such a restoration of
religion has been effected also in our time; not that it had been
altogether extinct; but there was no certainly defined people who called
upon God; and, no sincere profession of faith, no uncorrupted religion
could anywhere be discovered. Whence it too evidently appears how great
is the propensity of men, either to gross contempt of God, or to
superstition; since both evils must then have everywhere prevailed, when
Moses relates it as a miracles that there was at that time a single
family in which the worship of God arose.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_221"></span>[222](cc01009.htm#fr_221) <span
id="x.i-p56.1"></span>

<span id="x.i-p57"></span> The following passage here occurs in the
original: — “<span id="x.i-p57.1"></span>Cognoscendi verbo congressum
viri cum uxore, rem per se pudendam, verecunde insinuat: quanquam coitus
foeditas inter peccati fructus numeranda est; quia nascitur ex libidinis
intemperie: porro licet,” etc.

<span id="fn_222"></span>[223](cc01009.htm#fr_222) <span
id="x.i-p57.2"></span>

<span id="x.i-p58"></span> “<span id="x.i-p58.1"></span>Ita duplicem
partum commemorans, nonnisi de uno concubitu loquitur.”

<span id="fn_223"></span>[224](cc01009.htm#fr_223) <span
id="x.i-p59.3"></span>

<span id="x.i-p60"></span> “<span id="x.i-p60.1"></span>Possedi hominem
per Deum.” — *Vulgate* . “<span id="x.i-p60.2"></span>Εκτησάμην ἄνθρωπον
διὰ τον Θεοῦ.” — *Sept*

<span id="fn_224"></span>[225](cc01009.htm#fr_224) <span
id="x.i-p60.3"></span>

<span id="x.i-p61"></span> The reader will find a discussion of this
remarkable passage worthy of his attention in Dr. J. P. Smith’s
Scripture Testimony to the Messiah, vol. 1, p. 228. Third edition. 1837.
This learned, indefatigable, and candid writer, argues with considerable
force in favor of the translation, ‘I have obtained a man, Jehovah,’ and
supposes that Eve really believed her first-born to be the incarnate
Jehovah. There is, however, great difficulty in allowing that she could
know so much as is here presupposed; and the remark of Dathe seems fatal
to this interpretation: — ‘<span id="x.i-p61.1"></span>Si scivit,
Messiam esse debere Jovam, quomodo existimare potuit, Cainam esse
Messiam, quem sciebat esse ab Adamo genitum.’ If Eve knew that Messiah
must be Jehovah, how could she think that Cain was the Messiah, when she
knew him to be the offspring of Adam? — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_225"></span>[226](cc01009.htm#fr_225) <span
id="x.i-p63.1"></span>

<span id="x.i-p64"></span> “<span id="x.i-p64.1"></span>Et addidit
parere fratrem ejus Ebel;” and she added to bring forth (or she brought
forth in addition) his brother Abel. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_226"></span>[227](cc01009.htm#fr_226) <span
id="x.i-p64.3"></span>

<span id="x.i-p65"></span> That is, “obtained,” or “gotten.” — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_227"></span>[228](cc01009.htm#fr_227) <span
id="x.i-p65.1"></span>

<span id="x.i-p66"></span> <span id="x.i-p66.1"></span>לנה, ( *Hebel* ,)
signifies vanity. — *Ed*

<span id="fn_228"></span>[229](cc01009.htm#fr_228) <span
id="x.i-p67.3"></span>

<span id="x.i-p68"></span> “<span id="x.i-p68.1"></span>Absque verbo.”
Literally “without the word.” — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_229"></span>[230](cc01009.htm#fr_229) <span
id="x.i-p68.2"></span>

<span id="x.i-p69"></span> That is, “truth received into the heart.” —
*Ed*.

<span id="fn_230"></span>[231](cc01009.htm#fr_230) <span
id="x.i-p69.2"></span>

<span id="x.i-p70"></span> Mincha usually, though not invariably,
signifies an “unbloody oblation,” in opposition to <span
id="x.i-p70.1"></span>עבז, ( *zeba* ,) a “bloody sacrifice.” — See
Gesenius, Lee, etc. — *Ed*

<span id="fn_231"></span>[232](cc01009.htm#fr_231) <span
id="x.i-p72.4"></span>

<span id="x.i-p73"></span> The word prevented is here used in the sense
now rendered somewhat obsolete, though retained in the Liturgy and
Articles of the Church of England. We have, in fact, no other word which
so well describes the effect of that prevenient grace, which anticipates
and goes before every thing that is good in man. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_232"></span>[233](cc01009.htm#fr_232) <span
id="x.i-p76.1"></span>

<span id="x.i-p77"></span> It will, perhaps, be admitted that Calvin
here deals too hardly with the opinions of the Jews. That God did in
some way bear public testimony to his acceptance of Abel’s sacrifice, is
recorded by St. Paul; and there is surely nothing unreasonable in the
supposition that he did it, as in several other instances, by fire from
heaven. The reader may see several authorities adduced in Poole; he may
also consult Ainsworth on the Pentateuch, Dr. P. Smith on the Atonement;
and especially, Faber’s “Treatise of the Origin of Expiatory Sacrifice.”
— *Ed*.

<span id="fn_233"></span>[234](cc01009.htm#fr_233) <span
id="x.i-p79.1"></span>

<span id="x.i-p80"></span> “<span id="x.i-p80.1"></span>Et retrancher
les occasions que prend Satan, pour faire illusion aux hommes, en
s’insinuant sous couleur des revelations.” — *French Tr*.

<span id="fn_234"></span>[235](cc01009.htm#fr_234) <span
id="x.i-p82.1"></span>

<span id="x.i-p83"></span> The version of the Septuagint is, <span
id="x.i-p83.1"></span>Οὐκ ἐα&lt;n ojrqw\~v prosene&gt;γκὟς ορθῶς δὲ μὴ
διελης ἤμαρτες; “If thou shouldst rightly offer, but yet not rightly
divide, wouldst thou not sin?” See Archbishop Magee’s Discourses, etc,
No. lxv., where he ingeniously accounts for the manner in which the
translators of the Septuagint version may have misunderstood the
original. — *Ed*

<span id="fn_235"></span>[236](cc01009.htm#fr_235) <span
id="x.i-p83.4"></span>

<span id="x.i-p84"></span> See Schindler, sub voce, No. in.; and the
Discourses before referred to, No. lxv.

<span id="fn_236"></span>[237](cc01009.htm#fr_236) <span
id="x.i-p84.2"></span>

<span id="x.i-p85"></span> “<span id="x.i-p85.1"></span>De re subjecta
habitur sermo.”

<span id="fn_237"></span>[238](cc01009.htm#fr_237) <span
id="x.i-p87.4"></span>

<span id="x.i-p88"></span> “<span id="x.i-p88.1"></span>Prima est ultio
quod se Judice, nemo nocens absolvitur, improba quamvis Gratia fallacis
Praetoris vicerit urnam.”

<span id="fn_238"></span>[239](cc01009.htm#fr_238) <span
id="x.i-p89.1"></span>

<span id="x.i-p90"></span> The Hebrew word <span
id="x.i-p90.1"></span>תאטח ( *chatath* ,) which primarily means sin, is
also frequently used for sin-offering, and is so translated in various
passages of our version. The learned Dr. Lightfoot was the first who
proposed that it should be so rendered in the present instance. His
interpretation has been controverted, especially by the Socinians; but
not be them only; the justly celebrated Dr. Davison has also attempted
to set it aside, in his Inquiry into the Origin and Intent of Primitive
Sacrifice. But the more profound learning of Dr. Magee and of Mr. Faber
has placed the interpretation of Lightfoot on a basis not easily to be
shaken. The translation of the passage will, on this supposition, be,
‘If thou doest not well, a sin-offering lieth or coucheth at the door’;
and the import of the address will be to this effect, ‘Thou hast only to
offer up a sacrifice of atonement, and then the defect of thy offering
will be supplied, and the pardon of thy sin granted.’ — See Magee’s
Second Discourse, and the Dissertations connected with it; also Faber’s
Treatise on the Origin of Expiatory Sacrifice. — *Ed*

<span id="fn_239"></span>[240](cc01009.htm#fr_239) <span
id="x.i-p91.1"></span>

<span id="x.i-p92"></span> Faber contends the expression, “Unto thee
shall be his (or its) desire,” refers to the victim which was to be
offered as a sin-offering. — See his Treatise, p.129. He also gives the
following poetical arrangement of God’s address to Cain: —

<span id="x.i-p93"></span>“Why is there hot anger unto thee;  
And why hath fallen thy countenance?  
If thou doest well, shall there not be exaltation?  
And if thou doest not well, at the door a sin-offering is couching.  
And unto thee is its desire,  
And thou shalt rule over it.”

<span id="x.i-p94"></span>— *Ed*.

<span id="fn_240"></span>[241](cc01009.htm#fr_240) <span
id="x.i-p96.1"></span>

<span id="x.i-p97"></span> “<span id="x.i-p97.1"></span>Egrediamur
foras.” — *Vulgate*.

<span id="fn_241"></span>[242](cc01009.htm#fr_241) <span
id="x.i-p100.1"></span>

<span id="x.i-p101"></span> “<span id="x.i-p101.1"></span>Parricidam
citaverit.” The word parricide is contrary to its original import,
applied to the murderer of any near relative. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_242"></span>[243](cc01009.htm#fr_242) <span
id="x.i-p101.2"></span>

<span id="x.i-p102"></span> By leaving the family of Abraham, in which
alone the true service of God was maintained. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_243"></span>[244](cc01009.htm#fr_243) <span
id="x.i-p104.1"></span>

<span id="x.i-p105"></span> “<span id="x.i-p105.1"></span>Ubi negari
factum non potest, ad statum qualitatis confugiunt.” — “<span
id="x.i-p105.2"></span>Ils ont recours aux qualitez et circonstances.” —
*French Trans*.

<span id="fn_244"></span>[245](cc01009.htm#fr_244) <span
id="x.i-p108.1"></span>

<span id="x.i-p109"></span> “<span id="x.i-p109.1"></span>Κατὰ
προσωποποιΐαν”

<span id="fn_245"></span>[246](cc01009.htm#fr_245) <span
id="x.i-p112.1"></span>

<span id="x.i-p113"></span> “<span id="x.i-p113.1"></span>στένων κάι
τρέμων.” “Groaning and trembling.” — *Sept*

<span id="fn_246"></span>[247](cc01009.htm#fr_246) <span
id="x.i-p113.7"></span>

<span id="x.i-p114"></span> “<span id="x.i-p114.1"></span>Instabiles
esse conqueritur.”

<span id="fn_247"></span>[248](cc01009.htm#fr_247) <span
id="x.i-p116.3"></span>

<span id="x.i-p117"></span> “<span id="x.i-p117.1"></span>Ecce repulisti
me a facie terrae, et a facie tua abscondar.”

<span id="fn_248"></span>[249](cc01009.htm#fr_248) <span
id="x.i-p124.1"></span>

<span id="x.i-p125"></span> “<span id="x.i-p125.1"></span>דונ signifies
motion, flight, wandering, exile, and is the name of the region into
which Cain was exiled.” — *Schindler*

<span id="fn_249"></span>[250](cc01009.htm#fr_249) <span
id="x.i-p127.1"></span>

<span id="x.i-p128"></span> “<span id="x.i-p128.1"></span>Ad sobolem
gignendam animum applicuisse.”

<span id="fn_250"></span>[251](cc01009.htm#fr_250) <span
id="x.i-p133.1"></span>

<span id="x.i-p134"></span> “<span id="x.i-p134.1"></span>Non
poenitendis dotibus, prae allis Adae posteris excelluisse.”

<span id="fn_251"></span>[252](cc01009.htm#fr_251) <span
id="x.i-p137.1"></span>

<span id="x.i-p138"></span> It is clear that Calvin had no perception of
the poetical character of this speech, or he would more correctly have
interpreted its meaning. There is, however, and will be, much difference
of opinion respecting the real nature of the act spoken of in this
obscure poem. Some have thought Lamech guilty of savage cruelty in
murdering an innocent person; others have deemed the act to be one of
justifiable homicide, done in self-defense. Others, again, have supposed
the expression of Lamech to be a mere question, which admitted only of a
negative answer, ‘Have I slain a man for my wound?’ And, lastly, there
are those who, with Calvin, take it as the language of bravado, ‘I would
slay a man for wounding me, if he should attempt to do it.’ In Bishop
Lowth’s fourth Prelection the whole is given in three distiches of
Hebrew poetry, of which the following is a translation: —

<span id="x.i-p139"></span>“Ada and Zillah, hear my voice:  
Ye wives of Lamech, hearken to my speech;  
Because I have slain a man for my wound,  
And a boy for my bruise:  
If Cain shall be avenged sevenfold,  
Lamech even seventy times seven.”

<span id="x.i-p140"></span><span id="x.i-p140.1"></span>De Sacra Poesi
Hebraeorum.  
See also Dr. A. Clarke’s Commentary in loco.

<span id="x.i-p141"></span>The following translation from Herder is also
worthy of notice: —

<span id="x.i-p142"></span>“Ye wives of Lamech, hear my voice,  
And hearken to my speech;  
I slew a man who wounded me,  
A youth who smote me with a blow,  
If Cain shall be seven times avenged,  
Then Lamech seventy times seven.”  
Caunter’s Poetry of the Pentateuch, vol. 1, p. 81.

<span id="x.i-p143"></span>Caunter commends the translation of Bishop
Lowth for having got rid of the copulative conjunction in the fourth
line. This, however, is a mistake into which he has been led by reading
Lowth not in the original, but in Dr. Gregory’s translation. A remark of
Michaelis appears worthy of attention. Speaking of Lamech and his wives,
he says, ‘It is not to be supposed that he addressed them in verse; the
substance of what he said has been reduced to numbers, for the sake of
preserving it easily in the memory.’ — *Ed*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 5](cc01010)
