[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc01012)  [Next](cc01014) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 1: Genesis, Part I*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xiv"></span>

<span id="xiv-p1"></span>CHAPTER 8.

<span id="xiv.i"></span>

<span id="xiv.i-p1"></span><span id="xiv.i-p1.1"></span>[Genesis
8:1-22](../../../bib/kjv/gen008.htm#001)<span id="xiv.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.i-p2"></span>**1.** And God remembered Noah, and every
living thing, and all the cattle that *was* with him in the ark: and God
made a wind to pass over the earth, and the waters asswaged;

<span id="xiv.i-p3"></span>**1.** Recordatus est autem Deus Noah, et
omnis bestiae, et omnis animalis quae erant cum eo in arca: et transire
fecit Deus ventum super terram, et quieverunt aquae.

<span id="xiv.i-p4"></span>**2.** The fountains also of the deep and the
windows of heaven were stopped, and the rain from heaven was restrained;

<span id="xiv.i-p5"></span> **2.** Et clauserunt se fontes abyssi,
fenestraeque coelo.

<span id="xiv.i-p6"></span>**3.** And the waters returned from off the
earth continually: and after the end of the hundred and fifty days the
waters were abated.

<span id="xiv.i-p7"></span>**3.** Et reversae sunt aquae a superficie
terrae, eundo et redeundo, et defecerunt aquae in fine quinquaginta et
centum dierum.

<span id="xiv.i-p8"></span>**4.** And the ark rested in the seventh
month, on the seventeenth day of the month, upon the mountains of
Ararat.

<span id="xiv.i-p9"></span> **4.** Et requievit arca mense septimo,
septimadecima die mensis super montes Ararath.

<span id="xiv.i-p10"></span>**5.** And the waters decreased continually
until the tenth month: in the tenth *month* , on the first *day* of the
month, were the tops of the mountains seen.

<span id="xiv.i-p11"></span> **5.** Et aquae ibant et deficiebant usque
ad mensem decimum: in decimo, in prima mensis visa sunt cacumina
montium.

<span id="xiv.i-p12"></span>**6.** And it came to pass at the end of
forty days, that Noah opened the window of the ark which he had made:

<span id="xiv.i-p13"></span> **6.** Et fuit, in fine quadraginta dierum,
aperuit Noah fenestram arcae quam fecerat.

<span id="xiv.i-p14"></span>**7.** And he sent forth a raven, which went
forth to and fro, until the waters were dried up from off the earth.

<span id="xiv.i-p15"></span>**7.** Et misit corvum, et egressus est
egrediendo et redeundo, donex siccarentur aquae quae erant super terram.

<span id="xiv.i-p16"></span>**8.** Also he sent forth a dove from him,
to see if the waters were abated from off the face of the ground;

<span id="xiv.i-p17"></span>**8.** Deinde misit columbam a se, ut
videret an extenuatae essent aquae a superficie terrae.

<span id="xiv.i-p18"></span>**9.** But the dove found no rest for the
sole of her foot, and she returned unto him into the ark, for the waters
*were* on the face of the whole earth: then he put forth his hand, and
took her, and pulled her in unto him into the ark.

<span id="xiv.i-p19"></span> **9.** Et non invenit columba requiem
plantae pedis sui, et reversa est ad eum in arcam: quia aquae erant in
superficie omnis terrae: et misit manum suam, et accepit eam,
introduxitque eam ad se in arcam.

<span id="xiv.i-p20"></span>**10.** And he stayed yet other seven days;
and again he sent forth the dove out of the ark;

<span id="xiv.i-p21"></span>**10.** Et expectavit adhuc septem dies
alios, et addidit ut mitteret columbam ex arca.

<span id="xiv.i-p22"></span>**11.** And the dove came in to him in the
evening; and, lo, in her mouth *was* an olive leaf pluckt off: so Noah
knew that the waters were abated from off the earth.

<span id="xiv.i-p23"></span>**11.** Et venit ad eum columba tempore
vespertimo, et ecce, folium olivae raptum erat in ore ejus, et cognovit
Noah quod extenuatae essent aquae a superficie terrae.

<span id="xiv.i-p24"></span>**12.** And he stayed yet other seven days;
and sent forth the dove; which returned not again unto him any more.

<span id="xiv.i-p25"></span>**12.** Et expectavit adhuc septem alios, et
misit columbam: et non addidit ut reverteretur ad cum amplius.

<span id="xiv.i-p26"></span>**13.** And it came to pass in the six
hundredth and first year, in the first *month* , the first *day* of the
month, the waters were dried up from off the earth: and Noah removed the
covering of the ark, and looked, and, behold, the face of the ground was
dry.

<span id="xiv.i-p27"></span>**13.** Et fuit, primo et sexcentesimo anno,
primo *mense* , in prima mensis, siccatae sunt aquae a superficie
terrae: removit autem Noah operimentum arcae, et vidit, et exxe siccata
erat facies terrae.

<span id="xiv.i-p28"></span>**14.** And in the second month, on the
seven and twentieth day of the month, was the earth dried.

<span id="xiv.i-p29"></span>**14.** Et in mense secundo, in septima et
vicesima die mensis, aruit terra.

<span id="xiv.i-p30"></span>**15.** And God spake unto Noah, saying,

<span id="xiv.i-p31"></span>**15.** Loquutus est autem Deus ad Noah,
dicendo,

<span id="xiv.i-p32"></span>**16.** Go forth of the ark, thou, and thy
wife, and thy sons, and thy sons’ wives with thee.

<span id="xiv.i-p33"></span>**16.** Egredere ex arca, tu, et uxor tua,
et filii tui, et uxores filiorum tuorum tecum.

<span id="xiv.i-p34"></span>**17.** Bring forth with thee every living
thing that *is* with thee, of all flesh, *both* of fowl, and of cattle,
and of every creeping thing that creepeth upon the earth; that they may
breed abundantly in the earth, and be fruitful, and multiply upon the
earth.

<span id="xiv.i-p35"></span>**17.** Omnem bestiam quae est tecum, ex
omni carne, tam de volatili quam de animali, et omni reptili quod reptat
super terram educ tecum: ut se moveant in terra, et crescant,
multiplicenturque super terram.

<span id="xiv.i-p36"></span>**18.** And Noah went forth, and his sons,
and his wife, and his sons’ wives with him:

<span id="xiv.i-p37"></span>**18.** Et egressus est Noah, et filii ejus,
et uxor ejus, et uxores filiorum ejus cum eo.

<span id="xiv.i-p38"></span>**19.** Every beast, every creeping thing,
and every fowl, *and* whatsoever creepeth upon the earth, after their
kinds, went forth out of the ark.

<span id="xiv.i-p39"></span>**19.** Omnis bestia, omne reptile et omne
volatile, omne quod movetur super terram, secundum familias eorum
egressa sunt ex arca.

<span id="xiv.i-p40"></span>**20.** And Noah builded an altar unto the
LORD; and took of every clean beast, and of every clean fowl, and
offered burnt offerings on the altar.

<span id="xiv.i-p41"></span>**20.** Et aedificavit Noah altare Jehovae,
et tulit ex omni animali mundo, et ex omni volatili mundo, et obtulit
holocausta in altari.

<span id="xiv.i-p42"></span>**21.** And the LORD smelled a sweet savour;
and the LORD said in his heart, I will not again curse the ground any
more for man’s sake; for the imagination of man’s heart *is* evil from
his youth; neither will I again smite any more every thing living, as I
have done.

<span id="xiv.i-p43"></span>**21.** Odoratusque est Jehova odorem
quietis. Et dixit Jehova in corde suo, Non addam ut maledicam ultra
terrae propter hominem: quia cogitatio cordis hominis mala est a
pueritia sua: nec addam ultra ut percutiam omne vivens quemadmodum feci.

<span id="xiv.i-p44"></span>**22.** While the earth remaineth, seedtime
and harvest, and cold and heat, and summer and winter, and day and night
shall not cease.

<span id="xiv.i-p45"></span>**22.** Posthac omnibus diebus terrae,
sementis et messis, et frigus et aestus, et aestas et hyems, et dies et
nox non cessabunt.

<span id="xiv.i-p46"></span> 

<span id="xiv.i-p47"></span><span id="xiv.i-p47.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.i-p48"></span>**1.** *And* *God* *remembered* *Noah* .
Moses now descends more particularly to that other part of the subject,
which shows, that Noah was not disappointed in his hope of the salvation
divinely promised to him. The *remembrance* of which Moses speaks, ought
to be referred not only to the external aspect of things, (so to speak,)
but also to the inward feeling of the holy man. Indeed it is certain,
that Gods from the time in which he had once received Noah into his
protection, was never unmindful of him; for, truly, it was by as great a
miracle, that he did not perish through suffocation in the ark, as if he
had lived without breath, submerged in the waters. And Moses just before
has said that by God’s secret closing up of the ark, the waters were
restrained from penetrating it. But as the ark was floating, even to the
fifth month, upon the waters, the delay by which the Lord suffered his
servant to be anxiously and miserably tortured might seem to imply a
kind of oblivion. And it is not to be questioned, that his heart was
agitated by various feelings, when he found himself so long held in
suspense; for he might infer, that his life had been prolonged, in order
that he might be more miserable than any of the rest of mankind. For we
know that we are accustomed to imagine God absent, except when we have
some sensible experience of his presence. And although Noah tenaciously
held fast the promise which he had embraced, even to the end, it is yet
credible, that he was grievously assailed by various temptations; and
God, without doubt, purposely thus exercised his faith and patience.
For, why was not the world destroyed in three days? And for what purpose
did the waters, after they had covered the highest mountains rise
fifteen cubits higher, unless it was to accustom Noah, and his family,
to meditate the more profitably on the judgments of Gods and when the
danger was past, to acknowledge that they had been rescued from a
thousand deaths? Let us therefore learn, by this example, to repose on
the providence of God, even while he seems to be most forgetful of us;
for at length, by affording us help, he will testify that he has been
mindful of us. What, if the flesh persuade us to distrust, yet let us
not yield to its restlessness; but as soon as this thought creeps in,
that God has cast off all care concerning us, or is asleep, or far
distant, let us immediately meet it with this shield, ‘The Lord, who has
promised his help to the miserable will, in due time, be present with
us, that we may indeed perceive the care he takes of us.’ Nor is there
less weight in what is added that God also remembered the animals; for
if, on account of the salvation promised to man, his favor is extended
to brute cattle, and to wild beasts; what may we suppose will be his
favor towards his own children, to whom he has so liberally, and so
sacredly, pledged his faithfulness?

<span id="xiv.i-p49"></span>*And* *God* *made* *a* *wind* *to* *pass*
*over* *the* *earth* . Here it appears more clearly, that Moses is
speaking of the effect of God’s remembrance of Noah; namely, that in
very deed, and by a sure proof, Noah might know that God cared for his
life. For when God, by his secret power, might have dried the earth, he
made use of the wind; which method he also employed in drying the Red
Sea. And thus he would testify, that as he had the waters at his
command, ready to execute his wrath, so now he held the winds in his
hand, to afford relief. And although here a remarkable history is
recorded by Moses, we are yet taught, that the winds do not arise
fortuitously, but by the command of God; as it is said in <span
id="xiv.i-p49.1"></span>[Ps 104:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#004)<span
id="xiv.i-p49.1"></span>, that ‘they are the swift messengers of God;’
and again, that God rides upon their wings. Finally, the variety, the
contrary motions, and the mutual conflicts of the elements, conspire to
yield obedience to God. Moses also adds other inferior means by which
the waters were diminished and caused to return to their former
position. The sum of the whole is, that God, for the purpose of
restoring the order which he had before appointed, recalled the waters
to their prescribed boundaries so that while the celestial waters, as if
congealed, were suspended in the air; others might lie concealed in
their gulfs; others flow in separate channels; and the sea also might
remain within its barriers.

<span id="xiv.i-p50"></span><span id="xiv.i-p50.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.i-p51"></span>**3.** *And* *after* *the* *end* *of* *the*
*hundred* *and* *fifty* *days* . Some think that the whole time, from
the beginning of the deluge to the abatement of the waters, is here
noted; and thus they include the forty days in which Moses relates that
there was continued rain. But I make this distinction, that until the
fortieth day, the waters rose gradually by fresh additions; then that
they remained nearly in the same state for one hundred and fifty days;
for both computations make the period a little more than six months and
a half. And Moses says, that about the end of the seventh month, the
diminution of the waters appeared to be such that the ark settled upon
the highest summit of a mountain, or touched some ground. And by this
lengthened space of time, the Lord would show the more plainly, that the
dreadful desolation of the world had not fallen upon it accidentally,
but was a remarkable proof of his judgment; while the deliverance of
Noah was a magnificent work of his grace, and worthy of everlasting
remembrance. If, however, we number the seventh month from the beginning
of the year, (as some do,) and not from the time that Noah entered the
ark, the subsidence of which Moses speaks, took place earlier, namely,
as soon as the ark had floated five months. If this second opinion is
received, there will be the same reckoning of ten months; for the sense
will be, that in the eighth month after the commencement of the deluge,
the tops of the mountains appeared. Concerning the name Ararat, I follow
the opinion most received. And I do not see why some should deny it to
be Armenian the mountains of which are declared, by ancient authors,
almost with one consents to be the highest.  <span
id="fr_276"></span>[277](#fn_276) The Chaldean paraphrase also points
out the particular part, which he calls mountains of *Cardu* ,  <span
id="fr_277"></span>[278](#fn_277) which others call *Cardueni* . But
whether that be true, which Josephus has handed down respecting the
fragments of the ark found there in his time; remnants of which, Jerome
says, remained to his own age, I leave undecided.

<span id="xiv.i-p54"></span><span id="xiv.i-p54.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.i-p55"></span>**6.** *At* *the* *end* *of* *forty* *days*
. We may hence conjecture with what great anxiety the breast of the holy
man was oppressed. After he had perceived the ark to be resting on solid
ground, he yet did not dare to open the window till the fortieth day;
not because he was stunned and torpid, but because an example, thus
formidable, of the vengeance of God, had affected him with such fear and
sorrow combined, that being deprived of all judgment, he silently
remained in the chamber of his ark. At length he sends forth a raven,
from which he might receive a more certain indication of the dryness of
the earth. But the raven perceiving nothing but muddy marshes, hovers
around, and immediately seeks to be readmitted. I have no doubt that
Noah purposely selected the ravens which he knew might be allured by the
odour of carcasses, to take a further flight, if the earth, with the
animals upon it, were already exposed to view; but the raven, flying
around did not depart far. I wonder whence a negation, which Moses has
not in the Hebrew text, has crept into the Greek and Latin version,
since it entirely changes the sense.  <span
id="fr_278"></span>[279](#fn_278) Hence the fable has originated, that
the raven, having found carcasses, was kept away from the arks and
forsook its protector. Afterwards, futile allegories followed, just as
the curiosity of men is ever desirous of trifling. But the dove, in its
first egress, imitated the raven, because it flew back to the ark;
afterwards it brought a branch of olive in its bill; and at the third
time, as if emancipated, it enjoyed the free air, and the free earth.
Some writers exercise their ingenuity on the olive branch;  <span
id="fr_279"></span>[280](#fn_279) because among the ancients it was the
emblem of peace, as the laurel was of victory. But I rather think, that
as the olive tree does not grow upon the mountains, and is not a very
lofty tree, the Lord had given his servant some token whence he might
infer, that pleasant regions, and productive of good fruits, were now
freed from the waters. Because the version of Jerome says, that it was a
branch with green leaves; they who have thought, that the deluge began
in the month of September, take this as a confirmation of their opinion.
But the words of Moses have no such meaning. And it might be that the
Lord, willing to revive the spirit of Noah, offered some branch to the
dove, which had not yet altogether withered under the waters.

<span id="xiv.i-p58"></span><span id="xiv.i-p58.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.i-p59"></span>**15.** *And* *God* *spake* *unto* *Noah* .
Though Noah was not a little terrified at the judgment of God, yet his
patience is commended in this respect, that having the earth, which
offered him a home, before his eyes, he yet does not venture to go
forth. Profane men may ascribe this to timidity, or even to indolence;
but holy is that timidity which is produced by the obedience of faith.
Let us therefore know, that Noah was restrained, by a hallowed modesty,
from allowing himself to enjoy the bounty of nature, till he should hear
the voice of God directing him to do so. Moses winds this up in a few
words, but it is proper that we should attend to the thing itself. All
ought indeed, spontaneously, to consider how great must have been the
fortitude of the man, who, after the incredible weariness of a whole
year, when the deluge has ceased, and new life has shone forth, does not
yet move a foot out of his sepulcher, without the command of God. Thus
we see, that, by a continual course of faith, the holy man was obedient
to God; because at God’s command, he entered the ark, and there remained
until God opened the way for his egress; and because he chose rather to
lie in a tainted atmosphere than to breathe the free air, until he
should feel assured that his removal would be pleasing to God. Even in
minute affairs, Scripture commends to us this self-government, that we
should attempt nothing but with an approving conscience. How much less
is the rashness of men to be endured in religious matters, if, without
taking counsel of God, they permit themselves to act as they please. It
is not indeed to be expected that God will every moment pronounce, by
special oracles, what is necessary to be done; yet it becomes us to
hearken attentively to his voice, in order to be certainly persuaded
that we undertake nothing but what is in accordance with his word. The
spirit of prudence, and of counsel, is also to be sought; of which he
never leaves those destitute, who are docile and obedient to his
commands. In this sense, Moses relates that Noah went out of the ark as
soon as he, relying on the oracle of God, was aware that a new
habitation was given him in the earth.

<span id="xiv.i-p60"></span><span id="xiv.i-p60.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.i-p61"></span>**17.** *That* *they* *may* *breed*
*abundantly* *,* *etc* . With these words the Lord would cheer the mind
of Noah, and inspire him with confidence, that a seed had been preserved
in the ark which should increase till it replenished the whole earth. In
short, the renovation of the earth is promised to Noah; to the end that
he may know that the world itself was inclosed in the ark, and that the
solitude and devastation, at the sight of which his heart might faint,
would not be perpetual.

<span id="xiv.i-p62"></span><span id="xiv.i-p62.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.i-p63"></span>**20.** *And* *Noah* *builded* *an* *altar*
*unto* *the* *Lord* . As Noah had given many proofs of his obedience, so
he now presents an example of gratitude. This passage teaches us that
sacrifices were instituted from the beginning for this end, that men
should habituate themselves, by such exercises, to celebrate the
goodness of God, and to give him thanks. The bare confession of the
tongue, yea, even the silent acknowledgment of the heart, might suffice
for God; but we know how many stimulants our indolence requires.
Therefore, when the holy fathers, formerly, professed their piety
towards God by sacrifices, the use of them was by no means superfluous.
Besides, it was right that they should always have before their eyes
symbols, by which they would be admonished, that they could have no
access to God but through a mediator. Now, however, the manifestation of
Christ has taken away these ancient shadows. Wherefore, let us use those
helps which the Lord has prescribed.  <span
id="fr_280"></span>[281](#fn_280) Moreover, when I say that sacrifices
were made use of, by the holy fathers, to celebrate the benefits of God,
I speak only of one kind: for this offering of Noah answers to the
peace-offerings, and the first-fruits. But here it may be asked, by what
impulse Noah offered a sacrifice to God, seeing he had no command to do
so? I answer: although Moses does not expressly declare that God
commanded him to do it, yet a certain judgment may be formed from what
follows, and even from the whole context, that Noah had rested upon the
word of Gods and that, in reliance on the divine command, he had
rendered this worship, which he knew, indubitably, should be acceptable
to God. We have before said, that one animal of every kind was preserved
separately; and have stated for what end it was done. But it was useless
to set apart animals for sacrifice, unless God had revealed this design
to holy Noah, who was to be the priest to offer up the victims. Besides,
Moses says that sacrifices were chosen from among clean animals. But it
is certain that Noah did not invent this distinction for himself since
it does not depend on human choice. Whence we conclude, that he
undertook nothing without divine authority. Also immediately afterwards,
Moses subjoins, that the smell of the sacrifice was acceptable to God.
This general rule, therefore, is to be observed, that all religious
services which are not perfumed with the odour of faith, are of an
ill-savor before God. Let us therefore know, that the altar of Noah was
founded in the word of God. And the same word was as salt to his
sacrifices, that they might not be insipid.

<span id="xiv.i-p65"></span><span id="xiv.i-p65.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.i-p66"></span>**21.** *And* *the* *Lord* *smelled* *a*
*sweet* *savor*  <span id="fr_281"></span>[282](#fn_281) Moses calls
that by which God was appeased, an odour of rest; as if he had said, the
sacrifice had been rightly offered. Yet nothing can be more absurd than
to suppose that God should have been appeased by the filthy smoke of
entrails, and of flesh. But Moses here, according to his manner, invests
God with a human character for the purpose of accommodating himself to
the capacity of an ignorant people. For it is not even to be supposed,
that the rite of sacrifice, in itself, was grateful to God as a
meritorious act; but we must regard the end of the work, and not confine
ourselves to the external form. For what else did Noah propose to
himself than to acknowledge that he had received his own life, and that
of the animals, as the gift of God’s mercy alone? This piety breathed a
good and sweet odour before God; as it is said, (<span
id="xiv.i-p67.2"></span>[Ps
116:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa116.htm#012)<span id="xiv.i-p67.2"></span>,)

<span id="xiv.i-p68"></span>“What shall I render unto the Lord for all
his benefits? I will take the cup of salvation, and will call upon the
name of the Lord.”

<span id="xiv.i-p69"></span>*And* *the* *Lord* *said* *in* *his* *heart*
. The meaning of the passage is, God had decreed that he would not
hereafter curse the earth. And this form of expression has great weight:
for although God never retracts what he has openly spoken with his
mouth, yet we are more deeply affected when we hear, that he has fixed
upon something in his own mind; because an inward decree of this kind in
no way depends upon creatures. To sum up the whole, God certainly
determined that he would never more destroy the world by a deluge. Yet
the expression, ‘I will not curse,’ is to be but generally understood;
because we know how much the earth has lost of its fertility since it
has been corrupted by man’s sin, and we daily feel that it is cursed in
various ways. And he explains himself a little afterwards, saying, ‘I
will not smite anymore every thing living.’ For in these words he does
not allude to every kind of vengeance, but only to that which should
destroy the world, and bring ruin both on mankind and the rest of
animals: as if he would say, that he restored the earth with this
stipulation, that it should not afterwards perish by a deluge. So when
the Lord declares, (<span id="xiv.i-p69.1"></span>[Isa
54:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa054.htm#009)<span id="xiv.i-p69.1"></span>,)
that he will be contented with one captivity of his people, he compares
it with the waters of Noah, by which he had resolved that the world
should only once be overwhelmed.  <span
id="fr_282"></span>[283](#fn_282)

<span id="xiv.i-p71"></span>*For* *the* *imagination* *of* *man’s*
*heart* . This reasoning seems incongruous: for if the wickedness of man
is so great that it does not cease to provoke the anger of God, it must
necessarily bring down destruction upon the world. Nay, God seems to
contradict himself by having previously declared that the world must be
destroyed, because its iniquity was desperate. But here it behaves us
more deeply to consider his design; for it was the will of God that
there should be some society of men to inhabit the earth. If, however,
they were to be dealt with according to their deserts, there would be a
necessity for a daily deluge. Wherefore, he declares, that in inflicting
punishment upon the second world, he will so do it, as yet to preserve
the external appearance of the earth, and not again to sweep away the
creatures with which he has adorned it. Indeed, we ourselves may
perceive such moderation to have been used, both in the public and
special judgments of God, that the world yet stands in its completeness,
and nature yet retains its course. Moreover, since God here declares
what would be the character of men even to the end of the world, it is
evident that the whole human race is under sentence of condemnation, on
account of its depravity and wickedness. Nor does the sentence refer
only to corrupt morals; but their iniquity is said to be an innate
iniquity, from which nothing but evils can spring forth. I wonder,
however, whence that false version of this passage has crept in, that
the thought is prone to evil;  <span id="fr_283"></span>[284](#fn_283)
except, as is probable, that the place was thus corrupted, by those who
dispute too philosophically concerning the corruption of human nature.
It seemed to them hard, that man should be subjected, as a slave of the
devil to sin. Therefore, by way of mitigation, they have said that he
had a propensity to vices. But when the celestial Judge thunders from
heaven, that his thoughts themselves are evil, what avails it to soften
down that which, nevertheless, remains unalterable? Let men therefore
acknowledge, that inasmuch as they are born of Adam, they are depraved
creatures, and therefore can conceive only sinful thoughts, until they
become the new workmanship of Christ, and are formed by his Spirit to a
new life. And it is not to be doubted, that the Lord declares the very
mind of man to be depraved, and altogether infected with sin; so that
all the thoughts which proceed thence are evil. If such be the defect in
the fountain itself, it follows, that all man’s affections are evil, and
his works covered with the same pollution, since of necessity they must
savor of their original. For God does not merely say that men sometimes
think evil; but the language is unlimited, comprising the tree with its
fruits. Nor is it any proof to the contrary, that carnal and profane men
often excel in generosity of disposition, undertake designs apparently
honorable, and put forth certain evidences of virtue. For since their
mind is corrupted with contempt of God, with pride, self-love, ambitious
hypocrisy, and fraud; it cannot be but that all their thoughts are
contaminated with the same vices. Again, they cannot tend towards a
right end: whence it happens that they are judged to be what they really
are, crooked and perverse. For all things in such men, which release us
under the color of virtue, are like wine spoiled by the odour of the
cask. For, (as was before said,) the very affections of nature, which in
themselves are laudable, are yet vitiated by original sin, and on
account of their irregularity have degenerated from their proper nature;
such are the mutual love of married persons, the love of parents towards
their children, and the like. And the clause which is added, “from
youth,” more fully declares that men are born evil; in order to show
that, as soon as they are of an age to begin to form thoughts, they have
radical corruption of mind. Philosophers, by transferring to habit, what
God here ascribes to nature, betray their own ignorance. And to wonder;
for we please and flatter ourselves to such an extent, that we do not
perceive how fatal is the contagion of sin, and what depravity pervades
all our senses. We must, therefore, acquiesce in the judgment of God,
which pronounces man to be so enslaved by sin that he can bring forth
nothing sound and sincere. Yet, at the same time, we must remember, that
no blame is to be cast upon God for that which has its origin in the
defection of the first man, whereby the order of the creation was
subverted. And furthers it must be noted, that men are not exempted from
guilt and condemnation, by the pretext of this bondage: because,
although all rush to evil, yet they are not impelled by any extrinsic
force, but by the direct inclination of their own hearts; and, lastly,
they sin not otherwise than voluntarily.

<span id="xiv.i-p73"></span><span id="xiv.i-p73.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.i-p74"></span>**22.** *While* *the* *earth* *remaineth*
 <span id="fr_284"></span>[285](#fn_284) By these words the world is
again completely restored. For so great was the confusion and disorder
which had overspread the earth, that there was a necessity for some
renovation. On which account, Peter speaks of the old world as having
perished in the deluge, (<span id="xiv.i-p75.2"></span>[2Pe
3:6](../../../bib/kjv/pe2003.htm#006)<span id="xiv.i-p75.2"></span>.)
Moreover, the deluge had been an interruption of the order of nature.
For the revolutions of the sun and moon had ceased: there was no
distinction of winter and summer. Wherefore, the Lord here declares it
to be his pleasure, that all things should recover their vigor, and be
restored to their functions. The Jews erroneously divide their year into
six parts; whereas Moses, by placing the summer in opposition to the
winter, thus divides the whole year in a popular manner into two parts.
And it is not to be doubted, that by cold and heat he designates the
periods already referred to. Under the words, “seed-time,” and
“harvest,” he marks those advantages which flow to men from the
moderated temperature of the atmosphere. If it is objected that this
equable temperament is not every year perceived; the answer is ready,
that the order of the world is indeed disturbed by our vices, so that
many of its movements are irregular: often the sun withholds its proper
heat, — snow or hail follow in the place of dew, — the air is agitated
by various tempests; but although the world is not so regulated as to
produce perpetual uniformity of seasons, yet we perceive the order of
nature so far to prevail, that winter and summer annually recur, that
there is a constant succession of days and nights, and that the earth
brings forth its fruits in summer and autumn. Moreover, by the
expression, ‘all the days of the earth,’ he means, ‘as long as the earth
shall last.’

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_276"></span>[277](cc01013.htm#fr_276) <span
id="xiv.i-p51.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.i-p52"></span> “As to the opinion, which takes the
mountains of Ararat to be situated within the country of Armenia, the
followers of it (some very few excepted) do agree, that the ark of Noah
rested in that part of the mountains of Ararat, which in Greek and Latin
writers is styled the Gordiaean mountains, (or, with some variation, the
mountains of the Cordyaei, Cordueni, Carduchi, Curdi, etc.,) and which
lies near the spring of the Tigris.” — Wells’ Geography, vol. 1 chap. 2.
— *Ed*.

<span id="fn_277"></span>[278](cc01013.htm#fr_277) <span
id="xiv.i-p52.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.i-p53"></span> “<span id="xiv.i-p53.1"></span>ודרק ירוט
לע. ( *Al toorai Kardoo* ,) <span id="xiv.i-p53.2"></span>Super montes
Cardu. — Chaldee paraphrase.” — *Walton*

<span id="fn_278"></span>[279](cc01013.htm#fr_278) <span
id="xiv.i-p55.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.i-p56"></span> “<span id="xiv.i-p56.1"></span>בושו אוצי
אציו, *Vayesta yatso vashoob* .” “And went out going and returning.” The
Vulgate has it, ‘<span id="xiv.i-p56.2"></span>Qui egrediebatur, et non
revertebatur.’ The Septuagint introduces the same negative, so does the
Syriac; but the Chaldee paraphrase, the Samaritan text, and the Arabic
version, all omit the negative. Our translators, in the text, seem to
have followed the Vulgate, though hesitatingly, but in the margin, they
give the rendering of the original. — See Walton’s Polyglott. — *Ed*

<span id="fn_279"></span>[280](cc01013.htm#fr_279) <span
id="xiv.i-p56.3"></span>

<span id="xiv.i-p57"></span> “<span id="xiv.i-p57.1"></span>In ramo
olivae quidam philosophantur.”

<span id="fn_280"></span>[281](cc01013.htm#fr_280) <span
id="xiv.i-p63.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.i-p64"></span> “<span id="xiv.i-p64.1"></span>Quare
adminiculis utamur,” etc. The French translation has it, “<span
id="xiv.i-p64.2"></span>Et pourtant usons,” etc. “And, nevertheless, let
us use,” etc. The meaning of the sentence seems to be, that, as the
fathers, in obedience to God, used sacrifices, which were afterwards
abolished as being of no value, so ought we to avail ourselves of those
aids (adminicula) which might seem to be of no importance, had not God
enjoined them. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_281"></span>[282](cc01013.htm#fr_281) <span
id="xiv.i-p66.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.i-p67"></span> “<span id="xiv.i-p67.1"></span>Odorem
quietis.” “A savor of rest.” — Margin of English Version.

<span id="fn_282"></span>[283](cc01013.htm#fr_282) <span
id="xiv.i-p69.2"></span>

<span id="xiv.i-p70"></span> “For this is as the waters of Noah unto me;
for as I have sworn that the waters of Noah should no more go over the
earth, so have I sworn that I would not be wroth with thee, nor rebuke
thee.”

<span id="fn_283"></span>[284](cc01013.htm#fr_283) <span
id="xiv.i-p71.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.i-p72"></span> “<span id="xiv.i-p72.1"></span>Sensus enim,
et cogitatio humani cordis in malum prona sunt.” — *Vulgate*.

<span id="fn_284"></span>[285](cc01013.htm#fr_284) <span
id="xiv.i-p74.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.i-p75"></span> “<span id="xiv.i-p75.1"></span>Posthac
omnibus diebus terrae.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 9](cc01014)
