[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sky Lore](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](argr02)  [Next](argr04) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0027P88F0/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Astrology and Religion Among the Greeks and Romans*, by Franz Cumont,
\[1912\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_xi">p. xi</span>

# INTRODUCTION

<div align="center">

<table data-border="0">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td data-valign="top" width="372"><p>Ἐκ τῶν οὐρανίων τὰ ἐπίγεια ἤρτηται<br />
κατά τινα φυσικήν συμπάθειαν.</p>
<p>PHILO, <em>De Opificio Mundi</em>, c. 40.</p></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

</div>

 

After a long period of discredit and neglect, astrology is beginning to
force itself once more on the attention of the learned world. In the
course of the last few years scholars have devoted to it profound
researches and elaborate publications. Greek manuscripts, which had
remained a sealed book at a time when the quest for unpublished
documents is all the rage, have now been laboriously examined, and the
wealth of this literature has exceeded all expectation. On the other
hand, the deciphering of the cuneiform tablets has given access to the
wellsprings of a learned superstition, which up to modern times has
exercised over Asia and Europe a wider dominion than any religion has
ever achieved. I trust, therefore, that I am not guilty of undue
presumption in venturing to claim your interest for this erroneous
belief, so long universally accepted, which exercised an endless
influence on the creeds and the ideas of the most diverse peoples, and
which for that very reason necessarily demands the attention of
historians.

After a duration of a thousand years, the power of astrology broke down
when, with Copernicus, Kepler, and Galileo, the progress of astronomy
overthrew the false hypothesis upon which its entire structure rested,
namely, the geocentric system of the universe. The fact that the earth
revolves in space intervened to upset the complicated play of planetary
influences, and the silent stars, relegated to the unfathomable depths
of the sky, no longer made their prophetic voices audible to mankind.
Celestial mechanics and spectrum analysis finally robbed them of their
mysterious prestige. Thenceforth in that learned system of divination,
which professed to discover from the stars the secret of our destiny,
men saw nothing but the most monstrous of all the chimeras begotten of
superstition. Under the sway of reason the eighteenth

<span id="page_xii">p. xii</span>

and nineteenth centuries condemned this heresy in the name of scientific
orthodoxy. In 1824, Letronne thought it necessary to apologise for
discoursing to the Academy of Inscriptions on "absurd dreams" in which
he saw "nothing but one of those failings which have done most dishonour
to the human mind," <span id="fr_1"></span>[1](#fn_1)--as though man's
failings were not often more instructive than his triumphs.

But at the end of the nineteenth century the development of history,
from various sides, recalled the attention of investigators to ancient
astrology. It is an exact science which was superimposed on primitive
beliefs, and when classical philology, enlarging its horizon, brought
fully within its range of observation the development of the sciences in
antiquity, it could not set aside a branch of knowledge, illegitimate, I
allow, but indissolubly linked not only with astronomy and meteorology,
but also with medicine, botany, ethnography, and physics. If we go back
to the earliest stages of every kind of learning, as far as the
Alexandrine and even the Babylonian period, we shall find almost
everywhere the disturbing influence of these astral "mathematics." This
sapling, which shot up among the rank weeds by the side of the tree of
knowledge, sprang from the same stock and mingled its branches with it.

But not only is astrology indispensable to the savant who desires to
trace the toilsome progress of reason in the pursuit of truth along its
doublings and turnings,--which is perhaps the highest mission of
history; it also benefited by the interest which was roused in all
manifestations of the irrational. This pseudo-science is in reality a
creed. Beneath the icy crust of a cold and rigid dogma run the troubled
waters of a jumble of worships, derived from an immense antiquity; and
as soon as enquiry was directed to the religions of the past, it was
attracted to this doctrinal superstition, perhaps the most astonishing
that has ever existed. Research ascertained how, after having reigned
supreme in Babylonia, it subdued the cults of Syria and of Egypt, and
under the Empire,--to mention only the West,--transformed even the
ancient paganism of Greece and Rome.

It is not only, however, because it is combined with scientific

<span id="page_xiii">p. xiii</span>

theories, nor because it enters into the teaching of pagan mysteries,
that astrology forces itself on the meditations of the historian of
religions, but for its own sake (and here we touch the heart of the
problem), because he is obliged to enquire how and why this alliance,
which at first sight seems monstrous, came to be formed between
mathematics and superstition. It is no explanation to consider it merely
a mental disease. Even then, to speak the truth, this hallucination, the
most persistent which has ever haunted the human brain, would still
deserve to be studied. If psychology to-day conscientiously applies
itself to disorders of the memory and of the will, it cannot fail to
interest itself in the ailments of the faculty of belief, and
specialists in lunacy will do useful work in dealing with this species
of morbid manifestation with the view of settling its etiology and
tracing its course. How could this absurd doctrine arise, develop,
spread, and force itself on superior intellects for century after
century? There, in all its simplicity, is the historical problem which
confronts us.

In reality the growth of this body of dogma followed a course not
identical with, but parallel, I think, to that of certain other
theologies. Its starting-point was faith, faith in certain stellar
divinities who exerted an influence on the world. Next, people sought to
comprehend the nature of this influence: they believed it to be subject
to certain invariable laws, because observation revealed the fact that
the heavens were animated by regular movements, and they conceived
themselves able to determine its effects in the future with the same
certainty as the coming revolutions and conjunctions of the stars.
Finally, when a series of theories had been evolved out of that twofold
conviction, their original source was forgotten or disregarded. The old
belief became a science; its postulates were erected into principles,
which were justified by physical and moral reasons, and it was pretended
that they rested on experimental data amassed by a long series of
observations. By a common process, after believing, people invented
reasons for believing,--"*fides quaerens intellectum*,"--and the
intelligence working on the faith reduced it to formula, the logical
sequence of which concealed the radical fallacy.

<span id="page_xiv">p. xiv</span>

There is something tragic in this ceaseless attempt of man to penetrate
the mysteries of the future, in this obstinate struggle of his faculties
to lay hold on knowledge which evades his probe, and to satisfy his
insatiable desire to foresee his destiny. The birth and evolution of
astrology, that desperate error on which the intellectual powers of
countless generations were spent, seems like the bitterest of
disillusions. By establishing the unchangeable character of the
celestial revolutions the Chaldeans imagined that they understood the
mechanism of the universe, and had discovered the actual laws of life.
The ancient beliefs in the influence of the stars upon the earth were
concentrated into dogmas of absolute rigidity. But these dogmas were
frequently contradicted by experience, which ought to have confirmed
them. Then not daring to doubt the principles on which depended their
whole conception of the world, these soothsayer-logicians strove to
correct their theories. Unable to bring themselves to deny the influence
of the divine stars on the affairs of this world, they invented new
methods for the better determination of this influence, they complicated
by irrelevant data the problem, of which the solution had proved false,
and thus there was piled up little by little in the course of ages a
monstrous collection of complicated and often contradictory doctrines,
which perplex the reason, and whose audacious unsubstantiality will
remain a perpetual subject of astonishment. We should be confounded at
the spectacle of the human mind losing itself so long in the maze of
these errors, did we not know how medicine, physics, and chemistry have
slowly groped their way before becoming experimental sciences, and what
prolonged exertions they have had to make in order to free themselves
from the tenacious grasp of old superstitions.

Thus various reasons commended to the attention of scholars these old
writings of the Greek astrologers so long neglected. They set to work to
re-read and to re-publish these repulsive-looking books which had not
been reprinted since the sixteenth century. The last edition--and a
shockingly bad one--of the *Tetrabiblos* of Ptolemy is dated 1581.
Further, a number of unknown authors emerged from obscurity, a crowd of

<span id="page_xv">p. xv</span>

manuscripts mouldering in the tombs of libraries were restored to
light. <span id="fr_2"></span>[1](#fn_2)

The profit which can be gained from them is not confined to the science
of which they treat and to the adjacent domains, which astrology has
more or less penetrated. Their utility is much more varied and general,
and it would be difficult to set out in full their manifold
applications. <span id="fr_3"></span>[2](#fn_3)

I shall not dwell on the interest afforded to the scholar by a series of
texts spread over more than fifteen centuries, from the Alexandrine
period to the Renaissance. Nor, again, will I attempt to estimate the
importance which might be claimed in the political sphere by a doctrine
which has often guided the will of kings, and decided their enterprises.
Nor can I prove here by examples how the propagation of astrological
doctrines reveals unsuspected relations between the oldest
civilisations, and leads him who traces it from Alexandria and from
Babylon as far as India, China, and Japan, bringing him back again from
the Far East to the Far West.

So many questions of such varied interest cannot be considered all at
once. We must exercise restraint and confine ourselves to one view of
the subject. Our object in this course of lectures shall be limited to
showing how oriental astrology and star-worship transformed the beliefs
of the Græco-Latin world, what at different periods was the
ever-increasing strength of their influence, and by what means they
established in the West a sidereal cult, which was the highest phase of
ancient paganism. In Greek anthropomorphism the Olympians were merely an
idealised reflection of various human personalities. Roman formalism
made the worship of the national gods an expression of patriotism,
strictly regulated by pontifical and civil law. Babylon was the first to
erect the edifice of a cosmic religion, based upon science, which
brought human activity and human relations with the astral divinities
into the

<span id="page_xvi">p. xvi</span>

general harmony of organised nature. This learned theology, by including
in its speculations the entire world, was to eliminate the narrower
forms of belief, and, by changing the character of ancient idolatry, it
was to prepare in many respects the coming of Christianity.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1"></span>[xii:1](argr03.htm#fr_1) "*Rêveries absurdes . .
. une des faiblesses qui ont le plus déshonoré l’esprit humain*."

<span id="fn_2"></span>[xv:1](argr03.htm#fr_2) See *Catalogus Codicum
Astrologorum Graecorum* (ten volumes published), Brussels, 1893-1911.

<span id="fn_3"></span>[xv:2](argr03.htm#fr_3) See Franz Boll, *Zur
Erforschung der antiken Astrologie* (Neue Jahrbücher f. d. Klass.
Altertum), xxi (1903).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Contents](argr04)
