[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sky Lore](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](argr06)  [Next](argr08.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0027P88F0/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Astrology and Religion Among the Greeks and Romans*, by Franz Cumont,
\[1912\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_22">p. 22</span>

### LECTURE II. Babylon and Greece

The relations of Greek philosophy with oriental theologies form a
subject of vast extent, which has long been discussed. In this lecture
we do not pretend to solve these problems or even to cover the whole
ground which they embrace. Our interest is confined to one particular
point, namely, when and how Semitic star-worship came to modify the
ancient beliefs of the Hellenes.

Every sidereal cult, properly so called, was originally foreign to the
Greeks as to the Romans--a fact which undoubtedly proves that the common
ancestors of the Italians and the Hellenes dwelt in a northern land,
where the stars were frequently concealed by fogs or obscured by clouds.
For them nearly all the constellations remained a nameless and chaotic
mass, and the planets were not distinguished from the other stars. Even
the sun and the moon, although they were regarded as divinities, like
all the powers of nature, occupied but a very secondary place in the
Greek religion. Selene does not appear to have obtained anywhere an
organised cult, and in the few places where Helios had temples, as for
instance in the island of Rhodes, a foreign origin may reasonably be
suspected.

Aristophanes characterises the difference between the religion of the
Greeks and that of the barbarians by observing that the latter sacrifice
to the Sun and the Moon, the former to personal divinities like Hermes.
The pre-Hellenic populations very probably shared the worship of "the
barbarians" of whom Aristophanes speaks, and survivals are found in
popular customs and beliefs. Perhaps, also, certain distant
reminiscences of the original naturalism of the Aryan tribes led the
common people to regard the stars as living beings. It was a shock to
popular belief when Anaxagoras maintained that they were merely bodies
in a state of incandescence. But although the piety of the multitude was
full of reverence for the great celestial

<span id="page_23">p. 23</span>

luminaries, rulers of the day and of the night, the cities did not build
temples to them. The cult of these cosmic powers had been eliminated by
anthropomorphism.

From the days of Homer the gods are no longer physical agents, but
moral--or, if you like, immoral--beings. Resembling men in their
passions, they are their superiors in power alone; the close resemblance
of their feelings to those of their devotees leads them to mingle
intimately in the earthly life of the latter; inspired by a like
patriotism they take part with the opposing hosts in the strifes of the
cities, of which they are the official protectors; they are the
protagonists in all the causes which are espoused by their worshippers.
These immortal beings, whose image has been impressed upon the world by
an aristocratic epic, are but faintly distinguished from the warrior
heroes who worship them, save by the radiance of eternal youth. And
sculptors, by investing them with a sovereign grace and a serene
majesty, enabled them to elevate and ravish the souls of men by the mere
sight of their imperishable beauty. The whole spirit of the Hellenic
religion, profoundly human, ideally æsthetic, as poets and artists had
fashioned it, was opposed to the deification of celestial bodies,
far-off powers, devoid of feeling and of plastic form.

But though the prevalent worship and the city cults turned from the
stars to venerate the august company of Olympians, though Apollo in the
guise of a radiant youth eclipses the material brilliance of Helios, yet
we find that the *philosophers* assign a place of honour to these same
luminaries in their pantheon. Their systems, from the days of the Ionian
physicists, revive and justify the old naturalistic beliefs, which were
never entirely eradicated from the popular creed. Already in the eyes of
Pythagoras the heavenly bodies are divine, moved by the ethereal soul
which informs the universe and is akin to man's own soul. Plato accuses
Anaxagoras of favouring atheism by his daring assertion that the sun is
merely an incandescent mass and the moon an earth. Below the supreme
eternal Being, who unites in himself every perfection, Plato would have
us recognise the stars as "visible gods," which He animates with his own
life, and which manifest his power. To the reformer's

<span id="page_24">p. 24</span>

mind these celestial gods are infinitely superior to those of the
popular religion. This conception of the great idealist, to whom the
theology of the ancient and even that of the modern world owes more than
to any other thinker, was to be developed by his successors, and in
their hands astronomy became almost a sacred science. With no less pious
zeal, Plato's rival, Aristotle, defends the dogma of the divinity of the
stars: in them, as in the First Cause itself, he sees eternal
substances, principles of movement, and therefore divine; and this
doctrine, which thus forms an integral part of his metaphysic, was to
disseminate itself throughout the ages and throughout the world,
wherever the authority of the Master was recognised.

In deifying the celestial bodies, these philosophers may have been
influenced by the desire of recommending to the veneration of their
disciples beings more pure than those whom mythology represented as the
sorry heroes of ridiculous or indecent legends, and to whom fable
attributed all sorts of mischievous and shameful deeds. The polemics of
the early rationalists had discredited these absurd or odious myths, and
the deification of the stars, while saving polytheism, which was
practically indestructible, suppressed anthropomorphism, which
Xenophanes had already attacked so resolutely. The new sidereal theology
has all the appearance of a compromise between popular beliefs and pure
monotheism.

The philosophers may also have been led to this view, I readily grant,
by the logical development of their own thought: the unceasing movement
of these enormous masses showed that they were living beings, and the
eternal immutability of their orbits proved that a superior reason
directed their everlasting course. The admirable harmony of their
relations, the inevitable, as well as the perennial, regularity of their
revolutions implied the presence of a divine essence in them.

All this is quite true: practical motives and theoretical reasons may
have simultaneously influenced these thinkers. But nevertheless it is
impossible to doubt that in their attempts at the reformation of
religion they were also inspired by the example which was set by the
nations of the Orient. The

<span id="page_25">p. 25</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Greeks, who owed
the fundamental axioms of their uranography to the Babylonians, would
not fail to be struck also by the lofty character of a star-worship
which had become scientific. The elements of their sidereal theology
were, in all probability, derived from external sources together with
the rudiments of their astronomy.

Here we touch a question which is very extensive and still very obscure,
in spite of the interminable discussions which it has provoked,--or
perhaps by reason of these impassioned discussions. The history of the
intellectual development of the ancient world offers perhaps no more
fundamental problem than that of the influence which Babylonian science
exercised on Greece.

Recently, as we have observed, a certain school of Assyriologists has
curiously exaggerated the extent of this influence, and the excesses of
the "Pan-Babylonists" have provoked a well-founded distrust of those
fanciful views which see in Chaldea the mother of all wisdom. But the
reality of Hellenic borrowings from Semitic sources remains none the
less indisputable. At a distant date Hellas received from the far East a
duodecimal or sexagesimal system of measurement, both of time and of
objects. The habit of reckoning in terms of twelve hours which we still
use to-day, is due to the fact that the Ionians borrowed from the
Orientals this method of dividing the day. Besides the acquaintance with
early instruments, such as the sun-dial, <span
id="fr_20"></span>[1](#fn_20.md) they owed to the observatories of
Mesopotamia the fundamental data of their celestial topography: the
ecliptic, the signs of the zodiac, and the majority of the planets. To
this first influx of positive knowledge corresponds a first introduction
into the Greek systems of the mystic ideas which Orientals attached to
them. I will not lay stress on the doubtful traditions which make
Pythagoras a disciple of the Chaldeans, but it has proved possible to
demonstrate that his system of numbers and geometrical figures, designed
to represent certain gods, is in accordance with astrological theories.
The dodecagon bears the name of Jupiter because this planet traverses
the circle of

<span id="page_26">p. 26</span>

the zodiac in twelve years, that is to say, each year it traverses an
arc terminated by the angles of the polygon which is inscribed in that
circle.

<span id="img_sep"></span> ![](img/sep.jpg)

But these first scientific and religious importations are assigned to a
period when, as we know, the commercial cities of Ionia threw open their
gates to Asiatic influences. It is more important to collect the traces
of these Chaldean infiltrations after the Persian wars when Greek
thought had achieved its autonomy. Certain facts recently brought to
light indicate that the relations, direct or indirect, between the
centres of Babylonian learning and of Greek culture, were never at any
time entirely broken off. <span id="fr_21"></span>[1](#fn_21.md)

It is known that Meton passes as the inventor of a cycle of nineteen
years (*enneakaidekaëteris*) which would establish a periodic agreement
between the old lunar year and the solar revolutions, and which replaced
the ancient *octaëteris*, or cycle of eight years, up to that time in
use. The Golden Number <span id="fr_22"></span>[2](#fn_22.md) of our
calendars still reminds us how, according to the tradition, this
discovery, communicated to the Athenians in the year 432, excited their
admiration to such a degree that they caused the calculations of Meton
to be engraved in golden characters in the Agora. All this is, however,
a fable. Since an *octaëteris* is proved to have been in use at
Babylonia, by documents of the sixth century, and an
*enneakaidekaëteris* by inscriptions of the fourth century, and this
latter may well be much older, it seems difficult to believe that Meton
was not prompted by the example which the Orientals set him. This is the
more probable because he would appear to have had some superficial
acquaintance with astrology, if we may believe that, at the moment of
the departure of the fleet for Sicily, his science revealed to

<span id="page_27">p. 27</span>

him the disaster which awaited that expedition. It is true that it is
always possible to maintain that the Babylonians and the Greeks arrived
independently at the same conclusions, or even to go so far as to assert
that the former were the imitators of the latter.

But here is a more convincing argument. When the Greeks learned to
recognise the five planets known in antiquity, they gave them names
derived from their character. Venus, whose brightness Homer had already
celebrated, was called "Herald of the Dawn" (Ἑωσφόρος) or "Herald of
Light" (Φωσφόρος) or on the other hand "Vespertine" (Ἕσπερος), according
as she was considered as the star of the morning or that of the evening
(the identity of these two being not yet recognised). Mercury was named
the "Twinkling Star" (Στίλβων), Mars, because of his red colour, the
"Fiery Star" (Πυρόεις), Jupiter the "Luminous Star" (Φαέθων), Saturn the
"Brilliant Star" (Φαίνων), or perhaps, taking the word in another sense,
the "Indicator." Now, after the fourth century other titles are found to
supersede these ancient names, which are gradually ousted from use. The
planets become the stars of Hermes, Aphrodite, Ares, Zeus, Kronos,
(Ἑρμοῦ, Ἀφροδίτης, κτλ. ἀστήρ). Now this seems due to the fact that in
Babylonia these same planets were dedicated respectively to Nebo,
Ishtar, Nergal, Marduk, and Ninib. In accordance with the usual
procedure of the ancients, the Greeks substituted for these barbarous
divinities those of their own deities who bore some resemblance to them.
Clearly exotic ideas, the ideas of Semitic star-worship, have come in
here, for the ancient mythology of Hellas did not put the stars under
the patronage of the Olympians nor establish any connection between
them. Thus the names of the planets which we employ to-day, are an
English translation of a Latin translation of a Greek translation of a
Babylonian nomenclature.

Perhaps some doubt might still remain, if we did not see at the same
time some very peculiar beliefs of the sidereal religion of Babylon
creeping into the doctrines of the philosophers. It is a well-known fact
that this religion formed a triad, Sin, Shamash, and Ishtar. To the god
of the Moon, regarded as

<span id="page_28">p. 28</span>

the most powerful of the three, and to the Sun had been added Venus, the
most brilliant of the planets. These are the three great rulers of the
zodiac, and their symbols,--crescents, discs, containing a star of four
or six points--appear on the top of the boundary pillars (*kudurru*)
from the fourteenth century B.C. Now the same association is found in an
extract from Democritus, where the Sun, the Moon, and Venus are
distinguished from the other planets. <span
id="fr_23"></span>[1](#fn_23.md) The echo of the same theory extended even
to the Romans. Pliny, in a passage which owes its erudition to some
Chaldean author of the Hellenistic period, <span
id="fr_24"></span>[2](#fn_24.md) remarks that Venus is "the rival of the
Sun and the Moon," and he adds that "alone among the stars she shines
with such brilliance that her rays cast a shadow,"--a statement which
would be absurd in the climate of Rome, but which is strictly correct
under the clear sky of Syria.

Another instance of borrowing is still more obvious. To Babylonian
astrologers Saturn is the "planet of the Sun," he is the "Sun of the
night," <span id="fr_25"></span>[3](#fn_25.md) that is to say, according to
a system of substitutions, of which there are many examples, Saturn
could take in astrological combinations the place of the star of day
when the latter had disappeared. Diodorus was well aware of this fact.
When explaining (II, 30) that the Chaldeans designate the planets as
"the Interpreters" (ἑρμηνεῖς), because by their course they reveal to
men the will of the gods, he adds: "the star which the Greeks name
Kronos they call the 'star of the Sun,' because it is the most
prominent, and gives the most numerous and most important predictions."

Now in the *Epinomis* of Plato,--it matters little in this connection
whether this be a work of the Master himself in his old age, or whether
it was composed by his pupil, Philip of Opus, who after copying the Laws
may have added this appendix,--there is an allusion to this peculiar
doctrine. In the enumeration of the planets which is there made it is
stated that the slowest of them all bears according to some people

<span id="page_29">p. 29</span>

the name of Helios. <span id="fr_26"></span>[1](#fn_26.md) Moreover, the
fact that the writer was acquainted with oriental theories comes out no
less clearly from certain expressions of which he makes use in this
passage, than from the very object which he has in view. He dreamed of a
reconciliation between the cult of Apollo of Delphi, and that of the
sidereal gods which the piety of Syria and Egypt had taught to the
Greeks. According to him it behoved the Greeks to perfect this worship
of the stars, recently introduced into their country, as they had
perfected everything which they had received from the barbarians. These
phrases, in which Hellenic pride is clearly revealed, while at the same
time there slips in a confession of dependence on the foreigner, are
highly characteristic. Their whole significance is apparent now that a
typical detail has revealed to us what the author's astronomical
learning owes to the Chaldeans. Hereafter perhaps it will be proper to
attach some importance to a note preserved in a papyrus of
Herculaneum, <span id="fr_27"></span>[2](#fn_27.md) and due, it seems, to
this very Philip of Opus to whom the composition of the *Epinomis* is
attributed. It would appear that Plato in his old age received a
"Chaldean" guest, who was able to instruct him in the discoveries made
by his compatriots.

It seems to me to be beyond doubt that the influence of oriental
star-worship upon the *Epinomis* was much more extensive than has
hitherto been admitted. It is not from the Pythagoreans that the author
borrows, but, as he himself says, from the Syrians. We find set forth or
indicated in this brief dialogue the fundamental doctrines, of which we
have already seen some expressly attributed to the Chaldeans, while
others we shall find developed in the stellar theology of the Roman
period.

These doctrines are the idea that science in general is a gift of the
gods, and that mathematics in particular were revealed to men by Uranus,
considered as a deity, who caused them to be understood by his
periodical phenomena; the demonstration

<span id="page_30">p. 30</span>

that, whatever may be the opinion of the vulgar, the stars are animated
and divine, and that between these celestial divinities and the earth a
hierarchically organised army of airy spirits acts as intermediary; the
declaration that the most perfect of the sciences is astronomy, which
has become a theology. Man, the author says, attracted by the beauty of
the visible world, does not merely conceive the desire of knowing all
that his nature allows him to apprehend, he rises to a fervent
contemplation of the wondrous spectacle of harmonious movements, which
surpass all choruses in majesty and magnificence. This study, in short,
is inseparable from virtue; this wisdom secures supreme happiness, and
it has as its reward in the next world a life of bliss like that which
the pious astronomer has led on earth, but more perfect, a life in which
he will be entirely absorbed in the contemplation of celestial
splendours, and will attain to supreme felicity.

Truly the *Epinomis* is that which it professes to be: the first gospel
preached to Hellenes of the stellar religion of Asia. The ideas which
are here set forth will not cease to influence the Platonic school. Thus
Xenocrates, to whom astronomy is a sacred science, will develop
demonology, and we shall see how an eclectic, Posidonius, will expand
and exalt these same conceptions.

<span id="img_sep"></span> ![](img/sep.jpg)

But, it will be said, if the Greeks thus bowed to the supremacy of the
sidereal theology of the Chaldeans, how was it that astrology was not
introduced among them? For from the sixth to the fourth century the
whole marvellous development of their philosophy shows that it knows
nothing of cosmic fatalism and stellar divination. Speaking generally,
this assertion is correct, although certain traces of these speculations
are found, as we have seen, in works of the early Pythagoreans, and
recently a Chaldean doctrine has been successfully employed to explain a
passage of Pindar. <span id="fr_28"></span>[1](#fn_28.md) Now, about the
period when Philip of Opus published or wrote the *Epinomis*, another
pupil

}

<span id="page_31">p. 31</span>

of Plato, the astronomer Eudoxus of Cnidos, declared: "No credence
should be given to the Chaldeans, who predict and mark out the life of
every man according to the day of his nativity." <span
id="fr_29"></span>[1](#fn_29.md) Certain modern philologists--who doubtless
look upon Greek history as a kind of experiment in a closed vessel,
which a providence anxious to exclude every disturbing element conducted
for the fullest instruction of the *savants* of the future--certain
philologists, I say, have doubted whether Eudoxus in the fourth century
could really have known and condemned oriental genethlialogy. But like
Eudoxus, Theophrastus, a little later, spoke of it in his treatise on
"Celestial Signs": he regarded with surprise the claim of the Chaldeans
to be able to predict from these signs the. life and death of
individuals, and not merely general phenomena, such as good or bad
weather. <span id="fr_30"></span>[2](#fn_30.md)

The insatiable curiosity of the Greeks, then, did not ignore astrology,
but their sober genius rejected its hazardous doctrines, and their keen
critical sense was able to distinguish the scientific data observed by
the Babylonians from the erroneous conclusions which they derived from
them. It is to their everlasting honour that, amid the tangle of precise
observations and superstitious fancies which made up the priestly lore
of the East, they discovered and utilised the serious elements, while
neglecting the rubbish.

As long as Greece remained Greece, stellar divination gained no hold on
the Greek mind, and all attempts to substitute an astronomic theology
for their immoral but charming idolatry were destined to certain
failure. The efforts of philosophers to impose on their countrymen the
worship of "the great visible gods," as Plato terms them, recoiled
before the might of a tradition supported by the prestige of art and
literature. It was a purely intellectual movement which remained, as it
would seem, without serious practical result. It changed neither popular
nor official worship. The populace continued to pray "κατὰ τὰ πάτρια,"
after the fashion of their ancestors, to old

<span id="page_32">p. 32</span>

protectors of family and city, and the formulary of the old-fashioned
liturgies remained unchanged in spite of all the objections which the
science of the reformers could raise against it.

<span id="img_sep"></span> ![](img/sep.jpg)

But after the conquests of Alexander a great change took place. The
ancient ideal of the Greek republic gave way to the conception of
universal monarchy. Thenceforth municipal cults disappeared before an
international religion. The worship of the stars, common to all the
peoples, was strengthened by everything that weakened the particularism
of cities. In proportion as the idea of "humanity" spread, men were the
more ready to reserve their homage for those celestial powers which
extended their blessings to all mankind, and princes who proclaimed
themselves the rulers of the world, could not be protected save by
cosmopolitan gods.

Thus it was that thinkers agreed more and more in reserving the foremost
place for the sidereal deities. Zeno and his disciples proclaimed their
might still more clearly than the schools of Plato and Aristotle. Since
stoic pantheism represented Reason, which governs all things, as
residing in ethereal Fire, the stars in which the supreme Fire
manifested itself with the greatest force and brilliance, would
necessarily be invested with the loftiest divine qualities. In the same
way the prodigious success attained by the doctrine of Euhemerus
contributed to the exaltation of their power. This doctrine, we know,
regarded the divinities of fable as superior mortals, to whom after
death the gratitude or admiration of the multitude had accorded worship.
In thus attributing to the Olympians of old no longer merely human form
but also human nature, it left to the eternal and incorruptible stars
alone the dignity of original gods, and exalted them in proportion as it
lowered their rivals of bygone days.

Thus the political condition of the world, just as the tendencies of
theology, drew Hellenism towards star-worship. But the interpenetration
of the Orient and Greece which took place in this period, hastened this
religious evolution in a remarkable

<span id="page_33">p. 33</span>

manner. The Stoa, as we shall see, was freely accessible to barbaric
influences, and Euhemerus, we are told, drew his inspiration from
Egyptian theologoumena. But the decisive agency was the contact which
was established in the Seleucid Empire between Hellenic culture and
Babylonian civilisation.

The Chaldeans, whom the policy of the kings of Antioch strove to
conciliate, entered into close relations with the learned men who came
to Asia in the train of their conquerors, and they even proceeded to
carry their precepts throughout the land of Greece. A priest of Bel,
Berosus, established himself about the year 280 in the island of Cos,
and there revealed to his sceptical hearers the contents of the
cuneiform writings accumulated in the archives of his country, annals of
the ancient kings and astrological treatises. Another Chaldean,
Soudines, invited to the court of Attalus I, king of Pergamus, practised
there, about the year 238, the methods of divination in vogue in his
native land, such as inspection of the liver (ἡπατοσκοπία), and he
continued to be an authority frequently quoted by the later
"mathematici." On the other hand, Greek savants of repute, Epigenes of
Byzantium, Apollonius of Myndus, Artemidorus of Parium, declared
themselves the disciples of these same Chaldeans, and boasted of being
instructed in their priestly schools. At the same time centres of Greek
science were established in the heart of Mesopotamia, and in the ancient
observatories of Bel learners were initiated into the methods and
discoveries of the astronomers of Alexandria or Athens. Under the
Seleucids and the early Arsacids Babylon was a hellenised city, as is
proved by the epigraphical discoveries which have been made there. Of
this interpenetration of oriental and occidental learning we can to-day
quote some striking proofs. So it has quite recently been shown that a
series of prognostications derived from earthquakes, thunderstrokes, or
the course of the moon were literally translated from Assyrian texts
into the Greek *Brontologia* and *Selenodromia*. <span
id="fr_31"></span>[1](#fn_31.md) But though the reality of the relation
between the two sciences and pseudo-sciences

<span id="page_34">p. 34</span>

is uncontested and incontestable, there remains the difficulty of
deciding in each case which of the two influenced the other.

Thus it has been maintained that the ancient Babylonians were already
acquainted with the precession of the equinoxes, <span
id="fr_32"></span>[1](#fn_32.md) but an examination of cuneiform tablets
reveals the very important fact that they were ignorant of it at least
up to about the end of the second century B.C. The credit of this
discovery clearly belongs, therefore, to Hipparchus of Nicæa (about
161--126) as tradition asserts, and it is to him that the observatories
of Mesopotamia owed the knowledge of it. But conversely, thanks to the
recent publication of astrological treatises, it is possible to show
that certain discoveries hitherto attributed to Hipparchus owe their
origin in reality to some genuine Chaldeans. In one exceptional case we
can detect a borrowing in the very act and indicate the intermediary who
effected the transfer. Perhaps, then, some details will not be deemed
superfluous here. <span id="fr_33"></span>[2](#fn_33.md)

<span id="img_sep"></span> ![](img/sep.jpg)

The part of astronomy in which Babylonians pushed their investigators
furthest was probably the determination of the course of the moon, which
enabled them to predict the periodic return of eclipses. Undoubtedly
this was one of the most ancient studies to which the people of that
country directed their energies. Sin, the Moon-god, was in their eyes a
more considerable divinity than the Sun, Shamash, himself. Before the
duration of the year was known, the phases of the moon served to measure
time, and to fix the dates of sacred calendars; moreover, the star of
night allowed herself to be observed by the naked eye better than any
other, and it was possible to follow almost continuously her winding
course in the heavens. The experience, extending over thousands of
years, of this priesthood of astrologers, had led them little by little
to construct tables,

<span id="page_35">p. 35</span>

which had attained a high degree of precision at the moment when, under
Alexander, the Greeks entered into direct relations with them. The
remains of these tables have been deciphered and interpreted by F. X.
Kugler, and, astonishing to relate, they have revealed to him a mistake
which was introduced into, and, perpetuated in, the calculations of
modern astronomers. The old notations of the Chaldeans have allowed a
correction of the canons of Oppoizer! About the year 200 before our era
these learned priests had succeeded in determining in advance not only
the dates of the phases and eclipses of the moon, but also the principal
phenomena of the five planets. <span id="fr_34"></span>[1](#fn_34.md)
Although in general inclined to depreciate the value of Babylonian
science, in opposition to those who have unduly exaggerated it, this
most authoritative modern interpreter of it marvels at the aspect of
these great tables with their numerous columns regularly arranged, of
which the figures dovetail into each other like the cogwheels of a
machine, and the arrangement of which is expounded in explanatory notes.
"One does not know," he cries, "which to admire the more: the
extraordinary accuracy of the periods which is implied by the drawing up
of each of the columns of figures, or the ingenuity with which these old
masters contrived to combine all the factors to be considered." Even
before the cuneiform inscriptions had been deciphered, historians
admitted that the Chaldeans had deduced from their empirical
observations, amassed from generation to generation, a theory of the
motions of the moon which influenced the development of Greek doctrines.
Further, an evident proof of this is supplied by the fact that in the
*Almagest* Ptolemy <span id="fr_35"></span>[2](#fn_35.md) quotes, after
Hipparchus, the eclipses of the years 621, 523, 502, 491, 383 B.C.,
observed at Babylon, and the first of these has been found noted in an
Assyrian text. How absolutely the astronomer of Nicæa relied on his
oriental predecessors can be ascertained to-day from some figures.
Ptolemy attributed to Hipparchus an extremely exact calculation of the
lunar periods; but it has been possible to demonstrate that the duration
which he assigns to the various

<span id="page_36">p. 36</span>

months is precisely that which is laid down in the cuneiform tablets,
namely:

|      |             |       |     |      |     |       |                                               |
|------|-------------|-------|-----|------|-----|-------|-----------------------------------------------|
| Mean | synodic     | month | 29  | days | 12  | hours | 44' 31.3"                                     |
| "    | sidereal    | "     | 27  | "    | 7   | "     | 43' 14  "                                     |
| "    | anomalistic | "     | 27  | "    | 13  | "     | 18' 34.9"                                     |
| "    | dracontic   | "     | 27  | "    | 5   | "     |  5' 35.8" <span id="fr_36"></span>[1](#fn_36.md) |

Clearly the priority of discovery belongs to the Orientals, as well as
that of the inequality of the length of the seasons, of which they were
perfectly aware.

But how did these data and these doctrines pass from the banks of the
Euphrates to the Greek cities? Who was the intermediary between
Hipparchus and the priests of Babylon? Documents recently published have
revealed his name. Strabo, speaking of the schools of astronomers called
"Chaldean," which existed in various towns of Mesopotamia, adds: <span
id="fr_37"></span>[2](#fn_37.md) "Mathematicians frequently mention several
of them, as Kidenas, Nabourianos, and Soudines." According to
Pliny <span id="fr_38"></span>[3](#fn_38.md) the same Kidenas had
recognised that Mercury is never more than 23° from the sun. This
Kidenas was probably contemporary with Soudines, who lived in the second
half of the third century before Christ.

Now the astrologer, Vettius Valens, <span id="fr_39"></span>[4](#fn_39.md)
who wrote under the Antonines, tells us that he attempted to make for
himself a canon of the sun and the moon for the purpose of determining
eclipses, but, as time failed him, "he resolved to make use of
Hipparchus for the sun, and Soudines, Kidenas and Apollonius for the
moon . . . putting in their proper places the equinoxes and solstices at
the eighth degree of the signs of the zodiac." Further, a passage in an
anonymous commentary on Ptolemy <span id="fr_40"></span>[5](#fn_40.md)
represents Kidenas as the inventor of an ecliptic period of 251

<span id="page_37">p. 37</span>

lunations (synodic months) and 269 anomalistic revolutions, the
authorship of which was usually attributed to Hipparchus. It appears
from this treatise that Hipparchus did not adopt simultaneously, as was
believed, two ecliptic periods, one large, of 4267 lunations and 4573
anomalistic revolutions, and one small, one seventeenth of the former,
consisting of 251 lunations and 269 anomalistic revolutions, but that he
borrowed this latter from Kidenas and appears merely to have multiplied
it by 17 in order to make it correspond to a nearly exact number of
years, say 4612 sidereal revolutions (345 years) *minus* 7½°.

Now on a lunar table engraved in the second century in cuneiform
characters on 18 columns, a masterpiece of accuracy, can be read the
signature *Ki-din-nu*, and though ordinary scribes add their father's
name, *Ki-din-nu* is without any addition: he is the astronomer whom
every one knew.

Schiaparelli had already suspected the identity of this personage with
the Kidenas of the Greeks. Kugler has definitely proved it, <span
id="fr_41"></span>[1](#fn_41.md) for the equivalence of 251 synodic and 269
anomalistic months, which Ptolemy's commentator attributes to him, is
found precisely stated in this table of Kidinnu, and further the same
table places the equinoxes and the solstices at the 8th degree of the
signs of the zodiac, as did Valens, who quotes the canons of Kidenas. To
Hipparchus, on the contrary, the commencement of spring is the 0° of the
Ram, but the Roman calendars usually adopted the 8th degree in
conformity with the ancient usage of Babylon.

Kidenas or Kidinnu, then, belongs to that group of hellenised Chaldeans
of whom Berosus is the most illustrious representative, and who in the
third century before our era devoted themselves to the task of rendering
accessible to the Greeks the treasures of knowledge which were contained
in the cuneiform documents amassed in the libraries of their native
land. On these traditional data he based the hypothesis of a new
ecliptic period more correct than that of his Chaldean predecessors,
which was employed by Hipparchus and afterwards by Ptolemy. The very
quotations which are made from his works by Western writers prove that
he had them translated into

<span id="page_38">p. 38</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Greek and that he
thus enriched Hellenic astronomy with these lunar canons, to which the
observations taken at Babylon, extending over a long period of
centuries, had given an admirable precision.

<span id="img_sep"></span> ![](img/sep.jpg)

Thus we see critical researches gradually determining the extent of the
debt which Greece owes to Babylon, and substituting palpable realities
for the huge and shadowy phantoms which wandered in the pre-historic
twilight. The influence of the old oriental civilisation was not
exercised solely on the domain of science, but also of literature. Prof.
Diels of Berlin has recently pointed out <span
id="fr_42"></span>[1](#fn_42.md) how the often satirical tales, in which
trees and plants appear, belong to a class of fables popularised in
Assyria before they were repeated by Callimachus in his *Iambics* and by
the successors of Æsop. Further, the recent discovery of an Aramaic
manuscript of the fifth century at Elephantine has enabled us to show
how the romance of Akichar passed from the banks of the Euphrates to the
Jewish communities of Palestine and Egypt (to which it furnished the
motive of the book of Tobit) and reached Greece, where Theophrastus
adopted it and immortalised the wise Akicharos. But above all, Babylon
was to the men of old the mother of astronomy, as of star-worship. It is
in this department more than all others that it is possible to show how
the Greeks profited from the learned theories which had been formulated,
and from the positive data which had been slowly accumulated by these
ancient priests of Mesopotamia

*Longa per assiduam complexi saecula curam*. <span
id="fr_43"></span>[2](#fn_43.md)

The constructive logic of the Greeks, combining with the patient labours
of the indigenous race, produced in those days on the banks of the
Euphrates an intellectual movement, too little known, which would
perhaps have attained to the glory of Alexandrine science, if it had not
been lamentably arrested in the latter half of the second century by the
ravages of the

<span id="page_39">p. 39</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Parthian invasion
and the sack of Babylon. The Chaldeans themselves, emancipated from
tradition, discussed freely the principles of the universe, and of the
rival sects, which then sprang up at Borsippa, Orchoe, and elsewhere,
some went so far as to reject as mendacious the very astrology which had
been elaborated by their ancestors. <span id="fr_44"></span>[1](#fn_44.md)
The most remarkable representative of this rationalistic movement is
Seleucus of Seleucia, who may be either a Greek emigrant or a hellenised
native. Giving up the firmament of primitive cosmogonies, he opened the
infinite spaces of a limitless universe to the courses of the stars.
Recurring to a bold hypothesis of Aristarchus of Samos, and advancing
new arguments in its support, he showed that the sun is the centre of
the world, and that the earth has a double motion, revolving round the
sun and spinning on its own axis; at the same time he offered a better
explanation than any one had previously propounded of the movement of
the tides, which no doubt he had observed in the Persian Gulf, by
referring them to the phases of the moon. Copernicus, who by the
formulation of his heliocentric theory produced "the greatest revolution
in the history of knowledge," seems to have been ignorant even of the
name of his distant forerunner.

But the scientific rationalism of this Galileo of antiquity was destined
to be condemned. It was opposed by the force of a thousand-year-old
tradition, the anxious superstition of the mob, the haughty convictions
and temporal interests of a powerful sacerdotal caste. The future
belonged to a compromise, which, while respecting those ancient beliefs
to which the majority of mankind was invincibly attached, would satisfy
the demands of a more comprehensive intelligence. This conciliatory
formula was discovered by stoicism. Everywhere it devoted itself to the
task of justifying popular worships, sacred narratives, and ritual
observances. In Greece, it was able without much difficulty to come to
terms with cults more formalistic than doctrinal, more civic than moral,
in which no authority demanded assent to definite dogmas. A system of
accommodating allegories could readily put on gods or myths a physical,
ethical, or psychological interpretation, which

<span id="page_40">p. 40</span>

reconciled them with the cosmology or ethics of the Porch. In the East,
where more theological religions always implied a more definite
conception of the world, the task appeared much less easy. Yet certain
profound affinities reconciled stoicism with Chaldean doctrines. Whether
these did or did not contribute to the development of the ideas of Zeno,
they offer a singular analogy to his pantheism, which represented
ethereal Fire as the primordial principle and regarded the stars as the
purest manifestation of its power. Stoicism conceived the world as a
great organism, the "sympathetic" forces of which acted and re-acted
necessarily upon one another, and was bound in consequence to attribute
a predominating influence to the celestial bodies, the greatest and the
most powerful of all in nature, and its Εἱμαρμένη or Destiny, connected
with the infinite succession of causes, readily agreed also with the
determinism of the Chaldeans, founded, as it was, upon the regularity of
the sidereal movements. Thus it was that this philosophy made remarkable
conquests not only in Syria but as far as Mesopotamia. I recall only the
fact that one of the masters of the Porch, the successor of Zeno of
Tarsus at Athens, was Diogenes of Babylon (*circa* 240-150) and that,
later on, another distinguished Stoic, Archidemus, founded a famous
school at Babylon itself (second century B.C.). We know too little of
their theories to determine what place was held in them by the beliefs
of the country of their origin or of their adoption. We only perceive
the result of this movement of ideas which was to lead to the entry of
astrology and star-worship into the philosophy of Zeno. For us the
person who almost alone represents this fusion of East and West is
Posidonius of Apamea, of whom we shall speak in our next lecture, <span
id="fr_45"></span>[1](#fn_45.md) but the preparations for this fusion were
undoubtedly made by his predecessors. It is remarkable that the great
astronomer, Hipparchus, whose scientific theories, as we have just seen,
are directly influenced by Chaldean learning, was also a convinced
supporter of one of the leading doctrines of stellar religion.
"Hipparchus," says Pliny, <span id="fr_46"></span>[2](#fn_46.md) "will
never receive all

<span id="page_41">p. 41</span>

the praise he deserves, since no one has better established the
relationship between man and the stars, or shown more clearly that our
souls are particles of heavenly fire." In this passage we see affirmed
as early as the second century before our era a conception, the
development of which we follow in the sidereal mysticism of the Roman
period. <span id="fr_47"></span>[1](#fn_47.md)

Hipparchus saw the ruin of the country where was born that science which
he illumined. Invaded by the Parthians about the year 140 B.C.,
recaptured by Antiochus VII of Syria in 130, reconquered soon afterwards
by King Phraates, Mesopotamia was terribly ravaged for more than a
quarter of a century. Babylon, sacked and burned in 125, never recovered
her former splendour: a progressive decay brought on her a death by slow
consumption. The new Iranian princes evinced no solicitude for the
culture of Semitic priests. The vast brick-built temples, when the hand
of the restorer was withdrawn, crumbled into dust, one by one were
extinguished the lights of a civilisation which extended backwards for
forty centuries, and of the famous cities of Sumer and Accad there
survived little but the name. The last astronomical tablet in cuneiform
characters with which we are acquainted, is dated 8 B.C., and
Strabo, <span id="fr_48"></span>[2](#fn_48.md) speaking of Babylon about
the same period, applies to it a verse from a comic poet: "a mighty
desert--such is the mighty town."

Henceforth it is far from their native land, in Syria, in Egypt, and in
the West, that we must follow the development of the religious ideas
derived from the Chaldea of antiquity.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_20"></span>[25:1](argr07.htm#fr_20.md) Γνώμων, Herod., ii,
109.

<span id="fn_21"></span>[26:1](argr07.htm#fr_21.md) Kugler, *Im Bannkreis
Babels*, 1910, p. 116 ss. See for other proofs my paper, *Babylon and
die Griechische Astrologie* (Neue Jahrb. f. das klass. Altertum, xxvii),
(1911), 1 ss.

<span id="fn_22"></span>[26:2](argr07.htm#fr_22.md) The "Golden Number" of
the ecclesiastical calendar indicates the number of any year in the
cycle of nineteen years which brings round the phases of the moon at the
same dates. The dates of these phases in any year are thus the same as
in other years which have the same "Golden Number."

<span id="fn_23"></span>[28:1](argr07.htm#fr_23.md) Diels, *Doxographi
Graeci*, p. 344, 16 = *Fragm. der Vorsokratiker*, p. 366, 22.

<span id="fn_24"></span>[28:2](argr07.htm#fr_24.md) Plin., *Nat. Hist.*,
ii, 36.

<span id="fn_25"></span>[28:3](argr07.htm#fr_25.md) Jastrow, *Revue
d’Assyriologie*, vii, 1910, ss. p. 163

<span id="fn_26"></span>[29:1](argr07.htm#fr_26.md) As a matter of fact,
certain copyists, not understanding the meaning of this identification,
have inserted as a correction "of Kronos," but the reading of the best
manuscripts is Ἡλίου not Κρόνου, as has been observed by Bidez, *Rev. de
Philol.*, xxix (1905), p. 319.

<span id="fn_27"></span>[29:2](argr07.htm#fr_27.md) *Academicorum Phil.
Ind. Hercul*., ed. Mekler, p. 13, col. iii, 36.

<span id="fn_28"></span>[30:1](argr07.htm#fr_28.md) Franz Boll, *Neue
Jahrb. für das klass. Altertum*, xxi (1908), p. 119.

<span id="fn_29"></span>[31:1](argr07.htm#fr_29.md) Cic., *De Div.*, ii,
42, 87.

<span id="fn_30"></span>[31:2](argr07.htm#fr_30.md) Procl., *In Tim*., iii,
151, 1 (Diehl). On Theophrastus' translation of the tale of Akichar, see
below, [p. 38](#page_38.md).

<span id="fn_31"></span>[33:1](argr07.htm#fr_31.md) Bezold and Boll,
*Reflexe astrol. Keilinschriften bei Griechischen Schriftstellern*
(Abhandl. Akad. Heidelberg), 1911.

<span id="fn_32"></span>[34:1](argr07.htm#fr_32.md) See above, Lecture I,
[p. 3](argr06.htm#page_3.md).

<span id="fn_33"></span>[34:2](argr07.htm#fr_33.md) See my paper *Babylon
und die Griech. Astron.*, p. 6 ss., where the texts are fully given.

<span id="fn_34"></span>[35:1](argr07.htm#fr_34.md) See above, Lecture I,
p. 9.

<span id="fn_35"></span>[35:2](argr07.htm#fr_35.md) Ptol., Syntax., v, 14;
iv, 8, 11.

<span id="fn_36"></span>[36:1](argr07.htm#fr_36.md) The durations
calculated by modern astronomers are:

|       |     |      |     |       |     |       |
|-------|-----|------|-----|-------|-----|-------|
| \(1\) | 29  | days | 12  | hours | 44' | 2.9"  |
| \(2\) | 27  | "    | 7   | "     | 43' | 11.5° |
| \(3\) | 27  | "    | 13  | "     | 18' | 39.3" |
| \(4\) | 27  | "    | 5   | "     | 5'  | 36"   |

<span id="fn_37"></span>[36:2](argr07.htm#fr_37.md) Strab., xvi, 1, 6, p.
639 C.

<span id="fn_38"></span>[36:3](argr07.htm#fr_38.md) Plin., *Nat. Hist*.,
39.

<span id="fn_39"></span>[36:4](argr07.htm#fr_39.md) Vett. Val., *Anthol*.,
ix, p. 353, 22, ed. Kroll.

<span id="fn_40"></span>[36:5](argr07.htm#fr_40.md) Published, *Cat. Codd.
Astr.* VIII, part ii, p. 125.

<span id="fn_41"></span>[37:1](argr07.htm#fr_41.md) Kugler, *Im Bannkreis
Babels*, 1910, p. 122.

<span id="fn_42"></span>[38:1](argr07.htm#fr_42.md) Diels, *Orientalische
Fabeln im Griechischen Gewande* (Internation. Wochenschrift f. Wiss., 6
Aug., 1910).

<span id="fn_43"></span>[38:2](argr07.htm#fr_43.md) Manil., i, 54.

<span id="fn_44"></span>[39:1](argr07.htm#fr_44.md) Strab., xvi, 1, 6.

<span id="fn_45"></span>[40:1](argr07.htm#fr_45.md) See below, Lecture III,
[p. 47](argr08.htm#page_47.md).

<span id="fn_46"></span>[40:2](argr07.htm#fr_46.md) Plin., *Nat. Hist.*,
ii, 26, 95.

<span id="fn_47"></span>[41:1](argr07.htm#fr_47.md) See below, Lecture V.

<span id="fn_48"></span>[41:2](argr07.htm#fr_48.md) Strab., xvi, t, 5:
Ἑρημία μεγάλη ᾽στιν ἠ Μεγάλη πόλις.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Lecture III. The Dissemination in the West](argr08.md)
