[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sky Lore](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](argr10.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0027P88F0/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Astrology and Religion Among the Greeks and Romans*, by Franz Cumont,
\[1912\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_92">p. 92</span>

### LECTURE VI. Eschatology

In the previous lecture we showed how, to the astronomer theologians,
contemplation of the sky had become the source of a mystic union with
the divine stars. The sublime joys of ecstasy, which brings man into
communion with the sidereal gods, give him but a foretaste of the bliss
which is in store for him when after death his soul, ascending to the
celestial spheres, shall penetrate all their mysteries. The transient
exaltation, which illumines his intelligence here below, is a dim
foreshadowing of the intoxication which will be wrought in him by the
immediate prospect of the stars and the full comprehension of truth. The
most ideal pursuits of the sage in this world are but a faint
adumbration of a blessedness which will be perfected in the life to
come.

Thus astral mysticism based upon a psychological experience the
construction of a complete doctrine of immortality. It glorified its
ideal of earthly life and projected it into the life beyond. These
ideas, as they spread throughout the Roman world, could not fail to
modify profoundly the whole conception of man's destiny. In to-day's
lecture we shall devote ourselves to exhibiting this transformation.

<span id="img_sep"></span> ![](img/sep.jpg)

At the beginning of the Empire the ancient beliefs concerning existence
beyond the grave, the idea that the dead man lived a gloomy life in the
tomb, sustained by the funeral offerings of his descendants, retained
hardly any influence, and the mythological tales about the Styx,
Charon's barque, and the punishments inflicted in the nether world no
longer obtained any credence. Philosophical criticism had shown the
absurdity of these lugubrious chimeras. Greek philosophy in general
aimed at realising the *summum bonum* in this world. Of the two great
systems which were predominant at Rome, one

<span id="page_93">p. 93</span>

flatly denied a future life. It is well known that Epicurus taught that
the soul is composed of atoms and is dissolved with the body, and there
is no doctrine of the Master on which his disciples insist with more
complacent assurance. Lucretius <span id="fr_104"></span>[1](#fn_104.md)
praises him for having driven from men's minds "this dread of Acheron
which troubles the life of man to its inmost depths." The other great
philosophical school, Stoicism, showed considerable hesitation
concerning the fate in store for our souls. Its various representatives
held different views on this point. Panætius, the friend of the Scipios,
one of the writers who contributed most to win Rome over to the tenets
of the Porch, resolutely declined to believe in a survival of the
individual. In reality it is in this world that true Stoicism places the
realisation of its ideal. For it the aim of existence is not the
preparation for death but the attainment of perfect virtue. By giving
freedom from the passions, virtue confers independence and felicity. The
sage, a happy being, is a god on earth, and heaven can offer nothing
more to him. In this system eschatological theories had only a secondary
importance, and that explains their variations.

The negative point of view adopted by Panætius is that of the majority,
perhaps, of the theorists of astrology. Among those who prided
themselves on philosophy, many denied immortality or at least doubted
it, as for instance Ptolemy, who was influenced by the ideas of the
Peripatetics, or Vettius Valens, who represents purer Stoicism.
According to them the divine spark which animated bodies, became merged
after death in the cosmic fires, from which it had issued, without
preserving any individuality. From death, then, they expected nothing
but liberation from Destiny, of which they were the bondsmen here below;
henceforth they were freed from those cruel necessities and pitiless
vicissitudes to which those beings are subject who live under the
planetary vaults. Their conception of existence and their highest
aspirations were those to which the most antique of modern poets has
given forcible

<span id="page_94">p. 94</span>

expression; I mean Leconte de Lisle, who, adopting a definition of
Alfred de Vigny, declared that life is "a sombre incident between two
endless periods of sleep." His musical and despondent apostrophe is well
known <span id="fr_105"></span>[1](#fn_105.md):

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

"Et toi, divine Mort, où tout rentre et s’efface,  
Accueille tes enfants dans ton sein étoilé,  
Affranchis nous du temps, du nombre, et de l’espace,  
Et rends nous le repose que la vie a troublé." <span
id="fr_106"></span>[2](#fn_106.md)

</div>

This pessimism, which regarded annihilation as a blessing, might be
accepted by certain spirits and sometimes preached with a kind of
passion, as by Pliny in a famous confession of faith. <span
id="fr_107"></span>[3](#fn_107.md) But the majority, without venturing to
admit the certainty of a future life, clung to it as a comfortable
hypothesis entertained by certain thinkers.

We find it hard to resign ourselves to complete annihilation; even when
reason acquiesces in the destruction of our transitory being,
subconsciously we protest against it. The deep instinct of
self-preservation drives man to desire a continuance of life, and
feeling revolts against the anguish of an irrevocable separation,
against the final loss of all one loves. Moreover in imperial Rome there
were so many unpunished crimes, so much undeserved suffering, that men
naturally took refuge in the hope of a happier future which would repair
all the in-justices of a sorrowful present. This is the explanation of
the ever-increasing triumph of new theories concerning a life to come.
To the scepticism and the negative views which were prevalent at the end
of the Republic, at least in intellectual circles, were opposed
doctrines taught by the professors of the theology which found in
Posidonius its most illustrious exponent. A Stoic, he combines the
teaching of the Porch with

<span id="page_95">p. 95</span>

the idealism of Plato, who held that the soul, being an immaterial
essence, must rise to a fairer world. But he welcomes also, and above
all, the religious traditions of the Syrians, of which he is to be the
eloquent propagandist.

All Oriental mysteries profess to reveal to their adepts the secret of
attaining to a blessed immortality. In place of the shifting and
contradictory opinions of philosophers concerning the fate of man after
death, these religions offered a certainty based on a divine revelation
and corroborated by the belief of countless generations which had clung
to it. The despairing world eagerly welcomed these promises, and
philosophy, under-going a transformation, joined with the ancient
beliefs of the East to give to the Empire a new eschatology.

In point of fact, the different cults conceived blessedness under very
different forms, some of them gross enough. To the followers of Bacchus
or of the Phrygian Sabazius drunkenness is divine possession. The
devotee was to be admitted to the feast of the gods, there to rejoice
with them for ever in a state of pleasant intoxication. The Alexandrine
mysteries of Isis and Serapis diffused a less material conception of
future happiness. The dead will descend to the nether world in full
possession of his body as well as of his soul, and will enjoy an eternal
rapture in contemplating face to face the ineffable beauty of the gods,
whose equal he has become. But of the various beliefs which secured
adepts in the Roman world, none was to become so influential as that of
sidereal eschatology. This is the purest and most elevated doctrine
which can be put to the credit of ancient paganism, and it was to
establish a firm hold on the Western mind.

We shall attempt to show how it developed, by whom and when it was
disseminated, and what different forms it assumed in the Græco-Roman
world.

<span id="img_sep"></span> ![](img/sep.jpg)

Certain beliefs which are found, side by side with many others, among
primitive peoples, regard the spirits of the dead as departing to
inhabit the moon or the sun, or even fancy that their evergrowing host
forms the multitude of stars or crowds

<span id="page_96">p. 96</span>

the long track of the Milky Way. This very ancient idea received a new
significance when philosophers, as far back as Heraclitus, taught that
the soul is of the same nature as the ether, which is, as it were, the
soul of the universe. Just as the one causes our bodies to move, the
other, they said, caused the stars to fly across the spaces of the
heavens. At death the body fell to dust and was reunited with the earth,
but the glowing breath which had animated it, ascended to the luminous
fluid that extended above the clouds, and coalesced with this subtle
air, which was the source of all life. The official epitaph on the
Athenians who fell at Potidæa in 432 B.C., expresses the conviction that
the ether has received into its bosom the souls of these heroes as the
earth has received their bodies. <span id="fr_108"></span>[1](#fn_108.md)

There we have an opinion wide-spread in the fifth century from one end
of the Hellenic world to the other. In opposition, then, to the views of
the Homeric age and of popular belief; these doctrines taught that the
abode of souls was neither the tomb nor the nether realm of Pluto, but
the upper zone of the universe. Some, with greater exactitude, made them
the companions of the stars, whose divinity philosophers devoted
themselves to proving. <span id="fr_109"></span>[2](#fn_109.md) The two
ideas are closely related, for the affinity of gods and men is an
eminently Greek idea. Some sects of mystics--Orphic or
Pythagorean--taught that the spirits of the dead departed to dwell in
the moon, or to shine among the constellations. Thus Aristophanes <span
id="fr_110"></span>[3](#fn_110.md) transforms the Pythagorean poet, Ion of
Chios, the friend of Sophocles, into the morning star. In Plato's view
souls which have made a good use of their lives return to inhabit the
heavenly bodies, which served as their dwelling-place before birth, and
there partake of the bliss of a divine existence.

Moreover, the Greeks, as we have seen, <span
id="fr_111"></span>[4](#fn_111.md) had long before told how certain heroes
of fable had been transported to heaven in reward for their exploits.
Hercules, Perseus and Andromeda, the Dioscuri Castor and Pollux, and
many others had thus been

<span id="page_97">p. 97</span>

metamorphosed into constellations. "Catasterism" forms the *dénoûment*
of a number of mythological stories. Hence it did not appear bold to
assign to eminent men of the day the same destiny as to the heroes of
the past, and no one saw anything offensive in the supposition that
their divine spirits took a place in the sky. The astronomer Conon did
not hesitate even to recognise there the lock of hair which queen
Berenice had dedicated to Aphrodite, and which became thenceforth a new
cluster of stars. All persons, animals, and objects whose image men
professed to find in the celestial vault, thus had their legends which
connected them with some mythological episode or some historical event.

These doctrines, which in this way gradually spread over classical
Greece, were to be taken up and transformed by the Stoics. To the
disciples of Zeno the soul of man is a portion of that divine fire in
which their pantheistic naturalism saw at once the productive force and
the intelligence of the world. Human reason, a particle of this
universal reason, was conceived as a breath, a fiery emanation. Now the
stars are the most brilliant manifestation of the cosmic fire. The
philosophy of the Porch, then, favoured the belief that the soul was
united with the heavenly bodies by a special relation, and thus Stoicism
was readily reconciled with astrology. It is a remarkable fact that this
doctrine was defended, in the second century before our era, notably by
Hipparchus, who was not only one of the great astronomers but a
convinced adept of astrological theories, and, as we have seen, <span
id="fr_112"></span>[1](#fn_112.md) Pliny applauds him warmly for having
proved better than any one else that man is related to the stars and
that our souls are "a part of the heaven."

Yet the pure Stoics, as we said above, while fully admitting the
continued existence of this divine essence which warms and governs the
body, inclined to the belief that after death it was reabsorbed into the
universal fire without retaining any individuality. But very early this
philosophy was led to make concessions to popular beliefs. Certain of
its professors sought to bring the new principles which were formulated
in the sphere of physics and psychology into agreement with the mystic
ideas

<span id="page_98">p. 98</span>

propagated by the religious sects which began to spread from Asia over
the Græco-Latin world. Posidonius, let us recall the fact, was the most
active agent in bringing about this syncretism between East and West,
and his pupil Cicero gives us in the *Dream of Scipio* the earliest
statement of this eschatology at Rome: The souls of those who have
deserved immortality will not descend to the depths of the earth, they
will rise again to the starry spheres. We shall return several times to
this remarkable *Dream*.

A number of inscriptions attest the extent to which this belief had
spread by the first century before our era. There is an unlimited choice
of examples to quote. Thus an epitaph on a girl thirteen years old
discovered in the island of Thasos <span id="fr_113"></span>[1](#fn_113.md)
says: "In this tomb lies the body of a young maiden, *anthophoros*
(flower-bearer) of Ceres, carried off by the merciless Fates. But her
soul by the good-will of the Immortals dwells among the stars and takes
its place in the sacred choir of the blest." Here is a Latin
epitaph, <span id="fr_114"></span>[2](#fn_114.md) one among many of the
same kind: "My divine soul shall not descend to the shades; heaven and
the stars have borne me away; earth holds my body, and this stone an
empty name." Epigraphy proves that these ideas of a future life became
gradually prevalent. They were more and more generally accepted under
the Roman Empire in proportion as Oriental religions acquired more
authority, and in the last days of paganism they exerted a
preponderating influence.

<span id="img_sep"></span> ![](img/sep.jpg)

After this rapid sketch of the historical development of sidereal
eschatology, we shall attempt to trace the outlines of the doctrine and
to show its varieties.

We shall have to examine four points:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

1\. Who obtains astral immortality?

2\. How does the soul ascend to heaven?

3\. Where is the abode of the blest to be found?

4\. How is the blessedness that is vouchsafed to them conceived?

</div>

1\. *Who is it that wins the boon of this sidereal immortality*?

It appears certain that in the East it was at first reserved for

<span id="page_99">p. 99</span>

those monarchs who, while still on earth, were raised by the reverence
of their subjects above their fellow-men and put almost, or altogether,
on a level with the heavenly powers. Traces of this primitive conception
survived even at Rome. According to a tradition which is echoed by
Manilius, <span id="fr_115"></span>[1](#fn_115.md) Nature first revealed
her mysteries to the minds of kings, whose lofty thoughts reach the
summit of the heavens. Another doctrine was also taught, that the divine
souls of sovereigns come from a higher place than those of other men,
that the greater a man's dignity, the greater is the dower he gets from
heaven. But, in a general way, the rites employed to ensure immortality
to kings by putting them on a level with the gods, were by degrees
extended to important members of their entourage. This was a sort of
privilege, of posthumous nobility, which was conferred on great
ministers of state, or which they usurped, long before the common crowd
of the dead attained it. Such is the idea to which Cicero gives
expression in the *Dream of Scipio* <span
id="fr_116"></span>[2](#fn_116.md): "To all those who have saved,
succoured, or exalted their fatherland, there is assigned a fixed place
in heaven, where they will enjoy everlasting bliss, for it is from
heaven that they who guide and preserve states have descended, thither
to reascend." This is the republican paraphrase of the doctrine of the
divinity of kings. But if an ex-consul is thus willing to accord
apotheosis to statesmen, philosophers claim it for sages, men of letters
for great poets, and artists for creative geniuses. Here the old Greek
worship of heroes, combined with belief in "catasterism," comes in to
enlarge the narrow conception of monarchy. Hermes Trismegistus <span
id="fr_117"></span>[3](#fn_117.md) taught that there were different kinds
of royal souls, for there is a royalty of spirit, a royalty of art, a
royalty of science, even a royalty of bodily strength. All exceptional
men resemble the gods, and the people were loath to believe that they
perished for ever. Some modern writers have shared this sentiment. "That
a Shah of Persia or a critic of Milan," said Carducci, who had suffered
at the hands of the latter class, "dies irrevocably, I believe, and I
congratulate

<span id="page_100">p. 100</span>

myself on the belief. But that Mazzini or that Dante Alighieri is
utterly dead, I am entirely unconvinced."

Among those heroes whose merits had opened to them the gates of
heaven,--"virtus recludens immeritis mori caelum," as Horace puts
it, <span id="fr_118"></span>[1](#fn_118.md)--the military monarchies of
the East placed in the forefront the warriors who had died sword in hand
in defence of their country, or rather of their king. This doctrine,
which was deep-rooted particularly in Syria, has been preserved, as is
well known, in Islam. But, side by side with these valiant soldiers,
pious priests also were judged to merit immortality, or rather they
adjudged it to themselves. Who could be more worthy to mount to the
stars than those who, while yet on earth, lived in their society and in
contemplation of them? Then, when Oriental mysteries spread, they all
professed to prolong the existence of the initiated beyond the hour of
death appointed by Destiny and to exempt them from the fatal law imposed
on mankind. Participation in the occult ceremonies of worship becomes an
infallible means of securing salvation. The gods welcomed amongst them
the faithful who had served them fervently and had purified themselves
by the scrupulous performance of rites.

But the demands of a less exclusive morality did not allow happiness
beyond the grave to be secured as the reward of sectarian piety. Side by
side with devotional observances the practice of more essentially human
virtues was demanded. The purity necessary to salvation, which was
originally ritual purity, now became spiritual. Though priests doubtless
insisted strongly on the fulfilment of religious duties, the more
philosophical theologians looked, above all, to the psychological
conditions necessary for translation to heaven. We have indicated in
dealing with the subject of ecstasy,  <span
id="fr_119"></span>[2](#fn_119.md)--and we shall return to it shortly,--how
souls made gross by carnal passions were unable to ascend to the abode
of the gods of light. For those who have not kept themselves pure
throughout their lives, a posthumous purification is indispensable.

<span id="img_sep"></span> ![](img/sep.jpg)

<span id="page_101">p. 101</span>

2\. This brings us to the second question which we have set before
ourselves: *How did souls rise to the stars*?

It may be said that originally they made use of every method of
locomotion: they ascended to heaven on foot, on horseback, in carriages,
and they even had recourse to aviation. Among the ancient Egyptians the
firmament was conceived as being so close to the mountains of the earth
that it was possible to climb up to it with the aid of a ladder.
Although the stars had been relegated to. an infinite distance in space,
the ladder still survived in Roman paganism as an amulet and as a
symbol. Many people continued to place in tombs a small bronze ladder
which recalled the naive beliefs of distant ages; and in the mysteries
of Mithra a ladder of seven steps, made of seven different metals, still
symbolised the passage of the soul across the planetary spheres.

Though it had become difficult to reach heaven on foot, it was still
possible to get there on horseback,--on the back of a winged horse. Thus
the large cameo of Paris called "The Apotheosis of Augustus," represents
a prince of his house, Germanicus or Marcellus, borne by a "Pegasus,"
which doubtless has no connection with Bellerophon's mount. Sometimes a
griffin is preferred to Pegasus: the monster flies heaven-wards carrying
on its sturdy back the deceased raised to the level of the gods. The
dead, however, more frequently travelled in a car,--the car of the Sun.
The idea that the divine charioteer drives a team across the heavenly
fields existed in very early times in Syria as well as in Babylon,
Persia, and Greece. The horses of fire and the chariot of fire, which
carried up the prophet Elijah in a whirlwind, are very probably the
horses and chariot of the Sun. In the same way, when Mithra's mission on
earth was fulfilled, he had been conveyed in the chariot of Helios to
the celestial spheres over the ocean, and the happy lot which the hero
had won for himself he granted also to his followers. The Emperors in
particular were commonly reputed to become companions of the Sun-god
after death, as they had been his *protégés* in life, and to be
conducted by him in his chariot up to the summit of the eternal vaults.

Finally, there is a very wide-spread belief of Syrian origin

<span id="page_102">p. 102</span>

that souls fly to heaven on the back of an eagle. <span
id="fr_120"></span>[1](#fn_120.md) According to the story, Etana in
Babylon, like Ganymede in Greece, had been carried off in this way. The
pious shared this happy lot. This is why the eagle is used as the
ordinary decorative motif on sepulchral *stelae* at Hierapolis, the holy
city of the great Syrian goddess, and it appears with the same meaning
in the West. At the funeral rites of Emperors at Rome there was always
fastened to the top of the pyre on which the corpse was to be consumed,
an eagle, which was supposed to bear aloft the monarch's soul, and art
frequently represents the busts of the Cæsars resting on an eagle in the
act of taking flight, by way of suggesting their apotheosis. The reason
is that in the East the eagle is the bird of the Baals, solar gods, and
it carries to its master those who have been his servants in the world
below.

All these supposed methods of reaching heaven are very primitive: they
start from the supposition that a *load* has to be carried; they hardly
imply a separation of body and soul, and they are anterior to the
distinctions which philosophers established between different parts of
man's being. They are religious survivals of very ancient conceptions,
which only vulgar minds still interpreted literally.

The same idea is involved when magicians by secret processes professed
to assure the credulous of the possibility of raising themselves
upwards. If we are to believe Arnobius, <span
id="fr_121"></span>[2](#fn_121.md) they asserted that they could cause
wings to grow from the backs of their dupes, so as to enable them to fly
up to the stars. One of the wonders which miracle-mongers most
frequently boasted of working was that of soaring up into the air. The
phenomena of levitation are produced at all periods. The power which
magic professed to bestow on its adepts, is merely one particular
application of this art to eschatology or rather to deification
(ἀπαθανατισμός). Of this the papyrus erroneously called a "Mithraic
liturgy" is the most typical example. <span
id="fr_122"></span>[3](#fn_122.md)

These mechanical means of raising oneself, body and soul,

<span id="page_103">p. 103</span>

to the starry vault could still be recognised by superstition, which
picks up all the ideas that have dropped out in the evolution of
beliefs. They carry us back to an extremely low stage of religion, as we
said. Hence theologians no longer accepted them save as symbols. Other
doctrines of a more advanced character were developed, and these
constituted the true teaching of the great Oriental mysteries, just as
they had secured the adhesion of thinking men. They connected the ascent
of the soul after death with physical and ethical theories, and thus
caused sidereal immortality to enter into the order of the universe.
They either appealed to *solar attraction*, or based their doctrine on
the actual *nature of the soul*.

The Pythagoreans already believed that the glittering particles of dust
which danced ceaselessly in a sunbeam (ξύσματα), were souls descending
from the ether, borne on the wings of light. They added that this beam,
passing through the air and through water down to its depths, gave life
to all things here below. This idea persisted under the Empire in the
theology of the mysteries. Souls descended upon the earth,
[and](errata.htm#0.md) reascended after death toward the sky, thanks to the
rays of the sun, which served as the means of transport. On Mithraic
bas-reliefs, one of the seven rays which surround the head of *Sol
Invictus*, is seen disproportionately prolonged towards the dying Bull
in order to awake the new life that is to spring from the death of the
cosmogonic animal. But this ancient belief was brought into connection
with a general theory held by the Chaldeans. <span
id="fr_123"></span>[1](#fn_123.md) We saw that in the eyes of astrologers
the human soul was an igneous essence, of the same nature as the
celestial fires. The radiant sun continually caused particles of his
resplendent orb to descend into the bodies which he called to life.
Conversely, when death has dissolved the elements of which the human
being is composed, and the soul has quitted the fleshly envelope in
which it was imprisoned, the sun elates it again to himself. Just as his
ardent heat causes all material substances to rise from the earth, so it
draws to him again the invisible essence that dwells in us. He is the
Ἀναγωγεύς, "he who brings up from below," who attracts the spirit out of
the

<span id="page_104">p. 104</span>

flesh that defiles it. By a series of emissions and absorptions he in
turn sends his burning emanations into bodies at birth and after death
causes them to reascend into his bosom.

In this theory it is to the power of the sun, the great cosmic divinity,
that the ascension of the soul is due. According to another doctrine
mentioned above, which we are now going to consider more closely, the
cause of this ascension is the physical nature of the soul.

This doctrine is set forth with great precision by Cicero in the
*Tusculan Disputations*, <span id="fr_124"></span>[1](#fn_124.md) doubtless
after Posidonius. The soul is a fiery breath (*anima inflammata*)--that
is to say, its substance is the lightest in this universe composed of
four elements. It necessarily, therefore, has a tendency to rise, for it
is warmer and more subtle than the gross and dense air which encircles
the earth. It will the more easily cleave this heavy atmosphere, since
nothing moves more rapidly than a spirit. It must, therefore, in its
continuous ascent, pass through that zone of the sky where gather the
clouds and the rain, and where rule the winds, which, by reason of
exhalations from the earth, is damp and foggy. When finally it reaches
the spaces filled by an air that is rarefied and warmed by the sun, it
finds elements similar to its own substance, and, ceasing to ascend, it
is maintained in equilibrium. Henceforth it dwells in these regions,
which are its natural home, continually vivified by the same principles
that feed the everlasting fires of the stars.

This theory made it easier than the previous theory had done to
establish a firm connexion between ethical beliefs concerning future
destiny and physical theories about the constitution of the universe and
the nature of man. We have seen <span id="fr_125"></span>[2](#fn_125.md)
that virtue was conceived as liberation from the dominion of the flesh;
the soul is never purely spiritual or immaterial, but when it abandons
itself to the passions, it becomes gross, its substance grows more
corporeal, if I may use the expression, and then it is too heavy to rise
to the stars and gain the spheres of light. Its mere density will compel
it to float in our mephitic atmosphere until it has been purified and
consequently

<span id="page_105">p. 105</span>

lightened. Thus the door is opened to all doctrines concerning
punishment beyond the grave. How did pagans conceive this Purgatory
situated in the air?

There is a very old opinion that the soul is a breath and that, at the
moment when it escapes through the mouth of the dying man, it is carried
away by the winds. Thus the atmosphere was filled with wandering souls,
which became demons with power to succour or harm mortals. The origin of
these beliefs goes back to the most primitive animism. But the mysteries
introduced into them the idea of purification. Souls tossed by
whirlwinds are freed from defilements contracted during life, just as
linen hung in the air is bleached and loses all odour. When, after being
thus buffeted and blown about by the winds, souls are purified from part
of their sins, they rise to the zone of the clouds, where they are
drenched by rain and plunged into the gulf of the upper waters. Thus
cleansed from the stains that polluted them, they reach at last the
fires of heaven, whose heat scorches them. Not till they have undergone
this threefold trial, during which they have passed through countless
years of cruel expiation, do they find at length everlasting peace in
the serenity of the ether.

Virgil alludes to this doctrine in the famous line of the sixth book of
the *Æneid*, <span id="fr_126"></span>[1](#fn_126.md) where, speaking of
souls, he says:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

                    Aliae panduntur inanes  
Suspensae ad ventos, aliis sub gurgite vasto  
Infectum eluitur scelus aut exuritur igni.

</div>

Again, the passage of souls through the elements is represented
symbolically on a funeral monument almost contemporary with the poet.
Above the portrait of the deceased there appear first in the spandrels
of this *cippus*, two busts of the Winds facing each other. Higher up,
on the architrave are two Tritons and two dolphins, which evidently
represent the idea of the aqueous element. Finally, at the top of the
stone, in the pediment, we see two lions which, as on the Mithraic
monuments, are symbols of fire, the igneous principle. <span
id="fr_127"></span>[2](#fn_127.md)

<span id="page_106">p. 106</span>

Side by side with physical ideas, mythological beliefs always retained
their sway. Various sects professed to assure to the deceased a passage
through these regions peopled by malevolent demons: they taught their
members prayers which would propitiate hostile powers; they instructed
them in formula, consisting of veritable "pass-words," which would
compel the commandants (ἄρχοντες), posted to guard the gates of heaven,
to allow them to enter the upper sphere. Here is a legacy from the
ancient religions of the East. The Egyptian *Book of the Dead* is a
veritable guide to the other world, and the Orphic tablets of Petilia
are of the same character. The papyrus of Paris, called a Mithraic
liturgy, affords us the most characteristic example of the use of these
magical processes.

But more often the priests professed to give the soul a god to lead it
on its perilous journey through the whirlwinds of air, water, and fire
to the starry heavens. "Among the dead," says a funeral
inscription, <span id="fr_128"></span>[1](#fn_128.md) "there are two
companies: one moves upon the earth, the other in the ether among the
choirs of stars; I belong to the latter, for I have obtained a god as my
guide." This divine escort of souls frequently retains the name of
Hermes in conformity with ancient Greek mythology. An epigram belonging
to the first century of our era apostrophises the deceased in these
words: "Hermes of the wingèd feet, taking thee by the hand, has
conducted thee to Olympus and made thee to shine among the stars." <span
id="fr_129"></span>[2](#fn_129.md) But more often the rôle of escort now
devolves upon the Sun himself: We have seen <span
id="fr_130"></span>[3](#fn_130.md) that at the end of paganism the royal
star is figured as carrying mortals in his flying chariot. Those who had
not by their piety merited the protection of the god whose duty it was
to escort and introduce them, and who nevertheless ventured up to
heaven, were cast headlong into the perpetually raging gulf of the
warring elements which fought unceasingly around the earth.

<span id="img_sep"></span> ![](img/sep.jpg)

<span id="page_107">p. 107</span>

3\. The lowest of the seven planetary spheres, that of the moon,
separates the domain of the violent and restless elements and of beings
subject to fate, from that of the eternal gods, where all is order and
regularity. What becomes of the souls that enter this celestial zone,
and where are they stationed? In other words, *where is the abode of the
blest?*--the third question which we have to examine.

The masses did not attain to very precise ideas on this subject: they
hesitated, they contented themselves with the general assertion that the
soul is "among the stars." At the beginning of their poems, Lucan
addressing Nero and Statius addressing Domitian both asked what part of
heaven these Emperors will inhabit after their apotheosis <span
id="fr_131"></span>[1](#fn_131.md): Will they mount on the flaming chariot
of the Sun? will they take their place as new stars among the
constellations? Or even will Jupiter himself in the height of the
heavens yield to them his sceptre? In the same way theologians doubted
where to place the Elysian Fields. The Stoics had already emphatically
declared that they were not situated in the depths of the earth, as the
ancient Greeks believed. In conformity with their system of physical
interpretations of mythological names, Acheron became in their eyes the
air, Tartarus and Pyriphlegethon the zones of fire and hail. As for the
Elysian Fields, they are found to be located sometimes in the moon,
sometimes between the moon and the sun, sometimes in the sphere of the
fixed stars and particularly in the Milky Way, sometimes beyond this
extreme sphere of the heavens, outside the limits of the world. Among
the various doctrines there are two of which we have more precise
information from ancient authors. One is set forth by Plutarch after
Demetrius of Tarsus <span id="fr_132"></span>[2](#fn_132.md): it is a
combination of the ideas of Posidonius with the religious beliefs of the
mysteries. According to this doctrine, man is composed of body (σῶμα),
nutritive soul (ψυχή), and reason (νοῦς). The body is made of earth; the
vital principle, which nourishes it and causes it to grow, is lunar;
reason comes to us from the sun. Death severs from the body the
nutritive soul and the rational soul; the former is

<span id="page_108">p. 108</span>

dissolved in the moon, the latter ultimately, after complete
purification, reascends to its original source, the fount of all light.

This doctrine was adopted by those who regarded the Sun as the principal
god. But when, as we have explained, <span
id="fr_133"></span>[1](#fn_133.md) paganism renounced the view that the Sun
is the lord of the world, the Prime Cause, and set the Supreme Being
beyond the limits of the sensible world, enthroning him above the
planetary spheres in the highest of the heavens, the abode of the blest
was naturally transferred to the seat of divinity; and a theory, more
complicated than that of solar immortality, but doubtless only a
development of it, prevailed towards the end of the Roman empire.

This psychology, which owed its triumph to the astrological cults of
Asia, professed to establish a sevenfold division in the soul, to which
corresponded seven creations. It taught that our soul descends from the
height of heaven to this sublunary world, passing through the gates of
the planetary spheres, and thus at its birth the soul acquires the
dispositions and the qualities peculiar to each of these stars. After
death it regains its celestial home by the same path. Then, as it
traverses the zones of the sky, which are placed one above another, it
divests itself of the passions and faculties which it has acquired
during its descent to earth, as it were of garments. To the moon it
surrenders its vital and alimentary energy, to Mercury its cupidity, to
Venus its amorous desires, to the sun its intellectual capacities, to
Mars its warlike ardour, to Jupiter its ambitious dreams, to Saturn its
slothful tendencies. It is naked, disencumbered of all sensibility, when
it reaches the eighth heaven, there to enjoy, as a sublime essence, in
the eternal light where live the gods, bliss without end.

All these doctrines, then, in spite of differences in detail, taught
that souls, descended from the light above, were raised to the region of
the stars, where they dwelt forever with these radiant divinities. This
eschatology of "Chaldean" origin gradually displaced all others under
the Empire. The Elysian Fields, which not only the ancient Greeks, but
also the followers of Isis and Serapis still located in the depths of
the earth, were

<span id="page_109">p. 109</span>

transferred to the ether which laves the stars, and the subterranean
world became henceforth the gloomy abode of malevolent spirits. This
conception, a novelty in Europe, had long been that of Persian dualism,
which the mysteries of Mithra imported into the West. Their theology
systematically contrasts the infernal darkness, into which are plunged
demons and reprobates, with the bright abodes of the gods and the elect.

<span id="img_sep"></span> ![](img/sep.jpg)

4\. Before concluding this lecture, we have still a fourth question to
examine: *What conception was formed of the bliss reserved for the elect
who were raised to the stars*?

We have seen ([p. 95](#page_95).md) that the mysteries of Bacchus and
Thracian Orphism represented immortality as a sort of holy intoxication:
the faithful, sharing the banquet of the gods, rejoiced with them for
ever at a feast liberally supplied with wine. These beliefs were
combined with sidereal eschatology, only the locality of the repast was
transferred to the new Olympus, and the idea of a celestial banquet was
to survive up to the end of paganism and to impose itself, at any rate
as a symbol, even on Christianity.

But Plato had already ridiculed those who looked upon ceaseless
wine-bibbing as the highest reward of virtue, and the author of the
*Epinomis* already conceived eternal life as the contemplation of the
most beautiful things which eye can perceive--that is, the
constellations. This idea was developed in the sidereal cults, and
Posidonius was to set forth in stately language how the contemplation of
the sky and the study of the stars is the preparation for another
existence, in which human reason will know the fulness of the sublime
joy which a transient ecstasy causes it here below. As soon as it is
delivered from the trammels of the flesh, the soul will soar to these
lofty regions, whither it has hitherto been unable to escape except at
intervals. Flying across the immensity of space, it will reascend to the
stars from which it descended. Embracing in its view the entire circuit
of the world, it will perceive our globe as a scarcely visible point, or
as an ant-heap for the dominion of which a host of minute insects
contend. This earth, frozen in

<span id="page_110">p. 110</span>

the north, scorched in the south, submerged all round by the ocean,
intersected by deserts, devastated and defiled, is uninhabitable except
here and there. How contemptible will appear to the soul the narrowness
of its former dwelling, how empty the ambition of those who dream of no
other immortality than glory in this finite realm! As soon as it reaches
the starry spheres, reason is nourished and expands; in its former home
it regains its original qualities; it rejoices among the divine stars;
it contemplates all the glory of the bright heaven, and at the same time
it is ravished by the accordant sounds of enchanting music, the glorious
world-concert made by the harmonious movement of the spheres. Freed from
the passions of the body, it will be able to abandon itself entirely to
its insatiable desire for knowledge. Marvelling at the sidereal
revolutions, it will set itself to comprehend them; its keener vision
will enable it to discover the causes of all phenomena, and it will
receive a full revelation of all the secrets of Nature--that is, of God.

The doctrine of sidereal immortality is certainly the most elevated that
antiquity conceived. It was at this definitive formula that paganism
stopped. This belief was not to perish utterly with it; and even after
the stars had been despoiled of their divinity, it survived to some
extent the theology which had created it. If I had not already abused
your patience, it would be an interesting study to join you in searching
for survivals of these pagan tenets through the Middle Ages, and in
showing the forms which they assumed in the popular creed and amongst
the divines. In general, souls continued to be represented as passing
through the spheres of heaven in order to reach the abode of the Most
High. May I remind you that Dante was still inspired by these most
ancient astrological conceptions? His Paradise shows us the blest, who
have practised the virtues proper to each of the planets, inhabiting the
spheres of these seven wandering stars. To destroy these old
eschatological ideas it was necessary for Copernicus and Galileo to
overthrow the system of Ptolemy and bring down those heavens peopled by
bright beings, and so to open to the imagination the infinite spaces of
a boundless universe.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_104"></span>[93:1](argr11.htm#fr_104.md) Lucret., III, 37:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

*Et metus, ille foras praeceps Acheruntis agendus  
Funditus humanam qui vitam turbat ab imo*.

</div>

<span id="fn_105"></span>[94:1](argr11.htm#fr_105.md) *Poèmes antiques*,
"Dies Irae."

<span id="fn_106"></span>[94:2](argr11.htm#fr_106.md)

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

O Death divine, at whose recall  
Returneth all  
To fade in thy embrace,  
Gather thy children to thy bosom starred,  
Free us from time, from number, and from space,  
And give us back the rest that life hath marred.

</div>

<span id="fn_107"></span>[94:3](argr11.htm#fr_107.md) Pliny, *Nat. Hist*.,
vii, 55, § 188.

<span id="fn_108"></span>[96:1](argr11.htm#fr_108.md) Corp. Incr. Att., i,
442: Αἰθὴρ μὲν ψυχὰς ὑπεδέξατο, σώματα δὲ χθών.

<span id="fn_109"></span>[96:2](argr11.htm#fr_109.md) See above, Lecture
II, [p. 23](argr07.htm#page_23.md) sqq.

<span id="fn_110"></span>[96:3](argr11.htm#fr_110.md) Aristoph., *Pax*,
831.

<span id="fn_111"></span>[96:4](argr11.htm#fr_111.md) See above, Lecture
IV, [p. 65](argr09.htm#page_65.md).

<span id="fn_112"></span>[97:1](argr11.htm#fr_112.md) See above, Lecture
II, [p. 40](argr07.htm#page_40.md).

<span id="fn_113"></span>[98:1](argr11.htm#fr_113.md) Kaibel, *Epigr. Gr.*,
324.

<span id="fn_114"></span>[98:2](argr11.htm#fr_114.md) Buecheler, *Carmina
Epigr.*, 611.

<span id="fn_115"></span>[99:1](argr11.htm#fr_115.md) Manil., i, 41.

<span id="fn_116"></span>[99:2](argr11.htm#fr_116.md) Cic., *Somn. Scip*.,
c. 3.

<span id="fn_117"></span>[99:3](argr11.htm#fr_117.md) Herm. Trism. ap.
Stobaeum, *Ecl.*, p. 466, Wachsmuth.

<span id="fn_118"></span>[100:1](argr11.htm#fr_118.md) Horace, *Odes*, iii,
2, 21.

<span id="fn_119"></span>[100:2](argr11.htm#fr_119.md) See above, Lecture
V, [p. 83](argr10.htm#page_83.md).

<span id="fn_120"></span>[102:1](argr11.htm#fr_120.md) For further details
see my paper "L’aigle funéraire des Syriens et l’apothéose des
empereurs" (*Revue de l’histoire des religions*), 1910.

<span id="fn_121"></span>[102:2](argr11.htm#fr_121.md) Arnob., *Adv. Nat.*,
ii, 33, 62 (p. 65, 5; 97, 27, Reifferscheid).

<span id="fn_122"></span>[102:3](argr11.htm#fr_122.md) Dieterich, *Eine
Mithrasliturgie*, 1910, compare my *Oriental Religions* (1911), p. 260.

<span id="fn_123"></span>[103:1](argr11.htm#fr_123.md) See above, Lecture
IV, [p. 73](argr09.htm#page_73.md) ss.

<span id="fn_124"></span>[104:1](argr11.htm#fr_124.md) *Tusc. Disp.*, i,
43, § 18.

<span id="fn_125"></span>[104:2](argr11.htm#fr_125.md) See above, [p.
100](#page_100), and Lecture V, [p. 83](argr10.htm#page_83.md).

<span id="fn_126"></span>[105:1](argr11.htm#fr_126.md) Virgil, *Æn.*, vi,
740.

<span id="fn_127"></span>[105:2](argr11.htm#fr_127.md) *Jahresb. Inst.
Wien*, xii (1910), p. 213.

<span id="fn_128"></span>[106:1](argr11.htm#fr_128.md) Kaibel, *Epigramm.
Græca*, 650.

<span id="fn_129"></span>[106:2](argr11.htm#fr_129.md) Haussoullier, *Revue
de philologie*, 1909, p. 6.

<span id="fn_130"></span>[106:3](argr11.htm#fr_130.md) See above, [p.
101](#page_101.md).

<span id="fn_131"></span>[107:1](argr11.htm#fr_131.md) Lucan, i, 45 ss.
Stat., *Thebaid*., i, 22.

<span id="fn_132"></span>[107:2](argr11.htm#fr_132.md) Plut., *De Facie in
Orbe Lunae*, c. 26; cf. my *Théologie solaire*, pp. 464, 475.

<span id="fn_133"></span>[108:1](argr11.htm#fr_133.md) See above, Lecture
IV, p. 75.

 
