[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Southwest](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](tci055)  [Next](tci057) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### THE ANTELOPE HUNTER WHO WAS A WITCH <span id="fr_121"></span>[17](#fn_120)

Four men went hunting antelopes. One man gathered the party together,
and his brother-in-law went and a third man and a fourth. They had been
out several days. The others had already killed many antelopes, but the
leader was a witch, and he used to go out by himself and build a fire.
He was calling the, Gewa Indians (a. Ute tribe) to come and destroy his
companions, but he did not succeed in his purpose. His brother-in-law
thought, "I wonder why he always goes off at night. There is something
wrong." Again that night when the witch thought his brother-in-law was
sleeping he got up and went off. His brother-in-law followed at a
distance. He heard the witch say to himself, "All this time I have not
succeeded in what I desire." His brother-in-law thought, "This man is
not thinking right. We had better go home to-morrow." He went to the
others and said, "We had better start for home. We have killed enough
antelopes." They started to get ready. That night the brother-in-law
dreamed. He heard someone say to him, "Your side locks are too long. Cut
them to-morrow at sunrise and you will be safe." In the morning he rose
before sunrise and took a knife and was about to cut his side locks when
the sun rose. The witch came up. He said, "Why are you about to cut your
hair like that?" His brother-in-law said, "I heard someone in my dream
last night tell me to cut it at sunrise and I would be safe." The witch
said, "That dream is false. Do not cut your hair." He laid down his
knife and did not cut his side, locks.

The brother-in-law told the other two, "Go and get the burros." They
loaded them and he sent them on ahead. "Go on, I am going to hunt a
little and I will follow." The witch heard this. He was angry that they
were escaping. "I have been calling my helpers until this noon and they
have not come." The witch said to his brother-in-law, "It is Thursday
now. We better stay this one day longer." They went out hunting. The
witch said, "I will go off a little." His brother-in-law followed; he
heard the witch say to himself, "My helpers have not come, my helpers
have not come!" His brother-in-law thought, "He is thinking double
thoughts." At last the brother-in-law saw them coming. There were lots
of Gewa Indians. They made a circle just as if it were a rabbit hunt.
They surrounded him. He was a tall man and he had a gun, but they closed
in on him and took his gun. He was captured. They heard

<span id="page_109">p. 109</span>

the witch screaming and they went after him and killed him. The
brother-in-law fought them all. They could not overcome him. He heard
them talking, but did not understand their language. He thought they
were saying, "Shoot him." One pulled his arrow and it went through his
stomach but it did not kill him. He stooped down and ran out from under
the people's legs and escaped. He ran as fast as he could. He saw them
way behind. He got to a place where many oaks were growing. He threw
himself down. He lay there in hiding. All day he lay there. He was sick
because of the odor of the warm blood. He fainted. The Gewa came in
pursuit, but they did not find him and they all turned back.

In the late afternoon he woke as if he had been sleeping. He tore his
clothes to strips and tied up his wounds. He got up. "Perhaps they have
gone back. I will start for home." He cleaned himself and started for
home. He came across some Mexicans herding. "Hello, friends!" "Hello,
where are you coming from?" "From back below. I was hunting antelopes
and my brother-in-law caused me to be shot. They killed my
brother-in-law, I think. I heard him cry out. I think he is dead."
"Let's go over to our camp." They took him in. They brought him halfway
home. He got to Santo Domingo and the Santo Domingo Indians brought him
home. When the people of Cochiti heard that the Gewa Indians had shot
this man they got ready to go against them. They took the man to the
Giant Society and made medicine for him and he got well. He told the
people what had happened in the antelope hunting, how his brother-in-law
had called the Gewa against them and had been killed, but he himself had
escaped. So the witch was killed and the brother-in-law escaped and
lived a long time.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_120"></span>[108:17](tci056.htm#fr_121) Informant 1. Notes,
[p. 235](tci125.htm#page_235).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Two Witch Men](tci057)
