[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Southwest](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](tci002)  [Next](tci004) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_1">p. 1</span>

# TALES OF THE COCHITI INDIANS

### BY RUTH BENEDICT

## I. ORIGIN TALES AND STORIES OF THE KATCINAS

### URETSITI <span id="fr_0"></span>[1](#fn_0)

They were living at White House, and all the people (of the world)
called each other by relationship terms; they were brothers and sisters.
Uretsiti, the mother of the pueblos, and Naotsiti, the mother of the
Navahos, were sisters.

It was when they left White House that they began to have trouble.
Naotsiti challenged Uretsiti to a contest. She said, "Whoever the sun
shines on first shall be the greater," for she was taller than her elder
sister. Uretsiti and Naotsiti stood up before dawn and waited for the
first rays of the sun. Naotsiti said, "Whoever the sun strikes first,
her children shall be valuable; whoever the sun strikes last, her
children shall be worthless." She was boasting. Then the sun rose. Its
first rays fell on the hair of Uretsiti. They spread to her eyebrows,
and when they had rested there, the first light of the sun fell on the
top of the hair of Naotsiti. They spread down to her cheeks, and when
they rested there they touched the eyebrows of Naotsiti. They spread to
her chin, and when they rested there they touched the cheeks of
Naotsiti. They spread to her chest, and when they rested there they
touched the chin of Naotsiti. The light of the sun completely covered
Uretsiti, and still the shadow had not gone, from Naotsiti. When
Naotsiti saw her sister already standing in the full sunlight, she was
angry and said, "Why is it that you are standing covered with sun and I
am still in shadow?" Uretsiti answered, "It is not I who have done this.
It is our great mother. <span id="fr_1"></span>[2](#fn_1) This was your
challenge, but she has given me power to overcome." Then Naotsiti said,
"Do with me as you please. If you kill me, do not put it off." <span
id="fr_2"></span>[3](#fn_2) Uretsiti

<span id="page_2">p. 2</span>

took up her rabbit stick and threw it at Naotsiti. She turned into a
large woodrat and ran in among the rocks. Uretsiti could not follow her
in the crevices. So she was saved. Just as the mother of the pueblos was
safe and won in, this contest, so whenever there is fighting between the
Navahos and the pueblos, the people of the pueblos are safe and win.
Only once in a very long time one man is lost from the pueblos in
fighting with the Navahos. And as the Mother of the Navahos saved
herself by running in among the rocks, so the Navahos still save
themselves in war by hiding among the rocks. <span
id="fr_3"></span>[4](#fn_3)

VARIANT <span id="fr_4"></span>[5](#fn_4)

Naotsiti (mother of the Navahos) challenged Uretsiti (mother of the
Cochiti <span id="fr_5"></span>[6](#fn_5)) to a contest. She was taller
than her elder sister and she chose what the contest should be. She
said, "Whoever the sun sees first shall be the winner." They called
together all their people, and before sunrise they stood together on a
line, facing toward the east. But when the sun rose, it saw Uretsiti
first. Then Naotsiti said, "You have won. In four days we shall contest
again." In four days they rose early and scattered cornmeal to the
Kopishtaya. All the people came together, and Masewi and Oyoyewi were in
charge of the contest. When all the people were ready they brought the
Mothers into the center of all the people. Uretsiti had her hair cut in
old Cochiti fashion, <span id="fr_6"></span>[7](#fn_6) and Naotsiti in
Navaho fashion. They each of them carried a grinding muller. The first
turn was Naotsiti's. She struck Uretsiti so that she fell to the ground.
It was the turn of our Mother. She rose and struck Naotsiti so that she
fell to the ground. They laid down their mullers and wrestled. Then
Uretsiti overcame Naotsiti and killed her. She turned into a woodrat and
ran off. That is why the Navahos avoid woodrats. They do not kill them
because their mother is a woodrat. And this is why the men of Cochiti
are strongest in war, and the Navahos call them "full of power." From
all the pueblos, even from Zuñi and Hopi, they come to our pueblo
bringing belts and turquoises and mantas to offer to our Mother at her
shrine at Koaske. <span id="fr_7"></span>[8](#fn_7)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_0"></span>[1:1](tci003.htm#fr_0) Informant 1. See Dumarest,
Father Noël, Notes on Cochiti, New Mexico, Mem. Amer. Anthrop. Assoc.,
vol. VI, p. 212. For discussion and abstract see Notes, [p.
203](tci123.htm#page_203).

<span id="fn_1"></span>[1:2](tci003.htm#fr_1) The narrator suggested
that this referred to Thought Woman.

<span id="fn_2"></span>[1:3](tci003.htm#fr_2) Usually in this Keres
story the life of the loser is staked upon the contest.

<span id="fn_3"></span>[2:4](tci003.htm#fr_3) Note also Dumarest, 215,
n. 2.

<span id="fn_4"></span>[2:5](tci003.htm#fr_4) Informant 2.

<span id="fn_5"></span>[2:6](tci003.htm#fr_5) "Not even the mother of
Santo Domingo."

<span id="fn_6"></span>[2:7](tci003.htm#fr_6) So that the line of the
bangs and hair forms an uninterrupted half circle from ear to ear.

<span id="fn_7"></span>[2:8](tci003.htm#fr_7) A cave on the Rio Grande.
Where the Bloody Hand katcina went in also.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Flood](tci004)
