[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Southwest](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](tci069)  [Next](tci071) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### THE MAN WHO WAS CRUEL TO ANIMALS <span id="fr_142"></span>[10](#fn_141)

Inside of Shipap there were four rooms. The first room was guarded by a
mountain lion and beside him Masewa stood with a bow and arrow. If
anyone came, no matter how far away, the lion heard it, and Masewa
quieted him. The people sent a messenger, goatcini, to Shipap, and he
knocked at the door. Masewa said to the lion, "Be quiet. Do not hurt
him." He went to the door and brought in the messenger and took him to
the room where the chief priests were. They went in, and stood in front
of the altar. On each side they caused two men to stand, the tsamahia.
Masewa said to them, "I shall take you down to the village and you will
guard Cochiti." He took them down to the village and went back to
Shipap. He came back into the house and went into the room of the chief
priests. He stood in front of the altar and they caused two shin'auhia
to stand in front of it. Masewa said to them, "I will take you down to
the village and you will guard Cochiti." He took them down and went back
to Shipap. He came into the room of the chief priests and they said to
him, "Go to the people and tell them never to forget to believe in these
four whom we have given them to guard the village." <span
id="fr_143"></span>[31](#fn_142) Masewa went back to Shipap and went
into the room of the chief priests. They said to him, "Sit down." After
a while they heard a knock. One of the tsamahia had come back. He said,
"Some one has died in Cochiti."

The man who had died had never believed in ceremonies or in living again
after death. Whenever he saw a bird's nest, he broke the eggs and pulled
down the nest. Whenever he saw a bug or a worm, he heeled it. His father
and mother used to say to him often, "Do not be cruel to animals," but
he paid no attention. One day

<span id="page_129">p. 129</span>

he went down to the fields. In a tree he found a bird's nest. In it
there were two eggs. He made holes in the ends and sucked them. They
were red racer's (snake's) eggs. He came back to the village. At his own
house he sat down outside to eat. They heard a great noise coming from a
great distance. It sounded like the crack of a whip. It was a snake
flying through the air. When the man opened his mouth to eat, the snake
flew in. He fell down fainting. "Do not touch him! Leave him alone!"
Everybody ran away and was afraid to touch him. The snake came out of
his mouth carrying the two eggs and left the man dead.

Next morning the people in the village were preparing him for burial.
The chief priests in Shipap sent their messengers down to the village to
bring him where they were. They came to the house and took him out
secretly. They brought him towards Shipap. As they were going, the man
who had died saw that the road was well taken care of. It was all
cleared of stones and growth. "There are a great many people to take
care of this road." Farther on he saw melons growing. "See how
beautifully they grow. You have to have a good heart and believe in
everything." They came to Shipap and knocked at the door. All around he
saw the principal men sitting with sad faces. Their smoke filled the
room. The messenger said to him, "Look at these poor men, how sad they
are. We want you to see with your own eyes how unhappy they are because
of what you have done." The man saw it and wept. The cacique said to the
messengers, "You must take him back to his own body or they will bury
it. In the village they are already wrapping it." He said to the man who
had died, "Believe in everything." The man who had died knelt down by
the old men and asked them to forgive him. "I will not do these things
any more." They answered him, "All right, my boy. Be good when you get
back to your home." The messengers took him back to the village. They
hurried along so as to get there before his body was buried. The chief
priest had said to them, "When you get back to the village, throw him
violently upon his body." And they had told the man who had died, "Do
not be afraid. You will enter your body again and will be alive."

They returned and the man came back to life. He rose and his father and
mother embraced him and were very happy. He was very thirsty and called
for water. He called Masewa and O'yoyewa and others of the heads of the
pueblo and told them what he had seen in Shipap. "The chiefs were
sitting in Shipap with sad faces because of what I had done. They told
me not to do these things any more and to believe in all the katcinas
and medicine men." He always believed in everything after that. He grew
to be very old and never wore clothes any more. They made him cacique
and that is why we always have to have a cacique.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_141"></span>[128:10](tci070.htm#fr_142) Informant 2. Notes,
[p. 205](tci123.htm#page_205).

<span id="fn_142"></span>[128:31](tci070.htm#fr_143) These four are
protectors of the village and live In the hills around Cochiti.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Cacique who Visited the Dead](tci071)
