[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Southwest](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](tci013)  [Next](tci015) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### THE INSTITUTION OF POTTERY <span id="fr_27"></span>[5](#fn_27)

In the beginning Itc'tinaku considered how the people should live. She
said to herself, "My old father and my old mother must go down to the
people and be Clay (mitsi) Old Woman and Clay Old Man." <span
id="fr_28"></span>[16](#fn_28) In Shipap she made the old man and woman
into Clay Old Woman and Clay Old Man. The old woman began to mix the
clay with sand and soften it with water. When she had finished she made
it into a ball and wrapped it in a white manta. She began to coil a pot
with her clay, and Clay Old Man danced beside her singing while she
worked. All the people gathered in the village and watched her all day
long. When she had made her pots so high (about eighteen inches) and the
old man was singing and dancing beside her, he kicked it with his foot
and it broke in many pieces. The old woman picked up his stick and
chased him all around the plaza. She overtook him in the middle of the
kiva. They made friends again and she took the broken pot and rolled it
into a ball again. The old man took the pot and gave a piece of it to
everybody in the village. They each took it and made pottery as Clay Old
Woman had made it. This was the time they learned to make pottery. Clay
Old Man told them never to forget to make pottery. In those days they
only indented it with the marks of their fingers. Ever since when we do
not make pottery these two masked dancers come with the dance to remind
us of the clay they gave to the people. They tell us not to forget our
grinding stones and always to grind our own corn flour.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_27"></span>[12:5](tci014.htm#fr_27) Informant 2. Notes, [p.
208](tci123.htm#page_208).

<span id="fn_28"></span>[12:16](tci014.htm#fr_28) Clay Old Woman and
Clay Old Man have masks with white faces and red eyes. Notes, [p.
208](tci123.htm#page_208). The old woman has straggly hair cut in the
old round fashion and wears a white manta and white shawl. The old man
wears buckskin so that no hair shows and he carries a heavy load of clay
in his basket on his back. The stick with which the old woman chased him
is also part of his costume.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Bloody Hand-Print Katcina](tci015)
