[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Southwest](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](tci038)  [Next](tci040) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_70">p. 70</span>

### SUN STEALS SHELL MAN'S WIFE <span id="fr_81"></span>[4](#fn_80)

At old Cochiti (Tiputse) lived a man and his wife. His name was Stilina
(dance shells). His wife went for water and Sun came and stole her. Her
husband didn't know where she had gone. He mourned for her and tried to
follow her tracks. He was lying in a muddy place, and something crawled
on his neck and spoke to him. It was Spider Woman. She said, "What are
you doing here?" "I'm mourning for my wife who was stolen from me."
"Don't think of her, my son, and keep wondering where your wife is. Your
wife is where the sun comes up. There are two roads to that place, a new
and an old. Don't follow the new road; take the old. On the new road a
dangerous person will kill you. So go the old road."

He started on his journey. When he came, to the two roads, he wondered
why Spider Woman had said not to go by the good road, so he took the new
road. He came to the house of Whirlwind Man. He was out hunting, only
his mother was at home. She set out food for her guest. He was still
eating, when he heard Whirlwind Man coming. He came in. They fought. The
mother tried to separate them, but Shell Man killed Whirlwind Man. His
mother was frightened. She said, "Hurry, hurry, press his stomach. See
if you can make him alive again." Then Shell Man pressed him, and he
came to life. Then his mother said to her son, "Don't fight with this
man any more, my son. It is because of Shell Man that you are alive
again." She put food out again.

Whirlwind Man said to Shell Man, "I will take you where you wish to go."
So he took him where Sun rises. Whirlwind Man picked him up and took him
to the top of the high cliffs where his wife was. Whirlwind Man said to
Shell Man, "Go over yonder, you will find her alone. Sun is out
hunting." He went into Sun's house, and he found his wife grinding. She
was frightened. "How did you get here, my husband? Nobody comes here, it
is too dangerous." "I've come to get you. Before Sun comes home from
hunting I will take you back." She got ready. They went out before Sun
came home. When they got where Whirlwind was waiting, he started
homeward with them.

Sun came home and the woman was gone. He shot an arrow after them but it
fell to, one side. They were safe. <span id="fr_82"></span>[5](#fn_81)
They reached Whirlwind Man's house. "We have to go on to our home," they
said. They came to their own house. While they were coming along the
road, Sun shot another arrow. Shell Man cried, "Hurry up, we must go
faster, the man who stole you is coming after us!" \[paragraph
continues\]

<span id="page_71">p. 71</span>

Sun was shooting. When they got to Tiputse, Sun was right behind them,
but the woman was safe. Sun said to the woman, "You shall have a child
and he shall be chief of this people."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_80"></span>[70:4](tci039.htm#fr_81) Informant 3. Notes, [p.
230](tci125.htm#page_230).

<span id="fn_81"></span>[70:5](tci039.htm#fr_82) Because the wife was
pregnant; no man can harm a woman while she is carrying his child. See
above, [p. 69](tci038.htm#page_69).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Shell Man's Wife is Lured Away By His Eagle](tci040)
