[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Southwest](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](tci083)  [Next](tci085) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### DUCK SINGS FOR HER CHILDREN <span id="fr_166"></span>[3a](#fn_165)

At Whirlpool Place (Koashka) there lived a duck with lots of little
ducklings. She told her children to go to the river and have a bath. She
said, "I will sit on the bank and sing for you." They got to the river.
The mother sat on the bank, and she started to sing (unintelligible
words). She said, "When this song ends, jump in all together." At the
last word of her song, the ducklings jumped in and went under the water
and came up again far off. They swam around and came back to their
mother. She sang her song again and each time they ducked and swam and
came back to her.

Coyote heard Mother Duck singing. He said, "What a pretty song you sing
to your children. I must go and get mine too. I have as many children as
you have. I will get them. Why don't your children get drowned in all
that water?" Mother Duck answered, "It is because they have a great
power that they don't get drowned. If your children have a great power
like mine they won't drown either."

Coyote went off to get her children. She brought them all to the river
bank and asked Mother Duck where they were to start. She said, "They
must start from this bank when you sing the song for them." Old Coyote
said, "How shall I sing the song? When you sing it, you call your
children by name, but when I sing it must I call my children by name?"
Duck said, "That is right." Coyote started to sing, but the little
coyotes were afraid of the water and wouldn't go near the river. They
all bunched together on the bank. Mother Duck started to sing for the
little coyotes. She said, \[paragraph continues\]

<span id="page_149">p. 149</span>

"When I get to the end, jump into the water." She got to the end but the
coyotes all ran off home as fast as they could. Some of them Coyote
caught and threw into the river. So she drowned half of them and all the
ducks flew up away from Coyote. She started to cry for her children. She
cried and cried until she died.

### COYOTE IMITATES CROW <span id="fr_167"></span>[3](tci085.htm#fn_166)

Once there was a high bank of paper bread of all colors. At the bottom
it was blue, then white, red, gray, and white. On the top of this high
bank there was a crow, and at the bottom there was a little pond of
sweet-corn milk. The crow sang,

High bank of paper bread, high bank of paper bread;  
Pond of sweet-corn milk, pond of sweet-corn milk.

\[paragraph continues\] Every time, he bit a piece, of paper bread off
the bank he flew down to the sweet-corn pond to take a drink. Coyote
came along and said, "How nicely you jump. Sing the song to me for I
want to eat paper bread and drink the sweet-corn milk. I will do just as
you do." "All right." He sang his song,

High bank of paper bread, high bank of paper bread;  
Pond of sweet-corn milk, pond of sweet-corn milk.

\[paragraph continues\] Coyote listened and learned the song. He said,
"All right, now I'll start." "All right, you sing first." Coyote stood
on top of the high bank and sang and ate. He said, "Now I'll take a
drink." He was singing and getting ready to jump at the end of his song.
He jumped down and he fell straight into the pond and right there he
died. Crow began to caw (for joy). She wanted his eyes. She took them
out and shook them. They sounded like bells. She called, "Animals,
whoever uses fur for nests, come and take it from Coyote who has done
mischief." Wood rats and mice and chipmunks and squirrels came and took
the fur from Coyote for nests. Crow said, "All the kinds of birds that
eat meat, come and eat Coyote, for he has done mischief." The eagle and
the vulture and the chicken hawk and hawk came, and they all ate him up.
There was nothing left but his bones. Along came an old, old man with a
carrying basket. He walked with a cane and he could hardly get along. He
came to the place where Coyote's bones were and said, "These will make a
nice soup for grandmother." He put them in the basket, put it on his
back, and took the bones home to his wife.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_165"></span>[148:3a](tci084.htm#fr_166) Informant 2. Notes,
[p. 240](tci126.htm#page_240).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Road Runner Girls Grind](tci085)
