[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Southwest](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](tci076)  [Next](tci078) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### THE FROG WIFE <span id="fr_155"></span>[3](#fn_154)

When the people first came to live in Cochiti a girl went down to the
river to get water in her water jar. She saw a handsome man sitting by
the other bank. He asked her, "Did you come for water?" "Yes, I came for
water." "Come across the river, and I will take you home with me." "How
can I cross the river? There is lots of

<span id="page_141">p. 141</span>

water." "Take off your moccasins and put them in your manta and bring
them with you." She took them off and went across the river. As soon as
she got across, and came close to the boy, she put on her moccasins
again. "Are you ready?" "Yes." They went a long way through the arroyo.
The girl began to be very tired. She said, "Perhaps your home is very
faraway. I am very tired." "We are almost there. It is just up at the
top of this high bank and on the level ground above." As soon as they
got up he said, "Look over there. That is the village where I live.
We'll go straight into the plaza. On the east side on the second story,
in two rooms is my house." They went up. They came, to the hatchway, and
he called, "Grandmother, here comes in a daughter-in-law. Will you
welcome her?" "With all my heart I will welcome her." They told the girl
to sit down and the grandmother gave her food. Night came and they went
to bed. After they were, in bed, the grandmother said, "I'll get up
again and shell some corn for my daughter-in-law, so that she can grind
early in the morning." Afterwards she said, "Daughter-in-law, I have
shelled corn for you to grind early in the morning."

The daughter-in-law rose early in the morning and began to grind. She
broke off the husks and took the corn out of the grinding stone and
parched it. She put it back in the grinding stone and ground it till it
was fine. As she was grinding the boy went out to hunt. The girl put the
big bowl on the fire, and poured water in, and stirred in the flour till
it was thick and she made hard mush. The boy brought in rabbits. She
roasted them on the fire. The grandmother was very happy and she said,
"Granddaughter, what a good breakfast you can make. This tastes very
good." In the evening the grandmother shelled more corn ready for the
girl to grind early in the morning. Early in the morning she rose and
ground the corn as she had the day before. The boy went out hunting and
they continued four days. The grandmother shelled more corn and said,
"Here is more corn for you to grind early in the morning." Early again,
she got up and began to grind. As she ground, it seemed to her that the
corn was as hard as stone. She could not break one kernel of it. She
began to cry. The grandmother heard her and said, "What a beautiful song
my daughter-in-law is singing this morning!"

*Wa! wa!* (the frog's call)  
Down at the river are many lovers,  
For that I am homesick,  
*Wa! wa!*

\[paragraph continues\] She remembered the village where she had lived
so happily, and she said to herself, "I am homesick for the river again
where them are so many lovers. Before daylight I shall go back there."

<span id="page_142">p. 142</span>

In the morning before her grandmother was awake she went to get her
moccasins, and as she went past her grandmother she lifted her leg and
urinated over her. She went out. Presently the grandmother called her
daughter-in-law, but there, was no answer. She got up to look but she
had gone. She had gone back to the river, and she lived there forever
(as a frog, or toad).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_154"></span>[140:3](tci077.htm#fr_155) Informant 2. Notes,
[p. 237](tci125.htm#page_237).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Lion and Grizzly Bear](tci078)
