[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Southwest](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](tci036)  [Next](tci038) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CORNCOB BOY TRIUMPHS OVER HIS MOCKERS <span id="fr_75"></span>[22](#fn_74)

Long ago the people were living on the mesa. Corncob Boy's father and
mother died and left him an orphan. As he grew up he went from house to
house and was given food that had been left by his neighbors. When he
became older he began to tell people the things that were going to
happen. Some believed but others laughed. \[paragraph continues\]

<span id="page_63">p. 63</span>

After it happened as he had foretold, they believed him; but they began
to say he was a witch.

Masewa made proclamation that in a few days they would have a rabbit
hunt, both men and women. The young men made fun of Corncob Boy and
said, "You will kill nothing, not a rabbit," "As you say, so it will be
to you," said Corncob Boy. Others said, "You have no power." "Wait and
you will see what will happen." They started on the rabbit hunt. They
did not find even one rabbit. The people said, "Why did we not find even
a rabbit? We always see many rabbits." Then they remembered what Corncob
Boy said. One of the fathers (officials) said to the young men, "Tell me
the truth. What did Corncob Boy say to you?" That evening the council
called Corncob Boy to Masewa's house. The caciques were there. They
asked him what he had said. Corncob Boy told them, "I said they should
not catch a rabbit." The fathers said, "Why?" "Because the boys were
making fun of me. When I said that, the rabbits heard and hid from us
and we did not find any. If these men will not make fun of me any more,
I will work for my people and for the fathers." "Very well, we will test
you. We will appoint a day for another hunt and see whether the rabbits
give themselves up." Masewa said, "I shall tell my people that in four
days we shall go hunting." Masewa went out and made proclamation, "For
four days prepare your bows and arrows and, rabbit sticks and make
ready. On the fourth day we shall hunt rabbits." He came in. Corncob Boy
was still there. He threw his arm around Masewa's neck and he said, "I
hope we shall kill many rabbits." The priests went to their homes. "I
will go and ask our Mother," said Corncob Boy, "to send the rabbits."
Next morning be purified himself. He drank water, vomited, and asked our
Mother that they might get what they went out for. Some people saw him
and said, "Now we shall get what we want." Some still did not believe.

The day of the hunt came. Masewa went out and made proclamation that the
people should be ready and that they should go first south, and then
east. They started and went to the meeting place, first to the south,
then to the east. As soon as they started out they saw a great number of
cottontail rabbits and jack rabbits. Friends went together. First they
went south and then east and there, not far from the village, this side
of the river, they made the first circle and started the rabbits. They
killed many. They made the second circle and started those rabbits. They
killed many. They made the third circle and started those rabbits. They
killed many. They made the fourth circle and started those rabbits. They
could hardly carry the rabbits they had killed. Then they believed that
Corncob Boy had power and that he always got what he asked for his
people.

<span id="page_64">p. 64</span>

Still, however, not all the people believed in him. They had had no
rain. One day an old man met Corncob Boy and said, "Why is it we have no
rain?" "It will rain in four days." In four days it rained hard. In the
morning when the rain was over, the old man went to Corncob Boy's house
and put his hands on the boy and said, "My little boy." "My father." "I
believe now that you can do anything you ask. When will we have snow?"
"I will let you know at midday." Corncob Boy went to ask our Mother and
at midday he went to the old man's house. He said, "My father, you asked
me when we shall have snow. It will begin in four days. It will start
with evening, and in the morning it will be deep on the ground. Then we
shall hunt lots of rabbits; we must be ready."

Again the father went to Corncob Boy and he said, "My son, tell me how
the next year will be. I know that you have been brought up by no father
and mother; our Mother has raised you to be a help to your people."
Corncob Boy said to the old man, "I thank you, my father, that you have
known this. In four days I will tell you how the next year will be." He
purged himself, and he went to ask. He said, "I have come to ask you for
next year. I am asking that we shall have a good year, good yellow corn,
good blue com, good red corn, good white corn, good black corn, good
speckled corn, good sweet corn, good watermelons, good muskmelons, good
squashes, good peaches. That is what I am asking." Then they answered
him, "Next year shall be as Corncob Boy has said." He went back and told
the father.

After this, people asked Corncob Boy everything that should happen, and
he purged himself and asked our Mother for blessing. He became a great
man, and they asked him to be cacique, but he said, "No; I was not born
for it." He taught the people many things: How to hunt deer and
antelope; how to set a noose trap for geese; how to make snowshoes and
use them hunting mountain goats. He taught them to stand in a deep place
to catch big fish, to fasten flowers to a piece of rag and tie it under
water, and when the fish came up to smell them, to catch them in their
hands. <span id="fr_76"></span>[23](#fn_75) He made a rabbit stick and
taught them to use it on the rabbit hunt; he always killed the most
rabbits on a rabbit hunt.

In his day there was no sickness among the people. He taught them how to
live, not to steal, not to live with other men's wives, to ask our
Mother for help. For this reason the old men still know what is right
and teach the younger ones just as Corncob Boy taught.

He taught them what they should do in time of war, and taught Masewa and
the cacique to lead the people. He told them that at last a strange
people would come to this country, and all the tribes

<span id="page_65">p. 65</span>

would be scattered. There would be fewer and fewer deer and bears and
mountain goats; there would be less and less rain; the worms would eat
the corn and the apples and the peaches; there would be many strange
sicknesses. These people would bring wars, and afterwards they would
bring peace which would last a long time. Then his people must keep the
peace; even when the United States and Mexico were fighting his people
should stay out. All the pueblos heard these things which Corncob Boy
told, and now they have a great deal of respect for Cochiti, because
Corncob Boy belonged to Cochiti.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_74"></span>[62:22](tci037.htm#fr_75) Informant 4. Noes, [p.
219](tci124.htm#page_219). See also Arrow Boy, [p.
43](tci028.htm#page_43).

<span id="fn_75"></span>[64:23](tci037.htm#fr_76) The narrator caught
fish In this way in his youth.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Cuisi'n<sup>y</sup>inaw<sup>a</sup>](tci038)
