[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Southwest](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](tci059)  [Next](tci061) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### THE JEALOUS WIFE <span id="fr_127"></span>[17](#fn_126)

Near Uwashka there was a little village on top of the hill. A Cochiti
girl used to go up there. She stole a man who lived at Uwashka. They
were always together. When the man went to the fields the woman would
follow a little apart. They were not ashamed. The man was married. He
treated his wife badly. One day the wife said, "I think my husband is
not doing right. I think he is going with another woman. He says I am
going with other men, but I think it is he who is doing this thing." She
said to her mother, "I am going over there to his fields." "For what, my
daughter? What do you wish to see?" In the morning she saw her husband
hiding under his dress moccasins sewed with sinew. He went out. She
followed to see what he was doing. "I'm going, even if I get a whipping.
I will find out what is happening." She went along the hill. She came in
this direction. She met an old man. 'The man said, "Are you coming?"
"Yes." "Where are you going, poor thing?" "I'm going over there where my
husband is." "Poor thing, don't go over there." He begged her.
"Something might happen to you if you go about all alone." She cried. He
said, "If you want to follow him, come at sunset to Ha’ana (northeast of
Cochiti). When it's a little dark lie under the trees by the road. You
will catch them yourself. They always come along this road late."

She waited until dark and lay down under the trees. She heard their
voices. She trembled all over. They were coming along just as if they
were married. When they were near, she sprang up and ran to the woman.
"It is because of you that my husband treats me badly. You are stealing
my husband. You will see what you'll get for this. I will fight you."
The man left them there, and the women fought. The wife saw the other
girl had on the moccasins her husband had made. She seized one of her
legs and ripped off the moccasin and tore it in pieces. They came along
the whole way fighting like roosters. The wife lived by the church in
Hĕna, the girl lived at Putiua. People at Cochiti heard the fight and
they all came out to see what was happening. The wife's mother saw her
daughter coming fighting. "Poor thing, poor thing, do not act in this
way." "Mother, don't stop me. I caught them together. She'll see what
she gets." "I didn't know you went out, my daughter." "I am just paying
this girl back for all I've suffered from my husband because of her."
They fought. "Now you can go. \[paragraph continues\]

<span id="page_115">p. 115</span>

I have paid you what my husband gave me." She picked up stones and threw
them after her. Her mother was sad. "My daughter, I didn't know you went
out there. If your husband and this girl caught you as you caught them
perhaps I'd never see you any more." She went home. Her husband never
went back to her again.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_126"></span>[114:17](tci060.htm#fr_127) Informant 1. Notes,
[p. 222](tci125.htm#page_222).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Wife's Revenge](tci061)
