[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Southwest](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](tci119)  [Next](tci121) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### BUFFALO HUNTING OF THE PLAINS <span id="fr_214"></span>[8](#fn_213)

We went from here in August. We had horses with three poles fastened to
them for a travois, and we had one wagon drawn by

<span id="page_198">p. 198</span>

oxen. We went a day's journey and slept in a canyon. Next day we came to
Pecos. In the morning we went on again and came to San José. The next
night we camped at Turkey River. After that we traveled day and night.
We came out on the Plains at a great body of water that was called Green
Lake. From there we went north all the time. We camped at a rocky place
called the Cross. A day's journey north from there we came to a camp of
Mexicans. I said to Antonio (his chum), "Here is lots of meat." These
Mexicans were good hunters and they gave us food.

In the morning our leader told us, "Be ready to hunt." He took his long
buffalo stick <span id="fr_215"></span>[9](#fn_214) and tied a piece of
his fringed leggings to the top of it. I said to Antonio, "Let us go
after the hunter and see him kill the buffalo." He went out. We saw a
solitary buffalo coming to a pond to drink. He waded in, and when he was
fast in the mud, the leader went up close on horseback and noosed him.
He drew the rope tight and pulled him out of the pond. He spread out the
carcass and took the skin and some of the meat, but he left the greater
part because it would spoil. He went back to camp.

Next day we rested. That night we went to the Mexican camp and told them
to get their people together; we would form a party together to go out
hunting on the plains. The Mexicans received us well, and said,
"To-morrow we will go." He (Mexican leader) guided us a whole day's
trip. At midnight we came to the camping place. There was a lot of water
there and we were all thirsty. He said, "Go and drink." We went down to
the water but the brush grew so thick we could not reach it.

Next day we went on. The Indians and the Mexicans separated, the
Mexicans going one way and the Indians another. At a place called
Kapolina we came upon the buffalo. Two of the men had bows and arrows,
the leader had a spear, and I had a gun. We were all on horseback and we
killed six buffalo. We cut them and skinned them and packed the meat and
skins on the four horses. It was late when we got to the place where we
had camped. There were lots of people there and we hid, for we were
frightened. Then we saw that they were hunters from Santo Domingo and
from Santa Clara and from Sandia, who had arrived that day. We all
stayed four days there. The Indians of the other pueblos asked our
leader if he would lead their hunting party; we held a council with them
and planned to go hunting together.

That night we cut the six buffalo in strips and spread the meat on the
grass to dry it. The fat we hung from the cedar bushes. \[paragraph
continues\]

<span id="page_199">p. 199</span>

We made a feast for all the three pueblos, and put slabs of meat on the
coals and cracked the bones for the marrow.

After four days we went out all together on a hunt. It was a big hunt
for all the other pueblos were with us. We went north. As we were
passing an arroyo I saw a buffalo coming and I went after him. I killed
it in the arroyo. A Santo Domingo Indian came up and said, "Shall I help
you cut it up?" "No, this buffalo is only three years old. I can manage
it by myself." We all came back to camp bringing the buffalo we had
killed. That night we sliced the meat and hung the fat to dry. Each man
was given the same amount and the one who worked fastest went to bed
first. We stayed there a week. Every night the people of the other
pueblos came to the Cochiti camp and danced, and were paid with meat. We
had great piles of dried buffalo meat all ready to carry home. All our
provisions were gone, and we ate nothing but buffalo meat. The buffalo
fat we used just like bread. It snowed and we went hunting again. It was
very cold. Two Santa Clara hunters and two Sandia hunters were nearly
frozen. They could not go any farther through the snow. We went out to
look for them, and found them sitting in the snow with their legs
frozen. We took them to camp. They hobbled on sticks.

Next night we were ready to come home. We sent messengers ahead to the
home pueblos to tell them we were starting back. Antonio told me how to
lead the horses, how to pile dry meat on the buffalo skin and place the
load on the horses and tie it up. Next day we started, and that night we
came to the place where we had killed the buffalo that was stuck in the
mud. We rested that day. Then we started again. That day we traveled on
soft dirt, but the next day we had a hard road. We traveled night and
day for three days and three nights. Finally we came to Tucumcare. We
stayed all day and rested. The next day we got to Red Paint place, and
we gathered paint to bring home (as always, when they made this trip).
We got to Pajarito that night. We danced all night and told stories. The
next day we got to Turkey River (Mexican settlement). We stayed there
all day. We had the tongue of the wagon repaired and paid for it with
meat. We traded two or three oxen that were exhausted, for fresh oxen.

The next day the messenger from Cochiti returned. He said that our
message had come to Cochiti and that they were getting ready for us
there. He brought food to each of the Cochiti hunters from our wives. I
had a little baby. My wife had taken the hand of our baby and marked the
dough with it, and the bread in my lunch was marked with our baby's
hand. The messenger told me, "Hurry,

<span id="page_200">p. 200</span>

your father and mother are very homesick for you." I could not wait to
get home. I started on alone, and that night I slept alone at San José
River. I went on to Baca Ojo. People had told me, "Be careful, my
friend, there are lots of thieves there." I traveled all day alone, and
got to Baca Ojo. They begged me to stay there, and asked me to put my
mule in the barn.

I came on the next day to Galisteo, and from there I came in one day to
Cochiti. In the morning I came to a Mexican settlement. They said,
"Buffalo hunter, give me some grease, give me some meat." They took me
to their houses. I said, "I will give you some, I am not as hungry as
you Mexicans are." They took me into their houses and gave me good
things to eat and let me, rest a little. They were hungry for the
buffalo meat. I came to La Bajara Canyon. At home they were watching for
me, and went to my mother and father and told them that their son was
coming. My people were excited, and they went down to the river to meet
me. My father was very old, and my mother and father cried when they saw
me. I said to them, "Why are you thinking so much about me? I am well.
I've grown fat." We all went together to my house.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_213"></span>[197:8](tci120.htm#fr_214) Informant 3.

<span id="fn_214"></span>[198:9](tci120.htm#fr_215) This is called at
other times a spear, which, the informant said, the leader carried and
with which he stuck each buffalo. The animal then belonged to the leader
who "stuck" it, and he distributed the meat ceremonially when the people
had danced for it.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Antelope Hunting](tci121)
