[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Southwest](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](tci112)  [Next](tci114) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_191">p. 191</span>

### MONTEZUMA <span id="fr_205"></span>[1](#fn_204)

When Columbus discovered America, Montezuma was chief of the Taska'la
pueblo (near the capital of Mexico). He was pure Indian. Montezuma was a
strong ruler; no matter how many nations came to his country he would
not allow anyone to settle there. Montezuma knew that he could not
always rule his people, that some day he would have to give up his
power. He talked to his people and told them just how long he would
rule, and how he would go away. When the time came, he chose a Malinche
(his partner whenever he appears) and dressed her as we do for a dance,
put a white manta on her and feathers in her hair. He took this woman
and went down to a lake. There he told them, "I am going away, but I do
not die. I shall come again. When I have gone home, people from the
northeast will come, and they will be white. They will rule here." He
was dressed in ceremonial costume, wearing buckskin and a feather
headdress, and when he had spoken, he went down with the woman into the
water. He said he would come back when there were already many whites in
the country, but he did not say in what way he would return; we do not
understand. Perhaps he will be born again. as a baby, and perhaps he
will come full-grown just as he was when he went into the lake.

Before he left, he said, "You shall choose Wa'tumasi' to rule over you."
Wa'tumasi' was a chief of Aztĕko pueblo and he had married the sister of
Montezuma. He took Montezuma's place, but he was not a real Montezuma.
Many nations came to his country and wanted to settle there, Nan'kortez
came with many soldiers. He went about among the pueblos and did great
damage. He tried to end all customs and religions. His soldiers had
married the women of Taskala and Aztĕka, and he had many friends. When
he went to Taskala, he said to the chief men, "It is not right that the
chief of the Aztĕka should rule over you. You should set up your own
chief, and drive out Wa'tumasi'." When he went to Aztĕka he said, "The
pueblo of Taskala wishes to drive out the ruler that Montezuma placed
over them. Do not give up what is yours." So he set them by the ears. At
last he allied himself with Taskala and they made war on Aztĕka. They
fought bard, and all the soldiers of Nan'kortez were killed. He went
back to Spain to get more soldiers and all the time he was gone the
pueblos of Taskala and Aztĕka continued to fight. When he returned, the
people of Taskala had made allies of half the people and the people of
Aztĕka had made allies of the other half. Those Mexicans who had married
women of Taskala fought

<span id="page_192">p. 192</span>

with Taskala and those who had married women of Aztĕka fought with
Aztĕka. They fought the second war, and Nan'kortez fought again with
Taskala.

Wa'tumasi'’s wife dreamed that there would be four wars (with
Nan'kortez) and in the fourth war Wa'tumasi' would be captured. He
waited for the fourth war. He was captured and Nan'kortez put him in
prison, and sent word to the King of Spain that Wa'tumasi' had
surrendered; therefore Mexico was governed after this by the, King of
Spain. Nan'kortez took all the gold and treasures of Montezuma and took
them all to Spain. <span id="fr_206"></span>[4](#fn_205) The pueblos of
Taskala and Aztĕka set up other Montezumas, but they no longer had any
power.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_204"></span>[191:1](tci113.htm#fr_205) Informant 4. Notes,
[p. 219](tci124.htm#page_219).

<span id="fn_205"></span>[192:4](tci113.htm#fr_206) "The fathers at Peña
Blanca (Catholic mission opposite Cochiti) have told us that if the
Indians put in a claim for this treasure the king of Spain would be
obliged to return it; the governor of the United States would make him
send it back. The pueblos had a council but they did not want to put in
a claim for this treasure. Then the United States and Spain had a war
over it, and the United States won, but none of the treasure came back
to Cochiti."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The First Battle with the Whites](tci114)
