[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Southwest](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](tci122)  [Next](tci124) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_203">p. 203</span>

# I. ORIGIN TALES AND STORIES OF THE KATCINAS AND THE SOCIETIES

### ORIGIN TALES

### THE FLOOD

The story of a primordial world is full of European elements.

Before the people of this present dispensation came from the place of
emergence the people of the previous dispensation prepared for a great
flood. They manned a boat and stuffed it with corn. All those who were
overtaken by the flood were drowned or were turned into rocks. When the
flood had subsided, the white pigeon and the crow were sent out of the
boat to look for land, but the crow ate the eyes of the dead and in
punishment his feathers became black. Therefore crows are black. These
people of the former world who were saved in the boat are called "last
year's crop people" and are identified as Orientals, who are rarely seen
along the Rio Grande ([p. 2](tci003.htm#page_2)).

### QUARREL OF THE TWO SISTERS

The story of the two sisters Uretsete and Naotsete is the sacred origin
story of Cochiti, but for it we have to depend upon the version recorded
by Dumarest before 1900. There is to-day a strong feeling against
telling it to the whites, and only the culminating incident was told me.

Uretsete was the mother of the Indians, Naotsete, the elder sister, of
the whites. They both wanted to go to the south to people the country,
and Naotsete challenged her younger sister to a contest of powers to
determine which should have the privilege. She was to tell the direction
in which the tracks of a bird led along a meal road she had made.
Uretsete guessed correctly and called Turkey Man who had made the
tracks. He therefore belonged to her. In return she challenged Naotsete
In the same fashion, but caused the chaparral cock to leave his tracks
In the meal road. These do not indicate direction, and the elder sister
failed in her guess. Neither could she name the bird that had left the
tracks, so that chaparral cock also went to Uretsete and belonged to
her. In return Naotsete challenged her to name the rattlesnake who had
similarly left tracks on the meal road; she did so and won rattlesnake
to belong to her. Again Uretsete challenged her sister to guess Crow;
she failed and Crow also belonged to Uretsete.

The two sisters therefore challenged each other to fight. They were to
undergo a test before the entire people and success would belong to the
one on whom the rays of the sun rested first. Naotsete was the taller
and was confident of victory. The sisters fasted for four days while
their people made arrows for the warfare to follow. The sisters stood
for the test on a little hill and the war captains watched closely. But
Spider Man sent Magpie who covered a part of the sun with his wings so
that the rays fell on Uretsete.\[paragraph continues\]

<span id="page_204">p. 204</span>

As soon as she had won she seized her sister and the war captains helped
to bind her. Her sister tore open her chest and removed her heart. When
it was split open a squirrel came from the north side and a white dove
from the south. Uretsete then withdrew to Shipap, counselling her people
against disputes. (Dumarest, 212-215.)

Only the challenge of the sun's rays is told in the versions given in
1926 (p. 1). Both versions agree closely, and add one detail recorded
also for the Sia <span id="fr_220"></span>[1](#fn_219) (p. 34), and
indicated also in Dumarest (p. 214, n. 2), which depends upon an
association between the woodrat and the Navahos.

The Navahos are said at Cochiti to have taboos that center upon the
woodrat, and in these three tales Naotsete saves herself by running off
into the rocks as a woodrat; that is why Navahos still save themselves
among the rocks.

All the Cochiti versions agree therefore with the Sia story <span
id="fr_221"></span>[1](#fn_219) in making Uretsete the local divinity
and Naotsete the mother of the Navahos (of the whites also, Dumarest).
One version names Uretsete's shrine at Yoashke near Cochiti.

The Cochiti and Sia versions are set over against the Laguna versions
(for discussion see Boas, 228-238) where I'tc‘ts‘it<sup>y</sup>‘i is the
father of the whites and Nau'ts‘it<sup>y</sup>‘i the mother of the
Indians.

### EMERGENCE

The place of emergence in Cochiti is called Shipap and it is the home of
the dead and the supernaturals.

There are four "rooms" each guarded by Mountain Lion, over which Masewa
keeps watch. When people come who have a right to the help of the
Cochiti supernaturals, he quiets Mountain Lion. In the first room the
sk’akuts katcinas are parching corn. They jump when a kernel pops (the
description of the other three rooms was obviously omitted). In the
fourth room is Heluta, father of the katcinas ([p.
10](tci012.htm#page_10)).

In Shipap also Heluta imprisons the deer until they are let out over the
world for the use of man ([p. 11](tci012.htm#page_11)).

Our mother forbade the witches to accompany her children, but her plans
miscarried. The witches came up into this world ([p.
4](tci005.htm#page_4)).

The emergence was led by Masewa and his younger brother, followed by
Iareku, the corn mother, and all her people. They came through the
gateway of the rainbow and before they came out they had each received
from Masewa instructions as to where they were to settle in this world
(pp. [7](tci008.htm#page_7), [13](tci015.htm#page_13),
[249](tci128.htm#page_249)).

Each Indian carried an ear of corn and they stopped to grind when they
came to flat slabs of stone outcropping from the soil ([p.
13](tci015.htm#page_13)).

### THE ORIGIN OF THE STARS

(3 versions, *a* Dumarest, p. 227; *b* Benedict, informant 1, p. 4; *c*
Benedict, informant 1, p. 4)

Our mother gave the bag of stars, to carry up from the under world, to
Kotcimanyako, *b*; to Coyote, *c*; to Scarabeus, who has two eyes which
shine like

<span id="page_205">p. 205</span>

stars. At the advice of spider she had made the stars of cornmeal dough
and left them in the ashes without cooking so that they would shine,
*a*. Our mother forbade the carrier of the bag to open it but he
disobeyed. The stars flew into the sky in disorder and only a few of the
constellations were given names. (Therefore Coyote was punished with
great difficulty in providing himself with food, *c*; and Scarabeus was
punished with blindness and given only two horns with which to feel his
way, *a*.)

### FIRST DEATH

As they left Shipap a child sickened, and since this was the first
sickness they sent the chief of the Giant curing society back to our
mother in Shipap for help. She told him that if she helped her people in
this the world would be overcrowded with the living and It was better
for them to the and return to Shipap and live with her ([p.
5](tci005.htm#page_5)).

At this time all people were brothers, corn ripened In one day and
everyone was happy ([p. 5](tci005.htm#page_5)).

The people separated, half settling at White House and half at the
Village of Two Lions (pp. [5](tci005.htm#page_5),
[13](tci015.htm#page_13)).

### PLACE OF THE DEAD

The dead returned to Shipap and occasionally come back to this world for
various reasons and report what they have seen. One such story is
recorded of a man who was cruel to animals. He died and was escorted by
the spirit messengers to Shipap. He saw that the roads approaching it
were beautifully cared for, the work of many people. In Shipap the chief
priests received him with grief because of his cruelty to animals, and
he knelt and asked forgiveness. He was sent back to his body before it
was prepared for burial, and summoned the war chiefs and priests and
told them what he had seen. Ultimately he became cacique ([p.
128](tci069.htm#page_128)).

Another tale recounts the summoning of the flint priest to the other
world before he was installed as cacique. Supernatural messengers took
him out of his body and returned him to it just as it had been made
ready for burial. Meanwhile, In the other world, he had been shown the
punishments that awaited the wicked and the happiness that would come to
the good and how to care for his people as cacique ([p.
130](tci071.htm#page_130)).

Still another story of this sort tells of a mother who grieved for her
dead daughter, refusing to wash herself or cut her hair. Her daughter
was sent with the two supernatural messengers to appear to her mother,
dishevelled and dirty on account of her mother's mourning. The mother
washed herself and was then taken by the messengers to the other world
where she was shown her daughter who was again happy and clean. She was
returned to her body just as they were burying it ([p.
131](tci071.htm#page_131)).

Another account is told as a personal experience. It is full of
Christian elements. A hell is pictured for the wicked, and war captains
police them lest they escape ([p. 255](tci130.htm#page_255)).

### REBELLION AGAINST OUR MOTHER

The rebellion against the Mother which takes various forms in the
eastern pueblos (Boas, 27; 67) is not so strongly emphasized in these
Cochiti tales.

After Uretsete withdrew into Shipap, the people continued their travels.
But they quarrelled, and in consequence, they were decimated by illness.
They sent Coyote to Our Mother, but she reproached the people and asked
them to

<span id="page_206">p. 206</span>

select two men to send to her. When they came she gave them each a corn
fetish (iareko) which Spider helped her prepare with parrot feathers and
eagle down. These two became medicine men. (Dumarest, 215.)

The estrangement from Our Mother is referred to also In connection with
the plenty which Hummingbird enjoyed In Shipap, while all the rest were
starving as a result of a punishment of her people for their disbelief.
She withheld the storm clouds for four years ([p.
5](tci005.htm#page_5)). The story is more fully recorded from Laguna.
(Boas, p. 10-12.)

### ORIGIN OF SALT

(2 versions: *a*, Benedict, informant 1, [p. 6](tci007.htm#page_6); *b*,
informant 2, [p. 7](tci008.htm#page_7))

After Cochiti was settled Salt Woman came to the pueblo with her
grandson, Salt Man. She was scabby and old and dirty and people turned
her away unfed. She told the people, "These scabs are not sores," i. e.
were salt. (She left the pueblo and came to a place where children were
playing, swinging on a tree. She had a magic crystal, and she turned
them all into chaparral jays. They went to Santo Domingo and were
received and she gave them her flesh to eat *a*. She stayed only a
little while at Santo Domingo for people fouled her place *b*.) They
settled permanently to the southeast, at Salt Lake, and decreed the
people must go quietly and naked to get salt. That is why it is
necessary to go so far for salt.

(A similar idea is embodied in a. tale of European derivation, The
Contest of Good-tasting Fat. All the animals contested over the good
taste of their fat. Salt Mother decided the contest, proving that it was
all one what fat was eaten so long as she had not flavored the dish ([p.
7](tci008.htm#page_7)).

### THE INSTITUTION OF ANIMAL POWERS

The carnivorous animals went into retreat In preparation for the
blessing of the kind of livelihood they should have In this world.
Coyote was thirsty the third day, put sacred meal in the water and
drank. He told Wildcat and she did the same. Therefore good hunting was
given the other animals, but poor to Wildcat and Coyote ([p.
8](tci009.htm#page_8)).

### ORIGIN OF DEER

(3 versions: *a* Boas, p. 251; *b* Benedict, [p.
61](tci035.htm#page_61); *c* Benedict, [p. 11](tci012.htm#page_11))

Ganadyani (Heluta, *b*) planted dewclaws which sprouted into full grown
deer, *b*, *c*; he planted all kinds of game, *a*. He had (a baby son
Payatamu, *a*; a son-in-law Corncob Boy, *b*) and when he took him to
his field he knocked off the antlers of the deer just appearing from the
ground, *a*, *b*. When the game was full grown (he shut the deer up In
Shipap, and then let them out to fill the world, *c*; he Instituted the
rites to be performed over game that has been killed, and dispersed the
animals over the world, *a*). Corncob Boy in return for Deerplanter's
field of game, planted corn and taught Deerplanter's people its use,
*b*.

## STORIES OF THE KATCINAS

### HELUTA

The most prominent figure in the katcina tales, as he is also in any
katcina dance, is Heluta. He is called the father of the katcinas

<span id="page_207">p. 207</span>

and precedes their entry at a dance, announcing them and talking with
the people by signs. One of the tales of Heluta merges in that of
Ganadjani, the name changing midway of the tale. Ganadjani is father of
the koshare (Goldfrank, 53, n. 1) and father of the Shurdzi (Goldfrank,
62) and his shrine is the Shurdzi shrine. My notes specify his relation
to the Shurdzi but not to the koshare. In the tales he is the planter of
the deer, in whose garden the deer originate.

Heluta and Nyenyega, father of the Shurdzi, both wanted to marry Yellow
Woman, and the koshare set the test: to bring to Yellow Woman a deer
without a wound. N<sup>y</sup>en<sup>y</sup>ega succeeded and married
Yellow Woman ([p. 9](tci010.htm#page_9)).

Heluta lives in Shipap ([p. 10](tci012.htm#page_10)). He is the father
of Corncob Boy ([p. 62](tci035.htm#page_62)). He is the planter of the
deer (pp. [11](tci012.htm#page_11), [61](tci035.htm#page_61),
[251](tci129.htm#page_251)).

Heluta is summoned to compete in a contest of food supplies. He arrives
with only one little cob with a few scattered kernels on it. They mock
him and he promises that In four years they shall rank his living above
theirs. He withholds the rain. In the distress of famine they send Fly
to Shipap as a messenger, but Heluta tears out its tongue and on its
return it can only buzz. They sent Hummingbird who acknowledges to
Heluta the submission of his people and Heluta promises help if they
offer him a deer from the north side of the mountain upon which the sun
has never shone. They find such a deer and the drought ends ([p.
9](tci010.htm#page_9)).

Again in a tale of Corncob Boy, here Heluta's son, he punishes his
people for sex license by withholding rain. Only Corncob Boy is given
corn and an inexhaustible bowl of water, and is told to be generous to
the people in their need. When they are in great distress they ask
Corncob Boy to Intercede with his father and he sends Coyote as
messenger. Heluta relents and gives them the ceremony of the Giant
Society and it Is followed by rain ([p. 62](tci035.htm#page_62)).

In another tale of Corncob Boy, Heluta, is his father-in-law. Corncob
Boy leaves his pueblo and his two wives, because his people have mocked
him, and withholds the rain. Only to his wives he leaves Inexhaustible
water and corn and tells them to be generous. In the northwest he meets
two girls, Heluta's daughters, who marry him. His father shows him his
fields but he sees nothing. When he brushes aside sand he knocks off the
tender antlers of Heluta's growing deer. In return he plants corn and
teaches Heluta not to knock off its tender shoots. He teaches Heluta's
people the use of corn as food ([p. 61](tci035.htm#page_61)).

Heluta's (Ganadjani's) seeds are dewclaws. When he plants these the
antlers appear first, then full-sized deer. He takes them to Shipap and
shuts them up there. To fill the earth with deer he opens the gates and
lets them out upon the mountain. Therefore there are deer In the world
([p. 11](tci012.htm#page_11)).

In the text version ([p. 251](tci129.htm#page_251)) a combination of the
two stories, pp. [11](tci012.htm#page_11) and [61](tci035.htm#page_61),
is told of Ganadyani and his son Payatamu (youth). See notes, "Origin of
Deer," [p. 206](#page_206).

### THE IMPRISONMENT OF THE KATCINAS

The widely distributed pueblo story of the imprisonment of the katcinas
is fragmentary in our version.

A squirrel ran in among the katcinas at a basket dance, and frightened
them so that they ran away and could not be found. The people appealed
to Heluta and he commanded the koshare to find them. Masewa repeated his

<span id="page_208">p. 208</span>

command as deputy. The koshare broke open the earth at their feet and a
spruce tree grew out of it. Up this the lost katcinas climbed. They were
very weak from imprisonment. When the people saw them they were very
happy again ([p. 11](tci012.htm#page_11)).

Another story of the loss and recovery of the koshare is told of the
time when the people were living at White House and at the Village of
the Two Lions.

The kurena had a dance and after it went back to their house In the
east. But the koshare went off to (the then uninhabited) Cochiti, the
middle of the world. After this the katcina dances at White House were
failures because no koshare came with them, and at last Iareku, the Corn
Mother, told them to go to Cochiti, to the center of the world, where
they would find the lost clowns. Masewa led them to Cochiti and after
all the people had enjoyed the dance, the colors of the directions were
assigned to the koshare in the house of the Flint Society ([p.
14](tci016.htm#page_14)).

### OTHER KATICINAS

Yellow Woman's son is a little child when the katcinas return from
imprisonment, but when they have retired for four dances he is full
grown and takes his position as dance leader in the middle of the line
of dancers (mayurli katsena).

Clay Old Man and Clay Old Woman, katcinas, instituted pottery. Old Man
danced for her while she worked and when the pot was almost done he
knocked it over with his foot and broke it. She snatched up his stick (a
part of his regular katcina costume) and chased him (a pantomime which
is acted out in their katcina appearances). Afterwards Old Man gave a
bit of her clay to all the women in the village and enjoined pottery
making ([p. 12](tci013.htm#page_12)).

Bloody Handprint Katcina is much feared. The first time he came with the
katcinas to dance, he insisted on challenging a boy to race. When the
boy outdistanced him he threw his long obsidian knife at him and killed
him. He lives at the shrine at Koash'ke ([p. 13](tci015.htm#page_13)).

Gawi'ma celebrated by dance and song Arrow Boy's discovery of his wife
in sky land, and was paid by him with two turkeys ([p.
48](tci031.htm#page_48)).

Corn Soot Woman, Wesa, is a patron of the women's Corn Grinding society.
Her name and that of Ioashka figure in their songs. Corn Soot Woman
blessed the grinders with the promise of fat corn when her flesh (corn
soot) was included with the corn for grinding (pp.
[14](tci016.htm#page_14), [15](tci017.htm#page_15)).

## STORIES OF THE SOCIETIES

### THE KATCINAS OF THE WOMEN'S CORN GRINDING SOCIETY

The women's corn grinding society ground ceremonially that there might
be plenty of corn flour. Four women remained in the society room that
they might begin grinding before sunrise. They laid aside the sooted
ears to discard, but Corn Soot Woman appeared and protested, promising
that their corn should be fat if soot was included. Therefore they grind
the sooted ears with the rest end use her name in their songs ([p.
14](tci016.htm#page_14)).

### THE KOSHARE DANCE IN FRIJOLES CANYON

In the old days the Koshare were dancing on the roof tops. They threw a
little baby from one roof top to another and it fell and was killed. The
\[paragraph continues\]

<span id="page_209">p. 209</span>

Koshare jumped down after the baby and were killed also. For this reason
they left Frijoles and went to the mesa of the Stone Lions ([p.
15](tci017.htm#page_15)). In those days when they danced the footprints
of the people and their turkeys remained as landmarks ([p.
15](tci017.htm#page_15)).

### THE DEER DANCE

There are supernatural dangers associated with the dances.

At a certain deer dance the deer dancers were permanently metamorphosed
into deer and ran into the mountains. They tried to recover them through
the curing society ceremonies but they could not ([p.
17](tci021.htm#page_17)).

### THE SNAKE SOCIETY

The scene of a Snake Society story is laid in Sia, there being no snake
society in Cochiti at present.

A four days' fast of the Snake Society members enabled them to catch
snakes for their dance. They put these in great ollas in the ceremonial
room. They had to drink water flavored with ground cactus flowers. On
the fourth night there was a general curing ceremony in their ceremonial
room, and four members of the society danced with the snakes before the
ground altar. The feast was brought in, and afterwards the members slept
in the ceremonial room. They had intercourse with each other, and for
their sins they were turned into stone. They can still be seen in Sia
([p. 15](tci017.htm#page_15)).

### PUYATC SOCIETY

When Pecos was deserted those who were left behind committed suicide by
ceremonially becoming snakes. The others, who had gone down to Santo
Domingo, summoned the Puyatc Society, and tried ceremonially to restore
their relatives, but without success. Therefore the remnants of the
people of Pecos who live in Santo Domingo now have the Puyatc Society
([p. 16](tci019.htm#page_16)).

### GIANT SOCIETY

The Giant Society in. Cochiti is the curing society for all those who
are not specifically members of some other curing society. As they say,
the Giant Society is for all the uninitiated. It functions for them also
at birth, death, etc. For this reason the Giant Society is mentioned as
the proper curing society as a matter of course in many tales.

The Giant Society was instituted by Heluta after the great drought to
show his forgiveness of his people and to bring back the rains. The
Giant Society by its power created a giant magically to overcome the
child-eating giant of the witches ([p. 17](tci021.htm#page_17)). The
Giant Society acts as the curing society (pp. [76](tci041.htm#page_76),
[109](tci056.htm#page_109)).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_219"></span>[204:1](tci123.htm#fr_221) The Sia, by Matilda
Coxe Stevenson. Eleventh Ann. Rept. Bur. Ethn., p. 33.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: II. Hero Tales](tci124)
