[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Southwest](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](tci127)  [Next](tci129) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_249">p. 249</span>

# APPENDIX

### PLACE OF EMERGENCE <span id="fr_228"></span>[1](#fn_226)

Long ago in the north below from the Place of Emergence, everybody came
out. Now when those who are everyone's chiefs came out they all went
out. They went down south. Ma\*'s’ewa and Oyoyewa were watching them
when from there they started. Then all the people were now going south.
Everyone was moving away south and they built towns, but always were,
still watching them everyone's fathers, everyone's chiefs as they went.
Again when day came, they were always going. They only moved southward.
Thus they were always going. Now they were just going to the middle
south. Again somewhere from there they stopped. When it was day again
they always started from there. Thus they were just going to go south,
being taken by those who were everyone's chiefs, Ma\*'s’ewa and Oyoyewa.
But everyone's cacique was always walking in the middle. He took them,
carrying all his people on his arms, until they arrived there somewhere
at White House. And everyone's mother spoke thus, "Indeed, here it is."
Now everyone's mother made them arrive. He just carried all his people,
his children, in his arms. Now he arrived there. Therefore there was
going to be here the town of everyone's mother. Everyone's fathers,
Ma\*'s’ewa and Oyoyewa, were going to make a town. Then everyone's
fathers, Ma\*'s’ewa and Oyoyewa and everyone's mother notified them.
Later on the uninitiated were told how to act by Ma\*'s’ewa and Oyoyewa.
Then the two said, "It is good, everyone's mother, cacique, this place
is ready for you, everyone's, mother. For his sake let there be a town
here." Then everyone's mother, the cacique, made a town. Then he called
it White House. That was the White House. Now it was a town. Then the
people increased. Ma\*'s’ewa and Oyoyewa were always watching them. They
two took care of them, the whole town and the people. But everyone's
mother made an altar down in the north room, west room, south room, east
room, and above and below. After everyone's chief had made all of them,
then Ma\*'s’ewa and Oyoyewa looked after the room, looking after what
everyone's mother had made and also the White House. Then the people had
children and the town increased. Afterwards the people increased
excessively. \[paragraph continues\]

<span id="page_250">p. 250</span>

Then somewhere and somehow it happened that they began to separate
there. Then some people were going to separate. Each one was trying to
the everyone's people. Well, then they did so, but everyone's poor
mother had altars in the north room, west room, south room, and east
room. Then they were going to separate. Some went southwest, some, to
the middle south, some went southeast. Then they were separated. Then
everyone's people were going to take them as they went. They arrived in
the southwest. Then they moved here toward the southwest. Then they were
still going southward and they arrived way down south in the appointed
place. They were going to reach the place for which they were hoping.
Still everyone's mother was taking care of them as; they went and still
everyone's chief was also taking care of them as they went. Then they
were going to reach way down south Go'hawaima. They were going to
arrive. They were hoping to go in there. They were still coming from the
middle north down there. At the middle south they stopped. Here in the
north they stopped where everybody's mother said, "The four truly sacred
places are here," she said. Here he made altars and chiefs Ma\*'s’ewa
and Oyoyewa were always watching them as they went. They went along
coming from [the](errata.htm#3) north and they began to make towns. They
built altars. Thus they were coming from the north. Once upon a time
they did go from there and they left all the altars for the towns. They
went down south from there. Therefore there are many ruins in the north.
Everybody's grandfather and everybody's grandmother left there.
Therefore there are still ruins on the hills in the north. Then they
wished for the place there in the south appointed by everyone's mother.
They wished to go there to the south to Go'hawaima, that was the place
appointed by everyone's mother which they were going to reach. They went
along. They were going to go away. They were going to grow up. They were
going to arrive there in the south, at the place appointed by
everybody's mother. Everybody was destined to grow up, to arrive, to
climb up and to enter there. Then whatever everybody's mother ordained,
that was obeyed. They climbed up and entered there. Then everybody's
mother doe's everything for everyone. Here will be the resting place.
From here they went southeast, still taking the same way. They were also
always going southward to Go'hawaima. They were going to arrive. They
were going to climb up and enter somewhere where everyone's mother had
promised. They took everything and had it. Then from there they were all
going to assemble again. Then again our mother made everything sacred.
Here, then, will be the, resting place. Then for the sake of everybody,
you who are everybody's mother, cacique, you will have the power to take
this.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_226"></span>[249:1](tci128.htm#fr_228) Recorded in text by
Franz Boas. See also pp. [2](tci003.htm#page_2)-5. Notes, [p.
204](tci123.htm#page_204).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ganadyani](tci129)
