[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Southwest](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](tci110)  [Next](tci112) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### THE COMING OF THE MEXICANS <span id="fr_202"></span>[1](#fn_201)

Long ago before the Mexicans had settled thickly in this country they
heard there were cities to the north. Some of the Mexicans went to their
government and asked to come up against these wild Indians. Twelve men
started out and came first to Tucson. The Mexicans prayed to their god
that nobody should harm them, and they promised not to harm anybody. Ten
of the men were half-breeds (half Indian) and two were new-comers in the
country \[paragraph continues\]

<span id="page_188">p. 188</span>

(Spaniards). One of the Spaniards prayed for them all every day, and as
they went on he grew wiser and more powerful. They came to Zuñi and
stopped there. In those days they did not know how to count a year, but
they stayed about a year. When the Zuñi people first saw them, they were
afraid. They thought they were animals because of the hair that grew on
their faces, but the Spaniard who prayed went out and asked their god
for power to cure the sick at Zuñi, and it was given to him. When the
people saw that the sick were healed, they welcomed the strangers, and
in a few days they gave thanks to the god of the Mexicans.

The Spaniard planned to send three of the party back to Mexico with
messages, to tell their government that they were well received, that no
sickness had interrupted their journey, and that the Zuñis were willing
to take the Spanish on to new pueblos to the east. The three messengers
started back to Old Mexico doing the best they could to avoid danger
from the Indians, sometimes travelling by night.

When they had gone, the Zuñis provided an escort to take,
The-one-who-had-cured-the-sick to Acoma. He lived there and healed the
people. They went on to Laguna. The Zuñis told the people how long they
had lived at Zuñi, and how many miracles they had done, and that their
only difference from the Indians was that they had hair on their faces.
They stayed there a second year. The Acoma Indians followed to Laguna
bringing other sick people who had not yet been cured. The Zuñis went
back home from Laguna, and the Lagunas brought the Spaniards on to
Isleta. They told them not to be afraid for all Indians in this country
were brothers. The Acoma Indians who were sick were brought all the way
to Isleta to be cured by the Spaniard who had power. Also the Lagunas
brought their sick. If any were sick, too, in Isleta., they brought them
to him to be cured, and he cured them. While they stayed, one of the men
of the party in Isleta became the lover of a girl of this pueblo and it
is for this reason that we think Isleta is the most Spanish of the
Indian pueblos. They had children and their great-grandchildren speak of
this ancestor to-day.

The Isleta Indians guided the Spaniard-who-cured-the-sick on to Sandia,
and the Sandia Indians brought them on to Santa Ana. After that they
were taken west to Old Sia (to the northwest of present site). Many of
the other pueblos had heard of these people who had come from the south,
one of whom was a miracle worker, and they sent messages to each other
asking about them. In every pueblo where they had been, the fathers
said, "They are good people."

<span id="page_189">p. 189</span>

When they came to Sia, they stayed there some time. Then the Indians
took them to Jemez. Jemez was then far up in the canyon on the west
side. The Jemez Indians brought the Spaniards to the present site of
Cochiti (there were no people there then) and they passed east. They
went to Pecos and stayed at Pecos two years. The fathers took them to
the different northern pueblos, but they made their headquarters all
this time in Pecos.

While they were living there, another band of Spaniards started from
Mexico. They reached Zuñi, and there they sent word to the others, "Meet
us at Laguna; we have arrived from Mexico." As soon as they heard this
word they went back to meet the others at Laguna. The new company had a
priest from Old Mexico and he was already baptizing. They came on and
met the others at Laguna. The priest taught them that they should build
churches and missions. When they left Laguna, the priest and his
companions went on to Jemez. They welcomed him and told him they would
build a church. They built there the first church. The people had
already known The-man-who-cured-the-sick and they therefore accepted the
priest and the church with great readiness. When they had been accepted
in Jemez they went on to Pecos. These were the first three
churches. <span id="fr_203"></span>[2](#fn_202) That is the way we were
taught the churches were built. Soon after they built the next church at
Laguna. That is the way the new discoverers came from the south. Only
seven returned to Old Mexico; the rest remained with the Indians.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_201"></span>[187:1](tci111.htm#fr_202) Informant 4.

<span id="fn_202"></span>[189:2](tci111.htm#fr_203) There is a fault
here in the account. When questioned the narrator answered: "Yes, three:
Isleta, Jemez, and Pecos. They built also a church at San Marcos" (whose
inhabitants later joined Santo Domingo).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: How they Came Down from the Mesa](tci112)
