[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Southwest](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](tci130) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### A VISIT TO THE UNDERWORLD <span id="fr_232"></span>[1](#fn_230)

A man was sick for a whole year. He thought he was going to die, but he
wished to live. He became weaker and weaker. One night he dreamed that
person came to take him away. He followed him northward to the place
where the dead go, which is called *yu'ded<sup>e</sup>c*. A short time
before they arrive at *yu'ded<sup>e</sup>c* they came to a mountain. The
trail passed by the foot of the mountain. He was following the person
who had come to get him. They stopped at the foot of the mountain and he
saw that the mountain consisted of ice. All around there were ledges,
one over the other like the steps of a stairway. People were standing on
these ledges entirely naked. He recognized some of them. He asked his
guide, "What does this mean? I see all these naked people, men and
women, in rows all the way up the mountain." His guide replied, "My son,
this is the Iceberg. Do you see the water dripping down along it and
dripping upon the people?" The man asked, "Why is this done?" His guide
replied, "These are people who committed evil deeds while they were
alive and they are being punished here. The ice-cold water runs over
their bodies from head to foot. They have to stay here for a long time
as punishment for their evil deeds."

They went on and came to another place where men and women were tied to
both sides of the trail. They were tied to posts so that they could not
move. They were hungry and had nothing to eat. Only animals that crawled
along, the ground and came within their reach, such as lizards and
birds, were their food. The guide said, "They are punished in this way
on account of their evil deeds."

They came to another place and they saw an enclosure like a corral in
which men and women were kept. A war chief walked about outside to see
that nobody escaped. The guide told the man that

<span id="page_256">p. 256</span>

these people were kept here as a punishment and that they were given
very little food.

They went on and arrived at *yu'ded<sup>e</sup>c* (or *wenima*. The
narrator though it was more likely that it was the latter place). This
was a very beautiful place. All the people were dancing *ci'hwana* of
all kinds.

Then the guide said, "I have come to show you all these places. Only
people who have done good deeds on the earth go to
*yu'ded<sup>e</sup>c*. The man became *ci'hwana* and they danced here.
There are plenty of melons and watermelons."

Then the guide took the man to another place far in the south. There he
saw all the shamans gathered in one room. They were all ready to perform
their rites. One company was sitting in the north looking southward,
another in the south looking northward, still another in the east
looking westward, and another in the west looking eastward. The guide
said, "Maybe you know some of these shamans." Then the man recognized
some of the shamans from Cochiti who were dead. The guide told him that
only shamans who had done their duty came to this place. He told them
that people who had been bad would be sent to the places of punishment
or that they might be put into a fire. He continued, "My chief
(*ck’a'ayna*) ordered me to go and get you and to show you the places
where the dead go. Our Mother thinks that you are a good man. You are
head of the Giant shamans and you have always done your duty. You follow
the orders of our Mother. Those shamans who do not follow the orders of
our Mother will be punished in the fire or in the other places of
punishment. They will be locked up forever. They shall have no joy and
have nothing to cat. They will be given only bugs and lizards. When you
go home tell the people of the town what you have seen. They shall keep
to the faith that our Mother has given them. If they do not do so they
will be punished in the places that you have seen. Only those who do
right will have joy in the life after death. They will dance as
*ci'hwana*."

Then the guide took him back. He awoke and told the people what he had
seen.

Francisco Travers heard him tell this story.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_230"></span>[255:1](tci131.htm#fr_232) Recorded by Franz
Boas. see p. [128](tci069.htm#page_128)-132. Notes, [p.
205](tci123.htm#page_205).
