[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Southwest](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](tci113)  [Next](tci115) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### THE FIRST BATTLE WITH THE WHITES <span id="fr_207"></span>[3](#fn_206)

When my grandmother was a little girl (probably eight years old) there
was a great commotion in the pueblo. She wondered what was the matter;
the men hurried to get ready, and they an went off to the north. Every
morning her mother was crying. When she went around to the other houses,
everywhere all the women were crying. She wondered and wondered. Her
mother said to her, "Do not go to the other houses, nor play with the
other children. You haven't sense yet; you don't know why we are crying.
Our men may come back, or we may never see them again, for they have
gone to fight a battle." They lined up for battle at the river; on the
west side the Indians with bows and arrows and war clubs, and on the
east side the Whites with guns and spears. When the battle was over the
Whites on the east side put up a white flag on a pole to say that they
would be friends. The Indians on the west side put up a red flag on a
pole to say that they would rather have the battle than be friends. Then
both sides ran up red flags and each day the battle started again. The
captains on the east side (White) called to the Indians, "After
breakfast be ready for battle." The Indians said, "We don't care to wait
for breakfast. We fight any time. We will have our battle as we usually
have it." Very early in the morning the Indian chief said to his people,
"We will form a circle. You must all be brave men and not fall behind.
Fight with all your might and with all your hearts." The white soldiers
were all in one place. The Indians fought the way that they had always
fought their battles; when the white men were

<span id="page_193">p. 193</span>

surrounded, each Indian was to give the cry of a coyote or of a crow or
some animal to give the signal. When they were ready they closed in on
all sides upon the Whites. Before they knew it, the Indians had
surrounded them. The Whites jumped up, but they forgot even to take up
their guns. They fought bare handed. It was a great fight. At last the
Whites asked forgiveness, they fell on their knees and begged to be
friends.

While the battle was going on, in the pueblo the women were crying. They
went to the church and prayed that their husbands might come home
safely. My grandmother said that she went and watched the women crying
and praying.

When the battle was over the Whites sent their captain home ahead of
them. The Indians met him at Santa Fé and they killed him there. (His
grave is in Santa Fé now, near the main road.) His people spread out all
over the mountains and tried to escape. Some were killed by the Indians.
When they discovered so many Whites killed on the mountains, the Cochiti
Indians went up and brought their bodies down to the church to bury
them. They piled them up in a great heap. My grandmother peeped through
the window to see the pile of dead people, white as snow. She did not
know what they could be. The people afterwards looked for the Cochiti
Indians who had killed these soldiers but they could never find who they
were. In a few days they began to dig the grave--a long trench to hold
them all. Children went to see the bodies thrown in. The dogs ate them,
and they pressed the bodies in the trench with long sticks to make them
go in. All the Cochiti men came home safely. No one was killed.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_206"></span>[192:3](tci114.htm#fr_207) Informant 1.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The First Priest at Cochiti](tci115)
