[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Southwest](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](tci115)  [Next](tci117) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### THE GIRL WHO WAS STOLEN BY A NAVAHO <span id="fr_209"></span>[5](#fn_208)

While the Pueblos were at war with the Navahos and Apaches and the
Plains Indians, a Cochiti girl was stolen by the Navahos. One evening as
it was getting dark the girl went out to the corral. She was leaning
against the east side of the stockade. A man in a blanket came around
the stockade. She thought it was her lover and she put her arms around
him. He covered her in his blanket. As they were embracing he pulled her
toward the west. He put his hands over her mouth so she couldn't scream.
He took her to the Navaho country. There they tormented her and
ridiculed her and the women whipped her with whips and sticks. After a
while the Navaho boy could not stand the ridicule the girl had to bear.
He put a stop to it. He said, "I took her. I shall live with her--she
shall be my wife." She lived with him and had four children, two boys
and two girls.

One of the Navaho women was a good friend of the Pueblo girl's. One time
the friend asked, "Aren't you lonesome for your father and mother and
for your brothers and sisters?" "Yes, but I don't know the way home."
"Will you take my plan?" "Yes." "This year there are plenty of piñons
and yucca fruit on the mountains. We will invite our husbands to go out
to help us gather these. When we camp I will tell you in what direction
to go, what to do." They invited their husbands. The Navaho woman said,
"When you are ready and going to start, choose the two best riding
horses." When they were near the place where the piñons grew, the Navaho
woman said, "Tell your husband to look for a place to camp where the
piñons are thick. I will give you medicine to put your husband to sleep.
When he is asleep take a knife and cut off his head. Have no pity, just
as he had no pity when he was bringing you to the Navaho country. When
you have cut his head off, have the horses ready. Ride as fast as you
can. Do not stop anywhere. When my husband discovers that you have
killed your husband and goes with his head, you will have a good start."

When the Navaho woman's husband found out, he went to his wife to ask
her where the other had gone. She told him that she did not know. He had
to take the message to the Navahos before he could follow the girl. The
girl did as she was told; she had no

<span id="page_196">p. 196</span>

pity for the horses. When one was tired she rode the other. She traveled
all night. Next day the Navahos gave chase. That evening they nearly
caught her at a narrow place. She left her two horses there and escaped
down the cliff on foot. When she was almost down to the river level she
heard horse's hoofs behind her. She jumped aside and left the trail.
There was a little cave there and she hid. The horsemen passed her. They
thought the girl had reached the pueblo and they went back to the very
place where she was hiding. There they met the Navahos who were coming
up behind. They quarreled among themselves, for the relatives of the man
who had been killed wanted to take revenge on the pueblo, but the rest
were not willing. Those in authority said, "Our horses are tired and if
we are pursued by fresh horses none of us would escape." They turned
back. The girl could hear the Navaho man's relatives crying. She stayed
there all night. In the morning before dawn, she came out of the cave
and instead of taking the road, she went down an arroyo and came in from
the northeast side into the village.

That morning one of the Cochiti men had risen early to get wood. He was
tying his wood ready to put it on his back, and the girl followed him
till he was close to the pueblo. She said to him, "Father, where are you
going?" He turned and saw that she was a stranger. "Who are you?" "My
poor father, don't you know me? I am the girl who was taken by the
Navahos. I am the one who is coming back again now to my people." The
old man threw off his load and embraced the girl. He said, "Wait here. I
will take word back home." He ran to the pueblo and called to all the
people that his daughter had come back. So the girl returned home who
had been stolen by the Navahos. The rest of her life she lived among her
people.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_208"></span>[195:5](tci116.htm#fr_209) Informant 2.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Why the Navaho Buy So Much Turquoise](tci117)
