[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](pray007)  [Next](pray009.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Of Prayer*, by John Calvin, tr. Henry Beveridge \[1845\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.vi"></span>

#### <span id="iii.vi-p0.1"></span>6.

<span id="iii.vi-p1"></span>Another rule of prayer is, that in asking we
must always truly feel our wants, and seriously considering that we need
all the things which we ask, accompany the prayer with a sincere, nay,
ardent desire of obtaining them. Many repeat prayers in a perfunctory
manner from a set form, as if they were performing a task to God, and
though they confess that this is a necessary remedy for the evils of
their condition, because it were fatal to be left without the divine aid
which they implore, it still appears that they perform the duty from
custom, because their minds are meanwhile cold, and they ponder not what
they ask. A general and confused feeling of their necessity leads them
to pray, but it does not make them solicitous as in a matter of present
consequence, that they may obtain the supply of their need. Moreover,
can we suppose anything more hateful or even more execrable to God than
this fiction of asking the pardon of sins, while he who asks at the very
time either thinks that he is not a sinner, or, at least, is not
thinking that he is a sinner; in other words, a fiction by which God is
plainly held in derision? But mankind, as I have lately said, are full
of depravity, so that in the way of perfunctory service they often ask
many things of God which they think come to them without his
beneficence, or from some other quarter, or are already certainly in
their possession. There is another fault which seems less heinous, but
is not to be tolerated. Some murmur out prayers without meditation,
their only principle being that God is to be propitiated by prayer.
Believers ought to be specially on their guard never to appear in the
presence of God with the intention of presenting a request unless they
are under some serious impression, and are, at the same time, desirous
to obtain it. Nay, although in these things which we ask only for the
glory of God, we seem not at first sight to consult for our necessity,
yet we ought not to ask with less fervour and vehemency of desire. For
instance, when we pray that his name be hallowed — that hallowing must,
so to speak, be earnestly hungered and thirsted after.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 7.](pray009.md)
