[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](pray042)  [Next](pray044) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Of Prayer*, by John Calvin, tr. Henry Beveridge \[1845\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.xli"></span>

#### <span id="iii.xli-p0.1"></span>41.

<span id="iii.xli-p1"></span>The first petition is, HALLOWED BE THY
NAME. The necessity of presenting it bespeaks our great disgrace. For
what can be more unbecoming than that our ingratitude and malice should
impair, our audacity and petulance should as much as in them lies
destroy, the glory of God? But though all the ungodly should burst with
sacrilegious rage, the holiness of God's name still shines forth. Justly
does the Psalmist exclaim, "According to thy name, O God, so is thy
praise unto the ends of the earth" (<span
id="iii.xli-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
48:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa048.htm#010)<span id="iii.xli-p1.1"></span>).
For wherever God hath made himself known, his perfections must be
displayed, his power, goodness, wisdom, justice, mercy, and truth, which
fill us with admiration, and incite us to show forth his praise.
Therefore, as the name of God is not duly hallowed on the earth, and we
are otherwise unable to assert it, it is at least our duty to make it
the subject of our prayers. The sum of the whole is, It must be our
desire that God may receive the honour which is his due: that men may
never think or speak of him without the greatest reverence. The opposite
of this reverence is profanity, which has always been too common in the
world, and is very prevalent in the present day. Hence the necessity of
the petition, which, if piety had any proper existence among us, would
be superfluous. But if the name of God is duly hallowed only when
separated from all other names it alone is glorified, we are in the
petition enjoined to ask not only that God would vindicate his sacred
name from all contempt and insult, but also that he would compel the
whole human race to reverence it. Then since God manifests himself to us
partly by his word, and partly by his works, he is not sanctified unless
in regard to both of these we ascribe to him what is due, and thus
embrace whatever has proceeded from him, giving no less praise to his
justice than to his mercy. On the manifold diversity of his works he has
inscribed the marks of his glory, and these ought to call forth from
every tongue an ascription of praise. Thus Scripture will obtain its due
authority with us, and no event will hinder us from celebrating the
praises of God, in regard to every part of his government. On the other
hand, the petition implies a wish that all impiety which pollutes this
sacred name may perish and be extinguished, that everything which
obscures or impairs his glory, all detraction and insult, may cease;
that all blasphemy being suppressed, the divine majesty may be more and
more signally displayed.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 42.](pray044)
