[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](pray040)  [Next](pray042.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Of Prayer*, by John Calvin, tr. Henry Beveridge \[1845\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.xxxix"></span>

#### <span id="iii.xxxix-p0.1"></span>39.

<span id="iii.xxxix-p1"></span>This, however, does not prevent us from
praying specially for ourselves, and certain others, provided our mind
is not withdrawn from the view of this community, does not deviate from
it, but constantly refers to it. For prayers, though couched in special
terms, keeping that object still in view, cease not to be common. All
this may easily be understood by analogy. There is a general command
from God to relieve the necessities of all the poor, and yet this
command is obeyed by those who with that view give succour to all whom
they see or know to be in distress, although they pass by many whose
wants are not less urgent, either because they cannot know or are unable
to give supply to all. In this way there is nothing repugnant to the
will of God in those who, giving heed to this common society of the
Church, yet offer up particular prayers, in which, with a public mind,
though in special terms, they commend to God themselves or others, with
whose necessity he has been pleased to make them more familiarly
acquainted.

<span id="iii.xxxix-p2"></span>It is true that prayer and the giving of
our substance are not in all respects alike. We can only bestow the
kindness of our liberality on those of whose wants we are aware, whereas
in prayer we can assist the greatest strangers, how wide soever the
space which may separate them from us. This is done by that general form
of prayer which, including all the sons of God, includes them also. To
this we may refer the exhortation which Paul gave to the believers of
his age, to lift up "holy hands without wrath and doubting" (<span
id="iii.xxxix-p2.1"></span>[1 Timothy
2:8](../../../bib/kjv/ti1002.htm#008)<span id="iii.xxxix-p2.1"></span>.md).
By reminding them that dissension is a bar to prayer, he shows it to be
his wish that they should with one accord present their prayers in
common.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 40.](pray042.md)
