[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](pray010)  [Next](pray012) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Of Prayer*, by John Calvin, tr. Henry Beveridge \[1845\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.ix"></span>

#### <span id="iii.ix-p0.1"></span>9.

<span id="iii.ix-p1"></span>In fine, supplication for pardon, with
humble and ingenuous confession of guilt, forms both the preparation and
commencement of right prayer. For the holiest of men cannot hope to
obtain anything from God until he has been freely reconciled to him. God
cannot be propitious to any but those whom he pardons. Hence it is not
strange that this is the key by which believers open the door of prayer,
as we learn from several passages in The Psalms. David, when presenting
a request on a different subject, says, "Remember not the sins of my
youth, nor my transgressions; according to thy mercy remember me, for
thy goodness sake, O Lord" (<span id="iii.ix-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
25:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa025.htm#007)<span id="iii.ix-p1.1"></span>).
Again, "Look upon my affliction and my pain, and forgive my sins" (<span
id="iii.ix-p1.2"></span>[Psalm
25:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa025.htm#018)<span id="iii.ix-p1.2"></span>).
Here also we see that it is not sufficient to call ourselves to account
for the sins of each passing day; we must also call to mind those which
might seem to have been long before buried in oblivion. For in another
passage the same prophet, confessing one grievous crime, takes occasion
to go back to his very birth, "I was shapen in iniquity, and in sin did
my mother conceive me" (<span id="iii.ix-p1.3"></span>[Psalm
51:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#005)<span id="iii.ix-p1.3"></span>);
not to extenuate the fault by the corruption of his nature, but as it
were to accumulate the sins of his whole life, that the stricter he was
in condemning himself, the more placable God might be. But although the
saints do not always in express terms ask forgiveness of sins, yet if we
carefully ponder those prayers as given in Scripture, the truth of what
I say will readily appear; namely, that their courage to pray was
derived solely from the mercy of God, and that they always began with
appeasing him. For when a man interrogates his conscience, so far is he
from presuming to lay his cares familiarly before God, that if he did
not trust to mercy and pardon, he would tremble at the very thought of
approaching him. There is, indeed, another special confession. When
believers long for deliverance from punishment, they at the same time
pray that their sins may be pardoned; <span id="fr_2"></span>[3](#fn_2)
for it were absurd to wish that the effect should be taken away while
the cause remains. For we must beware of imitating foolish patients who,
anxious only about curing accidental symptoms, neglect the root of the
disease. <span id="fr_3"></span>[4](#fn_3) Nay, our endeavour must be to
have God propitious even before he attests his favour by external signs,
both because this is the order which he himself chooses, and it were of
little avail to experience his kindness, did not conscience feel that he
is appeased, and thus enable us to regard him as altogether lovely. Of
this we are even reminded by our Saviour's reply. Having determined to
cure the paralytic, he says, "Thy sins are forgiven thee;" in other
words, he raises our thoughts to the object which is especially to be
desired, viz. admission into the favour of God, and then gives the fruit
of reconciliation by bringing assistance to us. But besides that special
confession of present guilt which believers employ, in supplicating for
pardon of every fault and punishment, that general introduction which
procures favour for our prayers must never be omitted, because prayers
will never reach God unless they are founded on free mercy. To this we
may refer the words of John, "If we confess our sins, he is faithful and
just to forgive us our sins and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness"
(<span id="iii.ix-p1.8"></span>[1 John
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/jo1001.htm#009)<span id="iii.ix-p1.8"></span>).
Hence, under the law it was necessary to consecrate prayers by the
expiation of blood, both that they might be accepted, and that the
people might be warned that they were unworthy of the high privilege
until, being purged from their defilements, they founded their
confidence in prayer entirely on the mercy of God.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2"></span>[3](pray011.htm#fr_2) <span
id="iii.ix-p1.4"></span>French, "<span id="iii.ix-p1.5"></span>il
reconoissent le chastisement qu’ils ont merité;"—they acknowledge the
punishment which they have deserved.

<span id="fn_3"></span>[4](pray011.htm#fr_3) <span
id="iii.ix-p1.6"></span>The French adds, "<span
id="iii.ix-p1.7"></span>Ils voudront qu’on leur oste le mal de tests et
des reins, et seront contens qu’on ne touche point a la fievre;"—They
would wish to get quit of the pain in the head and the loins, and would
be contented to leave the fever untouched.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 10.](pray012)
