[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](pray002)  [Next](pray004) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Of Prayer*, by John Calvin, tr. Henry Beveridge \[1845\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.i"></span>

# <span id="iii.i-p0.1"></span>Of Prayer

## <span id="iii.i-p0.2"></span>John Calvin

#### <span id="iii.i-p0.3"></span>1.

<span id="iii.i-p1"></span>FROM the previous part of the work we clearly
see how completely destitute man is of all good, how devoid of every
means of procuring his own salvation. Hence, if he would obtain succour
in his necessity, he must go beyond himself, and procure it in some
other quarter. It has farther been shown that the Lord kindly and
spontaneously manifests himself in Christ, in whom he offers all
happiness for our misery, all abundance for our want, opening up the
treasures of heaven to us, so that we may turn with full faith to his
beloved Son, depend upon him with full expectation, rest in him, and
cleave to him with full hope. This, indeed, is that secret and hidden
philosophy which cannot be learned by syllogisms: a philosophy
thoroughly understood by those whose eyes God has so opened as to see
light in his light (<span id="iii.i-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
36:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa036.htm#009)<span id="iii.i-p1.1"></span>).
But after we have learned by faith to know that whatever is necessary
for us or defective in us is supplied in God and in our Lord Jesus
Christ, in whom it hath pleased the Father that all fulness should
dwell, that we may thence draw as from an inexhaustible fountain, it
remains for us to seek and in prayer implore of him what we have learned
to be in him. To know God as the sovereign disposer of all good,
inviting us to present our requests, and yet not to approach or ask of
him, were so far from availing us, that it were just as if one told of a
treasure were to allow it to remain buried in the ground. Hence the
Apostle, to show that a faith unaccompanied with prayer to God cannot be
genuine, states this to be the order: As faith springs from the Gospel,
so by faith our hearts are framed to call upon the name of God (<span
id="iii.i-p1.2"></span>[Romans
10:14](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#014)<span id="iii.i-p1.2"></span>).
And this is the very thing which he had expressed some time before,
viz., that the *Spirit of adoption*, which seals the testimony of the
Gospel on our hearts, gives us courage to make our requests known unto
God, calls forth groanings which cannot be uttered, and enables us to
cry, Abba, Father (<span id="iii.i-p1.3"></span>[Romans
8:26](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#026)<span id="iii.i-p1.3"></span>).
This last point, as we have hitherto only touched upon it slightly in
passing, must now be treated more fully.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2.](pray004)
