[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](pray030)  [Next](pray032) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Of Prayer*, by John Calvin, tr. Henry Beveridge \[1845\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.xxix"></span>

#### <span id="iii.xxix-p0.1"></span>29.

<span id="iii.xxix-p1"></span>This assiduity in prayer, though it
specially refers to the peculiar private prayers of individuals, extends
also in some measure to the public prayers of the Church. These, it may
be said, cannot be continual, and ought not to be made, except in the
manner which, for the sake of order, has been established by public
consent. This I admit, and hence certain hours are fixed beforehand,
hours which, though indifferent in regard to God, are necessary for the
use of man, that the general convenience may be consulted, and all
things be done in the Church, as Paul enjoins, "decently and in order"
(<span id="iii.xxix-p1.1"></span>[1 Corinthians
14:40](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#040)<span
id="iii.xxix-p1.1"></span>). But there is nothing in this to prevent
each church from being now and then stirred up to a more frequent use of
prayer and being more zealously affected under the impulse of some
greater necessity. Of perseverance in prayer, which is much akin to
assiduity, we shall speak towards the close of the chapter (sec. 51,
52). This assiduity, moreover, is very different from the BATTOLOGIAN
(Greek — English "yammering"), *vain speaking*, which our Saviour has
prohibited (<span id="iii.xxix-p1.2"></span>[Matthew
6:7](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#007)<span id="iii.xxix-p1.2"></span>).
For he does not there forbid us to pray long or frequently, or with
great fervour, but warns us against supposing that we can extort
anything from God by importuning him with garrulous loquacity, as if he
were to be persuaded after the manner of men. We know that hypocrites,
because they consider not that they have to do with God, offer up their
prayers as pompously as if it were part of a triumphal show. The
Pharisee, who thanked God that he was not as other men, no doubt
proclaimed his praises before men, as if he had wished to gain a
reputation for sanctity by his prayers. Hence that vain speaking, which
for a similar reason prevails so much in the Papacy in the present day,
some vainly spinning out the time by a reiteration of the same frivolous
prayers, and others employing a long series of verbiage for vulgar
display. <span id="fr_13"></span>[14](#fn_13) This childish garrulity
being a mockery of God, it is not strange that it is prohibited in the
Church, in order that every feeling there expressed may be sincere,
proceeding from the inmost heart. Akin to this abuse is another which
our Saviour also condemns, namely, when hypocrites for the sake of
ostentation court the presence of many witnesses, and would sooner pray
in the market-place than pray without applause. The true object of
prayer being, as we have already said (sec. 4, 5), to carry our thoughts
directly to God, whether to celebrate his praise or implore his aid, we
can easily see that its primary seat is in the mind and heart, or rather
that prayer itself is properly an effusion and manifestation of internal
feeling before Him who is the searcher of hearts. Hence (as has been
said), when our divine Master was pleased to lay down the best rule for
prayer, his injunction was, "Enter into thy closet, and when thou hast
shut thy door, pray to thy Father which is in secret, and thy Father
which seeth in secret shall reward thee openly" (<span
id="iii.xxix-p1.5"></span>[Matthew
6:6](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#006)<span id="iii.xxix-p1.5"></span>).
Dissuading us from the example of hypocrites, who sought the applause of
men by an ambitious ostentation in prayer, he adds the better course —
enter thy chamber, shut thy door, and there pray. By these words (as I
understand them) he taught us to seek a place of retirement which might
enable us to turn all our thoughts inwards and enter deeply into our
hearts, promising that God would hold converse with the feelings of our
mind, of which the body ought to be the temple. He meant not to deny
that it may be expedient to pray in other places also, but he shows that
prayer is somewhat of a secret nature, having its chief seat in the
mind, and requiring a tranquillity far removed from the turmoil of
ordinary cares. And hence it was not without cause that our Lord
himself, when he would engage more earnestly in prayer, withdrew into a
retired spot beyond the bustle of the world, thus reminding us by his
example that we are not to neglect those helps which enable the mind, in
itself too much disposed to wander, to become sincerely intent on
prayer. Meanwhile, as he abstained not from prayer when the occasion
required it, though he were in the midst of a crowd, so must we,
whenever there is need, lift up "pure hands" (<span
id="iii.xxix-p1.6"></span>[1 Timothy
2:8](../../../bib/kjv/ti1002.htm#008)<span id="iii.xxix-p1.6"></span>)
at all places. And hence we must hold that he who declines to pray in
the public meeting of the saints, knows not what it is to pray apart, in
retirement, or at home. On the other hand, he who neglects to pray alone
and in private, however sedulously he frequents public meetings, there
gives his prayers to the wind, because he defers more to the opinion of
man than to the secret judgment of God. Still, lest the public prayers
of the Church should be held in contempt, the Lord anciently bestowed
upon them the most honourable appellation, especially when he called the
temple the "*house of prayer*" (<span id="iii.xxix-p1.7"></span>[Isaiah
56:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa056.htm#007)<span id="iii.xxix-p1.7"></span>).
For by this expression he both showed that the duty of prayer is a
principal part of his worship, and that to enable believers to engage in
it with one consent his temple is set up before them as a kind of
banner. A noble promise was also added, "Praise waiteth for thee, O God,
in Sion: and unto thee shall the vow be performed" (<span
id="iii.xxix-p1.8"></span>[Psalm
65:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa065.htm#001)<span
id="iii.xxix-p1.8"></span>). <span id="fr_14"></span>[15](#fn_14) By
these words the Psalmist reminds us that the prayers of the Church are
never in vain; because God always furnishes his people with materials
for a song of joy. But although the shadows of the law have ceased, yet
because God was pleased by this ordinance to foster the unity of the
faith among us also, there can be no doubt that the same promise belongs
to us — a promise which Christ sanctioned with his own lips, and which
Paul declares to be perpetually in force.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_13"></span>[14](pray031.htm#fr_13) <span
id="iii.xxix-p1.3"></span>French, "<span id="iii.xxix-p1.4"></span>Cette
longueur de priere a aujourd’hui sa vogue en la Papauté, et procede de
cette mesme source; c’est que les uns barbotant force Ave Maria, et
reiterant cent fois un chapelet, perdent une partie du temps; les
autres, comme les chanoines et caphars, en abayant le parchemin jour et
nuict, et barbotant leur breviaire vendent leur coquilles au
peuple."—This long prayer is at present in vogue among the Papists, and
proceeds from the same cause: some muttering a host of Ave Marias, and
going over their beads a hundred times, lose part of their time; others,
as the canons and monks grumbling over their parchment night and day,
and muttering their breviary, sell their cockleshells to the people.

<span id="fn_14"></span>[15](pray031.htm#fr_14) <span
id="iii.xxix-p1.9"></span>Calvin translates, "<span
id="iii.xxix-p1.10"></span>Te expectat Deus, laus in Sion,"—God, the
praise in Sion waiteth for thee.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 30.](pray032)
