[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](pray044)  [Next](pray046) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Of Prayer*, by John Calvin, tr. Henry Beveridge \[1845\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.xliii"></span>

#### <span id="iii.xliii-p0.1"></span>43.

<span id="iii.xliii-p1"></span>The third petition is, THY WILL BE DONE
ON EARTH AS IT IS IN HEAVEN. Though this depends on his kingdom, and
cannot be disjoined from it, yet a separate place is not improperly
given to it on account of our ignorance, which does not at once or
easily apprehend what is meant by God reigning in the world. This,
therefore, may not improperly be taken as the explanation, that God will
be King in the world when all shall subject themselves to his will. We
are not here treating of that secret will by which he governs all
things, and destines them to their end (see chap. xxiv. s. 17). For
although devils and men rise in tumult against him, he is able by his
incomprehensible counsel not only to turn aside their violence, but make
it subservient to the execution of his decrees. What we here speak of is
another will of God, namely, that of which voluntary obedience is the
counterpart; and, therefore, heaven is expressly contrasted with earth,
because, as is said in The Psalms, the angels "do his commandments,
hearkening unto the voice of his word" (<span
id="iii.xliii-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
103:20](../../../bib/kjv/psa103.htm#020)<span
id="iii.xliii-p1.1"></span>). We are, therefore, enjoined to pray that
as everything done in heaven is at the command of God, and the angels
are calmly disposed to do all that is right, so the earth may be brought
under his authority, all rebellion and depravity having been
extinguished. In presenting this request we renounce the desires of the
flesh, because he who does not entirely resign his affections to God,
does as much as in him lies to oppose the divine will, since everything
which proceeds from us is vicious. Again, by this prayer we are taught
to deny ourselves, that God may rule us according to his pleasure; and
not only so, but also having annihilated our own may create new thoughts
and new minds so that we shall have no desire save that of entire
agreement with his will; in short, wish nothing of ourselves, but have
our hearts governed by his Spirit, under whose inward teaching we may
learn to love those things which please and hate those things which
displease him. Hence also we must desire that he would nullify and
suppress all affections which are repugnant to his will.

<span id="iii.xliii-p2"></span>Such are the three first heads of the
prayer, in presenting which we should have the glory of God only in
view, taking no account of ourselves, and paying no respect to our own
advantage, which, though it is thereby greatly promoted, is not here to
be the subject of request. And though all the events prayed for must
happen in their own time, without being either thought of, wished, or
asked by us, it is still our duty to wish and ask for them. And it is of
no slight importance to do so, that we may testify and profess that we
are the servants and children of God, desirous by every means in our
power to promote the honour due to him as our Lord and Father, and truly
and thoroughly devoted to his service. Hence if men, in praying that the
name of God may be hallowed, that his kingdom may come, and his will be
done, are not influenced by this zeal for the promotion of his glory,
they are not to be accounted among the servants and children of God; and
as all these things will take place against their will, so they will
turn out to their confusion and destruction.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 44.](pray046)
