[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](pray032)  [Next](pray034.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Of Prayer*, by John Calvin, tr. Henry Beveridge \[1845\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.xxxi"></span>

#### <span id="iii.xxxi-p0.1"></span>31.

<span id="iii.xxxi-p1"></span>Hence it is perfectly clear that neither
words nor singing (if used in prayer) are of the least consequence, or
avail one iota with God, unless they proceed from deep feeling in the
heart. Nay, rather they provoke his anger against us, if they come from
the lips and throat only, since this is to abuse his sacred name, and
hold his majesty in derision. This we infer from the words of Isaiah,
which, though their meaning is of wider extent, go to rebuke this vice
also: "Forasmuch as this people draw near me with their mouth, and with
their lips do honour me, but have removed their heart far from me, and
their fear toward me is taught by the precept of men: therefore, behold,
I will proceed to do a marvellous work among this people, even a
marvellous work and a wonder: for the wisdom of their wise men shall
perish, and the understanding of their prudent men shall be hid" (<span
id="iii.xxxi-p1.1"></span>[Isaiah
29:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa029.htm#013.md)<span
id="iii.xxxi-p1.1"></span>). Still we do not condemn words or singing,
but rather greatly commend them, provided the feeling of the mind goes
along with them. For in this way the thought of God is kept alive on our
minds, which, from their fickle and versatile nature, soon relax, and
are distracted by various objects, unless various means are used to
support them. Besides, since the glory of God ought in a manner to be
displayed in each part of our body, the special service to which the
tongue should be devoted is that of singing and speaking, inasmuch as it
has been expressly created to declare and proclaim the praise of God.
This employment of the tongue is chiefly in the public services which
are performed in the meeting of the saints. In this way the God whom we
serve in one spirit and one faith, we glorify together as it were with
one voice and one mouth; and that openly, so that each may in turn
receive the confession of his brother's faith, and be invited and
incited to imitate it.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 32.](pray034.md)
