[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](pray024)  [Next](pray026) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Of Prayer*, by John Calvin, tr. Henry Beveridge \[1845\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.xxiii"></span>

#### <span id="iii.xxiii-p0.1"></span>23.

<span id="iii.xxiii-p1"></span>In endeavouring to prove that such
intercession derives some support from Scripture they labour in vain. We
frequently read (they say) of the prayers of angels, and not only so,
but the prayers of believers are said to be carried into the presence of
God by their hands. But if they would compare saints who have departed
this life with angels, it will be necessary to prove that saints are
ministering spirits, to whom has been delegated the office of
superintending our salvation, to whom has been assigned the province of
guiding us in all our ways, of encompassing, admonishing, and comforting
us, of keeping watch over us. All these are assigned to angels, but none
of them to saints. How preposterously they confound departed saints with
angels is sufficiently apparent from the many different offices by which
Scripture distinguishes the one from the other. No one unless admitted
will presume to perform the office of pleader before an earthly judge;
whence then have worms such license as to obtrude themselves on God as
intercessors, while no such office has been assigned them? God has been
pleased to give angels the charge of our safety. Hence they attend our
sacred meetings, and the Church is to them a theatre in which they
behold the manifold wisdom of God (<span
id="iii.xxiii-p1.1"></span>[Ephesians
3:10](../../../bib/kjv/eph003.htm#010)<span
id="iii.xxiii-p1.1"></span>). Those who transfer to others this office
which is peculiar to them, certainly pervert and confound the order
which has been established by God and ought to be inviolable. With
similar dexterity they proceed to quote other passages. God said to
Jeremiah, "Though Moses and Samuel stood before me, yet my mind could
not be toward this people" (<span id="iii.xxiii-p1.2"></span>[Jeremiah
15:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer015.htm#001)<span
id="iii.xxiii-p1.2"></span>). How (they ask) could he have spoken thus
of the dead but because he knew that they interceded for the living? My
inference, on the contrary, is this: since it thus appears that neither
Moses nor Samuel interceded for the people of Israel, there was then no
intercession for the dead. For who of the saints can be supposed to
labour for the salvation of the peoples while Moses who, when in life,
far surpassed all others in this matter, does nothing? Therefore, if
they persist in the paltry quibble, that the dead intercede for the
living, because the Lord said, "*If they stood before me*,"
(*intercesserint*), I will argue far more speciously in this way: Moses,
of whom it is said, "*if he interceded*," did not intercede for the
people in their extreme necessity: it is probable, therefore, that no
other saint intercedes, all being far behind Moses in humanity,
goodness, and paternal solicitude. Thus all they gain by their cavilling
is to be wounded by the very arms with which they deem themselves
admirably protected. But it is very ridiculous to wrest this simple
sentence in this manner; for the Lord only declares that he would not
spare the iniquities of the people, though some Moses or Samuel, to
whose prayers he had shown himself so indulgent, should intercede for
them. This meaning is most clearly elicited from a similar passage in
Ezekiel: "Though these three men, Noah, Daniel, and Job, were in it,
they should deliver but their own souls by their righteousness, saith
the Lord God" (<span id="iii.xxiii-p1.3"></span>[Ezekiel
14:14](../../../bib/kjv/eze014.htm#014)<span
id="iii.xxiii-p1.3"></span>). Here there can be no doubt that we are to
understand the words as if it had been said, If two of the persons named
were again to come alive; for the third was still living, namely,
Daniel, who it is well known had then in the bloom of youth given an
incomparable display of piety. Let us therefore leave out those whom
Scripture declares to have completed their course. Accordingly, when
Paul speaks of David, he says not that by his prayers he assisted
posterity, but only that he "served his own generation" (<span
id="iii.xxiii-p1.4"></span>[Acts
13:36](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#036)<span
id="iii.xxiii-p1.4"></span>).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 24.](pray026)
