[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](pray000)  [Next](pray002) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Of Prayer*, by John Calvin, tr. Henry Beveridge \[1845\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii"></span>

## <span id="ii-p0.1"></span>Of Prayer

### <span id="ii-p0.2"></span>John Calvin

# <span id="ii-p0.3"></span>Outline

<span id="ii-p1"></span>1. A general summary of what is contained in the
previous part of the work. A transition to the doctrine of prayer. Its
connection with the subject of faith.

<span id="ii-p2"></span>2. Prayer defined. Its necessity and use.

<span id="ii-p3"></span>3. Objection, that prayer seems useless, because
God already knows our wants. Answer, from the institution and end of
prayer. Confirmation by example. Its necessity and propriety.
Perpetually reminds us of our duty, and leads to meditation on divine
providence. Conclusion. Prayer a most useful exercise. This proved by
three passages of Scripture.

<span id="ii-p4"></span>4. Rules to be observed in prayer. First,
reverence to God. How the mind ought to be composed.

<span id="ii-p5"></span>5. All giddiness of mind must be excluded, and
all our feelings seriously engaged. This confirmed by the form of
lifting the hand in prayer. We must ask only in so far as God permits.
To help our weakness, God gives the Spirit to be our guide in prayer.
What the office of the Spirit in this respect. We must still pray both
with the heart and the lips.

<span id="ii-p6"></span>6. Second rule of prayer, a sense of our want.
This rule violated, 1. By perfunctory and formal prayer 2. By hypocrites
who have no sense of their sins. 3. By giddiness in prayer. Remedies.

<span id="ii-p7"></span>7. Objection, that we are not always under the
same necessity of praying. Answer, we must pray always. This answer
confirmed by an examination of the dangers by which both our life and
our salvation are every moment threatened. Confirmed farther by the
command and permission of God, by the nature of true repentance, and a
consideration of impenitence. Conclusion.

<span id="ii-p8"></span>8. Third rule, the suppression of all pride.
Examples. Daniel, David, Isaiah, Jeremiah, Baruch.

<span id="ii-p9"></span>9. Advantage of thus suppressing pride. It leads
to earnest entreaty for pardon, accompanied with humble confession and
sure confidence in the Divine mercy. This may not always be expressed in
words. It is peculiar to pious penitents. A general introduction to
procure favour to our prayers never to be omitted.

<span id="ii-p10"></span>10. Objection to the third rule of prayer. Of
the glorying of the saints. Answer. Confirmation of the answer.

<span id="ii-p11"></span>11. Fourth rule of prayer, — a sure confidence
of being heard animating us to prayer. The kind of confidence required,
viz., a serious conviction of our misery, joined with sure hope. From
these true prayer springs. How diffidence impairs prayer. In general,
faith is required.

<span id="ii-p12"></span>12. This faith and sure hope regarded by our
opponents as most absurd. Their error described and refuted by various
passages of Scripture, which show that acceptable prayer is accompanied
with these qualities. No repugnance between this certainty and an
acknowledgment of our destitution.

<span id="ii-p13"></span>13. To our unworthiness we oppose, 1. The
command of God. 2. The promise. Rebels and hypocrites completely
condemned. Passages of Scripture confirming the command to pray.

<span id="ii-p14"></span>14. Other passages respecting the promises
which belong to the pious when they invoke God. These realised though we
are not possessed of the same holiness as other distinguished servants
of God, provided we indulge no vain confidence, and sincerely betake
ourselves to the mercy of God. Those who do not invoke God under urgent
necessity are no better than idolaters. This concurrence of fear and
confidence reconciles the different passages of Scripture, as to
humbling ourselves in prayer, and causing our prayers to ascend.

<span id="ii-p15"></span>15. Objection founded on some examples, viz.,
that prayers have proved effectual, though not according to the form
prescribed. Answer. Such examples, though not given for our imitation,
are of the greatest use. Objection, the prayers of the faithful
sometimes not effectual. Answer confirmed by a noble passage of
Augustine. Rule for right prayer.

<span id="ii-p16"></span>16. The above four rules of prayer not so
rigidly exacted, as that every prayer deficient in them in any respect
is rejected by God. This shown by examples. Conclusion, or summary of
this section.

<span id="ii-p17"></span>17. Through whom God is to be invoked, viz.,
Jesus Christ. This founded on a consideration of the divine majesty, and
the precept and promise of God himself. God therefore to be invoked only
in the name of Christ.

<span id="ii-p18"></span>18. From the first all believers were heard
through him only: yet this specially restricted to the period subsequent
to his ascension. The ground of this restriction.

<span id="ii-p19"></span>19. The wrath of God lies on those who reject
Christ as a Mediator. This excludes not the mutual intercession of
saints on the earth.

<span id="ii-p20"></span>20. Refutation of errors interfering with the
intercession of Christ. 1. Christ the Mediator of redemption; the saints
mediators of intercession. Answer confirmed by the clear testimony of
Scripture, and by a passage from Augustine. The nature of Christ's
intercession.

<span id="ii-p21"></span>21. Of the intercession of saints living with
Christ in heaven. Fiction of the Papists in regard to it. Refuted. 1.
Its absurdity. 2. It is nowhere mentioned by Scripture. 3. Appeal to the
conscience of the superstitious. 4. Its blasphemy. Exception. Answers.

<span id="ii-p22"></span>22. Monstrous errors resulting from this
fiction. Refutation. Exception by the advocates of this fiction. Answer.

<span id="ii-p23"></span>23. Arguments of the Papists for the
intercession of saints. 1. From the duty and office of angels. Answer.
2. From an expression of Jeremiah respecting Moses and Samuel. Answer,
retorting the argument. 3. The meaning of the prophet confirmed by a
similar passage in Ezekiel, and the testimony of an apostle.

<span id="ii-p24"></span>24. 4. Fourth papistical argument from the
nature of charity, which is more perfect in the saints in glory. Answer.

<span id="ii-p25"></span>25. Argument founded on a passage in Moses.
Answer.

<span id="ii-p26"></span>26. Argument from its being said that the
prayers of saints are heard. Answer, confirmed by Scripture, and
illustrated by examples.

<span id="ii-p27"></span>27. Conclusion, that the saints cannot be
invoked without impiety. 1. It robs God of his glory. 2. Destroys the
intercession of Christ. 3. Is repugnant to the word of God. 4. Is
opposed to the due method of prayer. 5. Is without approved example. 6.
Springs from distrust. Last objection. Answer.

<span id="ii-p28"></span>28. Kinds of prayer. Vows. Supplications.
Petitions. Thanksgiving. Connection of these, their constant use and
necessity. Particular explanation confirmed by reason, Scripture, and
example. Rule as to supplication and thanksgiving.

<span id="ii-p29"></span>29. The accidents of prayer, viz., private and
public, constant, at stated seasons, &c. Exception in time of necessity.
Prayer without ceasing. Its nature. Garrulity of Papists and hypocrites
refuted. The scope and parts of prayer. Secret prayer. Prayer at all
places. Private and public prayer.

<span id="ii-p30"></span>30. Of public places or churches in which
common prayers are offered up. Right use of churches. Abuse.

<span id="ii-p31"></span>31. Of utterance and singing. These of no avail
if not from the heart. The use of the voice refers more to public than
private prayer.

<span id="ii-p32"></span>32. Singing of the greatest antiquity, but not
universal. How to be performed.

<span id="ii-p33"></span>33. Public prayers should be in the vulgar, not
in a foreign tongue. Reason, 1. The nature of the Church. 2. Authority
of an apostle. Sincere affection always necessary. The tongue not always
necessary. Bending of the knee, and uncovering of the head.

<span id="ii-p34"></span>34. The form of prayer delivered by Christ
displays the boundless goodness of our heavenly Father. The great
comfort thereby afforded.

<span id="ii-p35"></span>35. Lord's Prayer divided into six petitions.
Subdivision into two principal parts, the former referring to the glory
of God, the latter to our salvation.

<span id="ii-p36"></span>36. The use of the term Father implies, 1. That
we pray to God in the name of Christ alone. 2. That we lay aside all
distrust. 3. That we expect everything that is for our good.

<span id="ii-p37"></span>37. Objection, that our sins exclude us from
the presence of him whom we have made a Judge, not a Father. Answer,
from the nature of God, as described by an apostle, the parable of the
prodigal son, and from the expression, *Our* Father. Christ the earnest,
the Holy Spirit the witness, of our adoption.

<span id="ii-p38"></span>38. Why God is called generally, Our Father.

<span id="ii-p39"></span>39. We may pray specially for ourselves and
certain others, provided we have in our mind a general reference to all.

<span id="ii-p40"></span>40. In what sense God is said to be *in
heaven*. A threefold use of this doctrine for our consolation. Three
cautions. Summary of the preface to the Lord's Prayer.

<span id="ii-p41"></span>41. The necessity of the first petition a proof
of our unrighteousness. What meant by the name of God. How it is
hallowed. Parts of this hallowing. A deprecation of the sins by which
the name of God is profaned.

<span id="ii-p42"></span>42. Distinction between the first and second
petitions. The kingdom of God, what. How said to come. Special
exposition of this petition. It reminds us of three things. Advent of
the kingdom of God in the world.

<span id="ii-p43"></span>43. Distinction between the second and third
petitions. The will here meant not the secret will or good pleasure of
God, but that manifested in the word. Conclusion of the three first
petitions.

<span id="ii-p44"></span>44. A summary of the second part of the Lord's
Prayer. Three petitions. What contained in the first. Declares the
exceeding kindness of God, and our distrust. What meant by *bread*. Why
the petition for bread precedes that for the forgiveness of sins. Why it
is called ours. Why to be sought *this day*, or *daily*. The doctrine
resulting from this petition, illustrated by an example. Two classes of
men sin in regard to this petition. In what sense it is called, our
bread. Why we ask God to give it to us.

<span id="ii-p45"></span>45. Close connection between this and the
subsequent petition. Why our sins are called debts. This petition
violated, 1. By those who think they can satisfy God by their own
merits, or those of others. 2. By those who dream of a perfection which
makes pardon unnecessary. Why the elect cannot attain perfection in this
life. Refutation of the libertine dreamers of perfection. Objection
refuted. In what sense we are said to forgive those who have sinned
against us. How the condition is to be understood.

<span id="ii-p46"></span>46. The sixth petition reduced to three heads.
1. The various forms of temptation. The depraved conceptions of our
minds. The wiles of Satan, on the right hand and on the left. 2. What it
is to be led into temptation. We do not ask not to be tempted of God.
What meant by evil, or the evil one. Summary of this petition. How
necessary it is. Condemns the pride of the superstitious. Includes many
excellent properties. In what sense God may be said to lead us into
temptation.

<span id="ii-p47"></span>47. The three last petitions show that the
prayers of Christians ought to be public. The conclusion of the Lord's
Prayer. Why the word Amen is added.

<span id="ii-p48"></span>48. The Lord's Prayer contains everything that
we can or ought to ask of God. Those who go beyond it sin in three ways.

<span id="ii-p49"></span>49. We may, after the example of the saints,
frame our prayers in different words, provided there is no difference in
meaning.

<span id="ii-p50"></span>50. Some circumstances to be observed. Of
appointing special hours of prayer. What to be aimed at, what avoided.
The will of God, the rule of our prayers.

<span id="ii-p51"></span>51. Perseverance in prayer especially
recommended, both by precept and example. Condemnatory of those who
assign to God a time and mode of hearing.

<span id="ii-p52"></span>52. Of the dignity of faith, through which we
always obtain, in answer to prayer, whatever is most expedient for us.
The knowledge of this most necessary.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Of Prayer.](pray002)
