[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](pray048)  [Next](pray050.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Of Prayer*, by John Calvin, tr. Henry Beveridge \[1845\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.xlvii"></span>

#### <span id="iii.xlvii-p0.1"></span>47.

<span id="iii.xlvii-p1"></span>These three petitions, in which we
specially commend ourselves and all that we have to God, clearly show
what we formerly observed (sec. 38, 39), that the prayers of Christians
should be public, and have respect to the public edification of the
Church and the advancement of believers in spiritual communion. For no
one requests that anything should be given to him as an individual, but
we all ask in common for daily bread and the forgiveness of sins, not to
be led into temptation, but delivered from evil. Moreover, there is
subjoined the reason for our great boldness in asking and confidence of
obtaining (sec. 11, 36). Although this does not exist in the Latin
copies, yet as it accords so well with the whole, we cannot think of
omitting it.

<span id="iii.xlvii-p2"></span>The words are, THINE IS THE KINGDOM, AND
THE POWER, AND THE GLORY, FOR EVER. Here is the calm and firm assurance
of our faith. For were our prayers to be commended to God by our own
worth, who would venture even to whisper before him? Now, however
wretched we may be, however unworthy, however devoid of commendation, we
shall never want a reason for prayer, nor a ground of confidence, since
the kingdom, power, and glory, can never be wrested from our Father. The
last word is AMEN, by which is expressed the eagerness of our desire to
obtain the things which we ask, while our hope is confirmed, that all
things have already been obtained and will assuredly be granted to us,
seeing they have been promised by God, who cannot deceive. This accords
with the form of expression to which we have already adverted: "Grant, O
Lord, for thy name's sake, not on account of us or of our
righteousness." By this the saints not only express the end of their
prayers, but confess that they are unworthy of obtaining did not God
find the cause in himself and were not their confidence founded entirely
on his nature.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 48.](pray050.md)
