<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index) 
[Wisdom of the East](../../woe/index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](tpol11)  [Next](tpol13) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Path of Light*, by L.D. Barnett, \[1909\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_92">p. 92</span>

### CHAPTER IX

### THE PERFECT KNOWLEDGE

<span class="smallcaps">All</span> this equipment (46) the Sage has
ordained for the sake of wisdom; so he that seeks to still sorrow must
get him wisdom. We deem that there are two verities, the Veiled Truth
and the Transcendent Reality. The Reality is beyond the range of the
understanding; the understanding is called Veiled Truth (47). . . . Thus
there is never either cessation or existence; the universe neither comes
to be nor halts in being. Life's courses, if thou considerest them, are
like dreams and as the plantain's branches (48); in reality there is no
distinction between those that are at rest and those that are not at
rest. Since then the forms of being are empty, what can he gained, and
what lost? who can be honoured or despised, and by whom? Whence should
come joy or sorrow? What is sweet, what bitter? What is desire, and
where shall this desire in verity be sought? If thou considerest the
world of living things, who shall die therein? who shall be

<span id="page_93">p. 93</span>

born, who is born? who is a kinsman and who a friend, and to whom? Would
that my fellow-creatures should understand that all is as the void! They
are angered and delighted by their matters of strife and rejoicing; with
grief and labour, with despair, with rending and stabbing one another,
they wearily pass their days in sin as they seek their own pleasure;
they die and fall into hells of long and bitter anguish; they return
again and again to happy births after births and grow wonted to joy
(49). . . . In life are oceans of sorrow, fierce and boundless beyond
compare, a scant measure of power, a brief term of years; our years are
spent in vain strivings for existence and health, in hunger, faintness,
and labour, in sleep, in vexation, in fruitless commerce with fools, and
discernment is hard to win; how shall we come to restrain the spirit
from its wont of wandering? There, too, the Spirit of Desire (60) is
labouring to cast us into deep hells; there evil paths abound, and
unbelief can scarce be overcome; it is hard to win a brief return,
exceeding hard for the Enlightened to arise to us; the torrent of
passion can scarce be stayed. Alas, how sorrow follows on sorrow! Alas,
how lamentable is the estate of them that are borne down in the floods
of affliction, and in their sore distress see not how sad their plight
is, like one who should again and again come forth from the waters of
his bath and cast himself

<span id="page_94">p. 94</span>

into fire, and so in their sore trouble deem themselves to be in happy
estate? As thus they live in sport that knows not of age and
dissolution, dire afflictions will come upon them, with Death in their
forefront. Then when will the day come when I may bring peace to them
that are tortured in the fire of sorrow by my ministrations of sweetness
born from the rain-clouds of my righteousness, and when I may reverently
declare to the souls who imagine a real world that all is void, and
righteousness is gathered by looking beyond the Veiled Truth (61)?

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Notes](tpol13)

</div>
