[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe1034)  [Next](sbe1036) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B001W0Z6P6/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[](index)  
*Sacred Books of the East, Vol. 10: The Dhammapada and Sutta Nipata*, by
Max Müller and Max Fausböll, \[1881\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

p. 67

# III. MAHÂVAGGA.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## 1. PABBA*GG*ÂSUTTA.

> King Bimbisâra feeling interested in Buddha tries to tempt him with
> wealth, but is mildly rebuked by Buddha.

   1. I will praise an ascetic life such as the clearly-seeing (Buddha)
led, such as he thinking (over it) approved of as an ascetic life. (404)

   2. ' This house-life is pain, the seat of impurity,' and 'an ascetic
life is an open-air life,' so considering he embraced an ascetic life.
(405)

   3. Leading an ascetic life, he avoided with his body sinful deeds,
and having (also) abandoned sin in words, he cleansed his life. (406)

   4. Buddha went to Râ*g*agaha, he entered the Giribba*g*a in Magadha
for alms with a profusion of excellent signs. (407)

   5. Bimbisâra standing in his palace saw him, and seeing him endowed
with these signs, he spoke these words: (408)

   6. 'Attend ye to this man, he is handsome, great, clean, he is both
endowed with good conduct, and he does not look before him further than
a yuga (the distance of a plough). (409)

   7. 'With downcast eyes, thoughtful, this one is not like those of low
caste; let the king's messengers run off, (and ask): "Where is the
Bhikkhu going?"' (410)

   8. The king's messengers followed after (him, and

p. 68

said): 'Where is the Bhikkhu going, where will he reside? (411)

   9. 'Going begging from house to house, watching the door (of the
senses), well restrained, he quickly filled his bowl, conscious,
thoughtful. (412)

   10. 'Wandering about in search of alms, having gone out of town, the
Muni repaired to (the mountain) Pa*nd*ava; it must be there he lives.'
(413)

   11. Seeing that he had entered his dwelling, the messengers then sat
down, and one messenger having returned announced it to the king. (414)

   12. 'This Bhikkhu, O great king, is sitting on the east side of
Pa*nd*ava, like a tiger, like a bull, like a lion in a mountain cave.'
(415)

   13. Having heard the messenger's words, the Khattiya in a fine
chariot hastening went out to the Pa*nd*ava mountain. (416)

   14. Having gone as far as the ground was practicable for a chariot,
the Khattiya, after alighting from the chariot, and approaching on foot,
having come up (to him), seated himself. (417)

   15. Having sat down the king then exchanged the usual ceremonious
greetings with him, and after the complimentary talk he spoke these
words: (418)

   16. 'Thou art both young and delicate, a lad in his first youth,
possessed of a fine complexion, like a high-born Khattiya. (419)

   17. 'I will ornament the army-house, and at the head of the assembly
of chiefs (nâga) give (thee) wealth; enjoy it and tell me thy birth,
when asked.' (420)

   18. Buddha: 'Just beside Himavanta, O king, there lives a people
endowed with the power of wealth, the inhabitants of Kosala. (421)

p. 69

   19. 'They are Âdi*kk*as by family, Sâkiyas by birth; from that family
I have wandered out, not longing for sensual pleasures. (422)

   20. 'Seeing misery in sensual pleasures, and considering the
forsaking of the world as happiness, I will go and exert myself; in this
my mind delights.' (423)

Pabba*gg*âsutta is ended.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## 2. PADHÂNASUTTA.

> Mâra tries to tempt Buddha, but disappointed is obliged to withdraw.
> Comp. [Gospel of S. Matthew iv](../../bib/kjv/mat.htm#4:1).

   1. To me, whose mind was intent upon exertion near the river
Nera*ñg*arâ, having exerted myself, and given myself to meditation for
the sake of acquiring Nibbâna (yogakkhema), (424)

   2. Came Namu*k*i speaking words full of compassion: 'Thou art lean,
ill-favoured, death is in thy neighbourhood. (425)

   3. 'A thousandth part of thee (is the property) of death, (only) one
part (belongs to) life; living life, O thou venerable one, is better;
living thou wilt be able to do good works<sup>\[1\]</sup>. (426)

   4. 'When thou livest a religious life, and feedest the sacrificial
fire, manifold good works are woven to thee; what dost thou want with
exertion? (427)

   5. 'Difficult is the way of exertion, difficult to pass, difficult to
enter upon;' saying these verses Mâra stood near Buddha. (428)

\[1. Sahassabhâgo mara*n*assa,  
     Eka*m*so tava *g*îvita*m*,  
     *G*îva*m* bho *g*îvita*m* seyyo,  
     *G*îva*m* pu*ññ*âni kâhasi.\]

p. 70

   6. To Mâra thus speaking Bhagavat said this: 'O thou friend of the
indolent, thou wicked one, for what purpose hast thou come here? (429)

   7. 'Even the least good work is of no use to me; and what good works
are required, Mâra ought to tell. (430)

   8. 'I have faith and power, and understanding is found in me; while
thus exerting myself, why do you ask me to live<sup>\[1\]</sup>? (431)

   9. 'This (burning) wind will dry up even the currents of the rivers;
should it not by degrees dry up my blood, while I am exerting myself?
(432)

   10. 'While the blood is drying up, the bile and the phlegm are dried
up; while the flesh is wasting away, the mind gets more tranquil, and my
attention, understanding, and meditation get more
steadfast<sup>\[2\]</sup>. (433)

   11. 'While I am living thus, after having felt the extreme
sensations, my mind does not look for sensual pleasures; behold a
being's purity. (434)

   12. 'Lust thy first army is called, discontent thy second, thy third
is called hunger and thirst, thy fourth desire. (435)

   13. 'Thy fifth is called sloth and drowsiness, thy sixth cowardice,
thy seventh doubt, thy eighth hypocrisy and stupor, (436)

   14. 'Gain, fame, honour, and what celebrity has

\[1. Eva*m* ma*m* pahitattam pi  
     Ki*m* *g*îvam anupu*kkh*asi.

2\. Lohite sussamânamhi  
     Pitta*m* semha*ñ* *k*a sussati,  
     Ma*m*sesu khîyamânesu  
     Bhiyyo *k*ittam pasîdati  
     Bhiyyo sati *k*a pa*ññ*â ka  
     Samâdhi mama ti*tth*ati.\]

p. 71

been falsely obtained; and he who exalts himself and despises
others<sup>\[1\]</sup>. (437)

   15. 'This, O Namu*k*i, is thine, the black one's, fighting army; none
but a hero conquers it, and after conquering it obtains joy. (438)

   16. 'Woe upon life in this world! death in battle is better for me
than that I should live defeated. (439)

   17. 'Plunged into this world some Sama*n*as and Brâma*n*as are not
seen, and they do not know the way in which the virtuous walk. (440)

   18. 'Seeing on all sides an army arrayed, and Mâra on his elephant, I
am going out to do battle, that he may not drive me away from my place.
(441)

   19. 'This army of thine, which the world of men and gods cannot
conquer, I will crush with understanding as (one crushes) an unbaked
earthen pot with a stone<sup>\[2\]</sup>. (442)

   20. 'Having made my thought subject to me and my attention firm, I
shall wander about from kingdom to kingdom, training disciples
extensively. (443)

   21. 'They (will be) zealous and energetic, executing my orders, (the
orders) of one free from lust, and they will go (to the place) where,
having gone, they will not mourn.' (444)

   22. Mâra: 'For seven years I followed Bhagavat step by step; I found
no fault in the perfectly enlightened, thoughtful (Buddha). (445)

\[1. Yo *k*' attâna*m* samukka*m*se  
     Pare *k*a ava*g*ânati.

2\. Ya*m* te ta*m* na-ppasahati  
     Sena*m* loko sadevako  
     Ta*m* te pa*ññ*âya ga*kkh*âmi\[\*\]  
     Âma*m* patta*m* va amhanâ.

\*. Instead of ga*kkh*âmi I read bha*ñg*âmi. B<sup>a</sup> has
ve*kkh*âpi, B<sup>i</sup> ve*ggh*âmi.\]

p. 72

   23. 'The crow hovered round the rock that looked like (a lump of)
fat: "Do we here find something soft, is it something sweet?" (446)

   24. 'Having obtained nothing sweet there, the crow went away from
that spot. Thus like the crow approaching the rock, being disgusted, we
shall go away from Gotama<sup>\[1\]</sup>.' (447)

   25. While overcome with sorrow the string of his lute slipped down;
then that evil-minded Yakkha disappeared there. (448)

Padhânasutta is ended.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## 3. SUBHÂSITASUTTA.

> On well-spoken language.

   So it was heard by me:

   At one time Bhagavat dwelt at Sâvatthî in *G*etavana. Bhagavat said
this: 'O Bhikkhus, the speech that is provided with four requisites is
well-spoken, not ill-spoken, both faultless and blameless to the wise.'

   'Which four?'

   'O Bhikkhus, the Bhikkhu speaks well-spoken (language), not
ill-spoken; he speaks what is right (dhamma), not what is unrighteous
(adhamma); he speaks what is pleasing, not what is unpleasing; he speaks
what is true, not what is false. O Bhikkhus, the speech that is provided
with these four requisites, is well-spoken, not ill-spoken, both
faultless

\[1. Kâko va selam âsa*gg*a<sup>\[\*\]</sup>.  
     Nibbi*gg*âpema Gotama*m*<sup>\[+\]</sup>.

\*. C<sup>b</sup> C<sup>k</sup> âva*gg*a, B<sup>a</sup> assa*gg*a,
B<sup>i</sup> âssa*gg*a.

+. Instead of Gotama*m* I read Gotamâ.\]

p. 73

and blameless to the wise.' This said Bhagavat. When Sugata had said
this, then the Master spoke the following:

   1. 'Well-spoken language the just call the principal (thing); let one
speak what is right (dhamma), not what is unrighteous (adhamma), that is
the second; let one speak what is pleasing, not what is unpleasing, that
is the third; let one speak what is true, not what is false, that is the
fourth.' (449)

   Then the venerable Va<u>n</u>gîsa, rising from his seat, throwing his
robe over one shoulder and bending his joined hands towards Bhagavat,
said this: 'It occurs to me, O Sugata!'

   'Let it occur to thee, O Va<u>n</u>gîsa!' said Bhagavat.

   Then the venerable Va<u>n</u>gîsa, standing before Bhagavat, praised
him with appropriate stanzas:

   2. 'Let one say such words by which he does not pain himself, nor
hurt others; such words are truly well-spoken. (450)

   3. 'Let one speak pleasing words which are received joyfully (by
all), and which (saying) he, without committing sins, speaks what is
pleasing to others. (451)

   4. 'Truth verily is immortal speech, this is a true saying; in what
is true, in what is good, and in what is right, the just stand firm, so
they say. (452)

   5. 'The words which Buddha speaks, which are sure to bring about
extinction and put an end to pain, such (words) are truly the best.'
(453)

Subhâsitasutta is ended.

p. 74

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## 4. SUNDARIKABHÂRADVÂ*G*ASUTTA.

> Buddha shows to Sundarikabhâradvâ*g*a on whom to bestow oblations, and
> the Brâma*n*a is finally converted.

   So it was heard by me:

   At one time Bhagavat dwelt in Kosala on the bank of the river
Sundarikâ. And during that time the Brâma*n*a Sundarikabhâradvâ*g*a made
offerings to the fire and worshipped the fire. Then the Brâma*n*a
Sundarikabhâradvâ*g*a, having made offerings to the fire and worshipped
the fire, and having risen from his seat, looked about him on all sides
towards the four quarters of the globe, saying: 'Who is to enjoy the
rest of this oblation?' The Brâma*n*a Sundarikabhâradvâ*g*a saw Bhagavat
sitting not far off at the root of a tree, wrapped up head and body; and
seeing him he, after taking the rest of the oblation with his left hand
and the waterpot with his right hand, went up to Bhagavat. Then
Bhagavat, on hearing the footsteps of Sundarikabhâradvâ*g*a, the
Brâma*n*a, uncovered his head. Then the Brâhma*n*a Sundarikabhâradvâ*g*a
thought: 'This man is shaved, this man is a shaveling,' and he wished to
return again from there. Then this came to the mind of
Sundarikabhâradvâ*g*a, the Brâma*n*a: 'Some Brâma*n*as also here are
shaved, I think I shall go up and ask him about his descent.' Then the
Brâhma*n*a Sundarikabhâradvâ*g*a went up to Bhagavat, and having gone up
he said this: 'Of what family art thou?'

   Then Bhagavat answered Sundarikabhâradvâ*g*a, the Brâma*n*a, in
stanzas:

   1. 'No Brâma*n*a am I, nor a king's son, nor any

p. 75

Vessa; having thoroughly observed the class of common people, I wander
about the world reflectingly, possessing nothing. (454)

   2. 'Dressed in a sanghâ*t*i<sup>\[1\]</sup> and houseless I wander
about, with my hair cut off, calm, not intermixing with people in this
world. Thou askest me an unseasonable question about (my) family, O
Brâhma*n*a!' (455)

   3. Sundarikabhâradvâ*g*a: 'Sir, Brâma*n*as together with Brâma*n*as
ask truly, Art thou a Brâhma*n*a?'

   Bhagavat: 'If thou sayest, I am a Brâma*n*a, and callest me no
Brâma*n*a, then I ask thee about the Sâvitti that consists of three
padas and twenty-four syllables<sup>\[2\]</sup>.' (456)

   4. Sundarikabhâradvâ*g*a: 'For what (reason) did the Isis, men,
Khattiyas, Brâma*n*as make offerings to the gods abundantly in this
world?'

   Bhagavat: 'He who, perfect and accomplished at the time of offering,
obtains the ear of one or the other (god), he will succeed, so I say.'
(457)

   5. 'Surely his offering will bear fruit,'--so said the
Brâma*n*a,--'because we saw such an accomplished man; for by not seeing
such as you, somebody else will enjoy the oblation.' (458)

   6. Bhagavat: 'Therefore, O Brâma*n*a, as you have come here to ask
for something, ask; perhaps thou mightest here find one that is calm,
without anger, free from pain, free from desire, one with a good
understanding.' (459)

\[1. See Rhys Davids, Buddhism, p. 166.

2\. Ta*m* Sâvitti*m* pu*kkh*âmi  
     Tipada*m* *k*atuvîsatakkhara*m*.  
           (Rig-veda III, 62, 10.)\]

p. 76

   7. Sundarikabhâradvâ*g*a: 'I delight in offering, O Gotama, I desire
to make an offering, but I do not understand it; do thou instruct me,
tell me in what case the offering succeeds.' (460)

   8. Bhagavat: 'Therefore, O Brâma*n*a, lend me thy ear, I will teach
thee the Dhamma. (461)

   9. 'Do not ask about descent, but ask about conduct; from wood, it is
true, fire is born; (likewise) a firm Muni, although belonging to a low
family, may become noble, when restrained (from sinning) by humility.
(462)

   10. 'He who is subdued by truth, endowed with temperance,
accomplished, leading a religious life, on such a one in due time people
should bestow oblations; let the Brâma*n*a who has good works in view,
offer. (463)

   11. 'Those who, after leaving sensual pleasures, wander about
houseless, well restrained, being like a straight shuttle, on such in
due time people should bestow oblations; let the Brâma*n*a who has good
works in view, offer. (464)

   12. 'Those whose passions are gone, whose senses are well composed,
who are liberated like the moon out of the grasp of Râhu, on such in due
time people should bestow oblations; let the Brâma*n*a who has good
works in view, offer. (465)

   13. 'Those who wander about in the world without clinging (to
anything), always thoughtful, having left selfishness, on such in due
time people should bestow oblations; let the Brâma*n*a who has good
works in view, offer. (466)

   14. 'He who, after leaving sensual pleasures, wanders about
victorious, he who knows the end of birth and death, who is perfectly
happy (parinibbuta),

p. 77

calm like a deep water, Tathâgata deserves the oblation. (467)

   15. 'Just with the just and far from the unjust<sup>\[1\]</sup>,
Tathâgata is possessed of infinite understanding; undefiled both in this
world and in the other, Tathâgata deserves the oblation. (468)

   16. 'He in whom there lives no deceit, no arrogance, he who is free
from cupidity, free from selfishness, free from desire, who has banished
anger, who is calm, the Brâma*n*a who has removed the taint of grief,
Tathâgata deserves the oblation. (469)

   17. 'He who has banished (every) resting-place of the mind, he for
whom there is no grasping, he who covets nothing either in this world or
in the other, Tathâgata deserves the oblation<sup>\[2\]</sup>. (470)

   18. 'He who is composed, who has crossed over the stream (of
existence) and knows the Dhamma by (taking) the highest view (of it), he
whose passions are destroyed, who is wearing the last body, Tathâgata
deserves the oblation. (471)

   19. 'He whose passion for existence and whose harsh talk are
destroyed, are perished, (and therefore) exist not, he the accomplished
and in every respect liberated Tathâgata deserves the oblation. (472)

   20. 'He who has shaken off all ties, for whom there are no ties, who
amongst arrogant beings is free from arrogance, having penetrated pain
together with its domain and subject, Tathâgata deserves the oblation.
(473)

   21. 'He who, without giving himself up to desire, sees seclusion
(i.e. Nibbâna), who has overcome the view that is to be taught by
others, to whom there

\[1. Samo samehi visamehi dûre.

2\. Comp. [Dhp. v. 20](sbe1003.htm#pp_20).\]

p. 78

are no objects of sense whatever, Tathâgata deserves the
oblation<sup>\[1\]</sup>. (474)

   22. 'He to whom all Dhammas of every description, after he has
penetrated them, are destroyed, are perished, (and therefore) exist not,
he who is calm, liberated in the destruction of attachment (i.e.
Nibbâna), Tathâgata deserves the oblation. (475)

   23. 'He who sees the destruction of bond and birth, who has totally
evaded the path of passion, (who is) pure, faultless, spotless,
undepraved, Tathâgata deserves the oblation. (476)

   24. 'He who does not measure himself by himself, who is composed,
upright, firm, without desire, free from harshness (akhila), free from
doubt, Tathâgata deserves the oblation. (477)

   25. 'He to whom there is no cause of folly, who has a supernatural
insight in all Dhammas, who wears the last body, and who has acquired
perfect enlightenment, the highest, the blessed, (for him) thus a
Yakkha's purification (takes place)<sup>\[2\]</sup>.' (478)

   26. Sundarikabhâradvâ*g*a: 'May my offering be a true offering,
because I met with such a one out of the accomplished; Brahman is my
witness, may Bhagavat accept me, may Bhagavat enjoy my oblation.' (479)

   27. Bhagavat: 'What is obtained by stanzas is not to be enjoyed by
me, this is not the custom of the clearly-seeing, O Brâma*n*a; Buddhas
reject what is obtained by stanzas. While the Dhamma

\[1. Âsa*m* anissâya vivekadassî  
     Paravediya*m*<sup>\[\*\]</sup> di*tth*im upâtivatto  
     Âramma*n*â yassa na santi ke*k*i, &c.

2\. Comp. [Kalahavivâdasutta, v. 14](sbe1036.htm#pp_875).

\*. Paravediyan ti parehi *ñ*âpetabba*m*. Commentator.\]

p. 79

exists, O Brâma*n*a, this is the practice (of the Buddhas). (480)

   28. 'With other food and drink must thou serve one that is perfect, a
great Isi, whose passions are destroyed, and whose misbehaviour has
ceased, for this is a field for one who looks for good
works<sup>\[1\]</sup>.' (481)

   29. Sundarikabhâradvâ*g*a: 'Good, O Bhagavat, then I should like to
know, who will enjoy a gift from one like me, and whom I shall seek at
the time of sacrifice (as one worthy of offerings) after having accepted
thy doctrine.' (482)

   30. Bhagavat: 'Whosoever has no quarrels, whose mind is untroubled,
and who has freed himself from lusts, whose sloth is driven away, (483)

   31. 'Whosoever conquers his sins, knows birth and death, the Muni who
is endowed with wisdom<sup>\[2\]</sup>, such a one who has resorted to
offering, (484)

   32. 'Him you should worship and honour with food and drink; so the
gifts will prosper.' (485)

   33. Sundarikabhâradvâ*g*a: 'Thou Buddha deservest the oblation, (thou
art) the best field for good works, the object of offering to all the
world; what is given to thee will bear great fruit.' (486)

   Then the Brâma*n*a Sundarikabhâradvâ*g*a said this to Bhagavat: 'It
is excellent, O venerable Gotama! It is excellent, O venerable Gotama!
As one raises what has been overthrown, or reveals what has been hidden,
or tells the way to him who has gone astray, or holds out an oil lamp in
the dark that those who have eyes may see the objects, even so by the
venerable Gotama in manifold ways the Dhamma has been illustrated; I
take refuge in

\[1. Comp. [Kasibhâradvâ*g*sutta, v. 7](sbe1033.htm#pp_81).

2\. Moneyyasampanna*m* = pa*ññ*âsampanna*m*. Commentator.\]

p. 80

the venerable Gotama, in the Dhamma, and in the Assembly of Bhikkhus; I
wish to receive the robe and the orders from the venerable Gotama.'

   The Brâma*n*a Sundarikabhâradvâ*g*a received the pabba*gg*â from
Bhagavat, and he received also the upasampadâ; and the venerable
Bhâradvâ*g*a, having lately received the upasampadâ, leading a solitary,
retired, strenuous, ardent, energetic life, lived after having in a
short time in this existence by his own understanding ascertained and
possessed himself of that highest perfection of a religious life for the
sake of which men of good family rightly wander away from their houses
to a houseless state. 'Birth had been destroyed, a religious life had
been led, what was to be done had been done, there was nothing else (to
be done) for this existence,' so he perceived, and the venerable
Bhâradvâ*g*a became one of the arahats.

Sundarikabhâradvâ*g*asutta is ended.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## 5. MÂGHASUTTA.

> Buddha on being asked tells Mâgha of those worthy of offerings and the
> blessing of offering.

   So it was heard by me:

   At one time Bhagavat dwelt at Râ*g*agaha, in the mountain (called)
the Vulture's Peak (Gi*ggh*akû*t*a).

   Then the young man Mâgha went to Bhagavat, and having gone to him he
talked pleasantly with him, and after having had some pleasant,
remarkable conversation with him he sat down apart; sitting down apart
the young man Mâgha spoke this to Bhagavat:

p. 81

   'O venerable Gotama, I am a liberal giver, bountiful, suitable to beg
of; justly I seek for riches, and having sought for riches justly, I
give out of the justly obtained and justly acquired riches to one, to
two, to three, to four, to five, to six, to seven, to eight, to nine, to
ten, to twenty, to thirty, to forty, to fifty, to a hundred, I give
still more. (I should like to know), O venerable Gotama, whether I,
while so giving, so offering, produce much good.'

   'Certainly, O young man, dost thou in so offering produce much good;
he, O young man, who is a liberal giver, bountiful, suitable to beg of,
and who justly seeks for riches, and having sought for riches justly,
gives out of his justly obtained and justly acquired riches to one, to
two, to three, to four, to five, to six, to seven, to eight, to nine, to
ten, to twenty, to thirty, to forty, to fifty, to a hundred, and gives
still more, produces much good.'

   Then the young man Mâgha addressed Bhagavat in stanzas:

   1. 'I ask the venerable Gotama, the bountiful,'--so said the young
man Mâgha,--'wearing the yellow robe, wandering about houseless:' 'He
who is a householder, suitable to beg of, a donor, who, desirous of
good, offers having what is good in view, and giving to others in this
world food and drink,--where (i.e. on whom bestowed) will the oblation
of such an offerer prosper?' (487)

   2. 'He who is a householder, suitable to beg of, a donor, O
Mâgha,'--so said Bhagavat,--'who, desirous of good, offers having what
is good in view, and giving to others in this world food and drink, such
a one will prosper with those worthy of offerings.' (488)

p. 82

   3. 'He who is a householder, suitable to beg of, a donor,'--so said
the young man,--'who, desirous of good, offers having what is good in
view, and giving to others in this world food and drink,--tell me (I
being such a one), O Bhagavat, of those worthy of offerings.' (489)

   4. Bhagavat: 'Those indeed who wander about in the world without
clinging to anything and without possessing anything, perfect,
self-restrained, on such in due time people should bestow oblations; let
the Brâhma*n*a who has good (works) in view, offer. (490)

   5. 'Those who have cut through all bonds and fetters, who are
subdued, liberated, free from pain, and free from desire, on such in due
time people should bestow oblations; let the Brâma*n*a who has good
(works) in view, offer. (491)

   6. 'Those who are released from all bonds, who are subdued,
liberated, free from pain, and free from desire on such in due time
people should bestow oblations; let the Brâma*n*a who has good (works)
in view, offer. (492)

   7. 'Those who, having forsaken both passion and hatred and folly,
have destroyed their desires and lead a religious life, on such in due
time people should bestow oblations; let the Brâhma*n*a who has good
(works) in view, offer<sup>\[1\]</sup>. (493)

   8. 'Those in whom there lives no deceit, no arrogance, who are free
from cupidity, free from selfishness, free from desire, on such in due
time people should bestew oblations; let the Brâma*n*a who has good
(works) in view, offer. (494)

   9. 'Those indeed who without being lost in desire,

\[1. Comp. [Dhp. v. 20](sbe1003.htm#pp_20).\]

p. 83

after crossing the stream (of existence), wander about free from
selfishness, on such in due time people should bestow oblations; let the
Brâma*n*a who has good (works) in view, offer. (495)

   10. 'Those in whom there is no desire for anything in the world, nor
for existence after existence here or in the other world, on such in due
time people should bestow oblations; let the Brâma*n*a who has good
(works) in view, offer. (496)

   11. 'Those who, after leaving sensual pleasures, wander about
houseless, well restrained, being like a straight shuttle, on such in
due time people should bestow oblations; let the Brâma*n*a who has good
(works) in view, offer. (497)

   12. 'Those whose passions are gone, whose senses are well composed,
who are liberated like the moon out of the grasp of Râhu, on such in due
time people should bestow oblations; let the Brâhma*n*a who has good
(works) in view, offer. (498)

   13. 'Those who are calm, whose passions are gone, who are without
anger, and for whom there is no transmigration after having left here,
on such in due time people should bestow oblations; let the Brâhma*n*a
who has good (works) in view, offer. (499)

   14. 'Those who, after leaving birth and death altogether, have
conquered all doubt, on such in due time people should bestow oblations;
let the Brâma*n*a who has good (works) in view, offer. (500)

   15. 'Those who wander about in the world with themselves for a light,
not possessed of anything, in every respect liberated, on such in due
time people should bestow oblations; let the Brâma*n*a who has good
(works) in view, offer. (501)

   16. 'Those who in this world rightly understand

p. 84

this: "This is the last (birth), there is no re-birth," on such in due
time people should bestow oblations; let the Brâma*n*a who has good
(works) in view, offer. (502)

   17. 'He who is accomplished, and delights in meditation, thoughtful,
possessed of thorough enlightenment, a refuge for many, on such a one in
due time people should bestow oblations; let the Brâhma*n*a who has good
(works) in view, offer.' (503)

   18. 'Certainly my question was not in vain, Bhagavat has told me of
those worthy of offerings; for thou truly knowest this in this world, as
surely to thee this Dhamma is known. (504)

   19. 'He who is a householder, suitable to beg of, a donor,'--so said
the young man Mâgha,--'who, desirous of good, offers having what is good
in view, and giving to others in this world food and drink,--tell me (I
being such a one), O Bhagavat, of the blessing of offering.' (505)

   20. 'Offer, O Mâgha,'--so said Bhagavat,--'and while offering make
calm thy mind in all things; the object of the one that offers is the
oblation, standing fast in this he leaves hatred behind. (506)

   21. 'Such a one whose passion is gone will repress hatred,
cultivating an unbounded friendly mind; continually strenuous night and
day he will spread infinite goodness through all regions.' (507)

   22. Mâgha: 'Who prospers? who is liberated and who is bound? In which
way can one by himself go to Brahmaloka? Tell this to me who does not
know, O Muni, when asked. Bhagavat is indeed my witness that Brahman is
seen by me to-day, for thou art to us equal to Brahman, this is the
truth; how can one attain Brahmaloka, O thou glorious one?' (508)

p. 85

   23. 'He who offers the threefold blessing of oblation, O Mâgha,'--so
said Bhagavat,--'such a one will prosper with those worthy of offerings;
so, having offered properly, he who is suitable to beg of attains
Brahmaloka, so I say.' (509)

   This having been said, Mâgha the young man spoke as follows to
Bhagavat: 'Excellent, O venerable Gotama! Excellent, O venerable Gotama!
As one raises what has been overthrown, or reveals what has been hidden,
or tells the way to him who has gone astray, or holds out an oil lamp in
the dark that those who have eyes may see the objects, even so by the
venerable Gotama in manifold ways the Dhamma has been illustrated; I
take refuge in the venerable Gotama and in the Dhamma and in the
Assembly of Bhikkhus. Let the venerable Gotama accept me as an upâsaka
(a follower, me), who henceforth for all my life have taken refuge (in
him).'

Mâghasutta is ended.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## 6. SABHIYASUTTA.

> Sabhiya, the Paribbâ*g*aka, goes to the six famous teachers of his
> time to have his questions answered, but not having his doubts solved,
> he repairs to Gotama and asks him how one is to behave to become a
> Brâma*n*a, a Sama*n*a, a Nahâtaka, a Khetta*g*ina, a Kusala, a
> Pa*nd*ita, a Muni, a Vedagû, an Anuvidita, a Dhîra, an Â*g*âniya, a
> Sottiya, an Ariya, a *K*ara*n*avat, a Paribbâ*g*aka. Bhagavat answers
> his questions, and Sabhiya finally receives the robe and the orders
> from Buddha.

   So it was heard by me:

   At one time Bhagavat dwelt at Râ*g*agaha, in Ve*l*uvana, in
Kalandakanivâpa. And at that time questions were recited to Sabhiya, the
Paribbâ*g*aka

p. 86

(wandering mendicant), by an old benevolent deity: 'He who, O Sabhiya,
be it a Sama*n*a or a Brâma*n*a, explains these questions to thee when
asked, near him thou shouldst live a religious life.'

   Then Sabhiya, the Paribbâ*g*aka, having learnt the questions from
that deity, went to whatever Sama*n*as and Brâma*n*as there were that
had an assembly (of Bhikkhus), a crowd (of followers), and were
well-known teachers, famous leaders, considered excellent by the
multitude, as Pûra*n*a-Kassapa, Makkhali-Gosâla, A*g*ita-Kesakambali,
Pakudha-Ka*kk*âyana, Sa*ñg*aya-Bela*tth*iputta, and
Niga*nth*a-Nâtaputta. Those he went to, and after going to them, he
asked the questions. They, being asked the questions by Sabhiya, the
Paribbâ*g*aka, did not succeed (in answering them), and not succeeding,
they showed wrath and hatred and discontent, and they also in return put
questions to Sabhiya, the Paribbâ*g*aka.

   Then this came to the mind of Sabhiya, the Paribbâ*g*aka: 'Whatever
Sama*n*as and Brâma*n*as there are that have an assembly (of Bhikkhus),
a crowd (of followers), and are well-known teachers, famous leaders,
considered excellent by the multitude, as Pûra*n*a-Kassapa,
Makkhali-Gosâla, A*g*ita-Kesakambali, Pakudha-Ka*kk*âyana,
Sa*ñg*aya-Bela*tth*iputta, and Niga*nth*a-Nâtaputta, they, being asked
questions by me, did not succeed (in answering them), and not succeeding
they showed wrath and hatred and discontent, and they also in return put
questions to me in this matter; surely I think I shall go back to what I
have left, and enjoy sensual pleasures.

   Then this came to the mind of Sabhiya, the Paribbâ*g*aka: 'This
Sama*n*a Gotama has both an

p. 87

assembly (of Bhikkhus) and a crowd (of followers), and is a well-known
teacher, a famous leader, considered excellent by the multitude, surely
I think I shall go to Sama*n*a Gotama and ask these questions.' Then
this came to the mind of Sabhiya, the Paribbâ*g*aka: 'Whatever Sama*n*as
and Brâhma*n*as there are that are decayed, old, aged, advanced in
years, having reached old age, experienced elders, long ordained, having
assemblies (of Bhikkhus), crowds (of followers), being teachers
well-known, famous leaders, considered excellent by the multitude, as
Pûra*n*a-Kassapa, Makkhali-Gosâla, A*g*ita-Kesakambali,
Pakudha-Ka*kk*âyana, Sa*ñg*aya-Bela*tth*iputta, and
Niga*nth*a-Nâtaputta, they, being asked questions by me, did not succeed
(in answering them), and not succeeding they showed wrath and hatred and
discontent, and they also in return put questions to me in this matter;
(I should like to know) whether Sama*n*a Gotama being asked these
questions will be able to explain them to me, for Sama*n*a Gotama is
both young by birth and new in ascetic life.'

   Then this came to the mind of Sabhiya, the Paribbâ*g*aka: 'Sama*n*a
Gotama is not to be slighted because he is young; even if the Sama*n*a
is young, yet he is mighty and powerful; surely I think I shall go to
Sama*n*a Gotama and ask these questions.' Then Sabhiya, the
Paribbâ*g*aka, went on a journey to Râ*g*agaha, and wandering on his
journey in regular order he came to Râ*g*agaha, Ve*l*uvana,
Kalandakanivâpa, to Bhagavat, and having come to Bhagavat he talked
pleasantly with him, and after having had some pleasant and remarkable
conversation with him he sat down apart; sitting down apart

p. 88

Sabhiya, the Paribbâ*g*aka, spoke to Bhagavat in stanzas:

   1. 'Anxious and doubtful I have come,'--so said Sabhiya,--'longing to
ask questions. Do thou put an end to these (doubts when) asked these
questions by me, in regular order, and rightly explain them to me.'
(510)

   2. 'Thou hast come from afar, O Sabhiya,'--so said
Bhagavat,--'longing to ask questions; I shall put an end to those
(doubts when) asked those questions by thee, in regular order, and
rightly I shall explain them to thee. (511)

   3. 'Ask me, O Sabhiya, a question; whatsoever thou wishest in thy
mind that question I (will explain, and) put an end to (thy doubt).'
(512)

   Then this came to the mind of Sabhiya, the Paribbâ*g*aka: 'It is
marvellous, it is wonderful indeed, the reception which I did not get
from other Sama*n*as and Brâhma*n*as has been given me by Gotama,' so
saying he glad, rejoicing, delighted, and highly elated asked Bhagavat a
question:

   4. 'What should a man (necessarily) have obtained that people may
call him a Bhikkhu?'--so said Sabhiya,--'how may they call him
compassionate, and how subdued? how can he be called enlightened
(buddha)? Asked (about this) do thou, Bhagavat, explain it to me.' (513)

   5. 'He who by the path he has himself made, O Sabhiya,'--so said
Bhagavat,--'has attained to perfect happiness, who has conquered doubt,
who lives after having left behind both gain and goods, who has
destroyed re-birth, he is a Bhikkhu. (514)

   6. 'Always resigned and attentive, he will not hurt any one in all
the world, the Sama*n*a who has

p. 89

crossed the stream (of existence, and is) untroubled; for whom there are
no desires (ussada), he is compassionate. (515)

   7. 'He whose senses are trained internally and externally in all the
world, he who after penetrating this and the other world longs for
death, being trained, he is subdued. (516)

   8. 'Whosoever, after having considered all times (kappa), the
revolution (sa*m*sâra), both the vanishing and re-appearance (of
beings), is free from defilement, free from sin, is pure, and has
obtained destruction of birth, him they call enlightened (buddha).'
(517)

   Then Sabhiya, the Paribbâ*g*aka, having approved of and rejoiced at
the words of Bhagavat, glad, rejoicing, delighted, highly elated, asked
Bhagavat another question:

   9. 'What should a man (necessarily) have obtained that people may
call him a Brâma*n*a?'--so said Sabhiya,--'and how (may they call him) a
Sama*n*a? and how a Nahâtaka? how can he be called a Nâga? Asked (about
this) do thou Bhagavat explain it to me.' (518)

   10. 'He who, after removing all sins, O Sabhiya,'--so said
Bhagavat,--'is immaculate, well composed, firm-minded, perfect after
crossing the Sa*m*sâra, such an independent one is called a Brâma*n*a.
(519)

   11. 'He who is calm, having left behind good and evil, free from
defilement, having understood this and the other world, and conquered
birth and death, such a one is called a Sama*n*a by being
so<sup>\[1\]</sup>.' (520)

   12. 'Whosoever, after having washed away all sins internally and
externally in all the world, does

\[1. Sama*n*o tâdi pavu*kk*ate tathattâ.\]

p. 90

not enter time (kappa) amongst gods and men who are subject to time, him
they call a Nahâtaka (cleansed)<sup>\[1\]</sup>. (521)

   13. 'He who does not commit any crime in the world, who, after
abandoning all bonds and fetters, clings to nothing, being liberated,
such a one is called a Nâga (sinless) by being so<sup>\[2\]</sup>.'
(522)

   Then Sabhiya, the Paribbâ*g*aka, having approved of and rejoiced at
the words of Bhagavat, glad, rejoicing, delighted, highly elated,
further asked Bhagavat a question:

   14. 'Whom do the Buddhas call a Khetta*g*ina?'--so said
Sabhiya,--'how (can they call any one) a Kusala? and how a Pa*nd*ita?
how can he be called a Muni? Asked (about this) do thou Bhagavat explain
it to me.' (523)

   15. 'He who, after examining all regions, O Sabhiya,'--so said
Bhagavat,--'the divine and the human, and Brahman's region, is delivered
from the radical bond of all regions, such a one is called a
Khetta*g*ina (he who has conquered the regions) by being so. (524)

   16. 'He who, after examining all treasures, the divine and the human,
and Brahman's treasure, is delivered from the radical bond of all
treasures, such a one is called a Kusala (happy) by being so. (525)

   17. 'He who, after examining both kinds of senses, internally and
externally, is endowed with a

\[1. Devamanussesu kappiyesu  
     Kappan n' eti tam âhu nahâtako.

2\. Âgu*m* na karoti ki*ñk*i loke  
     Sabbasa*m*yoge visa*gg*a bandhanâni  
     Sabbattha na sa*gg*atî vimutto  
     Nâgo tâdi pavu*kk*ate tathattâ.  
But compare [Pabba*gg*âsutta
17](#pp_420%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20),
[Mâgandiyasutta 11](sbe1036.htm#pp_845), &c.\]

p. 91

clear understanding and has conquered evil and good (ka*n*hasukka), such
a one is called a Pa*nd*ita (wise) by being so. (526)

   18. 'He who, having understood the Dhamma of the just and the unjust,
internally and externally, in all the world, is to be worshipped by gods
and men, he, after breaking through the net of ties, is called a Muni
(sage).' (527)

   Then Sabhiya, the Paribbâ*g*aka, having approved of and rejoiced at
the words of Bhagavat, glad, rejoicing, delighted, highly elated,
further asked Bhagavat a question:

   19. 'What should one (necessarily) have obtained that people may call
him Vedagû?'--so said Sabhiya,--'and how (may they call him) Anuvidita?
and how Viriyavat? How does one become Â*g*âniya? Asked (about this) do
thou, O Bhagavat, explain it to me.' (528)

   20. 'He who, having conquered all sensations, O Sabhiya,'--so said
Bhagavat,--'which are (known) to Sama*n*as and to Brâma*n*as, is free
from passion for all sensations, he is Vedagû (having passed sensation)
after conquering all sensation. (529)

   21. 'He who, having seen the delusion of name and
form<sup>\[1\]</sup>, internally and externally, the root of sickness,
and is delivered from the radical bond of all sickness, such a one is
called Anuvidita (well-informed) by being so. (530)

   22. 'He who is disgusted in this world with all sins, is strong after
conquering the pain of hell, is strong and powerful, such a one is
called Dhîra ( = viriyavat, firm) by being so. (531)

\[1. Anuvi*kk*a papa*ñk*anâmarûpa*m*.\]

p. 92

   23. 'He whose bonds are cut off internally and externally, the root
of ties<sup>\[1\]</sup>, who is delivered from the radical bond of all
ties, such a one is called Â*g*âniya (high-bred) by being so.' (532)

   Then Sabhiya, the Paribbâ*g*aka, having approved of and rejoiced at
the words of Bhagavat, glad, rejoicing, delighted, highly elated,
further asked Bhagavat a question:

   24. 'What should a man (necessarily) have obtained that people may
call him a Sottiya?'--so said Sabhiya,--'how (may they call him) an
Ariya? and how a *K*ara*n*avat? how may he become a Paribbâ*g*aka? Asked
(about this) do thou, O Bhagavat, explain it to me.' (533)

   25. 'Whosoever, after having heard and understood every Dhamma in the
world, O Sabhiya,'--so said Bhagavat,--'whatsoever is wrong and
whatsoever is blameless, is victorious, free from doubt, liberated, free
from pain in every respect, him they call a Sottiya (learned in the
revelation). (534)

   26. 'Whosoever, after having cut off passions and desires, is wise
and does not (again) enter the womb, having driven away the threefold
sign, the mud (of lust), and who does not (again) enter time (kappa),
him they call an Ariya (noble). (535)

   27. 'He who in this world, after having attained the (highest) gain
in the *K*ara*n*as, is skilful, has always understood the Dhamma, clings
to nothing, is liberated, and for whom there are no passions, he is a
*K*ara*n*avat (endowed with the obsrvances). (536)

   28. 'Whosoever abstains from the action that has a painful result,
above and below and across and in

\[1. Yass' assu lutâni bandhanâni  
     A*ggh*atta*m* bahiddhâ *k*a sa<u>n</u>gamûla*m*.\]

p. 93

the middle, who wanders with understanding, who has put an end to
deceit, arrogance, cupidity and anger, name and form, him they call a
Paribbâ*g*aka (a wandering mendicant) who has attained the (highest)
gain.' (537)

   Then Sabhiya, the Paribbâ*g*aka, having approved of and rejoiced at
the words of Bhagavat, glad, rejoicing, delighted, highly elated, having
risen from his seat, and having put his upper robe upon one shoulder,
bending his joined hands towards Bhagavat, praised Bhagavat face to face
in appropriate stanzas:

   29. 'Having conquered the three and sixty (philosophical) views
referring to the disputations of the Sama*n*as, thou hast crossed over
the darkness of the stream<sup>\[1\]</sup>. (?) (538)

   30. 'Thou hast passed to the end of and beyond pain, thou art a
saint, perfectly enlightened, I consider thee one that has destroyed his
passions, thou art glorious, thoughtful, of great understanding, O thou
who puts an end to pain, thou hast carried me across. (539)

   31. 'Because thou sawest my longing, and carriedst me across my
doubt, adoration be to thee, O Muni, who hast attained the (highest)
gain in the ways of wisdom; O thou who art a true kinsman of the
Âdi*kk*as, thou art compassionate. (540)

   32. 'The doubt I had before thou hast cleared away for me, O thou
clearly-seeing; surely thou art a Muni, perfectly enlightened, there is
no obstacle for thee. (541)

\[1. Yâni *k*a tî*n*i yâni *k*a sa*tth*i  
     Sama*n*appavâdasitâni bhûripa*ññ*a  
     Sa*ññ*akkhara sa*ññ*anissitâni (?)  
     Osara*n*âni vineyya oghatam' agâ.\]

p. 94

   33. 'And all thy troubles are scattered and cut off, thou art calm,
subdued, firm, truthful. (542)

   34. 'All gods and both Nârada and Pabbata rejoice at thee, the chief
of the sinless (nâganâga), the great hero, when thou art speaking. (543)

   35. 'Adoration be to thee, O noble man, adoration be to thee, O thou
best of men; in the world of men and gods there is no man equal to thee.
(544)

   36. 'Thou art Buddha, thou art the Master, thou art the Muni that
conquers Mâra; after having cut off desire thou hast crossed over and
hast carried across this generation. (545)

   37. 'The elements of existence (upadhi) are overcome by thee, the
passions are destroyed by thee, thou art a lion, free from desire, thou
hast left behind fear and terror. (546)

   38. 'As a beautiful lotus does not adhere to the water, so thou dost
not cling to good and evil, to either; stretch forth thy feet, O hero,
Sabbiya worships the Master's (feet).' (547)

   Then Sabhiya, the Paribbâ*g*aka, stooping with his head to Bhagavat's
feet, said this to Bhagavat:

   'It is excellent, O venerable! It is excellent, O venerable! As one
raises what has been overthrown, or reveals what has been hidden, or
tells the way to him who has gone astray, or holds out an oil lamp in
the dark that those who have eyes may see the objects, even so by the
venerable Gotama in manifold ways the Dhamma has been illustrated; I
take refuge in the venerable Gotama, in the Dhamma, and in the Assembly
of Bhikkhus; I wish to receive the robe and the orders from the
venerable Bhagavat.'

   'He who, O Sabhiya, formerly belonging

p. 95

another creed (a*ññ*atitthiyapubba), wishes to be adopted into this
religion (dhammavinaya), and wishes to receive the robe and the orders,
he serves for four months; after the lapse of four months Bhikkhus who
have appeased their thoughts will give him the robe and the orders to
become a Bhikkhu, (for) I also in this matter acknowledge difference of
persons.'

   'If, O venerable, those that formerly belonged to another creed and
wish to be adopted into this religion and to receive the robe and the
orders, serve for four months, and after the lapse of four months
Bhikkhus who have appeased their thoughts give them the robe and the
orders that they may become Bhikkhus, I will (also) serve for four
months, and after the lapse of four months Bhikkhus who have appeased
their thoughts shall give (me) the robe and the orders that I may become
a Bhikkhu.'

   Sabhiya, the Paribbâ*g*aka, received the robe and the orders from
Bhagavat, and the venerable Sabhiya, having lately received the
upasampadâ, leading a solitary, retired, strenuous, ardent, energetic
life, lived after having in a short time in this existence by his own
understanding ascertained and possessed himself of that highest
perfection of a religious life for the sake of which men of good family
rightly wander away from their houses to a houseless state. 'Birth had
been destroyed, a religious life had been led, what was to be done had
been done, there was nothing else (to be done) for this existence,' so
he perceived, and the venerable Sabhiya became one of the saints.

Sabhiyasutta is ended.

p. 96

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## 7. SELASUTTA.

> Ke*n*iya, the *G*a*t*ila, invites Buddha with his assembly to take his
> meals with him on the morrow. Sela, the Brâma*n*a, arrived at that
> place with his three hundred young men; seeing the preparations he
> asks what is going on, and is answered that Buddha is expected the
> next day. On hearing the word 'Buddha,' Sela asks where Buddha lives,
> goes to him, converses with him, and is converted; so are his
> followers.

   So it was heard by me:

   At one time Bhagavat wandering about in A<u>n</u>guttarâpa, with a
large assembly of Bhikkhus, with 1250 Bhikkhus, went to Âpa*n*a, a town
in A<u>n</u>guttarâpa.

   And Ke*n*iya, the ascetic, with matted hair (*g*a*t*ila) heard the
following: 'The Sama*n*a, the venerable Gotama, the Sakya son, gone out
from the family of the Sakyas, wandering about in A<u>n</u>guttarâpa
with a large assembly of Bhikkhus, with 1250 Bhikkhus, has reached
Âpa*n*a, and the following good praising words met the venerable Gotama:
"And so he is Bhagavat, the venerable, the perfectly enlightened,
endowed with science and works (vi*gg*â*k*ara*n*a), the happy, knowing
the world, the incomparable, the charioteer of men that are to be
subdued, the master, the enlightened of gods and men, the glorious; he
teaches this world and the world of gods, of Mâras, of Brahmans, and
beings comprising Sama*n*as and Brâma*n*as, gods and men, having himself
known and seen them face to face; he teaches the Dhamma (which is) good
in the beginning, in the middle, and in the end, is full of meaning and
rich in words, quite complete; he teaches a religious life, and good is
the sight of such saints."'

   Then Ke*n*iya, the *G*a*t*ila, went (to the place) where

p. 97

Bhagavat was, and having gone there he talked pleasantly with him, and
after having had some pleasant and remarkable conversation (with him) he
sat down apart; and while Ke*n*iya, the *G*a*t*ila, was sitting down
apart, Bhagavat, by religious talk, taught, advised, roused, and
delighted him. Then Ke*n*iya, the *G*a*t*ila, having been taught,
advised, roused, and delighted by Bhagavat through religious talk, said
this to Bhagavat:

   'Let the venerable Gotama accept my food tomorrow, together with the
assembly of Bhikkhus.'

   This having been said, Bhagavat answered Ke*n*iya, the *G*a*t*ila:
'Large, O Ke*n*iya, is the assembly of Bhikkhus, one thousand two
hundred and fifty Bhikkhus, and thou art intimate with the Brâma*n*as.'

   A second time Ke*n*iya, the *G*a*t*ila, said this to Bhagavat:
'Although, O venerable Gotama, the assembly of Bhikkhus is large, one
thousand two hundred and fifty Bhikkhus, and I am intimate with the
Brâma*n*as, let the venerable Gotama accept my food to-morrow, together
with the assembly of Bhikkhus.'

   A second time Bhagavat said this to Ke*n*iya, the *G*a*t*ila: 'Large,
O Ke*n*iya, is the assembly of Bhikkhus, one thousand two hundred and
fifty Bhikkhus, and thou art intimate with the Brâma*n*as.'

   A third time Ke*n*iya, the *G*a*t*ila, said this to Bhagavat:
'Although, O venerable Gotama, the assembly of Bhikkhus is large, one
thousand two hundred and fifty Bhikkhus, and I am intimate with the
Brâhma*n*as, yet let the venerable Gotama accept my food to-morrow,
together with the assembly of Bhikkhus.' Bhagavat assented by being
silent.

p. 98

   Then Ke*n*iya, the *G*a*t*ila, having learnt the assent of Bhagavat,
after rising from his seat went to his hermitage, and having gone there
he addressed his friends and servants, his relatives and kinsmen (as
follows): 'Let my venerable friends and servants, relatives and kinsmen
hear me;--the Sama*n*a Gotama has been invited by me to (take his) food
(with me) to-morrow, together with the assembly of Bhikkhus; wherefore
you must render me bodily service.'

   'Surely, O venerable one,' so saying the friends and servants,
relatives and kinsmen of Ke*n*iya, the *G*a*t*ila, complying with his
request, some of them dug fireplaces, some chopped firewood, some washed
the vessels, some placed waterpots, some prepared seats. Ke*n*iya, the
*G*a*t*ila, on the other hand, himself provided a circular pavilion.

   At that time the Brâma*n*a Sela lived at Âpa*n*a, perfect in the
three Vedas, vocabulary, Ke*t*ubha, etymology, Itihâsa as the fifth
(Veda), versed in metre, a grammarian, one not deficient in popular
controversy and the signs of a great man, he taught three hundred young
men the hymns<sup>\[1\]</sup>. At that time Ke*n*iya, the *G*a*t*ila,
was intimate with the Brâhma*n*a Sela. Then the Brâma*n*a Sela
surrounded by three hundred young men, walking on foot, arrived at the
place where the hermitage of Ke*n*iya, the *G*a*t*ila, was. And the
Brâma*n*a Sela saw the *G*a*t*ilas in Ke*n*iya's hermitage, some of them
digging fireplaces, some chopping firewood, some washing the vessels,
some placing waterpots, some

\[1. Tena kho pana samayena. Selo brâhma*n*o Âpa*n*e pa*t*ivasati
ti*nn*a*m* vedâna*m* pâragû sanigha*nd*uke*t*ubhâna*m*
sâkkharappabhedâna*m* itihâsapa*ñk*amâna*m* padako veyyâkara*n*o
lokâyatamahâpurisalakkha*n*esu anavayo tî*n*i mâ*n*avakasatâni mante
vâ*k*eti.\]

p. 99

preparing seats, and Ke*n*iya, the *G*a*t*ila, on the other hand,
himself providing a circular pavilion; seeing Ke*n*iya, the *G*a*t*ila,
he said this: 'Is the venerable Ke*n*iya to celebrate the marriage of a
son or the marriage of a daughter, or is there a great sacrifice at
hand, or has Bimbisâra, the king of Magadha, who has a large body of
troops, been invited for to-morrow, together with his army?'

   'I am not to celebrate the marriage of a son or the marriage of a
daughter, nor has Bimbisâra, the king of Magadha, who has a large body
of troops, been invited for to-morrow, together with his army, yet a
great sacrifice of mine is at hand. The Sama*n*a Gotama, the Sakya son,
gone out from the Sakya family, wandering about in A<u>n</u>guttarâpa
with a large assembly of Bhikkhus, one thousand two hundred and fifty
Bhikkhus, has reached Âpa*n*a, and the following good praising words met
the venerable Gotama: "And so he is Bhagavat, the venerable, the
perfectly enlightened, endowed with science and works
(vi*gg*â*k*ara*n*a), the happy, knowing the world, the incomparable, the
charioteer of men that are to be subdued, the master, the enlightened of
gods and men, the glorious, he has been invited by me for to-morrow,
together with the assembly of Bhikkhus."'

   'Didst thou say that he is a Buddha, O venerable Ke*n*iya?'

   'Yes, I say, O venerable Sela, that he is a Buddha.'

   'Didst thou say that he is a Buddha, O venerable Ke*n*iya? ,

   'Yes, I say, O venerable Sela, that he is a Buddha.'

   Then this occurred to the Brâhma*n*a Sela: 'This sound "Buddha" is
(indeed) rare, but in our hymns

p. 100

are to be found the thirty-two signs of a great man, and for a great man
endowed with these there are two conditions, and no more: if he lives in
a house he is a king, a universal (king), a just religious king, a lord
of the four-cornered (earth), a conqueror, one who has obtained the
security of his people (and) is possessed of the seven gems. These are
his seven gems, namely, the wheel gem, the elephant gem, the horse gem,
the pearl gem, the woman gem, the householder gem, and the chief gem as
the seventh. He has more than a thousand sons, heroes, possessing great
bodily strength and crushing foreign armies; he having conquered this
ocean-girt earth without a rod and without a weapon, but by justice,
lives (in a house). But if, on the other hand, he goes out from (his)
house to the houseless state, he becomes a saint, a perfectly
enlightened, one who has removed the veil in the world. And where, O
venerable Ke*n*iya, dwells now that venerable Gotama, the saint and the
perfectly enlightened?'

   This having been said, Ke*n*iya, the *G*a*t*ila, stretching out his
right arm, spoke as follows to the Brâma*n*a Sela: 'There, where yon
blue forest line is, O venerable Sela.'

   Then the Brâma*n*a Sela together with (his) three hundred young men
went to the place where Bhagavat was. Then the Brâma*n*a Sela addressed
those young men: 'Come ye, venerable ones, with but little noise,
walking step by step, for Bhagavats are difficult of access, walking
alone like lions, and when I speak to the venerable Sama*n*a Gotama, do
ye not utter interrupting words, but wait ye venerable ones, for the end
of my speech.'

   Then the Brâma*n*a Sela went to the place where

p. 101

Bhagavat was, and having gone there he talked pleasantly with Bhagavat,
and after having had some pleasant and remarkable conversation with him
he sat down apart, and while sitting down apart Sela, the Brâhma*n*a,
looked for the thirty-two signs of a great man on the body of Bhagavat.
And the Brâma*n*a Sela saw the thirty-two signs of a great man on the
body of Bhagavat with the exception of two; in respect to two of the
signs of a great man he had doubts, he hesitated, he was not satisfied,
he was not assured as to the member being enclosed in a membrane and as
to his having a large tongue.

   Then this occurred to Bhagavat: 'This Brâma*n*a Sela sees in me the
thirty-two signs of a great man with the exception of two, in respect to
two of the signs of a great man he has doubts, he hesitates, he is not
satisfied, he is not assured as to the member being enclosed in a
membrane, and as to my having a large tongue.' Then Bhagavat created
such a miraculous creature that the Brâma*n*a Sela might see Bhagavat's
member enclosed in a membrane. Then Bhagavat having put out his tongue
touched and stroked both his ears, touched and stroked both nostrils,
and the whole circumference of his forehead he covered with his tongue.

   Then this occurred to the Brâhma*n*a Sela: 'The Sama*n*a Gotama is
endowed with the thirty-two signs of a great man, with them all, not
with (only) some of them, and yet I do not know whether he is a Buddha
or not; I have heard old and aged Brâhma*n*as, teachers and their
previous teachers, say that those who are saints and perfectly
enlightened manifest themselves when their praise is uttered. I think I
shall praise the Sama*n*a Gotama face to

p. 102

face in suitable stanzas.' Then the Brâma*n*a Sela praised Bhagavat face
to face in suitable stanzas:

   1. 'Thou hast a perfect body, thou art resplendent, well-born, of
beautiful aspect, thou hast a golden colour, O Bhagavat, thou hast very
white teeth, thou art strong. (548)

   2. 'All the signs that are for a well-born man, they are on thy body,
the signs of a great man. (549)

   3. 'Thou hast a bright eye, a handsome countenance, thou art great,
straight, majestic, thou shinest like a sun in the midst of the assembly
of the Sama*n*as. (550)

   4. 'Thou art a Bhikkhu of a lovely appearance, thou hast a skin like
gold; what is the use of being a Sama*n*a to thee who art possessed of
the highest beauty? (551)

   5. 'Thou deservest to be a king, a king of universal kings, a ruler
of the four-cornered (earth), a conqueror, a lord of the jambu grove
(i.e. India). (552)

   6. 'Khattiyas and wealthy kings are devoted to thee; rule, O Gotama,
as a king of kings, a leader of men.' (553)

   7. 'I am a king, O Sela,'--so said Bhagavat,--'an incomparable,
religious king (dhammarâ*g*an), with justice (dhammena) I turn the
wheel, a wheel that is irresistible<sup>\[1\]</sup>.' (554)

   8. 'Thou acknowledgest thyself (to be) perfectly enlightened
(sambuddha),'--so said Sela, the Brâhmana,--'an incomparable, religious
king; "with justice I turn the wheel," so thou sayest, O Gotama. (555)

\[1. Compare Gospel of [S. John xviii.
37](../../bib/kjv/joh.htm#18:37).\]

p. 103

   9. 'Who is thy general, (who is thy) disciple, (who is) the successor
of the master, who is to turn after thee the wheel of religion turned
(by thee)? ' (556)

   10. 'The wheel turned by me, O Sela,'--so said Bhagavat,--'the
incomparable wheel of religion, Sâriputta is to turn after (me), he
taking after Tathâgata. (557)

   11. 'What is to be known is known (by me), what is to be cultivated
is cultivated (by me), what is to be left is left by me, therefore I am
a Buddha, O Brâma*n*a. (558)

   12. 'Subdue thy doubt about me, have faith (in me), O Brâma*n*a,
difficult (to obtain) is the sight of Buddhas repeatedly. (559)

   13. 'Of those whose manifestation is difficult for you (to obtain) in
the world repeatedly, I am, O Brâma*n*a, a perfectly enlightened, an
incomparable physician, (560)

   14. 'Most eminent, matchless, a crusher of Mâra's army; having
subjected all enemies I rejoice secure on every side.' (561)

   15. Sela: 'O venerable ones, pay attention to this: as the
clearly-seeing (Buddha) says, (so it is): he is a physician, a great
hero, and roars like a lion in the forest. (562)

   16. 'Who, having seen him, the most eminent, the matchless, the
crusher of Mâra's army, is not appeased, even if he be, of black origin
(ka*n*hâbhi*g*âtika). (563)

   17. 'He who likes me, let him follow after (me), he who does not like
me, let him go away; I shall at once take the orders in the presence of
him of excellent understanding (i.e. Buddha).' (564)

p. 104

   18. The followers of Sela: 'If this doctrine of the perfectly
enlightened pleases thee, we also shall take the orders in the presence
of him of excellent understanding.' (565)

   19. These three hundred Brâma*n*as asked with clasped hands (to be
admitted into the order): 'We want to cultivate a religious life, O
Bhagavat, in thy presence.' (566)

   20. 'A religious life is well taught (by me), O Sela,'--so said
Bhagavat,--'an instantaneous, an immediate (life), in which it is not in
vain to become an ascetic to one who learns in earnest<sup>\[1\]</sup>.'
(567)

   Then the Brâma*n*a Sela together with his assembly took the robe and
the orders in the presence of Bhagavat.

   Then Ke*n*iya, the *G*a*t*ila, by the expiration of that night,
having provided in his hermitage nice hard food and soft food, let
Bhagavat know the time (of the meal): 'It is time, O venerable Gotama,
the meal is prepared.' Then Bhagavat in the morning, having put on his
raiment and taken his bowl and robes, went to the *G*a*t*ila Ke*n*iya's
hermitage, and having gone there he sat down on the prepared seat,
together with the assembly of Bhikkhus. Then Ke*n*iya, the *G*a*t*ila,
satisfied and served with his own hands the assembly of Bhikkhus, with
Buddha at their head, with nice hard food and soft food. Then Ke*n*iya,
the *G*a*t*ila, having gone up to Bhagavat who had finished eating and
had taken his hand out of the bowl, took a low seat and sat down apart,
and

\[1. Svâkkhâta*m* brahma*k*ariya*m*  
     Sandi*tth*ika*m* akâlika*m*  
     Yattha amoghâ pabba*gg*â  
     Appamattassa sikkhato.\]

p. 105

while Ke*n*iya, the *G*a*t*ila, was sitting down apart, Bhagavat
delighted him with these stanzas:

   21. 'The principal thing in sacrifice is the sacred fire, the
principal thing amongst the hymns is the Sâvitti<sup>\[1\]</sup>, the
king is the principal amongst men, and the sea the principal amongst
waters (nadîna*m*<sup>\[2\]</sup>). (568)

   22. 'Amongst the stars the moon is the principal thing, the sun is
the principal thing amongst the burning<sup>\[3\]</sup> (objects),
amongst those that wish for good works and make offerings the assembly
(sa*m*gha) indeed is the principal.' (569)

   Then Bhagavat, having delighted Ke*n*iya, the *G*a*t*ila, with these
stanzas, rose from (his) seat and went away.

   Then the venerable Sela together with his assembly leading a
solitary, retired, strenuous, ardent, energetic life, lived after having
in a short time in this existence by his own understanding ascertained
and possessed himself of that highest perfection of a religious life for
the sake of which men of good family rightly wander away from their
houses to a houseless state; 'birth (had been) destroyed, a religious
life (had been) led, what was to be done (had been) done, there was
nothing else (to be done) for this existence,' so he perceived, and the
venerable Sela together with his assembly became one of the saints.

   Then the venerable Sela together with his assembly went to Bhagavat,
and having gone (to him) he put his upper robe on one shoulder, and
bending his joined hands towards Bhagavat he addressed him in stanzas:

\[1. Sâvittî *kh*andaso mukha*m*.

2\. Comp. [Nâlakasutta v. 42](#pp_720).

3\. Âdi*kk*o tapata*m* mukha*m*.\]

p. 106

   23. 'Because we took refuge in thee on the eighth day previous to
this, O thou clearly-seeing, in seven nights, O Bhagavat, we have been
trained in thy doctrine. (570)

   24. 'Thou art Buddha, thou art the Master, thou art the Muni that
conquered Mâra, thou hast, after cutting off the affections, crossed
over (the stream of existence) and taken over these beings. (571)

   25. 'The elements of existence (upadhi) have been overcome by thee,
the passions have been destroyed by thee, thou art a lion not seizing on
anything, thou hast left behind fear and danger. (572)

   26. 'These three hundred Bhikkhus stand here with clasped hands;
stretch out thy feet, O hero, let the Nâgas worship the Master's feet.'
(573)

Selasutta is ended.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## 8. SALLASUTTA.

> Life is short, all mortals are subject to death, but knowing the terms
> of the world the wise do not grieve, and those who have left sorrow
> will be blessed.--Text in the Dasaratha-*G*âtaka, p. 34.

   1. Without a cause and unknown is the life of mortals in this world,
troubled and brief, and combined with pain. (574)

   2. For there is not any means by which those that have been born can
avoid dying; after reaching old age there is death, of such a nature are
living beings. (575)

   3. As ripe fruits are early in danger of falling, so mortals when
born are always in danger of death. (576)

   4. As all earthen vessels made by the potter end in being broken, so
is the life of mortals. (577)

p. 107

   5. Both young and grown-up men, both those who are fools and those
who are wise men, all fall into the power of death, all are subject to
death. (578)

   6. Of those who, overcome by death, go to the other world, a father
does not save his son, nor relatives their relations. (579)

   7. Mark! while relatives are looking on and lamenting greatly, one by
one of the mortals is carried off, like an ox that is going to be
killed. (580)

   8. So the world is afflicted with death and decay, therefore the wise
do not grieve, knowing the terms of the world. (581)

   9. For him, whose way thou dost not know, either when he is coming or
when he is going, not seeing both ends, thou grievest in vain. (582)

   10. If he who grieves gains anything, (although he is only) a fool
hurting himself, let the wise man do the same. (583)

   11. Not from weeping nor from grieving will any one obtain peace of
mind; (on the contrary), the greater his pain will be, and his body will
suffer. (584)

   12. He will be lean and pale, hurting himself by himself, (and yet)
the dead are not saved, lamentation (therefore) is of no avail. (585)

   13. He who does not leave grief behind, goes (only) deeper into pain;
bewailing the dead he falls into the power of grief. (586)

   14. Look at others passing away, men that go (to what they deserve)
according to their deeds, beings trembling already here, after falling
into the power of death. (587)

   15. In whatever manner people think (it will come to pass), different
from that it becomes, so great is

p. 108

the disappointment<sup>\[1\]</sup> (in this world); see, (such are) the
terms of the world. (588)

   16. Even if a man lives a hundred years or even more, he is at last
separated from the company of his relatives, and leaves life in this
world. (589)

   17. Therefore let one, hearing (the words of) the saint, subdue his
lamentation; seeing the one that has passed away and is dead, (let him
say): 'He will not be found by me (any more).' (590)

   18. As a house on fire is extinguished by water, so also the wise,
sensible, learned, clever man rapidly drives away sorrow that has
arisen, as the wind a tuft of cotton. (591)

   19. He who seeks his own happiness should draw out his arrow (which
is) his lamentation, and complaint, and grief. (592)

   20. He who has drawn out the arrow and is not dependent (on anything)
will obtain peace of mind; he who has overcome all sorrow will become
free from sorrow, and blessed (nibbuta). (593)

Sallasutta is ended.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## 9. VÂSE*TTH*ASUTTA.

> A dispute arose between two young men, Bhâradvâ*g*a and Vâse*tth*a,
> the former contending man to be a Brâma*n*a by birth, the latter by
> deeds. They agreed to go and ask Sama*n*a Gotama, and he answered that
> man is a Brâma*n*a by his work only. The two young men are
> converted.--Text (from Ma*ggh*imanikâya) and translation in Alwis's
> Buddhist Nirvâna, p. 103.

   So it was heard by me:

   At one time Bhagavat dwelt at I*kkh*âna*m*kala, in the
I*kkh*âna*m*kala forest. At that time many distinguished,

\[1. Etâdiso vinâbhâvo.\]

p. 109

wealthy Brâma*n*as lived at I*kkh*âna*m*kala, as the Brâma*n*a
*K*a*m*kin, the Brâma*n*a Târukkha, the Brâma*n*a Pokkharasâti, the
Brâhmana *G*ânusso*n*i, the Brâma*n*a Todeyya, and other distinguished,
wealthy Brâma*n*as.

   Then this dialogue arose between the young men Vâsettha and
Bhâradvâ*g*a while walking about:

   'How does one become a Brâma*n*a?'

   The young man Bhâradvâ*g*a said: 'When one is noble by birth on both
sides, on the mother's and on the father's side, of pure conception up
to the seventh generation of ancestors, not discarded and not reproached
in point of birth, in this way one is a Brâma*n*a.'

   The young man Vâse*tth*a said: 'When one is virtuous and endowed with
(holy) works, in this way he is a Brâma*n*a.'

   Neither could the young man Bhâradvâ*g*a convince the young man
Vâse*tth*a, nor could the young man Vâse*tth*a convince the young man
Bhâradvâ*g*a. Then the young man Vâse*tth*a addressed the young man
Bhâradvâ*g*a: 'O Bhâradvâ*g*a, this Sama*n*a Gotama, the Sakya son, gone
out from the Sakya family, dwells at I*kkh*âna*m*kala, in the forest of
I*kkh*âna*m*kala, and the following good praising words met the
venerable Gotama: "And so he is Bhagavat, the venerable, the
enlightened, the glorious, let us go, O venerable Bhâradvâ*g*a, let us
go (to the place) where the Sama*n*a Gotama is, and having gone there
let us ask the Sama*n*a Gotama about this matter, and as the Sama*n*a
Gotama replies so will we understand it."'

   'Very well, O venerable one;' so the young man Bhâradvâ*g*a answered
the young man Vâse*tth*a.

p. 110

   Then the young men Vâse*tth*a and Bhâradvâ*g*a went (to the place)
where Bhagavat was, and having gone, they talked pleasantly with
Bhagavat, and after having had some pleasant and remarkable conversation
(with him) they sat down apart. Sitting down apart the young man
Vâse*tth*a addressed Bhagavat in stanzas:

   1. 'We are accepted and acknowledged masters of the three
Vedas<sup>\[1\]</sup>, I am (a pupil) of Pokkharasâti, and this young
man is (the pupil) of Târukkha. (594)

   2. 'We are accomplished in all the knowledge propounded by those who
are acquainted with the three Vedas, we are padakas (versed in the
metre), veyyâkara*n*as (grammarians?), and equal to our teachers in
recitation (*g*appa)<sup>\[2\]</sup>. (595)

   3. 'We have a controversy regarding (the distinctions of) birth, O
Gotama! Bhâradvâ*g*a says, one is a Brâma*n*a by birth, and I say, by
deeds; know this, O thou clearly-seeing! (596)

   4. 'We are both unable to convince each other, (therefore) we have
come to ask thee (who art) celebrated as perfectly enlightened. (597)

   5. 'As people adoring the full moon worship (her) with uplifted
clasped hands, so (they worship) Gotama in the world. (598)

   6. 'We ask Gotama who has come as an eye to the world: Is a man a
Brâhma*n*a by birth, or is he so

\[1. Anu*ññ*âtapati*ññ*âtâ  
     Tevi*gg*â mayam asm' ubho.

2\. Tevi*gg*ânam<sup>\[\*\]</sup> yad akkhâta*m*  
     Tatra kevalino 'smase,  
     Padak' asmâ veyyâkara*n*â,  
     Gappe<sup>\[+\]</sup> â*k*ariyasâdisâ.

\*. Tevi*gg*âna*m* = tivedâna*m*. Commentator; but compare [v.
63](#pp_656).

+. *G*appe = vede. Commentator.\]

p. 111

by deeds? Tell us who do not know, that we may know a Brâma*n*a.' (599)

   7. 'I will explain to you, O Vâse*tth*a,'--so said Bhagavat,--'in due
order the exact distinction of living beings according to species, for
their species are manifold. (600)

   8. 'Know ye the grass and the trees, although they do not exhibit
(it), the marks that constitute species are for them, and (their)
species are manifold. (601)

   9. 'Then (know ye) the worms, and the moths, and the different sorts
of ants, the marks that constitute species are for them, and (their)
species are manifold. (602)

   10. 'Know ye also the four-footed (animals), small and great, the
marks that constitute species are for them, and (their) species are
manifold. (603)

   11. 'Know ye also the serpents, the long-backed snakes, the marks
that constitute species are for them, and (their) species are manifold.
(604)

   12. 'Then know ye also the fish which range in the water, the marks
that constitute species are for them, and (their) species are manifold.
(605)

   13. 'Then know ye also the birds that are borne along on wings and
move through the air, the marks that constitute species are for them,
and (their) species are manifold. (606)

   14. 'As in these species the marks that constitute species are
abundant, so in men the marks that constitute species are not abundant.
(607)

   15. 'Not as regards their hair, head, ears, eyes, mouth, nose, lips,
or brows, (608)

   16. 'Nor as regards their neck, shoulders, belly, back, hip, breast,
female organ, sexual intercourse, (609)

p. 112

   17. 'Nor as regards their hands, feet, palms, nails, calves, thighs,
colour, or voice are there marks that constitute species as in other
species. (610)

   18. 'Difference there is in beings endowed with bodies, but amongst
men this is not the case, the difference amongst men is nominal
(only)<sup>\[1\]</sup>. (611)

   19. 'For whoever amongst men lives by cowkeeping,--know this, O
Vâse*tth*a,--he is a husbandman, not a Brâma*n*a.' (612)

   20. 'And whoever amongst men lives by different mechanical
arts,--know this, O Vâse*tth*a,--he is an artisan, not a Brâma*n*a.
(613)

   21. 'And whoever amongst men lives by trade,--know this, O
Vâse*tth*a,--he is a merchant, not a Brâma*n*a. (614)

   22. And whoever amongst men lives by serving others,--know this, O
Vâse*tth*a,--he is a servant, not a Brâhma*n*a. (615)

   23. 'And whoever amongst men lives by theft,--know this, O
Vâse*tth*a,--he is a thief, not a Brâhma*n*a. (616)

   24. 'And whoever amongst men lives by archery,--know this, O
Vâse*tth*a,--he is a soldier, not a Brâma*n*a. (617)

   25. 'And whoever amongst men lives by performing household
ceremonials,--know this, O Vâse*tth*a,--he is a sacrificer, not a
Brâma*n*a. (618)

   26. 'And whoever amongst men possesses villages and countries,--know
this, O Vâse*tth*a,--he is a king, not a Brâma*n*a. (619)

\[1. Pa*kk*atta*m* sasarîresu,  
     Manussesv-eta*m* na vi*gg*ati,  
     Vokâra*ñ* *k*a manussesu  
     Sama*ññ*âya pavu*kk*ati.\]

p. 113

   27. 'And I do not call one a Brâma*n*a on account of his birth or of
his origin from (a particular) mother; he may be called bhovâdi, and he
may be wealthy, (but) the one who is possessed of nothing and seizes
upon nothing, him I call a Brâhma*n*a<sup>\[1\]</sup>. (620)

   28. 'Whosoever, after cutting all bonds, does not tremble, has shaken
off (all) ties and is liberated, him I call a Brâma*n*a. (621)

   29. 'The man who, after cutting the strap (i.e. enmity), the thong
(i.e. attachment), and the rope (i.e. scepticism) with all that pertains
to it, has destroyed (all) obstacles (i.e. ignorance), the enlightened
(buddha), him I call a Brâma*n*a. (622)

   30. 'Whosoever, being innocent, endures reproach, blows, and bonds,
the man who is strong in (his) endurance and has for his army this
strength, him I call a Brâma*n*a. (623)

   31. 'The man who is free from anger, endowed with (holy) works,
virtuous, without desire, subdued, and wearing the last body, him I call
a Brâhma*n*a. (624)

   32. 'The man who, like water on a lotus leaf, or a mustard seed on
the point of a needle, does not cling to sensual pleasures, him I call a
Brâhma*n*a. (625)

   33. 'The man who knows in this world the destruction of his pain, who
has laid aside (his) burden, and is liberated, him I call a Brâma*n*a.
(626)

   34. 'The man who has a profound understanding, who is wise, who knows
the true way and the wrong way, who has attained the highest good, him I
call a Brâma*n*a. (627)

\[1. Comp. [Dhp. v. 396](sbe1028.htm#pp_396), &c.\]

p. 114

   35. 'The man who does not mix with householders nor with the
houseless, who wanders about without a house, and who has few wants, him
I call a Brâhma*n*a. (628)

   36. 'Whosoever, after refraining from hurting (living) creatures,
(both) those that tremble and those that are strong, does not kill or
cause to be killed, him I call a Brâma*n*a. (629)

   37. 'The man who is not hostile amongst the hostile, who is peaceful
amongst the violent, not seizing (upon anything) amongst those that
seize (upon everything), him I call a Brâma*n*a. (630)

   38. 'The man whose passion and hatred, arrogance and hypocrisy have
dropt like a mustard seed from the point of a needle, him I call a
Brâma*n*a. (631)

   39. 'The man that utters true speech, instructive and free from
harshness, by which he does not offend any one, him I call a Brâma*n*a.
(632)

   40. 'Whosoever in the world does not take what has not been given (to
him), be it long or short, small or large, good or bad, him I call a
Brâhma*n*a. (633)

   41. 'The man who has no desire for this world or the next, who is
desireless and liberated, him I call a Brâma*n*a. (634)

   42. 'The man who has no desire, who knowingly is free from doubt; and
has attained the depth of immortality, him I call a Brâma*n*a. (635)

   43. 'Whosoever in this world has overcome good and evil, both ties,
who is free from grief and defilement, and is pure, him I call a
Brâma*n*a. (636)

   44. 'The man that is stainless like the moon, pure, serene, and
undisturbed, who has destroyed joy, him I call a Brâma*n*a. (637)

p. 115

   45. 'Whosoever has passed over this quagmire difficult to pass, (who
has passed over) revolution (sa*m*sâra) and folly, who has crossed over,
who has reached the other shore, who is meditative, free from desire and
doubt, calm without seizing (upon anything), him I call a Brâma*n*a.
(638)

   46. 'Whosoever in this world, after abandoning sensual pleasures,
wanders about houseless, and has destroyed the existence of sensual
pleasures (kâmabhava), him I call a Brâma*n*a. (639)

   47. 'Whosoever in this world, after abandoning desire, wanders about
houseless, and has destroyed the existence of desire (ta*n*hâbhava), him
I call a Brâma*n*a. (640)

   48. 'Whosoever, after leaving human attachment (yoga), has overcome
divine attachment, and is liberated from all attachment, him I call a
Brâhma*n*a. (641)

   49. 'The man that, after leaving pleasure and disgust, is calm and
free from the elements of existence (nirupadhi), who is a hero, and has
conquered all the world, him I call a Brâma*n*a. (642)

   50. 'Whosoever knows wholly the vanishing and reappearance of beings,
does not cling to (anything); is happy (sugata), and enlightened, him I
call a Brâma*n*a. (643)

   51. 'The man whose way neither gods nor Gandhabbas nbr men know, and
whose passions are destroyed, who is a saint, him I call a Brâma*n*a.
(644)

   52. 'The man for whom there is nothing, neither before nor after nor
in the middle, who possesses nothing, and does not seize (upon
anything), him I call a Brâma*n*a. (645)

   53. 'The (man that is undaunted like a) bull, who

p. 116

is eminent, a hero, a great sage (mahesi), victorious, free from desire,
purified, enlightened, him I call a Brâma*n*a. (646)

   54. 'The man who knows his former dwellings, who sees both heaven and
hell, and has reached the destruction of births, him I call a Brâma*n*a.
(647)

   55. 'For what has been designated as "name" and "family" in the world
is only a term, what has been designated here and there is understood by
common consent<sup>\[1\]</sup>. (648)

   56. 'Adhered to for a long time are the views of the ignorant, the
ignorant tell us, one is a Brâma*n*a by birth. (649)

   57. 'Not by birth is one a Brâma*n*a, nor is one by birth no
Brâma*n*a; by work (kammanâ) one is a Brâma*n*a, by work one is no
Brâma*n*a. (650)

   58. 'By work one is a husbandman, by work one is an artisan, by work
one is a merchant, by work one is a servant. (651)

   59. 'By work one is a thief, by work one is a soldier, by work one is
a sacrificer, by work one is a king. (652)

   60. 'So the wise, who see the cause of things and understand the
result of work, know this work as it really is<sup>\[2\]</sup>. (653)

   61. 'By work the world exists, by work mankind

\[1. Sama*ññ*â h' esâ lokasmi*m*  
     Nâmagotta*m* pakappita*m*,  
     Sammu*kk*â samudâgata*m*  
     Tattha tattha pakappita*m*.

2\. Evam eta*m* yathâbhûta*m*  
     Kamma*m* passanti pa*nd*itâ  
     Pa*t*i*kk*asamuppâdadasâ  
     Kammavipâkakovidâ.\]

p. 117

exists, beings are bound by work as the linch-pin of the rolling cart
(keeps the wheel on)<sup>\[1\]</sup>. (654)

   62. 'By penance, by a religious life, by self-restraint, and by
temperance, by this one is a Brâma*n*a, such a one (they call) the best
Brâma*n*a. (655)

   63. 'He who is endowed with the threefold knowledge<sup>\[2\]</sup>,
is calm, and has destroyed regeneration,--know this, O Vâse*tth*a,--he
is to the wise Brahman and Sakka.' (656)

   This having been said, the young men Vâse*tth*a and Bhâradvâ*g*a
spoke to Bhagavat as follows:

   'It is excellent, O venerable Gotama! It is excellent, O venerable
Gotama! As one raises what has been overthrown, or reveals what has been
hidden, or tells the way to him who has gone astray, or holds out an oil
lamp in the dark that those who have eyes may see the objects, even so
by the venerable Gotama in manifold ways the Dhamma has been
illustrated; we take refuge in the venerable Gotama, in the Dhamma, and
in the Assembly of Bhikkhus; may the venerable Gotama receive us as
followers (upâsaka), who from this day for life have taken refuge (in
him).'

Vâse*tth*asutta is ended.

\[1. Kammanâ vattatî loko,  
     Kammanâ vattatî pa*g*â,  
     Kammanibandhanâ sattâ  
     Rathasâ*n*îva yâyato.

2\. Tîhi vi*gg*âhi sampanno.\]

p. 118

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## 10. KOKÂLIYASUTTA.

> Kokâliya abuses Sâriputta and Moggallâna to Buddha; therefore as soon
> as he has left Buddha, he is struck with boils, dies and goes to the
> Paduma hell, whereupon Buddha describes to the Bhikkhus the punishment
> of backbiters in hell.

   So it was heard by me:

   At one time Bhagavat dwelt at Sâvatthî, in *G*etavana, in the park of
Anâthapi*nd*ika. Then the Bhikkhu Kokâliya approached Bhagavat, and
after having approached and saluted Bhagavat he sat down apart; sitting
down apart the Bhikkhu Kokâliya said this to Bhagavat: "O thou venerable
one, Sâriputta and Moggallâna have evil desires, they have fallen into
the power of evil desires.'

   When this had been said, Bhagavat spoke to the Bhikkhu Kokâliya as
follows: '(Do) not (say) so, Kokâliya; (do) not (say) so, Kokâliya;
appease, O Kokâliya, (thy) mind in regard to Sâriputta and Moggallâna:
Sâriputta and Moggallâna are amiable<sup>\[1\]</sup>.'

   A second time the Bhikkhu Kokâliya said this to Bhagavat: 'Although
thou, O venerable Bhagavat, (appearest) to me (to be) faithful and
trustworthy, yet Sâriputta and Moggallâna have evil desires, they have
fallen into the power of evil desires.'

   A second time Bhagavat said this to the Bhikkhu Kokâliya: '(Do) not
(say) so, Kokâliya; (do) not (say) so, Kokâliya; appease, O Kokâliya,
(thy) mind in regard to Sâriputta and Moggallâna: Sâriputta and
Moggallâna are amiable.'

   A third time the Bhikkhu Kokâliya said this to Bhagavat: 'Although
thou, O venerable Bhagavat, (appearest) to me (to be) faithful and
trustworthy,

\[1. Pesalâ ti piyasîlâ. Commentator.\]

p. 119

yet Sâriputta and Moggallâna have evil desires, Sâriputta and Moggallâna
have fallen into the power of evil desires.'

   A third time Bhagavat said this to the Bhikkhu Kokâliya: '(Do) not
(say) so, Kokâliya; (do) not (say) so, Kokâliya; appease, O Kokâliya,
(thy) mind in regard to Sâriputta and Moggallâna: Sâriputta and
Moggallâna are amiable.'

   Then the Bhikkhu Kokâliya, after having risen from his seat and
saluted Bhagavat and walked round him towards the right, went away; and
when he had been gone a short time, all his body was struck with boils
as large as mustard seeds; after being only as large as mustard seeds,
they became as large as kidney beans; after being only as large as
kidney beans, they became as large as chick peas; after being only as
large as chick peas, they became as large as a Kola*tth*i egg (?); after
being only as large as a Kola*tth*i egg, they became as large as the
jujube fruit; after being only as large as the jujube fruit, they became
as large as the fruit of the emblic myrobalan; after being only as large
as the fruit of the emblic myrobalan, they became as large as the unripe
beluva fruit; after being only as large as the unripe beluva fruit, they
became as large as a billi fruit (?); after being as large as a billi
fruit, they broke, and matter and blood flowed out. Then the Bhikkhu
Kokâliya died of that disease, and when he had died the Bhikkhu Kokâliya
went to the Paduma hell, having shown a hostile mind against Sâriputta
and Moggallâna. Then when the night had passed Brahman Sahampati of a
beautiful appearance, having lit up all *G*etavana, approached Bhagavat,
and having approached and saluted Bhagavat,

p. 120

he stood apart, and standing apart Brahman Sahampati said this to
Bhagavat: 'O thou venerable one, Kokâliya, the Bhikkhu, is dead and
after death, O thou venerable one, the Bhikkhu Kokâliya is gone to the
Paduma hell, having shown a hostile mind against Sâriputta and
Moggallâna.'

   This said Brahman Sahampati, and after saying this and saluting
Bhagavat, and walking round him towards the right, he disappeared there.

   Then Bhagavat, after the expiration of that night, addressed the
Bhikkhus thus: 'Last night, O Bhikkhus, when the night had (nearly)
passed, Brahman Sahampati of a beautiful appearance, having lit up all
*G*etavana, approached Bhagavat, and having approached and saluted
Bhagavat, he stood apart, and standing apart Brahman Sahampati said this
to Bhagavat: "O thou venerable one, Kokâliya, the Bhikkhu, is dead; and
after death, O thou venerable one, the Bhikkhu Kokâliya is gone to the
Paduma hell, having shown a hostile mind against Sâriputta and
Moggallâna." This said Brahman Sahampati, O Bhikkhus, and having said
this and saluted me, and walked round me towards the right, he
disappeared there.'

   When this had been said, a Bhikkhu asked Bhagavat: 'How long is the
rate of life, O venerable one, in the Paduma hell?'

   'Long, O Bhikkhu, is the rate of life in the Paduma hell, it is not
easy to calculate either (by saying) so many years or so many hundreds
of years or so many thousands of years or so many hundred thousands of
years.'

   'But it is possible, I suppose, to make a comparison, O thou
venerable one?'

p. 121

   'It is possible, O Bhikkhu;' so saying, Bhagavat spoke (as follows):
'Even as, O Bhikkhu, (if there were) a Kosala load of sesamum seed
containing twenty khâris, and a man after the lapse of every hundred
years were to take from it one sesamum seed at a time, then that Kosala
load of sesamum seed, containing twenty khâris, would, O Bhikkhu, sooner
by this means dwindle away and be used up than one Abbuda hell; and even
as are twenty Abbuda hells, O Bhikkhu, so is one Nirabbuda hell; and
even as are twenty Nirabbuda hells, O Bhikkhu, so is one Ababa hell; and
even as are twenty Ababa hells, O Bhikkhu, so is one Ahaha hell; and
even as are twenty Ahaha hells, O Bhikkhu, so is one A*t*a*t*a hell; and
even as are twenty A*t*a*t*a hells, O Bhikkhu, so is one Kumuda hell;
and even as are twenty Kumuda hells, O Bhikkhu, so is one Sogandhika
hell; and even as are twenty Sogandhika hells, O Bhikkhu, so is one
Uppalaka hell; and even as are twenty Uppalaka hells, O Bhikkhu, so is
one Pu*nd*arîka hell; and even as are twenty Pu*nd*arîka hells, O
Bhikkhu, so is one Paduma hell; and to the Paduma hell, O Bhikkhu, the
Bhikkhu Kokâliya is gone, having shown a hostile mind against Sâriputta
and Moggallâna.' This said Bhagavat, and having said this Sugata, the
Master, furthermore spoke as follows:

   1. 'To (every) man that is born, an axe is born in his mouth, by
which the fool cuts himself, when speaking bad language. (657)

   2. 'He who praises him who is to be blamed or blames him who as to be
praised, gathers up sin in his mouth, and through that (sin) he will not
find any joy. (658)

p. 122

   3. 'Trifling is the sin that (consists in) losing riches by dice;
this is a greater sin that corrupts the mind against Sugatas. (659)

   4. 'Out of the one hundred thousand Nirabbudas (he goes) to
thirty-six, and to five Abbudas; because he blames an Ariya he goes to
hell, having employed his speech and mind badly. (660)

   5. 'He who speaks falsely goes to hell, or he who having done
something says, "I have not done it;" both these after death become
equal, in another world (they are both) men guilty of a mean
deed<sup>\[1\]</sup>. (661)

   6. 'He who offends an offenceless man, a pure man, free from sin,
such a fool the evil (deed) reverts against, like fine dust thrown
against the wind<sup>\[2\]</sup>. (662)

   7. 'He who is given to the quality of covetousness, such a one
censures others in his speech, (being himself) unbelieving, stingy,
wanting in affability, niggardly, given to backbiting. (663)

   8. 'O thou foul-mouthed, false, ignoble, blasting, wicked,
evil-doing, low, sinful, base-born man, do not be garrulous in this
world, (else) thou wilt be an inhabitant of hell<sup>\[3\]</sup>. (664)

   9. 'Thou spreadest pollution to the misfortune (of others), thou
revilest the just, committing sin (yourself), and having done many evil
deeds thou wilt go to the pool (of hell) for a long time. (665)

\[1. Comp. [Dhp. v. 306](sbe1024.htm#pp_306).

2\. Comp. [Dhp. v. 125](sbe1011.htm#pp_125).

3\. Mukhadugga vibhûta-m-anariya  
     Bhûnahu<sup>\[\*\]</sup> pâpaka dukkatakâri  
     Purisanta kalî ava*g*âta  
     Mâ bahubhâ*n*i dha nerayiko si.

\*. Bhûnahu bhûtihanaka vuddhinâsaka. Commentator.\]

p. 123

   110. 'For one's deeds are not lost, they will surely come (back to
you), (their) master will meet with them, the fool who commits sin will
feel the pain in himself in the other world<sup>\[1\]</sup>. (666)

   11. 'To the place where one is struck with iron rods, to the iron
stake with sharp edges he goes; then there is (for him) food as
appropriate, resembling a red-hot ball of iron. (667)

   12. 'For those who have anything to say (there) do not say fine
things, they do not approach (with pleasing faces); they do not find
refuge (from their sufferings), they lie on spread embers, they enter a
blazing pyre. (668)

   13. 'Covering (them) with a net they kill (them) there with iron
hammers; they go to dense darkness<sup>\[2\]</sup>, for that is spread
out like the body of the earth. (669)

   14. 'Then (they enter) an iron pot, they enter a blazing pyre, for
they are boiled in those (iron pots) for a long time, jumping up and
down in the pyre. (670)

   15. 'Then he who commits sin is surely boiled in a mixture of matter
and blood; whatever quarter he inhabits, he becomes rotten there from
coming in contact (with matter and blood). (671)

   16. 'He who commits sin will surely be boiled in the water, the
dwelling-place of worms; there it is not (possible) to get to the shore,
for the jars (are) exactly alike<sup>\[3\]</sup>. (?) (672)

\[1. Comp. [Revelation xiv. 13](../../bib/kjv/rev.htm#14:13).

2\. Andha*m* va Timisa*m* âyanti.

3\. Pu*l*avâvasathe salilasmi*m*  
     Tattha ki*m* pa*kka*ti kibbisakârî,  
     Gantu*m* na hi tîram p' atthi  
     Sabbasamâ hi samantakapallâ.\]

p. 124

   17. 'Again they enter the sharp Asipattavana with mangled limbs;
having seized the tongue with a hook, the different watchmen (of hell)
kill (them). (673)

   18. 'Then they enter Vetara*n*î, that is difficult to cross and has
got streams of razors with sharp edges; there the fools fall in, the
evil-doers after having done evil. (674)

   19. 'There black, mottled flocks of ravens eat them who are weeping,
and dogs, jackals, great vultures, falcons, crows tear (them). (675)

   20. 'Miserable indeed is the life here (in hell) which the man sees
that commits sin. Therefore should a man in this world for the rest of
his life be strenuous, and not indolent. (676)

   21. 'Those loads of sesamum seed which are carried in Paduma hell
have been counted by the wise, they are (several) nahutas and five
ko*t*is, and twelve hundred ko*t*is besides<sup>\[1\]</sup>. (677)

   22. 'As long as hells are called painful in this world, so long
people will have to live there for a long time; therefore amongst those
who have pure, amiable, and good qualities one should always guard
speech and mind.' (678)

Kokâliyasutta is ended.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## 11. NÂLAKASUTTA.

> The Isi Asita, also called Ka*n*hasiri, on seeing the gods rejoicing,
> asks the cause of it, and having heard that Buddha has been born, he
> descends from Tusita heaven. When the Sakyas showed the child to him,
> he received it joyfully and prophesied

\[1. Nahutâni hi ko*t*iyo pa*ñk*a bhavanti  
     Dvâdasa ko*t*isatâni pun' a*ññ*â.\]

p. 125

> about it. Buddha explains to Nâlaka, the sister's son of Asita, the
> highest state of wisdom.--Compare Lalita-vistara, Adhyâya VII; Asita
> and Buddha, or the Indian Simeon, by J. Muir, in the Indian Antiquary,
> Sept. 1878.

Vatthugâthâ.

   1. The Isi Asita saw in (their) resting-places during the day the
joyful, delighted flocks of the Tidasa gods, and the gods in bright
clothes, always highly praising Inda, after taking their clothes and
waving them. (679)

   2. Seeing the gods with pleased minds, delighted, and showing his
respect, he said this on that occasion: 'Why is the assembly of the gods
so exceedingly pleased, why do they take their clothes and wave them?
(680)

   3. 'When there was an encounter with the Asuras, a victory for the
gods, and the Asuras were defeated, then there was not such a rejoicing.
What wonderful (thing) have the gods seen that they are so delighted?
(681)

   4. 'They shout and sing and make music, they throw (about their) arms
and dance; I ask you, the inhabitants of the tops of (mount) Meru,
remove my doubt quickly, O venerable ones!' (682)

   5. 'The Bodhisatta, the excellent pearl, the incomparable, is born
for the good and for a blessing in the world of men, in the town of the
Sakyas, in the country of Lumbinî. Therefore we are glad and exceedingly
pleased. (683)

   6. 'He, the most excellent of all beings, the preeminent man, the
bull of men, the most excellent of all creatures will turn the wheel (of
the Dhamma) in the forest called after the Isis, (he who is) like the
roaring lion, the strong lord of beasts.' (684)

p. 126

   7. Having heard that noise he descended from (the heaven of) Tusita.
Then he went to Suddhodana's palace, and having sat down there he said
this to the Sakyas: 'Where is the prince? I wish to see (him).' (685)

   8. Then the Sakyas showed to (the Isi), called Asita, the child, the
prince who was like shining gold, manufactured by a very skilful (smith)
in the mouth of a forge, and beaming in glory and having a beautiful
appearance. (686)

   9. Seeing the prince shining like fire, bright like the bull of stars
wandering in the sky, like the burning sun in autumn, free from clouds,
he joyfully obtained great delight. (687)

   10. The gods held in the sky a parasol with a thousand circles and
numerous branches, yaks' tails with golden sticks were fanned, but those
who held the yaks' tails and the parasol were not seen. (688)

   11. The Isi with the matted hair, by name Ka*n*hasiri, on seeing the
yellow blankets (shining) like a golden coin, and the white parasol held
over his head, received him delighted and happy. (689)

   12. And having received the bull of the Sakyas, he who was wishing to
receive him and knew the signs and the hymns, with pleased thoughts
raised his voice, saying: 'Without superior is this, the most excellent
of men.' (690)

   13. Then remembering his own migration he was displeased and shed
tears; seeing this the Sakyas asked the weeping Isi, whether there would
be any obstacle in the prince's path. (691)

   14. Seeing the Sakyas displeased the Isi said: 'I do not remember
anything (that will be) unlucky for the prince, there will be no
obstacles at

p. 127

all for him, for this is no inferior (person). Be without anxiety. (692)

   15. ' This prince will reach the summit of perfect enlightenment, he
will turn the wheel of the Dhamma, he who sees what is exceedingly pure
(i.e. Nibbâna), this (prince) feels for the welfare of the multitude,
and his religion<sup>\[1\]</sup> will be widely spread. (693)

   16. 'My life here will shortly be at an end, in the middle (of his
life) there will be death for me; I shall not hear the Dhamma of the
incomparable one; therefore I am afflicted, unfortunate, and suffering.'
(694)

   17. Having afforded the Sakyas great joy he went out from the
interior of the town to lead a religious life; but taking pity on his
sister's son, he induced him to embrace the Dhamma of the incomparable
one. (695)

   18. 'When thou hearest from others the sound "Buddha," (or) "he who
has acquired perfect enlightenment walks the way of the Dhamma," then
going there and enquiring about the particulars, lead a religious life
with that Bhagavat.' (696)

   19. Instructed by him, the friendly-minded, by one who saw in the
future what is exceedingly pure (i.e. Nibbâna), he, Nâlaka, with a heap
of gathered-up good works, and with guarded senses dwelt (with him),
looking forward to *G*ina (i.e. Buddha). (697)

   20. Hearing the noise, while the excellent *G*ina turned the wheel
(of the Dhamma), and going and seeing the bull of the Isis, he, after
being converted,

\[1. Brahma*k*ariya*m* = sâsana*m*. Commentator.\]

p. 128

asked the eminent Muni about the best wisdom, when the time of Asita's
order had come. (698)

The Vatthugâthâs are ended.

   21. 'These words of Asita are acknowledged true (by me), therefore we
ask thee, O Gotama, who art perfect in all things (dhamma). (699)

   22. 'O Muni, to me who am houseless, and who wish to embrace a
Bhikkhu's life, explain when asked the highest state, the state of
wisdom (moneyya).' (700)

   23. 'I will declare to thee the state of wisdom,'--so said
Bhagavat,--'difficult to carry out, and difficult to obtain; come, I
will explain it to thee, stand fast, be firm. (701)

   24. 'Let a man cultivate equanimity: which is (both) reviled and
praised in the village, let him take care not to corrupt his mind, let
him live calm, and without pride. (702)

   25. 'Various (objects) disappear, like a flame of fire in the
wood<sup>\[1\]</sup>; women tempt the Muni, let them not tempt him.
(703)

   26. 'Let him be disgusted with sexual intercourse, having left behind
sensual pleasures of all kinds, being inoffensive and dispassionate
towards living creatures, towards anything that is feeble or strong.
(704)

   27. 'As I am so are these, as these are so am I, identifying himself
with others, let him not kill nor cause (any one) to
kill<sup>\[2\]</sup>. (705)

\[1. U*kk*âva*k*â ni*kkh*aranti  
     Dâye aggisikhûpamâ.

2\. Yathâ aha*m* tathâ ete  
     Yathâ ete tathâ aha*m*  
     Attâna*m* upama*m* katvâ  
     Na haneyya na ghâtaye.  
        Comp. [Dhp v. 129](sbe1012.htm#pp_129).\]

p. 129

   28. 'Having abdoned desire and covetousness let him act as one that
sees clearly where a common man sticks, let him cross over this hell.
(706)

   29. 'Let him be with an empty stomach, taking little food, let him
have few wants and not be covetous; not being consumed by desire he will
without desire be happy. (707)

   30. 'Let the Muni, after going about for alms, repair to the
outskirts of the wood, let him go and sit down near the root of a tree.
(708)

   31. 'Applying himself to meditation, and being wise, let him find his
pleasure in the outskirts of the wood, let him meditate at the root of a
tree enjoying himself. (709)

   32. 'Then when night is passing away let him repair to the outskirts
of the village, let him not delight in being invited nor in what is
brought away from the village. (710)

   33. 'Let not the Muni, after going to the village, walk about to the
houses in haste; cutting off (all) talk while seeking food, let him not
utter any coherent speech<sup>\[1\]</sup>. (711)

   34. '"What I have obtained that is good," "I did not get (anything
that is) good," so thinking in both cases he returns to the tree
unchanged<sup>\[2\]</sup>. (712)

   35. "Wandering about with his alms-bowl in his

\[1. Na vâ*k*am payutam bha*n*e.

2\. Alattha*m* yad ida*m* sâdhu  
     Nâlattha*m* kusalam iti,  
     Ubhayen' eva so tâdi<sup>\[\*\]</sup>  
     Rukkha*m* va upanivattati.

\*. Tâdi = nibbikâro. Commentator.\]

p. 130

hand, considered dumb without being dumb, let him not blush at a little
gift, let him not despise the giver. (713)

   36. 'Various are the practices illustrated by the Sama*n*a, they do
not go twice to the other shore, this (is) not once
thought<sup>\[1\]</sup>. (?) (714)

   37. 'For whom there is no desire, for the Bhikkhu who has cut off the
stream (of existence) and abandoned all kinds of work, there is no pain.
(715)

   38. 'I will declare to thee the state of wisdom,'--so said
Bhagavat,--'let one be like the edge of a razor, having struck his
palate with his tongue, let him be restrained in (regard to his)
stomach. (716)

   39. 'Let his mind be free from attachment, let him not think
much<sup>\[2\]</sup> (about worldly affairs), let him be without
defilement, independent, and devoted to a religious life. (717)

   40. 'For the sake of a solitary life and for the sake of the service
that is to be carried out by Sama*n*as, let him learn, solitariness is
called wisdom<sup>\[3\]</sup>; alone indeed he will find pleasure. (718)

   41. 'Then he will shine through the ten regions, having heard the
voice of the wise, of the meditating, of those that have abandoned
sensual pleasures, let my adherent then still more devote himself to
modesty and belief. (719)

   42. 'Understand this from the waters in chasms

\[1. U*kk*âva*k*â hi pa*t*ipadâ  
     Sama*n*ena pakâsitâ,  
     Na pâra*m* digu*n*a*m* yanti,  
     Na ida*m* ekagu*n*a*m* muta*m*.

2\. Na *k*âpi bahu *k*intaye.

3\. Ekatta*m* monam akkhâta*m*.\]

p. 131

and cracks: noisy go the small waters, silent goes the vast
ocean<sup>\[1\]</sup>. (720)

   43. 'What is deficient that makes a noise, what is full that is calm;
the fool is like a half-(filled) water-pot, the wise is like a full
pool. (721)

   44. 'When the Sama*n*a speaks much that is possessed of good sense,
he teaches the Dhamma while knowing it, while knowing it he speaks
much<sup>\[2\]</sup>. (722)

   45. 'But he who while knowing it is self-restrained, and while
knowing it does not speak much, such a Muni deserves wisdom (mona), such
a Muni has attained to wisdom (mona)<sup>\[3\]</sup>.' (723)

Nâlakasutta is ended.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## 12. DVAYATÂNUPASSANÂSUTTA.

> All pain in the world arises from upadhi, avi*gg*â, sa*m*khârâ
> vi*ññ*â*n*a, phassa, vedanâ, ta*n*hâ, upâdâna, ârambha, âhâra,
> i*ñg*ita, nissaya, rûpa, mosadhamma, sukha.

   So it was heard by me:

   At one time Bhagavat dwelt at Sâvatthî in Pubbârâma, Migâramâtar's
mansion. At that time Bhagavat on the Uposatha day<sup>\[4\]</sup>, on
the fifteenth,

\[1. Tan nadîhi vi*g*ânâtha  
     Sobbhesu padaresu *k*a:  
     Sanantâ yanti kussobbhâ  
     Tu*n*hî yâti mahodadhi.

2\. Ya*m* sama*n*o bahu bhâsati  
     Upeta*m* atthasa*m*hita*m*  
     *G*âna*m* so dhamma*m* deseti  
     *G*âna*m* so bahu bhâsati.

3\. Yo *k*a *g*âna*m* sa*m*yatatto  
     *G*âna*m* na bahu bhâsati  
     Sa munî monam arahati  
     Sa munî monam a*ggh*agâ.

4\. See Rhys Davids, Buddhism, p. 140.\]

p. 132

it being full moon, in the evening was sitting in the open air,
surrounded by the assembly of Bhikkhus. Then Bhagavat surveying the
silent assembly of Bhikkhus addressed them (as follows):

   'Whichever Dhammas there are, O Bhikkhus, good, noble, liberating,
leading to perfect enlightenment,--what is the use to you of listening
to these good, noble, liberating Dhammas, leading to perfect
enlightenment? If, O Bhikkhus, there should be people that ask so, they
shall be answered thus: "Yes, for the right understanding of the two
Dhammas." "Which two do you mean?" "(I mean), this is pain, this is the
origin of pain," this is one consideration, "this is the destruction of
pain, this is the way leading to the destruction of pain," this is the
second consideration; thus, O Bhikkhus, by the Bhikkhu that considers
the Dyad duly<sup>\[1\]</sup>, is strenuous, ardent, resolute, of two
fruits one fruit is to be expected: in this world perfect knowledge, or,
if any of the (five) attributes still remain, the state of an Anâgâmin
(one that does not return).' This said Bhagavat, (and) when Sugata had
said this, the Master further spoke:

   1. 'Those who do not understand pain and the origin of pain, and
where pain wholly and totally is stopped, and do not know the way that
leads to the cessation of pain, (724)

   2. 'They, deprived of the emancipation of thought

\[1. . . . kâ upanisâ savanâyâ,'ti iti *k*e bhikknave pu*kkh*itâro assu
te evam assu va*k*anîyâ: yâvad eva dvayatâna*m* dhammâna*m*
yathâbhûta*m* *ñ*â*n*âyâ 'ti, ki*ñk*a dvayata*m* vadetha? 'ida*m*
dukkha*m*, aya*m* dukkhasamudayo' ti ayam ekânupassanâ, 'aya*m*
dukkhanirodho, aya*m* dukkhanirodhagâminî pa*t*ipadâ' ti aya*m*
dutiyânupassanâ; eva*m* sammâdvayatânupassino . . .\]

p. 133

and the emancipation of knowledge, are unable to put an end (to
sa*m*sâra), they will verily continue to undergo birth and decay. (725)

   3. 'And those who understand pain and the origin of pain, and where
pain wholly and totally is stopped, and who know the way that leads to
the cessation of pain, (726)

   4. 'They, endowed with the emancipation of thought and the
emancipation of knowledge, are able to put an end (to sa*m*sâra), they
will not undergo birth and decay. (727)

   '"Should there be a perfect consideration of the Dyad in another
way," if, O Bhikkhus, there are people that ask so, they shall be told,
there is, and how there is: "Whatever pain arises is all in consequence
of the upadhis (elements of existence)," this is one consideration, "but
from the complete destruction of the upadhis, through absence of
passion, there is no origin of pain," this is the second consideration;
thus, O Bhikkhus, by the Bhikkhu that considers the Dyad duly, that is
strenuous, ardent, resolute, of two fruits one fruit is to be expected:
in this world perfect knowledge, or, if any of the (five) attributes
still remain, the state of an Anâgâmin (one that does not return).' This
said Bhagavat, (and) when Sugata had said this, the Master further
spoke:

   5. 'Whatever pains there are in the world, of many kinds, they arise
having their cause in the upadhis; he who being ignorant creates upadhi,
that fool again undergoes pain; therefore being wise do not create
upadhi, considering what is the birth and origin of pain. (728)

   '"Should there be a perfect consideration of the

p. 134

Dyad in another way," if, O Bhikkhus, there are people that ask so, they
shall be told, there is, and how there is: "Whatever pain arises is all
in consequence of avi*gg*â (ignorance)," this is one consideration, "but
from the complete destruction of avi*gg*â, through absence of passion,
there is no origin of pain," this is the second consideration; thus, O
Bhikkhus, by the Bhikkhu that considers the Dyad duly, that is
strenuous, ardent, resolute, of two fruits one fruit is to be expected:
in this world perfect knowledge, or, if any of the (five) attributes
still remain, the state of an Anâgâmin (one that does not return).' This
said Bhagavat, (and) when Sugata had said this, the Master further
spoke:

   6. 'Those who again and again go to sa*m*sâra with birth and death,
to existence in this way or in that way,--that is the state of avi*gg*â.
(729)

   7. 'For this avi*gg*â is the great folly by which this (existence)
has been traversed long, but those beings who resort to knowledge do not
go to rebirth. (730)

   '"Should there be a perfect consideration of the Dyad in another
way," if, O Bhikkhus, there are people that ask so, they shall be told,
there is, and how there is: "Whatever pain arises is all in consequence
of the sa*m*khâras (matter)," this is one consideration, "but from the
complete destruction of the sa*m*khâras, through absence of passion,
there is no origin of pain," this is the second consideration; thus, O
Bhikkhus, by the Bhikkhu that considers the Dyad duly, that is
strenuous, ardent, resolute, of two fruits one fruit is to be expected:
in this world perfect knowledge, or, if any of the (five) attributes
still remain, the state

p. 135

of an Anâgâmin (one that does not return).' This said Bhagavat; (and)
when Sugata had said this, the Master further spoke:

   8. 'Whatever pain arises is all in consequence of the sa*m*khâras, by
the destruction of the sa*m*khâras there will be no origin of pain.
(731)

   9. 'Looking upon this pain that springs from the sa*m*khâras as
misery, from the cessation of all the sa*m*khâras, and from the
destruction of consciousness will arise the destruction of pain, having
understood this exactly, (732)

   10. 'The wise who have true views and are accomplished, having
understood (all things) completely, and having conquered all association
with Mâra, do not go to re-birth. (733)

   '"Should there be a perfect consideration of the Dyad in another
way," if, O Bhikkhus, there are people that ask so, they shall be told,
there is, and how there is: "Whatever pain arises is all in consequence
of vi*ññ*â*n*a (consciousness)," this is one consideration, "but from
the complete destruction of vi*ññ*â*n*ana, through absence of passion,
there is no origin of pain," this is the second consideration; thus, O
Bhikkhus, by the Bhikkhu that considers the Dyad duly, that is
strenuous, ardent, resolute, of two fruits one fruit is to be expected:
in this world perfect knowledge, or, if any of the (five) attributes
still remain, the state of an Anâgâmin (one that does not return).' This
said Bhagavat, (and) when Sugata had said this, the Master further
spoke:

   11. 'Whatever pain arises is all in consequence of vi*ññ*â*n*a, by
the destruction of vi*ññ*â*n*a there is no origin of pain. (734)

p. 136

   12. 'Looking upon this pain that springs from vi*ññ*â*n*a as misery,
from the cessation of vi*ññ*â*n*a a Bhikkhu free from desire (will be)
perfectly happy (parinibbuta). (735)

   '"Should there be a perfect consideration of the Dyad in another
way," if, O Bhikkhus, there are people that ask so, they shall be told,
there is, and how there is: "Whatever pain arises is all in consequence
of phassa (touch)," this is one consideration, "but from the complete
destruction of phassa, through absence of passion, there is no origin of
pain," this is the second consideration; thus, O Bhikkhus, by the
Bhikkhu that considers the Dyad duly, that is strenuous, ardent,
resolute, of two fruits one fruit is to be expected: in this world
perfect knowledge, or, if any of the (five) attributes still remain, the
state of an Anâgâmin (one that does not return).' This said Bhagavat,
(and) when Sugata had said this, the Master further spoke:

   13. 'For those who are ruined by phassa, who follow the stream of
existence, who have entered a bad way, the destruction of bonds is far
off. (736)

   14. 'But those who, having fully understood phassa, knowingly have
taken delight in cessation, they verily from the comprehension of
phassa, and being free from desire, are perfectly happy. (737)

   '"Should there be a perfect consideration of the Dyad in another
way," if, O Bhikkhus, there are people that ask so, they shall be told,
there is, and how there is: "Whatever pain arises is all in consequence
of the vedanâs (sensations)," this is one consideration, "but from the
complete destruction of the vedanâs, through absence of passion, there

p. 137

no origin of pain," this is the second consideration; thus, O Bhikkhus,
by the Bhikkhu that considers the Dyad duly, that is strenuous, ardent,
resolute, of two fruits one fruit is to be expected: in this world
perfect knowledge, or, if any of the (five) attributes still remain, the
state of an Anâgâmin (one that does not return).' This said Bhagavat,
(and) when Sugata had said this, the Master further spoke:

   15. 'Pleasure or pain, together with want of pleasure and want of
pain, whatever is perceived internally and externally, (738)

   16. 'Looking upon this as pain, having touched what is perishable and
fragile, seeing the decay (of everything), the Bhikkhu is disgusted,
having from the perishing of the vedanâs become free from desire, and
perfectly happy. (739)

   '"Should there be a perfect consideration of the Dyad in another
way," if, O Bhikkhus, there are people that ask so, they shall be told,
there is, and how there is: "Whatever pain arises is all in consequence
of ta*n*hâ (desire)," this is one consideration, "but from the complete
destruction of ta*n*hâ, through absence of passion, there is no origin
of pain," this is the second consideration; thus, O Bhikkhus, by the
Bhikkhu that considers the Dyad duly, that is strenuous, ardent,
resolute, of two fruits one fruit is to be expected: in this world
perfect knowledge, or, if any of the (five) attributes still remain, the
state of an Anâgâmin (one that does not return).' This said Bhagavat,
(and) when Sugata had said this, the Master further spoke:

   17. 'A man accompanied by ta*n*hâ, for a long time transmigrating
into existence in this way or

p. 138

that way, does not overcome transmigration (sa*ms*âra). (740)

   18. 'Looking upon this as misery, this origin of the pain of ta*n*hâ,
let the Bhikkhu free from ta*n*hâ, not seizing (upon anything),
thoughtful, wander about. (741)

   '"Should there be a perfect consideration of the Dyad in another
way," if, O Bhikkhus, there are people that ask so, they shall be told,
there is, and how there is: "Whatever pain arises is all in consequence
of the upâdânas (the seizures)," this is one consideration, "but from
the complete destruction of the upâdânas, through absence of passion,
there is no origin of pain," this is the second consideration; thus, O
Bhikkhus, by the Bhikkhu that considers the Dyad duly, that is
strenuous, ardent, resolute, of two fruits one fruit is to be expected:
in this world perfect knowledge, or, if any of the (five) attributes
still remain, the state of an Anâgâmin (one that does not return).' This
said Bhagavat, (and) when Sugata had said this, the Master further
spoke:

   19. 'The existence is in consequence of the upâdânas; he who has come
into existence goes to pain, he who has been born is to die, this is the
origin of pain. (742)

   20. 'Therefore from the destruction of the upâdânas the wise with
perfect knowledge, having seen (what causes) the destruction of birth,
do not go to re-birth. (743)

   '"Should there be a perfect consideration of the Dyad in another
way," if, O Bhikkhus, there are people that ask so, they shall be told,
there is, and how there is: "Whatever pain arises is all in

p. 139

consequence of the ârambhas (exertions)," this is one consideration,
"but from the complete destruction of the ârambhas, through absence of
passion, there is no origin of pain," this is the second consideration;
thus, O Bhikkhus, by the Bhikkhu that considers the Dyad duly, that is
strenuous, ardent, resolute, of two fruits one fruit is to be expected:
in this world perfect knowledge, or, if any of the (five) attributes
still remain, the state of an Anâgâmin (one that does not return).' This
said Bhagavat, (and) when Sugata had said this, the Master further
spoke:

   21. 'Whatever pain arises is all in consequence of the ârambhas, by
the destruction of the ârambhas there is no origin of pain. (744)

   22, 23. 'Looking upon this pain that springs from the ârambhas as
misery, having abandoned all the ârambhas, birth and transmigration have
been crossed over by the Bhikkhu who is liberated in non-exertion, who
has cut off the desire for existence, and whose mind is calm; there is
for him no re-birth. (745, 746)

   '"Should there be a perfect consideration of the Dyad in another
way," if, O Bhikkhus, there are people that ask so, they shall be told,
there is, and how there is: "Whatever pain arises is all in consequence
of the âhâras (food?)," this is one consideration, "but from the
complete destruction of the âhâras, through absence of passion, there is
no origin of pain," this is the second consideration; thus, O Bhikkhus,
by the Bhikkhu that considers the Dyad duly, that is strenuous, ardent,
resolute, of two fruits one fruit is to be expected: in this world
perfect knowledge, or, if any of the (five) attributes still

p. 140

remain, the state of an Anâgâmin (one that does not return).' This said
Bhagavat, (and) when Sugata had said this, the Master further spoke:

   24. 'Whatever pain arises is all in consequence of the âhâras, by the
destruction of the âhâras there is no origin of pain. (747)

   25. 'Looking upon this pain that springs from the âhâras as misery,
having seen the result of all âhâras, not resorting to all âhâras, (748)

   26. 'Having seen that health is from the destruction of desire, he
that serves discriminatingly and stands fast in the Dhamma cannot be
reckoned as existing, being accomplished<sup>\[1\]</sup>. (749)

   '"Should there be a perfect consideration of the Dyad in another
way," if, O Bhikkhus, there are people that ask so, they shall be told,
there is, and how there is: "Whatever pain arises is all in consequence
of the i*ñg*itas (commotions)," this is one consideration, "but from the
complete destruction of the i*ñg*itas, through absence of passion, there
is no origin of pain," this is the second consideration; thus, O
Bhikkhus, by the Bhikkhu that considers the Dyad duly, that is
strenuous, ardent, resolute, of two fruits one fruit is to be expected:
in this world perfect knowledge, or, if any of the (five) attributes
still remain, the state of an Anâgâmin (one that does not return).' This
said Bhagavat, (and) when Sugata had said this, the Master further
spoke:

   27. 'Whatever pain arises is all in consequence of the i*ñg*itas, by
the destruction of the i*ñg*itas there is no origin of pain. (750)

   28. 'Looking upon this pain that springs from

\[1. Sa*m*kha*m* nôpeti vedagû.\]

p. 141

the i*ñg*itas as misery, and therefore having abandoned the i*ñg*itas
and having stopped the sa*m*khâras; let the Bhikkhu free from desire and
not seizing (upon anything), thoughtful, wander about. (751)

   '"Should there be a perfect consideration of the Dyad in another
way," if, O Bhikkhus, there are people that ask so, they shall be told,
there is, and how there is: "For the nissita (dependent) there is
vacillation," this is one consideration, "the independent (man) does not
vacillate," this is the second consideration; thus, O Bhikkhus, by the
Bhikkhu that considers the Dyad duly, that is strenuous, ardent,
resolute, of two fruits one fruit is to be expected: in this world
perfect knowledge, or, if any of the (five) attributes still remain, the
state of an Anâgâmin (one that does not return).' This said Bhagavat,
(and) when Sugata had said this, the Master further spoke:

   29. 'The independent (man) does not vacillate, and the dependent
(man) seizing upon existence in one way or in another, does not overcome
sa*m*sâra. (752).

   30. 'Looking upon this as misery (and seeing) great danger in things
you depend upon, let a Bhikkhu wander about independent, not seizing
(upon anything), thoughtful. (753)

   '"Should there be a perfect consideration of the Dyad in another
way," if, O Bhikkhus, there are people that ask so, they shall be told,
there is, and how there is: "The formless (beings), O Bhikkhus, are
calmer than the rûpas (for ruppa, i.e. form-possessing)," this is one
consideration, "cessation is calmer than the formless," this is another
consideration, "thus, O Bhikkhus, by the Bhikkhu that considers

p. 142

the Dyad duly, that is strenuous, ardent, resolute, of two fruits one
fruit is to be expected: in this world perfect knowledge, or, if any of
the (five) attributes still remain, the state of an Anâgâmin (one that
does not return).' This said Bhagavat, (and) when Sugata had said this,
the Master further spoke:

   31. 'Those beings who are possessed of form, and those who dwell in
the formless (world), not knowing cessation, have to go to re-birth.
(754)

   32. 'But those who, having fully comprehended the forms, stand fast
in the formless (worlds), those who are liberated in the cessation, such
beings leave death behind. (755)

   '"Should there be a perfect consideration of the Dyad in another
way," if, O Bhikkhus, there are people that ask so, they shall be told,
there is, and how there is: "What has been considered true by the world
of men, together with the gods, Mâra, Brahman, and amongst the
Sama*n*as, Brâma*n*as, gods, and men, that has by the noble through
their perfect knowledge been well seen to be really false," this is one
consideration; "what, O Bhikkhus, has been considered false by the world
of men, together with the gods, Mâra, Brahman, and amongst the
Sama*n*as, Brâma*n*as, gods, and men, that has by the noble through
their perfect knowledge been well seen to be really true," this is
another consideration. Thus, O Bhikkhus, by the Bhikkhu that considers
the Dyad duly, that is strenuous, ardent, resolute, of two fruits one
fruit is to be expected: in this world perfect knowledge, or, if any of
the (five) attributes still remain, the state of an Anâgâmin (one that
does not return).' This said Bhagavat,

p. 143

(and) when Sugata had said this, the Master further spoke:

   33. 'Seeing the real in the unreal, the world of men and gods
dwelling in name and form<sup>\[1\]</sup>, he thinks: "This is true."
(756)

   34. 'Whichever way they think (it), it becomes otherwise, for it is
false to him, and what is false is perishable<sup>\[2\]</sup>. (?) (757)

   35. 'What is not false, the Nibbâna, that the noble conceive as true,
they verily from the comprehension of truth are free from desire (and)
perfectly happy<sup>\[3\]</sup>. (758)

   '"Should there be a perfect consideration of the Dyad in another
way," if, O Bhikkhus, there are people that ask so, they shall be told,
there is, and how there is: "What, O Bhikkhus, has been considered
pleasure by the world of men, gods, Mâra, Brahman, and amongst the
Sama*n*as, Brâma*n*as, gods, and men, that has by the noble by (their)
perfect knowledge been well seen to be really pain," this is one
consideration; "what, O Bhikkhus, has been considered pain by the world
of men, gods, Mâra, Brahman, and amongst the Sama*n*as, Brâhma*n*as,
gods, and men, that has by the noble by their perfect knowledge been
well seen to be really pleasure," this is the second consideration.
Thus, O

\[1. Nâmarûpasmi*m*, 'individuality.'

2\. Yena yena hi ma*ññ*anti  
     Tato ta*m* hoti a*ññ*athâ,  
     Ta*m* hi tassa musâ hoti,  
     Mosadhamma*m* hi ittara*m*.

3\. Amosadhamma*m* nibbâna*m*  
     Tad ariyâ sa*kk*ato vidû,  
     Te ye sa*kk*âbhisamayâ  
     Ni*kkh*âtâ parinibbutâ.\]

p. 144

Bhikkhus, by the Bhikkhu who considers the Dyad duly, who is strenuous,
ardent, resolute, of two fruits one fruit is to be expected: in this
world perfect knowledge, or, if any of the (five) attributes still
remain, the state of an Anâgâmin (one who does not return).' This said
Bhagavat, (and) when Sugata had said so, the Master further spoke:

   36. 'Form, sound, taste, smell, and touch are all wished for,
pleasing and charming (things) as long as they last, so it is said.
(759)

   37. 'By you, by the world of men and gods these (things) are deemed a
pleasure, but when they cease it is deemed pain by them. (760)

   38. 'By the noble the cessation of the existing body is regarded as
pleasure; this is the opposite of (what) the wise in all the world
(hold)<sup>\[1\]</sup>. (761)

   39. 'What fools say is pleasure that the noble say is pain, what
fools say is pain that the noble know as pleasure:--see here is a thing
difficult to understand, here the ignorant are confounded. (762)

   40. 'For those that are enveloped there is gloom, for those that do
not see there is darkness, and for the good it is manifest, for those
that see there is light; (even being) near, those that are ignorant of
the way and the Dhamma, do not discern (anything)<sup>\[2\]</sup>. (763)

\[1. Sukhan ti di*tth*am ariyehi  
     Sakkâyass' uparodhana*m*,  
     Pa*kk*anîkam ida*m* hoti  
     Sabbalokena passata*m*.

2\. Nivutâna*m* tamo hotî  
     Andhakâro apassata*m*,  
     Sata*ñ* *k*a viva*t*a*m* hoti  
     Âloko passatâm iva,  
     Santike na vi*g*ânanti  
     Magadhammass' akovidâ.\]

p. 145

   41. 'By those that are overcome by the passions of existence, by
those that follow the stream of existence, by those that have entered
the realm of Mâra, this Dhamma is not perfectly understood. (764)

   42. 'Who except the noble deserve the well-understood state (of
Nibbâna)? Having perfectly conceived this state, those free from passion
are completely extinguished<sup>\[1\]</sup>.' (765)

   This spoke Bhagavat. Glad those Bhikkhus rejoiced at the words of
Bhagavat. While this explanation was being given, the minds of sixty
Bhikkhus, not seizing (upon anything), were liberated.

Dvayatânupassanâsutta is ended.

Mahâvagga, the third.

\[1. Ko nu a*ññ*atra-m-ariyehi  
     Pada*m* sambuddham arahati  
     Ya*m* pada*m* samma-d-a*ññ*âya  
     Parinibbanti anâsavâ.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: IV. Atthakavagga.](sbe1036)
