[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe1031)  [Next](sbe1033) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B001W0Z6P6/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[](index)  
*Sacred Books of the East, Vol. 10: The Dhammapada and Sutta Nipata*, by
Max Müller and Max Fausböll, \[1881\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

p. xi

## INTRODUCTION

#### TO

## THE SUTTA-NIPÂTA.

   THE Collection of Discourses, Sutta-Nipâta, which I have here
translated<sup>\[1\]</sup>, is very remarkable, as there can be no doubt
that it contains some remnants of Primitive Buddhism. I consider the
greater part of the Mahâvagga, and nearly the whole of the
A*tth*akavagga as very old. I have arrived at this conclusion from two
reasons, first from the language, and secondly from the contents.

   1. We not only find here what we meet with in other Pâli poetry, the
fuller Vedic forms of nouns and verbs in the plural, as avîtata*m*hâse,
pa*nd*itâse, dhammâse, sitâse, upa*tth*itâse, pavâdiyâse, &c., and
*k*arâmase, asmase, sikkhissâmase; the shorter Vedic plurals and the
instrumental singular of nouns, as vini*kkh*ayâ, lakkha*n*â for
vini*kkh*ayâni, lakkha*n*âni, mantâ, pari*ññ*â, vinayâ, lâbhakamyâ for
mantâya, &c.; Vedic infinitives, as vippahâtave, sampayâtave,
u*nn*ametave; contracted (or sometimes old) forms, as santyâ, *g*a*kk*â,
dugga*kk*â, sammu*kk*â, titthyâ, thiyo, parihîrati for santiyâ,
*g*âtiyâ, sammutiyâ, titthiyâ, itthiyo, parihariyati, by the side of
protracted forms, such as âtumâna*m*; but also some unusual (sometimes
old) forms and words, as apu*kkh*asi, sagghasi<sup>\[2\]</sup> =
sakkhissasi, sussa*m* = su*n*issâmi (Sansk. *s*roshyâmi), pâva and pâvâ
= vadati, pave*kkh*e = paveseyya, parikissati = parikilissati, vineyya,
vi*k*eyya, ni*kkh*eyya, pappuyya, = vinayitvâ, &c., da*tth*u = disvâ (S.
d*ri*sh*t*vâ), atisitvâ = atikkamitvâ, anuvi*kk*a = anuviditvâ,
paribbasâna = vasamâna, amhanâ (S. a*s*manâ) = pâsâ*n*ena, vâ*k*îbhi,
*k*atubbhi, rattamahâbhi, ise (vocative), suvâmi = sâmi, maga = miga,

\[1. Sir M. Coomâra Swâmy's translation of part of the book has been a
great help to me. I hope shortly to publish the Pâli text.

2\. C reads pagghasi.\]

p. xii

tumo = so, parovara = parâvara, bhûnahu = bhûtihanaka, upaya, âmagandha,
dhona, vyappatha, vyappathi, vevi*kkh*â, visenibhûta, visenikatvâ,
pa*t*iseniyanti. Sometimes we meet also with difficult and irregular
constructions, and very condensed expressions. All this proves, I think,
that these parts of the book are much older than the Suttas in which the
language is not only fluent, but of which some verses are even
singularly melodious.

   2. In the contents of the Suttanipâta we have, I think, an important
contribution to the right understanding of Primitive Buddhism, for we
see here a picture not of life in monasteries, but of the life of
hermits in its first stage. We have before us not the systematizing of
the later Buddhist church, but the first germs of a system, the
fundamental ideas of which come out with sufficient clearness. From the
A*tth*akavagga especially it is evident where Buddha takes his stand in
opposition to Philosophy (di*tth*i = dar*s*ana).

   Indian society at the time of Buddha had two large and distinguished
religious sects, Sama*n*as and Brâhma*n*as. This is apparent from
several passages where they are mentioned together; for instance,
Vinaya, ed. Oldenberg, II, p. 295; Grimblot, Sept Suttas Pâlis, p. ix, 8
&c., 118 &c., 158 &c., 306 &c., 309; Dhammapada, p. 392; Suttanipâta;
vv. 99, 129, 189, 440, 529, 859, 1078; Sabhiyasutta, at the beginning;
the Inscriptions of Asoka; Mahâbhâshya, II, 4, 9 (fol. 398 a); Lalita
Vistara, pp. 309, l. 10, 318, l. 18, 320, l. 20; and lastly, Megasthenes
(Schwanbeck, p. 45), {Greek: *dúo génh figodófwn, wn toùs mèn Braxmanas
kalei, toùs dè Sarmanas*}.

   Famous teachers arose and gathered around them flocks of disciples.
As such are mentioned Pûra*n*a-Kassapa, Makkhali-Gosâla,
A*g*ita-Kesakarnbali, Pakudha-Ka*kk*âyana, Sa*ñg*aya-Bela*tth*iputta,
and Nigan*tha*-Nâtaputta<sup>\[1\]</sup>; see Suttanipâta, p. 86;
Mahâparinibbânasutta, ed. Childers, p. 58; Vinaya II, p. 111; Grimblot,
Sept Suttas Pâlis, p. 114, &c.; Milindapa*ñ*ha, ed. Trenckner, p. 4.
Besides these there is Bâvari (Suttanipâta, p. 184), and his disciples
A*g*ita, Tissametteyya, Pu*nn*aka, Mettagû, Dhotaka, Upasîva, Nanda,

\[1. Cf. Indian Antiquary, 1880, p. 158.\]

p. xiii

Hemaka, Todeyya, Kappa, *G*atuka*nn*in, Bhadrâvudha, Udaya, Posâla,
Mogharâ*g*an (Pi<u>n</u>giya, vv. 1006-1008; Sela, p. 98), and,
*K*a<u>n</u>kin, Târukkha, Pokkharasâti, *G*ânusso*n*i, Vâse*tth*a, and
Bhâradvâ*g*a, p. 109.

   We learn that there were four kinds of Sama*n*as, viz. Magga*g*inas,
Maggadesakas (or Maggadesins, Magga*ggh*âyins), Magga*g*îvins, and
Maggadûsins, vv. 83-88. Among these Sama*n*as disputes arose, vv. 828,
883-884; a number of philosophical systems were formed, and at the time
of Buddha there were as many as sixty-three of them, v. 538. These
systems are generally designated by di*tth*i, vv. 54, 151, 786, 837,
851, &c.; or by di*tth*igata, vv. 834, 836, 913; or by di*tth*asuta, v.
778; or by di*tth*a, suta, and muta, vv. 793, 813, 914; or by di*tth*a,
suta, sîlavata<sup>\[1\]</sup>, and muta, vv. 790, 797-798, 836, 887,
1080. The doctrines themselves are called di*tth*inivesa, v. 785; or
nivesana, vv. 209, 470, 801, 846; or vini*kkh*aya, vv. 838, 866, 887,
894; and he who entertains any of them, is called nivissavâdin, vv. 910,
913.

   What is said of the Sama*n*as seems mostly to hold good about the
Brâhma*n*as also. They too are called disputatious, vâdasîla, v. 381,
&c., p. 109; and three kinds of them are mentioned, viz. Titthiyas,
Â*g*îvikas, and Niga*nth*as, vv. 380, 891-892. ln contradistinction to
the Sama*n*as the Brâhma*n*as are designated as Tevi*gg*as, vv. 594,
1019; they are Padakas, Veyyâkara*n*as, and perfect in *G*appa,
Nigha*nd*u, Ketubha, Itihâsa, &c., v. 595, p. 98. They are called
friends of the hymns, v. 139; well versed in the hymns, v. 976; and
their principal hymn is Sâvitti<sup>\[2\]</sup>, vv. 568, 456. They
worship and make offerings to the fire, pp. 74, 20. In
Brâhma*n*adhammikasutta the ancient and just Brâhma*n*as are described
in opposition to the later

\[1. I am not sure whether sîlavata is to be understood as one notion or
two. It is generally written in one word, but at p. 109 Vâse*tth*a says,
when one is virtuous and endowed with works, he is a Brâhma*n*a, yato
kho bho sîlavâ *k*a hoti vatasampanno *k*a ettâvatâ kho brâhma*n*o hoti.
Sîlavata, I presume, refers chiefly to the Brâhma*n*as.

2\. From v. 456 we see that Buddha has rightly read vare*n*iyam as the
metre requires; but I must not omit to mention that the Commentator
understands by Sâvitti the Buddhistic formula: Buddha*m* sara*n*a*m*
ga*kkh*âmi, Dhamma*m* sara*n*a*m* ga*kkh*âmi, Sa*m*gha*m* sara*n*a*m*
ga*kkh*âmi, which, like Sâvitti, contains twenty-four syllables.\]

p. xiv

Brâhma*n*as, who slay innocent cows and have acquired wealth through the
favour of the kings. vv. 307, 308, 311, 302<sup>\[1\]</sup>.

   All these disputants hold fast to their own prejudiced views, v. 910.
They say that purity comes from philosophical views, from tradition, and
from virtuous works, and in many other ways, v. 1078, and that there is
no bliss excepting by following their opinions, vv. 889, 891, 892.

   Buddha himself has, it is true, sprung from the Sama*n*as: he is
called Sama*n*a Gotama, p. 96; he shines like a sun in the midst of the
Sama*n*as, v. 550; and intercourse with Sama*n*as is said to be the
highest blessing, v. 265. But Buddha has overcome all their systems, v.
538; there is nothing which has not been seen, heard, or thought by him,
and nothing which has not been understood by him, v. 1121. All the
disputatious Brâhma*n*as do not overcome him in understanding, v. 380;
and he asserts that no one is purified and saved by philosophy or by
virtuous works, vv. 1079, 839. Sanctification, in fact, does not come
from another, vv. 773, 790, 813; it can be attained only by going into
the yoke with Buddha, v. 834; by believing in him and in the Dhamma of
the Saints, vv. 183, 185, 370, 1142; on the whole, by being what Buddha
is.

   What then is Buddha?

   First he is a Visionary, in the good sense of the word; his knowledge
is intuitive. 'Seeing misery,' he says, 'in the philosophical views,
without adopting any of them, searching for truth, I saw inward peace,'
vv. 837, 207. And again, 'He, a conqueror unconquered, saw the Dhamma
visibly, without any traditional instruction,' vv. 934, 1052, 1065. He
teaches an instantaneous, an immediate religious life, vv. 567, 1136. He
is called *k*akkhumat, endowed with an eye, clearly-seeing, vv. 160,
405, 540, 562, 596, 956, 992, 1028, 1115, 1127; samanta*k*akkhu, the
all-seeing, vv. 1062, 1068; and as such he has become an eye to the
world, v. 599. He sees the subtle meaning of things, vv. 376, 175; he
is, in one word, Sambuddha, the perfectly-enlightened, vv. 177, 555,
596, 992; and by knowledge he is delivered, vv. 1106,

\[1. Besides the religious Brâhma*n*as some secular Brâhma*n*as are
mentioned, p. 11.\]

p. xv

727, 733. Existence is avi*gg*â, ignorance, v. 729; vi*gg*â, knowledge,
is the extinction of the world, v. 730.

   Secondly, he is an Ascetic, a Muni<sup>\[1\]</sup>, one that forsakes
othe world and wanders from the house to the houseless state, vv. 273,
375, 1003; because from house-life arises defilement, v. 206. An ascetic
has no prejudiced ideas, v. 802; he has shaken off every philosophical
view, v. 787; he does not enter into disputes, v. 887; he is not pleased
nor displeased with anything, v. 813; he is indifferent to learning, v.
911; he does not cling to good and evil, vv. 520, 547, 790; he has cut
off all passion and all desire, vv. 2, 795, 1130, 916; he is free from
marks, v. 847; and possessionless, aki*ñk*ana, vv. 175, 454, 490, 620,
1058, 1062, 976, 1069, 1114. He is equable, v. 855; under all
circumstances the same, v. 952; still as the deep water, v. 920; calm,
vv. 459, 861. He has reached peace, vv. 837, 845, 919; he knows that
bliss consists in peace, v. 933; he has gone to immortal peace, the
unchangeable state of Nibbâna, v. 203. And how is this state brought
about? By the destruction of consciousness, vv. 734-735. And how does
consciousness cease? By the cessation of sensation, vv. 1109-1110; by
being without breathing, vv. 1089-1090<sup>\[2\]</sup>.

   1. What then is sin according to Buddha?

   Subjectively sin is desire, in all its various forms, vv. 923, 1103;
viz. desire tor existence generally, vv. 776, 1059, 1067, and especially
for name and form, i.e. individual existence, vv. 354, 1099. As long as
man is led by desire he will be whirled about in existence, v. 740; for
as long as there is birth, there will be death, v. 742. Existence is
called the stream of death, v. 354; the realm of Mâra, vv. 164, 1145.
Those who continually go to sa*m*sâra with birth and death, are the
ignorant, v. 729.

\[1. Buddha is sometimes styled the great Isi, vv. 1060, 1082; sometimes
a Muni, vv. 164, 700; sometimes a Brâhma*n*a, v. 1064; sometimes a
Bhikkhu, vv. 411, 415; and all these appellations are used synonymously,
vv. 283, 284, 1064, 1056, 843, 844, 911, 912, 946, 220. Ascetic life is
praised throughout the book, especially in the Uraga-, Muni-, Râhula-,
Sammâparibbâ*g*aniya-, Dhammika-, Nâlaka-, Purâbheda-, Tuva*t*aka-,
Attada*nd*a-, and Sâriputta-suttas.

2\. This system ends, it will be seen from this, like other ascetic
systems, in mysticism.\]

p. xvi

   But desire originates in the body, vv. 270, 1099; sin lies
objectively in embodiment or matter, and consequently the human body is
looked upon as a contemptible thing. See Vi*g*ayasutta, p. 32.

   2. And what is bliss?

   Subjectively, it is emancipation from desire by means of the peace
that Buddha preaches, vv. 1065-1066, 1069, 1084, 1108, 838-839.

   Objectively, it is emancipation from body and matter. One must
destroy the elements of existence, upadhî, vv. 373, 546, 1050, 1056; and
leave the body behind, that one may not come to exist again, vv. 1120,
1122, 761. The ignorant only create upadhî, v. 1050, and go again and
again to sa*m*sâra, v. 729. The wise do not enter time, kappa, vv. 521,
535, 860; they look upon the world as void, v. 1118; hold that there is
nothing really existing, v. 1069; and those whose minds are disgusted
with a future existence, the wise who have destroyed their seeds (of
existence), go out like a lamp, vv. 234, 353-354. As a flame, blown
about by the violence of the wind, goes out, and cannot be reckoned (as
existing), even so a Muni, delivered from name and body, disappears, and
cannot be reckoned (as existing), v. 1073. For him who has disappeared,
there is no form; that by which they say he is, exists for him no
longer, v. 1075.

   'Exert thyself, then, O Dhotaka,'--so said Bhagavat,--'being wise and
thoughtful in this world, let one, having listened to my utterance,
learn his own extinction,' v. 1061.

     Tena h' âtappa*m* karohi,--Dhotakâ 'ti Bhagavâ,--  
     idh' eva nipako sato  
     ito sutvâna nigghosa*m*  
     sikkhe nibbânam attano.

   With this short sketch of the contents of the Suttanipâta for a
guide, I trust it will be easy to understand even the more obscure parts
of the book.

V. FAUSBÖLL.      

   COPENHAGEN,  
            Sept. 13, 1880.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: I. Uragavagga.](sbe1033)
