[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe1002)  [Next](sbe1004) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B001W0Z6P6/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[](index)  
*Sacred Books of the East, Vol. 10: The Dhammapada and Sutta Nipata*, by
Max Müller and Max Fausböll, \[1881\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

p\. 3

# DHAMMAPADA.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## CHAPTER I.

THE TWIN-VERSES.

   1. All that we are is the result of what we have thought: it is
founded on our thoughts, it is made up of our thoughts. If a man speaks
or acts with an evil thought, pain follows him, as the wheel follows the
foot of the ox that draws the carriage.

\[1. Dharma, though clear in its meaning, is difficult to translate. It
has different meanings in different systems of philosophy, and its
peculiar application in the phraseology of Buddhism has been fully
elucidated by Burnouf, Introduction à l'Histoire du Buddhisme, p. 41
seq. He writes: 'Je traduis ordinairement ce terme par condition,
d'autres fois par lois, mais aucune de ces traductions n'est
parfaitement complète; il faut entendre par dharma ce qui fait qu'une
chose est ce qu'elle est, ce qui constitue sa nature propre, comme l'a
bien montré Lassen, à l'occasion de la célèbre formule, "Ye dharmâ
hetuprabhavâ."' Etymologically the Latin for-ma expresses the same
general idea which was expressed by dhar-ma. See also Burnouf, Lotus de
la bonne Loi, p. 524. Fausböll translates: 'Naturae a mente principium
ducunt,' which shows that he rightly understood dharma in the Buddhist
sense. Gogerly (see Spence Hardy, Eastern Monachism, p. 28) translates:
'Mind precedes action,' which, if not wrong, is at all events wrongly
expressed; while Professor Weber's rendering, 'Die Pflichten aus dem
Herz folgern,' is quite inadmissible. D'Alwis (Buddhist Nirwana, p. 70
seq.), following the commentary, proposes to give a more technical
interpretation of this verse, viz. 'Mind is the leader or all its
faculties. Mind is the chief (of all its faculties). The very mind is
made up of those (faculties). If one speaks or acts with a polluted
mind, then affliction follows him as the wheel follows the feet of the
bearer (the bullock).' To me this technical acceptation seems not
applicable here, where we have to deal with the simplest moral precepts,
and not with psychological niceties of Buddhist philosophy. It should be
stated, however, that Childers, who first (s.v. dhamma) approved of my
translation, seems afterwards to have changed his opinion. On p. 120 of
his excellent Pâli Dictionary he said: 'Three of the five khandhas, viz.
vedanâ, sa*ññ*â, and sa<u>n</u>khâra, are collectively termed dhammâ
(plur.), "mental faculties," and in the first verse of Dhammapada the
commentator takes the word dhammâ to mean those three faculties. But
this interpretation appears forced and unnatural, and I look upon Dr.
Max Müller's translation, "All that we are is the result of what we have
thought," as the best possible rendering of the spirit of the phrase
mano pubba<u>n</u>gamâ dhammâ.' But on p. 577 the same scholar writes:
'Of the four mental khandhas the superiority of vi*ññ*â*n*a is strongly
asserted in the first verse of Dhammapada, "The mental faculties
(vedanâ, sa*ññ*â, and sa<u>n</u>khâra) are dominated by Mind," they are
governed by Mind, they are made up of Mind." That this is the true
meaning of the passage I am now convinced; see D'Alwis, Nirwana, pp.
70-75.' I do not deny that this may have been the traditional
interpretation, at all events since the days of Buddhaghosa, but the
very legend quoted by Buddhaghosa in illustration of this verse shows
that its simpler and purely moral interpretation was likewise supported
by tradition, and I therefore adhere to my original translation.\]

p\. 4

   2. All that we are is the result of what we have thought: it is
founded on our thoughts, it is made up of our thoughts. If a man speaks
or acts with a pure thought, happiness follows him, like a shadow that
never leaves him.

   3. 'He abused me, he beat me, he defeated me, he robbed me,'--in
those who harbour such thoughts hatred will never cease.

   4. 'He abused me, he beat me, he defeated me, he robbed me,'--in
those who do not harbour such thoughts hatred will cease.

\[2. See Beal, Dhammapada, p. 169.

3\. On akko*kkh*i, see Ka*kk*âyana VI, 4, 17. D'Alwis, Pâli Grammar, p.
38 note, 'When akko*kkh*i means "he abused," it is derived from kru*s*,
not from krudh.' See Senart, Ka*kk*âyana, I. c.\]

p\. 5

   5. For hatred does not cease by hatred at any time: hatred ceases by
love, this is an old rule.

   6. The world does not know that we must all come to an end here;--but
those who know it, their quarrels cease at once.

   7. He who lives looking for pleasures only, his senses uncontrolled,
immoderate in his food, idle, and weak, Mâra (the tempter) will
certainly overthrow him, as the wind throws down a weak tree.

   8. He who lives without looking for pleasures, his senses well
controlled, moderate in his food, faithful and strong, him Mâra will
certainly not overthrow, any more than the wind throws down a rocky
mountain.

   9. He who wishes to put on the yellow dress without having cleansed
himself from sin, who disregards temperance and truth, is unworthy of
the yellow dress.

\[6. Pare is explained by 'fools,' but it has that meaning by
implication only. It is {Greek: *oi pólloi*}, cf. Vinaya, ed. Oldenberg,
vol. i., p. 5, l. 4. Yamâmase, a 1 pers. plur. imp. Âtm., but really a
Le*t* in Pâli. See Fausböll, Five *G*âtakas, p. 38.

7\. Mâra must be taken in the Buddhist sense of 'tempter,' or 'evil
spirit.' See Burnouf, Introduction, p. 76: 'Mâra est le démon de
l'amour, du péché et de la mort; c'est le tentateur et l'ennemi de
Buddha.' As to the definite meaning of vîrya, see Burnouf, Lotus, p.
548.

In the Buddhistical Sanskrit, kusîda, 'idle,' is the exact counterpart
of the Pâli kusîta; see Burnouf, Lotus, p. 548. On the change of
Sanskrit d into Pâli t, see Kuhn, Beiträge zur Pali Grammatik, p. 40;
Weber, Ind. Studien, XIII, p. 135.

9\. The dark yellow dress, the Kâsâva or Kâshâya, is the distinctive
garment of the Buddhist priests. See Vish*n*u-sûtra LXIII, 36. The play
on the words anikkasâvo kâsâvam, or in Sanskrit anishkashâya*h*
kâshâyam, cannot be rendered in English. Kashâya means 'impurity,'
nish-kashâya, 'free from impurity,' anish-kashâya, 'not free from
impurity,' while kâshâya is the name of the yellowish Buddhist garment.
The pun is evidently a favourite one, for, as Fausböll shows, it occurs
also in the Mahâbhârata, XII, 568:  
      Anishkashâye kâshâyam îhârtham iti viddhi tam,  
      Dharmadhva*g*ânâ*m* mu*nd*ânâ*m* v*ri*ttyartham iti me mati*h*.  
'Know that this yellow-coloured garment on a man who is not free from
impurity, serves only for the purpose or cupidity; my opinion is, that
it is meant to supply the means of living to those shavelings, who carry
their virtue or the dharma like a flag.'

(I read v*ri*ttyartham, according to the Bombay edition, instead of
k*ri*târtham, the reading of the Calcutta edition.)

On the exact colour of the dress, see Bishop Bigandet, The Life or
Legend or Gaudama, the Budha of the Burmese, Rangoon, 1866, p. 504. Cf.
*G*âtaka, vol. ii. p. 198.\]

p\. 6

   10. But he who has cleansed himself from sin, is well grounded in all
virtues, and regards also temperance and truth, he is indeed worthy of
the yellow dress.

   11. They who imagine truth in untruth, and see untruth in truth,
never arrive at truth, but follow vain desires.

   12. They who know truth in truth, and untruth in untruth, arrive at
truth, and follow true desires.

   13. As rain breaks through an ill-thatched house, passion will break
through an unreflecting mind.

   14. As rain does not break through a well-thatched house, passion
will not break through a well-reflecting mind.

   15. The evil-doer mourns in this world, and he

\[10. With regard to sîla, 'virtue,' see Burnouf, Lotus, p. 547.

11, 12. Sâra, which I have translated by 'truth,' has many meanings in
Sanskrit. It means the sap of a thing, then essence or reality; in a
metaphysical sense, the highest reality; in a moral sense, truth. It is
impossible in a translation to do more than indicate the meaning of such
words, and in order to understand them fully, we must know not only
their definition, but their history. See Beal, Dhammapada, p. 64.

13\. See Beal, Dhammapada, p. 65.

15\. Kili*tth*a is klish*t*a, a participle of kli*s*. It means
literally, what is spoilt. The abstract noun kle*s*a, 'evil or sin,' is
contantly employed in Budddist works; see Burnouf, Lotus, p. 443.\]

p\. 7

mourns in the next; he mourns in both. He mourns and suffers when he
sees the evil of his own work.

   16. The virtuous man delights in this world, and he delights in the
next; he delights in both. He delights and rejoices, when he sees the
purity of his own work.

   17. The evil-doer suffers in this world, and he suffers in the next;
he suffers in both. He suffers when he thinks of the evil he has done;
he suffers more when going on the evil path.

   18. The virtuous man is happy in this world, and he is happy in the
next; he is happy in both. He is happy when he thinks of the good he has
done; he is still more happy when going on the good path.

   19. The thoughtless man, even if he can recite a large portion (of
the law), but is not a doer of it, has no share in the priesthood, but
is like a cowherd counting the cows of others.

\[16. Like klish*t*a in the preceding verse, vi*s*uddhi in the present
has a technical meaning. One of Buddhaghosa's most famous works is
called Visuddhi-magga. See Burnouf, Lotus, p. 844; Beal, Dhammapada, p.
67.

17, 18. 'The evil path and the good path' are technical expressions for
the descending and ascending scale of worlds through which all beings
have to travel upward or downward, according to their deeds; see
Bigandet; Life of Gaudama, p. 5, note 4, and p. 449; Burnouf,
Introduction, p. 599; Lotus, p. 865, l. 7; l. 11. Fausböll translates
'heaven and hell,' which comes to the same; cf. vv.
[126](sbe1011.htm#pp_126), [306](sbe1024.htm#pp_306).

19\. In taking sahitam in the sense of sa*m*hitam or sa*m*hitâ, I follow
the commentator who says, Tepi*t*akassa Buddhava*k*anass' eta*m*
nâma*m*, but I cannot find another passage where the Tipi*t*aka, or any
portion of it, is called Sahita. Sa*m*hita in [vv.
100-102](sbe1010.htm#pp_100) has a different meaning. The fact that some
followers of Buddha were allowed to learn short portions only of the
sacred writings by heart, and to repeat them, while others had to learn
a larger collection, is shown by the story of *K*akkhupâla, p. 3. of
Mahâkâla, p. 26, &c. See Childers, s.v. sahita.\]

p\. 8

   20. The follower of the law, even if he can recite only a small
portion (of the law), but, having forsaken passion and hatred and
foolishness, possesses true knowledge and serenity of mind, he, caring
for nothing in this world or that to come, has indeed a share in the
priesthood.

\[20. Sâma*ññ*a, which I have rendered by 'priesthood,' expresses all
that belongs to, or constitutes a real Sama*n*a or *S*rama*n*a, this
being the Buddhist name corresponding to the Brâhma*n*a, or priest, of
the orthodox Hindus. Buddha himself is frequently called the Good
Sama*n*a. Fausböll takes the abstract word sâma*ññ*a as corresponding to
the Sanskrit sâmânya, 'community,' but Weber has well shown that it
ought to be taken as representing *s*râma*n*ya. He might have quoted the
Sâma*ññ*a-phala-sutta, of which Burnouf has given such interesting
details in his Lotus, p. 449 seq. Fausböll also, in his notes on v. 332,
rightly explains sâma*ññ*atâ by *s*râma*n*yatâ. See Childers, s.v.
sâma*ññ*a.

Anupâdiyâno, which I have translated by 'caring for nothing,' has a
technical meaning. It is the negative of the fourth Nidâna, the
so-called Upâdâna, which Köppen has well explained by Anhänglichkeit,
'taking to the world, loving the world.' Köppen, Die Religion des
Buddha, p. 610. Cf. [Suttanipâta, v. 470](sbe1035.htm#pp_470).\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter II. On Earnestness.](sbe1004)
