[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe1023)  [Next](sbe1025) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B001W0Z6P6/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[](index)  
*Sacred Books of the East, Vol. 10: The Dhammapada and Sutta Nipata*, by
Max Müller and Max Fausböll, \[1881\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

p\. 74

## CHAPTER XXII.

THE DOWNWARD COURSE.

   306. He who says what is not, goes to hell; he also who, having done
a thing, says I have not done it. After death both are equal, they are
men with evil deeds in the next world.

   307. Many men whose shoulders are covered with the yellow gown are
ill-conditioned and unrestrained; such evil-doers by their evil deeds go
to hell.

   308. Better it would be to swallow a heated iron ball, like flaring
fire, than that a bad unrestrained fellow should live on the charity of
the land.

   309. Four things does a wreckless man gain who covets his neighbour's
wife,--a bad reputation, an uncomfortable bed, thirdly, punishment, and
lastly, hell.

\[306. I translate niraya, 'the exit, the downward course, the evil
path,' by 'hell,' because the meaning assigned to that ancient
mythological name by Christian writers comes so near to the Buddhist
idea of niraya, that it is difficult not to believe in some actual
contact between these two streams of thought. See also Mahâbh. XII,
7176. Cf. *G*âtaka, vol. ii. p. 416; [Suttanipâta, v.
660](sbe1035.htm#pp_660).

307, 308. These two verses are said to be taken frorn the
Vinaya-pi*t*aka I, 4, 1; D'Alwis, Nirvâ*n*a; p. 29.

308\. The charity of the land, i.e. the alms given, from a sense of
religious duty, to every mendicant that asks for it.

309, 310. The four things rnentioned in verse 309 seem to be repeated in
verse 310. Therefore, apu*ññ*alâbha, 'bad fame,' is the same in both:
gati pâpikâ must be niraya; da*nd*a must be nindâ, and râtî thokikâ
explains the anikâmaseyya*m*. Buddhaghosa takes the same view of the
meaning of anikâmaseyya, i.e. yathâ i*kkh*ati eva*m* seyyam alabhitvâ,
ani*kkh*ita*m* parittakam eva kâla*m* seyya*m* labhati, 'not obtaining
the rest as he wishes it, he obtains it, as he does not wish it, for a
short time only.'\]

p\. 75

   310. There is bad reputation, and the evil way (to hell), there is
the short pleasure of the frightened in the arms of the frightened, and
the king imposes heavy punishment; therefore let no man think of his
neighbour's wife.

   311. As a grass-blade, if badly grasped, cuts the arm,
badly-practised asceticism leads to hell.

   312. An act carelessly performed, a broken vow, and hesitating
obedience to discipline, all this brings no great reward.

   313. If anything is to be done, let a man do it, let him attack it
vigorously! A careless pilgrim only scatters the dust of his passions
more widely.

   314. An evil deed is better left undone, for a man repents of it
afterwards; a good deed is better done, for having done it, one does not
repent.

   315. Like a well-guarded frontier fort, with defences within and
without, so let a man guard himself. Not a moment should escape, for
they who allow the right moment to pass, suffer pain when they are in
hell.

   316. They who are ashamed of what they ought not to be ashamed of,
and are not ashamed of what they ought to be ashamed of, such men,
embracing false doctrines enter the evil path.

   317. They who fear when they ought not to fear, and fear not when
they ought to fear, such men, embracing false doctrines, enter the evil
path.

\[313. As to ra*g*a meaning 'dust' and 'passion,' see Buddhaghosha's
Parables, pp. 65, 66.\]

p\. 76

   318. They who forbid when there is nothing to be forbidden, and
forbid not when there is something to be forbidden, such men, embracing
false doctrines, enter the evil path.

   319. They who know what is forbidden as forbidden, and what is not
forbidden as not forbidden, such men, embracing the true doctrine, enter
the good path.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXIII. The Elephant.](sbe1025)
