[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe1003)  [Next](sbe1005) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B001W0Z6P6/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[](index)  
*Sacred Books of the East, Vol. 10: The Dhammapada and Sutta Nipata*, by
Max Müller and Max Fausböll, \[1881\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

p\. 9

## CHAPTER II.

ON EARNESTNESS<sup>\[1\]</sup>.

   21. Earnestness is the path of immortality (Nirvâ*n*a),
thoughtlessness the path of death. Those who are in earnest do not die,
those who are thoughtless are as if dead already.

   22. Those who are advanced in earnestness, having understood this
clearly, delight in earnestness, and rejoice in the knowledge of the
Ariyas (the elect).

   23. These wise people, meditative, steady, always possessed of strong
powers, attain to Nirvâ*n*a, the highest happiness.

\[1. There is nothing in the tenth section of the Dhammapada, as
translated by Beal, corresponding to the verses of this chapter.

21\. Apramâda, which Fausböll translates by 'vigilantia,' Gogerly by
'religion,' Childers by 'diligence,' expresses literally the absence of
that giddiness or thoughtlessness which characterizes the state of mind
of worldly people. It is the first entering into oneself, and hence all
virtues are said to have their root in apramâda. (Ye ke*k*i kusalâ
dhammâ sabbe te appamâdamûlakâ.) I have translated it by 'earnestness,'
sometimes by 'reflection.' 'Immortality,' am*ri*ta, is explained by
Buddhaghosa as Nirvâ*n*a. Am*ri*ta is used, no doubt, as a synonym of
Nirvâ*n*a, but this very fact shows how many different conceptions
entered from the very first into the Nirvâ*n*a of the Buddhists. See
Childers, s.v. nibbâna, p. 269.

This verse, as recited to A*s*oka; occurs in the Dîpava*m*sa VI, 53, and
in the Mahâva*m*sa, p. 25. See also Sanatsu*g*âtîya, translated by
Telang, Sacred Books of the East, vol. viii. p. 138.

22\. The Ariyas, the noble or elect, are those who have entered on the
path that leads to Nirvâ*n*a; see Köppen, p. 396. Their knowledge and
general status is minutely described; see Köppen, p. 436.

23\. Childers, s.v. nibbâna, thinks that nibbâna here and in many other
places means Arhatship.\]

p\. 10

   24. If an earnest person has roused himself, if he is not forgetful,
if his deeds are pure, if he acts with consideration, if he restrains
himself, and lives according to law,--then his glory will increase.

   25. By rousing himself, by earnestness, by restraint and control, the
wise man may make for himself an island which no flood can overwhelm.

   26. Fools follow after vanity, men of evil wisdom. The wise man keeps
earnestness as his best jewel.

   27. Follow not after vanity, nor after the enjoyment of love and
lust! He who is earnest and meditative, obtains ample joy.

   28. When the learned man drives away vanity by earnestness, he, the
wise, climbing the terraced heights of wisdom, looks down upon the
fools, serene he looks upon the toiling crowd, as one that stands on a
mountain looks down upon them that stand upon the plain.

   29. Earnest among the thoughtless, awake among the sleepers, the wise
man advances like a racer, leaving behind the hack.

   30. By earnestness did Maghavan (Indra) rise to the lordship of the
gods. People praise earnestness; thoughtlessness is always blamed.

   31. A Bhikshu (mendicant) who delights in earnestness, who looks with
fear on thoughtlessness,

\[25. Childers explains this island again as the state of an Arhat
(arahatta-phalam).

28\. Cf. Childers, Dictionary, Preface, p. xiv. See Vinaya, ed.
Oldenberg, vol. i. p. 5, s.f.

31\. Instead of saha*m*, which Dr. Fausböll translates by 'vincens,' Dr.
Weber by 'conquering,' I think we ought to read *d*ahan, 'burning,'
which was evidently the reading adopted by Buddhaghosa. Mr. R. C.
Childers, whom I requested to see whether the MS. at the India Office
gives saha*m* or *d*aha*m*, writes that the reading *d*aha*m* is as
clear as possible in that MS. The fetters are meant for the senses. See
[verse 370](sbe1027.htm#pp_370).\]

p\. 11

moves about like fire, burning all his fetters, small or large.

   32. A Bhikshu (mendicant) who delights in reflection, who looks with
fear on thoughtlessness, cannot fall away (from his perfect state)--he
is close upon Nirvâ*n*a.

\[1. See Childers, Notes, p. 5.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter III. Thought.](sbe1005)
