[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Next](hm01.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# HINDU MYSTICISM

## S. N. DASGUPTA, Ph.D.

###### Author of A History of Indian Philosophy and Yoga as Philosophy and Religion

#### Chicago: Open Court Publishing Co.

#### \[1927\]

NOTICE OF ATTRIBUTION  
Scanned at Intangible Textual Heritage, November 2005. Proofed and
Formatted by John Bruno Hare. This text is in the public domain in the
United States because it was published between 1922 and 1964 and not
renewed at the United States Copyright Office in a timely fashion as
required by law at the time. These files may be used for any
non-commercial purpose, provided this notice of attribution is left
intact in all copies.

 

<span id="page_v">p. v</span>

*To*

*HIS EXCELLENCY*

*The Rt. Hon’ble Victor Alexander George Robert Bulwer-Lytton, Earl of
Lytton P.C., G.C.S.I., G.C.I.E., Chancellor of The University of
Calcutta and Governor of Bengal, India.*

*May it please your Excellency,*

*I know that your noble and cultivated soul will always be eager to
receive with cordial hospitality the high ideals, thoughts and
attainments of the people of any age and of any country, but more
particularly of India, over the destinies of a part of which your
excellency had to preside for some time.*

*Mine is a humble performance, but I feel extremely grateful to you that
it was solely through the kind patronage of your excellency that I could
avail myself of the opportunities that came and accept the invitations
of many foreign universities, at one of which these lectures were
delivered. Your generous courtesies, cordiality and sympathetic
willingness to help will always endear your name to me, as it will do to
many others. By associating this brief account of the mystics of India
with your name I am only paying my tribute of respect to you for the
high respect that you yourself have for the lofty ideals of humanity. I
shall be glad if you will kindly accept this unworthy gift and sometimes
think of India, her past greatness and future possibilities.*

*I remain your Excellency,  
Loyally and sincerely yours,*

*Surendranath Dasgupta,  
Presidency College,  
Calcutta*.

<span id="page_vi">p. vi</span>

HINDU MYSTICISM

was presented first in the form of six lectures given by Professor
Dasgupta in 1926 as the Norman Wait Harris Foundation Lectures at
Northwestern University. The author was at one time a Lecturer,
University of Cambridge; Professor of Sanskrit, Chittagong College,
Bengal; and Professor of Philosophy, Presidency College, Calcutta.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Preface](hm01.md)
