[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](hm02)  [Next](hm04) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_3">p. 3</span>

### LECTURE I

### SACRIFICIAL MYSTICISM

THE Hindus possess a body of sacred compositions called the Vedas. Of
these there are four collections. Two of them comprise original hymns.
The contents of the others consist largely of poems derived from the
former two. The collections of original hymns, known as the Rig Veda and
the Atharva Veda, include, respectively, 1028 original hymns of about
10600 stanzas and 731 hymns of about 6000 stanzas. All of these were
kept in memory and transmitted by recitation and close memorizing on the
part of teachers and pupils in an unbroken chain of early traditions
from a time when writing was probably not known. The opinions of
scholars vary greatly regarding the antiquity of this literature; some
think that the hymns were composed about 6000 B. C. or at a still
earlier date, while others think that they were composed about 1200 B.
C. or 1000 B. C. The Vedic hymns are probably the earliest important
religious documents of the human race.<span class="margnote"><span
id="1-1">1</span></span>

The hymns of the Atharva Veda contain among other things descriptions of
charms for curing diseases, prayers for long life and health,
imprecations against demons, sorcerers and enemies, charms pertaining to
women--to secure their love or arouse jealousy, and

<span id="page_4">p. 4</span>

the like--charms for securing harmony and influence in an assembly,
charms for securing the prosperity of household, fields, cattle,
business, gambling, etc., charms in expiation of sins and defilement.
The hymns of the Rig Veda, on the other hand, are often praises of
various deities, who are frequently mere personifications of the
different powers of nature, such as the rain-god, the wind-god, the
fire-god, and the like. The prayers in these hymns are praises of the
greatness and power, the mysterious nature, and the exploits of these
deities, as well as prayers for various favors. Often the favors sought
are of the nature of material blessings, such as long life, vigorous
offspring, cattle and horses, gold, etc. Prayers for the advancement of
the inner spiritual achievements of man, for righteousness or moral
greatness, prayers expressing a passionate longing for the divine or a
humble submission of the mind to the divine will are not so frequent.
Most of these prayers were recited in the performance of certain
prescribed rituals. Though from the praises of the gods one might infer
that it was the gods who were supposed to bestow the benefits, it was in
fact the complete set of ritualistic performances that was considered to
be the cause of the showering of the benefits. It was supposed that
these ritualistic performances when carried out in all their details,
precisely and accurately, could by their joint and mysterious effect
produce a mysterious something whereby the prayers were fulfilled. <span
class="margnote"><span id="1-2">2</span></span>

I shall omit from my discussion the hymns of the Atharva Veda which deal
only with spells, witchcraft

<span id="page_5">p. 5</span>

and incantations. But while I take for examination those hymns of the
Rig Veda which express beautiful ideas about the nature-deities and
which voice personal requests for material comforts or for advantages,
it should be understood that they also were chanted in connection with
the performance of rituals and sacrifices. It is difficult to determine
whether in the earliest period definite theories had been formulated
regarding the intimate and indispensable connection between the chanting
of these hymns of personal appeal and the performance of the rituals.
But if we judge by the Vedic literature of the Brahmanas (probably
composed shortly after the hymns, and later appended to them) which
indicate authoritatively the place of these hymns in the ritualistic
observances and specify what hymns were to be uttered under what
ritualistic conditions and in what order or manner, it seems almost
certain that the prevailing form of what is commonly called the Vedic
religion may in strictness not be considered as a religion in the
ordinarily accepted meaning of this term. Many of the ritualistic
observances, or *yajna*, required the help of a large number of priests,
and large quantities of butter, rice, milk, animals, etc. They had to be
performed with the most elaborate details from day to day, for months
together and sometimes even for ten or twelve years; and it was enjoined
that all the observances should be performed in exact accordance with
the prescriptions laid down in the Brahmana literature. Even the
slightest inaccuracy or the most trifling inexactness would be
sufficient to spoil the entire effect of the sacrifice. But

<span id="page_6">p. 6</span>

if the sacrifices were performed with the strictest accuracy, then the
material advantages for which they were performed were bound to come
regardless of the good will or the ill will of the gods to whom the
prayers were offered. Tvashtar had performed a sacrifice for the birth
of a son who might kill Indra, but owing to a slight error in
pronunciation the meaning of the prayer was changed and the sacrifice
produced a son who was not a killer of Indra but of whom Indra was the
killer. <span class="margnote"><span id="1-3">3</span></span>

This idea of sacrifice is entirely different from anything found in
other races. For with the Vedic people, the sacrifices were more
powerful than the gods. The gods could be pleased or displeased; if the
sacrifices were duly performed the prayers were bound to be fulfilled.
The utterance or chanting of the stanzas of the Vedic hymns with
specially prescribed accents and modulations, the pouring of the melted
butter in the prescribed manner into the sacrificial fire, the husking
of rice in a particular way, the making and exact placing of cakes, all
the thousand details of rituals--often performed continuously for days,
months and years with rigorous exactness--was called a *yajna*
(frequently translated into English, "sacrifice"). All the good things
that the people wanted, be it the birth of a son, a shower of rain, or a
place of enjoyment in heaven, were believed to be secured through the
performance of these sacrifices. It is possible that when these hymns
were originally composed, they were but simple prayers to the deified
powers of nature, or that they were only associated with some simple
rituals.

<span id="page_7">p. 7</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> But the evidence
that is presented to us in the later Vedic and non-Vedic records
containing descriptions of these sacrifices and discussions respecting
their value, convinces us beyond doubt that it was the performance of
these sacrifices, perfect in every detail in accordance with the
dictates of the sacrificial manuals, the Brahmanas, that was believed to
be capable of producing everything that a man could desire. A direct
consequence of this apparently unmeaning necessity of strictest accuracy
of ritualistic performances is a theory that came to be formulated and
accepted in later periods, namely, that the sacrificial rites revealed
such supernatural wisdom that they could not have been made by any one
but were self-existent. It came to be held that the hymns of the Vedas,
as well as the sacrificial manuals, were without authorship; that they
existed eternally, prescribing certain courses of ritualistic procedure
for the attainment of particular advantages and prohibiting certain
undesirable courses of action. Consistently with the sacrificial theory
it was also believed that the meanings of the hymns, so far as they
described events or facts of nature or the exploits and the conduct of
the gods were of a legendary character, that their true value consisted
in the enjoining of particular courses of action or of dissuading people
from other courses of action. <span class="margnote"><span
id="1-4">4</span></span>

Religion in its ordinarily accepted sense means a personal relationship
with some divine or transcendent person to whom we submit and to whom we
pray for material advantages or for spiritual or moral enlightenment.

<span id="page_8">p. 8</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> But here was a
belief in the divinity or the uncreatedness of a literature--the
Vedas--which was believed to contain within itself the secret laws of
the universe. Here there was a conception of commands, categorical in
nature and external in character, without the least suggestion of any
commander. Though these commands were supposed not to have emanated from
any person, they may nevertheless in some sense be described as
transcendent, for they were regarded as far above human wisdom. No
reason could be given why a particular sacrificial performance should
produce any particular kind of material advantage. There stand the
commands--commands which had revealed themselves to the minds of the
various sages, which had no beginning in time, which do not imply any
commander, and which are absolutely faultless and unerring in their
directions. <span class="margnote"><span id="1-5">5</span></span>

The sacrifices, thus, were supposed to possess a mysterious power
capable of regulating and modifying the workings of the universe for the
advantage of individuals; and the Vedic commands were thought to embody
omniscience respecting the ways of the world. Though the repository of
omniscience, the Vedas were not conceived as divulging to us their
secrets but merely as providing a body of directions which, if followed,
would give whatever advantages one craved in this life or the next. The
sacrifices (*yajna*) or their mysterious powers, are called *dharma*, a
term which in Indian vernaculars is often used wrongly to translate the
English word "religion." The Vedic hymns, the priests, and the
sacrifices are also called "the great"

<span id="page_9">p. 9</span>

by the application of the term *brahman*, which in later Indian
philosophy and religion had such a momentous history. <span
class="margnote"><span id="1-6">6</span></span>

What we have described is no ordinary magic of spells and incantations,
but a repository of the cosmic secrets and cosmic forces. These
impersonal commands unite in them the concepts of an unalterable law and
perfect omniscience; they imply therefore the possibility of reaping all
the comforts of this life and of the after-life by submission to them
and compliance with them. But they involve no law-giver, no divine
person, no author of the universe or of the destinies of human beings
who must be pacified, obeyed or loved, and by whose grace we receive the
blessings of life. We can control our own destinies, and have whatever
we may want, if we only follow the commands. There is no other mystery
of life save this great mystery of the Vedic commands, and these are
absolutely inscrutable. These commands do not teach ordinary laws of
social life or of behavior toward our fellow-beings, or anything that we
could discover by our own intelligence and wisdom. Neither do they teach
us anything that we could learn by experience or reason. They give
direction for the attainment of the good things of this life or of the
after-life only in so far as the means thereto are absolutely
undiscoverable by us. They are not a body of facts, but a body of
commands and prohibitions. Yet they do not represent commands of the
inner conscience or of the spirit within us; they do not give us any
food for the spirit. They represent an objective and unalterable

<span id="page_10">p. 10</span>

law realistically conceived, and they relate to desires for material
comforts in this life or the life in heaven. This concept gives us all
the principal elements of religion except that of a divine person. The
acceptance of the blessings of this life as gifts from God, and a sense
of our duty to please Him by submission and prayer are, therefore, not
implied in this system of Vedic sacrifices. What is implied is some
great impersonal force which harmonises ourselves and our destinies with
the happenings and events of the world of nature. Instead of God we find
here a body of commands which demand our obedience and reverence; but
the source of their power and the secret of their omniscient character
and uncreatedness cannot be determined by us through reason or
experience. But this ritualistic mysticism--if we may be permitted thus
to call it--must be distinguished from the simple feelings and ideas
that are found in the hymns themselves. In all probability the latter
did not originally imply the complicated ritualistic hypotheses of the
later period. <span class="margnote"><span id="1-7">7</span></span>

The forces of nature with their wonderful manifestations of inexplicable
marvels appeared to the early sages like great beings endowed with life
and personality. They were treated at times as friendly, but again as
hostile. Sometimes the mystery of the natural phenomena seemed
stupifying in its psychological effect. The laws of nature were at that
time unknown, and there was no obstacle to the free flight of the
imagination. When the Vedic sage saw the sun proceeding

<span id="page_11">p. 11</span>

in his upward and downward course through the sky he cried out in his
wonder:

"Undropped beneath, not fastened firm, how comes it  
That downward turned he falls not downward?  
The guide of his ascending path,--who saw it?" <span
id="fr_0"></span>[1](#fn_0)

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> The sage is full
of wonder that "the sparkling waters of all rivers flow into one ocean
without ever filling it." He perceives the unalterable course of the sun
from day to day, and the succession of day and night, and he exclaims
with delight: "Every day, in unceasing interchange with night and her
dark wonders, comes the dawn with her beautiful ones to reanimate the
worlds, never failing in her place, never in her time." Again, he is
puzzled when thinking whither the shining ones of the sky disappear, and
he cries forth in amazement:

"Who is it knows, and who can tell us surely  
Where lies the path that leads to the Eternals?  
Their deepest dwellings only we discover,  
And hidden these in distant secret regions."

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> In how many hymns
does the singer express his wonder that the rough red cow gives soft
white milk. To the god Indra he cries:

"Grant me, O God, the highest, best of treasures,  
A judging mind, prosperity abiding,  
Riches abundant, lasting health of body,  
The grace of eloquence, and days propitious."

<span id="page_12">p. 12</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> To the God of the
destroying storm he prays:

"Let me through thy best medicines, O Rudra,  
My life on earth prolong a hundred winters.  
From us dispel all hatred and oppression,  
On every side calamity drive from us.

Where then, O Rudra, is thy hand of mercy,  
The hand that healing brings and softens sorrow,  
That takes away the ills which the gods send?  
Let me, O mighty one, feel thy forgiveness.

The hero gladdened me amid tumult  
With greater might when I his aid entreated;  
Like some cool shade from the Sun's heat protected  
May I attain to Rudra's grace and refuge."

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Again when he is
penitent he would ask forgiveness of the god Varuna, the personification
of the all-embracing heaven, and say:

"If we to any dear and loved companion  
Have evil done, to brother or to neighbour,  
To our own countryman or to a stranger,  
That sin do thou O Varuna forgive us."

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Or,

"Forgive the wrongs, committed by our fathers,  
What we ourselves have sinned in mercy pardon;  
My own misdeeds do thou O God take from me,  
And for another's sin let me not suffer."

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Or, again,

"If ever we deceived like cheating players,  
If consciously we have erred or all unconscious  
According to our sin do not thou punish;  
Be thou the singer's guardian in thy wisdom."

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> But besides these
prayers, we sometimes find poems

<span id="page_13">p. 13</span>

composed by the Vedic people, descriptive of their varied experiences of
ordinary life. Thus a gambler gives his experience as follows:

"My wife has never angered me nor striven,  
Was ever kind to me and my companions;  
Though she was faithful to me, I have spurned her,  
For love of dice, the only thing I value.

The gambler's wife deserted mourns; his mother  
Laments her son, she knows not where he wanders  
And he in debt and trouble, seeking money,  
Remains at night beneath the roof of strangers.

And when I say that I will play no longer,  
My friends abandon me and all desert me;  
Yet then again I hear the brown dice rattling  
I hasten, like a wanton to her lover."

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Again we read:

"The gambler hurries to the gaming table,  
'Today I'll win,' he thinks in his excitement.  
The dice inflame his greed, his hopes mount higher;  
He leaves his winnings all with his opponent."

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> When we read these
hymns we see in them the simple prayers of a simple primitive people
impressed with the inexplicable and varied phenomena of a tropical
climate. They turn to the forces behind the latter as personified
deities, describing the phenomena and offering their simple prayers. We
find in these prayers experiences of simple wonder, of sufferings and of
simple enjoyments. But when we come to the sacrificial stage of
development we find a religious outlook in which the independent simple
meanings of the

<span id="page_14">p. 14</span>

hymns possess importance only for their sacrificial utterance in
particular contexts. During the particular ritual observances the
different verses were often torn out of their contexts and were combined
with others which apparently had little or no relation with them and no
conceivable bearing on the performances during which they were chanted
or uttered. They were simply the means for the performance of the
sacrifices. Their simple meanings as descriptions of things or events or
phenomena or ideas were dropped from consideration. The value attached
to them centered about their being uttered or chanted in particular
Vedic sacrifices in accordance with certain sacrificial canons of
interpretation. The entire significance of these hymns consisted either
in their use as directions for the performance of certain sacrificial
duties or in their utterance in these sacrifices under prescribed
conditions as found in the sacrificial manuals, the Brahmanas, which
were considered as part of the Vedas. Thought and feeling were driven
from their places of importance in human nature, and the whole emphasis
was laid on the interpretation of the Vedic literature as a system of
duties involving commands and prohibitions, and nothing else. Some of
these duties were compulsory, while others were voluntary in the sense
that they had to be performed only when one wanted to secure some
desired end unattainable by any means discoverable by his reason or
experience. <span class="margnote"><span id="1-8">8</span></span>

The authority which this system of Vedic injunctions and prohibitions
was supposed to possess was so high as to demand the entire submission
of one's will

<span id="page_15">p. 15</span>

and thought. Their claims did not stand in need of any justification by
reason or logic, for they were supposed to be guides in a sphere where
reason and experience were utterly helpless. The only fruitful way in
which reason could be employed with regard to these Vedic commands was
by accepting their authority and then trying to explain them in such a
way that their mysterious nature might be reconciled to us. These Vedic
commands cannot be described as "revelations" in the ordinary Christian
sense of the term; for the latter presupposes the existence of a living
God able and willing to bestow the body of truths that man requires,
whereas the Vedic commands are devoid of any notion of a law-giver. This
sacrificial mysticism, if it may be so called, does not recognize any
God or supreme being from whom these commands emanate or who reveals
them to man. The commands are taken as eternal truths, beginningless and
immortal, revealing themselves to man and demanding man's submission to
them. Nevertheless they are not spiritual or inner truths revealed from
within man himself; they are external and impersonal commands which
contain within themselves the inscrutable secrets of nature and of the
happiness of man. <span class="margnote"><span id="1-9">9</span></span>

The fact that the Vedas were regarded as revelations of eternal truths,
truths which no human reason could ever challenge, naturally divested
reason of confidence in its ability to unravel the mysteries of man and
of the world. Even in the somewhat later days of the evolution of Vedic
culture, when there grew up a school of thinkers who disbelieved the
claim that the

<span id="page_16">p. 16</span>

whole of the Vedas were nothing but a body of commands and prohibitions
and who held that there were at least some particular portions of the
Vedas which dealt with the eternal truths of spiritual facts and
experiences of reality, the belief remained unshaken that what the Vedas
gave one as truths were unshakeable and unchallengeable by reason or by
experience. This means a definite lowering or degradation of reason in
its capacity as truth-finder. Reason calls for counter-reason and leads
through an endless regressus without ever being able to lead to truth.
The Vedas, then, are the only repository of the highest truths, and the
function of reason is only to attempt to reconcile these truths with our
experience and sense-observation. It is surprising that reason has
continued to remain in this subordinate position throughout the
development of Indian religious and philosophical thought almost to our
own days. No change, no new idea could be considered to be right or
could be believed by the people, unless it could also be shown that it
had the sanction of the Vedas. Reason was never trusted as the only true
and safe guide. <span class="margnote"><span id="1-10">10</span></span>

The word "mysticism" is a European word with a definite history. Most
European writers have used it to denote an intuitive or ecstatic union
with the deity, through contemplation, communion, or other mental
experiences, or to denote the relationship and potential union of the
human soul with ultimate reality. But I should for my present purposes
like to give it a wider meaning which would include this and the other
different types of mysticism that I may be discussing

<span id="page_17">p. 17</span>

in the course of this series of lectures. I should like to define
mysticism as a theory, doctrine, or view that considers reason to be
incapable of discovering or of realising the nature of ultimate truth,
whatever be the nature of this ultimate truth, but at the same time
believes in the certitude of some other means of arriving at it. If this
definition be accepted, then this ritualistic philosophy of the Vedas is
the earliest form of mysticism that is known to India or to the world.
This Vedic mysticism prepared the way for the rise of the other forms of
mysticism that sprang up in India. Subsequent lectures will deal with
these later forms, in some of which at least it will be easy to notice
their similarity to Western types of mysticism with which Western
readers are more or less familiar. <span class="margnote"><span
id="1-11">11</span></span>

The main elements of the sacrificial mysticism of the Vedas may be
summarised as follows: First, a belief that the sacrifices when
performed with perfect accuracy, possess a secret, mysterious power to
bring about or produce as their effect whatever we may desire either in
this life or in the hereafter. Second, the conception of an unalterable
law--involved in such invariable and unfailing occurrences of effects
consequent upon the performance of these sacrifices. Third, an
acceptance of the impersonal nature of the Vedic literature, as having
existed by itself from beginningless time and as not created or composed
by any person, human or divine. Fourth, the view that the Vedic
literature embodies nothing but a system of duties involving commands
and prohibitions. Fifth, a recognition of the supreme authority of the
Vedas

<span id="page_18">p. 18</span>

as the only source of the knowledge of ultimate truths which are far
beyond the powers of human reason. Sixth, the view that truth or
reality, whether it be of the nature of commands or of facts (as was
maintained by the later Vedic schools of thought, the Upanishads), could
be found once for all in the words of the Vedas. Seventh, the belief
that the Vedic system of duties demands unfailing obedience and
submission. Two definite characteristics emerge from these: first, the
transcendent, mysterious, and secret power of the sacrifices, replacing
the natural forces personified as gods; second, the ultimate superiority
of the Vedas as the source of all truths, and as the unchallengeable
dictators of our duties, leading to our material well-being and
happiness. The assumption of the mysterious omnipotence of sacrifices,
performed by following the authoritative injunctions of the Vedas
independently of reason or logical and discursive thought, forms the
chief trait of the mysticism of the Vedic type. There is nothing here of
feeling or even of intellect, but a blind submission, not to a person
but to an impersonal authority which holds within it an unalterable and
inscrutable law, the secret of all powers which we may want to wield in
our favor. <span class="margnote"><span id="1-12">12</span></span>

The next step in the development of this type of mysticism consists in
the growth of a school of thought which sought to intellectualise the
material sacrifices. It encouraged the belief that it was quite
unnecessary actually to perform the sacrifices requiring the expenditure
of enormous sums of money for the collection of materials and for labor.
The same results

<span id="page_19">p. 19</span>

might be as well obtained through certain kinds of meditation or
reflection. Thus, instead of the actual performance of a horse
sacrifice, in which the immolation of a horse is accompanied by other
rituals engaging the services of large numbers of men and the
expenditure of funds such as kings alone could provide, one might as
well think of the dawn as the head of a horse, the sun as its eye, the
wind as its life, the heaven as its back, the intervening space as its
belly, the sky as its flesh and the stars as its bones. Such a
meditation, or rather concentrated imagining of the universe as a cosmic
horse, would, it was maintained, produce all the beneficial results that
could be expected from the performance of an actual horse sacrifice.
Thus, these attempts to intellectualise sacrifices took the form of
replacing by meditation the actual sacrifices, and this substitution was
believed to produce results which were equally beneficial. This
meditation by substitution gradually took various forms: certain letters
of the alphabet had, for example, to be thought of, or meditated upon,
as Brahman or some other deity, or as vital functions of the body, or as
some personified nature deity. This meditation was supposed to produce
beneficial results. It should not be supposed that the sacrificial forms
were entirely supplanted by these new forms of substitution-meditations.
Rather did they spring up side by side with them. These forms of
meditation did not mean prolonged contemplation, or any logical process
of thinking, but merely the simple practice of continually thinking of
one entity, process, or letter as another entity or process. <span
class="margnote"><span id="1-13">13</span></span>

<span id="page_20">p. 20</span>

Even in modern India there are still many men who believe that the
repetition of mystical formulas (apparently meaningless combinations of
letters, or the names of some deities) is capable of producing
beneficial results. Even the worship of a round or an oval stone as the
god Vishnu or Siva, or again the worship of a waterjug or an image as a
particular god or goddess, is nothing but a modified form of
substitution-meditation, one thing being considered and meditated upon
as another. These practices are to be distinguished from the ordinary
spells and incantations commonly believed in by uneducated people. These
substitution-meditations are often believed to be productive of virtue.
They form the normal modes of worship of the ordinary Hindu and have now
taken the place of the old sacrifices. Nevertheless the old Vedic
sacrifices are also to a certain extent performed on occasions of
marriages and other domestic ceremonies, as an indispensable part of
those ceremonies which still claim to belong entirely to the Vedic
order. <span class="margnote"><span id="1-14">14</span></span>

But, refraining from further references to modern India, let us pick up
our thread of discussion and note the next stage in the development of
the substitution-meditations. Although the latter were in their
conception doubtless as mystical and magical as the old sacrifices, they
represent an advance. For in them the mystical powers are supposed to
reside not in external performances, but in specific forms of meditation
or thinking. This represents an approach toward a consciousness of self
and toward a recognition of the mystical powers of thought and
meditation of a

<span id="page_21">p. 21</span>

peculiar type. But it was only after an almost endless and fruitless
search that the highest idea of self and the highest idea of world
mystery and its solution dawned in the minds of the Vedic thinkers. What
we find at this stage is merely that the Vedic thinkers had become
conscious of the activity of thought and of imagination, and had begun
to realise that the activity involved in thinking ought to be considered
to be as potent a power as the activity involved in the actual
performances of material sacrifices. Man's inner thought and his
performance of sacrificial duties in the world outside are both regarded
as capable of producing mysterious changes and transformations in nature
which would benefit man. Passages are to be found in the literature
where the vital and other inner processes of the self are compared with
a sacrifice. The three periods of human life are considered as being the
same as the three bruisings of the sacrificial plant soma; and the
functions of hungering, eating and begetting are considered to be the
same as the different ceremonies of the soma sacrifice. Logical thinking
in Vedic times seems to have taken the form of crude generalisation. The
fundamental operation of logical thinking is generalisation based on a
scrutiny of facts of experience, noting differences and avoiding false
identifications. But in the early stages of Vedic thinking,
generalisations were very crude and based on insufficient data, slurring
points of difference and making bold identifications. Thus from the fact
that we perspire through heat, there arose the cosmological belief that
out of fire there came water.

<span id="page_22">p. 22</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> From observation
of three principal colors, red, white and black (the colors of fire,
water and earth) sprang the idea that the universe is made up of the
three elements, viz., fire, water and earth. It was thought that
wherever there was red, it was due to the existence of fire, wherever
there was white it was due to the existence of water, and wherever there
was black, it was due to the existence of earth. <span
class="margnote"><span id="1-15">15</span></span>

By a similar loose process of generalisation the word Brahman came to
denote the Vedic verses, truth, sacrifices, and knowledge.
Etymologically the word means "The Great." Probably it signified vaguely
and obscurely the mysterious power underlying these sacrifices and the
substitution-meditations. Both the ideas involved in the conception of
Brahman as the highest power and the highest knowledge were derived from
the notion of the sacrifices. Thus we read in the celebrated man-hymn of
the Rig Veda that the gods offered the supreme man as a sacrifice and
that from this great oblation all living creatures, as well as the
atmosphere, sky, earth and the four quarters, came into being. Three
parts of this supreme man transcend the world while one part of him is
the whole world about us; and yet, he is himself both the sacrifice and
the object of the sacrifice.

But while I have just emphasised the importance of the mysticism of
sacrifice in the development of the mystical conception of Brahman as
the supreme being, it would be wrong to hold that the mysticism of the
sacrifices is alone responsible for the evolution of the great concept
of Brahman. Side by side with the concept

<span id="page_23">p. 23</span>

found in the Rig Veda of the many gods as personifications of the forces
of nature, there was also growing a tendency toward the conception of
one supreme being, and this tendency gradually gained in force. Thus, in
Rig Veda X. 114.5 we find a verse in which it is said that the deity is
one, though he is called by various names. One of the hymns (R. V. X.
129), again, runs as follows: <span class="margnote"><span
id="1-16">16</span></span>

"Then there was neither Aught nor Naught, no air nor sky beyond.  
What covered all? Where rested all? In watery gulf profound?  
Nor death was then, nor deathlessness, nor change of night and day.  
That one breathed calmly, self-sustained; naught else beyond it lay.  
Gloom hid in gloom existed first--one sea eluding view.  
The one a void in chaos wrapt, by inward fervor grew.  
Within it first arose desire, the primal germ of mind,  
Which nothing with existence links, as ages searching find.  
The kindling ray that shot across the dark and drear abyss,--  
Was it beneath or high aloft? What bard can answer this?  
There fecundating powers were found and mighty forces strove,  
A self-supporting mass beneath, and energy above.  
Who knows and who ever told, from whence this vast creation rose?  
No gods had then been born. Who then can e’er the truth disclose  
Whence sprang this world, whether framed by hand divine or no,  
Its lord in heaven alone can tell, if he can show." <span
id="fr_1"></span>[2](#fn_1)

<span id="page_24">p. 24</span>

Again, in the Atharva Veda (X, 7.) we find a hymn dedicated to Skambha
where the different parts of this deity are identified not only with the
different parts of the material world but also with a number of moral
qualities such as faith, austere fervor, truthfulness, etc. All the
thirty-three gods of the Vedas are contained within him and bow down to
him. He is also called Brahman, "The Great." In the next hymn of the
Atharva Veda (X. 8) Brahman is adored and spoken of as presiding over
the past and the future, and he is said to be residing within our hearts
and to be the self which never decays but is self-existent and
self-satisfied. This appears to be very much like the idea of the
Upanishads of which I shall speak in my next lecture. In the Shatapatha
Brahmana, also, we hear of Brahman as having created the gods; and in
the Taittiriya Brahmana, Brahman is said to have created the gods and
the entire world. <span class="margnote"><span
id="1-17">17</span></span>

Thus we find that the conception of one great being who created the
world and the gods, and who is also the power presiding over our lives
and spirits, was gradually dawning in the minds of a few people. And
though the sacrificial theory tended to lead away from the ordinary
meanings of these Vedic hymns, the development of the sacrificial theory
itself also made for the conception of some mysterious force which
reconciled the destinies of the world and nature with those of men and
their desires. This mysterious power, it was held, is resident not only
in things external but also in activities of the inner life; it
manifests itself in the power of thought, as is exemplified by the
mysterious

<span id="page_25">p. 25</span>

efficacy of the substitution-meditations. What was the nature of this
mysterious power? It is difficult to answer this question. We have seen
that its conception varied in significance according to the mode of its
development and the sources from which it evolved. But when once the
conception was formed, all these constituent notions were mixed
together. People regarded Brahman as the highest, but they did not know
how Brahman was to be known. Those who started with the sacrificial
bias, thought substitution-meditations to be the way to a knowledge of
Brahman. And so we find various instructions regarding meditation upon
objects, such as the wind, life, fire, etc.,--even upon unmeaning
letters. <span class="margnote"><span id="1-18">18</span></span>

But parallel with this tendency went another, viz., an intellectual
search after Brahman, the highest, which displayed a contempt for
sacrifices. We find Brahmins going out of their own sphere to warrior
castes and kings for secret instruction about the nature of Brahman.
There are narratives in which we find that kings belonging to the
warrior caste fill proud Brahmins with a sense of discomfiture by
exposing the ignorance of the latter concerning the secret nature of
Brahman. Thus Balaki Gargya approached King Ajatashatru with the request
to be allowed to explain to him the nature of Brahman. He then tried
twelve times in succession to define Brahman as the presiding person in
the sun, moon, lightning, ether, wind, fire, water, etc.; and in each
case King Ajatashatru refuted him by showing the lower position that
such presiding persons occupy in the whole of the universe, whereas

<span id="page_26">p. 26</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Brahman should be
that which is the highest. Again, we find another narrative in which
five Brahmins meet and discuss the question, "What is our Atman and what
is Brahman?" They proceed to Uddalaka Aruni with the question. When
Uddalaka mistrusts his ability to answer the question, all six go to
King Ashvapati Kaikeya for instruction. King Ashvapati first asks them
what it is that they worship as Atman or Brahman, anticipating their
error that they still regard Atman or Brahman as a new kind of external
divinity. The six Brahmins explain Atman in succession as the heaven,
the sun, the wind, space, water, and the earth, and in so doing assume
it to be an objective and an external deity more or less like the old
Vedic deities. This shows us a stage of thought in which people somehow
understood Brahman to be the highest principle, but yet found it
difficult to shake off their old conceptions of external deities or
personifications of nature. Again we find Sanatkumara instructing Narada
regarding the nature of Brahman. In so doing Sanatkumara starts from
"Name," by which he probably understands all conceptual knowledge. With
his peculiar logic, which is difficult for us to follow, he observes
that speech is greater than name, that mind is greater than speech, that
imagination is greater than mind, and so on. Passing in succession
through a number of such concepts, from lower to higher, he ultimately
stops at that which is absolutely great, the unlimited, beyond which
there is nothing and within which is comprehended all that is to be
found in the outer and the inner world. <span class="margnote"><span
id="1-19">19</span></span>

<span id="page_27">p. 27</span>

The most important point to be noted in the development of this stage of
thought is that worship or prayer is possible only as directed toward a
deity conceived with limited powers and as occupying a subordinate
position in the universe. But with reference to that which is conceived
as the highest truth and the highest power, there is no longer the
possibility of external forms of worship. We shall find in the next
lecture not only that it is not possible to worship Brahman but that it
is not possible to reach Brahman by logical thought or any kind of
conceptual apprehension. Thus in a Upanishadic story, referred to by
Shankara, we are told of a person who approached a sage Bahva and sought
from him instructions regarding the nature of Brahman. Bahva did not
speak. He was asked a second time; still he did not speak. Yet again he
was asked, but still he did not speak. When the inquirer became annoyed
by this, Bahva told him that he was, from the first, by his silence
telling him how Brahman was to be described: Brahman is silence and so
cannot be represented in speech. There are, however, unmistakable
indications that there were still some who believed that even the
highest could be worshipped and adored and that men could still submit
themselves to Him as to the highest personal God who comprehends us all
and controls us all. But the idea that was gradually gaining ground with
some of the most important sages, and which will be expounded in the
next lecture, was that Brahman, as the highest, is no ordinary personal
God who can be induced by worship to favor us or who can be approached
by the

<span id="page_28">p. 28</span>

pure intellect or even by feeling. Brahman still retains its mysterious
character as the highest power, truth, being and bliss which can neither
be worshipped nor known by ordinary means of knowledge. But its nature
can be realised, and realised so perfectly that the realisation will be
like the bursting of a shell of light, a revelation which will submerge
the whole of one's life together with all that it contains. The next
lecture will describe this type of mysticism of the Upanishads, which
represents one of the highest and best, and undoubtedly one of the most
distinctive, types of mysticism that India has produced. <span
class="margnote"><span id="1-20">20</span></span>

The Upanishads form the concluding portions of the Vedic literature,
both chronologically from the point of view of the development of ideas.
They were composed later than the priestly manuals, the Brahmanas, and
the manuals of substitution-meditations in the Aranyaka literature, and
they form the most authoritative background of all later Hindu
philosophical thought. They possess the high authority of the Vedas and
are the source of the highest wisdom and truth. The word "Upanishad" has
been interpreted etymologically by Shankara to mean "that which destroys
all ignorance and leads us to Brahman." It has also been interpreted to
mean a secret or mystical doctrine, or a secret instruction, or a secret
and confidential sitting. I have elsewhere, in my *History of Indian
Philosophy*, shown how all the different systems of orthodox Indian
philosophy look to the Upanishads for light and guidance, differently
interpreting the Upanishad texts to suit their own specific systems of
thought.

<span id="page_29">p. 29</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Eleven of these,
Isha, Kena, Katha, Prashna, Mundaka, Mandukya, Taittiriya, Aitareya,
Chandogya, Brihadaranyaka, and Svetashvatara, are probably the oldest.
They vary greatly in length: while the Isha Upanishad would occupy but a
single printed page, Brihadaranyaka would occupy at least fifty pages.
Since the longer ones probably contain compositions of different periods
and of different authorship they represent various stages of evolution
and exhibit different intentions. Being the concluding portions of the
Vedas, they are called the Vedanta. Their interpretations by different
later writers gave rise to different systems of Vedanta philosophy. (One
of these well-known forms of Vedanta philosophy was made known to the
western world for the first time by a gifted Hindu, Svami Vivekananda.)
The Upanishads themselves, however, do not seem to have been written in
a systematic, well-connected and logical form. They are mystical
experiences of the soul gushing forth from within us; they sparkle with
the beams of a new light; they quench our thirst, born at their very
sight. It was of these that the German philosopher Schopenhauer said:
"How does every line display its firm and definite and throughout
harmonious meaning. From every sentence deep, original, and sublime
thoughts arise and the whole is pervaded by a high and holy and earnest
spirit. . . . In the whole world there is no study, except that of the
originals, so beneficial and so elevating as that of the Upanishads. It
has been the solace of my life, it will be the solace of my death."
Cases are known in which even Christian

<span id="page_30">p. 30</span>

missionaries, sent out to India to teach church doctrines to clergymen
or to preach Christianity among the Indians, became so fascinated by the
high and lofty teachings of the Upanishads that they introduced the
teaching of the Upanishads in the Church and as a consequence were
compelled to resign their posts. To Hindus of all denominations there is
nothing higher and holier than the inspired sayings of the Upanishads.
To them we shall address our attention in the next lecture. <span
class="margnote"><span id="1-21">21</span></span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_0"></span>[11:1](hm03.htm#fr_0) This translation is from
Kaegi-Arrowsmith, *The Rig Veda*, p. 35. The immediately following
translations are taken from the same work.

<span id="fn_1"></span>[23:2](hm03.htm#fr_1) The translation is taken
from Muir's *Original Sanskrit Texts*, Vol. V.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Lecture II. The Mysticism of the Upanishads](hm04)
