[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](hm03)  [Next](hm05.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_33">p. 33</span>

### LECTURE II

### THE MYSTICISM OF THE UPANISHADS

IN the last lecture reference was made to a few of the monotheistic
hymns of the Rig Veda and the Atharva Veda. Others might be cited; for
instance, the adoration hymn to Hiranyagarbha (R. V. X. 121) who is
therein described as the lord of the universe.

"In the beginning rose Hiranyagarbha,  
Born as the only lord of all existence.  
This earth he settled firm and heaven established:  
What god shall we adore with our oblations?  
Who gives us breath, who gives us strength, whose bidding  
All creatures must obey, the bright gods even;  
Whose shade is death, whose shadow life immortal:  
What god shall we adore with our oblations?  
Who by his might alone became the monarch  
Of all that breathes, of all that wakes or slumbers,  
Of all, both man and beast, the lord eternal:  
What god shall we adore with our oblations?  
Whose might and majesty these snowy mountains,  
The ocean and the distant stream exhibit;  
Whose arms extended are these spreading regions:  
What god shall we adore with our oblations?  
Who made the heavens bright, the earth enduring,  
Who fixed the firmament, the heaven of heavens;  
Who measured out the air's extended spaces:  
What god shall we adore with our oblations?" <span
id="fr_2"></span>[1](#fn_2.md)

<span id="page_34">p. 34</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Or one may point
to such hymns as the following:

"Who is our father, our creator, maker,  
Who every place doth know and every creature,  
By whom alone to gods their names were given,  
To him all other creatures go to ask him." <span
id="fr_3"></span>[2](#fn_3.md)

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> But such hymns are
not numerous and probably belong to the last epoch of the composition of
the Vedic hymns. Most of the Vedic hymns exhibit a conspicuous tendency
toward the polytheistic personification of nature. From most of them the
monotheistic tendency is well-nigh absent. <span class="margnote"><span
id="2-1">1</span></span>

So, also, the literature of the sacrificial manuals, the Brahmanas,
emphasizes the doctrine of the sacrifice. The adoration hymns of the
different gods have lost their independent value and are esteemed only
on account of the fact that these verses, sometimes mutilated and torn
out of their context, are uttered or chanted in connection with various
sacrificial rituals. This literature also contains some passages of a
monotheistic or pantheistic character; but the emphasis is almost
entirely on the performance of the sacrifices. In the Aranyaka
literature, which contains the substitution-meditations, the value and
power of thought is realized for the first time. But it is only in the
Upanishads that one finds the earliest instances of a sincere and
earnest quest after Brahman, the highest and the greatest. <span
class="margnote"><span id="2-2">2</span></span>

The most important characteristic which distinguishes the science of
Brahman from the science of the

<span id="page_35">p. 35</span>

sacrifices consists in the fact that the former springs entirely from
inner, spiritual longings, while the latter is based almost wholly on
mundane desires. The science of sacrifice aimed at the acquirement of
merit, which could confer all the blessings of life in consequence of
due obedience to the Vedic and ritualistic injunctions and prohibitions.
The science of Brahman, however, did not seek any ordinary blessings of
life. It proceeded from the spiritual needs of our soul which could be
satisfied only by attaining the highest aim. All that is mortal, all
that is transient and evanescent, all that gives men the ordinary joys
of life, such as wealth or fame confer, are but brute pleasures and
brute satisfactions, which please only so long as men allow themselves
to be swayed by the demands of their senses. In the hurry and bustle of
our modern life, of rapid movements over land, sea and air, in this age
of prolific scientific inventions and appliances which add to our
material comforts and luxury, in this age of national jealousies and
hatreds, which in the name of patriotism and freedom often try to
enslave others or monopolize the necessities and luxuries of life for
the use of the people of a particular country, it is easy to forget that
we have any needs other than the purely material ones. With all the
boasted culture of our modern age, with all our advancement of science
and progress, do we ever stop to think just what we mean by progress? We
have no doubt discovered many new facts of nature, and brought many
natural forces under our control. But like vultures soaring high in the
air, with greedy eyes fixed on the bones

<span id="page_36">p. 36</span>

and flesh of the carrion in the field below, are we not, in all our
scientific soarings, often turning our greedy eyes to sense
gratifications and trying to bind science to the attainment of new
comforts and luxuries? The new comforts and luxuries soon become
absolute necessities, and we eagerly press forward to the invention of
some other new modes of sense gratification and luxury. Science debased
to the end of spreading death and of enslaving humanity, or to the end
of procuring newer and newer sensations, a life spent in the whirlpool
of fleeting pleasures, varied, subtle, and new, and in the worship of
the almighty dollar is what most of us tend to call progress. We live
more for the body than for the soul. Our body is our soul; our body is
our highest Brahman. The story is told in the Chandogya Upanishads that
Virochana and Indra went to Prajapati to receive instructions regarding
the nature of the self, or of Brahman the highest. Prajapati gave a
course of false instructions, apparently to test the powers of
discrimination of his two pupils Virochana and Indra. He asked them to
get themselves well-dressed and appear at their best, and then to look
into a mirror. When they did so and saw the image of their own bodies in
the mirror, Prajapati told them that it was their well-dressed bodies
reflected in the mirror that was the true self and the highest Brahman;
and they went away satisfied with the answer. Indra, indeed, later
returned to Prajapati dissatisfied with the answer; but Virochana
(probably an old ancestor of ours) was satisfied with the answer that
there is nothing

<span id="page_37">p. 37</span>

higher than what appears to our senses, our earthly body, and our
earthly joys. <span class="margnote"><span id="2-3">3</span></span>

But what a different answer do we get from Maitreyi, the wife of
Yajnavalkya in the Brihadaranyaka Upanishad II. 4. Yajnavalkya, wishing
to become a hermit, explained to his two wives Maitreyi and Katyayani
that he wished to divide his wealth between them so that they might live
independently while he was away seeking his higher spiritual destiny.
But Maitreyi replied: "Well, sir, if you could give me all the wealth of
the world, could I become immortal by that?" "No," said Yajnavalkya,
"you will only live in pleasure as the rich men do, but I can promise
you no hope of immortality through wealth." Maitreyi replied, "Well,
sir, what shall I do with that with which I cannot be immortal? Tell me
if you know anything by which I may be immortal." <span
class="margnote"><span id="2-4">4</span></span>

It is this spiritual craving for immortality that distinguishes the
mental outlook of the sages of the Upanishads from our own. Yet this
desire for immortality is no mere desire for personal survival
continuing the enjoyment of pleasures under newer and happier conditions
of life, whether in this world or in heaven. This quest for immortality,
as it is found in the Upanishads, is in no sense a yearning for personal
immortality, the decayless, diseaseless, deathless existence of the
individual with his body in full vigor of youth. Neither is it the
desire for a bodiless existence of a self fond of sensual joys and sense
gratifications and fettered by all the needs and necessities of mundane
relations and mundane gratifications. This quest

<span id="page_38">p. 38</span>

for immortality is identical with the quest of the highest self, the
highest truth and reality, the highest Brahman. It is the perception and
realization of the inner spring of our life and the inmost spirituality
of man as he is within himself, beyond the range of sense and of
discursive thought. If it were a sense-feeling--color, taste, touch, or
sound--it might easily be pointed out as this or that sense-datum. It is
an ineffable, non-conceptual, inner experience, lying in its own
unfathomable depth. When a lump of salt is thrown into the sea, it is
entirely dissolved in it; by no means can any part of the lump be
recovered in its original form, but every part of the water tastes
saline. Similarly, when this stage of supra-consciousness (*prajnana*)
is reached, all ordinary experiences are submerged and dissolved in
this. great, infinite, limitless, homogeneous experience. Like the calm
and changeless consciousness of deep, dreamless sleep, is this stage
where all duality has vanished: there is no person who knows, nor
anything that he is aware of. Ordinary knowledge presupposes a
difference between ourselves, our knowledge, and that of which we are
aware. When I see a color, there is the "I" which sees, there is the
knowledge of the color and also the color itself. When I smell, there is
the "I" that smells and the smell; when I think, there is the "I" that
thinks and that which is thought; when I speak there is the "I" that
speaks and that which is spoken. No one would for a moment think of
identifying these. But at this stage of the non-conceptual intuition of
the self--an unspeakable, ineffable experience--there is no

<span id="page_39">p. 39</span>

trace of any duality, and we have one whole of blissful experience
wherein is distinguished no one that knows and nothing that he is aware
of. All ordinary states of knowledge imply a duality of knower and that
which is known; but this is an experience where all duality has
vanished. <span class="margnote"><span id="2-5">5</span></span>

Nevertheless this experience is not something which is wholly beyond, or
wholly out of all relation with, our conscious states of dual
experience. For it is the basis, or background, as it were, of all our
ordinary knowledge involving the knower and the known. In music, the
different notes and tones cannot be grasped separately from and
independently of the music itself, and when we are busy in apprehending
separately the different notes we miss the music or the harmony which is
in itself a whole of experience that cannot be taken in parts, in the
multiplicity of the varied notes. So it is with this ineffable
experience, which in reality underlies all our ordinary experiences and
states of knowledge as the basis or ground of them all; when we are lost
in the discursive multiplicity of our ordinary experience, we miss this
underlying reality. But when once again we are in touch with it, our
so-called personality is as it were dissolved in it, and there ensues
that infinitude of blissful experience in which all distinctions are
lost. Whatever is dear to me, as e.g., father, mother, wife, money,
fame, etc., is so because I love my own self so dearly. It is because I
can find the needs of my self best realized through these that I love
these. None of these can be ends in themselves; it is only the self that
can be an end unto itself, irrespective

<span id="page_40">p. 40</span>

of any other ulterior end or motive. None of the many-sided interests,
desires, and activities of the self represent the self in its entirety
or in its essence. It is only this supra-conscious experience, which
actually underlies them all, that can be called the real self and that
for which everything else exists. Everything else is dear to me because
my self is dear to me; but this supra-conscious experience underlies the
so-called personality, or self, as its very essence, truth and final
reality. <span class="margnote"><span id="2-6">6</span></span>

It is indeed difficult for us, with the traditions and associations of
our modern world, to believe in the reality of this intuitional
experience, unless we attempt to realize it ourselves--unless, by
turning our minds entirely away from sense-objects and sense-enjoyments,
we deliberately, with faith and firmness, plunge into the depths of this
new kind of experience. It cannot be expressed in words or understood by
conceptual thought; it reveals itself only to supra-conscious
experience. The language of the sages of the Upanishads seems strange to
us; but we cannot hope to understand a thing of which we have had no
experience. Talk to a child of ten about the romantic raptures of love
felt by a pair of lovers, or of the maddening intoxication of sense
cravings; what would he understand of it? Talk to a Greenlander about
the abominable heat of an African desert; will he be able to imagine it?
When an experience is to be realized, the powers of mere logical
thinking or of abstraction or of constructive imagination are not
sufficient for the purpose. Only another realization of the same
experience

<span id="page_41">p. 41</span>

can testify to its truth. We are here concerned with an experience which
is non-conceptual, intuitive, and ultimate. But, what is more, subtle,
fine and formless as it is, it is said to be the source, basis, and
ground of everything else. According to a story told in the Chandogya
Upanishad VI, when Shvetaketu returned after a stay of twelve years at
the house of his preceptor, where he studied all the Vedas, he became
arrogant, considered himself to be a wise man, and hardly ever talked
with others. His father said to him: "Well, Shvetaketu, what have you
learned that you seem to think yourself so wise? Do you know that which
when once known everything else becomes known? When you once know what
iron is, you know all that can be made out of iron, for these are in
essence nothing but iron; we can distinguish the iron vessels from iron
only by their specific forms and names. But whatever may be their names
and forms, the true essence in them all, whether they be needles, pans
or handles, is nothing but iron. It is only that you find therein so
many forms and names. What are these names and forms worth without the
essence? It is the essence, the iron, that manifests itself in so many
forms and names; when this iron is known, all that is made of iron is
also known. It is the ineffable reality, the ultimate being which is the
essence of everything else. As rivers which flow into the sea lose all
their individuality in it and cannot be distinguished, so all divergent
things lose their individuality and distinctness when they are merged in
this highest being, the ultimate reality from which they have all

<span id="page_42">p. 42</span>

sprung forth. Fine and subtle though this experience be, yet it is in
reality the entire universe of our knowledge. A small seed of an oak
tree when split open reveals nothing that we can call worth noting, yet
it is this fine kernel of the seed that holds within it the big oak
tree." <span class="margnote"><span id="2-7">7</span></span>

The chief features of this Upanishad mysticism are the earnest and
sincere quest for this spiritual illumination, the rapturous delight and
force that characterize the utterances of the sages when they speak of
the realization of this ineffable experience, the ultimate and the
absolute truth and reality, and the immortality of all mortal things.
Yet this quest is not the quest of the God of the theists. This highest
reality is no individual person separate from us, or one whom we try to
please, or whose laws and commands we obey, or to whose will we submit
with reverence and devotion. It is, rather, a totality of partless,
simple and undifferentiated experience which is the root of all our
ordinary knowledge and experience and which is at once the ultimate
essence of our self and the highest principle of the universe, the
Brahman or the Atman. There is, indeed, another current of thought,
evident in several passages of different Upanishads, in which Brahman is
conceived and described as the theistic God. This will be dealt with
separately later on. The special characteristic of the line of thought
that has now been described is a belief in a superior principle which
enlivens our life, thoughts, actions, desires and feelings, which is the
inmost heart of the self of man, the immortal and undying reality

<span id="page_43">p. 43</span>

unaffected by disease and death, and which is also the ultimate and
absolute reality of the universe. <span class="margnote"><span
id="2-8">8</span></span>

A story is told in the Katha Upanishad according to which King
Vajashravasa made a sacrifice involving a gift of all the valuables that
he possessed. When everything of the sort had been given away, he made a
supplementary gift of his cows which were all old and useless. His son
Naciketas, finding that these gifts would be more embarassing than
useful to the recipient, disapproved of his father's action. He thought
that his father had not finished giving his "all" until he, his son, was
also given away. So he asked his father, "To whom are you going to give
me?" He was dear to his father; so his father did not like this question
and remained silent. But when the question was again and again repeated,
the father lost his temper and said, "I give you over to death." Then
Naciketas went to the place of Yama, the king of death, where he
remained fasting for three days and nights. Yama, willing to appease
him, requested him to take any boons that pleased him. Naciketas replied
that men do not know what happens to people when they have passed from
earthly life, whether they still continue to exist or whether they cease
to exist; and he requested Yama to answer this question on which there
were so many divergent opinions. Yama in answer said that this was a
very difficult question and that even the gods did not know what becomes
of man after he passes away from his earthly life; that, therefore, he
would rather give Naciketas long life, big estates, gold in abundance,
horses, elephants, and

<span id="page_44">p. 44</span>

whatever else in the way of earthly enjoyment might seem to him
desirable. But the philosophical quest was dearer to Naciketas than all
the earthly goods that the king of death could bestow upon him. Money,
he thought, can not satisfy man; money is of use only so long as a man
lives, and he can live only so long as death does not take him away.
This quest of the ultimate destiny of man, of his immortal essence, is
itself the best and the highest end that our hearts may pursue. So
Naciketas preferred to solve this mystery and riddle of life rather than
to obtain all the riches of the world and all the comforts that they
could purchase. <span class="margnote"><span id="2-9">9</span></span>

The king of death appreciated the wisdom of Naciketas' choice. He
explained that there are two paths, the path of the good and the path of
the pleasant, and that they are different paths, leading to two entirely
different goals. The mad hankering after riches can only justify itself
by binding us with ties of attachment to sense-pleasures which are
short-lived and transitory. It is only the spiritual longing of man
after the realization of his highest, inmost, truest, and most immortal
essence that is good in itself, though it does not appeal to greedy
people who are always hankering after money. Desire for money blinds our
eyes, and we fail to see that there is anything higher than the desire
for riches, or that there is anything intrinsically superior to our
ordinary mundane life of sense-pleasures and sense-enjoyments. The
nature of the higher sphere of life and of the higher spiritual
experiences cannot be grasped by minds which are always

<span id="page_45">p. 45</span>

revolving in the whirlpool of mad desires for riches and
sense-enjoyments. As the sage, in his serene enjoyment of spiritual
experiences, may well think sense-pleasures dull, insipid, and
valueless, so the multitude who live a worldly life of ordinary
pleasures and enjoyments, fail to perceive the existence of this
superior plane of life and the demands of the spirit for the realization
of its immortal essence. They think that nothing exists higher and
greater than this mundane life of ordinary logical thought and
sense-enjoyments. Most men live on this ordinary level of life; they
see, hear, taste, touch and smell. They think and they argue. They have
a mind which thinks, feels, and wills, and they have senses which seek
their own gratification. They employ the former in the service of the
latter and every day discover newer and subtler ways of
sense-gratification; they also employ the latter to serve the former by
furnishing sense data to guide and check the course of logical thought
and the development of science. The more men, upon comparing opinions,
find themselves agreeing that they possess nothing of a more lofty
character, the more they cease to believe in the validity and truth of
the existence of anything undying in man. They fail to notice that the
life they are living has had the effect of chilling and freezing the
clear flowing stream of spiritual experiences and of stifling the
spiritual instincts and longings of the soul. Generations of lives spent
without once turning the eyes to the spiritual light within have served
to build up traditions, beliefs, and tendencies of such an order that
faith in the existence

<span id="page_46">p. 46</span>

of the higher spirituality of man is lost. Discourse about the
spirituality of man in its highest sense appears to most men to be no
more than a myth of by-gone days or the result of the undue nervous
excitation or heated imagination of a religious intoxication. The net
result of our modern education, civilization, and culture has been the
disappearance of the belief that there is anything higher than the
gratification of man's primitive instincts under such checks as society
requires, the pursuit of the physical sciences, and the successful
employment of the art of reasoning for the satisfaction of all the
diverse interests of human beings. So Yama, the king of death, says to
Naciketas that the majority of the people do not believe that there is
anything higher than the ordinary mundane life, being content with the
common concerns and interests of life; that it is only the few who feel
this higher call and are happy to respond to it and to pursue a course
of life far above the reach of the common man. <span
class="margnote"><span id="2-10">10</span></span>

But what is this undying spiritual essence, or existence? Cannot our
powers of reasoning, as they are employed in philosophical discussion or
logical arguments, discover it? If they can, then at its best it can be
nothing loftier than thought and can not be considered as the highest
principle by which even thought itself and all conscious processes, as
well as the functioning of all sense-operations, are enlivened and
vitalized. So Yama tells Naciketas that this highest spiritual essence
in us cannot be known by discursive reason. Only persons who have
realized this truth can point this out to us as an experience which is
at once

<span id="page_47">p. 47</span>

self-illuminating and blissful and which is entirely different from all
else that is known to us. Once it is thus exhibited, those who have the
highest moral elevation and disinclination to worldly enjoyments can
grasp it by an inner intuitive contact with the reality itself
(*adhyatmayoga*). This truth is indeed the culmination of all the
teaching of the Vedas. <span class="margnote"><span
id="2-11">11</span></span>

To Naciketas' question as to what becomes of men when they leave this
earthly life, Yama's answer is that no one is ever born and no one ever
dies. Birth and death pertain only to our physical bodies, but our
essence is never born and never dies. The birth and death of the
physical body may well be explained by reference to physical causes, and
there is not much of a mystery therein. But man cannot be identified
with his body, nor can he be identified simply with the life which he
has in common with all other animals, and even with plants. Life, in a
large measure, seems to be nothing but a harmonious functioning of the
inner organs of the body; but no one would say that these movements of
the organs can be called "man." There is a superior principle which
vitalises and quickens the process of life, enlivens the activity of
thought, moves the senses to their normal and regular operations, which
is realized, or intuited, as the very essence of our inner illumination,
and which is also the highest and ultimate principle underlying all
things. <span class="margnote"><span id="2-12">12</span></span>

We are here face to face with the real mysticism of the Upanishads. This
highest essence of man, the self, the Brahman, is difficult of
perception; it is hidden, as in a deep cavern, in that deathless being
who exists

<span id="page_48">p. 48</span>

from the beginning of all time and beyond all time. It is the subtlest,
the smallest of the small and yet the greatest of the great. It exists
changeless and just the same one when everything else that it has
vitalized has ceased to exist. This, our inmost self, cannot be known by
much learning or scholarship, nor by sharp intelligence, nor by strong
memory. It can only be known, or intuited, by the person to whom it
reveals its own nature. In one place we are told that it can be intuited
only by an inner, direct, and immediate touch. In another place it is
said that it can only be perceived by those who have practised the
perceiving of fine truths by a superfine intelligence of the highest
order (Katha I. 3.12). The path to this superior intuition is like the
edge of a sharp razor, dangerous and difficult. It is beyond all
sense-knowledge; and he who intuits this secret truth of the
beginningless, endless, unchangeable and eternal overcomes all death.
For, once one realizes oneself to be identical with this highest
principle, death and the fear of it sink into insignificant, illusory
nothingness. <span class="margnote"><span id="2-13">13</span></span>

There is, however, another line of thought running through the different
Upanishads in which Brahman appears as the supreme Lord from whom
everything has proceeded and who is the source of all energy. Thus in
the Kena Upanishad we find the query: "By whose will and directed by
whom does the mind work, and directed by whom did life first begin? By
whose will does the organ of speech work, and led by whom do the eye and
the ear perform their respective functions?" Then comes the answer: "It
is from Him

<span id="page_49">p. 49</span>

that the organ of speech, the ear, the eye, the mind and life have all
derived their powers; He is the thought of thought, the mind of mind,
and the life of life. So neither mind nor eye, neither ear nor speech,
can tell us anything about Him, because neither the eye nor the ear nor
the mind can reach Him, but He alone is the agent operative through all
these organs and making the eye perceiver, the ear hearer, the mind a
thinker and the life a living force. But He, in his own nature, cannot
be grasped by any one of these." <span class="margnote"><span
id="2-14">14</span></span>

A story is told to illustrate the greatness of Brahman as the supreme
and all-powerful Lord. All the gods were at one time congratulating
themselves on their own greatness, though all the while it was Brahman
alone who was great. Brahman saw the false conceit of the gods and
appeared before them as the all-powerful Lord. The gods sent the god of
fire to him to enquire who this great Lord was. Agni, the god of fire,
approached him and this great Lord asked Agni who he was and what he
could do? Agni replied that he was the god of fire and could burn the
whole world. Brahman then put before him a straw and asked him if he
could burn it. Agni tried with all his might to burn it, but failed.
Thereupon Agni returned to the gods saying that he could not learn who
this great lord was. Vayu, the wind-god, approached Brahman and said
that he was the wind-god and could blow away the whole world. Again
Brahman placed a straw before him, asking him to blow it away if he
could. Vayu also failed and came back to the other gods. Then Indra came
forward to inquire who this great Lord

<span id="page_50">p. 50</span>

was, but Brahman had already disappeared from the scene. Thereupon a
bright glorious goddess appeared in the sky and told him that this
supreme Lord was Brahman, that He alone was great, and that all the
powers of the gods of fire, wind, etc., were derived from him. <span
class="margnote"><span id="2-15">15</span></span>

It is said in the Katha VI. 1-3 that all the worlds are maintained in
him. He is like a big tree which has its roots far below and its
branches above, forming the visible universe around us. He is the great
Life from which everything else has come into being. Nothing dare
ignore, disobey, or outstrip Him. He is like a great thunder of fear
over us all. It is by His fear that the fire and the sun give heat, that
the wind blows, and that Death runs about. He is elsewhere described
(Brrh. IV. IV. 22) as the controller, Lord and master of all. He is the
Lord of all that has been and all that will be. He is the creator of the
universe and the world belongs to Him and He to the world (Brrh. IV. IV.
13). Yet He is the inmost self of all living beings
(*sarvabhutantaratma*) and the immortal inner controller of them all
(*antaryamin*). But, though He is the controller and creator of all, yet
it is He who has become this visible universe of diverse names and
forms. Just as the wind and the fire appear in different forms, so He
also appears in all the varied forms that present themselves to us in
this world. Being one in Himself, He has become the visible many of the
universe. But yet He is absolutely untouched by faults and defects of
this mortal world. As the Sun which by its light illumines all colors
and forms for

<span id="page_51">p. 51</span>

the eye and is yet unaffected by the defects of our eyes, so the
Brahman, who by his light has brought all things into existence and
continues as their inmost essence, is yet wholly unaffected by their
defects, their mortal and transitory forms. <span class="margnote"><span
id="2-16">16</span></span>

Whether the teaching of the Upanishads is to be called pantheism or not
will depend on the definition of pantheism. Certainly there are some
passages such as those just considered which describe Brahman as having
spread Himself in diverse forms in all the objects that we see around
us. This might readily be taken as indication of some form of
materialistic pantheism. But this is merely one phase or aspect of the
matter. It seems to be contradicted by the idea of Brahman as the
creator, ruler, and controller, by whose will everything moves and the
order of events is kept in its right place undisturbed. Neither life nor
death nor any of the powers of nature can transgress his orders; He is a
thundering fear over us all, and yet He is also the bridge by which all
the diverse things of the world are connected with one another and with
man, their spiritual master. This latter conception, which is present in
many passages of the Upanishads, is apparently dualistic and implies a
personal God. The Shvetashvatara Upanishad abounds in passages of an
avowedly dualistic character. There it is said that He alone is the Lord
of all bipeds and quadrupeds, the protector and master of the universe,
and yet is hidden in all beings. The duality between the individual soul
and God is also definitely expressed in at least two of the earlier
Upanishads, Mundaka 3. 1. 1 and Shvetashvatara 4. 6,

<span id="page_52">p. 52</span>

where, with reference to Brahman and the individual, it is said that two
birds which are alike in nature and friendly to each other reside in the
same tree, but that one of them (the individual) eats sweet fruits (i.e.
of his own deeds) while the other is happy in itself without eating any
fruit whatsoever. In the same Shvetashvatara Upanishad, the sage is
described as saying: "I know this great person who resides beyond all
darkness (of sin and ignorance), as bright as the sun. He who knows Him
escapes death and there is no other way of escape. There is nothing
superior to Him, and there is nothing which is greater than Him, and
there is nothing smaller than Him. He stands alone by Himself in the
Heavens unmoved like a tree, and yet the world is filled by this
person." But this also is a passing phase. In a passage immediately
preceding that in the Mundaka Upanishad just referred to, it is said
that Brahman is right before us in the front; Brahman is behind us in
the back; Brahman is on the right and on the left. Again it is said in
the Katha Upanishad: "He who perceives diversity in this world suffers
the death of all deaths." "He is the controller and the self of all
beings; He makes the one form many, being one He satisfies the desires
of the many." <span class="margnote"><span id="2-17">17</span></span>

The most important emphasis of the Upanishads seems to be on that
ineffable experience which lies hidden in the background of all our
experiences and at the same time enlivens them all. Yet the experiencer
himself is lost, and dissolved as it were, in this superior experience,
where there is neither experiencer

<span id="page_53">p. 53</span>

nor that which is experienced. This experience, or state, cannot be
intellectually grasped; it can only be pointed out as different from all
that is known, or from all that can be described as "this" or "that."
One can only assert that "It is not this," "It is not this." It is like
the state of a deep dreamless sleep, like the feeling of intense bliss
where neither the knower nor the known can be distinctly felt but where
there is only the infinitude of blissful experience. <span
class="margnote"><span id="2-18">18</span></span>

The various commentators upon the Upanishads belonging to different
schools of thought and yet each interested to secure for himself the
support of the Upanishads, have been fighting with one another for the
last twelve hundred years or more to prove that the Upanishads are
exclusively in favor of one party as against the others. Thus some
contend that the Upanishads teach that Brahman alone exists and all the
rest that appears is false and illusory. Others hold that the Upanishads
favor the doctrine of modified duality of man in God and of God in man.
Still others maintain that the Upanishads give us exclusively a doctrine
of uncompromising duality. And so forth. Passages have often been
twisted and perverted, and many new connections and contexts have been
introduced or imposed upon the texts, to suit the fancy or the creed of
the individual commentator. I think all these interpretations are
biassed and onesided, and therefore inexact. The Upanishads reveal to us
different phases of thought and experience, not a consistent dogmatic
philosophy. The apparent inconsistency of the different phases of
thought is removed if we take a psychological

<span id="page_54">p. 54</span>

point of view and consider them as different stages of development in
the experience of minds seeking to grasp a sublime, ultimate but
inexpressible truth. This truth has a logic of its own, different from
the logic of discursive thought wherein distinctions are firm and rigid,
where concepts are like pieces of brick mortared together by the logical
movement of thought. Its logic is that of experience in which the
apparently contradictory ideas or thoughts lose their contradictoriness
and become parts of one solid whole. The different phases of experience
are lived through and enjoyed as inalienable parts of one great
experience. When attempts are made to describe any particular phase of
this experience it will naturally seem to conflict with the other phases
in the eyes of those who have not the capacity of realising the concrete
whole experience and who can only look at the phases from an external
and a purely intellectual point of view where distinctions cannot be
obliterated. When a lover embraces his beloved in his first kiss, he may
feel her as the holiest angel, as his own dear life or as the embodiment
of all his happiness, as, Shelley says, his "Spouse, Sister Angel, Pilot
of the Fate,"

"Of unentangled intermixture, made  
By love, of light and motion; one intense  
Diffusion, one serene Omnipresence."

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> But these epithets
when applied to a woman can hardly be justified, according to
intellectual standards, as properly applied, though the lover may have
felt an indescribable sweetness of love in which all these diverse

<span id="page_55">p. 55</span>

sentiments melted together to form its taste and flavor. The different
phases of experience and belief which we find in the Upanishads need not
therefore be taken out and pitted against one another. They may all be
regarded as stages of experience between which the minds of the sages
oscillated in attempting the realisation of a truth which was beyond
speech, beyond thought and beyond all sense-perception. It was sometimes
felt as the great over-lord, the controller, creator, ordainer, and
master of all, sometimes as the blissful spiritual experience, and
sometimes as the simple unity in which all duality has vanished. <span
class="margnote"><span id="2-19">19</span></span>

This truth, person, or absolute--whatever it may be called--was felt as
the highest embodiment of moral perfection. It is complete
self-illumination, bodiless, faultless, sinless and pure. It is, as it
were, covered by a cup of gold in such wise that we, looking at the
shiny cup, miss the real treasure that lies concealed beneath. Its
illumination reveals itself only when our minds have turned away from
all the external lights of the outside world; for where this light is
shining, all the other lights of the sun, the moon, and the stars have
ceased to give light. The Upanishads tell us again and again that it
cannot be perceived by any of our senses and that it cannot be
comprehended by reasoning, or by logical and discursive thought, or by
discussions, scholarship and much learning, or even by the reading of
the scriptures. Only those who have ceased from all sinful actions and
have controlled all their sense desires, who are unruffled by passions
of all kinds and are at peace

<span id="page_56">p. 56</span>

with themselves, can have the realization of this great truth by the
higher intuitive knowledge (*prajnana*, as distinguished from *jnana*,
or cognition). In Mundaka III. 1, it is said that we can attain this
self by truth, control, spiritual fervor and absolute extinction of all
sex desires. Only the sages who have purged themselves of all moral
defects and faults are capable of perceiving this holy spiritual light
within themselves. The Upanishads never tire of repeating that the
revelation of this truth is possible only through the most perfect moral
purity which results in a natural illumination of intuitive perception
when one seeks to attain this partless essence through meditation. Not
only can this truth not be perceived by the eye or described in speech;
but it cannot even be gained as a boon, or gift, by pleasing the gods or
by ascetic practices or by sacrificial performances. It can only be
attained by an intuition (*para*) which is superior in kind to the Vedic
knowledge of sacrifices, called the lower knowledge (*apara*). By
supreme moral elevation and untiring and patient search one can come in
touch with Brahman and can enter into Him, but one must abandon all his
mundane desires by which he is bound to earthly things. And when through
this high moral elevation, control of desires, meditation and the like,
one comes face to face with this highest reality, or Brahman, he is lost
in it like rivers in the sea; nothing remains of him which he can feel
as a separate individual, but he becomes one with Brahman. This is known
by the seer through his heart when his senses have ceased to move and
when his thought and

<span id="page_57">p. 57</span>

intellect have come to a dead halt. No one can describe what that
existence is; one can only say that it is "being," nothing more. Here
all the knots of the heart are untied, all doubts are dispelled, and
there is one spiritual light of unity that shines forth in its serene
oneness. <span class="margnote"><span id="2-20">20</span></span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2"></span>[33:1](hm04.htm#fr_2.md) Translation taken from
Kaegi-Arrowsmith, *The Rig Veda*, p. 88 f.

<span id="fn_3"></span>[34:2](hm04.htm#fr_3.md) R. V. X. 82.3, as
translated by Kaegi-Arrowsmith.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Lecture III. Yoga Mysticism](hm05.md)
