[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](etm066)  [Next](etm068) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0029F21C4/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Eighteen Treatises from the Mishna*, by D. A. Sola and M. J. Raphall,
\[1843\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER IX.

§ 1. Persons who, in consequence of being \[legally\] unclean, or on a
distant journey, did not observe the first passover, must observe the
second. They also who, through error or compulsory force, have been
prevented observing the first, must observe the second passover. Then
why does the text (Numb. ix. 10) particularly mention "the unclean
person, or he who is on a distant journey"? in order to teach us that in
case of neglect of the observance of the second passover by them, they
only do not incur the penalty of utter excision n 7, but others do incur
it.

§ 2. What must be considered a *distant journey?* According to R.
Akivah, it is from Moodaim \[‏מודעים‎\], <span
id="fr_341"></span>[1](#fn_341) and beyond, and from all places around
Jerusalem, situated at the same distance. R. Eleazar says, "Any distance
beyond the outside of the threshold of the court of the Temple, must be
considered as comprehended under that term." R. José says, "It was to
denote this, that it is directed that a dot must be placed over the ‏ה‎
in the word ‏רהוקה‎ \[signifying 'distant'\], to indicate that it is not
necessary that a person should actually be on a distant road, but that
he is considered as distant while he has not passed beyond the threshold
of the court of the Temple."

§ 3. What is the difference between the first and second Passover? They
differ, that in respect to the first mentioned, nothing leavened may be
seen nor found in the house; while on the second, leavened and
unleavened may be had together in the house \[whilst the sacrifice is
eaten\]. By the eating of the first mentioned, it is necessary

<span id="page_120">p. 120</span>

to say the "Hallel," but not by the last mentioned; but it is necessary
to say the "Hallel" during the time either is sacrificed: both must be
roasted, and eaten with unleavened-cakes and bitter herbs; and \[the
sacrifice of\] both supersedes the Sabbath.

§ 4. When a paschal sacrifice was brought under circumstances of legal
impurity, it might not be eaten by men having a running issue, or by
women suffering under an excessive flow of menses, by those in their
ordinary menstrual period, and by lying-in women; but if they have eaten
thereof, they do not thereby incur the penalty of utter excision, ‏כרת‎.
R. Eleazar considers these as also not subject to that punishment, if
they have entered the sanctuary in that state.

§ 5. What is the difference between the Passover as celebrated in Egypt,
and that observed by later generations? The Egyptian Passover was
specially ordered to be purchased on the 10th of Nissan, and it was
required that its blood should be sprinkled with a bunch of hyssop on
the lintel, and on the two side-posts of the door, and also that it
should be eaten with unleavened-bread on the first night of the Passover
in a hasty manner; whilst it is required to abstain during the Passover
of later generations, from all leaven during the whole seven days of its
duration.

§ 6. R. Joshua says, "I heard once \[of my teachers\] that the animal
which was substituted for another, intended as a paschal sacrifice,
might be offered; and I have also heard, that it might not be offered:
and I am unable to explain this." R. Akivah says, "I will explain it: if
a paschal offering had been lost, and is again found, before the animal
intended to replace it had been slaughtered, it must be left to pasture
until it contracts a legal blemish, when it is to be sold, and
peace-offerings purchased with its proceeds; and it is even so with the
animal substituted for it, and if it was found after the other animal
had been already killed, it may be sacrificed as a peace-offering, as
also any animal substituted for it."

§ 7. If a person has set apart, or selected as a paschal-offering, a
she-goat or a ewe-lamb, or a male of two years old, they must be left to
pasture until they contract a \[legal\] blemish; they must then be sold,
and the proceeds paid to the fund of voluntary burnt-offerings. <span
id="fr_342"></span>[2](#fn_342) If a person who has selected his
paschal-offering die \[in the

<span id="page_121">p. 121</span>

*interim*, before it is sacrificed\], his son cannot bring it as a
paschal offering, but must bring it as a peace-offering. <span
id="fr_343"></span>[3](#fn_343)

§ 8. When a paschal sacrifice has become mixed with other \[animals
intended\] as sacrifices, they must all be left to pasture till they
contract a \[legal\] blemish; they are then to be sold, and \[the
owner\] must bring for the price obtained for the finest animal among
them, another sacrifice of each kind of offering \[with which it was
mixed\], and the loss is to be defrayed from the private means of the
owner. A paschal-offering which had become mixed with first-born \[of
animals\], may, according to R. Simeon, be eaten by a company of
priests.

§ 9. When a company have lost their paschal sacrifice, and say to some
one, "Go, seek, and slaughter it for us," and he went, found, and
slaughtered it, whilst the company had also slaughtered one; if his had
been slaughtered first, he shall eat of it, and the others shall join
with him in eating; but if theirs had been first slaughtered, they shall
eat of theirs and he of his; if it is uncertain which had been
slaughtered first, or that both had been slaughtered at one time, then
shall he eat of his paschal-offering, of which the others are not
permitted to partake, and their’s must be burned; but they are not bound
to observe a second Passover. If he had told them, "If I should stop out
long, go ye and slaughter a paschal-sacrifice for me," and he went,
found, and slaughtered \[the lost paschal-sacrifice\], whilst the others
had also slaughtered one: if theirs had been first slaughtered, they
shall eat it, and he may eat it with them; but if his had been first
slaughtered, he shall eat of his, and they of theirs; if it be uncertain
which sacrifice had been slaughtered first, or that both had been
slaughtered at one time, then shall they eat theirs, but he is not
permitted to eat thereof with them; and his sacrifice must be burned,
but he is not bound to observe a second Passover. If he said to them,
\["Slaughter a paschal offering for me should I stay away,"\] and they
had said to him \["Seek and slaughter for us our lost paschal
sacrifice,"\] they shall all eat of that which had been slaughtered
first; <span id="fr_344"></span>[4](#fn_344) if it is uncertain which
had been first slaughtered,

<span id="page_122">p. 122</span>

then both must be burned; but if there was no expressed agreement
between all the parties, they are not to be considered as at all
connected with each other, \[and each must eat his sacrifice
separately\].

§ 10. When the paschal sacrifices of two companies have become mixed,
each company shall take one \[of the animals\], and a member of each
company shall go to the other, whilst a member of that company goes to
the first mentioned, and each company shall thus address the member of
the other: "If this paschal offering be ours, we withdraw from your
company, and be thou numbered with us; but should it be yours, then we
withdraw from ours, and will be numbered with you;" <span
id="fr_345"></span>[5](#fn_345) and thus five companies, of five members
each, and ten, of ten, \[shall act\], namely, that one of each company
shall conjoin with him one of another company, and shall thus address
him. <span id="fr_346"></span>[6](#fn_346)

§ 11. When a paschal offering of two individuals has become mixed, each
shall take one of the animals to himself, and invite a person from the
street \[a stranger\] to eat it with him; these individuals shall then
go to each other, and thus address each other's guest: "If this
sacrifice is mine, withdraw from this, and be numbered with me, but if
it is yours, then I do withdraw from mine, and will be numbered with
you." <span id="fr_347"></span>[7](#fn_347)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_341"></span>[119:1](etm067.htm#fr_341) This is the place
mentioned so often in Josephus, and in the history of the Maccabees,
under the name of Modain. Its distance from Jerusalem was stated to have
been fifteen miles, ‏מילין‎; which it is calculated may be walked over
by a person of ordinary powers, in the space between the rising of the
sun, and commencement of the evening \[the period during which the
paschal sacrifice might be slaughtered\], in the months of Nissan and
Tishri, or during the period of the vernal and autumnal equinoxes, when
the days and nights are of equal length.

<span id="fn_342"></span>[120:2](etm067.htm#fr_342) There was a chest in
the Temple for the reception of voluntary gifts for that purpose.

<span id="fn_343"></span>[121:3](etm067.htm#fr_343) This does, of
course, only apply in case that son had not been included among those
appointed and numbered to eat it.

<span id="fn_344"></span>[121:4](etm067.htm#fr_344) The difference
between this and the preceding proposition of our Mishna consists, that
in the preceding part he said, "Slaughter it for me if I stop away," the
others did not say, "We will do so," but here is an *expressed* mutual
agreement to do certain acts by *both* parties.

<span id="fn_345"></span>[122:5](etm067.htm#fr_345) And their paschal
sacrifice shall be eaten by the other company.

<span id="fn_346"></span>[122:6](etm067.htm#fr_346) As above stated.

<span id="fn_347"></span>[122:7](etm067.htm#fr_347) The necessity for
these forms is two-fold: First, because it is a maxim, that one
individual cannot be numbered in two companies, and eat of the paschal
sacrifice of both; and, secondly, because every paschal offering must
have owners to eat, and can only be eaten by the owners, and by those
appointed and numbered to eat it with them.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter X](etm068)
