[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](etm087)  [Next](etm089) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0029F21C4/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Eighteen Treatises from the Mishna*, by D. A. Sola and M. J. Raphall,
\[1843\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_164">p. 164</span>

### CHAPTER IV.

§ 1. When the feast of new year happened on the Sabbath, they used to
sound in the sanctuary, but not out of it. After the destruction of the
temple, Rabban Jochanan, son of Zaccai, ordained that they should sound
in every place in which there is a tribunal of justice \[‏בית דין‎\]. R.
Eleazar says, "He only issued this ordinance in respect to Jamnia," but
they \[the other sages\] said unto him, "It was the same for Jamnia as
for any other place in which there is a permanent tribunal of justice."

§ 2. And in this respect also, was Jerusalem privileged above
Jamnia, <span id="fr_501"></span>[1](#fn_499) viz. that every city from
whence Jerusalem could be seen and the sounding heard, which was near
enough, and to which it was allowed to go on the Sabbath, might sound;
but in Jamnia it was only permitted to sound before the tribunal of
justice.

§ 3. Formerly the loolab \[palm-branch, &c\] was taken seven days in the
sanctuary, and only one day out of it. After the destruction of the
temple, Rabban Jochanan, son of Zaccai ordained, "that the loolab should
everywhere be taken for seven days, in commemoration of the sanctuary,"
also, "that the whole day of the waving \[of the 'Omer' <span
id="fr_502"></span>[2](#fn_500)\] it should be prohibited \[to eat of
the new corn\]."

§ 4. Formerly evidence as to the appearance of the new moon was received
the whole \[of the thirtieth\] day; but as it once happened that the
witnesses delayed coming, which interrupted the Song of the
Levites <span id="fr_503"></span>[3](#fn_501) \[at the evening
sacrifice\], it was ordained that witnesses should be admitted till the
time of Minchah only, and if any came after that time, that and the
following day were kept as holy. After the destruction of the temple,
Rabbon Jochanan, son of Zaccai ordained, "that evidence as to the
appearance of the moon should be

<span id="page_165">p. 165</span>

received all day." R. Joshua, son of Korcha says, "This too did Rabban
Jochanan, son of Zaccai ordain, viz. that wherever the chief of the
tribunal might be, the witnesses need only go to the place of meeting
\[of the Sanhedrin <span id="fr_504"></span>[4](#fn_502)\]."

§ 5. The order of the blessings to be said on the feast of new year is
as follows: the blessings ‏אבות וגבורות וקדשת השם‎, <span
id="fr_505"></span>[5](#fn_503) are said, with which are connected the
‏מלכיות‎ \[or series of texts relative to the supreme rule of the
Almighty\] without sounding the shophar; then, concerning the holiness
of the day, <span id="fr_506"></span>[6](#fn_504) after which the
shophar is sounded; then follow the ‏זכרונות‎ \[or texts relative to the
kind remembrance of the Almighty to his creatures\], after which the
shophar is again sounded. Next follow the ‏שופרות‎ \[or texts in which
the sounding of the shophar is mentioned\], and the shophar is sounded
\[the third time\], he then says, ‏עבודה‎, ‏הודאה‎ and ‏ברכת
כהנים‎. <span id="fr_507"></span>[7](#fn_505) Such is the opinion of R.
Jochanan ben Nourrie: but R. Akivah objected, saying to him, "If the
shophar is not to be sounded after the reading of the ‏מלכיות‎, why are
they to be mentioned?" But the proper order is the following:—‏אבות
וגבורות וקדשת השם‎ are said, with which the ‏מלכיות‎ are to be combined;
after which, the shophar is to be sounded, then the ‏זכרונות‎ are to be
read, and the shophar sounded; next ‏שופרות‎, and the shophar is again
sounded; after which ‏עבודה‎, ‏הודאה‎ and ‏ברכת בהנים‎ <span
id="fr_508"></span>[7](#fn_505) are said.

§ 6. Not less than ten texts of the Holy Scripture relative to ‏מלכיות‎
must be said, ten relating to ‏זכרונות‎, and ten to ‏שופרות‎. R.
Jochanan ben Nourrie says, "The obligation \[of reading these texts\]
will be duly fulfilled if three only of each \[class\] have been said,
but no texts relating to either \[class\] containing predictions of
punishment are to be used. The texts from the law are to be read first,
and the concluding texts are to be from the prophets." But R. Jose says,
"It is sufficient if the concluding verse be one from the law."

§ 7. The second of those who, on the feast of the new year, officiate at
the reading desk \[‏תיבה‎\] as ministers of the congregation, <span
id="fr_509"></span>[8](#fn_506) shall

<span id="page_166">p. 166</span>

cause another person to sound the shophar, and on days when the Hallel
is read, the first minister <span id="fr_510"></span>[9](#fn_507) must
read the Hallel.

§ 8. It is not permitted for the purpose of sounding the shophar on the
feast of new year, to go beyond the ‏תחום‎ \[Sabbatical limits\] to
remove a heap of stones, <span id="fr_511"></span>[10](#fn_508) mount a
tree, ride on any animal, or swim over the waters \[to get a shophar\],
nor may he cut it \[thereon\] with any thing that may not be used on
account of transgression against the Sabbatical rest \[‏שבות‎\], nor on
account of a direct negative commandment of the law; but a person may,
if he choose, pour water or wine into the shophar. <span
id="fr_512"></span>[11](#fn_509) Children may not be prevented to sound,
but, on the contrary, it is lawful to be occupied in teaching them to
sound; but he who thus teaches, as also other persons who listen to
these sounds, cannot thereby become released from their obligation.

§ 9. The order of sounding the shophar is:—three sounds are blown
thrice, <span id="fr_513"></span>[12](#fn_510) the time of duration of
the sound of six tekeah's, is equal to that of three terooah's, and that
of each tekeah as three sighs or moans. If a person has sounded the
first tekeah, and prolonged the sound of the second, so as to be equal
to two, it will only reckon as one sound. If a person, after having said
all the blessings, <span id="fr_514"></span>[13](#fn_511) has at that
moment only obtained a shophar, he shall sound three times tekeah,
terooah, and tekeah; even as the minister of the congregation is bound
\[to say the amidah for himself <span
id="fr_515"></span>[14](#fn_512)\], so is every individual bound to do
so. But Rabbon Gamaliel says, "The minister of the congregation releases
the public from their obligation."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_499"></span>[164:1](etm088.htm#fr_501) Here is evidently a
hiatus in the text of the Mishna, which the commentators have thus
supplied from the context; "They used to sound in the whole city of
Jerusalem till the sixth hour \[i.e. as long as the Sanhedrin sat in the
temple to teach\], but in Jamnia, before the tribunal only, and not in
the town. And in this respect also," &c.

<span id="fn_500"></span>[164:2](etm088.htm#fr_502) See Leviticus xxii.
11–15.

<span id="fn_501"></span>[164:3](etm088.htm#fr_503) For being doubtful
whether the witnesses might yet come, and the day be sanctified as Rosh
Hodesh, when the festive song of the feast of new moon was to be sung,
or that which was used on weekdays, in case of the non-appearance of the
witnesses; and, therefore, it appears that they did not sing at all on
that occasion.

<span id="fn_502"></span>[165:4](etm088.htm#fr_504) Who might pronounce
the word "Mekoodash," although the chief Beth Din was absent.

<span id="fn_503"></span>[165:5](etm088.htm#fr_505) The three first
blessings of the Amidah and Moosaph Abboth is from the beginning till
‏מגן אברהם‎, Guebooroth commences ‏אתה גבור‎, and Kedushat Ashem is from
thence till ‏האל הקדוש‎.

<span id="fn_504"></span>[165:6](etm088.htm#fr_506) Namely, that
commencing ‏אתה בחרתנו‎.

<span id="fn_505"></span>[165:7](etm088.htm#fr_508) The three last
blessings of the Amidah or Moosaph ‏רצה‎, ‏מודים‎ and ‏שים שלום‎.

<span id="fn_506"></span>[165:8](etm088.htm#fr_509) The minister who
reads the ‏מוסף‎ is thus called, in reference to the one who read
‏שחרית‎, and had thus preceded him. It was the custom in the time of the
<span id="page_166">p. 166</span> Mishna, that two ministers were
employed each Sabbath, or festival, one to read ‏שחרית‎ and the other
‏מוסף‎; the latter is not allowed here to sound the shophar, that it may
not interrupt the reading, even as a minister who is a Cohen, is not
allowed \[for the same reason\] to go to the ‏דוכן‎ to say the blessing
of the priests when officiating as minister. Compare Treatise Berachoth,
chap. V. § 4.

<span id="fn_507"></span>[166:9](etm088.htm#fr_510) That is, he who has
read ‏שחרית‎, the first prayers.

<span id="fn_508"></span>[166:10](etm088.htm#fr_511) Under which a
shophar is buried.

<span id="fn_509"></span>[166:11](etm088.htm#fr_512) in order to clear
or improve its tone.

<span id="fn_510"></span>[166:12](etm088.htm#fr_513) Namely, Tekeah,
Terooah, and Tekeah.

<span id="fn_511"></span>[166:13](etm088.htm#fr_514) Of the Moosaph.

<span id="fn_512"></span>[166:14](etm088.htm#fr_515) And is not released
from his obligation by this ‏חזרה‎, or repetition, which he reads to the
congregation.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Introduction](etm089)
