[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](etm027)  [Next](etm029) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0029F21C4/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Eighteen Treatises from the Mishna*, by D. A. Sola and M. J. Raphall,
\[1843\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER VI.

§ 1. Wherewith \[on her person\] may a woman go out? and wherewith may
she not go out? <span id="fr_103"></span>[1](#fn_103) A woman must not
go out with linen or woollen laces; nor with the straps on her head,
because

<span id="page_45">p. 45</span>

she cannot bathe with them on, but must first unfasten them: nor with a
frontlet and pendants thereto, <span id="fr_104"></span>[2](#fn_104)
unless sewn to her cap; nor with the lining of the frontlet, into the
public reshuth; <span id="fr_105"></span>[3](#fn_105) nor with a golden
\[ornament in the shape of a\] town; nor with a tight gold chain; nor
with nose-rings; nor with finger-rings, on which there is no seal; nor
with a needle without an eye: but if she has gone out with either of
these, she is not guilty \[to bring\] a sin-offering.

§ 2. A man is not to go out with iron-bound sandals, <span
id="fr_106"></span>[4](#fn_106) nor with one \[iron-bound shoe\], unless
he has a sore in \[the other\] foot; nor yet with Tephilin; <span
id="fr_107"></span>[5](#fn_107) nor yet with an amulet, unless it be by
a distinguished sage; nor with cuirass, helmet, or armour for the legs:
but if he has gone out \[with either of these\] he is not guilty \[to
bring\] a sin-offering.

§ 3. A woman must not go out with a needle that has an eye; nor with a
finger-ring that has a seal on it; nor with a ‏כוליאר‎; <span
id="fr_108"></span>[6](#fn_108) nor with a smelling-bottle, or
balm-flask: if she has gone out \[with either of these\] on her person,
she is guilty, \[and bound to bring\] a sin-offering. Such is the dictum
of R. Meir; but the sages absolve her \[therefrom, as far as regards
going out\] with a smelling-bottle or balm-flask.

§ 4. Man must not go out with a sword, nor with a bow, nor with a
triangular shield, nor with a round one, nor with a spear; if he has
gone out \[with either of these\] he is guilty, \[and bound to bring\] a
sin-offering. R. Eleazar saith, "They are ornaments \[becoming\] to
him:" but the sages hold, "they are nothing else but a stigma
\[unbecoming\], for it is said, 'They shall beat their swords into
ploughshares, and their spears unto pruning-books, nation shall not lift
up sword against nation, neither shall they learn war any more.'" <span
id="fr_109"></span>[7](#fn_109)

<span id="page_46">p. 46</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Knee-buckles are
clean, and a man may go out with them on the Sabbath;
stride-chains <span id="fr_110"></span>[8](#fn_110) are liable to become
unclean, and a man must not go out with them on the Sabbath.

§ 5. A woman may go out with plaits of hair, whether of her own hair or
of another woman, or of an animal; with frontlet and pendants, if they
are sewn fast to the cap; with the lining of a frontlet, and with
false-ringlets \[curls\], into the courtyard; with soft wool in her
ears, or soft wool in her shoe, or soft wool she has prepared for her
menstruation; with a \[grain of\] pepper or \[of\] salt, or with
whatever else she \[is accustomed to\] put into her mouth, provided she
does not put it \[into her mouth\] especially on the Sabbath; and if she
drop it \[out of her mouth on the ground\] she must not put it back
\[into her mouth\] again; a false tooth, or a gilt tooth, Rabbi permits
\[the going out with\]; but the sages prohibit \[it\].

§ 6. Women may go out with a coin fastened on a swelling in their feet;
little girls may go out with laces on, and even with wires in their
ears; Arabian women may go out in their large veils, and Median women in
their mantillas: so \[indeed\] may any one; but the sages adduce their
instances from existing \[and known objects\].

§ 7. A woman may fold up a stone, or a nut, or a coin, in her mantilla,
provided she does it not especially on the Sabbath-day.

§ 8. The cripple may go out with his wooden leg: such is the dictum of
R. Meir; but R. José prohibits it. If the wooden leg has a hollow
receptacle for rags, it is \[liable to become\] unclean; leather
crutches \[of a cripple who is lame of both ankles\], are \[liable to
become\] unclean from pressure; but he may go out with them on the
Sabbath, and \[also\] enter into the outer court \[of the temple\] with
them. The chair and crutches \[of one who is paralytic\] are \[liable to
become\] unclean from pressure, he must not go out with them on the
Sabbath, and he must not enter the outer court \[of the Temple\] with
them: ‏אנקטמין‎ <span id="fr_111"></span>[9](#fn_111) are clean, but he
must not go out with them.

§ 9. Boys may go out with their bands, and princes with golden bells: so
\[indeed\] may every one, but the sages adduce their instances from
things existing \[and known\].

§ 10. It is permitted to go out with the egg of a grasshopper, or

<span id="page_47">p. 47</span>

the tooth of a fox, or the nail of one who has been hanged, as medical
remedies: such is the dictum of R. Meir; but the sages hold \[according
to another version; such is the dictum of R. José, but R. Meir holds\],
"That even on the week-day this is prohibited, because of \[its
imitating\] the ways of the Amorites." <span
id="fr_112"></span>[10](#fn_112)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_103"></span>[44:1](etm028.htm#fr_103) The question is, to
decide what constitutes ornaments, and, as such, part of her attire, and
what is burden.

<span id="fn_104"></span>[45:2](etm028.htm#fr_104) In the East, women
wear a thin gold plate on their foreheads, with pendants fastened
thereto.

<span id="fn_105"></span>[45:3](etm028.htm#fr_105) According to some,
this restriction applies to the lining only; according to others, to all
the articles.

<span id="fn_106"></span>[45:4](etm028.htm#fr_106) This prohibition was
occasioned by a melancholy accident during the persecution by Hadrian,
when some Jews assembled in the synagogue on the Sabbath in defiance of
the imperial edict, were disturbed by a sudden noise, and fearing the
Romans were upon them, preferred falling by their own hands, and used
their iron-bound sandals as the instruments of death.

<span id="fn_107"></span>[45:5](etm028.htm#fr_107) Even according to the
opinion of those who maintain that tephilin must be used on the Sabbath.

<span id="fn_108"></span>[45:6](etm028.htm#fr_108) A diadem, or
serpentine kind of head-dress, not generally worn by women, and
therefore considered a burden.

<span id="fn_109"></span>[45:7](etm028.htm#fr_109) Isa. ii. 4; Mic. iv.
3.

<span id="fn_110"></span>[46:8](etm028.htm#fr_110) Small chains used to
contract the length of the stride or step. They were the invention of a
particular family at Jerusalem, who suffered ill-health, and other
inconveniencies from the length and rapidity of their steps.

<span id="fn_111"></span>[46:9](etm028.htm#fr_111) Wooden shoes or
stilts, used to supply the loss of a limb.

<span id="fn_112"></span>[47:10](etm028.htm#fr_112) And, as such, being
a reprehensible superstition, prohibited; *vide* Lev. xviii. 3.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VII](etm029)
