[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](etm065)  [Next](etm067) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0029F21C4/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Eighteen Treatises from the Mishna*, by D. A. Sola and M. J. Raphall,
\[1843\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER VIII.

§ 1. When a paschal sacrifice had been slaughtered for a woman living in
her husband's house, by her husband, and another by her father \[also
reckoning on her\], <span id="fr_333"></span>[1](#fn_333) she must eat
of that of her husband. If she went to pass the first festival after her
marriage at her father's house, and her father and husband have each
slaughtered a paschal sacrifice for her, she may eat it at either place
she prefers. When several guardians of an orphan have slaughtered
paschal sacrifices for him, the orphan may go and eat it at the house he
prefers. A slave belonging to two masters may not eat of the sacrifice
of both masters.

<span id="page_117">p. 117</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> One who is partly
a slave and partly free, may not eat of the paschal sacrifice of his
master.

§ 2. If a person order his slave to go and slaughter for him the paschal
sacrifice, and the slave go and slaughter a kid or a lamb, he may eat
it; if the slaughter a kid and a lamb, he may only eat that which has
been slaughtered first. How is he to act when he has forgotten the
\[exact words\] of the order of his master? He must kill a lamb and a
kid, and say \[at the time of the killing and sprinkling of the blood\],
if my master said \[I should take\] "a kid," then be the kid for him,
and the lamb for me; but if he said "a lamb," then be the kid for me,
and the lamb for him. If the master also had forgotten the precise terms
of the order he gave, both animals must be burned, and neither master
nor slave is bound to bring a second paschal sacrifice.

§ 3. If a person say to his sons, "I slaughter the paschal sacrifice for
whichever of you shall arrive first in Jerusalem," then the first of
them whose head and greatest part of his body has \[first\] entered
\[the city gate\] has thereby acquired a right to his own share, and
acquires the same for his brethren, who were also invited. As many
people may partake of a paschal sacrifice as can obtain therefrom the
quantity of meat of the size of an olive. Those that were numbered to
eat it may withdraw \[from the company\] before the paschal sacrifice is
slaughtered. R. Simeon says, "\[They may do so\], until the blood
thereof is sprinkled."

§ 4. When a person has appointed others to partake with him of his share
of the paschal sacrifice, his company are at liberty to give him his
share to eat it separately with his own guests; and they may eat their
own share \[apart from him and his guests\].

§ 5. A person subject to a running issue, who has twice in the same day
experienced that issue, <span id="fr_334"></span>[2](#fn_334) and whose
seventh day happened on the 14th of Nissan, may have the paschal
sacrifice slaughtered for him thereon; but if he has experienced it
thrice \[in the same day\], it may be slaughtered for him only in case
his eighth day should happen \[on the 14th of Nissan\]. For a woman who
has menstruated a day beyond her regular period, it may be slaughtered
on her second day, <span id="fr_335"></span>[3](#fn_335) and when she
has done so for two consecutive days, after her regular

<span id="page_118">p. 118</span>

period, it may be slaughtered for her on her third day; but for a woman
subject to a flow of menses \[three days beyond her regular period\], it
may be slaughtered on her eighth day only.

§ 6. For an ‏אונן‎ \[a mourner who has lost on the 14th of Nissan a
relative for whom he is obliged to mourn\]; for a person employed in
digging out of a heap of fallen ruins \[persons therein
overwhelmed <span id="fr_336"></span>[4](#fn_336)\]; for a prisoner who
had a promise of being released; <span id="fr_337"></span>[5](#fn_337)
and for aged and sick persons it is lawful to slaughter a paschal
sacrifice, while they can eat thereof the minimum quantity of meat the
size of an olive. But it may not be slaughtered for either on their own
account alone, because they may cause the paschal offering to become
desecrated and useless; <span id="fr_338"></span>[6](#fn_338) therefore,
when either of these becomes disqualified to eat it, he needs not bring
a second Passover sacrifice: except the person who has dug out \[a dead
body\] from under the ruins, since such a one is unclean from the very
outset.

§ 7. A paschal sacrifice may not be slaughtered for a single individual
only, according to the opinion of R. Jehudah: but R. José allows it. It
may not be slaughtered even for a party of a hundred individuals, if
each of them cannot eat thereof the minimum quantity of the size of an
olive. Neither may a company to eat it be formed of women, with slaves
and minors.

§ 8. An ‏אונן‎ may eat of the paschal sacrifice at even, after he has
bathed himself, but not of other holy \[sacrifices\]; but one who has
only received the information of the decease of a near relative, or one
who has the bones of a deceased person gathered for him, may eat of
other holy sacrifices, after he has bathed himself. <span
id="fr_339"></span>[7](#fn_339) A heathen proselyte, who was circumcised
on the day before the Passover festival, may, according to Beth Shammai,
"bathe himself, and eat in the evening of the paschal sacrifice." But
Beth Hillel say, "One

<span id="page_119">p. 119</span>

who has just parted from the uncircumcised must be considered like one
who has just parted from the grave." <span
id="fr_340"></span>[8](#fn_340)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_333"></span>[116:1](etm066.htm#fr_333) To form one of the
persons "appointed and numbered" to eat it.

<span id="fn_334"></span>[117:2](etm066.htm#fr_334) Such a person is
unclean for seven days, without being bound to bring a sacrifice; but if
he had experienced it three times in the same day, he is not considered
clean before he has sacrificed.

<span id="fn_335"></span>[117:3](etm066.htm#fr_335) This can only be
properly understood on reference to Treatise Niddah.

<span id="fn_336"></span>[118:4](etm066.htm#fr_336) When it is unknown
whether they are alive or not, in the latter case the person who digs
them out contracts pollution.

<span id="fn_337"></span>[118:5](etm066.htm#fr_337) In time to eat of
the paschal sacrifice.

<span id="fn_338"></span>[118:6](etm066.htm#fr_338) The mourner, through
grief which may prevent his eating any thing. The person who digs to
deliver the overwhelmed from the fallen ruins, in case any dead body is
found. The prisoner, lest he be detained in the \[heathen\] prison; and
the aged and sick, lest a sudden increase of illness or weakness might
happen to them, so as to prevent their eating the paschal sacrifice.

<span id="fn_339"></span>[118:7](etm066.htm#fr_339) Since the
prohibitions in these cases are only of Rabbinical origin, they do not
prevent the eating of the paschal sacrifice—a direct command of the Holy
Law, the neglect of which is punished with excision \[‏כרת‎\].

<span id="fn_340"></span>[119:8](etm066.htm#fr_340) And, therefore, this
proselyte may not eat of the paschal lamb on that evening, because one
who has just left a grave or dead body, becomes unclean for seven days,
and requires the prescribed sprinklings on the third and seventh day of
his purification, as mentioned in Leviticus.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IX](etm067)
