[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](etm060)  [Next](etm062) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0029F21C4/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Eighteen Treatises from the Mishna*, by D. A. Sola and M. J. Raphall,
\[1843\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER III.

§ 1. The law concerning tire due observance of the Passover, will be
transgressed by using the following articles: namely, Babylonian
‏כותח‎, <span id="fr_264"></span>[1](#fn_264) Median beer \[made of
wheat or barley\], Edomite vinegar, <span
id="fr_265"></span>[2](#fn_265) Egyptian zeithum, <span
id="fr_266"></span>[3](#fn_266) the dough of bran used by dyers, the
dough used

<span id="page_102">p. 102</span>

by cooks, <span id="fr_267"></span>[4](#fn_267) and the paste used by
writers; <span id="fr_268"></span>[5](#fn_268) R. Eleazar says, also the
paste used by women to adorn themselves with. <span
id="fr_269"></span>[6](#fn_269) This is the general rule: whatever is
composed of any kind of grain, can cause a transgression of the paschal
laws; and they that are guilty of this, incur the penalty attached to
the transgression of an admonitory precept, <span
id="fr_270"></span>[7](#fn_270) but not that of being "utterly cut off"
\[‏כרת‎\].

§ 2. If there be any dough in the holes or crevices of a
kneading-trough: <span id="fr_271"></span>[8](#fn_271) if there is as
much as the size of an olive in any one place, it must be forthwith
removed, but if less than that quantity is together in one place, it may
be considered as non-existing, being so inconsiderable; and thus it is
in respect to pollutions. <span id="fr_272"></span>[9](#fn_272) But when
the dough is cared for \[when the owner wishes to use it\], it forms a
separation, <span id="fr_273"></span>[10](#fn_273) \[and the trough is
unpolluted\], but when it is desired to leave the dough in the trough,
it must be considered as forming an integral part of the trough; <span
id="fr_274"></span>[11](#fn_274) a dull dough <span
id="fr_275"></span>[12](#fn_275) may not be used, if one of the same
quality and size can become leavened in the same time.

§ 3. How can the cake of the dough \[‏חלה‎\] be separated on the
Passover when it has become unclean? <span
id="fr_276"></span>[13](#fn_276) R. Eleazar says, "It is only to be
named after it has been baked;" R. Jehudah, son of Beterah says, "This
is not the leaven concerning which it is said, 'It shall not be seen nor
found in thy house;'" it must, therefore, be separated, and left till
the evening, without caring whether it becomes leaven or not.

<span id="page_103">p. 103</span>

§ 4. Rabbon Gamaliel says, "Three women may knead dough on the Passover
at one time, and bake it in the same oven, one after the other;" but the
sages say, "Three women may occupy themselves with their dough, but in
the following manner: one shall knead and another fashion the dough,
whilst the third bakes;" R. Akivah says, "It is not the same with all
women, wood, or ovens." <span id="fr_277"></span>[14](#fn_277) This is
the rule: as soon as dough becomes inflated, let the woman plunge her
hand in cold water. <span id="fr_278"></span>[15](#fn_278)

§ 5. Dough which begins to become leavened must be burned; but the
person who eats it has not incurred the penalty \[of excision\]. Dough
which falls in holes or rents must be burned, and whoever eats it has
incurred the penalty of excision. When is a dough to be considered as
commencing to become leavened? When it exhibits small rents standing
apart in different directions, like the antennae \[horns or feelers\] of
locusts. A dough which falls in holes or rents is thus to be considered,
when the rents cross each other: such is the dictum of R. Jehudah; but
the sages say, "Whoever eats either incurs the penalty of excision."
When is a dough to be considered as commencing to become leavened? When
its surface has become pale, like \[the face of\] a person whose hair
stands on end \[through terror\].

§ 6. When the 14th of Nissan happens on the Sabbath, all \[leaven\] must
be removed *before* the Sabbath commences: such is the dictum of R.
Meir; but the sages say it is to be done at the proper time; R. Eleazar
ben Zadok says, "The heave-offering must be removed before the Sabbath,
and non-consecrated things at the proper time.

§ 7. If a person went \[on the 14th of Nissan\] to slaughter his
Passover-sacrifice, or to circumcise his son, or to eat the
betrothing-meal at the house of his father-in-law, and remembers on the
road that he has left leaven in his house: if he can return home and
remove it, and then go back to execute any of the mentioned duties, he
must do so, and remove it; but if not, he must mentally declare it as
annulled. If his intention, on leaving home, was to aid persons to
escape from armed foes, from inundation, robbers, or fire, or to save
persons from under the ruins of fallen buildings, he may mentally annul
the leaven; but if his intention was to obtain a sabbatical resting

<span id="page_104">p. 104</span>

station for his private purposes, <span id="fr_279"></span>[16](#fn_279)
he must immediately return to annul the leaven.

§ 8. Also, if a person on leaving Jerusalem, remembers having with him
consecrated flesh: if he has gone beyond \[the hill\] Zophim, he may
burn it where he is; but if not, he must return, and burn it before the
sanctuary, with wood of the altar. What quantity \[of flesh or leaven\]
makes it obligatory to return? R. Meir says, "When both are the size of
an egg;" R. Jehudah says, "When of the size of an olive;" but the sages
say, "Consecrated flesh when of the size of an olive, and leaven when of
the size of an egg."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_264"></span>[101:1](etm061.htm#fr_264) This is explained to
be a mixture of mouldy bread with milk and salt, used to dip food in.

<span id="fn_265"></span>[101:2](etm061.htm#fr_265) That is, vinegar
made in the Idumean manner, by the fermentation of barley and wine.

<span id="fn_266"></span>[101:3](etm061.htm#fr_266) The name of a
medicine of Egyptian origin, mentioned by Pliny (book xxii. c.82), under
the name of "zythum;" according to the Talmud, it was composed of equal
parts of barley, salt, and wild saffron.

<span id="fn_267"></span>[102:4](etm061.htm#fr_267) To cover the pots to
attract the impurities of the food when boiling; the amylos of the
ancients.

<span id="fn_268"></span>[102:5](etm061.htm#fr_268) Or rather, by
bookbinders to paste the sheets together so as to form a book.

<span id="fn_269"></span>[102:6](etm061.htm#fr_269) This paste was made
of flour mixed with aromatics and other ingredients, and used as a
cosmetic.

<span id="fn_270"></span>[102:7](etm061.htm#fr_270) That is, he shall be
chastised with thirty-nine stripes, ‏מלקות‎.

<span id="fn_271"></span>[102:8](etm061.htm#fr_271) To fasten its broken
parts, or to stop up holes or crevices in the trough.

<span id="fn_272"></span>[102:9](etm061.htm#fr_272) By being touched by
any creeping thing, ‏טומאת שרץ‎.

<span id="fn_273"></span>[102:10](etm061.htm#fr_273) That is, a
protection from pollution.

<span id="fn_274"></span>[102:11](etm061.htm#fr_274) This part applies
more particularly to other times of the year, and not to the Passover
exclusively.

<span id="fn_275"></span>[102:12](etm061.htm#fr_275) In the original, "a
deaf dough," ‏בצק החרש‎; or as others read it ‏בצק החרס‎, a dough
\[like\] a brick, i.e. a dough which does not soon exhibit any marks of
rising, or which yields a dull sound when struck by the hand \[like a
deaf person who does not answer when spoken to\]; according to the other
derivation, when it is as hard as a brick.

<span id="fn_276"></span>[102:13](etm061.htm#fr_276) Since it may not he
baked on the festival, nor be used thereon in any manner.

<span id="fn_277"></span>[103:14](etm061.htm#fr_277) For some women work
quicker than others; some kinds of wood kindle sooner than others; and
some ovens are sooner heated than others differently constructed.

<span id="fn_278"></span>[103:15](etm061.htm#fr_278) To hinder the dough
from rising.

<span id="fn_279"></span>[104:16](etm061.htm#fr_279) By staying on the
extreme limits of the ‏תחום‎ when the Sabbath commences, in order to
obtain liberty to move 2000 amoth, or cubits, on every side of that
station on the Sabbath. (See Treatise Erubin.)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IV](etm062)
