[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](etm082)  [Next](etm084) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0029F21C4/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Eighteen Treatises from the Mishna*, by D. A. Sola and M. J. Raphall,
\[1843\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER V.

§ 1. It is lawful to let down fruit on the festival by a trap-door, and
to cover fruit, and jars containing oil, to protect them from water
dripping thereon; but this may not be done on the Sabbath. It is
nevertheless lawful to place a utensil under a dropping vessel on the
Sabbath \[to prevent the waste of the liquor\].

§ 2. In whatsoever a person transgresses and infringes the precept of
resting on the Sabbath \[‏שבות‎\], whether in doing any optional
action, <span id="fr_453"></span>[1](#fn_452) or a legal action, <span
id="fr_454"></span>[2](#fn_453) he will also transgress, if he does them
on the festival. The following actions are prohibited ors account of the
precept to rest \[‏שבות‎\]:—It is prohibited to climb trees, to mount
any animal, to swim on the waters, to clap with the hands, <span
id="fr_455"></span>[3](#fn_454) to strike on the hips, <span
id="fr_456"></span>[4](#fn_455) or to dance. The following are
prohibited as optional

<span id="page_154">p. 154</span>

actions:—It is unlawful to administer justice, to acquire a woman as a
wife \[by giving her a ring, money, &c.\], and to perform the ceremony
of taking off the shoes of one that refuses to marry the widow of his
deceased brother (Deut. xxv. 5, &c.), or to marry such a brother's
widow. The following are prohibited as legal actions:—It is not
permitted to consecrate any thing, to value sacred things, to pronounce
any thing as devoted \[to the service of the temple\], and to separate
heave-offerings and tithes; all these actions have been decided to be
prohibited to be done on the festival, and a fortiori on the Sabbath.
There is no difference between the Sabbath and the festival, except that
the preparation of food is permitted on the latter.

§ 3. Cattle and utensils may be brought as far only as their owners may
go, <span id="fr_457"></span>[5](#fn_456) and when a person commits his
cattle to his son or shepherd, they may not be brought or driven further
than the owner may go. Utensils that are appropriated to the exclusive
use of one among brethren living together in the same house, may be
brought as far as that brother may go; but if they are not thus
exclusively appropriated to one only, they may be brought to the places
where all may go.

§ 4. A utensil that had been borrowed since the day before the festival,
maybe carried as far as the borrower may go; but if on the festival, as
far as the lender may go: and when one woman has borrowed of another
spice, water, or salt, to make dough, they may be carried as far as both
may go. Rabbi Jehudah excepts water, because its substance does not
remain visible.

§ 5. Burning coals may be carried as far as the owners thereof may go,
but a flame may be carried everywhere. If a coal of consecrated fire be
applied to profane use, the sin of desecration has been committed, <span
id="fr_458"></span>[6](#fn_457) and although no profane use may be made
of the flame of a sacred fire, yet the person who thus applies it has
not incurred the penalty, and thus, if any person carries \[on the
Sabbath\] a burning coal into a public place, he is guilty, but does not
incur the penalty for a flame only. The waters of a well belonging to a
private individual, may be carried as far as that person may go, but if
it belonged to a town, as far as the inhabitants thereof may go. The
waters of a well made for the use of travellers \[such as those\] who

<span id="page_155">p. 155</span>

core from Babylon, may be carried as far as the person who draws them
may go.

§ 6. If a person has fruit in another town, whose inhabitants have made
an erub \[Sabbatical mixture\] in order to bring him something \[on the
festival\], they may not bring him any of his own fruit, but if he has
made the erub himself, the fruit may be carried to any place he is
allowed to go.

§ 7. When any person has invited guests <span
id="fr_459"></span>[7](#fn_458) \[on the festival\], they may not carry
home with them any food, unless he has on the day before the festival
granted the guests a right of possession to their portions. <span
id="fr_460"></span>[8](#fn_459) It is not lawful to give drink to, or to
slaughters animals living free \[not under the control of man\], but it
is allowed in respect to domestic animals. The animals which at night
are in town, or in the suburbs thereof, are considered domestic; and
those which lie at night in the open field <span
id="fr_461"></span>[9](#fn_460) are called animals living free \[i.e.
not under the immediate care of man\].

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_452"></span>[153:1](etm083.htm#fr_453) Actions proper to be
done, but not strictly necessary.

<span id="fn_453"></span>[153:2](etm083.htm#fr_454) Actions legally
enjoined, but prohibited to be done on the Sabbath.

<span id="fn_454"></span>[153:3](etm083.htm#fr_455) As a sign of
rejoicing.

<span id="fn_455"></span>[153:4](etm083.htm#fr_456) As a mark of
despair, or mourning. (Compare Jeremiah xxi. 19.)

<span id="fn_456"></span>[154:5](etm083.htm#fr_457) This and the
following sections can only be understood by a reference to what is laid
down concerning the Sabbatical limits ‏תחום שבת‎, in Treatise Erubin.

<span id="fn_457"></span>[154:6](etm083.htm#fr_458) And the person who
has thus used it must bring the sacrifice called ‏קרבן מעילה‎.

<span id="fn_458"></span>[155:7](etm083.htm#fr_459) This treats of
guests living in another place, who have made erub to be able to go to
the residence of their host.

<span id="fn_459"></span>[155:8](etm083.htm#fr_460) By expressing
himself to that effect to some person on that day: in which case the
guests, although not present, gain a right to their portions.

<span id="fn_460"></span>[155:9](etm083.htm#fr_461) Beyond the ‏תחום‎,
or Sabbatical limits, and remain there during the summer months.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Introduction](etm084)
