[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](etm064)  [Next](etm066) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0029F21C4/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Eighteen Treatises from the Mishna*, by D. A. Sola and M. J. Raphall,
\[1843\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER VII.

§ 1. How must the paschal sacrifice be roasted? A spit made of the wood
of the pomegranate-tree is to be taken and put in at the mouth \[of the
lamb or kid\] and brought out again at the vent thereof; its legs and
entrails are to be placed inside, according to R. José the Galilean; but
R. Akivah says, "This would be a kind of boiling, therefore they ought
to be suspended on the outside \[of the lamb\]."

§ 2. The paschal sacrifice may not be roasted on an iron roasting spit,
nor on a gridiron \[‏אסכלא‎\]. R. Zadok relates that R. Gamaliel said
once to his bondsman Tabbi, "Go and roast for us the paschal sacrifice
on a gridiron." If the roasted lamb had in any part touched the
earthenware oven on which it was roasted, that part must be

<span id="page_114">p. 114</span>

pared off. If the fat which drips therefrom had fallen on the oven, and
had again fallen on the lamb, the part so touched must also be cut out;
but if the dripping fell on \[hot\] fine flour, a handful \[of the
flour\] must be taken \[and burned\].

§ 3. If the paschal sacrifice has been anointed \[or basted\] with
consecrated oil of heave-offering, and the company appointed to eat it
consists of priests, they may eat it; but if of Israelites, they must
wash it off the lamb, if yet raw; or should it have been already
roasted, they must pare off the outward skin. If it had been anointed
with oil of the second tithe, its value may not be charged to the
company in money, because it is not lawful to redeem and sell it in
Jerusalem. <span id="fr_320"></span>[1](#fn_320)

§ 4. Five kinds of sacrifices maybe brought, even if those who offer
them should be in a state of \[legal\] pollution; but they may not be
eaten in that state; namely, the "Omer," the two loaves, <span
id="fr_321"></span>[2](#fn_321) the shewbread, <span
id="fr_322"></span>[3](#fn_322) the peace-offerings of the congregation,
and the he-goats, offered on the feast of the New Moon; but the paschal
offerings, which were sacrificed in a state of pollution, may be eaten
in that state, because the primary intention \[of the command of the
law\] was, that they should be eaten.

§ 5. If the flesh of the paschal offering had contracted a legal
pollution, and the fat thereof remains \[unpolluted\] its blood may not
be sprinkled on the altar: but if the fat had become polluted, and the
flesh remains \[unpolluted\], the blood may be sprinkled, although this
is not the case with respect to other consecrated sacrifices \[under
similar circumstances\]; for although the flesh \[of these\] had
contracted pollution, and the fat remains unpolluted, their blood may be
sprinkled \[on the altar\].

§ 6. When the whole or the greater part of the congregation had
contracted \[legal\] pollution, or that the priests were in a state of
\[legal\] pollution—but the congregation was clean—it may be brought in
this state of pollution; but if the minority only of the congregation
had contracted pollution, the majority that are clean shall sacrifice
the first passover at its proper time, and the unclean \[minority\]
shall sacrifice a second passover \[on the 14th of the following
month\].

§ 7. If, after the blood of a paschal sacrifice had been sprinkled on
the altar, it became known that it was unclean, the plate or frontlet of
gold \[of the high priest <span id="fr_323"></span>[4](#fn_323)\]
expiates \[the sin\]; <span id="fr_324"></span>[5](#fn_324) but if the
body of

<span id="page_115">p. 115</span>

the paschal sacrifice had been polluted, the golden plate does not
expiate; <span id="fr_325"></span>[6](#fn_325) because it is a maxim,
that the golden plate expiates the paschal sacrifice and that of the
Nazarite, when the blood of these had been polluted; but it does not
expiate when the body of the sacrifice had become polluted. It does,
however, expiate, for \[the so called\] pollution of the abyss or
ground. <span id="fr_326"></span>[7](#fn_326)

§ 8. If the whole or greater part of the paschal offering had become
polluted, it must be burned before the sanctuary with wood used for the
altar: if the lesser part thereof had become polluted, or, that some
part had remained \[on the morning of the 15th\] they must burn it in
their own courts, or on their roofs, with their own wood; avaricious
persons, however, used to burn it before the sanctuary, to avail
themselves of the wood used for the altar.

§ 9. When a slaughtered passover sacrifice has been carried \[beyond the
walls of Jerusalem\] or has become polluted, it must be immediately
burned. If the owners thereof have contracted pollution or died, it must
he left till its form has passed away, <span
id="fr_327"></span>[8](#fn_327) and must be burned on the 16th of
Nissan. <span id="fr_328"></span>[9](#fn_328) R. Johanan ben Berokah
says, "That also must be burned immediately, because there are none to
eat it."

§ 10. The bones, nerves, and other remaining parts must be burned on the
16th; but if that should be a Sabbath, they must be burned on the 17th,
because the burning of these does not supersede the laws of the Sabbath
nor those of the festival.

§ 11. Every part usually eaten of a full grown ox, may be eaten of the
tender passover kid or lamb; such as the sinews or tendons over the
joints. Whoever breaks any bones of the clean passover lamb, incurs the
penalty of forty stripes, but the person who should leave a part of the
paschal lamb over night, or who breaks a bone of an unclean paschal
sacrifice, does not incur that penalty.

§ 12. If part of a member reaches or extends outside, it must be cut
till it \[the knife\] reaches the bone, then the flesh is to be removed

<span id="page_116">p. 116</span>

inwardly, till the joint is reached, when it may be there cut off \[and
the bone must be cast away\]. With regard to other sacrifices \[the
bones of which might be lawfully broken\], the protruding part must be
cut off with a chopping knife; if it extend from the ‏אגף‎ \[door-wing
or lobby <span id="fr_329"></span>[10](#fn_329)\], it must be considered
as inward; if it protrude further than this, it is to be considered as
outward \[and must be cut off\]. The openings in a wall, and the
thickness of a wall, maybe considered as inward.

§ 13. When two companies eat their paschal sacrifice in one house
\[room\], each turning their faces in a different direction while eating
it, <span id="fr_330"></span>[11](#fn_330) and the warming pot or kettle
\[containing water to mix with the wine <span
id="fr_331"></span>[12](#fn_331)\] is in the middle between the two
companies, the waiter or servant \[‏שמש‎\] must close his mouth \[i.e.
not eat\] while he waits on the other company to pour out wine for them;
then he must turn his face towards the company he eats with, and he must
not eat till he has rejoined his own company. <span
id="fr_332"></span>[13](#fn_332) It is, however, permitted to a bride to
avert her face from the company while eating the paschal sacrifice.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_320"></span>[114:1](etm065.htm#fr_320) Where alone the
paschal sacrifice might be lawfully brought and eaten.

<span id="fn_321"></span>[114:2](etm065.htm#fr_321) Offered on the feast
of weeks.

<span id="fn_322"></span>[114:3](etm065.htm#fr_322) Offered on the
Sabbath.

<span id="fn_323"></span>[114:4](etm065.htm#fr_323) See Exodus xviii.
36–38.

<span id="fn_324"></span>[114:5](etm065.htm#fr_324) And it is not
necessary to bring a second paschal offering on the 14th of Iyar.

<span id="fn_325"></span>[115:6](etm065.htm#fr_325) And an offering must
be again brought on the second passover.

<span id="fn_326"></span>[115:7](etm065.htm#fr_326) By this term the
Mishna and Talmud express the pollution contracted by passing over
ground containing a dead body, without the person passing being then
aware of the fact.

<span id="fn_327"></span>[115:8](etm065.htm#fr_327) Rashi and Bartenora
explain this phrase thus:—"It is to be left over-night so as to become
‏נותר‎, or a paschal sacrifice which has remained over-night uneaten,
and which must be burned, according to the command of the Holy Law."
(Exodus xii. 10.)

<span id="fn_328"></span>[115:9](etm065.htm#fr_328) According to
Maimonides, the sacrifice is to be left till it becomes decomposed and
putrid.

<span id="fn_329"></span>[116:10](etm065.htm#fr_329) The first is the
literal translation of the word ‏אגף‎, mentioned in the original, which
Rashi explains to be the place over which the door swings, i.e. the area
contained on the segment of the circle it describes in swinging
outwards, is yet considered as belonging to the room. According to
Maimonides, ‏אגף‎ is the space between the inner and outer door of a
room; i.e. a kind of lobby or entry.

<span id="fn_330"></span>[116:11](etm065.htm#fr_330) Of the same paschal
sacrifice.

<span id="fn_331"></span>[116:12](etm065.htm#fr_331) Anciently water
used to be placed near the table, as the wine was considered too strong
to be drunk unmixed.

<span id="fn_332"></span>[116:13](etm065.htm#fr_332) No one may eat of
the paschal offering in two places, or with two separate companies.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VIII](etm066)
