[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](etm074)  [Next](etm076) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0029F21C4/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Eighteen Treatises from the Mishna*, by D. A. Sola and M. J. Raphall,
\[1843\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER III.

§ 1. A ‏לולב‎ \[palm-branch\] which has been acquired by theft, or which
is withered, is not valid. One which comes from a grove <span
id="fr_376"></span>[1](#fn_375) \[devoted to idolatry\], or from a
rejected town <span id="fr_377"></span>[2](#fn_376) \[that has been
enticed to idolatry\], is not valid. If the point has been broken off,
or the leaves torn off, it is not valid: if they are only dissevered, it
is valid. R. Jehudah saith, "It must be tied together at the top." A
loolab from the Iron Mount <span id="fr_378"></span>[3](#fn_377) \[is
valid\]. A loolab that measures three hands \[in length\] sufficient to
shake it by, is valid.

§ 2. A myrtle-bough which has been acquired by theft, or which is
withered, is not valid. One which comes from a grove, or from a rejected
town, is not valid. If the point has been broken off, or

<span id="page_135">p. 135</span>

the leaves torn off, or if one has more berries on it than leaves, it is
not valid: if they \[the number of berries\] have been lessened, it
becomes valid; but this must not be done on the festival.

§ 3. A willow of the brook, which has been acquired by theft, or which
is withered, is not valid. One which comes from a grove, or from a
rejected town, is not valid. If the point has been broken off, or the
leaves torn off, or if it be a ‏צפצפה‎, <span
id="fr_379"></span>[4](#fn_378) it is not valid. One that is faded, or
from which some of the leaves have dropped off, or which has grown on
dry ground \[not near a brook\], is valid.

§ 4. R. Ishmael saith "\[A man is to use\] three myrtle boughs, two
willows, one palm-branch, and one citron; even if two out of the three
myrtle-boughs have their points broke off \[they may be used\]." R.
Tarphon saith, "Even though all three should have their points broke off
\[they may be used\]." R. Akivah saith, "Even as one citron and one
loolab \[only are used\], so likewise \[are\] one myrtle-bough and one
willow \[only to be used\]."

§ 5. A citron which has been acquired by theft, or which is withered, is
not valid. One that comes from a grove, or from a rejected town, is not
valid. One \[taken\] off a tree which is not circumcised, <span
id="fr_380"></span>[5](#fn_379) is not valid; nor \[one taken\] from
heave-offering <span id="fr_381"></span>[6](#fn_380) that is unclean.
From clean heave-offering man is not to take a citron; but if he leas
taken one, it is valid. One \[taken\] from *Demai*, <span
id="fr_382"></span>[7](#fn_381) Beth Shammai declare not valid, but Beth
Hillel declare it valid. Man is not to take a citron from second tithe
in Jerusalem, but if he has taken one, it is valid.

§ 6. If one stain <span id="fr_383"></span>[8](#fn_382) spread over the
greater portion of the citron, if it has lost its crown, or the fine
rind thereof has been peeled off, or if it be split, or perforated \[or
not entire\]; if ever so little thereof be wanting, it is not valid. If
the stain be spread over the smaller portion of the citron, if it has
lost its stalk, or if that be perforated \[but the citron itself is
entire\], so that no part thereof, however

<span id="page_136">p. 136</span>

small, be wanting, the citron is valid; a dark coloured one is not
valid. A leek-green citron R. Meir pronounces valid: but R. Jehudah
declares it not valid.

§ 7. \[Respecting\] the \[minimum\] legal size of a small citron, R.
Meir saith, "\[It must be\] like a nut." R. Jehudah saith, "like an egg;
and of a large citron \[it must be such\] that a man can hold two in one
hand." Such is the dictum of R. Jehudah: but R. Jose saith, "Even though
\[he must use\] two hands to one citron \[it is of legal size and
valid\]."

§ 8. The loolab must only be tied with its own kind \[palm branches\].
Such is the dictum of R. Jehudah: but R. Meir saith, "\[it may be tied\]
even with twine." R. Meir also said, "It happened that the inhabitants
of Jerusalem tied a loolab with gold lace." But they \[the sages\]
replied, "\[Yes, they did so\], but \[beneath the gold lace\] they tied
it with its own kind."

§ 9. When did they shake the loolab?" At \[the verse\] ‏הודו לה׳‎,
\[praise ye the Lord, &c.\], <span id="fr_384"></span>[9](#fn_383) at
the beginning and ending thereof; and at the verse, ‏אנא ה׳ הושיעה נא‎
\[O Lord, we beseech thee, save us.\]" <span
id="fr_385"></span>[10](#fn_384) Such is the dictum of Beth Hillel: but
Beth Shammai hold, "\[That the loolab must\] also \[be shaken\] at \[the
verse\] ‏אנא ה׳ הצליהח נא‎, \[O Lord, we beseech thee, prosper
us\]." <span id="fr_386"></span>[11](#fn_385) R. Akivah said, "I watched
\[particularly noticed\] Rabbon Gamaliel and R. Joshua; and I saw, that
while all the people shook their palm branches \[at both the
last-mentioned verses\], they \[the two rabbies\] only shook theirs at
‏הושיעה נא‎." If a person is on the road, and has no loolab with him, he
must, when he gets home, shake it at his table, \[even while at his
meals\]. If he has not done it in the morning, he must do it towards the
evening, as the whole of the day is valid for \[the use of\] the loolab.

§ 10. If the hallel <span id="fr_387"></span>[12](#fn_386) be read to a
man by a bondman, or a woman, or a minor, he must repeat after them
\[word for word\] what they read; <span id="fr_388"></span>[13](#fn_387)
but it is a disgrace to him. <span id="fr_389"></span>[14](#fn_388) If a
grown-up person <span id="fr_390"></span>[15](#fn_389) read it \[the
hallel\] to him, he only repeats after him \[responds\] Hallelujah.

<span id="page_137">p. 137</span>

§ 11. At a place where it is the custom to repeat \[read certain <span
id="fr_391"></span>[16](#fn_390) verses twice\], a man is to repeat
\[them\]. Where it is the custom simply \[to recite them once\] a man is
simply \[to recite them once\]. Where it is the custom to say a
benediction after the loolab, a man is to say a benediction. In every
case, according to the custom of the country, \[a man must conform
thereto\]. If a person purchase a loolab from his neighbour during the
seventh \[Sabbatical year\], he \[the vendor\], is to give him a citron
as a gift \[in the bargain\]; for it is not permitted to buy a citron
during the seventh \[Sabbatical year\].

§ 12. Formerly the loolab was used in the Temple \[on each of the\]
seven \[days of the festival\]; and, in the country, \[every place
except the Temple at Jerusalem\], the first day \[only\]. But after the
Temple was destroyed, R. Jochanan ben Sachai decreed, "That in the
country \[everywhere\] the loolab should be used \[during the whole\]
seven \[days\] of the festival, in memory of the Holy Temple." He, at
the same time, also decreed, "that on the day of ‏נוף‎ <span
id="fr_392"></span>[17](#fn_391) it should be unlawful to eat new
grain."

§ 13. If the first day of the festival fall on a Sabbath, every man is
to bring his loolab to the Synagogue \[on the Sabbath-eve, and leave it
there\]. On the \[next\] morning they come early to Synagogue, and each
man must distinguish \[seek out\] his own loolab, and take it; for the
sages hold, "that a man cannot fully acquit himself of his duty on the
first day of the festival, by means of a loolab that belongs to his
neighbour; whereas, on the subsequent days of the festival, he may fully
acquit himself of his duty, by means of a loolab belonging to his
neighbour."

§ 14. R. José saith, "If the first day of the festival fall on the
Sabbath, should a man forget \[that it is the Sabbath-day\], and carry
his loolab out \[into the public reshuth\], <span
id="fr_393"></span>[18](#fn_392) he is absolved; because he carried it
out with intent to fulfil the law."

§ 15. A woman may receive the loolab out of the hand of her son, or of
her husband, and put it back into water on the Sabbath. R. Jehudah
saith; "On the Sabbath it may be put back, on the festival they may add
\[fresh water\], and on the middle days they may change \[the water;
pouring out the stale, and putting fresh water in its stead\]. A minor,
who understands how to shake the loolab, is bound to perform that duty."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_375"></span>[134:1](etm075.htm#fr_376) In which the
palm-tree is devoted to idolatrous rites.

<span id="fn_376"></span>[134:2](etm075.htm#fr_377) Deut. xiii. 12.

<span id="fn_377"></span>[134:3](etm075.htm#fr_378) A mountain near
Jerusalem, southward, the palm-branches on which were very short.

<span id="fn_378"></span>[135:4](etm075.htm#fr_379) The distinguishing
marks of a brook-willow \[*salix helix*\] are dark wood, long leaves,
with smooth margin; those of a ‏צפצפה‎ are white wood, round leaves,
with serrated margin. Among the many different species of willow which
answer to this last description, it is impossible to describe which is
the one meant by the text.

<span id="fn_379"></span>[135:5](etm075.htm#fr_380) Vide Levit. xix. 23,
and Mishna, Treatise Orlah.

<span id="fn_380"></span>[135:6](etm075.htm#fr_381) Numb. xviii. 11, 12.

<span id="fn_381"></span>[135:7](etm075.htm#fr_382) Fruit of which it is
doubtful whether the legal dues have been paid.

<span id="fn_382"></span>[135:8](etm075.htm#fr_383) But if there are two
different stains on the body of the citron, even though they spread only
over a small portion thereof, or if there be any stain on the crown, the
citron is not valid.

<span id="fn_383"></span>[136:9](etm075.htm#fr_384) Ps. cxvii.

<span id="fn_384"></span>[136:10](etm075.htm#fr_385) Ps. cxviii. 25.

<span id="fn_385"></span>[136:11](etm075.htm#fr_386) Ps. cxviii, end of
verse 25.

<span id="fn_386"></span>[136:12](etm075.htm#fr_387) The *lauds*, a
prayer composed of Psalms cxiii. to cxviii. inclusive.

<span id="fn_387"></span>[136:13](etm075.htm#fr_388) Whosoever is not
legally obliged to perform a duty cannot exempt others by acting as
their deputy. And as bondmen, women, and minors are not legally
compelled, their reciting the prayer will not exempt the man; who,
therefore, must repeat it verbatim.

<span id="fn_388"></span>[136:14](etm075.htm#fr_389) It is disgraceful
to him that he has not learned his prayers.

<span id="fn_389"></span>[136:15](etm075.htm#fr_390) A youth of the
legal age of thirteen years and upwards, who, being legally obliged, may
act as deputy for another.

<span id="fn_390"></span>[137:16](etm075.htm#fr_391) From the verse
‏אודך כי עניתני‎. (Ps. cxviii. 21, to the end.)

<span id="fn_391"></span>[137:17](etm075.htm#fr_392) The day of waving
\[the sheaf of the first fruits\]. The 16th day of Nissan \[the first
month\] was so called. (Vide Lev. xxiii. 10, 11.)

<span id="fn_392"></span>[137:18](etm075.htm#fr_393) Vide Introduction
to Treatise Sabbath.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IV](etm076)
