[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](etm091)  [Next](etm093) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0029F21C4/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Eighteen Treatises from the Mishna*, by D. A. Sola and M. J. Raphall,
\[1843\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER III.

§ 1. The order of fasts above-mentioned applies only when the first
fructifying rains do not descend; but when the sprouts degenerate, they
shall immediately commence to sound an alarm. It is also to be sounded
immediately if there be an interval of forty days between each rain;
because it is a general plague on the land, causing dearth.

§ 2. If rain sufficient for the growth of sprouts and herbage has
fallen, but not for the growth of trees; or sufficient for the growth of
trees, but inadequate to the growth of herbage; or sufficient for both,

<span id="page_174">p. 174</span>

but not to fill the wells, cisterns, and caves, an alarm is immediately
to be sounded,

§ 3. And thus if no rain should have fallen over any particular city
similar to that which is written (Amos iv. 7), "I caused it to rain upon
one city, and caused it not to rain upon another city, one piece was
rained upon," &c., \[the inhabitants of\] such a city must fast, and
sound an alarm, and those of the circumjacent places shall fast, but not
sound. R. Akivah says, "they are to sound, but not to fast."

§ 4. And thus, when pestilence reigns in a city, or when the \[sound\]
walls fall down, \[the inhabitants of\] such a city must fast, and sound
an alarm: and those of the circumjacent places shall fast, but not
sound. R. Akivah says, "they are to sound, but not to fast." What must
be considered as a pestilence? When in a city, capable of furnishing
five hundred able men, three persons die in three consecutive days, it
is a pestilence; less than this is not a pestilence.

§ 5. An alarm is to be sounded in all places for the following
plagues:—For a corn-blast, mildew, locusts, caterpillars, attacks of
ferocious animals, hosts of armed men; for all these an alarm must be
sounded, because they are spreading evils.

§ 6. It once happened, that some elders went from Jerusalem, each to his
own place, and they decreed a fast, because a corn-blast, of a size to
cover therewith the mouth of an oven, had been seen near Ascalon. They
also decreed a fast on account of two children having been devoured by
wolves on the other side of the Jordan. R. José says, "it was not
because the wolves actually devoured \[children\], but because they had
appeared \[in the towns prowling for food\]."

§ 7. For the following calamities an alarm is to be sounded even on the
Sabbath:—For a city surrounded by enemies; for a flood threatening to
inundate the country; for a ship in imminent danger of being wrecked at
sea \[in a storm\]. R. José says, This sounding is to be, to obtain
assistance \[from men\], not as an imploring cry \[to God\]." Simeon the
Temanite says, "They shall also sound on the Sabbath in case of
pestilence;" but the sages did not agree with him \[in this\].

§ 8. For every plague—which may the community never be visited
with! <span id="fr_540"></span>[1](#fn_537)—an alarm is to be sounded,
except for a superabundance of

<span id="page_175">p. 175</span>

rain. <span id="fr_541"></span>[2](#fn_538) It happened once, that they
said to Honee, ‏המעגל‎, "Pray for us, that rain may fall." He told them,
"Go and bring in the Passover ovens, <span
id="fr_542"></span>[3](#fn_539) that they may not be spoiled by the
rain." He prayed, and the rain did not descend. What did he then? He
marked out a circle, <span id="fr_543"></span>[4](#fn_540) and placing
himself within it, thus prayed, "Creator of the world! thy children have
looked up to me as being peculiarly favoured by thee; <span
id="fr_544"></span>[5](#fn_541) I swear, by thy Great Name, that I will
not move from this place until thou wilt have compassion on thy
children." The rain began to drop down \[gently\]. He said, "It was not
for this that I petitioned, but for rain \[sufficient to fill\] wells,
cisterns, and caves." The rain then fell in violent torrents; when he
said, "Not for such rains did I petition, but for mild, felicitous, and
liberal showers." The rain then fell in the usual manner, until the
Israelites of Jerusalem were obliged to go from the city to the Temple
mountain, on account of the rain. They came and said to him, "Even as
thou didst pray that the rains might come down, thus pray now that they
may cease." He said to them, "Go and see whether the stone ‏טועים‎ <span
id="fr_545"></span>[6](#fn_542) is covered by the waters." Simeon, son
of Shatach sent him word, "If thou wert not Honee, I would order thee to
be anathematised; but what shall I do to thee? since thou sinnest
against God, and yet he forgives and indulges thee like a favoured
child, who sins against his father, and is yet forgiven and indulged. To
thee may be applied the text, 'Thy father and mother shall rejoice, and
they who begot thee shall be glad.' (Prov. xxiii. 25.)"

§ 9. If, while they are fasting, rain should fall before sunrise, they
shall not continue to fast the whole day; but they must if after
sunrise. R. Eleazar says, "If \[it rains\] before noon they need not
continue to fast the whole day; but they must if the rain commenced
after noon is passed." It happened once that a fast \[for rain\] was

<span id="page_176">p. 176</span>

ordered in Lydda \[‏לוד‎\], and it rained before noon; when R. Tarphon
said unto them, "Go, eat and drink, and make a feast." They went, eat
and drank, and made a feast; but in the evening they returned, and sang
the great Hallel. (Ps. cxxxvi, &c.)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_537"></span>[174:1](etm092.htm#fr_540) This is to avoid
making use of an expression involving evil; but the real meaning is,
"For every plague that may befal the community," &c.

<span id="fn_538"></span>[175:2](etm092.htm#fr_541) If it does not spoil
the growing corn. Observe, this Mishna applies *exclusively* to the Holy
Land, and other mountainous countries, where they can scarcely have too
much rain.

<span id="fn_539"></span>[175:3](etm092.htm#fr_542) The ovens they used
to roast the paschal lamb, which were moveable, and made of clay or
slightly baked earthenware, and which were generally kept outside the
house when not in use.

<span id="fn_540"></span>[175:4](etm092.htm#fr_543) Some explain it, "He
dug out a circular trench on which he placed himself."

<span id="fn_541"></span>[175:5](etm092.htm#fr_544) In the original,
"That I am like a son of the house before thee."

<span id="fn_542"></span>[175:6](etm092.htm#fr_545) A high stone in
Jerusalem was thus called, because those who had found any article
deposited it thereon, and proclaimed through the city that they had
found something. The owner of the lost article then applied, and if the
description of the article he alleged to have lost was found to be
correct, it was restored.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IV](etm093)
