[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](etm006)  [Next](etm008) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0029F21C4/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Eighteen Treatises from the Mishna*, by D. A. Sola and M. J. Raphall,
\[1843\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER VI.

§ 1. What blessing must be said for fruit? For fruit which grows on a
tree, say, "who createst the fruit of the tree" except for wine; for
thereon the benediction is; "who createst the fruit of the vine." For
fruits growing on the earth say "who createst the fruit of the earth"
except for bread, for thereon the benediction; "who bringest forth bread
from the earth" must be said. For vegetables say, "who createst the
fruit of the earth" R. Jehudah saith "who createst \[various\] kinds of
herbs."

§ 2. If he has said the benediction "who createst the fruit of the

<span id="page_8">p. 8</span>

earth," for fruit grown on trees he has acquitted himself \[of the
obligation to return thanks\]: but should he say "the fruit of the
tree," for fruits grown on the earth, he has not acquitted himself. But
if for either \[kind\] he said "who gave being to all things through his
mandate" he has acquitted himself.

§ 3. For things which do not derive their immediate growth from the
earth \[ground\] say ‏שהכל‎ "who gave being to all things," &c. For
vinegar, unripe fruit which has dropt \[off the tree\], and
locusts <span id="fr_17"></span>[1](#fn_17) say ‏שהכל‎ \["who gave
being," &c.\] On milk, cheese, and eggs, say \[also\] ‏שהכל‎. R. Jehudah
saith no blessing should be pronounced over things which had their
origin in a curse \[or corruption\], \[or which partake of the character
of a curse\].

§ 4. If a man has before him various kinds \[of fruits\], R. Jehudah
saith, If there be among them of the seven kinds <span
id="fr_18"></span>[2](#fn_18), he is to pronounce the benediction
thereon: but the sages say he may say the blessing on which of them he
pleases.

§ 5. If the blessing on wine has been said before commencing the meal,
it frees the wine drunk after the meal. If the blessing has been said
over the ‏פרפרת‎ <span id="fr_19"></span>[3](#fn_19) eaten before the
meal, it frees the ‏פרפרת‎ eaten after the meal. If the blessing has
been said over the bread, it frees the ‏פרפרת‎; but the blessing on the
‏פרפרת‎ does not free the bread. Beth Shammai say, Neither does it free
that which has been cooked \[made dishes\]."

§ 6. If several persons sit down to eat, each one must say grace for
himself; but if they sit at the same table, one says grace for them all.
If wine is brought to them during the meal, each one says the blessing
thereon for himself: but if it is brought after the meal, one says the
blessing for them all. He also says the blessing for the perfume <span
id="fr_20"></span>[4](#fn_20), although that be not brought till after
the meal.

§ 7. If salted food be set before a man, and bread with it, the blessing
is said on the salted food, which frees the bread, as that is only an
accessary. The general rule is, whenever any principal

<span id="page_9">p. 9</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> \[article of
food\] is partaken of, with an accessary to it; the blessing is said on
the principal article, which frees the accessary.

§ 8. If a person have eaten figs, grapes, and pomegranates, he must say
three blessings after them. Such is the dictum of Rabbon Gamaliel: but
the sages hold one blessing only, being a compendium of the three. R.
Akiva saith, even if a person has eaten \[nothing but\] boiled pulse,
and he has made his meal of it, he is bound to say the three blessings.
Whoever drinks water to \[satisfy\] his thirst, says the blessing
‏שהכל‎. R. Tarphon saith, \[he must say the blessing\] ‏בורא נפשות
רבות‎. \["who createst many animate beings and providest for their
wants,"\] &c.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_17"></span>[8:1](etm007.htm#fr_17) Locusts form a common
article of food in the East.

<span id="fn_18"></span>[8:2](etm007.htm#fr_18) The Holy Land is
celebrated for the production of seven kinds of fruits, &c. enumerated
in Deut. viii. 8.

<span id="fn_19"></span>[8:3](etm007.htm#fr_19) ‏פַּרְפֶרֶה‎ derived
from the Greek παραφερομενα. It signifies here anything eaten before
dinner to excite appetite; also after dinner as dessert. Some are of
opinion it means anything that is usually eaten with bread παραφερομενα
\[food before the repast\].

<span id="fn_20"></span>[8:4](etm007.htm#fr_20) It was customary to
introduce perfumes and incense after the meal was over.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VII](etm008)
