[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](etm012)  [Next](etm014) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0029F21C4/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Eighteen Treatises from the Mishna*, by D. A. Sola and M. J. Raphall,
\[1843\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER II.

§ 1. If in a saah <span id="fr_43"></span>[1](#fn_43) of seed-corn there
is one-fourth \[of a kab\] of any other kind of seed, the \[last
mentioned\] quantity must be diminished. R. Jose saith, "Whether this
quarter of a kab consist of one \[different kind of\] seed, or of two
\[kinds\], it must be picked out of the saah." R. Simeon saith, "This
rule \[that the quantity of different seeds intermingled among a saah of
seed-corn, must be

<span id="page_16">p. 16</span>

diminished if it amount to one-fourth of a kab\] holds good only when
the whole quarter of a kab is of one kind." But the sages hold, that
whatever of kilaim is mixed among a saah of seed-corn, must all be
included in the computation of the quarter of a kab.

§ 2. To what does this rule apply? To grain of one kind mixed among
grain of other kinds; to legumes mixed among legumes; also to grain
\[mixed\] among legumes, and to legumes mixed among grain. They \[the
sages\] laid it down as a rule, that all kinds of non-edible garden
seeds, are subject to the computation of kilaim, provided they reach the
proportion of one twenty-fourth part of the total quantity of seed-corn
required to sow a Beth-Saah. <span id="fr_44"></span>[2](#fn_44) R.
Simeon saith, "As in this instance they \[the sages\] are more rigid, so
in another instance they alleviate \[the observance\], inasmuch as
flaxseed mixed among corn, is also subject to the computation of kilaim
only when it reaches the proportion of one twenty-fourth part to the
Beth-Saah. <span id="fr_45"></span>[3](#fn_45)

§ 3. If a man having sown his field with wheat changes his mind, and
determines to sow it with barley, he must tarry till the first sown seed
has germinated \[is dissolved in the ground\], then he must plough up
the field before he may sow the fresh seed; if the wheat \[first sown\]
has sprung up, he is not to say, "I will first sow \[the barley\], and
then plough up my field," but he must plough up first, and afterwards
sow. To what extent is he bound to plough up his field? To the depth of
the furrows for the early rain. Abbah Saul saith, "so that in a field of
the size of a Beth-Saah there remain not the space \[equal to receive\]
one-fourth kab of seed-corn \[unploughed\]."

§ 4. If a man, having sown his field, change his mind, and determine to
plant thereon, he must not say, "I will first plant and then plough up
my field," but he must plough un first and afterwards plant. If, having
planted his field, he change his mind, and determine to sow on it, he
must not say, "I will first sow my field, and then root up what I have
planted," but he must first uproot, and then sow. But, if he like, he
may cut down the stalks of the plants till within \[less than\] a hand
high from the ground; he then sows, and, lastly, uproots what he has
planted.

<span id="page_17">p. 17</span>

§ 5. If his field has been sown with carraway, or ‏לוף‎, <span
id="fr_46"></span>[4](#fn_46) he must not sow any thing over them, as
these two kinds do not spring up \[ripen\] till after three years. <span
id="fr_47"></span>[5](#fn_47) If sprouts of isatis <span
id="fr_48"></span>[6](#fn_48) have sprung up among corn, or if various
kinds of seed have sprung up in the ground of a barn, or if fœnum
Græcum <span id="fr_49"></span>[7](#fn_49) spring up, of various kinds,
a man is not bound to weed them out; but if he has commenced to weed out
or cut down any of them, he is \[in that case\] bound to destroy all
except one kind only.

§ 6. If a man wishes to cultivate his field in patches \[streaks or
plots\], set with different kinds \[of seeds or plants\], what distance
is he bound to leave between the respective plots? Beth Shammai hold,
"the distance of three furrows;" Beth Hillel hold, "the width of a yoke,
such as is used in plains." Both opinions, however, approximate very
closely.

§ 7. There is no legal objection if the point of the angle of \[a field
sown with\] wheat enter into a field of barley; as any one can see to
which field the angle belongs. If a man's field be sown with wheat, and
the adjoining field of his neighbour with some other kind, there is no
objection to his sowing the same kind \[of seed\] that his neighbour has
sown, close to the adjoining field. If his own field be sown with wheat,
and the adjoining one of his neighbour likewise, there is no objection
to his sowing a furrow \[row\] of flax between them, but he must not sow
any other kind. R. Simeon saith, "Flax forms no exception from other
kinds \[and is consequently prohibited\];" but R. José saith, "Even in
the midst of his own field a man may sow a furrow \[row\] of flax by way
of experiment."

§ 8. Mustard or wild saffron must not be sown adjoining a cornfield; but
they may be sown adjoining a meadow; also adjoining a field which lies
fallow, or one that has been newly ploughed up; also next to a stone
wall, or a footpath, or a hedge \[fence\] ten hands high; or to a trench
\[ditch\], ten hands deep and four hands wide; or next to a tree which
trails its branches along the ground; or to a rock \[stone\] ten hands
high and for hands broad.

§ 9. If a man wishes to divide his field into square plots sown with,
different kinds of seed, he must apportion it into twenty-four squares

<span id="page_18">p. 18</span>

to the *beth saah* of seed corn, one square to each quarter of a kab,
and he may then sow whatever kind of seed he pleases into each
\[separate\] square. If there be one or two such squares \[in a
cornfield\], a man may sow mustard-seed in them; but if three \[such
squares\] adjoining each other are in a field of corn, he must not sow
mustard-seed on them, as the plot of ground would seem to be a mustard
field. Such is the dictum of R. Meir; but the sages say, "Nine such
squares may be sown with mustard-seed, but ten may not \[are
prohibited\]." <span id="fr_50"></span>[8](#fn_50) R. Eleazar ben Jacob
saith, "Though the field be of size sufficient to receive an entire
kur <span id="fr_51"></span>[9](#fn_51) of seed, not more than one
square must be made in it."

§ 10. Whatever forms part of the superficies of a field, and is of size
sufficient to receive a quarter kab of seed, must be included in the
computation of the quarter kab. Thus the space round a vine, or a grave,
or a rock \[stone\], must be included in the computation of the quarter
kab. \[One kind of\] corn must be sown \[at the distance of\] one
quarter kab area from \[another kind of\] corn. Herbs \[at the distance
of\] six hands from other herbs. Corn from herbs, or herbs from corn,
\[must be sown at the distance of\] one quarter of a kab. R. Eleazar
saith, "herbs from corn, at the distance of six hands only."

§ 11. One kind of corn inclining over \[standing higher than\] another
kind of corn, or one kind of herbs over another, or corn over herbs, or
herbs over corn, are all permitted, except Greek pumpkins. R. Meir
saith, "excepting also cucumbers and Egyptian beans; nevertheless I
prefer their opinion \[that of the sages\] to mine own."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_43"></span>[15:1](etm013.htm#fr_43) A saah equal to six
kab; a quarter kab, the twenty-fourth part of a saah.

<span id="fn_44"></span>[16:2](etm013.htm#fr_44) An area of 2500 square
amoth equal to the sowing of a saah measure of seed-corn.

<span id="fn_45"></span>[16:3](etm013.htm#fr_45) As garden-seeds are
smaller than corn; whereas, flax-seed, which takes up much more room, is
only subject to the same proportion.

<span id="fn_46"></span>[17:4](etm013.htm#fr_46) Arum \[wake-robin\].

<span id="fn_47"></span>[17:5](etm013.htm#fr_47) The expression of the
Mishna is obscure, particularly as the two species named ripen annually.
Some are of opinion, the Mishna intends to say, that the tenacity of
these two species is so great, that after three years they may spring up
again.

<span id="fn_48"></span>[17:6](etm013.htm#fr_48) Woad.

<span id="fn_49"></span>[17:7](etm013.htm#fr_49) Fenugreek.

<span id="fn_50"></span>[18:8](etm013.htm#fr_50) R. Meir holds, "that
all the squares are, according to law, arable;" whereas the sages hold,
"that alternate squares only are by law permitted to be made arable."

<span id="fn_51"></span>[18:9](etm013.htm#fr_51) Kur, equal to thirty
saah, or one hundred and eighty kab.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter III](etm014)
