[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](etm125)  [Next](etm127) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0029F21C4/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Eighteen Treatises from the Mishna*, by D. A. Sola and M. J. Raphall,
\[1843\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER VII.

§ 1. He who by vow interdicts his wife from enjoying any benefit from
him for thirty days, must provide her \[maintenance through\] a
guardian: <span id="fr_865"></span>[1](#fn_860) beyond then \[if for a
longer period\] he must divorce her, and pay \[the amount of\] her
Ketubah. R. Jehudah saith, "In the case of an \[ordinary\] Israelite,
\[if his vow extends to\] one month, he must keep her, \[but if to\] two
months, he must divorce her, and pay \[the amount of\] her Ketubah. \[In
the case of\] a priestess \[should his vow extend to\] two months, he
must keep her, \[but if to\] three months, he must divorce her and pay
her Ketubah.

§ 2. He who tacitly confirms the vow <span
id="fr_866"></span>[2](#fn_861) of his wife, that she will not taste any
\[particular\] kind of fruit, must \[at once\] divorce her, and pay lier
Ketubah. R. Jehudah saith, "\[In the case of\] an \[ordinary\]
Israelite, \[should the vow extend to\] one day, he must keep her, \[but
if to\] two days, he must divorce her, and pay her Ketubah: \[in the
case of\] a priestess, \[should the vow extend to\] two days, he must
keep her, \[but if to\] three days, he must divorce her, and pay her
Ketubah."

§ 3. He who tacitly confirms the vow of his wife, that she will not
adorn herself with any particular kind of ornament, must divorce her,
and pay her Ketubah. R. Jose saith, "\[In the case\] of a poor woman, if
she has set no \[fixed\] limit \[to the duration of her vow\]: <span
id="fr_867"></span>[3](#fn_862) and \[of\] a rich woman after thirty
days.

§ 4. He who tacitly confirms the vow of his wife, that she will not

<span id="page_259">p. 259</span>

enter her father's house, <span id="fr_868"></span>[4](#fn_863) should
the father reside in the same town, \[if the vow extends to\] one month,
he \[the husband\] must keep her; \[but if to\] two months, he must
divorce her, and pay her Ketubah. Should the father reside in another
town, \[if the vow extends to\] one festival, he \[the husband\] must
keep her; <span id="fr_869"></span>[5](#fn_864) \[but if to\] three
festivals, he must divorce her, and pay her Ketubah.

§ 5. He who tacitly consents to the vow of his wife, that she will not
enter a house of mourning or a house of feasting, <span
id="fr_870"></span>[6](#fn_865) must divorce her, and pay her Ketubah,
because he closes \[all doors\] against her. <span
id="fr_871"></span>[7](#fn_866) But if he assigns other \[good\] reasons
\[for confirming her vow <span id="fr_872"></span>[8](#fn_867)\], he is
permitted to keep her. If he says: "\[I will annul thy vow\] on
condition thou tellest A.B. what \[lewd words\] thou didst speak to me,"
or "which I did speak to thee," or that she is to fill \[a given number
of buckets of water\] and pour \[them\] on a dunghill, <span
id="fr_873"></span>[9](#fn_868) he must divorce her, and pay her
Ketubah.

§ 6. The following women are divorced, and do not receive \[the amount
of\] their Ketubah:—She who violates the Law of Moses, or Jewish
\[rules\]. <span id="fr_874"></span>[10](#fn_869) What constitutes \[a
violation of\] the Law of Moses? If she causes him to eat \[food\] which
has not paid tithe: if she submits to his embraces while she is in a
state of Niddah: <span id="fr_875"></span>[11](#fn_870) if she does not
set apart Chalah: and if she vows, but does not keep \[her vow\]. What
constitutes \[a violation of\] Jewish rules \[customs\]? If she goes out
with her hair loose \[bareheaded\]: if she spins in the street, and
converses \[flirts\] with any man. Abbah Saul saith, "\[Likewise\] if
she curses his children in his presence." R. Tarphon saith, "\[Also\] if
she is a ‏קולנית‎, a noisy woman." What is \[meant

<span id="page_260">p. 260</span>

by\] a noisy woman? One who speaks in her own house \[so loud\] that the
neighbours can hear her.

§ 7. If a man is Mekadesh <span id="fr_876"></span>[12](#fn_871) a
woman, on condition that she is not subject to any vows, and it is
discovered that she is subject to vows, the Kidushin <span
id="fr_877"></span>[13](#fn_872) are void. Should he have espoused her
without investigation \[as to the condition he stipulated\], and then
discovers that she is subject to vows, he may divorce her without paying
her Ketubah. If he has mekadeshed her on condition that she is free from
corporeal blemishes, and she is found to be subject to such blemishes,
the Kidushin are void. Should he have espoused her without
investigation, and then discovers blemishes, he may divorce her without
paying her Ketubah. All those blemishes which disqualify priests <span
id="fr_878"></span>[14](#fn_873) \[from ministering at the altar\], also
disqualify women \[from insisting on the validity of their Kidushin\].

§ 8. If the blemishes are discovered while she is yet in her father's
house, it is incumbent on the father to prove, that after she was
betrothed these blemishes had arisen, and his \[the bridegroom's\] field
become harrowed. <span id="fr_879"></span>[15](#fn_874) But if she is
entered under the husband's authority, it is incumbent on the husband to
prove, that before she was betrothed these blemishes existed in her, and
that his bargain was entered upon in error. Such is the dictum of R.
Meir, but the sages say: "To what do these remarks apply? To blemishes
that are hidden \[out of sight\]; but with respect to those that are
evident he cannot start any objections. And should there be a bath in
the city in which the espousals are to take place, he cannot raise any
objections, even with respect to such blemishes as are hidden, as he
could cause her to be examined by his female relatives."

§ 9. Should the husband contract any corporeal blemish, they \[the
Bethdin\] do not compel him to divorce his wife. R. Simeon ben Gamaliel
saith, "To what \[case\] does this assertion apply? To minor blemishes.
But \[in cases of\] serious blemishes, they compel him to divorce \[his
wife\]."

§ 10. The following \[are the circumstances on account of which\] they
compel him to divorce \[his wife\]: if he is smitten with leprosy, or
afflicted with a polypus; <span id="fr_880"></span>[16](#fn_875) or if
he gathers dogs’-dung \[for the purpose of preparing leather\], or is a
copper-smelter, or a tanner. <span id="fr_881"></span>[17](#fn_876)

<span id="page_261">p. 261</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Whether these
circumstances existed before marriage or arose after marriage, with
respect to them all, R. Meir observes, "Even though he \[the husband\]
specially covenanted with her, <span id="fr_882"></span>[18](#fn_877)
she may plead, 'I thought I could bear it, but now I find I cannot.'"
The sages, however, hold, that she is compelled to bear it, <span
id="fr_883"></span>[19](#fn_878) except \[in the case of the husband
becoming\] smitten with leprosy, as he \[then\] is in danger of a
decline. <span id="fr_884"></span>[20](#fn_879) It happened at Sidon,
that a tanner died, and left a brother \[who also was\] a tanner. The
sages held "That she \[his childless widow\] had a right to plead, 'Thy
brother I could bear, but thee I cannot bear.'" <span
id="fr_885"></span>[21](#fn_880)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_860"></span>[258:1](etm126.htm#fr_865) Who is to furnish
her with necessaries beyond the produce of her own labour. This guardian
the husband must not specially appoint, since a man's representative is
like himself; a special appointment would, therefore, be an infringement
on his vow, but he declares, "Whosoever provides for her shall not he a
loser."

<span id="fn_861"></span>[258:2](etm126.htm#fr_866) By not exercising
his prerogative to annul her vow the day he hears thereof. (Vide Numbers
xxx. 8–11.)

<span id="fn_862"></span>[258:3](etm126.htm#fr_867) And if she has fixed
a limit to her vow, it must not exceed twelve months.

<span id="fn_863"></span>[259:4](etm126.htm#fr_868) Under a penalty,
that if she does she would forego all connubial intercourse with her
husband.

<span id="fn_864"></span>[259:5](etm126.htm#fr_869) The text here
requires the following emendation: "But if to two festivals, he must
divorce her, and pay her Ketubah; but in the case of a priestess, should
the vow extend to two festivals, he may keep her, but if to three," &c.

<span id="fn_865"></span>[259:6](etm126.htm#fr_870) Under the same
penalty as in note 4.

<span id="fn_866"></span>[259:7](etm126.htm#fr_871) He excludes her from
sympathy in the hour of grief, and from consolation that might alleviate
her sufferings.

<span id="fn_867"></span>[259:8](etm126.htm#fr_872) That the inhabitants
of the town are wicked, and not fit to associate with.

<span id="fn_868"></span>[259:9](etm126.htm#fr_873) According to some
commentators, this means that she is to prevent conception after
coition. The conditions here mentioned are such, that in the one case
she is required to violate the rules of decency and of self-respect, and
in the other to appear in the eyes of the world as a lunatic, or be
guilty of an impious act.

<span id="fn_869"></span>[259:10](etm126.htm#fr_874) Customs observed by
Jewish women, though not enacted in the law.

<span id="fn_870"></span>[259:11](etm126.htm#fr_875) Telling him that
she is clean.

<span id="fn_871"></span>[260:12](etm126.htm#fr_876) Mekadesh, the act
of betrothing.

<span id="fn_872"></span>[260:13](etm126.htm#fr_877) Kidushin,
betrothment.

<span id="fn_873"></span>[260:14](etm126.htm#fr_878) Vide Leviticus xxi.
17, and Treatise Bekooroth, chap. VII.

<span id="fn_874"></span>[260:15](etm126.htm#fr_879) Vide chap. I. § 6,
and note 8 of this Treatise.

<span id="fn_875"></span>[260:16](etm126.htm#fr_880) ‏פיליפוס‎, from the
Greek πολυπους, a disease of the nose.

<span id="fn_876"></span>[260:17](etm126.htm#fr_881) In the
last-mentioned four instances, either by reason of his disease or of
<span id="page_261">p. 261</span> his trade, he emits a fetid
disagreeable odour, which renders contact with his person extremely
loathsome.

<span id="fn_877"></span>[261:18](etm126.htm#fr_882) Before marriage,
that she was not to avail herself of her legal right to seek a divorce.

<span id="fn_878"></span>[261:19](etm126.htm#fr_883) In case he has made
it a matter of special agreement before marriage, that she is not to
enforce her right of divorce.

<span id="fn_879"></span>[261:20](etm126.htm#fr_884) As a consequence of
his performing the marriage duty.

<span id="fn_880"></span>[261:21](etm126.htm#fr_885) She was
consequently entitled to perform the ceremony of Chalitzah, and did not
forfeit her Ketubah.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VIII](etm127)
