[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](etm122)  [Next](etm124) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0029F21C4/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Eighteen Treatises from the Mishna*, by D. A. Sola and M. J. Raphall,
\[1843\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER IV.

§ 1. \[Of\] a damsel who has been seduced, the \[compensation for\]
disgrace and deterioration, and the fine belong to her father, and
likewise \[the compensation\] for \[bodily\] pain \[of her\] who has
been ravished. If the cause was brought before the tribunal previous to
her father's death, \[the damages\] belong to her father. Should the
father die, they belong to her brethren; but if the cause could not be
brought before the tribunal previous to the father's decease, they \[the
damages\] belong to herself. According to another version, R. Simeon
saith, "If the money could not be received \[the payment enforced\]
previous to the father's decease, they \[the damages\] belong to
herself." If the cause was brought before the tribunal previous to her
becoming fully nubile, they \[the damages\] belong to her father. If the
father dies, they belong to her brethren; but if the cause could not be
brought before the tribunal till after she was fully nubile, they \[the
damages\] belong to herself. R. Simeon saith, "If the money could not be
received \[the payment enforced\] previous to the father's death,
\[according to another version, to her becoming fully nubile\], they
\[the damages\] belong to herself. The produce of her labor \[her
earnings\], and what she finds, even though she has not received \[the
wages of her labor previous to\] her father's death, belong to her
brethren."

§ 2. Should a man betroth his non-nubile daughter \[to one who\]
divorces her, and \[the father again\] betrothes her, and she becomes

<span id="page_250">p. 250</span>

a widow, her Ketubah from both husbands belongs to him \[the father\].
Should he marry her \[to one who\] divorces her, and \[the father again
causes her to\] marry, and she becomes a widow, her Ketubah from both
husbands belongs to herself. R. Jehudah saith, "The first Ketubah
belongs to the father:" but they \[the sages\] replied, "That from \[and
after\] the time she got married, her father has no claim on her."

§ 3. Should the daughter of a female proselyte who had been converted
along with her \[mother\], commit fornication \[after being betrothed as
a ‏נערה‎ damsel\] her \[punishment\] is strangulation, but she is not
\[to be brought out to\] the door of her father's house, <span
id="fr_821"></span>[1](#fn_816) nor has she \[a right to\] the 100 selah
\[in case she has been unjustly slandered\]. <span
id="fr_822"></span>[2](#fn_817) If she was conceived while \[her mother
yet was\] in unholiness \[previous to conversion\], but was born in
holiness \[after conversion\] her \[punishment\] is lapidation, but she
is not \[to be brought out to\] the door of her father's house, nor has
she \[a right to\] the 100 selah. But if \[both\] her being conceived
and her birth were in holiness \[took place after her mother's
conversion\], she is like a daughter of Israel in every respect. Whether
she has a father but no father's house, or a father's house but no
father, <span id="fr_823"></span>[3](#fn_818) her \[punishment\] is
lapidation: \[for\] the door of her father's house is not spoken of
otherwise than as a \[conditional\] command. <span
id="fr_824"></span>[4](#fn_819)

§ 4. The father is entitled to the Kidushin <span
id="fr_825"></span>[5](#fn_820) of his daughter \[she being
non-nubile\], whether they be by money, marriage contract, or
connection. He is \[moreover\] entitled to what she finds, to her
earnings, and to annul her vows. He \[also\] receives her Get <span
id="fr_826"></span>[6](#fn_821) for her, but does not enjoy the usufruct
\[of her maternal property\] during her life. The husband has the
advantage over him, inasmuch as he does enjoy the usufruct \[of her
property\] during her lifetime. But then he is bound to her maintenance,
to her ransom \[in case of her being led into captivity\], and to her
interment. R. Jehudah saith, "Even the poorest man in Israel should not
have less than two mourning pipes \[instruments\], and one mourning
woman \[at the funeral of his wife\]."

<span id="page_251">p. 251</span>

§ 5. She \[a female\] is always \[invariably\] under the authority of
her father until she is placed under the authority of her husband \[by
marriage\]; \[according to another version: until she is placed under
the ‏חפה‎ nuptial canopy\]. <span id="fr_827"></span>[7](#fn_822) Has
the father surrendered her to the emissaries of the husband, she is
under the authority of the husband. Has the father gone with the
husband's emissaries, or have the father's emissaries gone with the
husband's emissaries, she is \[yet\] under the father's authority. Have
the father's emissaries surrendered her to the husband's emissaries, she
is under the authority of her husband.

§ 6. The father is not obligated to maintain his daughter; for this
exposition \[of the following clause in the Ketubah\] was propounded by
R. Eleazar ben Azariah before the sages in the ‏ברם‎, <span
id="fr_828"></span>[8](#fn_823) in Jabneh: "The sons to inherit, and the
daughters to be maintained," even as the sons do not inherit till after
the father's decease, so the daughters likewise have no \[claim\] to be
maintained until after the father's decease." <span
id="fr_829"></span>[9](#fn_824)

§ 7. Though he \[the husband\] has not signed a Ketubah for her, \[the
bride, nevertheless\] a virgin receives 200 dinar, and a widow a maneh,
as that is a fixed stipulation \[enacted\] by the Bethdin. <span
id="fr_830"></span>[10](#fn_825) If he has signed over to her a field
worth 100 zooz only, instead of the 200 zooz \[legally her due\], and
has not \[in the Ketubah\] added the words, "All my other possessions
are subject to and liable for thy Ketubah," the obligation is
\[nevertheless\] in force as that is a fixed stipulation \[enacted\] by
the Bethdin. <span id="fr_831"></span>[11](#fn_826)

<span id="page_252">p. 252</span>

§ 8. Though he may not have inserted in her Ketubah, "If thou art made a
captive I will ransom thee, and receive thee \[back\] as my wife;" or,
if she be the wife of a priest, "and will bring thee back into thine own
land \[home\]," <span id="fr_832"></span>[12](#fn_827) the obligation is
nevertheless in force, as that is a fixed stipulation \[standing
condition enacted\] by the Bethdin.

§ 9. If she is made captive, he is bound to ransom her. Should he
propose, "Here is her Get, and \[the amount of her\] Ketubah, let her
ransom herself \[at her own expense\]," it is not allowed him \[so to
do\]. If she is hurt, he is bound to have her cured: but should he
propose, "Here is her Get, and \[the amount of her\] Ketubah, let her
get herself healed \[at her own expense\]," he is allowed \[so to do\].

§ 10. Though he may not have inserted \[on her Ketubah\], "The male
children thou mayest have by me shall inherit the amount of thy Ketubah
over and above their equal shares with their brethren," the obligation
is \[nevertheless\] in force, as that is a fixed stipulation \[standing
rule enacted\] by the Bethdin.

§ 11. \[Though he may not have inserted on her Ketubah\], "The female
children thou mayest have by me shall abide in my house, and be
maintained out of my property, until they are espoused by men," the
obligation is nevertheless\] in force, as that is a fixed stipulation
\[enacted\] by the Bethdin.

§ 12. \[Though he may not have inserted on her Ketubah\], "Thou shalt
abide in my house, and be maintained out of my property, as long as thou
continuest a widow," the obligation is \[nevertheless\] in force, as it
is a fixed stipulation enacted by the Bethdin. As above \[in the manner
and form above set forth\], the men of Jerusalem wrote \[in their
Ketuboth\]: the men of Galilee wrote like them: but the men of Judea
wrote "\[Thou shalt abide in my house, and be maintained out of my
property\] until the heirs prefer to give thee \[the amount of\] thy
Ketubah." Therefore, should the heirs prefer it, they give her \[the
amount of\] her Ketubah, and dismiss her. <span
id="fr_833"></span>[13](#fn_828)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_816"></span>[250:1](etm123.htm#fr_821) Deut. xxii. 21.

<span id="fn_817"></span>[250:2](etm123.htm#fr_822) Deut. xxii. 19.

<span id="fn_818"></span>[250:3](etm123.htm#fr_823) Should the father,
though still alive, possess no house, or should he be dead, in either
case the sentence of death is to be executed.

<span id="fn_819"></span>[250:4](etm123.htm#fr_824) The observances
which according to law (Deut. xxii. 21) ought to take place at her
execution, are not indispensable, and if they cannot be enforced, the
punishment is nevertheless inflicted.

<span id="fn_820"></span>[250:5](etm123.htm#fr_825) Vide Treatise
Kidushin, chap. I. § 1.

<span id="fn_821"></span>[250:6](etm123.htm#fr_826) Vide Treatise
Gittin, chap. I. § 1.

<span id="fn_822"></span>[251:7](etm123.htm#fr_827) Commentators are
divided in opinion as to what is here understood by the word Chupah.
According to the Rambam, it denotes a bower of roses and myrtles, into
which the bridegroom conducts his bride \[after she has been surrendered
to him by her father\], and where they are left alone. According to
Rabbenu Nissim, however, it is not necessary that they should be left
alone, but the wife becomes subject to the husband's authority as soon
as she enters his abode, to be there married to him.

<span id="fn_823"></span>[251:8](etm123.htm#fr_828) The lecture room at
Jamnia ‏יבנה‎, was in the form of an amphitheatre, with rows of seats
raised above each other, so that the disciples sat in clusters like
vines in a vineyard; hence the name, ‏כרם‎ vineyard.

<span id="fn_824"></span>[251:9](etm123.htm#fr_829) The father is not
bound to maintain either sons or daughters after they have completed the
sixth year, unless he is possessed of food sufficient for the
consumption of one day, but while he is, he must share it with his
offspring.

<span id="fn_825"></span>[251:10](etm123.htm#fr_830) And as such tacitly
understood and in force.

<span id="fn_826"></span>[251:11](etm123.htm#fr_831) That the whole of
his real property—even such parts thereof as he may subsequently
alienate—remain liable for the Ketubah, and are mortgaged for the
payment thereof.

<span id="fn_827"></span>[252:12](etm123.htm#fr_832) A priest must not
continue to cohabit with his wife after she has been a captive among
heathen, for she is considered to be ‏חללה‎, profaned. (Vide Levit. xxi.
7.)

<span id="fn_828"></span>[252:13](etm123.htm#fr_833) The formula of the
men of Judea has not been adopted: the widow has, consequently, the
right to abide in his house, and to be maintained out of his property
until she marries again, or chooses, judicially, to obtain her Ketubah.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter V](etm124)
