[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](etm155)  [Next](etm157) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0029F21C4/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Eighteen Treatises from the Mishna*, by D. A. Sola and M. J. Raphall,
\[1843\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER VI.

§ 1. The precept of covering the blood \[of wild animals and fowl\]
\[Lev. xvii. 19\], is obligatory in and out of the Holy Land, during and
after the existence of the Temple, in animals slaughtered for ‏חולין‎,
but not in those which are consecrated sacrifices. It applies solely to
wild animals and fowl, whether these were domesticated, or were caught
in a wild state. Also to the ‏כוי‎, <span
id="fr_1235"></span>[1](#fn_1230) because it is doubtful \[whether that
animal is to be classed among the domestic or wild animals\]. It may
therefore not he slaughtered on the festival, but if it was slaughtered
\[thereon\], its blood need not be covered \[on that day\].

§ 2. When an animal was slaughtered and found to be Terefá, or if it was
slaughtered for idolatrous purposes, or as ‏חולין‎ within, or as
consecrated offerings without the temple-court; or a bird or wild animal
condemned to lapidation, <span id="fr_1236"></span>[2](#fn_1231) R. Meir
considers it obligatory \[to cover the blood\], but the sages hold, "It
is not obligatory to do so." When it became Nebelah by being
slaughtered, or when it was killed by a knife being thrust up its
nostrils, or that the trachea and œsophagus were forcibly torn off, it
is not obligatory to cover the blood.

§ 3. When a deaf and dumb person, an idiot, or a minor, have slaughtered
in the presence of other \[i.e. qualified\] persons, the latter are
bound to cover the blood, but not if the above \[disqualified persons\]
had slaughtered by themselves; and thus also in respect to the precept
of not slaughtering an animal and its young \[on the same day\]: if any
of these \[unqualified persons\] had slaughtered

<span id="page_342">p. 342</span>

one of the animals in the presence of \[qualified\] persons, the other
animal may not be slaughtered after them \[on the same day\]. If they
had slaughtered one of the animals by themselves, R. Meir permits to
slaughter the other after them \[on the same day\], but the sages decide
it to be prohibited; they admit, however, "That a person who did so
slaughter it, is not liable to the punishment of the forty stripes."

§ 4. Should a person slaughter as many as a hundred wild animals or fowl
in one place, one covering will suffice for all of them. If many fowl
are killed in one place, one covering suffices for all. If many wild
animals and fowl were killed in one place, one covering suffices for
both kinds. R. Jehudah saith, "When a person slaughtered the wild
animal, he must cover its blood first, and then slaughter the fowl."
When a person had slaughtered \[a wild animal or fowl\], and omitted to
cover the blood, if another person had observed that omission, the
latter is bound to cover the blood. When the blood, after it was duly
covered, became uncovered, it is not necessary to cover it again; but if
the wind had covered it \[and it was afterwards uncovered\], it is
required to be again covered.

§ 5. When the blood was mixed with water, if the blood is still
apparent, the obligation of covering it remains in force. If mixed with
\[red\] wine, \[that wine\] must be considered as if it were water. If
it was mixed with the blood <span id="fr_1237"></span>[4](#fn_1232) of
another domestic or wild animal, that blood must be considered as water;
but R. Jehudah observes, "One kind of blood does not neutralise another
kind."

§ 6. The blood which spirts \[from the throat of an animal on its being
cut, and bespatters a wall, &c.\] and that on the slaughtering knife, it
is obligatory to cover. R. Jehudah saith, "When is this the case? When
there is no other blood but that; but when there is other blood besides,
it is not required to do so."

§ 7. With what substances is it lawful to cover the blood, and with what
may it not be covered? It is lawful to cover with pulverised manure,
with fine sand, with mortar, with potsherds, with bricks, or with the
earthenware cover \[or bung\] of a barrel, viz. when these substances
had been pulverised, but not with unpulverised manure, coarse sand, or
brick, or earthenware covering, which had not been pounded. Nor may it
be covered by merely placing a vessel over it. Rabbon Simeon ben
Gamaliel laid it down as a rule, "That

<span id="page_343">p. 343</span>

it is lawful to cover with any substance which would sustain vegetation,
but not with substances unfit for the growth of plants."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1230"></span>[341:1](etm156.htm#fr_1235) The offspring of a
he-goat and a hind. (De Pomis.)

<span id="fn_1231"></span>[341:2](etm156.htm#fr_1236) This does not
refer to the precept Exod. xxi. 29, like the above, but to another case,
viz. when an unnatural crime had been committed with any animal, when
the animal, as well as the person who committed the crime, is to be put
to death, as ordered in Lev. xx. 15 and 16.

<span id="fn_1232"></span>[342:4](etm156.htm#fr_1237) Produced by
venesection from the wild animal.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VII](etm157)
