[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](etm117)  [Next](etm119) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0029F21C4/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Eighteen Treatises from the Mishna*, by D. A. Sola and M. J. Raphall,
\[1843\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER XVI.

§ 1. When a woman, whose husband and rival had gone to a distant
country, is acquainted that her husband was dead, she may neither marry
\[strangers\] nor her brother-in-law by *Yeboom* until she has
ascertained whether that rival was left pregnant, or not. But if she had
a mother-in-law \[abroad\], she need not apprehend, <span
id="fr_771"></span>[1](#fn_766) lest that mother-in-law might have
brought forth a son, <span id="fr_772"></span>[2](#fn_767) but if her
mother-in-law was pregnant at the time of her departure, she is bound to
notice it. <span id="fr_773"></span>[3](#fn_768) But R. José declares it
unnecessary.

§ 2. When both wives of two brothers say severally, "My husband is
dead," neither may re-marry, because it is to be apprehended in respect
to each of them, that the husband of the other may \[possibly\] be yet
alive. If one has witnesses, and not the other, she who has witnesses
may not re-marry, <span id="fr_774"></span>[4](#fn_769) but the other
wife may. <span id="fr_775"></span>[5](#fn_770) If one has children, and
not the other, she who has children may marry again, but not sire who
has no children. When these women had married

<span id="page_238">p. 238</span>

two brothers by *Yeboom*, and these husbands also died, they may not
re-marry, but R. Eleazar saith, "Having once been permitted to marry
their brothers-in-law, this permission \[to re-marry\] extends to all
men."

§ 3. The testimony of a witness \[as to the identity of an alleged
deceased married man\], is only then valid, when he testifies that he
recognised the physiognomy with the nose <span
id="fr_776"></span>[6](#fn_771) of the deceased, although the witness
mentioned other particular signs in the person or dress \[of the
deceased\]. Testimony can only be received of one who had seen the
deceased after he had actually given up the ghost, and is not admissible
when the witness only saw him mortally wounded, or hanging, or that he
was being devoured by a wild animal. The identity of the person can only
be vouched for, when the witness saw him within three days after his
decease, but R. Jehudah ben Baba observes, "This is not the same for all
people, places, or seasons." <span id="fr_777"></span>[7](#fn_772)

§ 4. If a man fell into the water, whether that was limited in
extent, <span id="fr_778"></span>[8](#fn_773) or not, <span
id="fr_779"></span>[9](#fn_774) his wife may not marry again. <span
id="fr_780"></span>[10](#fn_775) R. Meir saith, "It happened once that a
man fell into a large well, and after three days came up again alive."
But R. Jose relates \[to the contrary effect\], that it once happened
that a blind man went down in a cave to bathe, and his guide followed
him, and when they had waited so long for their return till their death
appeared certain, their wives were permitted to re-marry. It also
happened in Asya \[Asia Minor\] that a man was fastened to a chain and
cast into the sea, and on withdrawing the chain, his leg only was found;
the sages then decided, that when the leg \[of a person\] is found
separated from the body above the knee, his wife may marry again, <span
id="fr_781"></span>[11](#fn_776) but not if the leg was found separated
below the knee.

§ 5. Even if \[a witness\] had his information from women only, who,
conversing with each other, said, "A.B. is dead," his evidence

<span id="page_239">p. 239</span>

is valid. R. Jehudah says, "Even when he heard children say to each
other, 'We are going \[home\] from the burial and lamentation for A.B.'"
It is immaterial whether the witness intended by that declaration to
proffer it as testimony, or whether he did it without such intention. R.
Jehudah ben Baba says, "An Israelite may tender his evidence even
intentionally, but the evidence of a heathen is void when it is proved
that he has some private purpose, or intention to serve \[by his
evidence.\]"

§ 6. Evidence \[of the death of a married man\] is admissible even when
the witness saw him only by candle or moonlight. A woman maybe permitted
to re-marry, even if a voice in the air or echo <span
id="fr_782"></span>[12](#fn_777) had only been heard, declaring that
event. It once happened, that a man, on the top of a mountain, called
out, "A.B., son of C.D., of the place E. is dead." They ascended the
mountain without finding the person from whom the voice had proceeded,
yet the wife \[of A.B.\] was permitted to marry again. Another case
occurred in Tsal-mon,—a man exclaimed, "N. N., son of N. N., of the
place N., has been bitten by a venomous serpent, and must die." When
they came to the wounded man, \[his features\] could no longer be
recognized, yet his wife was permitted to marry again.

§ 7. R. Akivah says, "When I went down to Neardeah to intercalate a
month in the year, I met Nehemiah of Beth-delee, who told me, 'I heard
that with the exception of R. Jehudah ben Baba, permission is refused in
the Holy Land to a woman to re-marry upon the evidence of a single
witness.' On my answering in the affirmative, he said, 'Tell them in my
name you are aware that the tranquillity of this country is disturbed by
armed hosts, \[and therefore I cannot go to tender my personal
evidence\], but I have it in tradition from the elder Rabbon Gamaliel,
that a woman may re-marry on the evidence of a single witness, or of
that of a woman or slave.' When I returned and informed \[the younger\]
Rabbon Gamaliel of this, he rejoiced and said, 'We have found a
colleague for R. Jehudah ben Baba, \[who agrees with him in this\].'
That circumstance reminded Rabbon Gamaliel \[the younger\], that once,
when several men were killed at *Tel Arzah*, Rabbon Gamaliel, the elder,
permitted their wives to re-marry on the evidence of a single witness,
and to receive as valid evidence the testimony of a witness, whose
knowledge of the fact is only derived from

<span id="page_240">p. 240</span>

the deposition he heard another witness make in this case, also, \[to
grant this permission to re-marry\] on the evidence of a slave-woman, or
female slave." R. Eleazar and R. Joshua are, however, of opinion, that
the mentioned permission ought not to be granted to a woman to re-marry
upon the evidence of a single witness. R. Akivah saith, "Neither upon
that of a woman, a slave, a bond-woman, or of near relatives." But the
sages said unto him, "It happened once, that when a family of Levites
went to Zoar, the city of Palms, one \[of the said Levites\] fell ill on
the road, and they brought him to an inn. When they returned, they asked
the hostess, 'Where is our companion?'—She answered, 'He died, and I
have had him buried': permission was thereupon granted the wife of the
deceased to re-marry." They \[the sages\] said \[moreover\] to him,
"Shall not the evidence of a woman of sacerdotal race be equally
admissible as that of the \[heathen\] hostess of an inn?" but he
replied, "The reason why credence was accorded to this hostess was,
because she produced to them the staff of the deceased, his
travelling-bag, and the roll of the law he carried with him."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_766"></span>[237:1](etm118.htm#fr_771) To re-marry.

<span id="fn_767"></span>[237:2](etm118.htm#fr_772) In which case she
became subject to *Yeboom*, and could not marry any one else till she
had performed *Chalitzah* to him.

<span id="fn_768"></span>[237:3](etm118.htm#fr_773) That is, she must
wait for positive information whether her mother-in-law brought forth a
son before she can re-marry, or is bound to wait for *Chalitzah* or
*Yeboom*.

<span id="fn_769"></span>[237:4](etm118.htm#fr_774) Because the rule is
that the evidence of one sister-in-law is not available in this matter
to the other.

<span id="fn_770"></span>[237:5](etm118.htm#fr_775) Because her own
evidence suffices to prove the death of her own husband, and that of the
brother-in-law is proved by the evidence of the witnesses.

<span id="fn_771"></span>[238:6](etm118.htm#fr_776) Namely, that the
nose had not been cut off, or was so mutilated, as to render the person
irrecognizable.

<span id="fn_772"></span>[238:7](etm118.htm#fr_777) Because the period
and progress of putrefaction, which renders the features irrecognizable,
varies greatly in respect to the habit of body of the subject, the heat
or coldness of the climate, and of the season of the year.

<span id="fn_773"></span>[238:8](etm118.htm#fr_778) Under this
description arc to be understood ditches or ponds, or other sheets of
water, of which all the sides or banks may he seen.

<span id="fn_774"></span>[238:9](etm118.htm#fr_779) Such as the sea,
large rivers, &c.

<span id="fn_775"></span>[238:10](etm118.htm#fr_780) For he may,
perhaps, have been saved, although he did not return to his wife.

<span id="fn_776"></span>[238:11](etm118.htm#fr_781) For it is supposed,
that a person so circumstanced cannot possibly survive.

<span id="fn_777"></span>[239:12](etm118.htm#fr_782) In the original ‏בת
קול‎ "a daughter," or production of the voice, i.e. an echo. In the
present case it is supposed that the person from whom the voice
proceeded had gone away after he made the announcement.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Introduction](etm119)
