[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](etm120)  [Next](etm122) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0029F21C4/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Eighteen Treatises from the Mishna*, by D. A. Sola and M. J. Raphall,
\[1843\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER II.

§ 1. A woman, who becoming widowed or divorced, asserts, "As a virgin I
was married," while he \[the husband, or his heir\] asserts, "No! as a
widow thou wast married," \[in her case\] should there be evidence to
prove that she went \[to be married\] in a myrtle-wreath, <span
id="fr_795"></span>[1](#fn_790) and with her hair flowing, her Ketubah
is two hundred dinar. R. Jochanan ben Beroka saith, "The distribution of
parched corn <span id="fr_796"></span>[2](#fn_791) is also evidence \[in
her favor\]."

§ 2. R. Joshua admitted, "That should a man say to his neighbour, 'This
field did belong to thy father, but I bought it of him,' he is to be
believed, because the same mouth which binds also unbinds. <span
id="fr_797"></span>[3](#fn_792) But should there be evidence that the
field \[in question\] had belonged to the father of his neighbour, and
he \[the present holder, to justify and maintain his possession\]
asserts, 'I bought it of him,' he is not to be believed \[on his bare
unsupported assertion\]."

§ 3. Should witnesses declare, "This \[attestation\] is \[in\] our
handwriting, but we were forced \[to attest\]," or "we were minors," or
"we were \[on the score of consanguinity\] legally disqualified \[from
becoming\] witnesses," they are to be believed. <span
id="fr_798"></span>[4](#fn_793) But if there be witnesses to prove that
it is their handwriting, or if their handwriting is proved by other
means, they are not to be believed.

<span id="page_245">p. 245</span>

§ 4. Should one of them declare, "This is my handwriting, and this is
the handwriting of my companion;" and the other likewise declares, "This
is my handwriting, and that is the handwriting of my companion," they
are to be believed. Should each of them only declare, "This is my
handwriting," they require the additional \[testimony\] of another
person. Such is the dictum of Rabbi; but the sages hold that they do not
require the additional \[testimony\] of another person, but every man is
to be believed, when he declares, "This is my handwriting."

§ 5. A woman, who declares, "I have been married, but am divorced," is
to be believed, because the same mouth which binds also unbinds. <span
id="fr_799"></span>[5](#fn_794) But if there is evidence that she had
been married, although she asserts, "I am divorced," she is not to be
believed \[on her bare assertion\]. If she declares, "I have been
captured by Gentiles, but am undefiled," she is to be believed, because
the same mouth which binds also unbinds. <span
id="fr_800"></span>[6](#fn_795) But if there is evidence that she was in
captivity, although she asserts, "I am undefiled," she is not to be
believed. Should the evidence appear after her \[being declared
qualified for\] marriage \[with a priest\], her marriage is not
invalidated.

§ 6. If two women have been captured by heathens, the one declaring, "I
have been captive, but am undefiled," and the other likewise declaring,
"I have been captive, and am undefiled," neither of them is to be
believed. But if they bear testimony in favor of each other, they are to
be believed.

§ 7. Such \[is\] likewise \[the case\] with two men. \[If\] one
declares, "I am a priest," and the other \[also\] declares, "I am a
priest," neither of them is to be believed. <span
id="fr_801"></span>[7](#fn_796) But if they bear testimony in favor of
each other, they are to be believed.

§ 8. R. Jehudah saith, "No man is to be raised \[admitted\] to the
priesthood on the testimony of one witness \[only\]." R. Eleazar saith,
"When does this rule hold good? In case there should be any opponents
\[who gainsay his claim\]; but where there is no opposition, they do
raise \[admit\] to the priesthood on the testimony of \[only\] one
witness."

§ 9. A woman who is imprisoned among heathens on account of money
matters, is \[after her liberation\] permitted to her husband \[but if
imprisoned\] under sentence of death, \[she is after her liberation\]

<span id="page_246">p. 246</span>

interdicted to her husband. <span id="fr_802"></span>[8](#fn_797) A town
having been taken by siege \[storm\], all the priestesses \[wives of
priests\] that are within it become disqualified, and their marriage
void. But if they have any witness \[to attest that they have not been
defiled\], even \[though it be\] a bondman or a bondwoman, they are to
be believed; whereas no person is to be believed in his own favor.
\[When Jerusalem was taken\] R. Zachariah ben Hakazab \[a priest\]
declared: "\[By\] this \[holy\] temple, \[I swear\] her hand \[that of
his wife\] did not quit my hand from the hour the heathens entered into
Jerusalem, and until they left \[again\]." But they \[the sages\]
answered him: "No man can bear witness in his own favor."

§ 10. \[In\] the following \[cases, men\] are to be believed \[should
they offer\] to testify, when grown up, to what they have seen while
children. A man is to be believed, who affirms, "This is the handwriting
of my father;" "this is my teacher's handwriting;" \[or\] "this is my
brother's handwriting;" \[or\] "I remember that the woman A.B. went
forth \[to be married\] with a myrtle-wreath and flowing hair;" <span
id="fr_803"></span>[9](#fn_798) \[or\] "that A.B. went out of the school
to bathe and eat heave, and that he partook with us on the
thrashing-floor;" <span id="fr_804"></span>[10](#fn_799) \[or\] "that
this place is a ‏בית הפרס‎" <span id="fr_805"></span>[11](#fn_800)
\[or\] "thus far \[until this spot\] did we go on the Sabbath." <span
id="fr_806"></span>[12](#fn_801) But he is not to be believed were he to
state, "A.B. had a right of thoroughfare here;" \[or\] "A.B. had a right
here to place his deceased relatives, and to perform funeral
laments." <span id="fr_807"></span>[13](#fn_802)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_790"></span>[244:1](etm121.htm#fr_795) According to others
"a veil." Virgin brides wore such ornaments.

<span id="fn_791"></span>[244:2](etm121.htm#fr_796) On the marriage of a
virgin, parched corn was distributed among the wedding-guests.

<span id="fn_792"></span>[244:3](etm121.htm#fr_797) R. Joshua,
maintaining that the woman cannot be a trustworthy witness in her own
case, and having thereby established a general principle to that effect,
admits the exception to his general rule, which is in the case of a man,
who having by his own unsupported statement acknowledged a liability
that otherwise could not have been brought home to him, is to be
believed when he states how, and by what means he became discharged of
that liability. For if his own unsupported evidence is to have force
against him, it must have equal force for him.

<span id="fn_793"></span>[244:4](etm121.htm#fr_798) Provided there be no
other evidence than their own admission to prove their handwriting, so
that this case comes under the principle of the preceding Mishna, that
the same mouth which hinds also unbinds.

<span id="fn_794"></span>[245:5](etm121.htm#fr_799) She is consequently
at liberty to marry again.

<span id="fn_795"></span>[245:6](etm121.htm#fr_800) She is consequently
qualified to marry a priest.

<span id="fn_796"></span>[245:7](etm121.htm#fr_801) Or considered as
entitled to enjoy heave, &c.

<span id="fn_797"></span>[246:8](etm121.htm#fr_802) From the libidinous
practices of the heathens, it was presumed that they abused her person,
and that she consented, in order to save her life.

<span id="fn_798"></span>[246:9](etm121.htm#fr_803) That consequently
she was married as a virgin.

<span id="fn_799"></span>[246:10](etm121.htm#fr_804) That he was a
priest, and entitled to heave, &c.

<span id="fn_800"></span>[246:11](etm121.htm#fr_805) A burial-place that
has been ploughed, and made arable, and the vicinage of which, in a
circumference of one hundred Amoth, remains unclean.

<span id="fn_801"></span>[246:12](etm121.htm#fr_806) Which indicates the
Techoom. (Vide Treatise Erubin, chap. V. 4 5.)

<span id="fn_802"></span>[246:13](etm121.htm#fr_807) Because these
involve questions of property, requiring full evidence.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter III](etm122)
