[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](etm153)  [Next](etm155) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0029F21C4/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Eighteen Treatises from the Mishna*, by D. A. Sola and M. J. Raphall,
\[1843\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER IV.

§ 1. When an animal labours under difficult parturition, and the fœtus
put forth its fore-leg, and withdrew it again within the womb, this
fœtus may be eaten \[by killing the dam\]; but if it once protruded its
head, though it withdrew it again, it is to be considered as born. Any
part of an animal fœtus which had been cut off may be lawfully eaten,
but if aught of the spleen or kidneys of an animal had been cut off, it
is prohibited to eat these pieces. The rule is, "Whatever belongs to the
body of the animal itself, it is prohibited to eat, when cut off while
the animal was yet alive, but what does not belong to its own body, it
is lawful to eat."

§ 2. When an animal labours under difficult parturition with its
firstborn young, the fœtus may be cut from the womb piecemeal, <span
id="fr_1213"></span>[1](#fn_1208) and the pieces cast to the dogs; <span
id="fr_1214"></span>[2](#fn_1209) but if the greater part of the body
had protruded, it must be buried, and the dam is not further subject to
the law of firstborn. <span id="fr_1215"></span>[3](#fn_1210)

§ 3. When the fœtus of an animal lies dead within its womb, and the
shepherd \[or herd\] put his hand inside and touched it, he is clean,
whether the animal was of a clean or of an unclean species; but R. José,
the Galilean, holds that he is clean when the animal was of a clean, and
defiled when the animal was of an impure species.

<span id="page_336">p. 336</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> A human fœtus
which died within the womb, and was touched by the midwife placing her
hand inside, the midwife is unclean for seven days, but the woman \[the
mother of the fœtus\] is clean, till after the fœtus comes from her.

§ 4. When an animal labours under difficult parturition, and the fœtus
protruded its fore-leg, and it was cut off, and: then the darn was
slaughtered, the flesh of the young animal is clean. If the dam had been
slaughtered first, and then the protruding limb of the fœtus was cut of,
the flesh of the fœtus is to be considered \[unclean\], like that which
had touched the body of an animal that had died of itself \[Nebelah\].
Such is the dictum of R. Meir; but the sages hold, "That it must be
considered as if a properly slaughtered animal, but which, owing to some
internal blemish, had become Terefá, \[had touched it\]. For even as we
find that a properly slaughtered animal which became Terefá., becomes
clean \[i.e. is not considered as Nebelah\] by the said slaughtering,
thus also ought the slaughtering of the dam to render the protruding
limb of the fœtus clean." But R. Meir replied to them, "Not so, for when
the slaughtering causes an animal to be considered as clean, it is in so
far only as is applicable to the body of the animal itself: but can it
render clean the limb of the fœtus, which does not form part of the body
of the dam? Whence is it deduced, that the slaughtering renders an
animal found to be Terefá clean? \[It ought rather to be supposed, that
since\] it is prohibited to eat of an unclean animal, which is also the
case with "one found to be Terefá: that, therefore, even as an unclean
animal does not become clean by ‏שחיטה‎ \[or proper slaughtering
according to law\], thus also the act of ‏שחיטה‎ ought not to render an
animal clean, which was ascertained to be Terefá: yet this is not the
case, because, what is affirmed in respect to the unclean animal, which
at no time was a fit object for ‏שחיטה‎, cannot be predicated of the
clean animal \[which though Terefá\], *had* a period when it was fit for
‏שחיטה‎. Consequently you cannot hence deduce the proof you have
brought. Why does an animal, which is Terefá from the womb, become clean
by ‏שחיטה‎? It is because you cannot apply that which is affirmed in
respect to unclean animals, to which ‏שחיטה‎ is inapplicable, to clean
animals, to which ‏שחיטה‎ does apply. Thus also, an animal horn alive at
the end of eight months, does not become clean by the act of ‏שחיטה‎,
because that act is not lawfully applicable to similar animals, under
similar circumstances." <span id="fr_1216"></span>[4](#fn_1211)

<span id="page_337">p. 337</span>

§ 5. When a person slaughters an animal, and found within it a live or
dead fœtus eight months old, or a dead fœtus of nine months, he may tear
it up, <span id="fr_1217"></span>[5](#fn_1212) and let the blood run
off. If a live fœtus of nine months is found, it must be slaughtered,
and the penalty of the law would be incurred, if its dam was slaughtered
on the same day with it. <span id="fr_1218"></span>[6](#fn_1213) Such is
the dictum of R. Meir; but the sages say, "The act of ‏שחיטה‎ to the
dam, renders also the fœtus lawful." According to R. Simeon Sazuree
"\[The slaughtering of the dam is so efficient, that\] even if such an
animal should have grown to the age of eight years, and ploughs in the
fields, it does not require ‏שחיטה‎ for itself." If an animal had been
torn up \[i.e. been killed without proper ‏שחיטה‎\], and a live fœtus
nine months old found therein, it will be necessary to slaughter the
fœtus by itself, because the dam had not been \[properly\] slaughtered.

§ 6. An animal whose legs were cut off below the knee is Cashér, but not
when they were cut off above the knee, also when the junction of the
sinews <span id="fr_1219"></span>[7](#fn_1214) is interrupted. <span
id="fr_1220"></span>[8](#fn_1215) When the bone of the lower part of the
leg is broken: if the fractured part is covered by the flesh in the
larger proportion \[of its thickness and circumference\], the animal
becomes lawful for use by being properly slaughtered, but not when the
fractured part was not so covered.

§ 7. When an animal was killed, and a placenta \[i.e. the secundines or
afterbirth\] found therein, this latter may be eaten, <span
id="fr_1221"></span>[9](#fn_1216) if a person should not loath to eat
it; but it does not contract pollution as a thing edible, or as a
Nebelah. \[If the dam had died of itself\] but when it is considered
edible by any person, it becomes liable to contract pollution as an
edible, but not the pollution of Nebelah. When a placenta had partly
protruded from the womb, it becomes unlawful to be eaten. It is the sign
\[or proof\] of a child in woman, and of a young in an animal. <span
id="fr_1222"></span>[10](#fn_1217) A placenta that had been cast
prematurely by an animal which is with young for the first time, may be

<span id="page_338">p. 338</span>

cast to the dogs, <span id="fr_1223"></span>[11](#fn_1218) and in the
case of consecrated sacrifices it must be buried; <span
id="fr_1224"></span>[12](#fn_1219) but it is not lawful to bury it in a
cross road, or hang it up in a tree, <span
id="fr_1225"></span>[13](#fn_1220) because these are heathen practices.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1208"></span>[335:1](etm154.htm#fr_1213) To save the life
of the dam.

<span id="fn_1209"></span>[335:2](etm154.htm#fr_1214) Because it is
considered unborn. For a firstborn, being consecrated, may not be cast
to the dogs when it dies, but it must be buried.

<span id="fn_1210"></span>[335:3](etm154.htm#fr_1215) That is, any young
one she may have hereafter is not to be considered as a firstborn "that
openeth the womb." (See Exod. xiii. 1.)

<span id="fn_1211"></span>[336:4](etm154.htm#fr_1216) That is, ‏שחיטה‎
does not apply to an animal fœtus of eight months.

<span id="fn_1212"></span>[337:5](etm154.htm#fr_1217) That is, it does
not require ‏שחיטה‎.

<span id="fn_1213"></span>[337:6](etm154.htm#fr_1218) See Lev. xxii. 28.

<span id="fn_1214"></span>[337:7](etm154.htm#fr_1219) Hebrew ‏צומת
הגידין‎, meaning the place where the three sinews or muscles, the large
one and the two smaller ones at each side thereof, are joined, which is
a little above the ancle. There are sixteen such sinews in the leg of
fowl.

<span id="fn_1215"></span>[337:8](etm154.htm#fr_1220) By being cut
asunder.

<span id="fn_1216"></span>[337:9](etm154.htm#fr_1221) That is, it is not
considered as eating a part of a yet living animal, ‏אבר מן החי‎, which
is prohibited.

<span id="fn_1217"></span>[337:10](etm154.htm#fr_1222) The rule on which
all the regulations of this Mishna turn is, that there is never a
placenta without a fœtus.

<span id="fn_1218"></span>[338:11](etm154.htm#fr_1223) See Note 2, [p.
333](etm153.htm#page_333) of this Treatise.

<span id="fn_1219"></span>[338:12](etm154.htm#fr_1224) For the reason
stated Note 10, page [335](etm153.htm#page_335); and any young animal
born from one which was consecrated for sacrifice, becomes also
consecrated.

<span id="fn_1220"></span>[338:13](etm154.htm#fr_1225) These were the
superstitious practices of the heathens, who fancied that by those means
they could prevent abortions among their cattle.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter V](etm155)
