[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](etm108)  [Next](etm110) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0029F21C4/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Eighteen Treatises from the Mishna*, by D. A. Sola and M. J. Raphall,
\[1843\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER V.

§ 1. Rabbon Gamaliel saith, "In marriage by *Yeboom* no other letter of
divorce is valid after such a one has. already been given, <span
id="fr_703"></span>[1](#fn_698)

<span id="page_213">p. 213</span>

nor a promise of marriage after such a promise, nor connexion \[with
another sister-in-law\] after such connexion \[with a first\], and no
*Chalitzah* after a first *Chalitzah* had been given." But the sages
say, "Another divorce may be given after a first, or a promise of
marriage after such a promise, but there cannot be any thing \[further
of the same nature\] after a connexion, nor after a *Chalitzah*."

§ 2. As in the following cases:—When a brother-in-law promised marriage
by *Yeboom* to his widowed sister-in-law, and then gives her a *Get*,
she will be bound to perform also *Chalitzah* to him. <span
id="fr_704"></span>[2](#fn_699) If he promised her marriage, and then
received *Chalitzah* from her, she will require a *Get* \[in addition\]
to be fully released. If, after having promised her marriage, he had
connexion with her, he acted according to law. <span
id="fr_705"></span>[3](#fn_700)

§ 3. If he gave her a letter of divorce, and promised her marriage
afterwards, she will require another *Get* and *Chalitzah* \[to be fully
released\]. Also, if after giving her *Get* he had connexion with her;
but if, after giving her *Get*, he received *Chalitzah* from her, this
latter will be a useless act. <span id="fr_706"></span>[4](#fn_701) If
he received *Chalitzah* from her, and then gave her either a promise of
marriage, or a *Get*, or had connexion with her, or that the connexion
preceded the promise, or the *Get*, or the receipt of *Chalitzah* from
her, then neither of these acts are valid after *Chalitzah* has been
once performed. <span id="fr_707"></span>[5](#fn_702) It is immaterial
in these cases, whether it happened with one sister-in-law, and one
brother-in-law, or two sisters-in-law with one brother-in-law.

§ 4. As in the following case:—If a person promised marriage to his two
widowed sisters-in-law, they will both require \[to enable them to marry
another man\] a *Get* from him, and he is to receive *Chalitzah*

<span id="page_214">p. 214</span>

from one of them. If he promised marriage to one, and divorced the
other, then the first will require a *Get* and *Chalitzah*. If he
promised marriage to one, and then had connexion with the other, both
will require a *Get*, and one the *Chalitzah*. If he promised marriage
to one, and received *Chalitzah* from the other, the first will require
a *Get*. If he divorced both, they will both require *Chalitzah*. If he
divorced one, and had connexion with the other, this latter requires
both *Get* and *Chalitzah*. If he divorced one, and promised marriage to
the other, the last mentioned will require both *Get* and *Chalitzah*.
If he divorced one, and received *Chalitzah* from the other, nothing
that was done after the *Chalitzah* is valid.

§ 5. If he received *Chalitzah* first from one, and subsequently from
another sister-in-law, or after having received *Chalitzah* of one,
promised marriage to the other, or gave her *Get*, or had connexion with
her, or had connexion, first with one, and then with the other, and gave
the last mentioned then <span id="fr_708"></span>[6](#fn_703) a promise
of marriage, or a *Get*, or received *Chalitzah* from her, then, all
that happened after the *Chalitzah* \[or after the connexion\] is not
valid. It is indifferent whether this happen with one brother-in-law and
two sisters-in-law, or with one sister-in-law and two brothers-in-law.

§ 6. If, after receiving *Chalitzah* from his sister-in-law, he promised
her marriage, or divorced her, or had connexion with her, and gave her
afterwards a promise of marriage, or gave her *Get*, or received
*Chalitzah* from her, then no other acts after the *Chalitzah* are
valid, be it in the beginning, middle or end \[of other acts\], but in
the case of connexion; whatever took place afterwards is not valid, when
it happened at the beginning, but it is valid if it happened in the
middle, or end \[of other acts\]. R. Nehemiah saith, "Nothing is valid
either after *Chalitzah*, or after connexion, whether at the beginning,
middle, or end of other acts."

### CHAPTER VI.

\*      \*      \*      \*      \*  
\*      \*      \*      \*      \*  
\*      \*      \*      \*      \*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_698"></span>[212:1](etm109.htm#fr_703) It is necessary to
observe, that the Mishna treats here of a case when many wives were left
by a deceased brother to the surviving brother, who must perform the
*Yeboom*, or when there is but one such a widow, but many surviving
brothers. Neither this section, nor, indeed, the whole of this chapter,
can be well understood, without attending to the following rules,
mentioned in the commentary of Maimonides.

First, that a widow who, agreeably to the law of *Yeboom*, must either
be married by her brother-in-law, or must perform *Chalitzah* to him,
but is not released so as to enable her to marry again by any *Get* she
may have received of her said brother-in-law.

Secondly, that the obligation incumbent on the parties does only then
cease, when the said widow has fully and completely become the wife of
her former brother-in-law \[i.e. after the marriage has been
consummated\], and not before, <span id="page_213">p. 213</span> so that
although he betrothed her either with money, a ring, &c., or with a
marriage contract, which on other occasions is considered a binding and
valid marriage (see Treatise Kedushin, chap. I. § I); yet, here it is
but partially binding, and it is the same with a letter of divorce
\[*Get*\] given her before consummation of the marriage, which also has
the effect of releasing her, but partially only; for it will be
necessary that the ceremony of *Chalitzah* be performed before she be
finally released; and when such a woman is betrothed, she must first
receive a *Get*, and then perform *Chalitzah*, before she will be
finally released.

<span id="fn_699"></span>[213:2](etm109.htm#fr_704) But owing to the
divorce he may not marry her by *Yeboom*.

<span id="fn_700"></span>[213:3](etm109.htm#fr_705) According to the
regulations of the sages, that the promise of marriage must precede
connexion.

<span id="fn_701"></span>[213:4](etm109.htm#fr_706) For she is
prohibited to him from the moment he gave her the *Get*.

<span id="fn_702"></span>[213:5](etm109.htm#fr_707) Or after connexion
in other cases.

<span id="fn_703"></span>[214:6](etm109.htm#fr_708) After the connexion

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VII](etm110)
