[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](etm144)  [Next](etm146) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0029F21C4/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Eighteen Treatises from the Mishna*, by D. A. Sola and M. J. Raphall,
\[1843\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER I.

§ 1. A wife is acquired in three ways, and may recover her liberty <span
id="fr_1088"></span>[1](#fn_1083) in two ways. She is acquired by money,
by a marriage contract, or through carnal connection \[with her\]. <span
id="fr_1089"></span>[2](#fn_1084) What sum of money is required \[for
the mentioned purpose\]? According to Beth Shammai, "It must not be less
than a denarius \[‏דינר‎\] or its value;" <span
id="fr_1090"></span>[3](#fn_1085) but according to Beth Hillel, "It is
sufficient if it be a ‏פרוטה‎, or the value

<span id="page_307">p. 307</span>

thereof." What is the value of a ‏פרוטה‎? The eighth part of an Italian
asser \[‏איסר איטליקי‎\]. <span id="fr_1091"></span>[4](#fn_1086) She
regains her liberty by a Get \[letter of divorce\], and the death of her
husband. A woman whose husband died without issue, and who is left to a
brother-in-law to be married by him according to the laws of Yeboom, is
fully acquired by the brother-in-law as a wife by carnal connection with
her. She regains her liberty either by performing the ceremony of
Chalitzah, or by the death of her brother-in-law.

§ 2. A Hebrew slave becomes his master's property by money paid for his
purchase, or by virtue of a contract, and recovers his liberty by \[the
termination of his\] years \[of servitude\], by the Jubilee, and by the
decrease in the value of his original purchase money through his
[servitude](errata.htm#7). <span id="fr_1092"></span>[5](#fn_1087) A
Hebrew bondwoman's rights are more extensive than those of the Hebrew
bondman, inasmuch as she regains her liberty when she produces the signs
\[of puberty\]. A slave, who after six years of service wishes to remain
with his master, is acquired by the latter through the act of piercing
the slave's ear \[Exod. xxi. 6\], and recovers his liberty by the
Jubilee, or the death of his master.

§ 3. A Canaanite slave is acquired by money paid for his purchase, a
contract, or by any act of the slave indicative of his subjection, <span
id="fr_1093"></span>[6](#fn_1088) and can, according to R. Meir, recover
his liberty by his purchase money being repaid to his master by other
people, and by a deed of manumission which he himself receives. But the
sages say, "Also when the purchase money is repaid by himself, or the
deed of his manumission was received by others; but the money must be
given to him for that purpose by other people." <span
id="fr_1094"></span>[7](#fn_1089)

§ 4. Large cattle are acquired by the delivery \[of the animal from the
seller to the buyer\], and small cattle by raising them. Such is the
dictum of R. Meir and R. Eleazar; but the sages decide, "That

<span id="page_308">p. 308</span>

the legal acquisition of small cattle is by their being driven away \[by
or for the buyer\]."

§ 5. \[Immoveable\] property on which a lender has a retrogressive or
permanent right, <span id="fr_1095"></span>[8](#fn_1090) is acquired by
purchase money, deed of sale, or taking possession. \[Moveable\]
property which does not afford that security to a lender, is acquired by
being removed by the purchaser. Property of the description last
mentioned is acquired along with other property which does afford
permanent security, through the payment of the purchase money, by a deed
of sale, or taking possession. Yet, property which does not afford that
security, can cause its owner to take an oath on account of the
mentioned immoveable property. <span id="fr_1096"></span>[9](#fn_1091)

§ 6. In all things the value of which must be reduced into money, <span
id="fr_1097"></span>[10](#fn_1092) as soon as one person has taken
possession of the property he has received in barter, the other party
acquires a property in that for which he exchanged it, as for instance:
If a person bartered \[with anc. her\] an ox for a cow, or an ass for an
ox, as soon as one party has taken possession of the article bartered,
the other becomes possessed of the thing received in exchange, and is
liable to any risk appertaining thereto. The right of property is
secured to the Sanctuary as soon as the purchase money \[for the article
bought\] is paid; but that of private persons, only when they have taken
actual possession. A promise of property to the Sanctuary <span
id="fr_1098"></span>[11](#fn_1093) is equivalent to the delivery to a
private person. <span id="fr_1099"></span>[12](#fn_1094)

§ 7. All duties which it is incumbent on a father to do for his
son, <span id="fr_1100"></span>[13](#fn_1095) are incumbent on males
only, but not on females; but the obligation of all duties from a son to
his father <span id="fr_1101"></span>[14](#fn_1096) is incumbent on both
sexes. The observance of all affirmative precepts of the law, the

<span id="page_309">p. 309</span>

performance of which is limited to a certain time, are incumbent on
males, and not on females; and all affirmative precepts, the performance
of which is not limited to a certain time, are obligatory on both sexes.
All negative precepts, whether their performance does or does not depend
on time, are obligatory on both sexes, except the precepts not to
destroy \[the beard\] (Lev. ix. 27), not to cut round the corners of the
hair (ibid.), and against contamination from a dead body \[which, either
do not apply to, or are not obligatory on, females\].

8\. The imposition of hands \[on animals about to be sacrificed\], the
wavings \[of offerings\], the bringing \[meat-offerings\] to the altar,
the taking of the handful of flour thereof, the burning of incense, the
wringing or pinching off the heads of birds \[brought as sacrifices\],
the sprinklings and receiving of the blood \[of sacrifices\] are
obligatory on males only, and not on females, <span
id="fr_1102"></span>[15](#fn_1097) except the meat-offering of a
suspected adultress and of a woman who had taken the vow of a Nazarite,
which these women must wave \[personally\].

§ 9. Every precept which especially applies to the soil of the land of
Israel <span id="fr_1103"></span>[16](#fn_1098) is obligatory only
within the land of Israel, but those which do not especially apply to
that land <span id="fr_1104"></span>[17](#fn_1099) are obligatory in and
out of Palestine, except the precept of "Orlah" <span
id="fr_1105"></span>[18](#fn_1100) and "Kilaim." <span
id="fr_1106"></span>[19](#fn_1101) R. Eleazar saith, "Also the
prohibition to eat of the new corn." <span
id="fr_1107"></span>[20](#fn_1102)

§ 10. Whoever duly observes the commandment of the law will receive
happiness from heaven; his days will be prolonged, and he shall
hereafter inherit felicity in the land of eternal bliss. But he who does
not perform any commandment will not receive happiness from heaven, his
days will not be prolonged, nor shall he hereafter inherit felicity in
the land of eternal bliss. Whoever is versed in the law, in the Mishna
\[oral law\], and the usages of civilized society will not easily fall
into sin, as it is written, "A threefold cord is not easily broken"
\[Eccl. iv. 12\]; and those who are ignorant of the written and oral
law, and also of good morals, are unfit for human society.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1083"></span>[306:1](etm145.htm#fr_1088) To dispose of
herself, and marry again.

<span id="fn_1084"></span>[306:2](etm145.htm#fr_1089) That is, when he
says, "Behold thou art wedded to me with this connection," &c. Although
such a marriage is a legal one, and cannot be dissolved, except by a Get
or the death of the parties, yet the man who thus marries, is, as a
transgressor against morality and decency, punishable by the Tribunal
with the infliction of ‏מכת מרדות‎, or, "stripes for rebellion."

<span id="fn_1085"></span>[306:3](etm145.htm#fr_1090) This is calculated
to be equal to ninety grains of pure silver.

<span id="fn_1086"></span>[307:4](etm145.htm#fr_1091) Bartenora explains
in chap. iv. of ‏עדויות‎, and in chap. vii. of ‏כלים‎, that this is
Italian Greece, now called Calabria, which was anciently colonised by
the Greeks, and called by them Megala Hellas, or Magna Græcia \[Great
Greece\]. The value of a ‏פרוטה‎ is only half a grain of pure silver.

<span id="fn_1087"></span>[307:5](etm145.htm#fr_1092) A Hebrew bondwoman
or slave has a right to redeem herself at any time, by refunding to her
master the proportion of the original purchase money due for services
not yet performed; *ex. gr.* If sixty pieces were paid for six years'
servitude, the slave may after three years repurchase his liberty for
thirty pieces.

<span id="fn_1088"></span>[307:6](etm145.htm#fr_1093) That is, personal
services to the master, such as tying or untying his shoes, &c.

<span id="fn_1089"></span>[307:7](etm145.htm#fr_1094) Because, otherwise
it becomes the master's property.

<span id="fn_1090"></span>[308:8](etm145.htm#fr_1095) Which confers on
the lender of a mortgage an inalienable right as far as he is concerned,
and until he is paid; for should the borrower sell the property, the
lender has a right to take it from the buyer, and thus it always
retrogresses to the lender.

<span id="fn_1091"></span>[308:9](etm145.htm#fr_1096) Although no oath
is taken for immoveable property only.

<span id="fn_1092"></span>[308:10](etm145.htm#fr_1097) Namely, all
things that are exchanged for others, except coin.

<span id="fn_1093"></span>[308:11](etm145.htm#fr_1098) When a man says,
"This ox, or sheep, &c. I consecrate to the Sanctuary."

<span id="fn_1094"></span>[308:12](etm145.htm#fr_1099) Which completes
the bargain, and the seller is no longer at liberty to repent of his
bargain.

<span id="fn_1095"></span>[308:13](etm145.htm#fr_1100) They are:—1, to
circumcise him;—2, to redeem him, if a firstborn;—3, to instruct him, or
have him instructed in the Holy Law;—4, to teach him \[or have him
instructed\] in a trade or handicraft;—5, to marry him at a proper
age;—and 6, to have him taught the art of swimming.

<span id="fn_1096"></span>[308:14](etm145.htm#fr_1101) Viz. to honour
and fear him.

<span id="fn_1097"></span>[309:15](etm145.htm#fr_1102) Because the
Scripture mentions these commands in the masculine gender, ‏וסמך ידו
וקמץ והגיש‎ &c.

<span id="fn_1098"></span>[309:16](etm145.htm#fr_1103) Such as the
obligation of tithe heave, the agrarian rest during the Sabbatical year,
&c.

<span id="fn_1099"></span>[309:17](etm145.htm#fr_1104) As the observance
of the Sabbath, ‏תפילין‎, circumcision, &c.

<span id="fn_1100"></span>[309:18](etm145.htm#fr_1105) Vide Leviticus
xix. and Treatise Orlah.

<span id="fn_1101"></span>[309:19](etm145.htm#fr_1106) Ibid. and
Treatise Kilaim.

<span id="fn_1102"></span>[309:20](etm145.htm#fr_1107) Before it was
offered in the temple.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter II](etm146)
