[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](etm151)  [Next](etm153) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0029F21C4/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Eighteen Treatises from the Mishna*, by D. A. Sola and M. J. Raphall,
\[1843\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER II.

§ 1. When one of the pipes <span id="fr_1182"></span>[1](#fn_1177) has
been cut through in killing fowl, and both <span
id="fr_1183"></span>[2](#fn_1178) in killing cattle, they are
Cashér; <span id="fr_1184"></span>[3](#fn_1179) also when the greatest
part of these had been cut through. R. Jehudah saith, "It

<span id="page_329">p. 329</span>

is necessary that in killing fowl the veins at the side of the throat
should also be cut through." If but one half \[of the trachea\] is cut
through in fowl, and one and a half \[i.e. the trachea, and half of the
œsophagus\] in cattle, it is unfit; but if the greater part of one tube
is cut through in fowl, and the greater part of the two in cattle, it is
Cashér.

§ 2. If a person cut off two heads of animals or fowl at once, it is
Cashér; also if only the greater part of both tubes was cut through in
each. When two persons take hold of a knife whilst killing, even if one
held it at the top of the blade and the other at the bottom \[or
handle\], it is Cashér.

§ 3. If he hewed or chopped off the head at one blow, it is
Pasool. <span id="fr_1185"></span>[4](#fn_1180) If, when killing, he had
accidentally cut off the whole head, it is Cashér, if the knife extended
the width of a neck \[beyond the place cut\]. When a person in killing
cut off two heads at once: if the knife extends the width of one neck
only beyond the places cut, it is Cashér. <span
id="fr_1186"></span>[5](#fn_1181) This is, however, only in case the
knife had been passed down the throat of the animal only, without
drawing it back, or that the second or back cut was only made without
the down \[or first\] cut; but if the knife in cutting was drawn to and
fro, if it exceeded in the least the width of the throat of the animals,
even if it was as small as a penknive or lancet, it is Cashér. Should a
knife happen to drop accidentally on the throat of an animal, although
it was duly slaughtered in consequence, yet it is Pasool; for it is said
\[Deut. xxvii. 7\], "Thou shalt sacrifice, and thou shalt eat," viz.
that only which *thou* \[thyself\] sacrificest, that shalt thou eat. If
whilst in the act of slaughtering, the knife should drop from a person's
hand, and he picked it up; or his clothes, and he picked them up; <span
id="fr_1187"></span>[6](#fn_1182) or, that having become exhausted by
the exertion of setting or sharpening the knife, it was necessary that
another person should finish the cutting; if the delay thereby
occasioned was such, that during its duration another similar animal
might have been slaughtered, it is Pasool. R. Simeon said, "When a knife
could have been examined <span id="fr_1188"></span>[7](#fn_1183) during
the interval."

§ 4. When the œsophagus had been duly cut through, but the trachea was
torn off, or the reverse; or, that he cut through one of

<span id="page_330">p. 330</span>

the tubes, and then waited till the animal died; or, that he covered or
hid the knife by placing it under the second tube, <span
id="fr_1189"></span>[8](#fn_1184) and cut it off; it must, according to
R. Jishbab, he considered as Nebelah \[i.e. as an animal which died of
itself\], <span id="fr_1190"></span>[9](#fn_1185) but, according to R.
Akivah, as Terefá \[i.e. an animal torn by wild beasts\]. <span
id="fr_1191"></span>[10](#fn_1186) R. Jishbab gave the following rule
from the authority of R. Joshua, "Every animal which, owing to a defect
in slaughtering, has become Pasool \[or unfit for use\], must be
considered as Nebelah; but when the slaughtering was duly performed, and
it became Pasool through another cause, <span
id="fr_1192"></span>[11](#fn_1187) it must be considered as Terefá."
Then R. Akivah assented to him \[R. Jishbab\].

§ 5. When a domestic or wild animal or fowl was slaughtered, and no
blood followed \[the incision\], it is Cashér, and may be eaten with
unwashed hands; <span id="fr_1193"></span>[12](#fn_1188) because the
absence of blood rendered it unsusceptible of contracting and conveying
pollution. R. Simeon saith, "The slaughtering rendered it susceptible."

§ 6. If an animal is slaughtered when it is dangerously ill, according
to Rabbon Simeon ben Gamaliel, "It is sufficient \[to render it Cashér\]
when it can move or struggle with its fore and hind legs." R. Eleazar
saith, "It suffices if the blood spirted after its throat was cut." R.
Simeon teaches, "That even when a person slaughtered such an animal at
night, and found in the morning the walls \[of the slaughter-house\]
covered with blood, it is Cashér, agreeable to R. Eleazar's opinion."
But the sages hold it to be Cashér only, "when the animal struggled with
either his fore or hind leg, or that it wagged its tail;" this applies
to small as well as to large cattle. When a small cattle \[a sheep or
goat, &c.\] is slaughtered \[when dangerously ill\], and extends its
fore-leg, but does not draw it back, it is Pasool, because it only
indicates the last throe of parting life. This is to be understood only
in case the animal is supposed to be in imminent danger; but when it is
considered sound, although it should not have exhibited any of the
mentioned symptoms \[after being killed\], it is Cashér.

<span id="page_331">p. 331</span>

§ 7. When a person had slaughtered an animal for a heathen, it is
Cashér; but R. Eleazar decides it to be Pasool. R. Eleazar teaches,
"That if he slaughtered it with the intention that the heathen should
only eat the caul of the liver of the animal, <span
id="fr_1194"></span>[13](#fn_1189) it is Pasool, because the tacit
intention of the heathen is to use it for idolatrous purposes." R.
Joshua argued against this, and demonstrated his opinion by a syllogism
from minor to major \[‏קל וחומר‎\], <span
id="fr_1195"></span>[14](#fn_1190) "If where the intention renders
Pasool, as in the case of consecrated things, <span
id="fr_1196"></span>[15](#fn_1191) the matter is determined by the
intention of the acting priest, does it not follow that in the present
instance, which relates to non-consecrated things, <span
id="fr_1197"></span>[16](#fn_1192) and where the intention does not
render them Pasool, it should be determined by the intention of him that
slaughtered?" <span id="fr_1198"></span>[17](#fn_1193)

§ 8. When a person slaughtered an animal in or to the name of mountains,
hills, seas, rivers, or deserts, it is Pasool. <span
id="fr_1199"></span>[18](#fn_1194) When one of two persons holding the
same knife had killed the animal with the mentioned idolatrous
intention, and the other with a lawful intention, the animal so killed
is Pasool.

§ 9. It is not lawful to slaughter \[so that the blood should run\] into
the sea, or in a river, or to place the animal within a vessel; <span
id="fr_1200"></span>[19](#fn_1195) but it is lawful to slaughter in a
wet ditch, <span id="fr_1201"></span>[20](#fn_1196) or within a utensil
on board a ship. <span id="fr_1202"></span>[21](#fn_1197) It is not
permitted to slaughter in any pit at all, but it is lawful to make a pit
within the house, that the blood may collect therein; but this is not
permitted in the public street, not to countenance the custom of
heretics. <span id="fr_1203"></span>[22](#fn_1198)

§ 10. When a person slaughters an animal \[for profane use out of

<span id="page_332">p. 332</span>

the temple\] as a burnt offering or \[other\] sacrifice, or as a
doubtful sin offering, or as a Paschal sacrifice, or as a thanksgiving
offering, it is Pasool; but R. Simeon considers it Cashér. When two
persons take hold of a knife in slaughtering, and one of them did so
with the intention of slaughtering it as one of the mentioned
sacrifices, and the other with a lawful intention, it is Pasool. When it
was slaughtered as a sin-offering, or as a certain trespass-offering, or
as a firstborn, or as tithe \[of animals\], or as an exchanged
sacrifice, it is Cashér; for this is the rule, "If tine animal was
slaughtered as a sacrifice that can be offered by voluntary vow, it is
Pasool; but if it was slaughtered as any other sacrifice, it is Cashér."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1177"></span>[328:1](etm152.htm#fr_1182) That is, of the
first, or windpipe.

<span id="fn_1178"></span>[328:2](etm152.htm#fr_1183) The trachea or
windpipe; and the œsophagus or gullet.

<span id="fn_1179"></span>[328:3](etm152.htm#fr_1184) This is only when
it has thus happened without premeditation, for it is necessary to
commence the act of slaughtering with the intention of cutting through
both tubes. For the elucidation of the following part of the Mishna, it
is necessary to observe, that, according to tradition, five things are
to be avoided in killing cattle or fowl, as they would render them
Pasool, i.e. improper and unlawful to be used as food. The five
mentioned invalidating causes are:—

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

‏שהייה‎ or *delay*. As when a person cuts a little of the throat of the
animal, then stops and cuts again, and continues in the same manner till
the act of killing is completed.

‏דרסה‎, or *pressure*, i.e. when the cutting was effected by pressure
only, without passing the knife to and fro on the animal's throat, or
cutting off the head or tubes by a single stroke, using the knife like a
hatchet or sword.

‏חלרה‎ or *concealment*, i.e. when the knife was covered with any thing;
for instance, if it was covered or hidden by the wool of the animal, or
by a cloth, or that it was passed between the tubes, and the killing
completed by cutting the tubes either upward or downward.

‏הגרמה‎ or *deviation*. When the cutting has been beyond the bounds or
limits on the throat of the animal, and it was made either above or
below these limits hereafter to be indicated.

‏עקיר‎ or *tearing*. When the tubes of any of them had been forcibly
torn away before the act of killing was completed. (For more detailed
particulars see Talmud, Treatise Cholin, p. 9, and Maimonides, chap.
iii. of Hilchoth Shechitah, in vol. ii. of Yad Hachazakah.)

</div>

<span id="fn_1180"></span>[329:4](etm152.htm#fr_1185) On account of
‏דרסה‎, "forcible pressure;" see the preceding note.

<span id="fn_1181"></span>[329:5](etm152.htm#fr_1186) Consequently, the
knife must be at least thrice the size of the throat.

<span id="fn_1182"></span>[329:6](etm152.htm#fr_1187) Which caused delay
\[‏שייהה‎\].

<span id="fn_1183"></span>[329:7](etm152.htm#fr_1188) To ascertain if it
were fit for killing, and without notches.

<span id="fn_1184"></span>[330:8](etm152.htm#fr_1189) The œsophagus or
gullet.

<span id="fn_1185"></span>[330:9](etm152.htm#fr_1190) Which pollutes the
person who carries it. (See Treatise Kelim.)

<span id="fn_1186"></span>[330:10](etm152.htm#fr_1191) Which does not
communicate legal uncleanliness to the person who carries it.

<span id="fn_1187"></span>[330:11](etm152.htm#fr_1192) Through any of
the causes mentioned in the next chapter.

<span id="fn_1188"></span>[330:12](etm152.htm#fr_1193) Blood is one of
the seven fluids, mentioned in Treatise Yadaim, which render a substance
susceptible of contracting legal pollution. (For a complete
understanding of this Mishna see Treatises Zebachim and Yadaim.)

<span id="fn_1189"></span>[331:13](etm152.htm#fr_1194) Or any small
part, if of the size of an olive only.

<span id="fn_1190"></span>[331:14](etm152.htm#fr_1195) Here the
syllogism is from major to minor.

<span id="fn_1191"></span>[331:15](etm152.htm#fr_1196) Holy sacrifices.
(See Treatise Zebachim).

<span id="fn_1192"></span>[331:16](etm152.htm#fr_1197) Animals
slaughtered for private use.

<span id="fn_1193"></span>[331:17](etm152.htm#fr_1198) And not that of
the heathen; consequently, that animal should be Cashér. The Halacha or
decision is according to R. Joshua's inference.

<span id="fn_1194"></span>[331:18](etm152.htm#fr_1199) To eat, but not
to derive benefit from it; but if he said, "I slaughter it to the demon
or spirit of the mountain," &c., it is not only Pasool, but prohibited
to derive benefit from it.

<span id="fn_1195"></span>[331:19](etm152.htm#fr_1200) To collect the
blood. This and the following were ordered to avoid the idolatrous
practices which were anciently in vogue; when, for instance, they let
the blood run into the sea, to propitiate Neptune or some other fabulous
deity.

<span id="fn_1196"></span>[331:20](etm152.htm#fr_1201) When the water is
turbid.

<span id="fn_1197"></span>[331:21](etm152.htm#fr_1202) Although the
blood should run thence into the sea, for it is evidently done not to
soil the ship.

<span id="fn_1198"></span>[331:22](etm152.htm#fr_1203) This was also one
of the ancient idolatrous practises to collect the blood in a pit.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter III](etm153)
