[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](etm110)  [Next](etm112) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0029F21C4/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Eighteen Treatises from the Mishna*, by D. A. Sola and M. J. Raphall,
\[1843\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER IX.

§ 1. There are certain classes of women who, although lawfully married,
are, nevertheless, prohibited to marry \[in the event of the death of
their husbands without issue\] their brothers-in-law by *Yeboom*. Others
may marry their brothers-in-law, although their

<span id="page_217">p. 217</span>

marriage with their deceased husbands was illegitimate. Some, again, are
permitted to both husband and brother-in-law; while others are
prohibited to both. Lawfully married, and yet prohibited to their
brother-in-law, are,—a widow married to an ordinary priest, whose
brother is a high-priest; \[also\] when a desecrated priest, who has a
brother properly qualified, marries a qualified priest's daughter; when
an Israelite, who has a bastard brother, was married to an Israelite
woman; when a bastard marries a bastardess, and he has a legitimate
Israelite brother:—all these marriages are indeed legal, but the females
may, nevertheless, in case of their husband's death, not marry their
brothers-in-law by *Yeboom*.

§ 2. The following women may be married to their brothers-in-law by
*Yeboom*, although they had been illegitimately married to their
husbands:—when a high-priest, whose brother is an ordinary priest, has
betrothed a widow; when a priest, whose brother is a desecrated priest,
had married a profane woman; when a legitimately born Israelite has a
bastard brother, and marries a bastardess; or a bastard, whose brother
is a legitimately born Israelite, married an Israelite woman:—all these
may be married to their brothers-in-law by *Yeboom*, although they were
\[in the first instance\] illegally married to their deceased husbands.
Prohibited to both husband and brother-in-law are:—when a high-priest
married a widow, and his brother also became high-priest, or even if
only an ordinary priest; when a qualified priest, whose brother is also
qualified, had married a profane woman; when a legitimately born
Israelite, who has a legitimate brother, marries a bastardess:—all these
\[women\] are prohibited to both husband and brother-in-law, but every
other woman \[legally married\] may be married by *Yeboom*.

§. 3. In respect to the secondary degrees prohibited by the scribes
\[see chap. II. § 4\], the following is to he observed:—when a woman is
related in the secondary degree to her husband, but not to her
brother-in-law, <span id="fr_713"></span>[1](#fn_708) she is indeed
unlawfully married, but may \[if a widow without issue\] be married by
*Yeboom* to her late husband's brother; if related in the secondary
degree to her brother-in-law, but not to her husband, she cannot be
married to her brother-in-law by *Yeboom*, although the marriage with
her late husband was strictly legal; but if related in the secondary
degree to both, she is prohibited to both: such a woman has no right to
the portion secured

<span id="page_218">p. 218</span>

to her by her marriage-contract, <span id="fr_714"></span>[2](#fn_709)
nor repayment for the *usufructum* goods she brought to her husband, nor
has she a right to her maintenance, and to repayment for the wear and
tear \[deterioration\] of the property of which her husband had the
*usufruct;* her offspring however, are legitimate, but the husband must
be compelled to divorce her. A widow married to a high-priest; or a
divorced woman, or one who had performed the ceremony of *Chalitzah*,
married to an ordinary priest; a bastardess, and a female *Netin*,
married to an Israelite; and a legitimately-born Israelite woman married
to a *Netin*, or to a bastard—have a right to their *Ketubah* \[though
illegally married.\]

§ 4. An Israelite woman who was betrothed to a priest, or is pregnant by
one, or is waiting to be married by *Yeboom* to a priest; a priest's
daughter also, who is similarly situated in respect to an Israelite, may
not eat of the heave; an Israelite woman betrothed to, or pregnant by, a
Levite, or waiting to be married to one by *Yeboom*; also a Levite's
daughter similarly situated in respect to an Israelite, may not eat
tithe. A Levite's daughter betrothed to, or pregnant by, a priest, or
one who waits to be married to a priest by *Yeboom*; also a priest's
daughter similarly situated in respect to a Levite, may neither eat of
the heave-offering, nor of tithe.

§ 5. An Israelite woman married to a priest, may eat of the heave, and
also after his death if left with a son by him; if she then married a
Levite she may eat tithe, and also, after his death, if left with a son
by him. If she married subsequently an Israelite, she may no longer eat
either heave or tithe, not even after the decease of her Israelite
husband, in case she was left with a son by him; if after his death his
son also died, she may eat tithe; when her son from the Levite dies, she
may again eat heave, and when her son from the priest also dies, she may
not eat either heave or tithes.

§ 6. A priest's daughter married to an Israelite, may not eat heave,
even after his death, if left with a son by him; if she married
afterwards a Levite, she may eat tithe, also after his death, if left
with a son by him: if she was then again married to a priest, she may
eat heave; after the death of her son from the priest, she may no longer
eat heave; after the death of her son from the Levite she

<span id="page_219">p. 219</span>

may not eat tithe, and if her son: by the Israelite also dies, she
returns to her father's house. And the text (Lev. xxii. 13) applies to
her case, where it is said, "She shall again return to her father's
house as in her youth, and shall eat of her father's meat," \[i.e.
heave, &c.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_708"></span>[217:1](etm111.htm#fr_713) *Ex. gr.* The
maternal grandmother of the husband; whereas his brothers are related to
her by her father's side only.

<span id="fn_709"></span>[218:2](etm111.htm#fr_714) Because the marriage
is illegal. This want of right to compel the payment of her marriage
contract is limited to the sum she actually brought; but she can compel
the payment of the ‏תוקפת‎, or voluntary addition by the husband.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter X](etm112)
