[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [New Thought](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lam04)  [Next](lam06.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Life and Its Mysteries*, by Frank L. Hammer, \[1945\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_29">p. 29</span>

### III

### THOUGHT

*The mystery of thought!* In infancy our bodies awaken to enjoy the
world into which we are born. Then our minds awaken to curious
questioning and restless desire for knowledge. Then our souls awaken to
conscious search for life's spiritual meaning and purpose.

What is thought? Thought is a product of mind—not the brain. The
material scientist says: "A certain formation of brain cells creates a
certain kind of thought." Whereas certain thoughts produce a certain
brain cell formation. Thought has the same relation to the mind as the
wind has to the atmosphere, for thought is the mind's vibration, and
thinking is the process of setting the mind into motion.

Where do thoughts come from? There are three primary sources. Firstly:
It is possible, through deep, spiritual contemplation, to receive
thoughts directly from Universal Mind. Every human being can contact his
Heavenly Father without the aid of any intermediaries, either spiritual
or physical. "To be pure in heart" is the only stipulated requirement.

Secondly: Many thoughts emanate from the subconscious mind. Deep within
this mind there takes

<span id="page_30">p. 30</span>

place an involuntary accumulation of impressions and suggestions which
come to the surface after a more or less prolonged gestation. Indeed,
this storehouse of memory, this record of life, is a prolific source of
thoughts and many people are entirely too much under its influence.

Thirdly: The principal fountain of thought is the mental atmosphere
which is permeated with the thoughts of other people, both embodied and
disembodied. We have all had the experience of wondering where some
thought came from; it was probably in the "air," and our brains, being
sensitive receiving sets, "picked" it up.

There is no such thing as original or isolated thoughts; what is new is
their manner of expression or restatement. We cannot conceive of
anything which is not; the ideas are somewhere existent and have always
been in the mind substance. Our task is to give new shape and semblance
to the thought elements which otherwise remain undifferentiated and
formless. And those whose patterns are the most unlike the whole mass or
group thought are considered the most original.

Thoughts resemble the temperament of the person in whom they appear.
Consequently, no one's thoughts should constitute another's authority
any more than every head should be forced into a hat of fixed pattern or
unalterable dimensions.

Many people are totally unaware of the power of thought and the effect
it has upon their lives. These people invariably consider failure,
misfortune,

<span id="page_31">p. 31</span>

unhappiness and numerous other undesirable conditions as things that
just [accidentally](errata.htm#0.md) happen, whereas they are created by
the individual's wrong habits of thinking.

Similarly, liberation from these conditions is achieved through *right*
thinking. In order to change the outer environment, it is necessary
first to change the inner. If you do not want an undesirable fate or
future, do not contemplate an undesirable one. Think about what you *do*
want—not about what you do not want.

Right thinking is the key to health, happiness, prosperity and success.
The power of thought can either fill our lives with good or leave them
utterly empty. Everything one needs for his well-being exists in the
universal mind. It is ours for the taking, for we are heirs to the
kingdom of God, co-sharers with His opulence, wisdom and love.

Plato said: "All reality exists in the mind. The outer phenomenon, that
which appears, is only its outer expression. The visible universe is the
reflection of the invisible."

Everything in the universe had its origin in thought, wrought out and
preserved in stone, iron and wood, which upholds all structures from a
toy to a battleship. All art, literature, music, law and religion
existed first in the mind. Burn all books, destroy all churches,
demolish all art and they would all be embodied again and again through
thought—the creative force, for it is impossible to destroy mind wherein
exists their eternal pattern or idea.

<span id="page_32">p. 32</span>

Thought is the power that heals. Disease, like all else, has its origin
in mind; therefore, the mind must be healed first. The mind must become
harmonious before the body can be, because mind through thought is the
power that rules and governs the body.

People have been killed by thought. Fear and worry have buried many of
their victims. Hatred, envy and jealousy have wrecked countless lives.
Poisonous thoughts affect the body like poisonous drugs. Persons in
public life have been made deathly ill and often their lives shortened
by the volume of destructive thoughts sent them on the ebb tide of
popularity. This has happened to practically all reformers, leaders,
religious and moral teachers who labored for the welfare and upliftment
of humanity.

Men, animals and plants all grow from within. Life is sustained by the
drawing in of congenial matter and by the expulsion of foreign matter.
The law of attraction is found throughout all life. Our mind always
attracts thoughts which are akin to our own and resists those opposed to
our mental constitution. The mental atmosphere is filled with thought
forces from which we attract only those which are like our own. If you
are gloomy, sad, full of worry and vexation, you are certain to attract
similar thoughts, which will make you sadder and more gloomy. On the
contrary, if you are confident, hopeful and cheerful, you will attract
that kind of thoughts to you.

Mind, like the body, grows on the food which nourishes it, and takes on
the nature of the thing it

<span id="page_33">p. 33</span>

dwells upon. And the food of the mind is thought. Therefore, the mind
either becomes refined, sensitive, spiritual; or gross, material and
dull; determined by the nature of thoughts which constantly occupy its
attention. Thoughts are reproduced on the countenance. Sensual thoughts
create a sensual face; spiritual thoughts create a beautiful, spiritual
expression. Not only does our youth leave us, but our face tells how it
has left us. Faces are open books wherein is written the history of our
thinking.

How you have thought is revealed by the lines indelibly engraved in the
palms of your hands, by the shape of your head and how you walk. An
index to the thoughts of another is to imitate his posture and walk,
then observe the effect it has on your thinking. Involuntarily, you will
feel and think as the person you are imitating. There are no "secret"
vices or habits. They are loudly proclaimed on the countenance. Emerson
truly said: "What you are speaks so loudly no one can hear what you are
saying."

Thoughts are the essence of heaven and hell. People say there is no
hell, yet have one in their hearts and carry one around in their minds.
For heaven and hell are not localities, but states of consciousness.
"And what matter where I be, if I be still the same?" Persecuting
memories, or a condemning conscience, put a man in hades whether he
lives upon this earth or elsewhere. Peace of mind and serenity of spirit
are bliss. And the heaven we will find on

<span id="page_34">p. 34</span>

passing over is one we have prepared by our thinking and by the service
rendered to our fellow men.

Few pleasures are comparable to a trained and cultivated mind. The mind
is developed by thinking and not by cramming it with other people's
thoughts and opinions. It is not a bucket to be filled, but a dynamo to
be set into motion. There are no limits to its accomplishments, for the
soul already knows all things; we only need to develop our instrument so
that it can draw upon this inexhaustible storehouse of knowledge. A mind
which has been strengthened by discipline can meet vicissitude and
disaster with greater fortitude and courage. And it is never too late to
undertake its cultivation, for, unlike the body which attains its zenith
early in life, the best years for mental productivity come in the latter
years after the body has lost its prime.

It is impossible to learn anything which will not be of use to us
sometime. There is a true story of a professor at Cambridge who, at the
age of eighty, began the study of Latin. When asked by curious observers
of what use Latin would be at his age, he replied: "I intend to use it
in my next life."

As today our powers are not of heritage only, but acquirements from
previous lives before coming to earth, so studies today undertaken, no
matter how near to the evening of our days, will surely bear fruit, not
alone in our present life, but in the future.

"Guard well thy thoughts, for thoughts are heard in heaven," is a
literal truth and explains the efficacy

<span id="page_35">p. 35</span>

of prayer. For thoughts are the links between invisible substance and
the visible form. Thought is a tangible substance and, united with will,
is a projectile. The motive power of thought will be explained in the
following chapter entitled: "*Telepathy*."

 

*Few of us demand enough from life. We should bear in mind that we are
not beggars, but heirs to the Kingdom*.

 

 

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: IV. Telepathy](lam06.md)
