[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [New Thought](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lam06)  [Next](lam08) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Life and Its Mysteries*, by Frank L. Hammer, \[1945\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_45">p. 45</span>

### V

### TRUTH

There never has been a time when the desire to know the truth was so
prevalent and strong. There never has been a time when there were so
many intelligent men and women who were not content with surface
knowledge, with the appearance of things or doctrines based on personal
authority. They seek to penetrate into the hidden causes of things. In
this advancement many mistakes will be made, much will be discarded, but
it will only be the chaff which has served its purpose.

What is truth? Truth is an emanation of the Deity. Truth is the accurate
verity and reality. It is the understanding by the mind of that which
actually is. It is the unchangeable amid the changeable, the substance
behind the shadow, the permanent within the transient form. Truth is a
constant, not a variant. It cannot be added to or diminished from its
sum total.

How can we know the truth? Truth has clearly defined characteristics by
which it can be recognized. Among these attributes are its immutability
and infallibility, which we see demonstrated in the natural and
spiritual laws; for example, in chemistry, mathematics,

<span id="page_46">p. 46</span>

physics, astronomy and music. These are exact sciences because their
underlying laws of truth have been discovered. They are truths to all
people everywhere. Truth operates just as undeviatingly and unerringly
in other departments of life, only its laws are not so well known.

Truth comes from the Deity and is dispersed through myriads of
intelligences, gradually reaching men distorted and dimmed. The Source
is pure, but flows through imperfect and polluted channels, as the
Fountain of truth has many tributaries. Then too, the human mind is so
constituted that it can perceive only a fragment of truth at a time, and
that fragment faintly. Just as the naked eye cannot gaze directly at the
dazzling sun, so the mind of man cannot behold truth without being
veiled.

For this reason truth has always been clothed with ceremonies,
mysteries, symbolism and magic. In no other way would the masses accept
it; furthermore, it has to be carefully concealed otherwise they would
profane as well as reject it. Hence, Christ, Buddha, Confucius and
Krishna and other great teachers taught the people in parables and
allegories. Even today it is necessary to employ liberal use of
ceremonies and rituals to convey truth to unevolved mentalities.

Proof that basic human nature changes little, if at all, is only too
evident by its antagonism towards the truth. Indeed, men's opposition to
and rejection of truth remains one of life's profoundest mysteries.

<span id="page_47">p. 47</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Fables, folklore,
legends, superstition and error find fertile soil. But of truth Albert
Pike said:

"There is a singular obliquity in the human mind that makes false logic
more effective than the true with nine-tenths of those who are regarded
as men of intellect. . . . Each mind sees the truth, distorted through
its own medium."

When we question why God made man as He has, we are going beyond our
mental depth. However, if He had wanted all men to think alike, we can
be sure He would have created them with that capacity. But since men are
in diverse stages of unfoldment and their minds enshrouded in various
degrees of ignorance, it is necessary to have different aspects of
truth. Hence, the importance of being tolerant with those who choose to
worship God differently than we do. All truth leads to the same goal,
and all religions and philosophies which have stood the test of time
contain some element of truth, otherwise they would have perished.

Rarely is it wise to uproot another from his accustomed belief or way of
worship because we may think our method superior. It may be better for
us, but not for him. If our religion is actually superior, the only way
to convince him of it is by a superior way of living. Proselyting and
propagandism are discouraged by advanced teachers, who tell us the best
way to help others is to illumine the path they are in, for when a
person has outgrown a particular faith or creed, it will no longer
satisfy

<span id="page_48">p. 48</span>

his needs and he will of his own accord seek another more compatible
with his developing nature.

The most important thing is sincerity—to really believe that which we
profess to believe—and example still remains the most compelling of
arguments. An upright life is the living truth and works directly upon
other lives. Truth planted in the hearts of Jesus and Socrates grew and
yielded the fruit of noble lives. But it was their lives more than their
teaching that influenced the lives of others and thus their good
influence lifted up millions of those who had but a faint conception of
the great truths that underlie right conduct in the more intelligent.

Truth emancipates while error enslaves. Consequently, throughout the
ages every effort has always been made to resist truth and keep it from
the people. From the days of early Greece and before, you will find
proofs of it. Socrates was put to death. Pythagoras was driven from
Athens. Anaxagoras was imprisoned on account of new ideas. Galileo was
twice brought before the Inquisition and sentenced by those who believed
they had the power to kill truth. Descartes, Aristotle, Newton, and
Harvey were persecuted and condemned by those who thought truth could be
destroyed.

Despite all the efforts of its most powerful and unscrupulous enemies,
truth has never been destroyed and its sum total remains the same. Those
who profit from exploitation of the masses may temporarily suppress it
and plunge the world into

<span id="page_49">p. 49</span>

darkness; but there are ever a few brave souls who keep the truth alive
and prevent its enemies from totally extinguishing it.

There is the same hostile antagonism to truth in the year of our Lord
1945. Its exponents are silenced today just as effectively as centuries
ago. The method is different, that is all. Now they are morally
crucified and socially stoned; the cruelty has been transferred from the
physical to the mental plane.

Its changelessness is another characteristic by which truth can always
be recognized. Whatever varies with time, place, race or creed is not
truth, but a temporary expedient, substitute or counterfeit. People
often remark: "How truth changes!" For they discover that the "truths"
of childhood and youth are no longer true in maturity and old age. Often
prevalent beliefs of one century are discarded as utterly false in the
succeeding one. For example, look at the school textbooks of fifty years
ago and observe what radical changes have been made.

But truth does not and cannot change. If a thing is true today, it will
be true tomorrow and forever. If a thing is true in the beginning, it
will be true in the end.

What does change, however, is one's conception of the truth or eternal
principles. As one grows older and perhaps wiser, his outlook upon life
changes, his mental horizon expands, his intellectual and spiritual
natures deepen and develop, and, consequently,

<span id="page_50">p. 50</span>

he sees the same truth in another light, or perceives a larger view of
it. Then, too, most of us during our early years were indoctrinated with
beliefs contradictory to facts.

Many absurd theories and peculiar doctrines have been promulgated under
the guise of truth. But believing a thing does not make it true, nor
disbelieving it, untrue. People frequently confuse laws and decrees
enacted by rulers for the government of men as truths. There are no such
things as "man-made" truths. Man cannot create truth; he can only
discover it. That which is created by man can be destroyed by man.

Truth is absolute. It is a fallacy to suppose that truth can ever be
relative. Truth never conflicts or contradicts; for truth blends with
truth as light blends with light. All the religious founders taught the
same truths, the same cardinal principles. The hatred and animosity
existing among their followers is not due to fundamentals, but to their
accretions of theologies and doctrines.

Simplicity is another of truth's characteristics. Never is truth complex
of structure or difficult of comprehension; but so simple is its
language that even little children can readily understand it. On the
other hand error is always contradictory and so abstruse no one can make
any sense out of it. The pure and undefiled mind of a child is a perfect
receptacle for truth and, consequently, its perception of it is accurate
and acute. Conversely, the minds of

<span id="page_51">p. 51</span>

adults adulterate all they contact, including the truth; for truth, like
water that flows through impure channels, becomes polluted and
contaminated. So, if we are desirous of obtaining truth undefiled, we
must keep its channel, the mind, as free as possible from
obstructions—unclean, selfish, intolerant and hostile thoughts.

Moreover, truth, like a mathematical equation, always proves itself. All
truth is demonstrable. St. Paul the Apostle once exhorted his brethren
to "prove all things; hold fast that which is good," and a better
precept never was given. Faith is required to live, and most of us have
more faith than we realize. Yet faith is no substitute for knowledge,
but should be used in conjunction with it. And, when we are looking for
actual facts concerning this universe, we should not be satisfied with
faith alone, but should endeavor, by all the means at our command, to
see whether the things represented by faith are truly as they are
represented. Otherwise we are apt to accumulate more fables than facts.
Better an ounce of truth than a ton of theory.

Faith has the same relation to knowledge that a scaffolding has to a
building. When the structure has been completed, we can dispense with
the scaffolding. And so it is with life; we need faith until we know. We
must rely upon faith where we cannot see and when we do not understand.

<span id="page_52">p. 52</span>

Departure from truth results in intellectual suicide. The inevitable
fact that no one believes or trusts the habitual liar is bad enough; but
this is not the only or the worst penalty for intellectual dishonesty.
His faculty of discernment becomes so blunted from misuse that he can no
longer recognize truth. Hence, he is victimized by those who practice
deception and dishonesty. And, as he is unable to distinguish truth from
untruth, he often follows false prophets who lead him astray, aye, even
to destruction and to death.

Those who know the truth and live a lie close the door of heaven upon
themselves; while those who live a falsity believing it to be truth will
attract to themselves those who will enlighten them.

There are those who insist it to be of minor import whether their
beliefs are true or not. Such people can be likened to the foolish man
of the Scriptures, of whom the Master spoke: "A wise man, which built
his house upon a rock; and the rain descended, and the floods came, and
the winds blew, and beat upon that house; and it fell not; for it was
founded upon a rock." "A foolish man, which built his house upon the
sand; and the rain descended, and the floods came, and the winds blew,
and beat upon that house; and it fell; and great was the fall of it."

He who builds his house of life on truth builds upon an eternal
foundation. He who builds his house of life on error builds upon a
shifting and

<span id="page_53">p. 53</span>

unstable foundation. Eventually, all those who pre-ter or mistake
falsities for truth must retrace their steps and enter the lofty and
enduring road that leads toward God. The truth or secret of things is
revealed from within.

 

*Neither time nor clime alter Truth*.

 

 

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: VI. Free Will](lam08)
