[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [New Thought](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lam05)  [Next](lam07.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Life and Its Mysteries*, by Frank L. Hammer, \[1945\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_36">p. 36</span>

### IV

### TELEPATHY

What is telepathy? Telepathy is a faculty of mind, and is the power
which the mind has of communicating its own thoughts and receiving the
thoughts of others without employing the known channels of the senses or
any other physical agencies.

Telepathy is no recent discovery nor is it occult in manifestation, but
is old as thought and normal as thinking. That thought forces arrive at
their objective, regardless of distances or barriers, has long been
known to many philosophers, and that the mind has the power of affecting
inanimate objects and persons at a distance dates back to prehistoric
times.

As there are forces in the human personality besides those employed for
muscular and chemical purposes, so there are faculties in the mind that
far transcend the ones we use in objective thought and thinking. These
higher faculties, most fortunately, are yet dormant in mankind as a
whole. Better give children dynamite than entrust the creative powers of
thought to selfish and ambitious men.

Peculiar are some of the notions entertained about telepathic
communications. Many people deny this power to man, but have no doubt
that animals

<span id="page_37">p. 37</span>

possess it. Still more singular is the idea that the radio transmits and
receives vibrations via the ether, but that man has no such power.
Regardless of what anyone believes or disbelieves, it is only too
evident that our minds are constantly filled with a surge of ideas,
coming and going, over which we exercise little control.

Most people are helpless victims in regard to telepathy because they are
not cognizant of it, and, consequently, do not select their thoughts
which are constantly in their atmosphere. Their minds have not been
trained to discriminate, or choose only such thoughts which are useful,
constructive and beneficial, and reject those which are selfish,
destructive and pessimistic. They are at the mercy of every adverse
thought which comes their way and readily succumb to dejection,
melancholy and moods.

Many people mistake telepathic suggestions as emanating from their
minds, whereas they have been sent them by individuals who wish them to
act in a certain manner. It is always unwise to accept any thought or
suggestion without first examining its purpose and purport; for, unless
we know from where suggestions come, we are mere tools in the hands of
people who may be designing and unscrupulous. All people are the
recipient of others’ thoughts and not always to their benefit.

Rulers are well aware that thought is no imaginary thing, but a powerful
force to be reckoned with and, whenever possible, to be controlled. Not
for nothing does every country employ hordes of skillful

<span id="page_38">p. 38</span>

and high-salaried propagandists, for the leaders fear, more than
anything else, the awakening of the masses. It is only because their
minds are controlled that the people follow their leaders to death and
destruction.

How telepathy works escapes all analysis. Numerous theories have been
advanced to account for its operation, the most logical one being the
omnipresence of mind. Through the existence of a universal ether,
constant and pervading all space, all minds are in continual
communication with other mentalities, and have the power of influencing
them without the aid of any mechanical devices.

Whatever this force may be, it must pass across a greater or lesser
distance to produce its manifestations. It cannot be transmitted across
a void. It must have some means of conduction. The "carrier" for thought
vibrations is this magnetic mind substance, and telepathy underlies and
ramifies through all the diversified effects and is the basic principle
of all mental phenomena.

Thoughts are not indefinite abstractions, but are powerful, vital forces
endowed with form, color and odor. They are visible to clairvoyants and
audible to clairaudient people. They have motive power, traveling with
incredible speed, reaching almost instantly the remotest spheres, and
there is no diminution of power or strength regardless of the distance
traversed. We know for a certainty that entities who no longer employ
physical organs of any kind can and do transmit and receive telepathic
messages.

<span id="page_39">p. 39</span>

Uninformed people often scoff at telepathy on the grounds that
experiments performed are frequently far from being accurate or
reliable. Telepathy is perfect. But telepathy as a faculty and as a mode
of communication are entirely different. One is the method of
communication—the other is the mind's ability to communicate in that
way. They are as different as thought and speech. There is the ability
to think, while language is merely the system of symbols used for the
expression of ideas. Everyone has experienced difficulty with the
ambiguity of words. We have certain thoughts in mind, but when conveying
them to the mind of another, in speaking or writing, often an entirely
different idea is formed. Is it any wonder, then, that error should
prevail when untrained instrumentalities undertake to read minds?

Successful mind reading requires years of persistent practice and
intense concentration. Also, there are several obstacles which prevent
any appreciable degree of accuracy. Chief among these are a phlegmatic
temperament, dense organism and lack of rapport between transmitter and
receiver. Just as some people are born to sing and others are not, so
some people are naturally endowed for the pursuance of the mental
sciences. While these faculties can be cultivated to a limited degree,
these powers appear to be more or less hereditary for they often run in
families for generations.

Experience has proved that an emotional relationship forms the best
basis for thought transference.

<span id="page_40">p. 40</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Parents and their
children are in close rapport, for mothers often intuitively know when
their offspring are in danger. Husband and wife have been found very
susceptible to each other's thoughts, particularly if happily married
for a period of years.

Mrs. Upton Sinclair for one is able to get her husband's thoughts when
thousands of miles apart. Furthermore, she is also able to see what he
is doing. However, this phase of psychic perception is properly called
clairvoyance. Interior and distant hearing is designated as
clairaudience. It is sometimes erroneously believed that these psychic
senses are extensions of the physical ones. They are in reality, soul
senses, for the spiritual body has faculties analogous to its physical
counterpart. Blind people frequently have their psychic senses highly
developed, which accounts for their amazing ability to sense colors,
location, etc. Everyone knows what Helen Keller has accomplished.

We read recently about a James Holman, who lived in London during the
last century. He was known as the sight-seeing blind man, for, although
totally blind, he traveled around the world alone, in utter darkness,
and wrote several excellent travel books describing his adventures. "God
took away my eyes that my soul might see" is sometimes true.

Clairvoyant people can easily see across oceans and continents, into
closed boxes, sealed packets, etc. Clairaudient persons can hear at any
distance, and also hear thoughts as distinctly as if spoken audibly.
These faculties enable one to see and hear what is

<span id="page_41">p. 41</span>

positively obscure, unseen and unheard by the physical senses. Some
people exercise their psychic powers naturally and freely, while in
others their activity is entirely dormant.

While only a minority of people have unfolded their spiritual faculties,
telepathy, on the other hand, is the property in different degrees of
all created things, both animate and inanimate. Jeans, the eminent
astronomer, tells us that the planets have a system of
intercommunication. Animals rely on telepathy almost exclusively, and
some get the thoughts of human beings quite clearly. Birds, too,
communicate with one another, and there have been a few great
naturalists who could understand their language. Trees, plants and
flowers have a telepathic interchange of thought which is compatible
with their degree of consciousness. Flowers, particularly, are extremely
sensitive, and like to have people to talk to them. And they know who
loves them!

Many people marvel at the astounding accuracy of mind readers, who
perform at fairs, bazaars and theatres. Accomplices and codes usually
account for their amazing ability to get the right answer. Those with
genuine occult powers do not commercialize them, or use them for the
amusement of a curious, skeptical, and often vulgar, public audience.
Indeed, they could not if they would. The delicate organism necessary
for the catching of the subtle thought vibrations could not long endure
the coarse and cross currents prevailing in such an atmosphere.
Sensitive

<span id="page_42">p. 42</span>

people would speedily become ill and their powers diminish and decline.

Some of the Hindoos possess genuine powers of high degree, and we have
seen them read minds with perfect accuracy. But we must remember that in
India the culture of mind is thousands of years old, while the
Occidentals are just beginning to discover its existence.

Telepathy is the clue to the baffling mystery of several inventors
simultaneously working on the same invention. Each believes he is the
sole discoverer, then he learns another has patented the identical
invention. It is said that when Professor Bell was perfecting his
telephone, at least three other inventors were developing the same
thing. In wireless telegraphy Marconi had three competitors, and, in
many other inventions, who was first is still in dispute.

Men think ideas emanate from their minds, whereas "ideas are in the
air," and inventive minds are naturally in rapport with the same ideas.
This is also true with composers, musicians, writers, artists—all those
engaged in creative work. They unconsciously draw upon this mental force
that generates rays in myriad directions, and the sensitive souls catch
most readily these helpful influences.

Telepathy is the foundation for the efficacy of prayer. If thoughts were
devoid of power and locomotion, prayer would be of no avail; but we know
that all prayers are heard. That prayer is answered is a fact that few
will deny, as many people have

<span id="page_43">p. 43</span>

received its benefits and blessings. However, mechanical mumblings and
glib recitations are not prayers; these come from the lips and die on
the lips.

Prayers, the cry of the soul in distress, the travail of the spirit, a
moan of anguish, these are heard in the highest heavens and are always
answered according to the need of the individual. This earth would be a
dreadful place and life an unbearable experience if our Heavenly Father
ignored our needs and was impervious to our despair and affliction. God
has not abandoned this world nor forsaken His children; He hears their
cries and, through His emissaries, administers unto them.

It is by means of telepathy that we can communicate with the dwellers on
the Other side, for communion with the saints is a fact whether men
ignore or deny it. We can send messages to the disembodied far more
easily than to those in the flesh, because in their case we have not the
heavy, physical matter to penetrate, but can contact the mind directly.
Furthermore, as thought is the language in the world of spirit, no
misunderstandings arise. Space, not even millions of miles, is no
barrier; but it is our dull unreceptivity which prevents reception of
thoughts.

Our loved ones "Over There" not only know what we are doing, but know
what we are thinking. And the people of earth do not realize the agony
and heartbreak that is experienced when they see that we no longer
remember or have ceased to care. A loving thought is as welcome to the
senses of the

<span id="page_44">p. 44</span>

disembodied as is here a loving word or tender caress. If earthly people
could only know how much comfort and happiness is derived from these
thoughts of love and remembrance, surely none would be left lonely and
neglected.

When a soul departs from this life, he should always be accompanied by
thoughts of love and peace, by aspirations for his progression. The
beloved "dead" assuredly have a claim on our love and care, and should
never be forgotten and ignored when our kind and loving thoughts can
reach them instantly and are treasured beyond all price.

 

*Precious stones have their evolution and pass through many stages
before reaching perfection. The most precious jewel of all is the soul*.

 

 

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: V. Truth](lam07.md)
