[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [New Thought](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lam11)  [Next](lam13) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Life and Its Mysteries*, by Frank L. Hammer, \[1945\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_92">p. 92</span>

### X

### INDIVIDUALITY

What is individuality? How does it differ from personality? From
character? Is it permanent or transitory? Do souls retain their
individuality after death? These are recurring questions.

In the progression of nature, from the lowest living substance to the
complex organization of man, everything follows the principle of
evolution. Progression continues until the innermost is a perfected and
individualized expression of Divine Essence. The principle of spirit
existed eternally emanating from the fountain of spirit; but it could
not be individualized and made manifest without organisms.

Man's ancestry is dual; Father God and Mother Nature, and earthly
parents. From his celestial Progenitors he derives his individuality. It
is the mold into which the soul is cast at spiritual birth. As ages
often separate spiritual and physical birth, individuality is already
formed at the soul's advent into the corporeal form.

Most persons first exhibit that character which they have inherited from
their immediate progenitors; later, their individuality asserts itself.
Individuality is the mental stamp we give our actions; we

<span id="page_93">p. 93</span>

label everything with it. Every one of us has his own particular way of
doing things; it is always unconsciously present and connected with
everything we do. Individuality is not to be confused with
peculiarities, mannerisms or eccentricities, for it is not a matter of
externalities. It is innate and not subject to modification, alteration
or eradication.

Individuality, or the foundation character, is innately divine and
beautiful. It is godlike because it is an individualized portion of the
Creative Principle. This radical and imperishable character is
permanent. The progenitory character which man inherits from his earthly
parents is alterable, and its patently acquired imperfections ultimately
pass away; but his individuality remains forever the same.

Few, if any, individuals have ever been able to change the behavior
pattern of their childhood, though in adult life they found themselves
in entirely different surroundings and situations. The psychic life does
not and cannot change its foundation, and the characteristics of an
adult are noticeable in his infancy. A change of attitude in adult life
need not necessarily signify a change of behavior pattern.

Psychiatry also has revealed that the phenomena of the soul life are of
one incontrovertible and continuous pattern, that no change takes place
from childhood to maturity. Students and thinkers of old reached the
same conclusion, that is, that human nature has a fixed and unalterable
basis. This, however, does not imply that man is not an accountable

<span id="page_94">p. 94</span>

being, for man has free will and is the architect of his character.

Character is inherited and acquired. It is the medium through which the
soul expresses itself, or that form by which the mind manifests. But the
character is not the soul, neither is it an expression of man's inward
nature. Inward nature is compelled to express itself through form, but
such form may be the creation of an unfortunate parentage or education.

Character is the sum total of fixed habits gradually acquired by manner
of thinking and living. Although not permanent, it is constant, for no
one believes that any man can suddenly change his character. "A leopard
does not change his spots," is the Biblical version of this truth. "If a
man tells you the mountain has moved, believe him. But if he tells you
he has changed his nature, believe him not," says the Mohammedan. And,
like the cat in Aesop's fable who changed herself into a fine lady until
one day at a banquet, when a mouse ran across the board, she completely
forgot her acquired nature and became a cat again. Human nature may lie
buried or submerged for long periods, but under stress or strain
promptly asserts itself and comes to the surface.

As all created and acquired things contain within themselves the
elements of change and perishability, so character may be rebuilt or
completely torn down and another constructed. Good habits can be
acquired in place of bad ones and constructive principles

<span id="page_95">p. 95</span>

for destructive ones. Determination, application and the emulation of
those who have strong, determined characters are the tools for character
building.

Unlike character, which is deeply ingrained, personality is a surface
quality and is always flux. It is the mask which men put on or take off
at will. There are people who change their personality according to
their associates, surroundings, or objectives to be obtained. They
exhibit one face to their family, another to friends, clients, servants
and strangers. Many people have completely altered their personalities
when they discovered it militated against their progress and success,
or, to use the current expression, "streamlined it."

Personality is a definite asset for anyone aspiring to a public career.
Actors and actresses with personality are box-office favorites.
Physicians with a good bedside manner never lack for patients.
Politicians with magnetism have the masses following them like the Pied
Piper of Hamlin. Orators with eloquence hypnotize people into doing
things which are totally prejudicial to their own interest and welfare.
Often these moulders of public opinion and action have absolutely
nothing to offer except their personality. The most worthless and
weakest persons frequently have a fascinating personality. The minds of
the masses lacking discrimination mistake glitter for gold.

Success is achieved by developing one's innate aptitudes and abilities,
and not by imitating others. No

<span id="page_96">p. 96</span>

one is intended to be a mere copy of someone else, but someone different
and unique. Those who have accomplished the most and left an abiding
imprint on human life are those who dared to be *different*.

Neither insanity nor idiocy can affect or change individuality, as these
conditions pertain to that part of man that is transient and perishable.
While often startling and radical changes occur in the personality and
character manifestation, the inner and real man remains the same. Any
knowledge, talent or skill a person had before his mental aberration he
will manifest again when freed from the physical body. Defective brains
and diseased bodies do not exist in the spirit world, as death
mercifully terminates afflictions resulting from these causes.

But neither death nor the grave can cleanse the spirit of certain
characteristics which adhere to it. The different races preserve a
residue and for many periods continue to manifest these differences.
Ultimately however, divergent races converge and assimilate, acquired
and racial characteristics disappear and the universal consciousness is
accepted.

Each individual will differ everlastingly from every other individual.
There is no one type proper to all mankind. Human nature is organized
and equipped for progression throughout the ages. Each faculty and
quality of one's being is replete with an irresistible tendency to
unfold in the direction of an endless career. Each individual will be
developed in the likeness of its own interior character bequeathed by
Father God and Mother Nature. There will be

<span id="page_97">p. 97</span>

greater differences than we now have any idea of; we never have been the
same and we shall be more different with the centuries.

Were spirits constituted alike, they would gravitate to one center, but
being constitutionally dissimilar they can neither be merged into one
another nor lose themselves—as some have been led to suppose—in the
Universal Spirit or Great Creative Mind. You will not lose your
individuality on "passing over"; you will know and be known by parents,
children, friends and loved ones; such recognition is the principle of
the law of affinity.

The ultimate purpose of Nature and God is to individualize the Divine
and Universal Principle. But individualization does not mean separation
from God and the rest of creation. The illusion of separateness has
caused more sorrow and suffering than any other fallacy. The sun's rays
are individual, but never severed from their central source. The
branches and leaves are individual, but have no life apart from the
parent tree. So with man, he is individual yet forever one with Father
God and all created things. Summing up:

Individuality is what God has made man;  
Character is what man has made himself;  
Personality is the mask which he wears.

 

*Life's hardest battles are waged within the human breast*.

 

 

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XI. Reality](lam13)
