[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [New Thought](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lam13)  [Next](lam15) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Life and Its Mysteries*, by Frank L. Hammer, \[1945\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_105">p. 105</span>

### XI

### IMMORTALITY

Numerous are the reasons advanced of why the world has seemingly gone to
pieces. Extraordinary is the ingenuity writers display in avoiding the
natural and obvious explanation. Some even delve into astrology in their
efforts to evade acknowledging the sole and direct cause which is none
other than materialism. The destructive doctrine of annihilation with
its inevitable outcome has superseded the Truth of immortality; nearly
all semblance of morality has disappeared and corruption reigns supreme.

Rulers seem to be obsessed with the maniacal idea that civilization is
advanced and people improved if the earth is drenched with blood; that
human sacrifices will make this world better. Ostensibly, World War I
was for this purpose and everyone knows the result. It set the stage for
World War II and made a bumper crop of millionaires. Only money is
sacred to materialistic people; human lives are conscripted but capital
exempted. Only because the minds of the masses are drugged is such a
preposterous condition possible; otherwise lives would be sacred and
wealth conscripted.

<span id="page_106">p. 106</span>

The most imperative need of the world today is for a philosophy which
shall destroy materialism, reconcile brother with brother, acquaint men
with their origin, duty and destiny and enlighten them of the Truth of
immortality. Universal knowledge of immortality will revolutionize the
world because it will rationalize men's conduct. Men conscious of
immortality will not hate or kill their fellowmen, realizing that what
they do to another they do also to themselves and to God.

Now unenlightened and egotistical leaders believe that by purges,
liquidations and wars they are destroying life, which would make their
crimes infinitely more diabolical. They are worse than cannibals who
believe that mankind is bred to be eaten; war lords think men exist to
be slaughtered for their aggrandizement and power. Battalions they send
to death for a piece of real estate. The loss of thousands of men they
consider "negligible," but surround themselves with bodyguards.

This callous indifference to loss of life arises from their ignorance of
a future life where a higher law and court of justice are encountered.
If they had an inkling that, in the hereafter, they will be held
accountable, they would speedily alter their conduct and settle their
stupid disputes in a different manner. And when this knowledge becomes
general, as it will, their power over life and death will end.

People are beginning to question, with considerable doubt and suspicion,
the "divine" right of kings and rulers to conscript the life and freedom
of their

<span id="page_107">p. 107</span>

fellowmen. Did they derive it from on high or usurp it from the people?
What right has anyone to deprive millions of souls of earthly
expression? The physical body is the temple of the living God, the
dwelling place of the immortal soul, and was given by God for its
terrestrial expression. Destroying the body, whether one's own or that
of another, is a sin and must be expiated. And murder is still murder
when committed by thousands or millions with the consequences increased
proportionately.

Many people wonder if adequate punishment exists for those responsible
for making slaughter houses of their countries, filling hospitals with
the maimed, crippled, blind and insane, creating incalculable sorrow,
suffering and moral disorder. They need have no qualms on this score.
God is neither mocked nor cheated. While rarely, if ever, are rulers
brought to justice on earth, there is a hereafter, a place of stark
reality where all men reap as they have sown. Death wipes out no deeds
of infamy, cruelty and murder, but the instigator comes face to face
with their consequences.

As everyone knows, or certainly ought to know, the law of cause and
effect is not terminated at death, but is eternal in duration and
universal in scope, eventually bringing to all their just deserts.
Divine Justice is administered through this law, and both evil and good
return to their originator. Just as in the realm of physics "action and
reaction are equal," so on the moral plane cause and effect are equal.

<span id="page_108">p. 108</span>

When death comes to the liquidators, how will they greet their victims?
And meet them they surely shall. Terrible are the consequences of
murder. Through long centuries the cries and curses of the slain will
ring in their ears. Faces glaring with hatred and mockery will
constantly be before them, oceans of blood filled with ghastly corpses
from which escape will be impossible. There will be no surcease from
remorse, no peace for their soul until reparation has been made. Dante
in his Inferno gives a graphic and accurate description of the fate of
such as these. Not a pleasant future to contemplate, nevertheless it is
not the doctrine of fear but the gospel of Truth. Not for naught are so
many prayers said for the souls in purgatory.

However, men themselves are responsible for their future condition and
not some arbitrary being. In "Mystery of Mind" we mentioned the Akashic,
life's imperishable record. This record is both man's judge and
executioner. There is no tampering with this document, no judge or
lawyer can "fix" it for you. One's secret history is told wordlessly and
is forever known; the details of earth life are understood, all one's
acts and their far-reaching consequences. Man sees what he has thought,
wished, spoken and done without any palliating or extenuating excuses.
Happy for us if we live so we can leave this world in good spiritual
circumstances.

The first experience on entering the land of silence is usually seeing
those who have preceded you; quite often the nearest and dearest of all
greets the newcomer

<span id="page_109">p. 109</span>

and perhaps has long been awaiting his arrival. Hence, the expression of
peace frequently seen on the face of the departing one. At death the
soul returns to its Father's house, the home from which it has too long
been absent. Death is life's most beautiful adventure and is reserved
for the last.

Life Over There is not so different from life over here, for it is a
world of activity, labor and service, with every opportunity for
realizing one's dreams, hopes and ambitions, continuing and perfecting
interests and studies, and completing plans which perhaps were only
commenced on earth. It is a land of eternal development and progression,
and not a place of eternal idleness, stagnation, sleep and rest. Many
believe that after death all is different with the individual. There
never was a greater mistake. One neither gains nor loses through the
episode of death.

After death man assumes his spiritual body, which has senses
corresponding to all the external ones, and this body is beautiful or
ugly as was the life the soul lived on earth. Those of great
spirituality are dazzling and beautiful in appearance, while those who
are unevolved or evil are dark and hideous. Here in this earth life the
robes of honor are frequently worn by dishonorable men. In the next life
it will not be so. The light from the temple within will clothe itself
with a corresponding exterior. If our spiritual bodies are composed of
goodness and truth, we shall be clothed with pure robes. But if they be
composed of selfishness, vanity and evil, which are the errors of life,
we shall be clothed with

<span id="page_110">p. 110</span>

the filthy rags of impurity. *There are no variations to this law*.

There is a gradation or caste in the next world just as marked as among
the dwellers of earth. But Over There caste is determined by mental and
spiritual acquisitions; here, mostly by material possessions. On earth,
men are respectively "worth" so many thousands or millions of dollars;
in fact, they often are well nigh indistinguishable from their bank
accounts. Here is injustice—there is absolute justice.

Space and time, as understood by us, are unknown in the four-dimensional
world, and spirit people have incredible freedom of movement. Their
power is higher than organic force, their will overcomes material
gravity, and they can rise and float with the speed of light upon the
ether. A voyage on the celestial seas is quicker and more easily
accomplished than a telegraph operator can transmit events for the daily
press. Will is their motive power, and, where they will to be, they are.

There are no barriers between this world and the spiritual spheres
except the false ones which men have created in their minds. The
spiritual worlds are around and above us, and we are under the constant
scrutiny of its inhabitants. Their eyes are clairvoyant and they are
well acquainted with what we are doing, and they also know well what we
are thinking. If people realized that thousands of eyes witness every
deed, there would be a great decrease in crime and evil-doing. If the
transgressor knew that he was being watched and accompanied every

<span id="page_111">p. 111</span>

step, from the planning to the execution of his crime, that his conduct
was causing untold suffering and anguish to those who see what he is
doing though powerless to prevent it, much of our crime would disappear.

How fares it with the multitude of young men slain for causes no one can
understand? Prematurely wrenched from the body, they find themselves in
the next expression of life bewildered and confounded, emotionally,
mentally and spiritually unprepared. They are met and cared for by those
who understand and they gradually are made aware of their new status.
Liberated from the dense body, their consciousness expands and activity
increases, affording them innumerable opportunities for sending thoughts
to people on earth. Their telepathic ability to impress those in the
flesh is mainly responsible for the growing interest in what lies
beyond.

Always in time of war, when the exodus into the other world is so
enormous, there is a deep desire on the part of many people to know what
has happened to their loved ones. The soul within rebels at the
materialistic doctrine of oblivion and one yearns for assurance and
conviction of immortality.

This longing is stimulated by those over there who see the sorrow and
suffering their departure is causing their families and friends, and
they seek, through every avenue at their disposal, to impress them they
are not dead but more alive than ever. Many people are aware of these
thoughts although

<span id="page_112">p. 112</span>

unable to see or hear their originators. But make no mistake, their
voices will yet be heard.

Nothing is valued more by the boys in foreign lands, whether on earth or
Over There, than greetings and remembrances from loved ones. These are
treasured beyond all price, and people should daily send them loving
thoughts and pray for their progression and enlightenment. Remember
always, they are not "lost," but have only preceded you into the
heavenly land where each of us will go in our turn. Those who pass on in
youth have little karma to expiate and rapidly advance to higher planes.
While the wicked go to a worse place, the righteous and innocent go to a
world of surpassing beauty, happiness and peace.

The laws governing communication between earth and other planes of
consciousness are definite and irrevocable, more rigid than the laws
governing material communications. No caprice or will of man can change
them one iota; he must familiarize himself with their operation and then
comply with them. Those Over There are bound by these same laws, for by
no means are they free agents, but are subject to many restrictions.

A phenomenon of clairvoyance is at best but an inferential evidence
because it is not a matter of universal human experience. The same can
be said about spiritual manifestations; they too are local, special and
mostly private; although those who have received such evidence can
affirm that immortality is true, and that the human soul can never be
extinguished.

<span id="page_113">p. 113</span>

But the evidences which are worth anything are not outside. Man's
immortality, to be of any practical service, must be experienced in his
religious nature, felt in his soul, and not merely understood by his
intellectual faculties. True evidences come through two inward sources
of wisdom—intuition and reflection.

Those who dare to be truthful to these inward sources of knowledge will
feel positive evidence of immortality, and external evidences will serve
but as illustrations. When you find this internal conviction of
immortality which no sophistry can invalidate, you have found a treasure
beyond all price.

 

*It is no more appalling to enter the next stage of consciousness than
it was to come into this one*.

 

 

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XIII. Future Life of Animals](lam15)
