[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [New Thought](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lam14)  [Next](lam16.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Life and Its Mysteries*, by Frank L. Hammer, \[1945\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_114">p. 114</span>

### XIII

### FUTURE LIFE OF ANIMALS

Since the publication of Immortality a number of people have asked
whether animals do not also have a future life. They said it was
illogical and unjust that vicious and depraved human beings should enjoy
immortality while noble and intelligent animals be doomed to extinction.
This however, is not strictly true as many animals do live for a long
time after death.

While animals do not possess an immortal spirit, they do have in common
with man an astral or emotional body. This body is sustained by emotion
as animals experience love, hate, fear, courage, jealousy, desire, etc.
Emotion is what keeps them alive, their own and that of their former
owner or master. Animals which are most closely associated with man, who
reflect his intelligence, enjoy his protection and affection, live the
longest.

The life principle is of course universal and eternal, and is the basis
of all forms, mineral, plant, animal, human and angel. Individuality is
achieved by means of form or organization, and this determines the
degree of mortality or immortality. There is no definite line of
demarcation where mortality

<span id="page_115">p. 115</span>

ends and immortality begins; since there are degrees of intelligence in
animals as there are in men.

Only man has an organization sufficiently integrated and a brain
structure adequately developed to be a temple of the Living God. Animals
have only the primary elements of life. There is, however, no
annihilation and while some animals perish for all time at death, they
are absorbed into the universal life and again animate other forms.

Some people have inquired whether there are animals and birds on the
other side of life. Can anyone imagine a world without them? Animals and
birds have their own sphere where they live for long periods for the joy
and happiness they bring to man.

After death, devoted pets, as for instance dogs, remain on earth and
continue to frequent their old haunts, occupy their favorite spots, and
mingle with family and friends. People mourn and miss their pals while
all the time they are still in their midst puzzled because they are no
longer noticed. They do not know they are now invisible but believe they
are no longer wanted and loved, and finally the animals leave
disconsolate. Animal lovers on the other side seeing their distress care
for them until their master passes over.

Great is the surprise and joy of many people after death to find waiting
for them not only relatives and friends but amongst them a loyal animal
companion, who has not forgotten his master but greets

<span id="page_116">p. 116</span>

him with unrestrained delight. And this is one of the happiest of
reunions, for there is a natural affinity between man and the noble
horse and the faithful dog. The devoted companionship which death
interrupted is resumed and continued for many years in that beautiful
land where there are no partings, no tears and no misunderstandings.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XIV. Questions and Answers](lam16.md)
