[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](osi02)  [Next](osi04) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002FU5O7C/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Occult Science in India*, by Louis Jacoilliot, \[1919\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_20">p. 20</span>

### CHAPTER II.

### THE BRAHMINS.

Before touching upon the main point of our subject, it may not be amiss
to say a few words about the Brahmins. We do not propose, however, to
raise the question of their real origin, which has been the subject of
so much scientific controversy. According to some, who have certain
ethnological theories of their own to support, they came from the
sterile and desolate plains, which extend from the eastern shore of the
Caspian Sea to the banks of the Oxus. According to others, who agree
with the sacred books and pundits of India upon that point, they
originated in the country comprised between the Ganges and the Indus on
the one side and the Godavery and the Kristnah on the other. With regard
to the former hypothesis we have said elsewhere, <span
id="fr_0"></span>[1](#fn_0) "Such a theory seems singular, to say the
least, when it is known that this country, which is held out to us as
the cradle of the ancient Hindu race, does not possess a ruin, a
tradition, a trace, which can furnish an ethnological foundation for
such an opinion. This land, which is said to have produced the most
astonishing civilization of ancient times, has not a monument or
tradition of any sort to show for itself. It would be quite as logical,
indeed, to make the Aryans or Brahmins originate in the sandy deserts of
Sahara."

![](img/6stars.jpg)

According to the second theory, the Brahmins came

<span id="page_21">p. 21</span>

originally from the plains of Central Hindustan. This opinion has
historic and geographical truth in its favor, as well as the authority
of all the learned pundits and of Manu, whose celebrated words are well
known:

"Courouckchetra, Matsya, and the land of Boutchala, which is also called
Cauya-Cobja (the Mountain of the Virgin), and Souraswaca, also called
Mathoura, form the country adjacent to that of Brahmavarta, *the country
of virtuous men*, or, in other words, of the Brahmins."

These countries are included in the quadrilateral formed by the four
rivers just named. We shall not dwell upon this point further, however,
as it is not our intention to discuss ethnological problems in the
present work, but rather to set forth and elucidate religious
conceptions.

Manu, the legislator, who sprang from the Temples of India, attributes
to the Brahmins a Divine origin.

![](img/3stars.jpg)

For the propagation of the human race, from his *mouth*, from his *arm*,
from his *thigh*, from his *foot*, the Sovereign Master produced the
Brahmin, priest—the Xchatrya, king—the Vaysia, merchant—the Soudra,
slave.

![](img/3stars.jpg)

By his origin, which he derives from the most noble member, because he
was the first-born, because he possesses the Holy Scriptures, the
Brahmin is, by right, the Lord of all creation.

![](img/3stars.jpg)

Everything that the world contains is the Brahmin's property; by his
primogeniture and his eminent birth, he is entitled to everything that
exists.

![](img/3stars.jpg)

The Brahmin eats nothing that does not belong to him, receives no
garment that is not already his, and bestows

<span id="page_22">p. 22</span>

no alms from the property of others that does not also belong to him. It
is through the Brahmin's generosity that other men enjoy the goods of
this world. (Manu, book i.)

This is the original source of the doctrine of divine right.

For several thousand years the Brahmins (priests) ruled over India
without dispute. The kings, or, as we might rather say, the chiefs, were
only their agents. The mass of the people, like a flock of sheep,
maintained the upper classes in luxury and idleness by their labor.

In the temples, which were vast sacerdotal storehouses filled with the
treasures accumulated by the toil of the laboring classes, the priests
appeared before the eyes of the assembled multitude, clad in gorgeous
vestments. Kneeling before idols of wood, granite, or bronze, of their
own contrivance, they set an example of the most absurd
[superstition](errata.htm#0). Their principal motive in the performance
of their religious duties was the maintenance of their temporal
supremacy, and when the sacrifices were over, the Vaysia and Soudra
returned to their tasks, the chiefs to their pleasures, and the priests
to their mysterious abodes, where they engaged in the study of the
sciences and of the highest philosophical and religious speculations.

The hour came when the Xchatrias, or kings, made use of the people to
throw off the theocratic yoke, but when they had conquered the priests,
and assumed the title of *Lords of Creation*, they abandoned their late
allies, and said to the Brahmins:

"Preach to the people the doctrine that we are the elect of God, and we
will give you all the wealth and privileges you desire."

That was the basis of their agreement, and for twenty thousand years and
more the Soudra, the servum pecus, the people, have never been able to
break it up.

Reduced to a purely religious rôle, the Brahmins used

<span id="page_23">p. 23</span>

all their power to keep the multitude in ignorance and subserviency.
Mistrustful lest some members of their order more ambitious than the
rest might, one day or other, seek to further their own ends by stirring
up the lower classes to revolt, they placed the secret of their
religious belief, of their principles, of their sciences, under the
shield of an initiatory ceremony, to the highest grade of which those
only were admitted who had completed a novitiate of forty years of
passive obedience.

There were three degrees of initiation.

The first included all the Brahmins of the popular cult, or those who
officiated at the pagodas, whose business it was to work upon the
credulity of the multitude. They were taught to comment upon the three
first books of the Vedas, to direct the religious ceremonies, and to
perform sacrifices. The Brahmins of the first degree were in constant
communication with the people. They were its immediate directors, its
*gurus*.

The second degree included the *exorcists*, the *soothsayers*, the
*prophets*, and the *evocators of spirits*, whose business it was, in
times of difficulty, to act upon the imagination of the masses, through
supernatural phenomena. They read and commented upon the Atharva-Veda,
which was a collection of magical conjurations.

In the third degree the Brahmins had no direct relations with the
populace, the study of all the physical and supernatural forces of the
universe being their only occupation. They never appeared outside except
through awe-inspiring phenomena, which spectators were not allowed to
scrutinize too closely. According to the celebrated Sanscrit sorits, the
gods and spirits were at their disposition:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

Dêvadinam djagat sarvam.  
Mantradinam ta devata.  
Tan mantram brahmanadinam.  
Brahmana mama devata.

</div>

<span id="page_24">p. 24</span>

Everything that exists is in the power of the gods.

The gods are in the power of magical conjurations.

Magical conjurations are in the power of the Brahmins,

Therefore, the gods are in the power of the Brahmins.

![](img/3stars.jpg)

It was impossible to arrive at the highest degree without having passed
through the first two, where a process of weeding, as it were, was
constantly going on, having regard to the ability and intelligence of
the candidates.

It would have been impossible to conceive of a more effective instrument
of social conservatism, and our modern doctrinaires may well regard it
with a jealous eye.

Those who were too intelligent, or who were not sufficiently amenable to
discipline, owing to their inflexibility of character, were soon lost
amid the crowd of bigots and fanatics of the first degree, who were as
submissive and free from ambition as could possibly be desired. The
lower clergy, if we may be allowed to use the expression, were not much
above the level of the rest of the Hindu people, whose superstitions
they shared, and whom they taught, perhaps, honestly. Absorbed in the
ordinary observances of religious worship, that independence of mind
which usually accompanies knowledge was not to be apprehended from them.
It was not until twenty years had elapsed that promotion was possible
from the first to the second degree, where the veil of the occult
sciences first began to be uplifted, and the same period of time was
necessary in order to surmount the mysterious barriers of the third
degree. That class of initiates studied the *Agrouchada-Parikchai*, or
the Book of Spirits.

Above this last degree of initiation was the Supreme Council, under the
presidency of the Brahmatma, or supreme chief of all those who had been
initiated.

Only a Brahmin who had passed his eightieth year could exercise this
pontificate. He was the sole keeper of

<span id="page_25">p. 25</span>

the elevated formula, which included a summary of all knowledge, and was
contained in the three mystic letters—

A

U          M

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> —signifying
Creation, Preservation, Transformation. He commented upon them only in
the presence of the initiate.

Residing in an immense palace, surrounded by twenty-one walls, the
Brahmatma showed himself to the multitude only once a year, encompassed
with such pomp and pageantry that his [appearance](errata.htm#1)
impressed the imagination of all who saw him, as though they had been in
the presence of a God.

The common people thought that he was immortal.

In fact, in order to maintain this belief in the minds of the masses,
the death of the Brahmatma and the election of his successor were kept
profoundly secret, and were never known by them. Everything occurred in
the silence of the temples, and those who had been initiated in the
third degree alone took part in his election. Only those who were
members of the Supreme Council were eligible.

"Whoever among those who have been initiated into the third degree shall
reveal to a profane person a single one of the truths, a single one of
the secrets entrusted to his keeping, shall be put to death." <span
id="fr_1"></span>[1](#fn_1) The recipient of the revelation met a
similar fate.

Finally, to crown the whole system, there existed a higher word than the
mysterious monosyllable A, U, M—which made him who possessed the clue to
it, almost it equal to Brahma himself. The Brahmatma alone possessed it
and transmitted it to his successor in a sealed box.

Even now, when the Brahminic authority has sunk so

<span id="page_26">p. 26</span>

low before Mongol and European invasion; when every pagoda leas its
Brahmatma; this unknown word has been revealed to no human power, and
has been kept a profound secret. It was engraved in a golden triangle
and carefully kept in a sanctuary of the Temple of Asgartha, of which
the Brahmatma alone had the keys. For this reason, also, he wore, upon
his tiara, two crossed keys upheld by two kneeling Brahmins, as a sign
of the precious deposit which had been entrusted to his care.

This word and triangle were also engraved upon the gem of the ring,
which this religious chief wore as a sign of his dignity. It was also
set in a golden sun, which stood upon the altar upon which the supreme.
pontiff offered every morning the sacrifice of the Sarvameda, or
sacrifice to all the forces of nature.

At the death of the Brahmatma, his body was burned upon a golden tripod
and his ashes secretly thrown into the Ganges. If, in spite of every
precaution, a report of his death was bruited abroad, the priests
adroitly spread abroad the rumor that the supreme chief had ascended for
a time to Swarga (heaven) in the smoke of the sacrifice, but would soon
return to the earth.

Numerous revolutions have so thoroughly disturbed the social and
religious condition of India, that Brahminism no longer possesses any
supreme chief. Each pagoda has its three degrees of initiation, and its
own private Brahmatma. The chiefs of these temples are often at open
hostility with each other. However, this does not seem to have affected
their religious belief, as yet, and we shall see, as we study the
methods in use in the three different classes of initiation, that the
Hindu Brahmins still cling to their old religious prescriptions.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_0"></span>[20:1](osi03.htm#fr_0) The Genesis of Humanity.

<span id="fn_1"></span>[25:1](osi03.htm#fr_1) The Sons of God.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter III. The Brahmin—From His Birth To His Novitiate—The
Ceremony of the Djita Carma](osi04)
