[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](osi30)  [Next](osi32) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002FU5O7C/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Occult Science in India*, by Louis Jacoilliot, \[1919\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_176">p. 176</span>

### CHAPTER VI.

### THE CABALISTIC TRINITY.

"Having divided his body into two parts, the sovereign ruler became half
male and half female, and uniting with the female portion, begot Viradj
the son." (Manu, sloca 34, book i.)

"I, Viradj, desiring to give birth to the human race, first produced the
Ten Pradjapatis, who are the Lords of all created beings, after having
practised the greatest austerities." (Manu, sloca 34, book i.)

In such terms as these, the venerable legislator of the Hindus first
spake of the primitive triad, from which sprang the ten superior
spirits, who first manifested themselves in creation.

We have already seen in what affecting language the Book of the Pitris
speaks of the love of the husband for his spouse, and how the universe
sprang from that celestial union. In all the pagodas of India, that
symbolical trinity is represented by three heads, carved from a single
block of granite or marble, in the form of a single head.

It is extraordinary to see how closely this idea, which sprang up on the
banks of the Ganges, was copied in the teachings of the Jewish
Cabalists.

We are free to confess that what we have said about the Cabala is not
derived from our own knowledge upon that subject. All our information
about the Hebrews is taken from Mr. Franck of the Institute, and the
reader will understand that thereon rests the whole weight of our
argument.

<span id="page_177">p. 177</span>

After this digression, we will now go on with our proofs. They seem like
demonstrations in mathematics. We proposed to show that the Hebraic
Cabala sprang originally from the Hindu temples. The best means at our
command, in order to elucidate this problem, which is also interesting
from an ethnographic point of view, is simply to confront the doctrine
of the Pitris, as we have unfolded it, and the Hindu text, as we have
given it, with the Hebraic texts themselves. We have also given the
views of an eminent author, who certainly was not thinking of India when
he was explaining the mysteries of the Zohar and the Sepher Jeszireh,
and who too was wondering what could have been the birthplace of these
extraordinary doctrines, which, in spite of certain points of
similarity, never grew out of the Grecian or Arabic philosophies.

The following are the exact words of the Zohar, as given by the author
in question, accompanied by his comments thereon. They lead from unity
to the dyad, and from the dyad to the triad, by the same path which the
thinkers in the Hindu pagodas had previously explored:

"In the beginning, was the Ancient. Seen face to face, he is the supreme
head, the source of all light, the principle of all wisdom. The only
definition that can be applied to him is, unity."

From the bosom of this absolute unity, of which, however, variety is a
distinguishing feature, and from all relative unity, issue two
principles in parallel lines, which are apparently opposed to each
other, but in reality are not incompatible. The male, or active
principle is called wisdom; the female, or passive principle is
designated by a word that is commonly translated as intelligence.

"Everything that exists," says the Zohar, "everything that has been
formed by the *Ancient*, whose name be sanctified, can only subsist
through a *male* and a *female*."

From their eternal and mysterious union springs a *son*,

<span id="page_178">p. 178</span>

who, according to the original expression, takes after his *father* and
*mother* together, and bears witness to both of them.

This son of wisdom and intelligence, called, on account of his double
inheritance, the elder son of God, is knowledge, or science. *These
three persons* contain and include everything that is, but they are
united, in their turn, in the White Head, in the Ancient of ancients,
for *all is he* and *he is all*.

Sometimes he is represented with three heads forming a single one.
Sometimes he is compared to the brain, which, without losing its unity,
is divided into three parts, and by means of thirty-two pairs of nerves
is in communication with every part of the body, as, by the aid of the
thirty-two methods of wisdom, the divinity is diffused throughout the
universe.

"The Ancient," says the Zohar, "whose name be sanctified, exists with
three heads forming a single one, and this head is the most elevated of
all elevated things, and because the Ancient is represented by the
number three, all the other lights, or, in other words, the ten
Zephiroth, are also comprised within the number three."

In another part of the same work we read:

"There are three heads carved one within the other, and one above the
other. In this number we reckon first hidden wisdom, which is never
without a veil. This mysterious wisdom is the supreme principle of all
other wisdom. Above this first head is the Ancient; whatever is most
mysterious among mysteries. Finally comes the head which towers above
all others, and which is no head. What it contains no one knows, or can
know, for it equally escapes our knowledge and our ignorance. That is
the reason why the Ancient is called the non-being."

Sometimes the terms or, if it is preferred, the persona of this trinity
are represented as three successive and absolutely necessary phases of
existence, as well as of thought, as a deduction or evolution which, at
the same time, constitutes

<span id="page_179">p. 179</span>

the generation of the world. However surprising it may seem, there can
be no doubt about it, when we read the following lines taken from the
Zohar:

"Come and see; thought is the principle of everything; but it is at
first ignorant and self-contained. When thought succeeds in diffusing
itself abroad it has reached that stage when it becomes spirit. When it
has arrived at that point it is called intelligence, and is no longer
contained within itself as before. The spirit develops itself, in its
turn, among the mysteries by which it is surrounded, and a voice comes
from it, which is like a reunion of the celestial choirs, a voice which
is distinctly heard in articulate words, for it comes from the spirit,
but when we think of all these degrees, we see that thought and
intelligence, this voice and this language, are one and the same thing;
that thought is the principle of everything that is, and that no
interruption can exist therein. Thought itself is united to the
non-being, and is never separated from it. Such is the meaning of the
words; Jehovah is one and his name is one.

"The name, which signifies I am, indicates to us the union of everything
that is, the degree where all the methods of wisdom are still hidden,
and placed together, without our being able to distinguish one from the
other, but when a line of demarkation is once established, when it is
desired to distinguish the mother, *carrying all things in her womb, and
upon the point* of giving birth to them, in order to reveal the supreme
name; then God says, speaking of himself: *I who am*. Finally, *when all
is carefully formed and has issued from the maternal womb*, when
everything is in its place, and it is proposed both to designate the
individual and existence, God calls himself Jehovah, or I am that which
is."

We will conclude the present sketch by presenting a most extraordinary
resemblance between the doctrine of the Pitris and that of the Jewish
Cabalists.

<span id="page_180">p. 180</span>

In the Hindu system, as we have seen, there were three trinities which
proceeded successively from Swayambhouva, the self-existent being, and
were mingled in him in a supreme union. They are:

First, the initial trinity, which gave birth to the divine thought:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

Nara, the producer;

Nari, the mother,

Viradj, the son.

</div>

Second, the trinity, as manifested, from which spring the primitive
elements, which aid in the formation of the universe.

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

Agni,

Aya,

Sourya.

</div>

Third, the creating trinity:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

Brahma,

Vishnou,

Siva.

</div>

Franck informs us, upon the authority of the Zohar, that a precisely
similar doctrine was held by the Cabalists. He says:

"The ten Zephiroth were divided into *three classes*. Each presents the
*divinity to us under a different aspect*, but always under the aspect
of an *invisible trinity*.

"The first three Zephiroth are purely intellectual. As a matter of
metaphysics, they express the absolute identity of thought and
existence, and form what modern Cabalists call the intelligible world.
It is the first manifestation of the Deity.

"*The three* that succeed them have a moral character: on the one hand,
they make us conceive of God as identical with goodness and wisdom; on
the other hand, they exhibit the Supreme Being as the origin of beauty
and magnificence *in creation*. For this reason, they have been called
the *virtues*, or the *sensible world*.

<span id="page_181">p. 181</span>

"Finally, we learn *by the last three Zephiroth* that the universal
providence, or the Supreme Artist, is also *absolute force* or
all-powerful cause, and that this cause is, at the same time, the
*generating element of everything that is*. It is the last Zephiroth
that constitutes the *natural world* or *nature*, in its *essence* and
*active principle, natura naturans*."

Upon prosecuting our inquiries as to the original source of the
philosophical ideas of mankind, it is highly suggestive, to say the
least of it, that the Brahminical and Cabalistic notion of the three
trinities was almost identically the same.

First, there was an unrevealed God, the primordial and universal germ,
the Ancient of Days, as he was called by the Hindus, the Ancient of
Ancients, according to the Cabalistic philosophy.

Second, there was then a first trinity, begotten of thought and will.

Third, there was in either case a second trinity, which was the origin
of the elements, of the virtues, and of the forces of the sensible
world.

Fourth, according to the Hindus, a third trinity had charge of the work
of creation; according to the Cabalists, *it represents the generative
element of everything that is*.

Finally, in both doctrines, the active generative element, by perpetual
union with the passive or mother element, was continually shooting into
space the rays of life, from which souls escape and accomplish their
progressive destinies in the universe, and gradually ascend and are
absorbed in the immortal source from which they originally spring, or,
in other words, in unity.

In order to give a clearer idea of this notion of the Great All, with
its two-fold nature, continually begetting everything that exists, and
of the universe which is the product, or offspring, perpetually
ascending to unity, like

<span id="page_182">p. 182</span>

the links of an endless chain, or a self-feeding flame, the Zohar makes
use of the following comparison:

"In order to master the science of the sacred unity, look at the flame
which rises from a brightly burning fire, or from a lighted lamp; first
we see two lights, the one brilliantly white, the other black or blue.
The white light is above the other, and rises in a straight line. The
black light is underneath and seems to be the source of the former. They
are, however, so closely united to each other that they form but one
flame, but the foundation, formed by the blue or black light, in its
turn, is connected with the burning matter which is still farther
beneath. It should be known that the white light never changes; it
always preserves its peculiar color, but several shades are
distinguished in that which is beneath. The latter besides tends in two
opposite directions. On top it is connected with the white light and
below with the burning flame, but this matter is being continually
absorbed in its bosom, and is continually ascending toward the superior
light. In this manner everything returns to unity."

In view of the extraordinary similarity which we have shown to exist
between the doctrines held by the Hindus and those of the Jewish
Cabalists, what becomes of the claims of those Semitists who, in
imitation of Renan, adopt every method to disseminate their peculiar
views, independently of the fact that identically the same opinions were
held by other people in Asia and the East.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VII. The Belief in Mediating and Inspiring Spirits
According to the Jewish Cabalists](osi32)
