[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](osi37)  [Next](osi39) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002FU5O7C/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Occult Science in India*, by Louis Jacoilliot, \[1919\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_210">p. 210</span>

### CHAPTER IV.

### THE LEAF DANCE.

<span class="smallcaps">We</span> select at random some facts that fell
under our own observation, as they were noted down at the time, grouping
them, however, according to the method adopted by us, to make the Hindu
classification more clear.

What we call spirit force is called by the Hindus arta-ahancârasya or
the force of I.

I had been a resident of Pondichéry, the capital of the French
possessions in the Carnatic, for several years, when one morning,
between eleven and twelve o'clock, my dobachy or valet-de-chambre
informed me that a Fakir wanted to see me.

I had left Europe without the slightest idea of the phenomena which the
spiritualists attribute to their mediums. I was ignorant of the very
principles lying at the bottom of a faith which I then believed to be
new, but which I now know to be as old as the temples of India, Chaldea,
and Egypt for all religions commenced with the belief in spirits and
outward manifestations, the source of a revelation claimed to be divine.
I had not even seen a single case of table-tipping. The extravagances of
the faith in invisible spirits in which its adepts sincerely believed,
and which always formed a prominent feature of their stories, were so
like the ecstasies, the mysterious apparitions, and the whole machinery
of the Catholic church, that it had never occurred to me, ardent
naturalist as I was, to attend or witness one of the experiments which
had stirred up such a general interest in every direction.

As for the Hindu Fakirs, I conceived them to be simple magicians, and I
unceremoniously dismissed them whenever

<span id="page_211">p. 211</span>

they presented themselves. Yet I had heard a great deal of their
marvellous skill, and I was anxious to see a specimen of it.

The Hindu having been admitted, I received him in one of the interior
verandas of my house. I was struck first by his extreme leanness; his
face was as thin and bony as that of an anchorite, and his eyes, which
seemed half dead, produced a sensation such as I once experienced when
looking at the motionless, green orbs of a large deep-water shark.

He was waiting for me in a squatting posture upon the marble floor; when
he saw me he arose slowly. Bowing with his hands raised to his forehead,
he murmured the following:

"Saranai aya" (I greet you respectfully, Sahib), "it is I,
Salvanadin-Odéar, son of Canagarayen-Odéar. May the immortals watch over
your days."

"Salam, Salvanadin-Odéar, son of Canagarayen-Odéar, may you die upon the
sacred banks of the Tircangey, and may that transformation be your
last."

"The guru of the pagoda said to me this morning," continued the Hindu,
"go and glean at random, like the birds in the rice-fields, and Ganésa,
the god of travellers, has led me to your house."

"You are welcome."

"What do you want of me?"

"You are said to possess the faculty of communicating movement to inert
bodies without touching them. I should like to see a specimen of your
power."

"Salvanadin-Odéar has no such power; he merely evokes spirits, who lend
him their aid."

"Well, let Salvanadin-Odéar evoke the spirits, and show me what they can
do."

The words were hardly out of my mouth when the Fakir resumed his
squatting position upon the pavement, placing his seven-knotted stick
between his crossed legs.

<span id="page_212">p. 212</span>

He then asked to have my dobachy bring seven small flower-pots full of
earth, seven thin sticks of wood each about two cubits long, and seven
leaves taken from any tree, no matter what.

When these different articles had been brought, without touching them
himself, he had them placed in a horizontal line, about two yards from
his outstretched arm. He instructed my servant to plant a stick of wood
in each pot of earth, and to put on each stick a tree leaf with a hole
in the middle.

This being done, all the leaves dropped down the sticks, acting as
covers to the pots. The Fakir then joined his hands and raised them
above his head, and I heard him distinctly utter, in the Tamoul
language, the following invocation:

"May all the powers that watch over the intellectual principle of life
(kche’tradjna) and over the principle of matter (boûtatoma) protect me
from the wrath of the pisatchas (evil spirits), and may the immortal
spirit, which has three forms (mahatatridandi, the trinity), shield me
from the vengeance of Yama."

At the close of the invocation he stretched out his hands in the
direction of the flower-pots, and stood motionless, in a sort of
ecstasy. From time to time his lips moved as if he were continuing his
occult invocation, but no sound reached my ears.

I watched all these elaborate preparations with considerable interest
and amusement, without suspecting what was to follow. Suddenly it seemed
to me that my hair was moved by a slight current of air, which blew in
my face like one of those gusts that we often see in the tropics after
sunset, and yet the large straw curtains of vétivert, hanging in the
vacant spaces between the columns of the veranda, were undisturbed. I
thought that my senses had deceived me, but the phenomenon was repeated
several times.

At the end of about a quarter of an hour, though there

<span id="page_213">p. 213</span>

had been no change of position on the part of the Fakir, the fig-leaves
began to move slowly upward along the sticks of wood, and then as slowly
descend.

I approached and watched them as they continued their motion with the
closest attention. I must confess that when I saw that there was no
visible means of communication between the Hindu and the leaves I was
very much surprised.

I passed and repassed several times in the space which separated the
juggler from the pots of earth, but there was no interruption in the
ascent or descent of the leaves.

I asked to examine his arrangements and was unhesitatingly allowed to do
so. I removed the leaves from the sticks, and the sticks from the pots,
and emptied their contents upon the pavement. Having rung for the
*cousicara* (or cook) I ordered seven goblets to be brought from the
kitchen, and some earth and fresh leaves from the garden. I divided the
bamboo stick myself into seven pieces, and I arranged everything as it
had been done previously, placing it all at about four yards from the
Fakir, who looked on unconcernedly during the whole operation, without
making any remark or movement whatever.

"Do you think," I then asked him, "that the spirits will act now?"

He made no answer, but merely extended his arms, as he had done before.

Five minutes had hardly elapsed, when the upward and downward motion of
the leaves along the sticks was repeated.

I was amazed and it must be confessed that I had ample reason.

Still I would not acknowledge my defeat. I asked the Fakir if the pots
of earth were essential to the production of the phenomena, and, being
answered in the negative, I had seven holes bored in a plank, in which I
placed the

<span id="page_214">p. 214</span>

bamboo sticks. In a short time, the same phenomena occurred as before.

During the next two hours, I repeated the experiment in twenty different
ways, but always with the same result.

The only way in which I could account for it was by supposing that I was
under some powerful magnetic influence. The Fakir said to: "Is there not
some question you wish to put to the invisible spirits before they go?"

The question was totally unexpected, but as I had heard that European
mediums use an alphabet in conversing with spirits, as they claim, I
explained the matter to the Hindu, and asked him if I could enter into
communication with them by any such means.

He answered me in these words, "Ask anything you please, the leaves will
remain still, if the spirits have nothing to say. If, on the contrary,
those who guide them have any communication to make, they will move
upward along the sticks."

I was about to write an alphabet upon a sheet of paper when a very
simple device occurred to me. I had a set of raised brass letters and
figures upon zinc blocks which I used to stamp my name and a number upon
the books in my library. I threw them pell-mell into a small linen bag,
and the Fakir having resumed his position of invocation, I thought of a
friend, who had died twenty years before, and proceeded to extract the
letters and numbers, one by one.

Upon taking up each of the zinc blocks I looked at the letter or figure
as I called it off, and kept a watchful eye upon the leaves so that the
least movement would not escape me.

I had already taken out fourteen blocks and nothing unusual had
occurred, when upon the appearance of the letter A, the leaves began to
move, and after ascending to

<span id="page_215">p. 215</span>

the top of the sticks, fell again to the boards in which the pieces of
bamboo had been placed.

I could not help betraying some emotion, when I observed that the motion
of the leaves corresponded to the appearance of the first letter of my
friend's name. When the bag was empty, I put the letters and figures in
again, and continued as before. Letter by letter and figure by figure I
obtained the following words:

*Albain Brunier, died at Bourg-en-bresse* (*Ain*) *January* 3, 1856.

The name, the date, the place, everything was correct; the blood rushed
to my head as I read over and over again, the words which shone
strangely in my eyes.

What made my astonishment still greater was the fact that I had no
conception of phenomena of this class. I was totally unprepared for
them; I wanted to be alone and to reflect. I therefore dismissed the
Fakir, without making any further observations on that day. I made him
promise, however, to come on the morrow, at the same hour. He was
punctual to the appointment.

We repeated the same series of experiments, and the result was the same
as before.

The excitement which I had at first experienced, and which was perfectly
natural under the circumstances, had disappeared, but I was no nearer
than before to a belief in the supernatural and in the reality of the
Fakir's evocations. I was merely led to formulate in my own mind the
following supposition:

"If these phenomena were not the result of pure charlatanism, magnetic
influence, or hallucination, perhaps there is a natural force, the laws
of which we are yet ignorant of, and which enables its possessor to act
upon inanimate objects, and interpret thoughts, as the telegraph puts
two minds in communication in different and opposite parts of the
globe,"

<span id="page_216">p. 216</span>

I spent a portion of the night in reflection upon this point. On the
morrow I repeated the phenomena of the previous day at an early sitting.
I then asked the Fakir to do them over again, and I watched them, having
in mind the supposition [above](errata.htm#8) named.

When I asked the Fakir, for instance, to repeat the communication of the
previous day, I changed in my mind the orthography of the name, dwelling
strongly upon each letter. The following variations were the result:

Halbin Pruniet, died, etc.

I may add, however, that when I tried to change the name of the city, or
of the date of the occurrence, I was unsuccessful at that time and that
the message was always the same and always correct in those respects:

*Died at Bourg-en-Bresse* (Ain) *January* 3, 1856.

During fifteen days I had the Fakir at my house every day, and he always
submitted, with the utmost readiness, to all my requirements. I varied
my experiments as follows:

Bearing in mind always the exact words of the message as I first
received it, I wanted to know positively, whether it was possible to
effect a complete change in its terms.

At one time I obtained changes in the letters composing the name, so
that no one would have recognized it; at another time, the changes
referred to the date of the day, of the month, or of the year, but I
never obtained the slightest alteration in the name of the city, which
was invariably the same:

*Bourg-en-Bresse*.

Hence I concluded—referring always to the supposition under which I was
acting, that there really was a natural force, which had established a
communication between myself and the Fakir and the leaves—that I could
not sufficiently isolate my mind from the correct orthography of all the
words in the sentence.

<span id="page_217">p. 217</span>

On several different occasions I made similar attempts, with different
subjects, but with no better result.

While, on the one hand, the material phenomena were repeated with
scarcely any variation to speak of, still, there were constant changes
in the interpretation of my thoughts, which were sometimes designed on
my part, and sometimes, on the contrary, in direct opposition to what I
had intended. In the last sitting the Fakir gave, he lowered one balance
of a pair of scales simply with a peacock's feather, when the other
balance contained a weight of about a hundred and seventy pounds. By the
mere imposition of hands, he made a crown of flowers float in
[the](errata.htm#9) air, the atmosphere was filled with vague and
indistinct sounds and a shadowy hand drew luminous figures in space. At
that time I considered the two latter phenomena simply as
phantasmagoria—I did not even give them the benefit of a doubt. For this
reason, my notes of this sitting do not contain a full and accurate
account of the facts. I shall describe them farther on with suitable
details in the case of other magicians by whom they were also performed.

In short, with regard to purely material facts, I may say that I never
detected the slightest deception, and I applied the severest tests in
order to discover any fraud.

As for physiological facts, dismissing the hypothesis of supernatural
intervention, and on the simple supposition of a spiritual communication
between the operator and his assistant, I am bound to say that I
personally obtained nothing fixed, nothing invariable.

Such were my first observations at Pondichéry. My judicial duties and
special studies concerning ancient India did not give me time to
continue them, particularly in view of the results obtained, which were
positive enough with regard to all material phenomena, it is true, but
were doubtful and uncertain with regard to the transmission of mental
messages between two persons in full possession of

<span id="page_218">p. 218</span>

their faculties, but claimed to be in spiritual communication.

Perhaps there were grounds that might have warranted a further
investigation into this material force, and, supposing that it really
existed, for attempting to free it from the elaborate appliances and
clap-trap by which it was encompassed, in order to strike the popular
imagination. It was not, however, my business to do so, being otherwise
occupied, as I have already said, by my professional duties and studies
in relation to primitive society in Asia.

Still, while I took no further active interest in these phenomena, I was
in the habit of setting apart anything I might meet with, in the course
of my studies, relating to the doctrine of the Pitris, with the idea of
publishing subsequently whatever I might come across upon a subject
which seems to interest the Western, as much as it does the Asiatic
world.

From this time forward I also made notes of all the material phenomena
by whose aid the Fakirs seek to prove the existence of the power they
claim, for it seems to me that such facts were strongly corroborative of
their theory.

Although I have been careful to avoid any departure from the part which
I have assumed as a simple historian, I have desired, in the present
chapter, to give an account of the only attempts I have ever seriously
made to inform myself regarding this force which the Fakirs appear to
possess and by means of which, they claim, they hold communication with
invisible spirits, a claim which many persons of our time, even of the
highest intelligence, are disposed to allow. It seems to me that a reply
is due to the reader who may ask: Why does the author disavow any
personal responsibility? has he no opinion whatever upon this question?

I have indeed no *scientific opinion* upon this subject, as yet.

<span id="page_219">p. 219</span>

I am convinced that there are in nature, and in man, who is a part of
nature, immense forces, the laws of which are yet unknown to us.

I think that man will some day discover these laws, that things that we
now regard as dreams, will appear to us, in the future, as realities,
and that we shall one day witness phenomena of which we have now no
conception.

In the world of ideas, as in the material world, there is a period of
gestation, as of birth. Who knows whether this psychic force, as the
English call it—this force of the Ego, according to the Hindus, which
the humble Fakir exhibited in my presence, will not be shown to be one
of the grandest forces in nature?

I may be told that for more than ten thousand years, during which the
Hindus have given it their attention, they have never succeeded in
formulating the laws of this pretended force, and that we cannot afford
to lose our time, now or in the future, as they have done.

The Brahmins have made everything subordinate to their religion, and we
know that in *religious matters* there are no scientific experiments or
proof. See what the middle ages produced in the domain of the exact
sciences by taking their axioms from the words of the Bible!

From the remotest antiquity the pundits of the pagodas have been in the
habit of bursting vessels by the use of compressed steam. They have also
observed many electrical phenomena, but that has not led to the
construction of railroads or telegraphs. Among ourselves, have we not
seen scientific societies of the highest order officially treat Fulton
like a crazy man, and regard the telegraph as a toy, only fit for
sending messages from one room to another in the same dwelling. In the
open air, and with atmospheric disturbances, the telegraph wire was not
to be relied upon.

It has now, however, put a girdle round the earth, and we have sunk it
at the bottom of the deepest seas.

<span id="page_220">p. 220</span>

See what human society as a whole has done. Every age turns an idea over
and over again in all its phases; scientific men develop it and set
forth their theory, from which they refuse to swerve; every scientific
body has an opinion, to which it stoutly clings. If it does not say in
so many words, "Thus far shalt thou go and no farther," everybody knows
that it thinks so, for it rejects every idea that does not originate in
its own bosom, everything new and startling. Then the new generation
comes upon the stage and the sons rebel against their fathers, as behind
the time. The screw traverses the ocean, regardless of wind or tide, and
the electric fluid transmits thought to the four corners of the globe.

As I have been led to speak of my own views I will say that the
conclusion that I have drawn from what I have seen in India, laying
aside the clap-trap by which it is surrounded, and of which the Hindus
are very fond, is that there is in man a special force acting in an
unknown direction, and often intelligently, the laws of which require to
be studied by unprejudiced and liberal-minded specialists.

Perhaps it is this force, developed by education and by a certain system
of training, that the priests in the ancient temples set in motion, in
order to impress the popular imagination by pretended prodigies.

In that case there would seem to be some foundation for the ancient
stories and there probably was a real development of a natural force, in
connection with an exhibition of the grossest superstition, moving the
tree leaves at a distance, as well as the floral garlands and tapestry
hung in the temples, adding several pounds to the weight of peacock's
feathers, and producing musical sounds by the aid of concealed
instruments.

It is to be hoped that our scientists will some day or other make a
serious investigation into the production of some of these phenomena,
which I saw repeated before

<span id="page_221">p. 221</span>

my eyes, and which left no room for the slightest suspicion of
charlatanism. I do not know that such is their intention, but it would
be of some use, at any rate, whether it results in the exposure of a
fraud, or whether it ends in the discovery of a new force in nature.

![](img/3stars.jpg)

As I was putting in order for the press the different portions of this
volume, which was written at Pondichéry in 1866, and which had slumbered
in my drawer until then, for special reasons, I intended at first to
omit that part of the present chapter where, departing from my rôle as a
simple observer, I seemed to take sides in favor of a force, purely
natural, it is true, but which produced phenomena that were apparently
supernatural.

So far, I had rigidly excluded my personal opinions; should I now depart
from this rule in that part of my book which treated of the more or less
fantastical practices of the Hindus?

On the other hand, should I hesitate to acknowledge what seemed to be
the few probably real facts, apart from the supernatural, which seemed
to me to result from what I had seen?

I had not yet come to a decision on this point when, through the
politeness of Dr. Puel, I was made acquainted with an article upon the
psychic force, published by William Crookes, the eminent scientist and
member of the Royal Society of London, in the *Quarterly Journal of
Science*, one of the most respectable scientific organs of England.

I was not in England when the article appeared, and distance and my
other studies made it impracticable for me to keep up my familiarity
with works of this nature.

Imagine my surprise to see that the eminent chemist and physiologist had
arrived at the positive conclusion, as the result of experiments similar
to those I had seen in

<span id="page_222">p. 222</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> India, that there
exists a new force in the human organism, as I had timidly suggested,
several years before, as a matter of supposition.

I immediately came to the determination to leave my chapter as I had
written it, but to refer the reader to the article in question, as
confirmatory of the position I had assumed.

If, in spite of all the precautions I have taken to banish anything in
favor of a belief in the supernatural and to express my own opinion in
the most hypothetical manner, I have laid myself open to the reproach of
being too credulous, I shall bear the blame cheerfully, in the company
of one of the most distinguished of English scientists.

![](img/6stars.jpg)

It appears that this force, which first suggested itself to my mind in
1866, in order to explain the phenomena which were then taking place in
India before my face and eyes (the hypothesis that it was supernatural
being totally inadmissible), had recently been recognized by physicians,
astronomers, naturalists, and others, members of the Royal Society of
London—which contains all who are eminent for their learning in England,
as our Academy of Sciences contains men who are known and esteemed for
their labors the world over—not, as I had done, by suggesting it as an
hypothesis to explain certain phenomena, but by maintaining, after two
years of experiments:

First, that there exists a force capable of moving heavy bodies without
material contact, which depends in some unknown manner upon the presence
of human beings.

Second, that nothing certain was known with regard to the nature and
source of this force, but there is conclusive evidence that it exists.

Third, that movements can be produced in solid bodies without material
contact by this hitherto unknown force, acting at an indefinite distance
from the human organism, and wholly independent of muscular action.

<span id="page_223">p. 223</span>

Fourth, that this force makes solid bodies, which have no contact or
visible or material connection with the bodies of any persons present,
emit sounds which are distinctly heard by all present, and it is proved
that these sounds proceed from these objects, by vibrations which are
perfectly perceptible to the touch.

Fifth, that this force is frequently directed with intelligence.

The question is whether this is the force which the Hindus, who have
known of its existence for thousands of years, have sought to develop in
all subjects who were willing to become their tools, and who have
afterward, with a view to religious domination, attributed its
manifestations to superior spirits. We rather incline to think so,
though we express no opinion as to its nature or origin. It is not with
a view to elucidate this question, by showing what arguments may be
urged on either hand, that we have given this brief sketch of what has
been accomplished by English scientists upon this point. Our intention
was simply to show that *scientific men* in England have officially
recognized *the existence of a force, independent of muscular action,
capable of moving bodies, of sometimes emitting melodious sounds, and
which, is frequently directed with intelligence*, and to draw the
conclusion, from the similarity of the phenomena witnessed in England
and in India, that the laws which govern them, in either country, are
identical.

If some of the facts observed in India seem to be more wonderful than
any which have formed the subject of experiment in England (I speak of
the latter more particularly on account of the scientific endorsement
they have received), the two following reasons may be given:

It is very possible that the Hindus, in addition to the real *force*
they possess, also display a skill so great that it is difficult to
detect them in any act of deception.

Perhaps, too, as they have been in possession, for several

<span id="page_224">p. 224</span>

thousand years, of this *special force*, they have discovered the laws
which the *Englishmen* were unable to formulate, though they had proved
the existence of the *force itself*.

It would follow therefrom that the discovery of the laws in question may
have led to a more marked and decided progress in the production of
these phenomena.

With these remarks, and without guaranteeing their *scientific value*,
we will continue our account of the extraordinary manifestations which
the Brahmins attribute to superior spirits, and which they hold to be a
part of their religion..

We shall continue also, however, to indicate the efforts made by us to
test them, as far as we were able. The accounts, as we have said before,
are taken from our notes of travel in upper Bengal and the Himalaya
Valleys. We have only omitted the descriptive portions and such facts as
are of no general importance, being wholly personal.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter V. The Bronze Vase—Musical Accompaniments](osi39)
