[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](osi33)  [Next](osi35) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002FU5O7C/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Occult Science in India*, by Louis Jacoilliot, \[1919\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_196">p. 196</span> <span id="page_197">p. 197</span>

# FOURTH PART.

## EXOTERIC MANIFESTATIONS AND DEMONSTRATIONS AMONG THE INITIATES OF THE SACRED TEMPLES OF INDIA, AS SHOWN BY THE PERFORMING FAKIRS.

<span id="page_198">p. 198</span>

Power belongs to him who knows. (Agrouchada-Parikchai)

He who has penetrated the secret of things, who has lifted himself up by
contemplation to the knowledge of the immortal principle, who has
mortified his body and developed his soul, who knows all the mysteries
of being and not being, who has studied all the transformations of the
vital molecule from Brahma to man and from man to Brahma, he alone is in
communication with the Pitris and commands the celestial forces.
(Atharva-Veda.)

The Boutams (or bad spirits) tremble before him who is shaved, who wears
the triple girdle, and is clothed with the yellow vestment, and who
carries the seven-knotted stick. (Agrouchada-Parikchai.)

<span id="page_199">p. 199</span>

### TO THE READER.

<span class="smallcaps">The</span> philosophical part of our work is now
ended. In a subject so vast there are many points, no doubt, that might
have been more fully developed, but our main purpose has been to give a
comprehensive idea of the metaphysical speculations of the Hindu
initiates, and to show that their belief in spirits was only a
consequence of their system relating to God and his attributes, and to
the existence of the universe. In the comparison of this doctrine, which
is based upon the Vedas themselves, with those of other ancient people,
we devoted most of the space at our command to the Jewish Cabala,
because, though not so well known as Magism, the philosophy of Plato, or
the Alexandrian school, it also believed in the manifestations of
spirits, the power of evocation, and its external phenomena, precisely
in the same manner as the philosophy of the Pitris, their traditional
ancestor on the banks of the Ganges.

We might also have called attention to the fact that primitive
Christianity, with its Thautnaturgists suddenly appearing through closed
doors, raising the dead, floating in the air, and receiving the gift of
tongues, with its initiation in the Catacombs, its superior spirits, its
demons, and its exorcists, was intimately related to the Cabala and the
doctrine of the Pitris. We confined ourselves, however, to the statement
that that religious revolution in the earlier ages of our era was only a
synthesis of the old beliefs of Asia. An exhaustive study of the subject
would have required a book by itself, which we might not have the
leisure to complete.

<span id="page_200">p. 200</span>

The special scope of the present work forbids any extended excursion
into this field. The mere fact of our undertaking it would have
necessarily led us to devote the same space to the mysterious
initiations of [Egypt](errata.htm#7), Chaldea, and Persia, and, as the
reader will readily see, it would have compelled us to write a general
history of the ancient civilizations of the East, such as forms a part
of the ethnographical studies published by us elsewhere.

Before giving an account of the exterior phenomena and manifestations by
which the Hindus claim to show that they are in possession of occult
power, which is a logical consequence of their religious belief in the
part played by spirits in the universe, we desire to disavow any
personal responsibility whatever.

We assert nothing positively with regard to most of the facts which we
are about to relate. The skill derived from long experience,
charlatanism, and even hallucination itself, may assist to explain them.
We are bound to say, however, as impartial and faithful observers, that
though we applied the severest tests, to which the Fakirs and other
initiates interposed no objection whatever, we never succeeded in
detecting a single case of fraud or trickery, which, we admit, is far
from being a conclusive proof of their honesty.

Hue, the missionary, who also gives an account of similar phenomena,
witnessed by him in Thibet, was equally at a loss to account for them.

We are perfectly ready to admit, also, that we never knew a European,
either in India or Ceylon, even among the oldest residents, who was able
to indicate what means the votaries of the Pitris used in the production
of these phenomena.

Is this tantamount to saying that we believe in the intervention of
invisible spirits?

We do not believe in spiritualism, but while we believe that scepticism
or doubt in all cases, in spite of any amount

<span id="page_201">p. 201</span>

of proof, is something that man, in his weakness, has no right to
indulge in, we may add, on the other hand, that no one has a right to
assert a thing positively or scientifically, except upon careful
investigation, based upon proof upon either side.

We occupy the position which we assumed in our preface, viz.: That of a
simple recorder of facts which some regard as occult manifestations and
others as skilful jugglery.

There are, however, some phenomena, which, without going too far, we are
inclined to attribute to natural forces, the laws of which have not yet
been ascertained.

What are these forces? Or rather, what is the force which the Hindus
attribute to the pure Agasa fluid, under the direction of the spirits?

We are not an authority upon this point, and when we see the illustrious
scientist and member of the Royal Society of London, William Crookes,
treated with ridicule and contempt on account of the inquiries he is now
making with a view to the discovery of the laws of this force, we are
involuntarily reminded of the words of *Galvani*, to whom the western
world is indebted for the earliest experiments in electricity, as
follows:

"I am attacked by two classes of persons, the learned and the ignorant.
Both of them treat me with ridicule, and say that I am only fit to be *a
dancing-master for frogs*, <span id="fr_12"></span>[1](#fn_12) and yet I
think that I have discovered one of the grandest forces in nature."

In short, with regard to certain physical facts, which have nothing in
common with supernatural evocations, apparitions, or manifestations, and
which are not in direct opposition to the laws of nature, which are not
more wonderful than the results produced by electricity, we think that a
denial or affirmation following a thorough

<span id="page_202">p. 202</span>

and scientific investigation, is better than a denial or affirmation *à
priori*.

We know what a denial *à priori* is worth. It once rejected steam and
electricity. The phenomena which we shall describe are all included
within the three following categories:

First, facts and phenomena of exterior manifestations, obtained by
spiritual force, and generally with the aid of material objects.

Second, facts of a magnetic or somnambulistic character.

Third, the phenomena of evocation and apparition, and the production of
material objects by the spirits.

Phenomena of the first class are apparently easily tested. We shall tell
what we have done and what our experience has been, without, however,
expressing any opinion of our own as to their causes.

As to the last class of cases, we should have omitted them altogether
from the present work, as shunning a scientific investigation,
if—remembering that in ancient times the belief in evocations and
apparitions was universal; that all religions, with Christianity at
their head, included such phenomena in their mysteries and miracles—we
had not deemed that it would be at least a matter of historical
curiosity to set forth the nature of these singular practices—in common
use in India at the present day—which are so well adapted to influence
the popular mind, and which formed the basis of all the ancient
superstitions.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_12"></span>[201:1](osi34.htm#fr_12) Alluding to his
experiments on frogs.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter I. As to Who Are Initiated Into the Different Classes of
Occult Power](osi35)
