[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](osi32)  [Next](osi34) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002FU5O7C/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Occult Science in India*, by Louis Jacoilliot, \[1919\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_189">p. 189</span>

### CHAPTER VIII.

### POINTS OF RESEMBLANCE BETWEEN THE DOCTRINE OF THE PITRIS AND THAT OF THE ZEND-AVESTA OF PERSIA, THE PHILOSOPHY OF PLATO, THE ALEXANDRIAN SCHOOL, AND OF CHRISTIANITY.

The Jewish Cabala is not the only philosophical system in ancient times
which closely resembles the Brahminical doctrine.

According to Plato, the universe was an emanation from the Supreme
Being, created by the Word, or Son, and was a mere reproduction of the
eternal types contained in the divine wisdom; like the Hindus he
believes in the preexistence of the soul, and metempsychosis, and like
them he *secretly* instructed those who had been initiated in doctrines
of which those he popularly taught gave but a faint idea.

If we may apply that expression to him, the philosopher of Egina was
what we should call in modern times, an eclectic.

He taught his disciples, in a smaller compass, the traditions of human
wisdom, which had been handed down from age to age to his time, by means
of the mystic initiations in the temples.

We are positively told so by Proclus, in the following passage:

“Ἁπάσαν μὲν τοῦ Πλάτωνος φιλοσοφίαν, καὶ τὴν ἀρχὴν ἐκλάμψαι νομίζω, κατὰ
τὴν τῶν κρειττόνων ἀγαθοειδῆ βουλήσιν … τῆς τε ἄλλης ἁπάσης ἥμας
μετόχοος κατέστησε

<span id="page_190">p. 190</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> τοῦ Πλάτωνος
φιλοσοφίας, καὶ κοινωνοὺς τῶν ἐν ἀποῤῥήτοις παρὰ των αὐτου πρεσβυτέρων
μετείληφε.”

There are so many points of analogy between the philosophy of the
Alexandrian school, or Neo-platonism, and the Hindu doctrines which we
have just been investigating, that we cannot avoid the conclusion that
the former was derived from that inexhaustible Oriental fountain.
Moreover, it claims, itself, to have sprung from the mysterious
traditions of Asia.

Its idea of God is that he is the Great All, from which everything
proceeds, and to which everything tends. He is all and everything is in
him.

He is unity, τὸ ἕν;

He is the ineffable, ἀῤῥητός;

He is the unknown, ἀγνωστός.

According to Plotinus and his school, the Trinity is an emanation from
unity, exactly as held by those who believe in the Pitris.

It receives the following names, taken from its attributes:

τὸ ἕν το αγαθὸν, unity or, in other words, the good.

Νοῦς, the soul of the world, or the universal spirit.

Ψυκὴ τοῦ παντός, τῶν ὅλων, the demiourgos, or the creator.

The resemblance between the two systems is not confined, however, to a
single point. Each member of this trinity begets, in its turn, a special
trinity, and the mission of the three trinities that spring from them,
is to produce unceasingly and to perpetuate in this world, first, the
good; second, the intelligence or the vital principle; and third, the
work of creation.

Under more mystical names they are precisely similar to the three
trinities of the Brahmins and the Cabalists. According to the
Neo-platonists the Supreme Being,

<span id="page_191">p. 191</span>

with its various symbolic transformations, is a vast and everlasting
source, from which are constantly springing those universal races which,
through the love of the husband for his spouse, of the unity for the
intelligence, are provided with all the different attributes and are
thereby impelled to ascend unceasingly, through successive
transformations, until they arrive at unity itself.

"By a movement like that of an endless chain about a wheel," as the Book
of the Pitris says.

Between the Trinitarian systems of Christianity and those of the Hindus,
of the Cabalists, and of the Neo-platonists, the numerous points of
similarity are obvious at a glance, and we can readily see the source
from which the founders of that religion have derived their revelation.

We say founders, though that is not the proper name to apply to the
authors of the four gospels, whose idea it was to create a tradition of
their own, for it is now well settled that Christianity, which is as old
as the temples of Egypt and the pagodas of India, is a symbolic
synthesis of all the beliefs of antiquity.

Scholars living in the primitive ages of the church were not so easily
misled. In the third century, the illustrious Manichean, Faustus, wrote
these words, which we commend to the attention of all those who have
made the life of Jesus the theme of romantic study:

"Everybody knows that the gospels were actually written neither by Jesus
Christ nor by his personal disciples, but were carried along by
tradition, and long after their time were written by unknown people,
who, correctly supposing that their word would not be taken as to things
that had not come under their personal observation, placed at the head
of these traditional statements the names of the apostles or of
apostolic men contemporaneous with them." (Faustus.)

The Council of Nice, under the presidency of Constantine, that odious
and criminal despot, whose praises have

<span id="page_192">p. 192</span>

been sung by all the writers of the Church, indeed created a
Catholicism, as a means of discipline, which was entirely different from
primitive Christianity.

In very guarded language, Franck expresses a similar opinion in the
following words:

"Have we not every reason in the world to look upon the Cabala as a
precious relic *of the religious philosophy of the East*, which was
transported to Alexandria and became mingled with the teachings of
Plato, and whose influence—under cover of the usurped name of Denys, the
Areopagite—Bishop of Athens, who was converted and consecrated by Saint
Paul—was felt in the mysticism of the middle ages?"

To the question, What is, then, this religious philosophy of the East,
whose influence is apparent in the mystic symbols of Christianity? we
answer as follows:

The philosophy, of which we find traces among the Magi, the Chaldeans,
the Egyptians, the Hebrew Cabalists, and the Christians, is identical
with that of the Hindu Brahmins, who believed in the Pitris.

There is one argument in favor of this opinion which is
[absolutely](errata.htm#6) conclusive, and that is this: Among all
ancient countries, India is the only one that possesses the whole of
this philosophy, so much so, indeed, that if it were desired to
reconstruct it from materials obtained from other sources than the
immortal thinkers of the banks of the Ganges, it would be necessary to
borrow them at second hand, here and there, from the various quarters
wherever found, from Plato, from the Cabala, from the Alexandrian
school, from the Magi, and from Christianity.

On the other hand, the high antiquity of the mighty work performed in
India is opposed to the supposition, even for an instant, that the
Brahminical philosophy was formed of pieces and fragments taken from
these different systems, which, being posterior to the Vedas and
Manu—that nobody disputes—were not, as admitted even by those who

<span id="page_193">p. 193</span>

hold most firmly to the opposite view, born upon the soil where we now
find them.

If the Cabala, if Magism, Plato, the Alexandrian school, and
Christianity did not derive their doctrines from original sources, if,
on the contrary, we find them in the remotest ages in the philosophical
works of ancient India, not as isolated facts but as a complete
collection of beliefs, dogmas, and mysteries, which go to make up the
whole of what is called the Brahminic civilization, have we not every
reason to maintain that they came originally from the country of the
Vedas?

It is easy to trace through the ages the path of these lofty
speculations. From India they made their way into Persia and Chaldea,
both by means of emigration and natural infiltration. It is sufficient
to compare the traditions of the Boun-Dehesh and the Zend-Avesta with
those that have been the object of our study, in order to recognize
their similarity, only the system of the Parsecs and of the ancient
Chaldeans is less philosophical than that of the mother country, and
concedes to the *dews* and evil spirits a much greater degree of
importance than that which is recognized by the Indian theory, as
possessed by the Devas and Pisatchas.

We shall have to descend to the superstitions of vulgar Brahminism, we
shall have to go to the religion of the Soudra, in order to find a like
severity of conflict between the spirits of good and the spirits of
evil. Parseeism and Chaldeaism are a mixture of the gross superstitions
of the Hindu populace and of the philosophical conceptions of the
Brahmins.

This reminds us of the following lines, which we quote from Amniance
Marcellinus and which are confirmed by Agathias.

"The King Hytaspes, having penetrated as far as certain retired places
*in Upper India*, came to some solitary groves, whose silence seem to be
favorable *to the profound* 

<span id="page_194">p. 194</span>

*thoughts of the Brahmins*. There they taught him, as far as they
possibly could, the pure sacrificial rites, and the causes of the
movement of the stars and the universe, a part of which he communicated
to the Magi. The latter have transmitted these secrets from father to
son, together with the science of predicting the future. Since then,
during a long succession of ages until now, there have arisen a
multitude of Magi, belonging to the same race, who have devoted
themselves to the service of the temple and the worship of the Gods."

Egypt, which had never forgotten its early traditions, was constantly
drawing new life and vigor from the study of the scientific movement of
Upper Asia.

Moses of Chorenus, who lived five centuries before the present era,
bears witness to this, in the most positive manner, in the following
passage:

"The ancient Asiatics had a multitude of historical works which were
translated into Greek, when the Ptolemies established the Alexandrian
library and encouraged literary men by their liberality, so that the
Greek language became the depositary of all the ancient learning."

It is evident from all this, first, that people in ancient times did not
live a more isolated life from each other, as regards the philosophical
and religious sciences, than they do now. Second, that there was a large
collection of traditions, of which ancient India was the principal
source. Third, that a close connection existed between the teachings of
the Brahmins and the systems of the Magi, the Chaldeans, the Cabalists,
the Platonists, and the philosophers of the Alexandrian School, whose
sect called therapeutæ kept alive the traditions which afterward became
those of Christianity.

By the careful study and comparison of the old civilizations we thus
acquire a knowledge of the general drift and tendency of the human
intellect in those times, without

<span id="page_195">p. 195</span>

regard to the warring claims of rival sects or the conflicting
pretensions of individual pride.

There is not a fact, not a belief, not a discovery, that is independent
of tradition, and those who, in order to display their singularity and
to make a particular place for their special studies, are constantly
meeting with conceptions which lay claim to originality and are said to
have borrowed nothing from any that have preceded them, are unmindful of
the laws of history and of the evolution of the human mind.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: To the Reader](osi34)
