[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](osi40)  [Next](osi42) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002FU5O7C/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Occult Science in India*, by Louis Jacoilliot, \[1919\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_237">p. 237</span>

### CHAPTER VII.

### PHENOMENA OF ELEVATION AND KNOCKING.

The Fakir's third visit was short, as he was to pass the night in prayer
upon the banks of the sacred river, upon the occasion of a religions
festival, and he had been invited to a funeral sraddha, which was to
take place on the following day.

He came merely to inform me that he would be obliged to attend them, and
was preparing to return to the small hut that the Peishwa had given him
the use of, when, at my request, he consented to perform a phenomenon of
elevation, which I had already seen other performers successfully
accomplish, without, however, taking any particular notice of how they
did it.

Taking an ironwood cane which I had brought from Ceylon, he leaned
heavily upon it, resting his right hand upon the handle, with his eyes
fixed upon the ground. He then proceeded to utter the appropriate
incantations, which he had forgotten to favor me with the day previous.

From the elaborate preparation he made in my presence, I formed the
opinion that this was to be only another instance of what I had always
regarded as an acrobatic trick.

My judgment refuses, in fact, to attach any other name to such phenomena
as this:

Leaning upon the cane with one hand, the Fakir rose gradually about two
feet from the ground. His legs were crossed beneath him, and he made no
change in his position, which was very like that of those bronze statues
of

<span id="page_238">p. 238</span>

Buddha that all tourists bring from the far East, without a suspicion
that most of them come originally from English foundries.

For more than twenty minutes I tried to see how Covindasamy could thus
fly in the face and eyes of all the known laws of gravity; it was
entirely beyond my comprehension; the stick gave him no visible support,
and there was no apparent contact between that and his body, except
through his right hand.

When I dismissed him he informed me, upon leaving, that when the sacred
elephants should strike the hour of midnight upon the copper gong in the
pagoda of Siva, he would evoke the familiar spirits that protect the
Franguys (or French), who would then manifest their presence in some
manner in my bedroom.

The Hindus have a perfect understanding among themselves. In order to
prevent any too obvious fraud, I sent my two servants to pass the night
upon the dingui with the cercar and boatmen. The idea of the
supernatural was naturally repugnant to my mind. My leanings were all
the other way, but if the fact should occur as he predicted, I did not
want to be too easily duped. For that reason I prepared to throw every
obstacle in the Fakir's way.

The Peishwa's house was singularly constructed; all the windows
overlooked the Ganges, and it contained seven large apartments, one
above the other. All the rooms in each apartment opened upon covered
galleries or terraces projecting over the quay. The mode of
communication from one story to another was very curious. There was a
single flight of steps which led from the bottom apartment to that
immediately above. Upon crossing this second apartment, in the last room
was a second flight of stairs which had no communication with the
former, and which led to the story above, and so on up to the seventh
story, which was reached by means of a movable stairway which could be
raised by chains like a drawbridge.

<span id="page_239">p. 239</span>

It was this seventh story, which was furnished in a style partly
Oriental and partly European, which commanded a most splendid view and
where the air was the coolest, that the Peishwa had set apart for his
foreign guests.

As soon as it was dark, I examined all the different rooms in the
apartment, in the most careful manner, and made sure that nobody was
concealed in them. I then raised the drawbridge, and thus cut off all
communication from the outside.

At the hour named I thought I heard two blows distinctly struck against
the wall of my room. I walked toward the spot from which the sound
seemed to come, when my steps were suddenly arrested by a sharp blow,
which appeared to proceed from the glass shade that protected the
hanging lamp against gnats and night butterflies. A few more sounds were
heard at unequal intervals in the cedar rafters of the ceiling, and that
was all. I walked toward the end of the terrace. It was one of those
silvery nights, unknown in our more foggy lands. The vast flood of the
sacred river rolled silently along at the foot of the sleeping city,
upon one of whose steps the outlines of a human form were dimly
profiled. It was the Fakir of Trivanderam, praying for the repose of his
dead.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VIII. The Bamboo Stool—Aërial Flowers—The Mysterious
Punkah](osi42)
