[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](osi46)  [Next](osi48) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002FU5O7C/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Occult Science in India*, by Louis Jacoilliot, \[1919\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_272">p. 272</span>

### CHAPTER II.

### THE PHANTOM OF KARLI.

About four years after this, I was travelling in the province of
Aurungabad, on a visit to the subterranean temple of Karli, having come
through Madras, Bellary, and Bedjapour.

These celebrated crypts, which are excavated from the living rock, are
all situated within the area bounded by the Mahratta Hills, where are
also found all the other monuments of this character that India
possesses, as, for instance, Ellora, Elephanta, Rosah, etc.

According to E. Roberts, these hills, which all terminate in wide
plateaux, were protected, at one time, by fortresses, which made this
place a formidable line of defence against the Arabs and Mussulmans,
which proved effectual for more than five centuries.

The ruins of citadels are still standing upon the steep road leading to
Karli.

The entrance to the caves is situated about three hundred feet above the
bottom of the hill, and the only access is by a rough and narrow path,
which is more like the bed of a torrent than a practicable road.

The path leads to a terrace or platform, partly artificial, and cut in
the rock, or built of fragments of rock taken from the inside.

It is about a hundred feet wide, and forms a square worthy of the
magnificence of the interior of the temple.

At the left of the portico stands a massive column, supporting, upon its
capital, three lions so disfigured by the hand of time that they can
with difficulty be recognized

<span id="page_273">p. 273</span>

at all. This column is covered with inscriptions that are now illegible.

Penetrating into the interior, I stood at the threshold of a spacious
vestibule, the entire length of which, measuring about a hundred and
sixty feet, is covered with arabesques and sculptured figures of animals
and men. On either side of the entrance stood three elephants of
colossal size, with their drivers upon their necks and their houdahs
upon their backs, in which, with great boldness, the unknown artist had
fashioned a multitude of persons. The arched vault is sustained by two
rows of pillars, each of which is also surmounted by an elephant,
bearing upon his back a man and woman, in the form of cariatides, who
seem to bend beneath the enormous weight they bear.

The interior is imposing but dismal, and it is impossible to find one's
way in the prevailing darkness.

This grand underground crypt is a celebrated place of resort for
pilgrims, and crowds of Fakirs are often met with, who have come from
all parts of India, to perform their devotions in the Cave of
Evocations.

Others live permanently in the neighborhood of the temple, where they
spend the whole of their time in corporeal mortifications and mental
contemplation,. sitting, day and night, in front of two blazing fires,
which are constantly fed by the attendants, who wear a band upon their
month to prevent inhaling the slightest impurity, and eat nothing but a
few grains of cooked rice, which they moisten with water filtered
through a piece of linen cloth. They gradually arrive at a state of
emaciation bordering closely upon death. Their moral strength is soon
impaired, and when this protracted suicide has brought them to death's
door, they have long been in such a state of intellectual and physical
decrepitude that they hardly seem to be alive.

All Fakirs who strive to attain the highest transformations

<span id="page_274">p. 274</span>

in the superior spheres have to undergo these terrible mortifications.

One was pointed out to me who had arrived some months ago from Cape
Comorin, and who, sitting between two fires, in order, no doubt, to
hasten the decomposition of his physical organs, had already arrived at
a state of almost complete insensibility. Imagine my astonishment when,
from a deep scar running across the whole upper part of his skull, I
thought I, recognized the Fakir of Trivanderam.

Approaching and addressing him in that beautiful Southern language in
which he so much liked to converse, I asked him if he remembered the
Franguy of Benares.

His almost lifeless eyes seemed to blaze up for a moment, and I heard
him murmur the two Sanscrit words, which I had seen in phosphorescent
letters on the evening of our last sitting:

*Divyavapour gatwâ*,

meaning, "I have clothed myself with a fluidic (fluidique) body."

That was the only sign of recognition that I was able to obtain. He was
known to the Hindus in the neighborhood as Karli Sava, or the Karli
Phantom.

So, decrepitude and imbecility appear to be the final end of all Hindu
transformed Fakirs.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Conclusion](osi48)
