[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Misc Texts](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](oph06)  [Next](oph08.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# CHAPTER VII.

Egypt as the Home of Serpent Worship---Thoth said to be the founder of
Ophiolatreia---Cneph, the Architect of the Universe---Mysteries of
Isis---The Isaic Table---Frequency of the Serpent Symbol---Scrapis---In
the Temples of Luxore, etc.---Discovery at Malta---The Egyptian
Basilisk---Mummies---Bracelets---The Caduceus---Temple of Cneph at
Elaphantina---Thebes---Story of a Priest---Painting in a Tomb at Biban
at Malook---Pococke at Raigny.

 

Egypt, of all ancient nations the most noted for its idolatry, was in
its earliest days the home of the peculiar worship we are contemplating.
A learned writer on the subject says "the serpent entered into the
Egyptian religion under all his characters---of an Emblem of Divinity, a
Charm or Oracle, and a God." Cneph, Thoth and Isis were conspicuous and
chief among the gods and goddesses thus symbolized, though he is said to
have entered more or less into the symbolical worship of all the gods.

Sanchoniathon describes Thoth as the founder of Serpent Worship in
Egypt, and he is generally regarded as the planter of the earliest
colonies in Phœnicia and Egypt after the Deluge. He has been called the
Reformer of the Religions of Egypt, and Deane says: "He taught the
Egyptians (or rather that part of his colony which was settled in Egypt)
a religion, which, partaking of Zabaism and Ophiolatreia, had some
mixture also of primeval truth. The Divine Spirit he denominated Cneph,
and described him as the Original, Eternal Spirit, pervading all
creation, whose symbol was a serpent."

Cneph was called by the priests the architect of the universe, and has
been represented as a serpent with an egg in his mouth; the serpent
being his hieroglyphical emblem, and the egg setting forth the mundane
elements as proceeding from him.

After his death Thoth was, in return for services rendered to the
people, made a god of---the god of health, or of healing, and so became
the prototype of Æsculapius. His learning appears to have been great,
and he instructed the people in astronomy, morals, hieroglyphics and
letters. He is generally represented leaning upon a knotted stick which
has around it a serpent.

The mysteries of the worship of Isis abounded in allusions to the
serpent, and Montfaucon says that the Isaic table, a plate of brass
overlaid with brass enamel; intermixed with plates of silver, which
described the mysteries, was charged with serpents in every part as
emblems of the goddess. The particular serpent thus employed was that
small one well known as the instrument used in her suicide by the
celebrated Cleopatra, the asp. This creature is pictured and carved on
the priestly robes, the tiaras of the kings, the image of the goddess.
The British Museum possesses a head of this divinity wearing a coronet
of them. Not only so, the living reptiles were kept in her temple and
were supposed to sanctify the offerings by crawling about amongst them.

As we have said the serpent entered largely into the symbolical worship
of all the Egyptian deities, and Cneph, Thoth and Isis can only be
regarded as three of the chief.

Deane says there is scarcely an Egyptian deity which is not occasionally
symbolized by it. Several of these deities are represented with their
proper heads terminating in serpents' bodies. In Montfaucon, vol. 2,
plate 207, there is an engraving of Serapis with a human head and
serpentine tail. Two other minor gods are also represented, the one by a
serpent with a bull's head, the other by a serpent with the radiated
head of the lion. The second of these, which Montfaucon supposes to be
an image of Apis, is bored through the middle: probably with a design to
hang about the neck, as they did many other small figures of gods, by
way of ornament or charms.

The figure of Serapis encircled by serpents is found on tombs. The
appearance of serpents on tombs was very general. On an urn of Egnatius,
Nicephoras, and of Herbasia Clymene, engraved in Montfaucon, vol. 5, a
young man entwined by a serpent is described as falling headlong to the
ground. In the urn of Herbasia Clymene the corners are ornamented with
figures of serpents. It is a singular coincidence that the creature by
whom it is believed came death into the world should be consecrated by
the earliest heathen idolaters to the receptacles of the dead. It is
remarkable also that Serapis was supposed by the Egyptians to have
dominion over evil demons, or in other words was the same as Plato or
Satan."

On some of the Egyptian temples the serpent has been conspicuously
figured as an emblem consecrated to the Divine service. Thus it is found
at Luxore, Komombu, Dendara, Apollinopolis and Esnay. The Pamphylian
obelisk also bears it many times---fifty-two it is said---and according
to Pococke each of the pillars of the temple of Gava has it twice
sculptured.

All writers on the subject have noticed the variations of form under
which the serpent has appeared on Egyptian monuments, and have laid
stress upon it as indicating the great consideration in which he was
held. There is little to be wondered at in this when we remember that he
was regarded as symbolical of divine wisdom, power, and creative energy;
of immortality and regeneration, from the shedding of his own skin; and
of eternity, when represented in the act of biting his own tail.

One writer says the world was represented by a circle, intersected by
two diameters perpendicular to each other, which diameters, according to
Eusebius, were serpents. Jablonski says the circumference only, was a
serpent.

Kircher says that the elements (or rather what were so considered in
ancient times) were represented by serpents. Earth was symbolized by a
prostrate two-horned snake; water, by a serpent moving in an undulated
manner; air, by an erect serpent in the act of hissing; fire, by an asp
standing on its tail and bearing upon his head a globe. "From these
hieroglyphics," remarks Deane, "It is clear that the serpent was the
most expressive symbol of divinity with the Egyptians."

An engraving in Montfaucon, vol. 2, p. 237, calls for notice here, as
illustrating the great extent to which the veneration of the serpent
once prevailed in Egypt. In the year 1694, in an old wall of Malta, was
discovered a plate of gold, supposed to have been concealed there by its
possessors at a time when everything idolatrous was destroyed as
abominable. Montfaucon says: "This plate was rolled up in a golden
casket; it consists of two long rows which contain a very great number
of Egyptian deities, most of which have the head of some beast or bird.
Many serpents are also seen intermixed, the arms and legs of the gods
terminating in serpents' tails. The first figure has upon its back a
long shell with a serpent upon it; in each row there is a serpent
extended upon an altar. Among the figures of the sacred row there is
seen an Isis of tolerably good form. This same plate, no doubt, contains
the most profound mysteries of the Egyptian superstition."

It hardly matters where we look in Egypt, this same serpent symbol is
found entering into the composition of everything, whether ornamental,
useful, or ecclesiastical. The basilisk, the most venomous of all
snakes, and so regarded as the king of the species and named after the
oracular god of Canaan OB or OUB, was represented on coins with rays
upon his head like a crown; around the coin was inscribed "Agathodæmon."
The emperor Nero in the "madness of his vanity," it is said, caused a
number of such coins to be struck with the inscription "The New
Agathodæmon," meaning himself.

The Egyptians held basilisks in such veneration that they made images of
them in gold and consecrated and placed them in the temples of their
gods. Bryant thinks that they were the same as the Thermuthis, or deadly
asp. These creatures the Egyptians priests are said to have preserved by
digging holes for them in the corners of their temples, and it was a
part of their superstition to believe that whosoever was accidentally
bitten by them was divinely favoured.  <span id="fr_5"></span>[1](#fn_5.md)

Deane further mentions that the serpent is sometimes found sculptured,
and attached to the breasts of mummies; but whether with a view to
talismanic security, or as indicative of the priesthood of Isis, is
doubtful. A female mummy, opened by M. Passalacqua at Paris some years
ago, was adorned with a necklace of serpents carved in stone.

Bracelets, in the form of serpents, were worn by the Grecian women in
the time of Clemens Alexdrinus, who thus reproves the fashion:---"The
women are not ashamed to place about them the most manifold symbols of
the evil one; for as the serpent deceived Eve, so the golden trinket in
the fashion of a serpent misleads the women." The children also wore
chaplets of the same kind.

We must not omit to notice the Caduceus, which forms, it is said, one of
the most striking examples of the talismanic serpent. According to
Montfaucon, Kirchen and others, the notion that this belonged
exclusively to Hermes or Mercury is erroneous, as it can be seen in the
hand of Cybele, Minerva Amebis, Hercules Ogmius and the personified
constellation Virgo, said by Lucian to have had her symbol in the
Pythian priestess.

Variously represented in the main, the Caduceus always preserved the
original design of a winged wand entwined by two serpents. It is found
sometimes without the wings, but never without the serpents; the
varieties consisting chiefly in the number of folds made by the
serpents' bodies round the wand, and the relative positions of the wings
and serpents' heads. It was regarded as powerful in paralyzing the mind
and raising the dead.

Kirchen says that Caduceus was originally expressed by the simple figure
of a cross by which its inventor, Thoth, is said to have symbolized the
four elements proceeding from a common centre.

"Ophiolatreia," says Deane, "had taken such deep root in Egypt that the
serpent was not merely regarded as an emblem of divinity, but even held
in estimation as the instrument of an oracle. The priests of the temple
of Isis had a silver image of a serpent so constructed as to enable a
person in attendance to move its head without being observed by the
supplicating votary.

"But Egyptian superstition was not contented with worshipping divinity
through its emblem the serpent. The senseless idolator soon bowed before
the symbol itself, and worshipped this reptile, the representative of
man's energy, as a god."

In addition to the temple of the great serpent-god Cneph at Elephantina,
there was a renowned one of Jupiter at Thebes, where the practice of
Ophiolatreia was carried to a great length. Herodotus writes: "At Thebes
there are two serpents, by no means injurious to men; small in size,
having two horns springing up from the top of the head. They bury these
when dead in the temple of Jupiter: for they say that they are sacred to
that god." Ælian says: "In the time of Ptolemy Euergetes, a very large
serpent was kept in the temple of Æsculapius at Alexandria, and in
another place a live one of great magnitude was kept and adored with
divine honours; the name of this place he called Melité." He gives the
following story:---"This serpent had priests and ministers, a table and
a bowl. The priests every day carried into the sacred chamber a cake
made of flour and honey and then retired. Returning the next day they
always found the bowl empty. On one occasion, one of the priests, being
extremely anxious to see the sacred serpent, went in alone, and having
deposited the cake retired. When the serpent had ascended the table to
his feast, the priest came in, throwing open the door with great
violence: upon which the serpent departed with great indignation. But
the priest was shortly after seized with a mental malady, and, having
confessed his crime, became dumb and wasted away until he died."

In Hewart's tables of Egyptian hieroglyphics we see a priest offering
adoration to a serpent. The same occurs on the Isiac table.

"In a tomb at Biban, at Malook, is a beautiful painting descriptive of
the rites of Ophiolatreia. The officiating priest is represented with a
sword in his hand, and three headless victims are kneeling before an
immense serpent. Isis is seen sitting under the arch made by the
serpent's body, and the sacred asp, with a human face, is behind her
seated on the serpent's tail. This picture proves that the serpent was
propitiated by human victims."

It is noteworthy that in Egypt as in Phœnicia and other places serpent
worship was not immediately destroyed by the advance of Christianity.
The Gnostics united it with the religion of the cross, and a quotation
from Bishop Pococke will, just here, be most appropriate and
interesting.

"We came to Raigny, where the religious sheikh of the famous Heredy was
at the side of the river to meet us. He went with us to the grotto of
the serpent that has been so much talked of under the name of the Sheikh
Heredy, of which I shall give you a particular account, in order to show
the folly, credulity, and superstition of these people; for the
Christians have faith in it as well as the Turks. We went ascending
between the rocky mountain for half a mile, and came to a part where the
valley opens wider. On the right is a mosque, built with a dome over it,
against the side of the rock, like a sheikh's burial-place. In it there
is a large cleft in the rock out of which they say the serpent comes.
There is a tomb in the mosque, in the Turkish manner, that they say is
the tomb of Heredy, which would make one imagine that one of their
saints is buried there, and that they suppose his soul may be in the
serpent, for I observed that they went and kissed the tomb with much
devotion and said their prayers at it. Opposite to this cleft there is
another, which they say is the tomb of Ogli Hassan, that is of Hassan,
the son of Heredy; there are two other clefts which they say are
inhabited by saints or angels. The sheikh told me there were two of
these serpents, but the common notion is that there is only one. He said
it had been there ever since the time of Mahomet. The shape of it is
like that of other serpents of the harmless breed. He comes out only
during the four summer months, and it is said that they sacrifice to it.
This the sheikh denied, and affirmed they only brought lambs, sheep, and
money to buy oil for the lamps---but I saw much blood and entrails of
beasts lately killed before the door.

"The stories are so ridiculous that they ought not to be repeated, if it
were not to give an instance of their idolatry in those parts in this
respect, though the Mahometan religion seems to be very far from it in
other things. They say the virtue of this serpent is to cure all
diseases of those who go to it.

"They are also full of a story, that when a number of women go there
once a year, he passes by and looks on them, and goes and twines about
the neck of the most beautiful.

"I was surprised to hear a grave and sensible Christian say that he
always cured any distempers, but that worse followed. And some really
believe that he works miracles, and say it is the devil mentioned in
Tobit, whom the angel Gabriel drove into the utmost parts of Egypt."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_5"></span>[1](oph07.htm#fr_5.md) Gesner, Hist. Anim. p. 54,
citing Ælian.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 8](oph08.md)
