[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Misc Texts](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](oph03)  [Next](oph05) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# CHAPTER IV

Ancient Monuments of the West---The Valley of the Mississippi---Numerous
Earthworks of the Western States---Theory as to origin of the
mounds---The "Defence" Theory---The Religious Theory---Earthwork of the
"Great Serpent" on Bush Creek---The "Alligator," Ohio---The "Cross,"
Pickaway County---Structures of Wisconsin---Mr. Pigeon's
Drawings---Significance of the Earthmounds---The Egg and Man's Primitive
Ideas---The Egg as a Symbol---Birth of Brahma---Aristophanes and his
"Comedy of the Birds"---The Hymn to Protogones---The Chinese and
Creation---The Mundane or Orphic Egg---Kneph---Mr. Gliddon's replies to
certain enquiries---The Orphic Theogony and the Egg---The Great Unity.

 

The ancient monuments of the Western United States consist for the most
part of elevations and embankments of earth and stone, erected with
great labour and manifest design. In connection with these, more or less
intimate, are found various minor relics of art, consisting of ornaments
and implements of many kinds, some of them composed of metal but most of
stone.

These remains are spread over a vast amount of country. They are found
on the sources of the Alleghany, in the western part of the state of New
York on the east; and extend thence westwardly along the southern shore
of Lake Erie, and through Michigan and Wisconsin, to Iowa and the
Nebraska territory on the west. Some ancient works, probably belonging
to the same system with those of the Mississippi valley and erected by
the same people, occur upon the Susquehanna river as far down as the
Valley of Wyoming in Pennsylvania. The mound builders seem to have
skirted the southern border of Lake Erie, and spread themselves in
diminished numbers over the western part of the State of New York, along
the shores of Lake Ontario to the St. Lawrence river. They penetrated
into the interior, eastward, as far as the county of Onondaga, where
some slight vestiges of their work still exist. These seem tohave been
their limits at the north-east. We have no record of their occurrence
above the great lakes. Carner mentions some on the shores of Lake Pepin,
and some are said to occur near Lake Travers, under the 46<sup>th</sup>
parallel of latitude. Lewis and Clark saw them on the Missouri river,
one thousand miles above its junction with the Mississippi; and they
have been observed on the Kanzas and Platte and on other remote western
rivers. They are found all over the intermediate country, and spread
over the valley of the Mississippi to the Gulf of Mexico. They line the
shores of the Gulf from Texas to Florida, and extend in diminished
numbers into South Carolina. They occur in great numbers in Ohio,
Indiana, Illinois, Wisconsin, Missouri, Arkansas, Kentucky, Tennessee,
Louisiana, Mississippi, Alabama, Georgia, Florida and Texas. They are
found in less numbers in the Western portions of New York, Pennsylvania,
Virginia, and North and South Carolina; as also in Michigan, Iowa, and
in the Mexican territory beyond the Rio Grande del Norte. In short, they
occupy the entire basin of the Mississippi and its tributaries, as also
the fertile plains along the Gulf.

Although possessing throughout certain general points of resemblance
going to establish a kindred origin, these works, nevertheless, resolve
themselves into three grand geographical divisions, which present in
many respects striking contrasts, yet so gradually merge into each other
that it is impossible to determine where one series terminates and the
other begins. In the region bordering upon the upper lakes, to a certain
extent in Michigan, Iowa and Missouri, but particularly in Wisconsin, we
find a succession of remains, entirely singular in their form and
presenting but slight analogy to any others of which we have in any
portion of the globe. The larger proportion of these are structures of
earth bearing the forms of beasts, birds, reptiles, and even of men;
they are frequently of gigantic dimensions, constituting huge
basso-relievos upon the face of the country. They are very numerous and
in most cases occur in long and apparently dependent ranges. In
connection with them are found many conical mounds and occasional short
lines of embankment, in rare instances forming enclosures. These animal
effigies are mainly confined to Wisconsin, and extend across the
territory from Ford du Lac in a south-western direction, ascending the
Fox river and following the general course of Rock and Wisconsin rivers
to the Mississippi. They may be much more extensively disseminated; but
it is here only that they have been observed in considerable numbers. In
Michigan, as also in Iowa and Missouri, similar elevations of more or
less outline are said to occur. They are represented as dispersed in
ranges like the buildings of a modern city, and covering sometimes an
arc of many acres.

The number of these ancient remains is well calculated to excite
surprise, and has been adduced in support of the hypothesis that they
are most if not all of them natural formations, "the result of diluvial
action," modified perhaps in some instances, but never erected by man.
Of course no such suggestion was ever made by individuals who had
enjoyed the opportunity of seeing and investigating them. Simple
structures of earth could not possibly bear more palpable evidences of
an artificial origin than do most of the western monuments. The
evidences in support of this assertion, derived from the form,
structure, position and contents of these remains, sufficiently appear
in the pages of this work.

The structure, not less than the form and position of a large number of
the Earthworks of the West, and especially of the Scioto valley, render
it clear that they were erected for other than defensive purposes. The
small dimensions of most of the circles, the occurrence of the ditch
interior to the embankments, and the fact that many of them are
comletely commanded by adjacent heights, are some of the circumstances
which may be mentioned as sustaining this conclusion. We must seek,
therefore, in the connection in which these works are found and in the
character of the mounds, if such there be within their walls, for the
secret of their origin. And it may be observed that it is here we
discover evidences still more satisfactory and conclusive than are
furnished by their small dimensions and other circumstances above
mentioned, that they were not intended for defence. Thus, when we find
an enclosure containing a number of mounds, all of which it is capable
of demonstration were religious in their purposes or in some way
connected with the superstitions of the people who built them, the
conclusion is irresistible that the enclosure itself was also deemed
sacred and thus set apart as "tabooed" or consecrated
ground---especially when it is obvious at the first glance that it
possesses none of the requisites of a military work. But it is not to be
concluded that those enclosures alone, which contain mounds of the
description here named, were designed for sacred purposes. We have
reason to believe that the religious system of the mound builders, like
that of the Aztecs, exercised among them a great if not controlling
influence. Their government may have been, for aught we know, a
government of priesthood; one in which the priestly and civil functions
were jointly exercised, and one sufficiently powerful to have secured in
the Mississippi valley, as it did in Mexico, the erection of many of
those vast monuments which for ages will continue to challenge the
wonder of men. There may have been certain superstitious ceremonies,
having no connection with the purposes of the mounds, carried on in the
enclosures specially dedicated to them. It is a conclusion which every
day's investigation and observation has tended to confirm, that most,
perhaps all, of the earthworks not manifestly defensive in their
character were in some way connected with the superstitious rights of
the builders, though in what manner, it is, and perhaps ever will be,
impossible satisfactorily to determine.

By far the most extraordinary and interesting earthwork discovered in
the West is the great Serpent, situate on Brush Creek at a point known
as the "Three Forks," near the north line of Adams county, Ohio. It
occupies the summit of a high crescent-form hill or spur of land, rising
a hundred and fifty feet above the level of Brush Creek, which washes
its base. The side of the hill next the stream presents a perpendicular
wall of rock, while the other slopes rapidly, though it is not so steep
as to preclude cultivation. The top of the hill is not level but
slightly convex, and presents a very even surface one hundred and fifty
feet wide by one thousand long, measuring from its extremity to the
point where it connects with the table land. Conforming to the curve of
the hill and occupying its very summit is the serpent, its head resting
near the point and its body winding back for seven hundred feet in
graceful undulations, terminating in a triple coil at the tail. The
entire length, if extended, would be not less than one thousand feet.
The neck of the serpent is stretched out and slightly curved, and its
mouth is opened wide as if in the act of swallowing or ejecting an oval
figure which rests partially within the distended jaws. This oval is
formed by an embankment of earth, without any perceptible opening, four
feet in height, and is perfectly regular in outline, its transverse and
conjugate diameters being one hundred and sixty and eighty feet
respectively. The ground within the oval is slightly elevated; a small
circular elevation of large stones much burned once existed in its
centre, but they have been thrown down and scattered by some ignorant
visitor, under the prevailing impression probably that gold was hidden
beneath them. The point of the hill within which this egg-shaped figure
rests seems to have been artificially cut to conform to its outline,
leaving a smooth platform, ten feet wide and somewhat inclining inwards,
all around it.

Upon either side of the serpent's head extend two small triangular
elevations ten or twelve feet over. They are not high, and although too
distinct to be overlooked, are yet much too much obliterated to be
satisfactorily traced.

An effigy in the form of an alligator occurs near Granville, Licking
county, Ohio, upon a high hill or headland; in connection with which
there are unmistakeable evidences of an altar, similar to that in
conjunction with the work just named. It is known in the vicinity as
"the Alligator," which designation has been adopted for want of a
better, although the figure bears as close a resemblance to the lizard
as any other reptile. It is placed transversely to the point of land on
which it occurs, the head pointing to the south-west. The total length
from the point of the nose following the curve of the tail to the tip is
about two hundred and fifty feet, the breadth of the body forty feet,
and the length of the feet or paws each thirty-six feet. The ends of the
paws are a little broader than the remaining portions of the same, as if
the spread of the toes had been originally indicated. Some parts of the
body are more elevated than others, an attempt having evidently been
made to preserve the proportions of the object copied. The outline of
the figure is clearly defined; its average height is not less than four
feet; at the shoulders it is six feet in altitude. Upon the inner side
of the effigy is an elevated circular space covered with stones which
have been burned. This has been denominated an altar.

It seems more than probable that this singular effigy, like that last
described, had its origin in the superstition of its makers. It was
perhaps the high place where sacrifices were made on stated or
extraordinary occasions, and where the ancient people gathered to
celebrate the rites of their unknown worship. Its position and all the
circumstances attending it certainly favour such a conclusion.

The same is true of a work in the form of a cross, occupying a like
situation near the village of Tarlton, Pickaway County, Ohio. From these
premises, we are certainly justified in concluding that these several
effigies had probably a cognate design, possessed a symbolical
significance, and were conspicuous objects of religious regard, and that
on certain occasions sacrifices were made on the altars within or near
them.

The only structures sustaining any analogy to these are found in
Wisconsin and the extreme North-West. There we find great numbers of
mounds bearing the forms of animals of various kinds, and entering into
a great variety of combinations with each other, and with conical mounds
and lines of embankments, which are also abundant. They are usually
found on the low, level, or undulating prairies, and seldom in such
conspicuous positions as those discovered in Ohio. Whether they were
built by the same people with the latter, and had a common design and
purpose, it is not undertaken to say, nor is it a question into which we
propose to enter.

It is an interesting fact that amongst the animal effigies of Wisconsin,
structures in the form of serpents are of frequent occurrence.

Some years ago, Mr. Pigeon, of Virginia, made drawings of a number of
these, and he stated that near the junction of the St. Peter's with the
Mississippi River were a large number of mounds and monuments,
consisting---1<sup>st</sup>, of a circle and square in combination, as
at Circleville, in Ohio, the sole difference being a large truncated
mound in the centre of the square, as well as in the centre of the
circle, with a platform round its base; 2nd, near by, the effigy of a
gigantic animal resembling the elk, in length one hundred and
ninety-five feet; 3<sup>rd</sup>, in the same vicinity, a large conical
mound, three hundred feet in diameter at the base, and thirty feet in
height, its summit covered with charcoal. This mound was surrounded by
one hundred and twenty smaller mounds, disposed in the form of a circle.
Twelve miles to the westward of these , and within sight of them, was a
large conical truncated mound, sixty feet in diameter at the bottom, and
eighteen feet high, built upon a raised platform or bottom. It was
surrounded by a circle three hundred and sixty five feet in
circumference. Entwined around this circle, in a triple coil, was an
embankment, in the form of a serpent, two thousand three hundred and ten
feet in length. This embankment, at the centre of the body, was eighteen
feet in diameter, but diminished towards the head and tail in just
proportion. The elevation of the head was four feet, of the body six
feet, of the tail two feet. The central mound was capped with blue clay,
beneath which was sand mixed with charcoal and ashes.

Mounds arranged in serpentine form have also been found in Iowa, at a
place formerly known as Prairie La Porte, afterwards called Gottenburgh.
Also at a place seven miles north of these on Turkey River, where the
range was two and a half miles long, the mounds occurring at regular
intervals. Twenty miles to the westward of this locality was the effigy
of a great serpent with that of a tortoise in front of its mouth. This
structure was found to be one thousand and four feet long, eighteen feet
broad at its widest part, and six feet high; the tortoise was eighteen
by twelve feet.

Mr. Pigeon gave accounts of many other structures, tending to illustrate
and confirm the opinions advanced respecting the religious and
symbolical character and design of many, if not all, the more regular
earth-works of the Western States. Thirty miles west of Prairie Du
Chien, he found a circle enclosing a pentagon, which in its turn
enclosed another circle, within which was a conical truncated mound. The
outer circle was twelve hundred feet in circumference, the embankment
twelve feet broad and from three to five feet high. The entrance was on
the east. The mound was thirty-six feet in diameter by twelve feet high.
Its summit was composed of white pipe-clay, beneath which was found a
large quantity of mica in sheets. It exhibited abundant traces of fire.

Four miles distant from this, on the lowlands of the Kickapoo River, Mr.
Pigeon discovered a mound with eight radiating points, undoubtedly
designed to represent the Sun. It was sixty feet in diameter at the
base, and three feet high. The points extended outwards about nine feet.
Surrounding this mound were five crescent-shaped mounds so arranged as
to constitute a circle. Many analogous structures were discovered at
other places, both in Wisconsin and Iowa. At Cappile Bluffs, on the
Mississippi River, were found a conical, truncated mound, surrounded by
nine radiating effigies of men, the heads pointing inwards.

Probably no one will hesitate in ascribing the work just described, some
extraordinary significance. It cannot be supposed to be the offspring of
an idle fancy or a savage whim. It bears, in its position and the
harmony of its structure, the evidences of design, and it seems to have
been begun and finished in accordance with a matured plan, and not to
have been the result of successive and unmeaning combinations. It is
probably not a work for defence, for there is nothing to defend; on the
contrary, it is clearly and unmistakably, in form and attitude, the
representation of a serpent, with jaws distended, in the act of
swallowing or ejecting an oval figure, which may be distinguished, from
the suggestions of analogy, as an egg. Assuming for the entire structure
a religious origin, it can be regarded only as the recognised symbol of
some grand mythological idea. What abstract conception was thus
embodied; or what vast even thus typically commemorated, we have no
certain means of knowing! Analogy, however, although too often consulted
on trivial grounds, furnishes us with gleams of light, of greater or
less steadiness, as our appeals to its assistance happen to be
conducted, on every subject connected with man's beliefs. We proceed now
to discover what light reason and analogy shed upon the singular
structure before us.

Naturally, and almost of necessity, the egg became associated with man's
primitive idea of creation. It aptly symbolised that primordial,
quiescent state of things which preceded their vitalization and
activity---the inanimate chaos, before life began, when "the earth was
without form and void, and darkness was upon the face of the deep." It
was thus received in the early cosmogonies, in all of which the
vivification of the Mundane Egg constituted the act of creation; from it
sprang the world resplendent in glory and teeming with life.

Faber says---"The ancient pagans, in almost every part of the globe,
were wont to symbolize the world by an Egg. Hence this symbol is
introduced into the cosmogonies of nearly all nations, and there are few
persons even among those who have not made mythology their study, to
whom the Mundane Egg is not perfectly familiar. It was employed, not
only to represent the earth but also the Universe in its largest
extent." (Origin Pagan Idol., Vol. I, p. 175)

"The world," says Menu, "was all darkness, undiscernible,
undistinguishable, altoghether in a profound sleep, till the
Self-Existent, Invisible God (Brahm), making it manifest with five
elemtents and other glorious forms, perfectly dispelled the gloom.
Desiring to raise up creatures by an emanation from his own essence, he
first created the waters, and inspired them with power of motion; by
that power was produced a golden egg, blazing like a thousand stars, in
which was born Brahma, the great parent of national beings, that which
is the invisible cause, self-existent, but unperceived. This divinity
having dwelt in the Egg through revolving years, himself meditating upon
himself, divided into two equal parts, and from these halves he framed
the heavens and the earth, placing in the midst the subtil ether, the
eight points of the world, and the permanent receptacle of the waters."

The above is Maurice's translation. Sir William Jones renders it:---"The
sole, self-existent power, having willed to produce various beings from
his own divine substance, first, with a thought created the waters, and
placed in them a productive seed. That seed became an egg, bright as
gold, blazing like the luminary with a thousand beams, and in that egg
ws born himself, in the form of Brahma, the great forefather of all
spirits."

Aristophanes, in his Comedy of the Birds, is thought to have given the
notions of cosmogony, ancient even in his days. "Chaos, Night, black
Erebus, and wide Tartarus first existed: there was neither earth, nor
air, nor heaven; but in the bosom of Erebus black-winged Night produced
an Aerial Egg, from which was born golden-pinioned Love (Phanes), and
he, the Great Universal Father, begot our race out of dark Chaos, in the
midst of widespreading Tartarus, and called us into light."

We find this conception clearly embodied in one of the Orphic fragments,
the Hymn to Protogones, who is equivalent to Phanes, the Life-giver,
Priapus, or Generator.

"I invoke thee, oh Protogones, two-fold, great, wandering through the
ether;

Egg-Born rejoicing in thy golden wings;

Bull-faced, the Generator of the blessed and of mortal men;

The much-renowned Light, the far celebrated Ericapæus;

Ineffiable, occult, impetuous all-glittering strength;

Who scatterest the twilight cloud of darkness from the eyes,

And roam'st through the world upon the flight of thy wings,

Bringing forth the brilliant and all-pure light; wherefore I invoke
thee, as Phanes,

As Priapus the King, and as the dark-faced splendour,---

Come, thou blessed being, full of Metis (wisdom) and generation come in
joy

To thy sacred, ever-varying mysteries."

We have, according to these early notions, the egg representing Being
simply; Chaos, the great void from which, by the will of the superlative
Unity, proceeds the generative or creative influence, designated among
the Greeks as "Phanes," "Golden-pinioned Love," "The Universal Father,"
"Egg-born Protogones" (the latter Zeus or Jupiter); in India as
"Brahma," the "Great Parent of Rational Creatures," the "Father of the
Universe;" and in Egypt as "Ptha," the "Universal Creator."

The Chinese, whose religious conceptions correspond generally with those
of India, entertained similar notions of the origin of things. They set
forth that Chaos, before the creation, existed in the form of a vast
egg, in which was contained the principles of all things. Its
vivification, among them also, constituted the act of creation.

According to this and other authorities, the vivification of the Mundane
Egg is allegorically represented in the temple of Daibod, in Japan, by a
nest egg, which is shown floating in an expanse of waters against which
a bulb (everywhere an emblem of generative energy, and prolific heat,
the Sun) is striking with his horns.

"Near Lemisso, in the Island of Cyprus, is still to be seen a gigantic
egg-shaped vase, which is supposed to represent the Mundane or Orphic
Egg. It is of stone, and measures thrity feet in cirumference. Upon one
side, in a semi-circlar niche, is sculptured a bull, the emblem of
productive energy. This figure is understood to signify the Tauric
constellation, "The Stars of Abundance," with the heliacal or cosmical
rising of which was connected the return of the mystic reinvigorating
principle of animal fecundity." (Landseer's Sabæan Res.)

In the opinion above mentioned, many other nations of the ancient world,
the Egyptians, the Assyrians, the Phœnicians, and the Indo-Scythiac
nations of Europe participated. They not only supported the propriety of
the allegory, says Maurice, from the perfection of its external form,
but fancifully extended the allusion to its interior composition,
comparing the pure white shell to the fair expanse of heaven; the fluid,
transparent white, to the circumambient air, and the more solid yolk to
the central earth.

Even the Polynesians entertained the same general notions. The tradition
of the Sandwich Islanders is that a bird (with them it is an emblem of
Deity) laid an egg upon the waters which burst of itself and produced
the Islands.

The great hermaphrodite first principle in its character of Unity, the
Supreme Monad, the highest conception of Divinity was denominated Kneph
or Cnuphis among the Egyptians. According to Plutarch this god was
without beginning and without end, the One, uncreated and eternal, above
all, and comprehending all. And as Brahm, "the Self-existent
Incorruptible" Unity of the Hindus, by direction of His energetic will
upon the expanse of chaos, "with a thought" (says Menu) produced a
"golden egg blazing like a thousand stars," from which sprung Brahma,
the Creator; so according to the mystagogues, Kneph, the Unity of Egypt,
was represented as a serpent thrusting from his mouth an egg, from which
proceeds the divinity Phtha, the active creative power, equivalent in
all his attributes to the Indian Brahma.

That Kneph was symbolized by the ancient Egyptians under the form of
serpent is well known. It is not, however, so well established that the
act of creation was allegorically represented in Egypt by the symbolic
serpent thrusting from its mouth an egg, although no doubt of the fact
seems to have entertained by the various authors who have hitherto
writtenon the Cosmogony and Mythology of the primitive nations of the
East. With the view of ascertaining what new light has been thrown upon
the subject by the investigations of the indefatigable Champollion and
his followers---whose researches among the monuments and records of
Ancient Egypt have been attended with most remarkable results---the
following inquiries were addressed to Mr. G. R. Gliddon (U.S. Consul at
Cairo), a gentleman distinguished for his acquaintance with Egyptian
science, and his zeal in disseminating information on a subject too
little understood:---

"Do the serpent and the egg, separate or in combination, occur among the
Egyptian symbols and if they occur what significance seem to have been
assigned them? Was the serpent in any way associated with the worship of
the sun or the kindred worship of the Phallus?"

To these inquiries Mr. Gliddon replied as follows:---"In respect to your
first inquiry; I concede at once that the general view of the
Greco-Roman antiquity, the oriental traditions collected, often
indiscriminately, by the Fathers and the concurring suffrages of all
occidental Mythologists, attribute the compound symbol of the Serpent
combined with the Mundane Egg to the Egyptians. Modern criticism
however, coupled with the application of the test furnished by
Champollion le-Jeune and his followers since 1827 to the hieroglyphics
of Egypt, has recognised so many exotic fables and so much real
ignorance of Egyptology in the accounts concerning that mystified
country, handed down to us from the schools of Alexandria and Byzantium,
that at the present hour science treads doubtingly, where but a few
years ago it was fashionable to make the most sweeping assertions; and
we now hesitate before qualifying, as Egyptian in origin, ideas that
belong to the Mythologies of other eastern nations. Classical authority,
correct enough when treating on the philosophy and speculative theories
of Ptolemaic and Roman Alexandria, is generally at fault when in respect
to questions belonging to anterior or Pharaonic times. Whatever we
derive through the medium of the Alexandrines, and especially through
their successors, the Gnostics, must by the Archæologist be received
with suspicion.

After this you will not be surprised if I express doubts as to existence
of the myth of the Serpent and Egg in the Cosmogony of the early
Egyptians. It is lamentably true that, owing to twenty centuries of
destruction, so fearfully wrought out by Mohammed Ali, we do not up to
this day possess one tithe of the monuments or papyri bequeathed to
posterity by the recording genius of the Khime. It is possible that this
myth may have been contained in the vast amount of hieroglyphical
literature now lost to us. But the fact that in no instance whatever,
amid the myriads of inscribed or sculptured documents extant, does the
symbol of the Serpent and the Egg occur, militates against the
assumption of this, perhaps Phœnician myth, as originally Egyptian. "The
worship of the Serpent," observes Ampêre, "by the Ophites may certainly
have a real connection with the choice of the Egyptian symbol by which
Divinity is designated in the paintings and hieroglyphics, and which is
the Serpent Uræus (Basilisk royal, of the Greeks), the seraph set up by
Moses. Se Ra Ph is the singular of seraphim, meaning Semiticé,
splendour, fire, light; emblematic of the fiery disk of the sun and
which, under the name of Nehushtan---"Serpent Dragon"---was broken up by
the reforming Hezekiah (2 Kings, 18, 4); or with the serpent with wings
and feet, which we see represented in the Funeral Rituals; but the
serpent is everywhere in the Mythologies and Cosmogonies of the East,
and we cannot be assured that the serpent of the Ophites (any more than
that emitting or encircling the Mundane Egg) was Egyptian rather than
Jewish, Persian, or Hindustanee."

"No serpents found in the hieroglyphics bear, so far as I can perceive,
any direct relation to the Ouine Myth, nor have Egyptian Eggs any direct
connection with the Cosmogonical Serpent. The egg, under certain
conditions, seems to denote the idea of a human body. It is also used as
a phonetic sign S, and when combined with T, is the determinative of the
feminine gender; in which sense exclusively it is sometimes placed close
to a serpent in hieroglyphical legends."

"My doubts apply in attempting to give a specific answer to you specific
question; i.e., the direct connection, in Egyptian Mythology, of the
Serpent and the Cosmogonical Egg. In the "Book of the Dead," according
to a MS translation favoured me by the erudite Egyptologist, Mr. Birch,
of the British Museum, allusion is made to the "great mundane egg"
addressed by the deceased, which seems to refer to the winds or the
atmosphere---again the deceased exclaims 'I have raised myself up in the
form of the great Hawk which comes out of the Egg (i.e., the Sun).'

"I do not here perceive any immediate allusion to the duplex emblem of
the egg combined with the serpent, the subject of your query.

"Yet a reservation must be made in behalf of your very consistent
hypothesis---supported, as I allow, by all oriental and classical
authority, if not possibly by the Egyptian documents yet
undeciphered---which hypothesis is Euclidean. 'Things which are equal to
the same are equal to one another.' Now if the 'Mundane Egg' be in the
papyric rituals the equivalent to Sun, and that by other hieroglyphical
texts we prove the Sun to be, in Egypt as elsewhere, symbolized by the
figure of a Serpent, does not the 'ultima ratio' resolve both emblems
into one? Your grasp of this Old and New world Question reders it
superfluous that I should now posite the syllogism. I content myself by
referring you to the best of authorities. One point alone is what I
would venture to suggest to your philosophical acumen, in respect to
ancient 'parallelisms' between the metaphysical conceptions of radically
distinct nations (if you please, 'species' of mankind, at geographically
different centres of origins, compelled of necessity in ages anterior to
alphabetical record to express their ideas by pictures, figurative or
symbolical). It is that man's mind has always conceived, everywhere in
the same method, everything that relates to him; because the inability
in which his intelligence is circumscribed, to figure to his mind's eye
existence distinct from his own, constrains him to devolve in the
pictorial or sculptural delineation of his thoughts, within the same
circle of ideas; and, ergo, the figurative representative of his ideas
must ever be, in all ages and countries, the reflex of the same
hypotheses, material or physical. May not the emblem of the Serpent and
Egg, as well in the New as in the Old World, have originated from a
similar organic law without thereby establishing intercourse? Is not
your serpent a "rattle snake" and, ergo, purely American? Are not
Egyptian Serpent all purely Nilotic? The metaphysical idea of the
Cosmogonical Serpent may be one and the same; but does not the
zoological diversity of representation prove that America, three
thousand years ago, could have no possible intercourse with Egypt,
Phœnicia, or vice versa?

"Such being the only values attached to Serpents and eggs in Egyptian
hieroglyphics it is arduous to speculate whether an esoteric
significance did or did not exist between those emblems in the, to us,
unknown Cosmogony of the Theban and Memphite Colleges. I, too, could
derive inferences and deduce analogies between the attributes of the God
Knuphis, or the God Ptha, and the 'Mundane Egg' recorded by Eusebius,
Jamblichus, and a wilderness of classical authorities, but I fear with
no very satisfactory result. It is, however, due to Mr. Bonomi, to cite
his language on this subject. Speaking of the colossal state of Rameses
Sesostris at Metraheni, in a paper read before the Royal Society of
Literature, London, June, 1845, he observes, 'There is one more
consideration connected with the hieroglyphics of the great oval of the
belt, though not affecting the preceding argument; it is the oval or egg
which occurs between the figure of Ptha and the staff of which the usual
signification is Son or Child, but which by a kind of two-fold meaning,
common in the details of sculpture of this period (the 18<sup>th</sup>
or 19<sup>th</sup> Dynasty, say B.C. 1500 or 1200), I am inclined to
believe refers also to the myth or doctrine preserved in the writings of
the Greek authors, as belonging to Vulcan and said to be derived from
Egypt, viz., the doctrine of the Mundane Egg. Now, although in no
Egyptian sculpture of the remote period of this statue has there been
found any allusion to this doctrine, it is most distinctly hinted at in
one of the age of the Ptolomies; and I am inclined to think it was
imported from the Easy by Sesostris, where, in confirmation of its
existence at a very remote period, I would quote the existence of those
egg-shaped basaltic stones, embossed with various devices and covered
with cuneatic inscriptions, which are brought from some of the ancient
cities of Mesopotamia.

"In respect to your final inquiry, I may observe that I can produce
nothing from the hieroglyphics to connect, directly, Phallic Worship
with the solar emblem of the Serpent. In Semitic tongues, the same root
signifies Serpent and Phallus; both in different senses are solar
emblems."

In the Orphic Theogony a similar origin is ascribed to the egg, from
which springs "the Egg-born Protogones," the Greek counterpart of the
Egyptian Phtha. The egg in this instance also proceeds from the
pre-eminent Unity, the Serpent God, the "Incomparable Cronus," or
Hercules. (Bryant, quoting Athenagoras, observes---"Hercules was
esteemed the chief god, the same as Cronus, and was said to have
produced the Mundane Egg. He is represented in the Orphic Theology,
under the mixed symbol of a lion and a serpent, and sometimes of a
serpent only.")

Cronus was originally esteemed the Supreme, as is manifest from his
being called Il or Ilus, which is the same with the Hebrew El and,
according to St. Jerome, one of the ten names of God. Damascius, in the
life of Isidorus, mentions distinctly that Cronus was worshipped under
the name of El, who, according to Sanchoniathon, had no one superior or
antecedent to himself.

Brahm, Cronus, and Kneph each represented the mystical union of the
reciprocal or active and passive principles. Most, if not all, the
primitive nations recognised this Supreme Unity, although they did not
all assign him a name. He was the Creator of Gods, who were the Demiurgs
of the Universe, the creators of all rational beings, angels and men,
and the architects of the world.

The early writers exhaust language in endeavours to express the lofty
character and attributes, and the superlative power and dignity of this
great Unity, the highest conception of which man is capable. He is
spoken of in the sacred book of the Hindus as the "Almighty, infinite,
eternal, incomprehensible, self-existent Being; he who sees everything,
though never seen; he who is not to be compassed by description; he from
whom the universe proceeds; who reigns supreme, the light of all lights;
whose power is too infinite to be imagined; is Brahm, the One Being,
True and Unknown." (Coleman's Hind. Mythology.)

The supreme God of Gods of the Hindus was less frequently expressed by
the name Brahm than by the mystical syllable O´M, which corresponded to
the Hebrew Jehovah. Strange as the remark may seem to most minds, it is
nevertheless true, that the fundamental principles of the Hindu religion
were those of pure Monotheism, the worship of one supreme and only God.
Brahm was regarded as too mighty to be named; and, while his symbolized
or personified attributes were adored in gorgeous temples, not one was
erected to him. The holiest verse of the Vedas is paraphrased as
follows:

"Perfect truth; perfect happiness; without equal; immortal; absolute
unity; whom neither speech can describe nor mind comprehend;
all-pervading; all-transcending; delighted by his own boundless
intelligence, not limited by space or time; without feet, moving
swiftly; without hands, grasping all worlds; without ears, all-hearing,
understanding all; without cause, the first of all causes; all-ruling;
all-powerful; the Creator, Preserver, and Transformer of all things;
such is the Great One, Brahm."

The character and power of Kneph are indicated in terms no less lofty
and comprehensive than those applied to the omnipotent Brahm. He is
described in the ancient Hermetic books as the "first God, immovable in
the solitude of his Unity, the fountain of all things, the root of all
primary, intelligble, existing forms, the God of Gods, before the
etherial and empyrean Gods and the celestial."

In America this great Unity, this God of Gods, was equally recognised.
In Mexico as Teotl, "he who is all in himself" (Tloque Nahuaque); in
Peru as Varicocha, the "Soul of the Universe;" in Central America and
Yucatan as Stunah Ku or Hunab Ku, "God of Gods, the incorporeal origin
of all things." And as the Supreme Brahm of the Hindus, "whose name was
unutterable," was worshipped under no external form and had neither
temples nor altars erected to him, so the Supreme Teot and the
corresponding Varicocha and Hunab Ku, "whose names," says the Spanish
conquerors, "were spoken only with extreme dread," were without an image
or an outward form of worship for the reason, according to the same
authorities, that each was regarded as the Invisible and Unknown God.

The Mundane Egg, received as a symbol of original, passive, unorganized,
formless nature, because associated, in conformity with primitive
notions, with other symbols referring to the creative force or
vitalizing influence. Thus in the Hindu cosmogony Brahma is represented,
after long inertia, as arranging the passive elements, "creating the
world and all visible things." Under the form of the emblematic bull the
generative energy was represented breaking the quiescent egg. Encircled
by the folds of the agatho-demon, a type of the active principle, it was
suspended aloft at the temples of Tyre. For the serpent, like the bull,
was an emblem of the sun or of the attributes of that luminary---itself
the celestial emblem of the "Universal Father," the procreative power of
nature. "Everywhere," says Faber, "we find the great father exhibiting
himself in the form of a serpent, and everywhere we find the serpent
invested with the attributes of the Great Father and partaking of the
honours which were paid him." (Origin Pagan Idol., vol. I, p. 45).

Under this view, therefore, we may regard the compound symbol of the
serpent and the egg, though specifically allusive to the general
creation, as an illustration of the doctrine of the reciprocal
principles which, as we have already seen, enters largely into the
entire fabric of primitive philosophy and mythology.

Thus have we shewn that the grand conception of a Supreme Unity and the
doctrine of the reciprocal principles existed in America in a well
defined and easily recognised form.

Our present inquiry relates to the symbols by which they were
represented in both continents. That these were not usually arbitrary,
but resulted from associations, generally of an obvious kind, will be
readily admitted.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 5](oph05)
