[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Misc Texts](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](oph09)  [Next](oph11) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# CHAPTER X

India conspicuous in the history of Serpent
Worship---Nagpur---Confessions of a Snake Worshipper---The gardeners of
Guzerat---Cottages for Snakes at Calicut---The Feast of Serpents---The
Deity Hari---Garuda---The Snake as an emblem of immortality.

 

In the course of this work we have had occasion frequently to allude to
India as the home of the peculiar worship before us, and perhaps that
country may fairly be placed side by side with Egypt for the multitude
of illustrations it affords of what we are seeking to elucidate.

Mr. Rivett-Carnac, from whose paper in the journal of the Bengal Asiatic
Society we have already quoted, says:---"The palace of the Bhonslahs at
Benares brings me to Nágpúr, where, many years ago, I commenced to make,
with but small success, some rough notes on Serpent Worship. Looking up
some old sketches, I find that the Mahádeo in the oldest temples at
Nágpúr is surmounted by the Nág as at Benares. And in the old temple
near the palace of the Nágpúr, or city of the Nág or cobra, is a
five-headed snake, elaborately coiled. The Bhonslahs apparently took the
many-coiled Nág with them to Benares. A similar representation of the
Nág is found in the temple near the Itwarah gate at Nágpúr. Here again
the Nág or cobra is certainly worshipped at Mahádeo or the phallus, and
there are certain obvious points connected with the position assumed by
the cobra when excited and the expansion of the hood, which suggest the
reason for this snake in particular being adopted as a representation of
the phallus and an emblem of Siva.

"The worship of the snake is very common in the old Nágpúr Province
where, especially among the lower class, the votaries of Siva or Nág
Bhushan, 'he who wears snakes as his ornaments,' are numerous. It is
likely enough that the city took its name from the Nág temple, still to
be seen there, and that the river Nág, perhaps, took its name from the
city or temple, and not the city from the river, as some think. Certain
it is that many of the Kunbi or cultivating class worship the snake and
the snake only, and that this worship is something more than the
ordinary superstitious awe with which all Hindus regard the snake. I
find from my notes that one Kunbi whom I questioned in old days, when I
was a Settlement Officer in camp in the Nágpúr Division, stated that he
worshipped the Nág and nothing else; that he worshipped clay images of
the snake, and when he could afford to pay snake-catchers for a look at
a live one, he worshipped the living snake; that if he saw a Nág on the
road he would worship it, and that he believed no Hindu would kill a Nág
or cobra if he knew it were a Nág. He then gave me the following list of
articles he would use in worshipping the snake, when he could afford it;
and I take it, the list is similar to what would be used in ordinary
Siva Worship. 1---Water. 2---Gandh, pigment of sandal-wood for the
forehead or body. 3---Cleaned rice. 4---Flowers. 5----Leaves of the Bail
tree. 6---Milk. 7---Curds. 8---A thread or piece of cloth. 9---Red
powder. 10---Saffron. 11---Abir, a powder composed of fragrant
substances. 12---Garlands of flowers. 13---Buttemah or grain soaked and
parched. 14---Jowarri. 15---Five lights. 16---Sweetmeats. 17---Betel
leaves. 18---Cocoa nut. 19---A sum of money (according to means).
20---Flowers offered by the suppliant, the palms of the hands being
joined.

"All these articles, my informant assured me, were offered to the snake
in regular succession, one after the other, the worshipper repeating the
while certain mantras or incantations. Having offered all these gifts,
the worshipper prostrates himself before the snake, and, begging for
pardon if he has ever offended against him, craves the snake will
continue his favour upon him and protect him from every danger."

In the Oriental Memoirs by Forbes, we are told of the gardeners of
Guzerat who would never allow the snakes to be disturbed, calling them
"father," "brother," and other familiar and endearing names. The head
gardener paid them religious honours. As Deane says, "here we observe a
mixture of the original Serpent Worship, with the more modern doctrine
of transmigration."

Still more striking is the information in Purchas's Pilgrims, that a
king of Calicut built cottages for live serpents, whom he tended with
peculiar care, and made it a capital crime for any person in his
dominions to destroy a snake. "The natives," he says, "looked upon
serpents as endued with divine spirits."

Then there is the festival called "The Feast of the Serpents," at which
every worshipper, in the hope of propitiating the reptiles during the
ensuing year, sets by a portion of his rice for the hooded snake on the
outside of his house.

The deities of India and the wonderful temples and caves, as those at
Salsette and Elephanta, as may be seen in Maurice's Indian Antiquities,
Moor's Hindu Pantheon, The Asiatic Researches, Faber's Pagan Idolatry
and numerous other works, are universally adorned with, or represented
by this great symbol. Thus we have the statue of Jeyne, the Indian
Æsculapius, turbaned by a seven-headed snake; that of Vishnu on a rock
in the Ganges, reposing on a coiled serpent whose numerous folds form a
canopy over the sleeping god; Parus Nauth symbolized by a serpent;
Jagan-Nath worshipped under the form of a seven-headed dragon.

Hari appears to be one of the titles of Vishnu---that of the deity in
his preserving quality---and his appearance on the rock, as just
mentioned, is thus noticed in Wilkin's Hitopadesa: "Nearly opposite
Sultan Ganj, a considerable town in the province of Bahar, there stands
a rock of granite, forming a small island in the Ganges, known to
Europeans by the name of 'the rock of Ichangiri,' which is highly worthy
of the traveller's notice for the vast number of images carved upon
every part of its surface. Among the rest there is Hari, of a gigantic
size, recumbent upon a coiled serpent, whose heads (which are numerous)
the artist has contrived to spread into a kind of canopy over the
sleeping god; and from each of its mouths issues a forked tongue,
seeming to threaten instant death to any whom rashness might prompt to
disturb him. The whole lies almost clear of the block on which it is
hewn. It is finely imagined and is executed with great skill. The Hindus
are taught to believe that at the end of every Calpa (creation or
formation) all things are absorbed in the Deity, and that in the
interval of another creation, he reposeth himself upon the serpent Sesha
(duration) who is also called Ananta (endlessness)."

Moor says Garuda was an animal---half bird, half man---and was the vahan
or vehicle of Vishnu, also Arun's younger brother. He is sometimes
described in the manner that our poets and painters describe a griffin
or a cherub; and he is placed at the entrance of the passes leading to
the Hindu garden of Eden, and there appears in the character of a
destroying angel in as far as he resists the approach of serpents, which
in most systems of poetical mythology appears to have been the
beautiful, deceiving, insinuating form that sin originally assumed.
Garuda espoused a beautiful woman; the tribes of serpents, alarmed
thereat, lest his progeny should, inheriting his propensities, overpower
them, waged fierce war against him; but he destroyed them all, save one,
which he placed as an ornament about his neck. In the Elephanta cave
Garuda is often seen with this appendage; and some very old gold coins
are in existence depicting him with snakes or elephants in his talons
and beaks. Destroyer of serpents, Naganteka, is one of his names.

He was of great use to Krishna in clearing the country round Dwarka
(otherwise Dravira) from savage ferocious animals and noxious reptiles.
Vishnu had granted to Garuda the power of destroying his as well as
Siva's enemies; also generally those guilty of constant uncleanness,
unbelievers, dealers in iniquity, ungrateful persons, those who slander
their spiritual guides, or defiled their beds; but forbade him to touch
a Brahman, whatever was his guilt, as the pain of disobedience would be
a scorching pain in his throat, and any attack on a holy or pious person
would be followed by a great diminution of strength. By mistake,
however, Garuda sometimes seized a priest or a religious man, but was
admonished and punished in the first case by the scorching flame, and
was unable, even when he had bound him in his den, to hurt the man of
piety.  <span id="fr_10"></span>[1](#fn_10) To Rama also, in the war of
Lauka, Garuda was eminently useful: in Rama's last conflict with Ravana
the latter was not overcome without the aid of Garuda, sent by Vishnu to
destroy the serpent-arrows of Ravana. These arrows are called
"Sharpa-vana" (in the current dialect Sarpa a snake), is corrupted into
Saap or S\~mp and vana, an arrow, into ban) and had the faculty of
separating, between the bow and the object, into many parts, each
becoming a serpent. Viswamitra conferred upon Rama the power of
transforming his arrows into "Garuda-vanas," they similarly separating
themselves into "Garuda's," the terror and destroyer of the Sarpa.

Some legends make Garuda the offspring of Kasyapa and Diti. This
all-prolific dame laid an egg, which, it was predicted, would preserve
her deliverer from some great affliction. After a lapse of five hundred
years Garuda sprang from the egg, flew to the abode of Indra,
extinguished the fire that surrounded it, conquered its guards, the
devatas, and bore off the amrita (ambrosia) which enabled him to
liberate his captive mother. A few drops of this immortal beverage
falling on the species of grass called "Kusa," it became eternally
consecrated; and the serpents greedily licking it up so lacerated their
tongues with the sharp grass that they have ever since remained forked;
but the boon of eternity was ensured to them by their thus partaking of
the immortal fluid. This cause of snakes having forked tongues is still,
in the tales of India, popularly attributed to the above greediness; and
thier supposed immortality may have originated in some such stories as
these; a small portion of amrita, as in the case of Rahu, would ensure
them this boon.

In all mythological language the snake is an emblem of immortality: its
endless figure when its tail is inserted in its mouth, and the annual
renewal of its skin and vigour, afford symbols of continued youth and
eternity; and its supposed medicinal or life-preserving qualities may
also have contributed to the fabled honours of the serpent tribe. In
Hindu mythology serpents are of universal occurrence and importance; in
some shape or other they abound in all directions; a similar state of
things prevails in Greece and Egypt. Ingenious and learned authors
attribute this universality of serpent form to the early and all
pervading prevalence of sin, which, in this identical shape, they tell
us, and as indeed we all know, is as old as the days of our greatest
grandmother: thus much as to its age, when there was but one woman; its
prevalence, now there are so many, this is no place to discuss.

If such writers were to trace the allegories of Sin and Death, and the
end of their empire, they might discover further allusions to the
Christian dispensation in the traditions of the Hindus than have
hitherto been published---Krishna crushing, but not destroying the type
of Siva, has often been largely discussed. Garuda is also the
proverbial, but not the utter destroyer of serpents, for he spared one,
they and their archetype being, in reference to created beings, eternal.
His continual and destined state of warfare with serpents, a shape
mostly assumed by the enemies of the virtuous incarnations or deified
heroes of the Hindus, is a continued allegory of the conflicts between
Vice and Virtue so infinitely personified. Garuda, at length, appears
the coadjutor of all virtuous sin-subduing efforts, as the vehicle of
the chastening and triumphant party, and conveys him on the wings of the
winds to the regions of eternal day.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_10"></span>[1](oph10.htm#fr_10) Asiatic Res., vol. 5, p.
514.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 11](oph11)
