[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](hec05)  [Next](hec07) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002HWRKOI/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Hymns of the Eastern Church*, by J.M. Neale, \[1884\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_25">p. 25</span>

### INTRODUCTION.

As a general rule, the first poetical attempts of the Eastern, like
those of the Western, Church, were in classical measures. But as
classical Greek died out from being a spoken language,—as new trains of
thought were familiarized,—as new words were coined,—a versification
became valueless, which was attached with no living bonds to the new
energy, to the onward movement. Dean Trench has admirably expressed this
truth in the introduction to his "Sacred Latin Poetry," and showed how
the "new wine must be put into new bottles." Ecclesiastical terms *must*
be used, which rebel against classical metre: in Greek, no less than in
Latin, five words in eight would be shut out of the principal

<span id="page_26">p. 26</span>

classical rhythms. Now, the Gospel was preached to the poor. Church
hymns must be the life-expression of all hearts. The Church was forced
to make a way for saying in poetry what her message bade her say. <span
id="fr_0"></span>[\*](#fn_0)

S. Gregory Nazianzen, the first Greek Church poet, used only the
ordinary classical measures. S. Sophronius of Jerusalem employed (and in

<span id="page_27">p. 27</span>

their way not unhappily), Anacreontics: and his hymns on various
festivals have some elegance. But there is a certain degree of
dilettante-ism, rather than of earnestness, in these compositions; and
the most airy, tripping, frivolous measure that the Greek Muse
possessed, never, by any possibility, could form the ordinary utterance
of the Church. The Church compositions of S. Sophronius, though called
ποιήματα, are in fact mere prose: as those grand prayers on the
Epiphany.

How then was the problem to be solved as to

<span id="page_28">p. 28</span>

the composition of Eastern Church Song? In Latin, somewhat before the
time of S. Sophronius, A.D. 630, it was answered by the glorious
introduction of rhyme. Why not in Greek also?

Now, it is no less true in Greek, than in Latin, that there was a
tendency to rhyme from the very beginning. Open Homer: look for caudate
rhymes:—

Νημερτής τε καὶ Ἀψευδὴς καὶ Καλλιάνασσα·  
Ἔνθαδ᾽ ἔην Κλυμένη, Ἰάνειρα καὶ Ἰφιάνασσα.  
                                  Il. xviii. 46.

Ἄστεος αἰθομένοιο· θεῶν δέ Ϝε μῆνις ἀνῆκεν.  
Πᾶσι δὲ θῆκε πόνον, πολλοῖσι δὲ κήδἐ ἐφῆκεν·  
Ὡς Ἀχιλεὺς Τρώεσσι πόνον καὶ κήδεα θῆκεν·  
                                  Il. xxi. 523.

Οὐ μὲν γὰρ μεῖζον κλέος ἀνέρος, ὄφρα κεν ἦσιν  
Η ὅ τι ποσσὶν τε ῥέζει καὶ χερσὶ Ϝεῆσιν·.  
                                  Odyss. viii. 147.

<span id="page_29">p. 29</span>

*Leonines* are still more common. The reader's attention is particularly
requested to those that follow:—

Il. ii. 220. Ἔχθιστος δ᾽ Αχιλῆϊ μάλιστ᾽ ἦν, ἠδ᾽ Ὀδυσῆϊ,

      484. Ἔσπετε νῦν μοι, Μοῦσαι, Ὀλύμπια δώματ᾽ ἔχουσαι·

      475. Ῥεῖα διακρίνωσιν, ἐπεί κε νομῶ μιγέωσιν.

   iii. 84. Ὥς ἔφαθ᾽· οἱ δ᾽ ἔσχοντο μάχης, ἄνεῳ τ᾽ ἐγένοντο.

   v. 529. Ὦ φίλοι, ἀνέρες ἔστε, καὶ ἄλκιμον ἦτορ ἕλεσθε.

   vi. 242. Τὸν δ᾽ Ἑλένη μύθοισι προσηύδα μειλιχίοισι.

Od. i. 40.Ἐκ γὰρ Ὀρέσταο τίσις ἔσσεται ἈτρεϜίδαο.

      397. Αὐτὰρ ἐγὼ Ϝοἴκοιο Ϝἄναξ ἔσομ᾽ ἡμετέροιο.

<span id="page_30">p. 30</span>

   iv. 12 1. Ἐκ δ᾽ Ἑλένη θαλάμοιο θυώδεος ὑψορόφοιο.

   xiv. 371. Ἀσπίδας, ὅσσαι ἄρισται ἔνὶ στρατῷ ἠδὲ μέγισται.

And I might mark multitudes more: but these are enough by way of
example. The question then occurs at once, Why did not the new life,
instilled into the Greek as well as into the Latin language by
Christianity, seize the grand capability of <span
class="smallcaps">Rhyme</span> in the one case as well as in the other?
How stately it would have been in anapæstics! how sweet in trochaics!
Why was it neglected?

For this reason: the reader must remember that <span
class="smallcaps">hardly one of the rhymes I have been pointing out in
Homer would be rhymes to a Greek ear</span>. Read them accentually, and
you find ἄρισται and μέγισται are no more double

<span id="page_31">p. 31</span>

rhymes to a Greek than *gloriously* and *ferociously* are to us: μοῦσαι
and ἔχουσαι, no more than glory and victory. Accent, in the decline of
the language, was trampling down quantity. Now accent is not favourable
to such rhymes, though many poems have been thus composed in the newer
Greek:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

εὗρον φίλον κοματάκη  
καθ᾽ ὅπερ τετεραγωνάκη

</div>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> But it was not
sufficiently removed from every-day life,—too familiar,—had too little
dignity. There was an innate vulgarity about it which rendered it
impossible to the Church.

Now, let it be observed, accentuation even in Latin was not without its
difficulty. In the new style, dissyllables, whatever their real
quantity, were always read—and so we read them now—as trochees. Férox,
vélox, scéptrum.

<span id="page_32">p. 32</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Hence a verse in
the early metrical hymns, such as—

<span class="small">"Castos fides somnos juvat,"</span>

a dimeter iambic, would have been read in mediæval times, Cástos fídes
sómnos júvat, and so have virtually become a dimeter trochaic. Popular
poetry soon devised its own metre, political verse, as it was called,
because used for every-day domestic matters. This was none other than a
favourite metre of Aristophanes, iambic tetrameter catalectic,—our own
ballad rhythm:—

<span class="small">"A Captain bold of Halifax, who lived in country
quarters."</span>

And this, sometimes with rhyme, sometimes without, is the favourite
Romaic metre to the present day. For example:—

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

μή διά θύρας βαίνειν δὲ λέγω τοὺς κλεπταββάδας, <span id="page_33">p.
33</span>  
χωστοὺς, ἐγκλείστους, ἕλκοντας θήρια, στελοβάτας,  
πάντας ὅσοι παρὰ τὰ νόμιμα δρῶσι τὸν βίον,  
καὶ τῶν μονωτροπούντων δε, πλὴν ἐν ἐρήμου τρόποις.

</div>

The Church never attempted this sing-song stanza, and preferred falling
back on an older form.

From the brief allusions we find to the subject in the New Testament, we
should gather that "the hymns and spiritual songs" of the Apostles were
written in metrical prose. Accustomed as many of the early Christians
were to the Hebrew Scriptures, this is not unlikely; and proof seems
strong that it was so. Compare these passages:—

Eph. v. 14. *Wherefore he saith:*

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

ἔγειρε ὁ καθεύδων,  
καὶ ἀνάστα ἐκ τῶν νεκρῶν·  
ἐπιφαύσει σοι ὁ Χριστός.

</div>

<span id="page_34">p. 34</span>

Undoubtedly the fragment of a hymn. Again:—

Apoc. iv. 8.

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

μεγάλα καὶ θαυμαστὰ τὰ ἔργα σου,  
Κύριε ὁ Θεὸς ὁ παντοκράτωρ·  
δίκαιαι καὶ ἀληθιναὶ αἱ ὁδοί σου,  
ὁ Βασιλεὺς τῶν ἐθνῶν.

</div>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> And nearly coeval
with these we have the *Gloria in Excelsis*, the *Ter Sanctus*, and the
*Joyful Light*. Also the Eastern phase, so to speak, of the *Te Deum;*
the καθ᾽ ἐκάστην ἡμέραν. And to this rhythmical prose the Church now
turned.

Then, not to pursue the subject with a detail of which this Introduction
will not admit, we find that by the beginning of the eighth century,
verse, properly speaking (and that with scarcely an exception), had been
discarded for ever from the hymns of the Eastern Church; those hymns,
occupying a space beyond all comparison greater

<span id="page_35">p. 35</span>

than they do in the Latin, being written in measured prose. And now to
explain the system.

The stanza which is to form the model of the succeeding stanzas,—the
strophe, in fact,—is called the *Hirmos*, from its drawing others after
it. The stanzas which are to follow it are called *troparia*, from their
turning to it.

Let Ps. cxix. 13, be the Hirmos:—

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"I will talk of Thy commandments  
 and have respect unto Thy ways."</span>

</div>

Then verse 15 would be a troparion to it:—

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"With my lips have been I telling:  
 of all the judgments of Thy mouth."</span>

</div>

So would 17:—

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"O do well unto Thy servant:  
 that I may live, and keep Thy word."</span>

</div>

<span id="page_36">p. 36</span>

and Ps. cii. 16:—

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"When the <span class="smallcaps">Lord</span> shall
build up Sion:  
 and when His glory shall appear."</span>

</div>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Let verse 44 be a
Hirmos:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"So shall I always keep Thy law:  
 yea, for ever and ever."</span>

</div>

and 45 will be a troparion to it:—

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"And I will walk at liberty:  
 for I seek Thy commandments."</span>

</div>

These troparia are always divided for chanting by commas,—utterly
irrespective of the sense. This separation into *commatisms* renders it
very difficult to read them without practice. Take an example, with the
corresponding effect in English

Ωιδὴ ά· ἦχος δ᾽· ὁ εἶρμός·

Θαλάσσας τὸ ἐρυθραῖου πελαγος, ἀβρόχοις ἴχνεσιν, ὁ παλαιὸς πεζεύσας
Ισραὴλ, σταυροτύποις

<span id="page_37">p. 37</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Μωσέως χερσὶ, τοῦ
Ἀμαλὴκ τὴν δύναμιν, ε̑ν τῇ ἐρήμῳ ἐτροπώσατο.

<span class="small">"Israel in ancient times passing on foot with,
unbedewed steps the Red Gulf, of the sea, turned to flight by, the
cross-typifying arms, of Moses the might of Amalek, in the
wilderness."</span>

The perfection of troparia is in a Canon, of which I shall say more
presently. I need not trouble the reader with the minute distinction
between *troparia* and *stichera;* as a *troparion* follows a *Hirmos*,
so a *sticheron* follows an *bomoion*, and then becomes a *prosomoion*.
There are also *idiomela*,—that is, stanzas which are their own
models,—and an infinite variety of names expressive of the different
kind of troparia.

A collection of any number of troparia, preceded by their Hirmos,
sometimes merely quoted by its initial words, sometimes given at length,
and with inverted commas, is an *Ode*.

<span id="page_38">p. 38</span>

Let the Hirmos, be as before—

<span class="small">"With my lips have I," &c.</span>

and the Ode might follow thus:—

*Hirmos*.

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"With my lips have I been telling: of all the
judgments of Thy mouth.  
"Let us break their bonds asunder: and cast away their cords from us.  
"I am weary of my groaning: and every night I wash my bed.  
"For he lieth waiting secretly as a lion in his den.  
"I am poured out like water: and all my bones are out of joint."</span>

</div>

*Glory*.

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"I will talk of thy commandments: and have respect
unto thy ways."</span>

</div>

*Both now*.

And let this be most carefully observed: an Ode is simply a Sequence
under somewhat different laws. Just when the system of Greek

<span id="page_39">p. 39</span>

ecclesiastical poetry was fully developed, S. Notker and the Monks of S.
Gall hit out a similar one for the Latin Church: the Sequence or the
Prose. It was not copied from the East, for we have S. Notker's own
account of the way in which he invented it. It prospered to a certain
extent; that is, it became one, though the least important, branch of
Ecclesiastical verses. Now the perfection of Greek poetry is attained by
the Canons at Lauds, of which I proceed to speak.

A Canon consists of Nine Odes,—each Ode containing any number of
troparia from three to beyond twenty. The reason for the number nine is
this: that there are nine Scriptural canticles, employed at Lauds, (εἰς
τὸν Ὄρθρον), on the model of which those in every Canon are formed. The
first: that of Moses after the passage of the Red Sea—the second, that
of

<span id="page_40">p. 40</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Moses in
Deuteronomy (chap. xxxiii.)—the third, that of Hannah—the fourth, that
of Habakkuk—the fifth, that of Isaiah (xxvi. 9–20)—the sixth, that of
Jonah—the seventh, that of the Three Children (verses 3–34, of our
"Song" in the Bible Version)—the eighth, *Benedicite*—the ninth,
*Magnificat* and *Benedictus*.

From this arrangement two consequences follow. The first, that, as the
Second Canticle is never recited except in Lent, the Canons never have
any second Ode. The second, that there is generally some reference,
either direct or indirect, in each Ode, to the Canticle of the same
number: in the first Ode, *e.g.*, to the Song of Moses at the Red Sea:
in the third to that of Hannah. This gives rise, on the one hand, to a
marvellous amount of ingenuity, in tracing the most far-fetched
connexions,—in discovering the most remote types;—it brings out into the
clearest

<span id="page_41">p. 41</span>

light the wonderful analogies which underlie the surface of Scripture
narration; and so far imbues each Ode with a depth of Scriptural meaning
which it could scarcely otherwise reach. On the other, it has a
stiffening and cramping effect; and sometimes, especially to the
uninitiated, has somewhat of a ludicrous tendency. It would be curious
to sum up the variety of objects of which, in a thousand *Sixth Odes*,
we find Jonah's Whale a type. On the whole, this custom has about the
same disadvantages and advantages which Warton points out as resulting
from the four rhymes of a Spenserian stanza;—the
advantages,—picturesqueness, ingenuity, discovery of new beauties: the
disadvantages,—art not concealed by art, tautology, imparity of
similitudes, a caricature of typology, painful and affected elaboration.

The Hirmos, on which each Ode is based, is

<span id="page_42">p. 42</span>

sometimes quoted at length at the commencement, in which case it is
always distinguished by inverted commas; or the first few words are
merely cited as a note to the singer, for whose benefit the Tone is also
given.

The next noticeable matter is that these Odes are usually arranged after
an acrostich, itself commonly in verse: sometimes alphabetical. The
latter device was probably borrowed from the Psalms; as for example the
25, 112, 119.

The arrangement is not to be considered as a useless formality or
*pretty-ism:* it was of the greatest importance, when so many Canons had
to be remembered by heart. We know to what curious devices the Western
Church, in matters connected with the Calendar, had recourse as a
*Memoria Technica;* and not a few of her short hymns were alphabetical,
either by verses or by lines; I know no instance of any other kind of

<span id="page_43">p. 43</span>

acrostich. Besides the line which forms the initials of Greek Canons,
the name of the composer, likewise finds a frequent place. And it is
worth noticing that, whereas the authors of the world-famous hymns of
the West, with a few exceptions (such as the *Vexilla Regis*, the *Dies
Iræ*, the *Veni Sancte Spiritus*), are unknown, the case in the East is
reversed. The acrostich may, or may not, run through the Theotokia, of
which I now proceed to speak.

Each Ode is ended by a troparion, dedicated to the celebration of S.
Mary, and thence named *Theotokion*. Sometimes there is another, which
commemorates her at the Cross; and then it is a *Stauro-theotokion*. In
long Canons, a stanza, sometimes intercalated at the end of the third or
sixth Odes, is called a *Cathisma*, because the congregation are then
allowed to sit. There is also the *Oicos*, literally the *House*,—which
is the

<span id="page_44">p. 44</span>

exact Italian *Stanza*,—about the length of three ordinary troparia. The
*Catavasía* is a troparion in which both choirs come down together, and
stand in the middle of the Church, singing it in common.

The acrostichs are usually in iambics,—sometimes none of the best:
*e.g.*—

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

ἔκπλήττομαί σου τούς λόγους Ζαχαρία,

</div>

on the feast of S. Zacharias the Prophet:—and generally bringing in some
paronomasia on the Saint's names; as—

φερώνυμόν σε τοῦ Θεοῦ δῶρον σέβω, on that of S. Dorotheus.

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Or again:—

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

τρυφῆς μεθέξειν ἀξίωσόν με, Τρύφων·

</div>

and of S. Clement:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

μέλπω σε, κλῆμα τῆς νοητῆς ἀμπέλου.

</div>

<span id="page_45">p. 45</span>

But there are examples of acrostichs which take the form of an
hexameter, as—

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

εἰκάδι οὐρανοῦ εἰς ξενίην Ξένη ἦλθε τετάρτη.

</div>

and

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

Τιμόθεον τὸν Ἀπόστολον, ᾄσμαστιτοῖσδε γεραίρω·

</div>

and

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

τὸν θεορήμονα Γρηγόριον τον ἀοίδιμον ᾄδω·

</div>

I shall more than once have occasion to observe that, while the earlier
Odes, which treat of such subjects as the Resurrection, Ascension,
Nativity, are magnificent specimens of religious poetry, the later ones,
composed in commemoration of martyrs, of whom nothing but the fact of
their martyrdom is known, are often grievously dull and heavy. Herein
the Eastern Church would have done well; to have had, for such as these,
a Canon of the Common of Martyrs, instead of

<span id="page_46">p. 46</span>

celebrating each differently; if the tautology which composes such Odes
can indeed be called *different*.

I said, some short time since, that the Greek Ode and the Latin
Notkerian Sequence were essentially the same. This being so, it is to
introduce confusion into the very axioms of hymnology to call that kind
of Sequence, as Mone does, by the name of Troparion. The Troparion does
not answer to the Sequence, but to each stanza of the Sequence. The
differences between Odes and Sequences may be briefly summed up as
follows:—

The *Hirmos* in the former has a number of Troparia following it and
based on it, whereas in the latter the *Troparia* run in couples; that
is, one *Hirmos* has one follower, or *Troparion*, and there an end;
then, another follows another, and so on. There are sometimes triplets,
but these are not common.

<span id="page_47">p. 47</span>

2\. The *Hirmos* in Greek Odes is always an already existing Troparion;
whereas, in Latin, the writer generally composed that as much as any
other part of the Sequence. But in certain Sequences this was not always
the case. Godeschalkus sometimes took a verse from the Psalms.

3\. Sometimes, indeed, a whole Sequence was made super some other
Sequence, and then it became a vast Troparion, the different verses
taking the place of the *commatisms* in Greek Odes. In the February
number of *The Ecclesiologist* for 1859, is given a list of
Hirmos-Sequences, from the Brander MS. of S. Gall. But even in these
cases, it is better not to call them Troparia, as they have so little
real resemblance to Greek stanzas of that kind: I had rather see them
called Homoia.

4\. The rhythm in the Greek is far more exact. Not only the syllabic
arrangement, but the accentuation

<span id="page_48">p. 48</span>

is the same; whereas in Latin, the accentuation is often counter; that
is, an iambic dimeter in the Hirmos is answered by a trochaic dimeter in
the Troparion. For example, if the Hirmos were,—

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"The <span class="smallcaps">Lord</span> is great in
Sion:  
 and high above all people,"</span>

</div>

the requirements of a Sequence would be satisfied with the Troparion,

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"Look upon my misery:  
 and forgive me all my sins."</span>

</div>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Such a licence
would not for one moment be allowed in the Greek.

I next have to speak of the books in which Greek Hymnology is to be
found. They consist principally of sixteen volumes.

α. Twelve of the *Menæa:*—which would answer, in Western Ritual, to the
Breviary, minus the ferial offices. But, whereas in the

<span id="page_49">p. 49</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> West, the only
human compositions of the Breviary are the lections from the sermons of
the Fathers, the hymns, and a few responses—the body of the Eastern
Breviary is ecclesiastical poetry: poetry not, strictly speaking,
written in verse, but in measured prose. This is the staple of those
three thousand pages—under whatever name the stanzas may be
presented—forming Canons and Odes; as, Troparia, Idiomela, Stichera,
Stichoi, Contakia, Cathismata, Theotokia, Triodia, Staurotheotokia,
Catavasíæ,—or whatever else. Nine-tenths of the Eastern Service-book is
poetry.

β. The *Paracletice*, or *Great Octoechus:* in eight parts.

This contains the Ferial Office for eight weeks.

Each week has on Sunday—

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

A Canon of the Trinity.

A Canon of the Resurrection.

</div>

<span id="page_50">p. 50</span>

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

A Canon of the Cross and Resurrection.

A Canon of the Mother of <span class="smallcaps">God</span> (one or
more).

</div>

On Monday:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

A Canon of Penitence.

A Canon of the Angels.

</div>

On Tuesday:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

A Canon of Penitence.

A Canon of the Forerunner.

</div>

On Wednesday:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

A Canon of the Cross.

A Canon of the Mother of <span class="smallcaps">God</span>.

</div>

On Thursday:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

A Canon of the Apostles.

A Canon of S. Nicolas.

</div>

On Friday:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

A Canon of the Passion.

A Canon of the Mother of <span class="smallcaps">God</span> (two).

</div>

<span id="page_51">p. 51</span>

On Saturday:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

A Canon of Prophets and Martyrs.

A Canon of the Dead.

</div>

In the first week, the whole of the Canons are sung to the first Tone:
in the second, to the second, and so on. The Greek Tones answer to our
Gregorian, thus:—

<div align="center">

|      |        |        |                |
|------|--------|--------|----------------|
|      | Latin. | Greek. |                |
| Tone | I.     | I.     |                |
|      | II\.   | I.     | Plagal.        |
|      | III\.  | II\.   |                |
|      | IV\.   | II\.   | Plagal.        |
|      | V.     | III\.  |                |
|      | VI\.   |        | Varys (heavy.) |
|      | VII\.  | IV\.   |                |
|      | VIII\. | IX\.   |  Plagal.       |

</div>

The *Paracletice* forms a quarto volume (double columns) of 350 pages:
at least half is the work of Joseph of the Studium. The

<span id="page_52">p. 52</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> *Octoechus*,
sometimes called the *Little Octoechus*, contains the Sunday services
from the Paracletice: they are often printed separately.

γ. The *Triodion:* the Lent volume, which commences on the Sunday of the
Pharisee and Publican (that before Septuagesima) and goes down to
Easter. It is so called, because the leading Canons have, during that
period, only three Odes.

δ. The *Pentecostarion*,—more properly the *Pentecostarion
Charmosynon*,—the Office for Easter-tide. On a moderate computation,
these volumes together comprise 5000 closely printed quarto pages, in
double columns, of which at least 4000 are poetry.

The thought that, in conclusion, strikes one is this: the marvellous
ignorance in which English ecclesiastical scholars are content to remain
of this huge treasure of divinity—the gradual completion

<span id="page_53">p. 53</span>

of nine centuries at least. I may safely calculate that not one out of
twenty who peruse these pages will ever have read a Greek "Canon"
through; yet what a glorious mass of theology do these offices present!
If the following pages tend in any degree to induce the reader to study
these books for himself, my labour could hardly have been spent to a
better result.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_0"></span>[26:\*](hec06.htm#fr_0) As an illustration of
this remark, it is worth while noticing how very few examples of
Hexameters occur in the New Testament. I believe that the following are
all that are *tolerable;* that is, that can so be scanned without one or
two false quantities:—

S. Luke xxi. 18. Θρὶξ ἐκ τῆς κεφαλῆς ὑμῶν οὐ μὴ ἀπόληται

S. John xiii. 5. Βάλλει ὕδωρ εἰς τὸν νιπτῆρα, καὶ ἤρξατο νίπτειν.

S. John xiii. 16. οὐκ ἔστι \[ν\] δοῦλος μείζων τοῦ κυρίου αὐτοῦ.

S. John xvii. 20. καὶ περὶ τῶν πιστευσόντων διὰ τοῦ λόγου αὐτῶν.

Titus iii. 2. μηδένα βλασφημεῖν, ἀμάχους εἶναι, ἐπιεικεῖς.

Heb. xii. 13. καὶ τροχιὰς ὀρθὰς ποιήσατε τοῖς ποσὶν ὑμῶν.

<span id="page_27">p. 27</span>

There are some which are very near a hexameter: as S. Matt. xxiii. 6—

καὶ τὰς πρωτοκαθεδρίας ἐν ταῖς συναγωγαῖς.

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> A tolerable
pentameter occurs in Rom. vi. 53—

καὶ τὰ μέλη ὐμῶν ὅπλα δικαιοσύνης·

and a remarkable iambic in the <span class="smallcaps">Lord's</span>
Prayer.

τὸν ἄρτον ἡμῶν τὸν ἐπιούσιον δίδου.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: First Epoch](hec07)
