[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Northeast](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](al12)  [Next](al14) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002DPU8XY/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Algonquin Legends of New England*, by Charles G. Leland, \[1884\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### How Glooskap made his Uncle Mikchich the Turtle into a Great Man, and got him a Wife. <span id="fr_34"></span>[1](#fn_34) Of Turtles' Eggs, and how Glooskap vanquished a Sorcerer by smoking Tobacco.

(Micmac and Passamaquoddy.)

Now when Glooskap left Uktukamkw, or Newfoundland, it was in a canoe,
and he came to Piktook (M. for Pictou), which means the bubbling up of
air, because there is much bubbling in the water near that place. And
here there was an Indian village, and in that place the Master met with
a man whom he loved all his life.

<span id="page_52">p. 52</span>

And this was not because this man, whose name in Micmac is Mikchich and
in Passamaquoddy Chick-we-notchk, meaning the Turtle, was great, or well
favored, or rich. For truly he was none of these, being very poor and
lazy, no longer young, and not very clever or wise in any way. It is
said that he was indeed Glooskap's uncle, but others think that this was
by adoption. However, this old fellow bore all his wants with such good
nature that the Master, taking him in great affection, resolved to make
of him a mighty man. Which came to pass, and that in a strange manner,
as we shall see.

For coming to Piktook, where there were above a hundred wigwams,
Glooskap, being a very handsome, stately man, with the manner of a great
chief, was much admired, and that not a little by all the women, so that
every one wished to have him in the house. Yet he gave them all the
go-by, and dwelt with his old uncle, in whose quaint ways and old-time
stories he took great delight. And there was to be a great feast with
games, but Glooskap did not care to go, either as a guest or a performer
in the play.

Still he inquired of Mikchich if he would not take part in it, telling
him that all the maidens would be there, and asking him why he had never
married, and saying that he should not live alone. Then the uncle said,
"Poor and old and plain am I; I have not even garments fit for a feast;
better were it for me to smoke my pipe at home." "Truly, if that be all,
uncle," replied Glooskap, "I trow I can turn tailor and fit you

<span id="page_53">p. 53</span>

to a turn; and have no care as to your outside or your face, for to him
who knows how, 't is as easy to make a man over as a suit of clothes."
"Yes; but, nephew," said Mikchich, "how say you as to making over the
inside of a mortal?" "By the great Beaver!" answered the Master, "that
is something harder to do, else I were not so long at work in this
world. But before I leave this town I shall do that also for you; and as
for this present sport, do but put on my belt." And when he had done
that, Mikchich became so young and handsome that no man or woman ever
saw the like. And then Glooskap dressed him in his own best clothes, and
promised him that to the end of his days, whenever he should be a man,
he would be the comeliest of men; and because he was patient and tough,
he should, as an animal, become the hardest to kill of all creatures on
the face of the earth, as it came to pass.

So Mikchich went to the feast. Now the chief of Piktook had three
beautiful daughters, and the youngest was the loveliest in the land. And
on her he cast his eyes, and returning said, "I have seen one whom I
want." Now all the young men in Piktook desired this girl, and would
kill any one who would win her.

So the next day Glooskap, taking a bunch. of *wawbap* (P., wampum), went
to the chief and proposed for Mikchich, <span
id="fr_35"></span>[1](#fn_35) and the mother at once said "Yes." So

<span id="page_54">p. 54</span>

the girl made up a bed of fresh twigs and covered it with a great white
bear-skin, and went to Mikchich, and they returned and had dried meat
for supper. So they were married.

Now Turtle seemed to be very lazy, and when others hunted he lounged at
home. One day his young wife said to him that if this went on thus they
must soon starve. So he put on his snow-shoes and went forth, and she
followed him to see what he would do. And he had not gone far ere he
tripped and fell down, and the girl, returning, told her mother that he
was worthless. But the mother said, "He will do something yet. Be
patient."

One day it came to pass that Glooskap. said to Mikchich, "To-morrow
there will be a great game at ball, and you must play. But because you
have made yourself enemies of all the young men here, they will seek to
slay you, by crowding all together and trampling upon you. And when they
do this it will be by your father-in-law's lodge, and to escape them I
give you the power to jump high over it. This you may do twice, but the
third time will be terrible for you, and yet it must be."

All this happened as he foretold; for the young men indeed tried to take
his life, and to escape them Mikchich jumped over the lodge, so that he
seemed like a bird flying. But the third time he did this he was caught
on the top of the tent-poles, and hung there dangling in the smoke which
rose from below.

Then Glooskap, who was seated in the tent, said,

 

<span id="img_05400"></span> ![THE MUD-TURTLE JUMPING OVER THE WIGWAM OF
HIS FATHER-IN-LAW](img/05400.jpg)  
THE MUD-TURTLE JUMPING OVER THE WIGWAM OF HIS FATHER-IN-LAW

 

<span id="page_55">p. 55</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> "Uncle, I will now
make you the *sogmo*, or great chief of the Tortoises, and you shall
bear up a great nation." Then he smoked Mikchich <span
id="fr_36"></span>[1](#fn_36) so long that his skin became a hard shell,
and the marks of the smoke may be seen thereon to this day. And removing
his entrails he destroyed them, so that but one short one was left. And
he cried aloud, "*Milooks*! (M.) My nephew, you will kill me!" But the
nephew replied, "Not so. I am giving you great life. From this time you
may roll through a flame and never feel it, and live on land or in the
water. And though your head be cut off, it will live for nine days, and
your heart, even, shall beat as long when taken from your body." So
Mikchich rejoiced greatly.

And this came betimes, for he soon had need of it all. For the next day
all the men went on a hunt, and the Master warned him that they would
seek to slay him. Now the young men went on before, and Turtle lingered
behind; but all at once he made a magic flight far over their heads,
unseen, and deep in the forest he slew a moose. Then he drew this to the
snow-shoe track or road, and when his foes came up there he sat upon the
moose, smoking, and waiting for them. Now Glooskap had told them that
they would see some one come out ahead of them

<span id="page_56">p. 56</span>

all that day, and when this came to pass they were more angered in their
hearts than ever.

So they plotted to kill Turtle, and his nephew, who was about to leave,
told him how it would be. "First of all, they will build a mighty fire
and throw you in it. But do thou, O uncle, go cheerfully, for by my
power thou wilt in nowise suffer. Then they will speak of drowning, but
thou must beg and pray that this may not be; and then they will the more
seek to do so, and thou shalt fight them to the bitter end, and yet it
shall be."

And as he said, so it came to pass; and Mikchich, being of good cheer,
bade farewell to his nephew. <span id="fr_37"></span>[1](#fn_37) And
they seized him and threw him into a great fire, but he turned over and
went to sleep in it, being very lazy; and when the fire had burnt out he
awoke, and called for more wood, because it was a cold night.

Then they seized him yet again, and spoke of drowning. But, hearing
this, he, as if he were in mortal dread, begged them not to do this
thing. And he said they might cut him to pieces, or burn him, as they
would, but not to throw him into the water. <span
id="fr_38"></span>[2](#fn_38)

<span id="page_57">p. 57</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Therefore they
resolved to do so, and dragged him on. Then he screamed horribly and
fought lustily, and tore up trees and roots and rocks like a madman; but
they took him into a canoe and paddled out into the middle of the lake
(or to the sea), and, throwing him in, watched him sink as he vanished
far down below. So they thought him dead, and returned rejoicing.

Now the next day at noon there was a hot sunshine, and something was
seen basking on a great rock, about a mile out in the lake. So two young
men took a canoe and went forth to see what this might be. And when they
came to the edge of the rock, which was about a foot high, there lay
Mikchich sunning himself; but seeing them coming to take him, he only
said, "Good-by," and rolled over plump into the water, where he is
living to this day. In memory whereof all turtles, when they see any one
coming, tip-tilt themselves over into the water at once.

And Turtle lived happily with his wife, and she had a babe. Now it
happened in after-days that Glooskap came to see his uncle, and the
child cried. "Dost thou know what he says?" exclaimed the Master.
"Truly, not I," answered Mikchich, "unless it be the language of the
Mu-se-gisk (P., Spirits of the Air), which no man knoweth." "Well,"
replied Glooskap, "he is talking of eggs, for he says '*Hoo-wah*!
*hoo-wah*!' which methinks is much the same as '*Waw-wun, waw-wun*.' And
this in Passamaquoddy

<span id="page_58">p. 58</span>

means egg. "But where are there any?" asked Mikchich. Then Glooskap bade
him seek in the sand, and he found many, and admired and marveled over
them greatly; and in memory of this, and to glorify this jest of
Glooskap, the Turtle layeth eggs even to this day.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

The great Glooskap was a right valiant smoker; in all the world was no
man who loved a pipe of good tobacco so much as he. In those days the
summers were longer in the land of the Wabanaki, the sun was warmer, and
the Indians raised *tomawe* (tobacco, P.), and solaced themselves
mightily therewith. <span id="fr_39"></span>[1](#fn_39) And there came
to Glooskap a certain evil-minded magician, who sought to take his life,
as the Master very well knew, for he read the hearts of men as if they
had been strings of wampum. And this *m'téoulin* (P., magician),
believing himself to be greatest in all things, thought to appall
Glooskap by outdoing him at first in something at which he excelled; for
a fish is frightened when another swims faster, but not till then.

And the man sat down to smoke with an exceeding long pipe with a great
bowl, but that of Glooskap grew to be much greater. Then, having filled
his pipe, the sorcerer exhausted and burnt it out at one

<span id="page_59">p. 59</span>

pull, and then blew all the smoke out of his nose at one puff. So he sat
and looked at the Master. But Glooskap, whose pipe held ten times as
much tobacco, did the same, and blowing it out split the rocky ground,
so that a great chasm opened before them. Then they were silent awhile,
till the Master said, "If you can do that you may kill me." But he could
not, and so went back with shame to those who had sent him. <span
id="fr_40"></span>[1](#fn_40)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_34"></span>[51:1](al13.htm#fr_34) This legend of the
tortoise is carefully compiled from six different versions: the
narration of Tomah Josephs, a Passamaquoddy; the Anglo-Indian
manuscript, already cited; two accounts in the hand manuscript; the
author quoted without credit in *The Maritime Provinces*; and one by
Mrs. W. Wallace Brown. As the totem of the Tortoise was of the highest
rank among the Algonquins, this account of its origin is of
corresponding interest. Having employed an old Indian to carve the
handle of a war or scalping knife for me, such as was used by his
Passamaquoddy ancestors, he carved on it a tortoise. It was especially
the totem of the Lenni-Lenape, called by the Passamaquoddies
*Lel-le-nabé*, "the people."

<span id="fn_35"></span>[53:1](al13.htm#fr_35) All invitations to
festivals, or formal ceremonies, proposals of marriage, etc., were
preceded among these tribes by a gift of wampum.

<span id="fn_36"></span>[55:1](al13.htm#fr_36) In a verbal Passamaquoddy
narrative (John Gabriel), and in one given in *The Maritime Provinces*,
this was effected by Glooskap with tobacco-smoke from his pipe. In Mr.
Rand's manuscript it is the smoke of the tent-fire. The Passamaquoddy
narrations are invariably more spirited and humorous than the Micmac.

<span id="fn_37"></span>[56:1](al13.htm#fr_37) This is amusingly, though
not very clearly, set forth in the Indian manuscript as follows: "Make
believe but you dond want be trown. So he shaken hands witt is nuncel
kick hororch good by do him. Tell is uncle you--I shall not be kill and
I am going Lever (to live)--we may meet again."

<span id="fn_38"></span>[56:2](al13.htm#fr_38) This in the original is
extremely like Brer Rabbit's prayer not to be thrown into the
brier-bush. As this legend is one of the oldest of the Algonquin, and
certainly antedating the coming of the whites, I give it the priority
over the negro.

<span id="fn_39"></span>[58:1](al13.htm#fr_39) I have met with an old
Indian woman in New Brunswick who told me that her grandmother
remembered to have seen tobacco raised there by the Passamaquoddy.

<span id="fn_40"></span>[59:1](al13.htm#fr_40) In this "tale of
tobacco," told me by John Gabriel, the evil-minded magician is described
as a Black Cat. This is probably an error, as Glooskap himself appears
as chief of the Black Cats in another tale. It may be, however, that
this was Pook-jin-skwess in disguise.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: How Glooskap sailed through the great Cavern of Darkness](al14)
