[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Northeast](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](al22)  [Next](al24) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002DPU8XY/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Algonquin Legends of New England*, by Charles G. Leland, \[1884\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_104">p. 104</span>

### Of Glooskap and the Sinful Serpent.

(Passamaquoddy)

Of old time it befell that Glooskap had an enemy, an evil man, a sinful
beast, a great sorcerer. And this man, after trying many things, made
himself a great serpent, hoping so to slay the Master.

Of old time Glooskap met a boy whose name was *'Nmmokswess*, the
Sable. <span id="fr_77"></span>[1](#fn_77) And the boy had a flute:
whoever played on it could entice unto him all the animals. And once,
when the Master was afar, the boy broke the flute, and in his great
sorrow he would not return home, but wandered away into the wilderness.
Now Glooskap knew in his heart that the flute was broken: he who is a
magician knows at once of a great evil. And coming home, he asked of the
grandmother where the boy was, and she could only weep. Then the Master
said, "Though I roam forever, yet will I find the boy." So he went
forth, and he tracked him in the snow for three days; and on the third
night he heard some one singing in a hollow; and it was a magic song,
that which the *m'téoulin* sings when he is in dire need and death is
near. And making a circle round about the place, Glooskap looked down
and saw a wigwam, and heard the voice more distinctly as he drew nearer;
and it was the voice of the boy, and he was singing a song

<span id="page_105">p. 105</span>

against all of the snake kind. And he was wandering about the wigwam,
seeking a straight stick.

Then Glooskap understood all the thing, and how the boy had been enticed
into the wilderness by the evil arts of At-o-sis, the Snake, and that
the Great Serpent was in the wigwam, and had sent him out to seek a
straight stick. Then Glooskap, singing again softly, bade him get a very
crooked one, and told what more to, do. So the boy got an exceedingly
crooked one; and when he entered, the Snake, seeing it, said, "Why hast
thou got such a bad stick?" And the boy, answering, said, "Truly, it is
very crooked, but that which is crookedest may be made straightest, and
I know a charm whereby this can be done; for I will but heat this stick
in the fire, and then I will make it quite straight, as you shall see."
Now At-o-sis was very anxious to behold this wonderful thing, and he
looked closely; but the boy, as soon as the end of the stick was
red-hot, thrust it into his eyes and blinded him, and ran forth. Yet the
Snake followed him; but when he was without the wigwam he met the
Master, who slew him out of hand. <span id="fr_78"></span>[1](#fn_78)

Of old times. This is an end of the story.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_77"></span>[104:1](al23.htm#fr_77) Evidently no other than
Marten, or the Abistanooch of the Micmac mythology.

<span id="fn_78"></span>[105:1](al23.htm#fr_78) This curious legend is
suggestive of Ulysses and the Cyclops. The enemies of Glooskap are all
cannibals; the boy is sent out for a straight stick to serve as a spit
to roast him on. It is not impossible that the Snake, in some perfect
version of the tale, has but a single eye, since many of the evil
creatures of red Indian mythology are half stone lengthwise. But the
whole story is full of strange hints. It was told me by Tomah Josephs,
at Campobello, N. B.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Tale of Glooskap as told by another Indian. Showing how the
Toad and Porcupine lost their Noses](al24)
