[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Northeast](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](al41)  [Next](al43) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002DPU8XY/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Algonquin Legends of New England*, by Charles G. Leland, \[1884\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_208">p. 208</span>

# THE AMAZING ADVENTURES OF MASTER RABBIT

##### WITH THE OTTER, THE WOODPECKER GIRLS, AND MOOIN THE BEAR.

###### ALSO A FULL ACCOUNT OF THE FAMOUS CHASE, IN WHICH HE FOOLED LUSIFEE, THE WILD CAT. <span id="fr_120"></span>[1](#fn_120)

### I. How Master Rabbit sought to rival Keeoony, the Otter.

OF old times, *Mahtigwess*, the Rabbit, who is called in the Micmac
tongue *Ableegumooch*, lived with his grandmother, waiting for better
times; and truly he found it a hard matter in midwinter, when ice was on
the river and snow was on the plain, to provide even for his small
household. And running through the forest one day he found a lonely
wigwam, and he that dwelt therein was Keeoony, the Otter. The lodge was
on the bank of a river, and a smooth road of ice slanted from the door
down to the water. And the Otter made him welcome, and directed his
housekeeper to get ready to cook; saying which, he took the hooks on
which he was wont to string fish when he had them, and went to fetch a
mess for dinner. Placing himself on the top of the slide, he coasted in
and under the water, and then came out

<span id="page_209">p. 209</span>

with a great bunch of eels, which were soon cooked, and on which they
dined.

"By my life," thought Master Rabbit, "but that is an easy way of getting
a living! Truly these fishing-folk have fine fare, and cheap! Cannot I,
who am so clever, do as well as this mere Otter? Of course I can. Why
not?" Thereupon he grew so confident of himself as to invite the Otter
to dine with him--*adamadusk ketkewop*--on the third day after that, and
so went home.

"Come on!" he said to his grandmother the next morning; "let us remove
our wigwam down to the lake." So they removed; and he selected a site
such as the Otter had chosen for his home, and the weather being cold he
made a road of ice, or a coast, down from his door to the water, and all
was well. Then the guest came at the time set, and Rabbit, calling his
grandmother, bade her get ready to cook a dinner. "But what am I to
cook, grandson?" inquired the old dame.

"Truly I will see to that," said he, and made him a *nabogun*, or stick
to string eels. Then going to the ice path, he tried to slide like one
skilled in the art, but indeed with little luck, for he went first to
the right side, then to the left, and so hitched and jumped till he came
to the water, where he went in with a bob backwards. And this bad
beginning had no better ending, since of all swimmers and divers the
Rabbit is the very worst, and this one was no better than his brothers.
The water was cold, he lost his breath, he struggled, and was well-nigh
drowned.

<span id="page_210">p. 210</span>

"But what on earth ails the fellow?" said the Otter to the grandmother,
who was looking on in amazement.

"Well, he has seen somebody do something, and is trying to do likewise,"
replied the old lady.

"Ho! come out of that now," cried the Otter, "and hand me your
*nabogun*!" And the poor Rabbit, shivering with cold, and almost frozen,
came from the water and limped into the lodge. And there he required
much nursing from his grandmother, while the Otter, plunging into the
stream, soon returned with a load of fish. But, disgusted at the Rabbit
for attempting what he could not perform, he threw them down as a gift,
and went home without tasting the meal.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_120"></span>[208:1](al42.htm#fr_120) In this story the Wild
Cat is another form of Lox, the master of the wolves.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: II. How Mahtigwess, the Rabbit dined with the Woodpecker Girls,
and was again humbled by trying to rival them](al43)
