[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Northeast](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](al44)  [Next](al46) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002DPU8XY/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Algonquin Legends of New England*, by Charles G. Leland, \[1884\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### IV. Relating how the Rabbit became Wise by being Original, and of the Terrible Tricks which he by Magic played Loup-Cervier, the Wicked Wild Cat.

There are men who are bad at copying, yet are good originals, and of
this kind was Master Rabbit, who, when he gave up trying to do as others
did, succeeded very well. And, having found out his foible, he applied
himself to become able in good earnest, and studied *m'téoulin*, or
magic, so severely that in time he grew to be an awful conjurer, so that
he could raise ghosts, crops, storms, or devils whenever he wanted
them. <span id="fr_123"></span>[1](#fn_123) For he had perseverance, and
out of this may

<span id="page_214">p. 214</span>

come anything, if it be only brought into the right road.

Now it came to pass that Master Rabbit got into great trouble. The
records of the Micmacs say that it was from his stealing a string of
fish from the Otter, who pursued him; but the Passamaquoddies declare
that he was innocent of this evil deed, probably because they make great
account of him as their ancestor and as the father of the Wabanaki.
Howbeit, this is the way in which they tell the tale.

Now the Rabbit is the natural prey of the Loup-Cervier, or Lusifee, who
is a kind of wild cat, none being more obstinate. And this Wild Cat once
went hunting with a gang of wolves, and they got nothing. Then Wild Cat,
who had made them great promises and acted as chief, became angry, and,
thinking of the Rabbit, promised them that this time they should indeed
get their dinner. So he took them to Rabbit's wigwam; but he was out,
and the Wolves, being vexed and starved, reviled Wild Cat, and then
rushed off howling through the woods.

Now I think that the Rabbit is *m'téoulin*. Yes, he must be, for when
Wild Cat started to hunt him alone, he determined with all his soul not
to be caught, and made himself as magical as he could. So he picked up a
handful of chips, and threw one as far as possible, then jumped to
it,--for he had a charm for a long jump; and then threw another, and so
on, for a great distance. This was to make no tracks, and when he
thought he had got out of scent and sight and sound he scampered away
like the wind.

 

<span id="img_21400"></span> ![THE RABBIT MAGICIAN.](img/21400.jpg)  
THE RABBIT MAGICIAN.

 

<span id="page_215">p. 215</span>

Now, as I said, when the wolves got to Master Rabbit's house and found
nothing, they smelt about and left Wild Cat, who swore by his tail that
he would catch Rabbit, if he had to hunt forever and run himself to
death. So, taking the house for a centre, he kept going round and round
it, all the time a little further, and so more around and still
further. <span id="fr_124"></span>[1](#fn_124) Then at last having found
the track, he went in hot haste after Mr. Rabbit. And both ran hard,
till, night coming on, Rabbit, to protect himself, had only just time
*to trample down the snow a little, and stick up a spruce twig on end
and sit on it*. But when Wild Cat came up he found there a fine wigwam,
and put his head in. All that he saw was an old man of very grave and
dignified appearance, whose hair was gray, and whose majestic
(*sogmoye*) appearance was heightened by a pair of long and venerable
ears. And of him Wild Cat asked in a gasping hurry if he had seen a
Rabbit running that way.

"Rabbits!" replied the old man. "Why, of course I have seen many. They
abound in the woods about here. I see dozens of them every day." With
this he said kindly to Wild Cat that he had better tarry with him for a
time. "I am an old man," he remarked with solemnity,--"an old man,
living alone,

<span id="page_216">p. 216</span>

and a respectable guest, like you, sir, comes to me like a blessing."
And the Cat, greatly impressed, remained. After a good supper he lay
down by the fire, and, having run all day, was at once asleep, and made
but one nap of it till morning. But how astonished, and oh, how
miserable he was, when he awoke, to find himself on the open heath in
the snow and almost starved! The wind blew as if it had a keen will to
kill him; it seemed to go all through his body. Then he saw that he had
been a fool and cheated by magic, and in a rage swore again by his
teeth, as well as his tail, that the Rabbit should die. There was no hut
now, only the trampled snow and a spruce twig, and yet out of this
little, Rabbit had conjured up so great a delusion.

Then he ran again all day. And when night came, Master Rabbit, having a
little more time than before, again trampled down the snow, but for a
greater space, and strewed many branches all about, for now a huge
effort was to be made. And when Wild Cat got there he found a great
Indian village, with crowds of people going to and fro. The first
building he saw was a church, in which service was being held. And he,
entering, said hastily to the first person he saw, "Ha! ho have you seen
a Rabbit running by here?"

"Hush--sh, sh!" replied the man. "You must wait till meeting is over
before asking such questions." <span id="fr_125"></span>[1](#fn_125)
Then a young man beckoned to him to come

<span id="page_217">p. 217</span>

in, and he listened till the end to a long sermon on the wickedness of
being vindictive and rapacious; and the preacher was a gray ancient, and
his ears stood up over his little cap like the two handles of a pitcher,
yet for all that the Wild Cat's heart was not moved one whit. And when
it was all at an end he said to the obliging young man, But *have* you
seen a Rabbit running by?"

"Rabbits! Rab-bits!" replied the young man. "Why, there are hundreds
racing about in the cedar swamps near this place, and you can have as
many as you want." "Ah!" replied Wild Cat, "but they are not what I
seek. Mine is an entirely different kind." The other said that he knew
of no sort save the wild wood--rabbits, but that perhaps their Governor,
or Chief, who was very wise, could tell him all about them. Then the
Governor, or Sagamore, came up. Like the preacher, he was very
remarkable and gray, with the long locks standing up one on either side
of his head. And he invited the stranger to his house, where his two
very beautiful daughters cooked him a fine supper. And when he wished to
retire they brought out blankets and a beautiful *white bear's skin*,
and made up a bed for him by the fire. Truly, his eyes were closed as
soon as he lay down, but when he awoke there had been a great change.
For now he was in a wet cedar swamp, the wind blowing ten times worse
than ever, and his supper and sleep had done him little good, for they
were all a delusion. All around him were rabbits' tracks and broken
twigs, but nothing more.

<span id="page_218">p. 218</span>

Yet he sprang up, more enraged than ever, and swearing more terribly by
his tail, teeth, and claws that he would be revenged. So he ran on all
day, and at night, when he came to another large village, he was so
weary that he could just gasp, "Have-----you----seen a Rab----bit run
this way?" With much concern and kindness they all asked him what was
the matter. So he told them all this story, and they pitied him very
much; yea, one gray old man,--and this was the Chief,--with two
beautiful daughters, shed tears and comforted him, and advised him to
stay with them. So they took him to a large ball, where there was a
great fire burning in the middle thereof. And over it hung two pots with
soup and meat, and two Indians stood by and gave food to all the people.
And he had his share with the rest, and all feasted gayly.

Now, when they had done eating, the old Governor, who was very gray, and
from either side of whose head rose two very venerable, long white
feathers, rose to welcome the stranger, and in a long speech said it
was, indeed, the custom of their village to entertain guests, but that
they expected from them a song. Then Wild Cat, who was vain of his
voice, uplifted it in vengeance against the Rabbits:—

"Oh, how I hate them!  
How I despise them!  
How I laugh at them!  
May I scalp them all!"

Then he said that he thought the Governor should

<span id="page_219">p. 219</span>

sing. And to this the Chief consented, but declared that all who were
present should bow their heads while seated, and shut their eyes, which
they did. Then Chief Rabbit, at one bound, cleared the heads of his
guests, and drawing his *timheyen*, or tomahawk, as he jumped, gave Wild
Cat a wound which cut deeply into his head, and only fell short of
killing him by entirely stunning him. When he recovered, he was again in
snow, slush, and filth, more starved than ever, his head bleeding from a
dreadful blow, and he himself almost dead. Yet, with all that, the
Indian devil was stronger in him than ever, for every new disgrace did
but bring more resolve to be revenged, and he swore it by his tail,
claws, teeth, and eyes.

So he tottered along, though he could hardly walk; nor could he, indeed,
go very far that day. And when almost broken down with pain and
weariness, he came about noon to two good wigwams. Looking into one, he
saw a gray-haired old man, and in the other a young girl, apparently his
daughter. And they received him kindly, and listened to his story,
saying it was very sad, the old man declaring that he must really remain
there, and that he would get him a doctor, since, unless he were well
cared for at once, he would die. Then he went forth as if in great
concern, leaving his daughter to nurse the weary, wounded stranger.

Now, when the Doctor came, he, too, was an old gray man, with a
scalp-lock strangely divided like two horns. But the Wild Cat had become
a little suspicious,

<span id="page_220">p. 220</span>

having been so often deceived, for much abuse will cease to amuse even
the most innocent; an(l truly he was none of these. And, looking grimly
at the Doctor, <span id="fr_126"></span>[1](#fn_126) he said: "I was
asking if any Rabbits are here, and truly you look very much like one
yourself. How did you get that split nose?" Oh, that is very simple,"
replied the old man. Once I was hammering wampum beads, and the stone on
which I beat them broke in halves, and one piece flew up, and, as you
see, split my nose." "But," persisted the Wild Cat, "why are the soles
of your feet so yellow, even like a Rabbit's?" "Ah, that is because I
have been preparing some tobacco, and I had to hold it down with my
feet, for, truly, I [needed](errata.htm#1) both my hands to work with.
So the tobacco stained them yellow." Then the Wild Cat suspected no
more, and the Doctor put salve on his wound, so that he felt much
better, and, ere he departed, put by him a platter of very delicate
little round biscuits, or rolls, and a beautiful pitcher full of nice
wine, and bade him refresh himself from these during the night, and so,
stealing away softly, he departed.

But oh, the wretchedness of the awaking in the morning! For then Wild
Cat found himself indeed in the extreme of misery. His head was swollen
and aching to an incredible degree, and the horrible wound, which was
gaping wide, had been stuffed with hemlock

<span id="page_221">p. 221</span>

needles and pine splinters, and this was the cool salve which the Doctor
had applied. And as a last touch to his rage and shame, thinking in his
deadly thirst of the wine, he beheld on the ground, still left in the
snow, a last summer's pitcher-plant, half full of what might indeed pass
for wine by the mere sight thereof, though hardly to the taste. While
seeking for the biscuits on a platter, he found only certain small
pellets, such as abound about a rabbit warren. And then he swore by all
his body and soul that he would slay the next being he met, Rabbit or
Indian. Verily this time he would be utterly revenged.

Now Mahtigwess, the Rabbit, had almost come to an end of his
*m'téoulin*, or wizard power, for that time, yet he had still enough
left for one more great effort. And, coming to a lake, he picked up a
very large chip, and having seamed it with sorcery and magnified it by
magic threw it into the water, where it at once seemed to be a great
ship, such as white men build. And when the Wild Cat came up he saw it,
with sails spread and flags flying, and the captain stood so stately on
the deck, with folded arms, and he was a fine, gray-haired, dignified
man, with a cocked hat, the two points of which were like grand and
stately horns. But the Wild Cat had sworn, and he was mindful of his
great oath; so he cried, "You cannot escape me this time, Rabbit! I have
you now!" Saying this he plunged in, and tried to swim to the ship. And
the captain, seeing a Wild Cat in the water, being engaged in musket
drill, ordered his men to fire at it,

<span id="page_222">p. 222</span>

which they did with a bang! Now this was caused by a party of
night-hawks overhead, who swooped down with a sudden cry like a shot; at
least it seemed so to Wild Cat, who, deceived and appalled by this
volley, deeming that he had verily made a mistake this time, turned tail
and swam ashore into the dark old forest, where, if he is not dead, he
is running still. <span id="fr_127"></span>[1](#fn_127)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_123"></span>[213:1](al45.htm#fr_123) The three previous
chapters of the Rabbit legend are from the Micmac. The rest is
Passamaquoddy, as told by Tomah Josephs, who in his narration not only
often interpolated jocose remarks, but was wont to ejaculate "By Jolly!"
especially in the most striking scenes. I think that with him the
interjection had become refined and dignified.

<span id="fn_124"></span>[215:1](al45.htm#fr_124) While telling this,
Tomah described a spiral line. It is evident that if the volute were
only continued long enough it must inevitably end in finding any trail,
if the point of departure be only known. This device is familiar to all
Indians, and it is mentioned in other stories.

<span id="fn_125"></span>[216:1](al45.htm#fr_125) Though this story is
very old, the incident of the church (*sogmoye wigwam*, or chief house)
is manifestly modern.

<span id="fn_126"></span>[220:1](al45.htm#fr_126) This cross-examination
of the Doctor is taken from an Abenaki version, narrated by a St.
Francis Indian to Miss Alger. This Indian is the well-known Josep
Cáppino.

<span id="fn_127"></span>[222:1](al45.htm#fr_127) This expression, very
common among the Indians, appears to have been taken from the Canadians.
*Il court encore* ends many of their stories. This was related to me by
Tomah Josephs, September 2, 1882. I have four versions of it. In one,
the Chippewa, given by Schoolcraft, the wretched efforts to rival the
woodpeckers and bear are attributed to a no less personage than
Hiawatha, or Manobozho, himself, when under a cloud. But Hiawatha as a
poem deals only with the better part of the hero's character. In the
Rand manuscript, the most amusing portion of the adventures of the
Rabbit, or those with the Wild Cat, are much abbreviated. Tomah's tale
supplies this missing portion, but consists of nothing else. The Abenaki
tale is slightly different in its beginning: "Rabbit was making
maple-sugar in the woods, but he was very pious, and rested on the
Sabbath. While praying on this day by his hearth, there came a great
black fierce man, who glared at him, but Mahtigwess kept saying 'Peace!
peace! peace!' for that is the way the Rabbit prays. Then the stranger
was angry because he would not cease praying and talk to him, but the
Rabbit said, 'Would you have me break the Sabbath?' Then he went and
brought the stranger, who was a Wild Cat, refreshments." These
refreshments were the same as those given by the Doctor. Here the chase
begins.

There is probably much more of this story.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: V. How Master Rabbit went to a Wedding and won the Bride](al46)
