[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Northeast](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](al53)  [Next](al55) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002DPU8XY/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Algonquin Legends of New England*, by Charles G. Leland, \[1884\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_263">p. 263</span>

### The Thunder and Lightning Men.

(Passamaquoddy.)

This is truly an old Indian story of old time. Once an Indian was
whirled up by the roaring wind: he was taken up in a thunder-storm, and
set down again in the village of the Thunders. <span
id="fr_151"></span>[1](#fn_151) In after-times he described them as very
like human beings: they used bows and arrows (*tah-bokque*), and had
wings.

But these wings can be laid aside, and kept for use. And from time to
time their chief gives these Thunders orders to put them on, and tells
them where to go. He also tells them how long they are to be gone, and
warns them not to go too low, for it is sure death for them to be caught
in the crotch of a tree.

The great chief of the Thunders, bearing of the stranger's arrival, sent
for him, and received him very kindly, and told him that he would do
well to become one of them. To which the man being willing, the chief
soon after called all his people together to see the ceremony of
thunderifying <span id="fr_152"></span>[2](#fn_152) the Indian.

Then they bade him go into a square thing, or box, and while in it he
lost his senses and became a

<span id="page_264">p. 264</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Thunder. Then they
brought him a pair of wings, and he put them on. So he flew about like
the rest of the Thunders; he became quite like them, and followed all
their ways. And he said that they always flew towards the *sou' n'
snook*, or, south, and that the roar and crash of the thunder was the
sound of their wings. Their great amusement is to play at ball across
the sky. <span id="fr_153"></span>[1](#fn_153) When they return they
carefully put away their wings for their next flight. There is a big
bird in the south, and this they are always trying to kill, but never
succeed in doing so.

They made long journeys, and always took him with them. So it went on
for a long time, but it came to pass that the Indian began to tire of
his strange friends. Then he told the chief that he wished to see his
family on earth, and the sagamore listened to him and was very kind.
Then he called all his people together, and said that their brother from
the other world was very lonesome, and wished to return. They were all
very sorry indeed to lose him, but because they loved him they let him
have his own way, and decided to carry him back again. So bidding him
close his eyes till he should be on earth, they carried him down.

The Indians saw a great thunder-storm drawing near; they heard such
thunder as they never knew before, and then something in the shape of a
human being coming down with lightning; then they ran

<span id="page_265">p. 265</span>

to the spot where he sat, and it was their long-lost brother, who had
been gone seven years.

He had been in the Thunder-world. He told them how he had been playing
ball with the Thunder-boys: yes, how he had been turned into a real
Thunder himself.

This is why the Indians to this very day have a firm belief that the
thunder and lightning we hear and see are caused by (beings or spirits)
(called) in Indian *Bed-day yek* (or thunder), <span
id="fr_154"></span>[1](#fn_154) because they see them, and have,
moreover, actually picked up the *bed-dags k'chisousan*, or
thunder-bullet. <span id="fr_155"></span>[2](#fn_155) It is of many
different kinds of stone, but always of the same shape. The last was
picked up by Peter Sabattis, <span id="fr_156"></span>[3](#fn_156) one
of the Passamaquoddy tribe. He has it yet. He found it in a crotch-root
of a spruce-tree at Head Harbor, on the island of Campobello. This stone
is a sign of good-luck to him who finds it.

<span id="page_266">p. 266</span>

The thunder is the sound of the wings of the men who fly above. The
lightning we see is the fire and smoke of their pipes.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_151"></span>[263:1](al54.htm#fr_151) This tale is
transcribed, with very little alteration, from a manuscript collection
of tales written in Indian-English by an Indian. I retain the word
*thunders* as expressive of the beings in question. It has for title, A
Story called "*An Indian transformed into a Thunder*!"

<span id="fn_152"></span>[263:2](al54.htm#fr_152) This word is one of
the Indian author's own, but as I know of no synonym for it I retain it.
It is certainly not worse than "Native-Aniericanizing."

<span id="fn_153"></span>[264:1](al54.htm#fr_153) The Eskimo say that
the lightning of the Northern Lights is caused by spirits playing at
ball with the head of a walrus.

<span id="fn_154"></span>[265:1](al54.htm#fr_154) The manuscript is here
difficult to understand, but this is apparently the real meaning of it.

<span id="fn_155"></span>[265:2](al54.htm#fr_155) Thunderbolt.

<span id="fn_156"></span>[265:3](al54.htm#fr_156) I heard of the
existence of this legend a long time before I found it in the manuscript
collection obtained for me by Louis Mitchell. It is very curious as
being unquestionably of Eskimo origin, or common to the Eskimo; also
because it speaks of the Thunders as always endeavoring to kill a great
bird in the south. This is probably the thunder or storm bird, called by
the Passamaquoddy Indians *Wochowsen* or *Wuchowsen*, that is,
Wind-Blower. Another legend makes Thunder and Lightning the sons of
Mount Katahdin.

I may here mention that I am well acquainted with old Peter Sabattis,
the possessor of the "thunder-bullet."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Of the Woman who married the Thunder, and of their Boy](al55)
