[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Northeast](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](al55)  [Next](al57) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002DPU8XY/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Algonquin Legends of New England*, by Charles G. Leland, \[1884\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_268">p. 268</span>

# AT-O-SIS, THE SERPENT.

### How Two Girls were changed to Water-Snakes, and of Two Others that became Mermaids.

(Passamaquoddy.)

POCUMKWESS, or Thoroughfare, is sixty-five miles from Campobello. There
was an Indian village there in the old times. Two young Indian girls had
a strange habit of absenting themselves all day every Sunday. No one
knew for a long time where they went or what they did. But this was bow
they passed their time. They would take a canoe and go six miles down
the Grand Lake, where, at the north end, is a great ledge of rock and
sixty feet of water. There they stayed. All day long they ran about
naked or swain; they were wanton, witch-like girls, liking eccentric and
forbidden ways.

They kept this up for a long time. Once, while they were in the water,
an Indian who was hunting spied them. He came nearer and nearer, unseen.
He saw them come out of the water and sit on the shore, and then go in
again; but as he looked they grew longer and longer, until they became
snakes.

He went home and told this. (But now they had been seen by a man they
must keep the serpent form.) Men of the village, in four or five canoes,

<span id="page_269">p. 269</span>

went to find them. They found the canoe and clothes of the girls;
nothing more. A few days after, two men on Grand Lake saw the
snake-girls on shore, showing their heads over the bushes. One began to
sing,

"N'ktieh iében iut,  
Qu'spen ma ké owse."

We are going to stay in this lake  
A few days, and then go down the river.  
Bid adieu to our friends for us;  
We are going to the great salt water.

After singing this they sank into the water. They had very long hair.

 

A picture of the man looking at the snake-girls was scraped for me by
the Indian who told me this story. The pair were represented as snakes
with female heads. When I first heard this tale, I promptly set it down
as nothing else but the Melusina story derived from a Canadian French
source. But I have since found that it is so widely spread, and is told
in so many different forms, and is so deeply connected with tribal
traditions and totems, that there is now no doubt in my mind that it is
at least pre-Columbian.

Another and a very curious version of this story was obtained by Mrs. W.
Wallace Brown, who has been the chief discoverer of curious Indian lore
among the Passamaquoddies. It is called:

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ne Hwas, the Mermaid](al57)
