[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Northeast](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](al60)  [Next](al62) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002DPU8XY/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Algonquin Legends of New England*, by Charles G. Leland, \[1884\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_281">p. 281</span>

# THE PARTRIDGE.

### The Adventures of the Great Hero Pulowech, or the Partridge.

(Micmac.)

*Wee-yig-yik-keseyook*. A tale of old times. Two men once lived together
in one wigwam in the woods, on the border of a beautiful lake. Many
hard-wood trees made their pictures in it. One of these Indians was
Pulowech, the Partridge in the Micmac tongue, but who is called by the
Passamaquoddy Mitchihess; but the other was Wejek (M.), the Tree
Partridge.

Now it befell that one day Pulowech was walking along the shore, when it
was winter, and he beheld three girls, fair and fine, with flowing hair,
sitting on the ice braiding their locks. Then he knew that they were of
the fairy kind, who dwell in the water; and, verily, these were plentier
of old than they are now,--to our sorrow be it said, for they were good
company for the one who could get them. And Pulowech, knowing this,
said, "I will essay this thing, and perchance I may catch one or two of
them; which will be a great comfort, for. a pretty girl is a nice thing
to have about the wigwam." So he sought to secure them by stealing
softly along; but one cried, "*Ne miha skedap*!" "I see a man!" P., and
they all went head over heels, first best time, into the water;

<span id="page_282">p. 282</span>

and verily that was a cold duck for December in the Bay of Fundy.

But though Pulowech had never hunted for sea-girls, yet he had fished
for seals, who are greatly akin unto them, being almost as slippery; and
wotting well that no man hath the mitten till he is refused thirty times
and many more, he went about it in another wise. For this time he gat
many fir boughs, strewing them about as if blown by the wind, and hiding
himself behind them, again came up and made a sudden dart. Then the
maids, crying as before, "*Ne miha skedap*!" "I see a man!" went with a
dive into the deep. But this time he caught, if not the hair, at least
the hair-string, of the fairest, which remained in his hand. And, gazing
on this, it came into his mind that he had got that which was her charm,
or life, and that she could not live without it, <span
id="fr_161"></span>[1](#fn_161) or her cherished *sakultobee* (M.). And
taking it home, he tied it to the place in the wigwam above that wherein
he slept. Nor had he waited long before she came, and, with little ado,
remained with him as his wife.

Now Pulowech, being himself addicted to sorcery, knew that there were
divers knaves of the same stamp prowling about the woods, who would make
short work of a wife if they could find a plump young one in the
way,--they being robbers, ravishers, and cannibals withal. Therefore he
warned his bride to keep well within doors when he was away, and to open
to

<span id="page_283">p. 283</span>

none, which she, poor soul, meant to obey with all her might. But being
alone at midnight, and hearing a call outside, even "*Pantahdooe*!" M.,
"Open the door to me!" she wondered greatly who it might be. And it was
a very wicked wizard, a *boo-öin*, or pow-wow; and he, being subtle and
crafty, and knowing of her family, so imitated the voices of her
brothers and sisters, beseeching her to let them in, that her very heart
ached. "O sister, we have come from afar!" they cried. "We missed you,
and have followed you. Let us in! And yet again she heard a sad and very
earnest voice, and it was that of her old mother, crying, "*N'toos',
n'toos', pantahdooe*!" M., "My daughter! my daughter! open unto me!" and
she verily wist that it must be so. But when she heard the voice of her
dear old father, shaking and saying, "*Pantahdooe loke cyowchee*!" "Open
the door, for I am very cold!" she could resist no more, and, springing
up, opened it to those who were without. And then the evil sorcerers,
springing on her like mad wolves, dragged her away and devoured her.
They did not leave two of her little bones one with another. <span
id="fr_162"></span>[1](#fn_162)

Now when *Wejek*, the Tree Partridge, came in and found his friend's
wife gone, he was so angry that, without waiting, he set forth to seek
her. And this

<span id="page_284">p. 284</span>

was not wisely done, since, falling among them, he was himself slain.
Then Pulowech, returning last of all, and finding no one, sought by
means of magic to know where friend and wife might be. For taking a
*woltes*, or a wooden dish, he filled it with water, and charmed it with
a spell, and placed it in the back part of his wigwam, just opposite the
door. So he laid him down to sleep, and in the morning when he arose he
looked upon the dish,--even the dish of divination,--and lo! it was half
full of blood. Then he knew that the twain had been murdered.

Then gathering all his arms, he went forth for revenge, and passed many
days on the path, tracking the *boo-öin*; and having the eyesight of
sorcery, he one day beheld very far away, upon an exceeding high cliff,
the knee of a man sticking out of the stone, and knew that a sorcerer
had hidden himself in the solid rock, even as a child might hide itself
in a pile of feathers. Then throwing his tomahawk he cut away the knee,
and the *boo-öin*, his spell broken, remained hard and fast forever in
the ledge. And yet, anon, a little further on, he saw a foot projecting
from a wall, and this he likewise cut off, and with that he had slain
two.

And as he went further he found by the way a poor little squirrel, even
*Meeko*, who was crawling along, half dead, in sorry plight. And taking
her up he made her well, and placing her in his bosom, said, "Rest there
yet a while, *Meeko*, for thou must fight to-day, and that fiercely. Yet
fear not, for I will

<span id="page_285">p. 285</span>

stand by thee, and when I tap thy back, then shalt thou bring forth thy
young!"

Then going ever on, he saw from the mountains far in a lake below a
flock of wild geese sporting merrily, even the *Senum-kwak'*. But he
wist right well that these also were of the *boo-öin*, whom he sought,
and placing a spell on his bow, and singing a charm over his arrows that
they should not miss, he slew the wild fowl one by one, and tying their
heads together, he carried them in a bunch upon his back. And truly he
deemed it a good bag of game for one day.

And yet further on he came to a wigwam, and entering it saw a man there
seated, whom he knew at once was of the enemy. For he who sat there
glared at him grimly; he did not say to him, "*'Kutakumoogwal*!" "Come
higher up!" as they do who are hospitable. But having cooked some meat,
and given it in a dish to Pulowech's hand, he snatched it back again,
and said he would sooner give it to his dog. And this he did more than
once, saying the same thing. But Pulowech kept quiet. Then the rude man
said, "Hast thou met with aught to-day, thou knave?" And the guest
replied, "Truly I saw a fellow's knee sticking out of a stone, and I cut
it off. And yet, anon, I saw a foot coming from a rock, and this I also
chopped. And further on there was a flock of wild geese, and them I
slew; there was not one left,--no, not one. And if you will look without
there you may see them all dead, and much good may it do you!"

<span id="page_286">p. 286</span>

Then the savage sorcerer burst forth in all his rage--"Come on, then,
our dogs must fight this out!" "Thou sayest well," replied Pulowech;
"truly I am fond of a good dog-fight, so bring out thy pup!" And that
which the man brought forth was terrible; for it was no dog, but a
hideous savage beast, known to Micmacs as the *Weisum*. <span
id="fr_163"></span>[1](#fn_163)

But that which Pulowech produced was quite as different from a dog as
was the *Weisum*; for it was only *Meeko*, a poor little squirrel, and
half dead at that, which he laid carefully before the fire that it might
revive. <span id="fr_164"></span>[2](#fn_164) But anon it began to
revive, and grew until it was well-nigh as great as the Weisum. And then
there was indeed a battle as of devils and witches; he who had been a
hundred miles away might have heard it.

But anon it seemed that the *Weisum* was getting the better of *Meeko*.
Then Pulowech did but tap the squirrel on the back, when lo! she brought
forth two other squirrels, and these grew in all instant to be as large
as their mother, and the three were soon too many for the beast. "Ho!
call off your dogs!" cried the *boo-öin*; "you have beaten. But spare
mine, since, indeed, he does not belong to me, but to my grandmother,
who is very fond of him." <span id="fr_165"></span>[3](#fn_165) But this

<span id="page_287">p. 287</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Pulowech, who held
to his own in all things like a wolverine, was the last man alive to
think of, and he encouraged the squirrels until they had torn the Weisum
to rags.

Then he who had staked it, bitterly lamented, saying, "Alack, my poor
grandmother! Alas, how she will wail when she bears that her *Weisum* is
dead! Woe the day that ever I did put him up! Alas, my grandmother!" For
all which the cruel Pulowech, the hard-hearted, impenitent Partridge,
did not care the hair of a dead musk-rat.

Now the host, who had thus suddenly grown so tender-hearted, said, "Let
us sail forth upon the river in a canoe." Then they were soon on the
stream, and rushing down a rapid like a dart. And anon they came to a
terribly high cliff, in which there was a narrow cavern into which the
river ran. And on it, thundering through this door of death, borne on a
boiling surge, the bark was forced furiously into darkness. And Pulowech
sat firmly in his seat, and steered the boat with steady, certain hand;
but just as he entered the horrible bole, glancing around, he saw the
sorcerer leap ashore. For the evil man, believing that no one had ever
come alive out of the cavern, had betrayed him into it.

Yet ever cool and calm the mighty man went on, for danger now was
bringing out all the force of his

<span id="page_288">p. 288</span>

magic; <span id="fr_166"></span>[1](#fn_166) and soon the stream grew
smoother, the rocks disappeared from its bed, and then from afar there
was a brightness, and he was soon in the daylight and sunshine on a
beautiful stream, and by the banks thereof there grew the
*wabeyu-beskwan*, or water-lilies, and very pleasant it was to him to
feel the wind again. So using his paddle he saw a smoke rising from a
cave in the rocks, and landing and softly stepping up heard talking
within.

Nor had he listened long ere he knew the voice of the man who had lured
him into the canoe, and he was telling his grandmother how, one after
the other, all the best *boo-öin* of their band had been slain by a
mighty sorcerer. But when she heard from him how her beloved, or the one
who had inspired the Weisum, had been beaten, her wrath burst forth in a
storm, like the raving of devils, like a mad wind on the waves. And she
said, "If Pulowech were but before me, were he but alive, I would roast
him." The man, hearing this, cried, "Aye; but he is *not* alive, for I
sent him afloat down into the dark cavern!"

And then Pulowech, stepping in before them, said, "And yet I am alive.
And do thou, woman, *bak sok bok sooc*!" (roast me to death). Then she
scowled horribly at him, but said naught; and he, sitting down, looked
at them.

<span id="page_289">p. 289</span>

This woman was of the Porcupines, who are never long without raising
their quills, and they are fond of heat. Now there was in the cave much
hemlock bark, and this she began to heap on the fire. Then it blazed, it
crackled and roared; but Pulowech sat still, and said naught, neither
did his eyes change. And he called unto himself all his might, the might
of his magic did he awaken, and the spirit came unto him very terribly,
so that all the *boo-öin*, with their vile black witchcraft, were but as
worms before him, the Great and Terrible One. And when the fire had
burned low he brought in by his will great store of bark, so that the
whole cave was filled, and closing the door he lighted the fuel. Then
the Porcupines, who were those who had slain his wife and friend, howled
for mercy, but he was deaf as a stone to their cries. Then the roof and
sides of the cavern cracked with the heat, the red-hot stones fell in
heavy blocks, the red flames rose in the thickest smoke, but Pulowech
sat and sang his song until the witch and wizard were burned to cinders;
yea, till their white bones crumbled to ashes beneath his feet. And then
he arose and went unto his home. <span id="fr_167"></span>[1](#fn_167)

<span id="page_290">p. 290</span>

In this legend the hero passes the mysterious river which separates in
several Indian tales the ordinary world from that where the evil giants,
Jötuns, sorcerers, or witches live. It appears to correspond exactly to
"the stream called Ifing, which divides the earth between the Jötuns and
the Gods." (Edda, Vafthrudnismal, 16.) The attempt by the Porcupine host
to roast the guest alive and its failure bears a marked likeness to the
scene in the Grimnismâl, in which King Geirrod vainly strives to roast
his guest, Odin, and is himself slain.

"Fire, thou art hot,  
and much too great flame,  
let us separate."

The grandeur of Odin and the behavior of the Indian are set forth in a
strikingly similar manner in both narratives. If any modern poet had
depicted this incident in so like a style, every critic would have cried
out plagiarism!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_161"></span>[282:1](al61.htm#fr_161) The magic hair-string
plays a part in many of these tales. It belongs to the sorcery of all
the world in all ages.

<span id="fn_162"></span>[283:1](al61.htm#fr_162) This Indian Little Red
Riding-Hood story is very effective. The wolfish sorcerers bursting in
at midnight are even more terrible from a nursery melodramatic point,
than the old wolf in bed.

<span id="fn_163"></span>[286:1](al61.htm#fr_163) The *Amarok* of the
Eskimo.

<span id="fn_164"></span>[286:2](al61.htm#fr_164) In another version of
this story, the savage stranger puts up a real dog against the squirrel;
and in the story of Glooskap, it is that great man who makes the
squirrel great or small.

<span id="fn_165"></span>[286:3](al61.htm#fr_165) This trivial episode
of begging a call-off seems to have <span id="page_287">p. 287</span>
deeply impressed the Indians, who are generally sporting-men, since I
find it in both the Passamaquoddy and Micmac versions of the legend.

<span id="fn_166"></span>[288:1](al61.htm#fr_166) It is very
characteristic of the heroes of these Indian tales that they gradually
unfold or develop from small characteristics to very great ones. There
is a lesson in this, and it has been perfectly appreciated by poets and
similar sorcerers.

<span id="fn_167"></span>[289:1](al61.htm#fr_167) In this Micmac legend,
which is plainly a poem, there is one very striking and original element
in the art with which the great knowledge and power of Pulowech are kept
out of sight until towards the final unfolding. When he picks up the
Squirrel it is with a full comprehension that he will be confronted with
the Weisum. From the beginning to the end, he is master of the
situation; all goes on with him like the unfolding of Fate in a <span
id="page_290">p. 290</span> Greek tragedy, until the end, when, stern
and unpitying, he sits in the cavern of fire and sees his enemies
roasted alive before him.--From the Rand Manuscript.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Story of a Partridge and his Wonderful Wigwam](al62)
