[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Northeast](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](al62)  [Next](al64) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002DPU8XY/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Algonquin Legends of New England*, by Charles G. Leland, \[1884\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### How the Partridge built Good Canoes for all the Birds, and a Bad One for Himself.

When a partridge beats upon a hollow log he makes a noise like an Indian
at work upon a canoe, and when an Indian taps at a canoe it sounds afar
off like the drumming of a partridge, even of *Mitchihess*. And this
comes because that *N'karnayoo*, of ancient days, the Partridge, was the
canoe-builder for all the other birds. Yes, for all at once.

And on a certain day they every one assembled, and each got into his
bark, and truly it was a brave sight to see. First of all
*Kicheeplagon*, the Eagle, entered his great shell and paddled off,
using the ends of his wings; and then came *Ko-ko-kas*, the Owl, doing
the same; and *Kosqu'*, the Crane, *Wee-sow-wee-hessis*, the Bluebird,
*Tjidge-is-skwess*, the Snipe, and *Meg-sweit-tchip-sis*, the Blackbird,
all came sailing proudly after. Even the tiny *A-la-Mussit*, the
Humming-Bird, had a dear little boat, and for him the good Partridge had
made a pretty little paddle, only that some

<span id="page_294">p. 294</span>

thought it rather large, for it was almost an inch long. And
*Ishmegwess*, the Fish-Hawk, who lived on the wing, cried in amazement,
"*Akweden skouje*!" "A canoe is coming!" when he beheld this beautiful
squadron standing out to sea.

But when *Mitchihess*, the great builder, was asked why he had not built
a canoe for himself, he merely looked mysterious and drummed. And being
further questioned by the birds, he shook his head, and at last hinted
that when he built a canoe unto himself it would be indeed a marvel;
yea, a wonder such as even birds' eyes had never beheld,--an entire
novelty, and something to dream of. And this went on for many days.

But in due time it was noised abroad that the wonderful canoe had at
last been really built, and would soon be shown. And at an appointed
time all the birds assembled on the banks to behold this new thing. Now
the Partridge had reasoned that if a boat having two ends could be rowed
in two ways, one which was all ends, all round, could be rowed in every
way. So he had made a canoe which was exactly like a nest, or perfectly
round. And this idea had greatly amazed the honest feathered folk, who
were astonished that so simple a thing had not occurred to all of them.

But what was their wonder when Partridge, having entered his canoe and
proceeded to paddle, made no headway at all; for it simply turned round
and round, and ever and again the same way, let him work it as he would.
And after wearying himself and all in

<span id="page_295">p. 295</span>

vain, he went ashore, and, flying far inland, hid himself for very shame
under the low bushes, on the earth, where he yet remains. This is the
reason why he never seeks the sea or rivers, and has ever since remained
an inland bird. <span id="fr_172"></span>[1](#fn_172)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_172"></span>[295:1](al63.htm#fr_172) Having met Mr. Louis
Mitchell, the Indian member of the legislature in Maine, one day in
Eastport, I asked him to occupy the few minutes which would pass before
I should take the steamboat for Calais by telling me a story. He
complied by narrating the foregoing. It is very remarkable that the
Indian story-tellers of ancient days should have taken it into their
heads to satirize an idea which has been of late carried out completely
by the Russian Admiral Popoff, in his celebrated circular war steamer.
The story and all the Indian words in it are Passamaquoddy.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Mournful Mystery of the Partridge-Witch; setting forth how a
Young Man died from Love](al64)
