[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Northeast](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](al69)  [Next](al71) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002DPU8XY/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Algonquin Legends of New England*, by Charles G. Leland, \[1884\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### III. Another Version of the Dance of Old Age.

(Passamaquoddy.)

It was in the autumn, the time when Indians go up the rivers to their
hunting-grounds, that two young men left home. They ascended the stream;
they came to a branch, where they parted: one going alone, another with
his married brother.. This latter, with the brother, had left in the
village a female friend, a witch, who had forbidden him to go hunting,
but he had not obeyed her.

And she had cause to keep him at home, for, when he was afar in the
woods, and alone, he met one day with a very beautiful girl, who
fascinated him, and gave herself to him. And when he said that he did
not know how to conceal her from his friends she told him that she was a
fairy, and could make herself as small as a newly born squirrel, and
that all he need do was to wrap her up in a handkerchief and carry her
in his pocket. When alone, he could take her out, enjoy her company, and
then reduce and fold her up and put her away again.

<span id="page_331">p. 331</span>

He did so, but from that hour, while he carried the fairy near his
heart, he began to be wicked and strange. This was not caused by her,
but by the girl at home. He was entirely changed; he grew devilish; he
refused to eat, and never spoke. His sister-in-law began to fear him.
When she offered him food he cried out, "Unless I can devour one of your
children I will have nothing!"

When his brother returned and heard all this, he, too, offered him meat,
but met with a refusal and the reply, "Give me one of your little
children." To which he answered, "The child is so small that it will not
satisfy you. Let me go and get a larger one." Then he ran to the village
and informed his friends of what had come over the brother. And as they
knew that he was about to become a *kewahqu'* (*chenoo*) they resolved
to kill him.

But there was a young man there, a friend of the sufferer, who said that
he could save him. So all who were assembled bade him try.

And when night came he went apart, and began to sing his *m'téoulin*, or
magic song. When it ended there was a loud sound as of some heavy body
falling and striking the earth, which fairly shook. The next morning he
called all his friends and the married brother, and showed them a human
corpse. "Now leave me," he said. "Go to my friend and tell him that I
have food for him." The Indians did so, and in horror left the two
cannibals to devour their disgusting meal. When the insane youth was
satisfied,

<span id="page_332">p. 332</span>

his friend asked, "Have you had enough?" He replied that he had. <span
id="fr_190"></span>[1](#fn_190) Then the magician said, "You are
bewitched by the girl who forbade you to go hunting; she knew you would
find a maid better than she is. Now come with me."

They went to a small lake; they sat down by its side; the sorcerer began
his magic song. And as he sang the waters opened; from the disturbed
waves rose a huge Weewillmekq', a creature like an alligator, with
horns. And, as the terrible being came ashore, the magician said, "Go
and scrape somewhat from his horn and bring it here!" The young man had
become fearless; he went and did as he was bid: he scraped the horn, and
brought the scraping.

"Now, my friend," said the magician, "let us try this on a tree." There
was a large green beech growing by them. It was simply touched with the
fragment from the horn when another color spread all over the bark as
rapidly as the eye could follow it: in an instant it was dead, and in a
few minutes more it fell to the ground, utterly rotten, as if it were a
century old.

"Now," said the sorcerer, "we will experiment with this on the witch who
wishes to destroy you." So as it was night they went to the village. A
dance was being held, and the beautiful tall witch having paused to
rest, the two men approached her. The young man placed his hand on her
head; he held in it a scraping

<span id="page_333">p. 333</span>

of the horn of the *weewillmekq'*. As he did so she grew older in an
instant,--she became very old; a pale color rippled all over her; she
fell, looking a hundred years, dead on the floor, shriveled, dried, and
dropped to powder.

"She will not trouble you any more," said the sorcerer. "Her dance is
over."

 

This is the same story as the preceding, but I give it to show how
differently a tale may be told by neighbors. In one it is the *spretæ
injuria formæ*, the wrath of rejected love, which inspires the witch to
revenge; in the other it is jealousy. In one she inflicts madness; in
the other she turns him into a cannibal demon, as Loki, when only half
bad, was made utterly so by getting the "thought-stone" or heart of a
witch. This legend was sent to me by Louis Mitchell. It is written not
by him, but by some other Passamaquoddy, in Indian-English.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_190"></span>[332:1](al70.htm#fr_190) The human body which
supplied the meal was probably in reality a deer, or some such animal.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: M'téoulin, or Indian Magic](al71)
