[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Northeast](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](al71)  [Next](al73) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002DPU8XY/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Algonquin Legends of New England*, by Charles G. Leland, \[1884\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Tumilkoontaoo, or the Broken Wing.

(Micmac.)

An Indian family lived on the seashore. They had two sons; the eldest of
these was married, and had many small children. They lived by fishing;
they chiefly caught eels.

It came to pass that the weather was so stormy that they could not fish.
The wind blew terribly night and day; the waves were like dancing,
hills. Hunger made them fierce. One day the father told his boys to walk
along the shore and see if no fish had been cast on the beach.

A young man went; he went far along; and as he went the wind was ever
worse; it blew so fiercely

<span id="page_360">p. 360</span>

that he could hardly stand. It seemed to come from a point of land. He
resolved to pass it, and when there he saw the cause of the tempest.
Upon a *kwesopskeak'*--a high and rocky ledge, a bold cliff, but
surrounded by the water--sat the Wind-Bird, or storm-sagamore himself,
flapping his wings, and thereby raising all the wind.

Then the young man, who was brave and wise, resolved to outwit the
wind-god. And approaching him and addressing him as *Nikskamich*, "My
grandfather," he inquired, "are you cold!" And he answered, "Nay;" but
the young man insisted that he must be suffering, and offered to carry
him on his back to the main-land. <span id="fr_201"></span>[1](#fn_201)
And the offer being accepted, he carried the mighty bird from one weedy,
slippery rock to another, up and down, jumping anon, and wading through
the pools. But at the last rock he, with full intention, stumbled and
fell as if by accident, yet managed it so well as to break one of the
wings of the eagle, as he indeed meant to do. Yet he made great show of
being very sorry, and, having set the wing, bade the bird keep quiet,
and not move his wings for many days; not till the wound was healed
should he stir them. "Sit still, Nikskamich," he said, "and I will bring
you food; I will be attentive; you shall want nothing." And the god sat
still: there was a calm on the water; no leaves moved in the forest;
there was no wind in all the world.

<span id="page_361">p. 361</span>

The young man went home; there was not a breeze, the canoe went smoothly
over the sea, the eels could be seen in the depths, the Indians caught
fish by thousands; never before had they caught so many. And the
sagamore of the birds sat still; the Wind-Bird waited to get well; the
young man fed him every day.

There can be too much of what is good; good turns to evil, sweet to
sour. After many days of quiet calm the sea was covered with
*Ogokpegeak*, a scum which is caused by sickness among the fish, and
which is thrown off by them, for they suffer in still water. Then the
fisherman can no longer look down into the sea; then he cannot use the
spear.

Then the young man, examining the wing of the storm-bird, said,
Grandfather, it is much better; move it but a little now, that I may
see!" So he moved it; he gave a flap, and lo! a slight ripple passed
over the surface of the sleeping sea. And striking lightly with his
wings, again there came a breeze, and the *Ogokpegeak*, or the scum, was
blown away, and the Indians fished again, and all was well.

So they had the Wind-Bird for a friend, and the sea was smooth or stormy
as they willed. But these Indians wished for more than they could
manage. They grew tired of catching small fish; they wanted whales. "Let
us go and catch the Bootup!" said the elder brother. "How will you take
him?" asked the younger. "I will entice him with the *peepoogwokan*,"
said the elder, "with my pipe." So he sat by the sea; he played on

<span id="page_362">p. 362</span>

the pipe; he played, but no whale came. So they went back to their small
fishery.

This is manifestly the beginning and end of a very ancient Indian
mythical tale. The Micmacs have tacked on to it a ridiculous fragment of
an indifferent French nursery tale, without an end and without any
connection with the Indian beginning. The tradition is probably entirely
Eskimo. Among the Greenlanders there is a caste of whale-fishers,
separate and apart, and this story, in its second stage, was applied to
teach, *Ne sutor ultra crepidam*,--that all should stick to their
trades, and that though a sorcerer might rule the winds it did not
follow that he could win the whales.

I have spoken before of the curious identity of the Indian storm-king,
or Wind-Bird, with that of the Norse Hrosvelgar. When among the
Chippewas, west of Lake Superior, I met with a white man who had
received the name of Thunder-Bird from the Indians still further west.

The magicians of all countries, be they of Africa, Asia, or North
America, are invariably represented by travelers as holding their flock
in subjection, and never being doubted as to power or skill. But there
are skeptics or Agnostics among the men of the woods as well as among
those of civilized cities. There are shrewd fellows who cannot only
detect impostors, but turn their tricks to their own advantage. An
amusing illustration of this is given in the following story:

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_201"></span>[360:1](al72.htm#fr_201) It would appear that
while the bird flapped his wings he did not fly. I believe this was the
same with the Norse Hrosvelgar.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Fish-Hawk and Scapegrace](al73)
