[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Egypt](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](pyt04)  [Next](pyt06) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_22">p. 22</span>

### 2. RITUAL OF BODILY RESTORATION OF THE DECEASED, AND OFFERINGS, UTTERANCES 12-203.

*Utterances 12-19*.

*12*.

9a. --------------------------------------------

*13*.

9b. To say: I give to thee thy head; I fasten for thee thy head to (thy)
bones.

*14*.

9c. To say: I give to him his eyes, that he may be satisfied. Offering
of food and drink.

*15*.

9d. To say: Geb has given to thee thine eyes, that thou mayest be
satisfied -----

*16*.

10a. eye of Horus. One *nmś.t*--jar of water.

*17*.

10b. To say: Thot, he has given his head to him. A pitcher of water.

*18*.

10c. To say: He has caused it to be brought to him. One drink of water.

*19*.

10d. --------------------------------------------

*Utterance 20*.

11a. \[To say: O\] N., I have come in search of thee; I am Horus.

11b. I have pressed for thee thy mouth. I am thy son, thy beloved. I
have opened for thee thy mouth.

12a. \[He is the defender of his mother when she weeps for him, the
defender of her who is united with him\].

12b. \[How good is the condition (?) of thy mouth after\] I have
adjusted for thee thy mouth to thy bones!

<span id="page_23">p. 23</span>

12c. To say four times: Osiris N., I open for thee thy mouth with the
thigh, the eye of Horus. One thigh.

*Utterance 21*.

13a. \[To say: How good is the condition (?) of thy mouth after\] . I
have adjusted for thee thy mouth to thy bones!

13b. I open for thee thy mouth; I open for thee thine eyes, O N.

13c. I open for thee thy mouth with the *nwȝ*, the *mśḫtiw*-hook of
copper (or, iron), which opens the mouth of the gods.

13d. Horus opens the mouth of this N.; \[Horus opens the mouth of this
N.\].

13e. \[Horus has opened\] the mouth of this N.; Horus has opened the
mouth of this N.

13f. with that wherewith he opened the mouth of his father; with that
wherewith he opened the mouth of Osiris;

14a. with the copper, (or, iron) which comes forth from Set, the
*mśḫtiw*-hook of copper (or, iron), which opens the mouth of the gods.

14b. He opens the mouth of N. therewith, that he may go,

14c. that he himself may speak before the Great Ennead in the house of
the prince, which is in Heliopolis,

14d. that he may carry off the *wrr.t*-crown (which is) with Horus, lord
of men.

*Utterance 22*.

15\. To say: Osiris N., I bring to thee thy *ba*, whom thou lovest. I
open thy mouth.

*Utterance 23*.

16a. Osiris, carry off all those who hate N., who speak evilly against
his name.

16b. Thot, go, carry off him who has injured Osiris. Bring him who
speaks evilly against the name of N.

16c. Get him into thy hand. To say four times: Do not separate thyself
from him.

16d. Take care that thou be not separated from him. A libation.

*Utterance 24*.

16e. (Nt. Jéquier, IX 68). To say: Thot, hurry, carry off the enemy of
this N.

<span id="page_24">p. 24</span>

16f. ----- N. to Osiris.

*Utterance 25*.

17a. He who goes, goes with his *ka*: Horus goes with his *ka*; Set goes
with his *ka*;

17b. Thot goes with his *ka*; the god goes with his *ka*; Osiris goes
with his *ka*;

17c. *Mḫnti-’irti* goes with his *ka*; thou also goest with thy *ka*.

18a. O N., the hands of thy *ka* are before thee; O N., the hands of thy
*ka* are behind thee;

18b. O N., the feet of thy *ka* are before thee; O N., the feet of thy
*ka* are behind thee.

18c. Osiris N., I have given to thee the eye of Horus, so that thy face
may be equipped with it.

18d. Let the odour of the eye of Horus adhere to thee. To be said four
times: Fire of incense.

*Utterances 26-28*.

*26*.

19a. Horus who art in Osiris N., take to thyself the eye of Horus for
thou art as the eye of Horus which (lit. who) has extended with its
odour.

*27*.

19b. To say: Osiris N., take the eye of Horus, equip thyself with its
odour.

*28*.

19c. Osiris N., Horus has given to thee his eye that thou mayest equip
thy face with it. One pellet of incense (1644a).

*Utterance 29*.

20a. To say: O N., I have come, I have brought to thee the eye of Horus,

20b. that thou mayest equip thy face with it, that it may purify thee,
that its odour may (come) to thee.

20c. The odour of the eye of Horus is for N.; it drives away thy sweat.

20d. It defends thee against the violence (?) of the arm of Set.

<span id="page_25">p. 25</span>

21a. O N., the eye of Horus, is pleasing to thee; it is sound for thee.
The eye of Horus is sound; thou art sound. Three pellets of incense
(1644b).

*Utterance 30*.

21b. To say: Horus, dweller in Osiris N., equip thee with the eye of
Horus; take it to thee.

*Utterance 31*.

21c. To say: Osiris N., Horus has completely filled thee with his eye.

*Utterance 32*.

22a. This is thy cool water, Osiris; this is thy cool water, O N., which
went forth from thy son, which went forth from Horus.

22b. I have come; I have brought to thee the eye of Horus, that thy
heart may be refreshed by it. I have brought it to thee. It is under thy
soles.

23a. Take to thyself the efflux (sweat), which goes forth from thee; thy
heart shall not be weary thereby.

23b. To say four times, when thou goest forth justified: Libation; two
pellets of natron.

*Utterance 33*.

24a. To say: Osiris N., take to thyself this thy libation, which is
offered to thee by Horus,

24b. in thy name of "He who is come from the Cataract"; take to thyself
the efflux (sweat) which goes forth from thee.

24c. Horus has made me assemble for thee the gods from every place to
which thou goest.

24d. Horus has made me count (for) thee the children of Horus even to
the place where thou wast drowned.

25a. Osiris N., take to thyself thy natron, that thou mayest be divine.

25b. Nut has made thee to be as a god to thine enemy (or, in spite of
thee) in thy name of "god."

25c. *Ḥrnp.wi* recognizes thee, for thou art made young in thy name of
"Fresh water."

<span id="page_26">p. 26</span>

*Utterance 34*.

26a. *Smin*, *smin* opens thy mouth. One pellet of natron.

26b. O N., thou shalt taste its taste in front of the
*sḥ-n<u>t</u>r*-chapels. One pellet of natron.

26c. That which Horus spits out is *smin*. One pellet of natron.

26d. That which Set spits out is *smin*. One pellet of natron.

26e. That which the two harmonious gods (spit out) is *smin*. One pellet
of natron.

26f. To say four times: Thou hast purified thyself with natron, together
with Horus (and) the Followers of Horus. Five pellets of natron from
Nekheb, Upper Egypt.

*Utterance 35*.

27a. Thou purifiest (thyself); Horus purifies (himself). One pellet of
natron. Thou purifiest (thyself); Set purifies (himself). One pellet of
natron.

27b. Thou purifiest (thyself); Thot purifies (himself). One pellet of
natron. Thou purifiest (thyself); the god purifies (himself). One pellet
of natron.

27c. Thou also purifiest (thyself)--thou who art among them. One pellet
of natron.

27d. Thy mouth is the mouth of a sucking calf on the day of his birth.

27e. Five pellets of natron of the North, Wadi Natrûn (*št-p.t*)

*Utterance 36*.

28a. Thou purifiest (thyself); Horus purifies (himself). Thou purifiest
(thyself); Set purifies (himself). Thou purifiest (thyself); Thot
purifies (himself).

28b. Thou purifiest (thyself); the god purifies (himself). Thou
purifiest (thyself); thy *ka* purifies (himself). Thou purifiest
(thyself); thy god purifies (himself).

28c. Thou also purifiest (thyself); it is thou who art among thy
brothers, the gods.

29a. Thy natron is on thy mouth; thou purifiest thy bones, (and) all.
Equip thyself with that which belongs to thee.

29b. Osiris, I have given to thee the eye of Horus to equip thy face
therewith; adhere (to it).

29c. One pellet of natron.

<span id="page_27">p. 27</span>

*Utterance 37*.

30a. O N., shut now thy two jaws which were divided. *Pśš-kf*-instrument
(or, -bread).

*Utterances 38-42*.

*38*.

30b. Osiris N., I open for thee thy mouth. A sacred copper (or, iron)
(instrument) of South and North.

*39*.

31a. N., Take to thyself the eye of Horus, towards which he (Horus)
runs; he brings it to thee; put it in thy mouth.

31b. Three pellets of incense of the South; three pellets of incense of
the North.

*40*.

31c. O N., take to thyself the *šik* of Osiris. *ši*k-pellets.

*41*.

32a. Take the tip of the bodily breast of Horus; take it in thy mouth. A
jug of milk (or, one jug of fine milk).

*42*.

32b. Take the breast of thy sister Isis, which is protected(?); take
this in thy mouth. An empty *mnsȝ*-jar.

*Utterance 43*.

33a. Take the two eyes of Horus, the black and the white; take them to
thyself to be in thy face, that they may illuminate thy face.

33b. A white jar, a black jar, for carrying. N. has white *mnw*-stone
and black *mnw*-stone *hȝ<u>t</u>ś*-jars (which are) the right eye and
the left eye.

*Utterance 44*.

34a. May the sun in heaven be favourable to thee; may he cause the two
lords to be favourable to thee.

34b. May the night be favourable to thee; may the two ladies be
favourable to thee.

<span id="page_28">p. 28</span>

34c. The offering which is brought to thee is an offering which thou
seest, an offering which thou hearest.

34d. An offering is before thee, an offering is behind thee, an offering
which is with thee. A *w<u>d</u>ȝ.t*-cake.

*Utterances 45-48*.

*45*.

35a. Osiris N., take to thyself the white teeth of Horus which equip thy
mouth. Five white cakes.

*46*.

35b. To say four times: A royal offering to the *ka* of N. Osiris N.,
take to thyself the eye of Horus.

35c. (It is) thy cake; eat thou. A cake of offering, a
*w<u>d</u>ȝ.t*-cake.

*47*.

36a. Osiris N., take to thyself the eye of Horus, which is free from
Set, and which thou shalt take to thy mouth,

36b. and with which thou shalt open thy mouth. Wine; one white
*mnw*-stone *hȝ<u>t</u>ś*-jar.

*48*.

36c. Osiris N., open thy mouth with that with which thou art full. Wine;
one black *mnw*-stone *hȝ<u>t</u>ś*-jar.

*Utterances 49-52. 49*.

37a. Osiris N., take to thyself the liquid going forth from thee. Beer;
one black *mnw*-stone *ḥnw.t*-bowl.

*50*.

37b. Rē‘ thou adorest; (he who is) in heaven thou adorest. To N., the
lord (belong) all things.

37c. To thy body (belong) all things; to the *ka* of N. (belong) all
things; to his body (belong) all things.

37d. To lift up before his face a splendid offering table.

*51*.

38a. N., take to thyself the eye of Horus, which thou tastest. One
*dp.t*-loaf.

<span id="page_29">p. 29</span>

*52*.

38b. Darkness increases (?). One *ȝḥ*-cake.

*Utterances 53-57*.

*53*.

38c. N., take to thyself the eye of Horus, which thou shalt embrace. One
joint of meat.

*54*.

39a. N., take to thyself the eye of Horus, wrested from Set, which was
taken from thee, with which thou openest thy mouth.

39b. One white *mnw*-stone bowl of wine.

*55*.

39c. N., take to thyself the liquid which went forth from Osiris. One
black *mnw*-stone bowl of beer.

*56*.

40a. N., take to thyself the eye of Horus, which was taken from thee; it
is not far from thee. One copper (or, iron) bowl of beer.

*57*.

40b. N., take to thyself the eye of Horus; equip thyself with it. One
*ḥtm*-bowl of beer.

*57A*.

40c (Nt. Jéquier, XII 2 83). To say: I bring two eyes of Horus. An
*’iwn.t*-bow.

*57B*.

40d (Nt. 284). To say: From (or "in") the place where they fell.
*Ḫr.t*-sea.

*57C*.

40e (Nt. 285). To say: Take them which I give to thee. A bowstring.

*57D*.

40f (Nt. 286). To say: He cast them to the ground. A *rw<u>d</u>*-whip.

<span id="page_30">p. 30</span>

*57*E.

40g (Nt. 287). To say: Osiris N., I bring to thee two eyes of Horus. An
*’iwn.t*-bow.

*57F*.

40h (Nt. 288). \[To\] say: \[I gave to thee\] ----- Set. A
*p<u>d</u>.t*-bow.

*57*G.

40i (Nt. 289). To say: I gave \[to thee\] ---- heart of Set. A
\[*<u>d</u>* ---\].

*57H*.

40i (Nt. 290). \[To say\] ----------- n \[b\]. ---- *rw<u>d</u>*.

*57I*.

40k (Nt. 291). \[To say\] ------------- thou (?) hast seized them. -----

*57J*.

40l (Nt. 292). \[To say\] ---- \[Osir\]is N. I bring to thee the two
eyes of Horus, \[thy\] joy (?) --------

*57K*.

40m (Nt. 293). To say: Osiris N., take (?) to thyself the eye of Horus;
protect it; let it not cease (to be).

*57L*.

40n (Nt. 294). To say: Osiris N., take to thyself the eye of Horus, as
it was returned to him.

*57K-L*.

40m-n (Nt. 293-294). Like dry fruit (?) of Horus

*57M*.

40o (Nt. 295). To say: Osiris N., take to thyself the eye of Horus;
protect (it), for it is given (back) to him. The *’idr*-tail.

*57N*.

40p (Nt. 296). To say: Osiris N., take one eye of Horus. One tail.

<span id="page_31">p. 31</span>

*57O*.

40q (Nt. 297). To say: Osiris N., take to thyself the eye of this Horus,
which was taken by him from Set--he had robbed it. One tail.

*57P*.

40r (Nt. 298). To say: Osiris N., take to thyself the eye of Horus,
which is guarded by Geb. One *bs*-block.

*57Q*.

40S (Nt. 299). To say: Osiris N., take to thyself the eye of Horus over
which Set enjoyed himself. *Mśi* (?) *pn mr*.

*57R*.

40t (Nt. 300). To say: Osiris N., take to thyself the eye of Horus.
which he saw side (by side) with Set. A dagger.

*57S*.

40u (Nt. 300. To say: Osiris N., take to thyself the eye of this Horus,
which was taken by him from Set--\[he\] had robbed it. One tail.

*Utterances 58-71*.

*58*.

41a (Nt. 302). To say: Osiris, N., take to thyself the eye of Horus, and
the ointment for him, which \[he\] put in it. A trimmed garment.

*59*.

41b (Nt. 303). To say: Osiris N., take to thyself the eye of Horus; be
like it (in) its wisdom. A *śȝ.t*-garment (?).

41c (Nt. 304). To say: Osiris N., take to thyself the eye of this Horus,
which was taken by him from Set--he had robbed it. A tail.

*60*.

42a-b (Nt. 305). To say: Osiris N., I have given him to thee; take him,
envelop his heart (to thee). A royal garment of *n<u>t</u>ri*-stuff.

<span id="page_32">p. 32</span>

*61*.

42c (Nt. 306). To say: Osiris N., take to thyself the thigh of Set torn
out by Horus. A royal garment of *n<u>t</u>ri*-stuff.

*62*.

43a (Nt. 307). To say: Osiris N., take to thyself the water in the eye
of Horus. Do not separate thyself from it. A *ḥr-ś*-club.

43b (Nt. 308). To say: Osiris N., take to thyself the eye of Horus,
whose water Thot saw therein. A trimmed (garment); one *mdw*-club; one
sword.

*63*.

44a. \[To say: Osiris N., present thyself to thy son, Horus\];

44b. put him in thyself (lit. thy body). A *m<u>h</u>n*-club; an
*’isr*-club.

44c. -------------------- One *ḥr-ś*-club.

*63A*.

45a-i (Nt. 309). To say: Osiris N., make thyself great over him.

*64*.

45a-b (Nt. 309). To say: Behold, take it to thyself. A
*<u>d</u>śr*-club.

*65* (Sethe 65).

45C (Nt. 310). To say: Osiris N., he whom thou lovest is Horus. A
*ḥr-ś*-club.

*66*.

46a (Nt. 311). To say: Osiris N., take to thyself the eye of Horus. One
club of *śḫ.t*-wood.

*67*.

46b (Nt. 312). To say: Osiris N., put *n<u>hh</u>w* upon thee, put it in
thy hand, *ndśdś wś*-water. An *’iwnw-ḥr-ś*-club.

*68*.

47a (Nt. 313). To say: Osiris N., take to thyself the water which is in
the eye of Horus, O N.

<span id="page_33">p. 33</span>

*68A*.

47b (Nt. 314). To say: Fill thy hand with a *ḥr-ś*-club; equip thyself
with a *ḥr-ś*-club.

*68B*.

47c (Nt. 3 15). To say: It equips thee like a god; do not separate
thyself from it, that it may protect thee; do not separate thyself from
it.

*68C*.

47d (Nt. 313-315). One *ḥr-ś*-club.

*69*.

48a (Nt. 316). To say: Osiris N., take to thyself the finger of Set,
which causes the white eye of Horus to see. A *śmȝ*-club.

*70*.

48b (Nt. 317). To say: Osiris N., take to thyself the eye of Horus that
it may shine upon the finger of Set. A *<u>d</u>‘m*-sceptre.

*71*.

49 (Nt. 318). To say: Osiris N., take to thyself his hand--the hand of
thine enemy. A *<u>d</u>‘m*-sceptre.

*71A*.

49 + 1 (Nt. 3 19). To say: Osiris N., take his *wȝ* in thy hand. A
*wȝś-‘nḫ*-(sceptre).

*71B*.

49 + 2 (Nt. 320). To say: Osiris N., thou art mighty, thou art mighty
against his two fingers. An *‘b.t*-tool.

*71C*.

49 + 3 (Nt. 32 1). To say: Osiris N., thou livest, thou livest. *Rē‘nḫ*;
*An‘nḫ*.

*71D*.

49 + 4 (Nt. 322). To say: Osiris N., take to thyself the eye of Horus,
protected by his sons. One *nḫȝḫȝ*-whip.

<span id="page_34">p. 34</span>

*71E*.

49 + 5 (Nt. 323). To say: Osiris N., take to thyself the hand of *ḥt*
(?) that he may give it to them. An *‘w.t*-sceptre.

*71F*.

49 + 6 (Nt. 3 2 4). To say: Slay that *‘ḥ‘* (?). A
*p<u>d</u>-‘ḥ‘w*-weapon.

*71G*.

49 + 7 (Nt. 324). To say: Thot, bring it. A *nw*-weapon

*71H*.

49 + 8 (Nt. 32 5). To say: Thot, bring it. A sacred decorated (weapon?).

*71I*.

49 + 9 (Nt. 325). To say: Have I not given it to thee? Take it to
thyself (as) thy *nw*. A *rw<u>d</u>-nw*-whip

*71J*.

49 + 10 (Nt. 3 2 6). To say: Thou belongest to him. To say: Osiris N.,
seize it for thyself; hasten to Osiris N. A sacred *’ir*-weapon (?).

*71K*.

49 + 'I (Nt. 327). To say: Said Geb, Thot, bring him that bow. A
*p<u>d</u>-‘h‘w*-weapon.

*71L*.

49 + 12 (Nt. 328) --------- this *‘ḥ‘*-bow, in the presence of N., the
*‘ḥ‘* of N. A *p<u>d</u>-‘ḥ‘w*-weapon.

*Heading to Utterances 72-78*.

50a. Pouring a libation of oil.

*Utterances 72-76*.

*72*.

50b. Osiris N., I fill thine eye for thee with ointment. To say four
times. *Ś<u>t</u>-ḥb*-oil.

<span id="page_35">p. 35</span>

*73*.

50c. Osiris N., take to thyself that with which a liquid offering is
made. *Ḥknw*-oil.

*74*.

51a. Osiris N., take to thyself the eye of Horus, on account of which he
was punished. *Śf<u>t</u>*-oil.

*75*.

51b. Osiris N., take to thyself the eye of Horus, which is united with
him. *N<u>h</u>nm*-oil.

*76*.

51c. Osiris, N., take to thyself the eye of Horus, with which he brought
and carried the gods. *Twȝ.t*-oil.

*Utterance 77*.

52a. Oil, Oil, arise, open thou; (thou) who art on the brow of Horus,
arise, open thou.

52b. Thou who art on the brow of Horus, put thyself on the brow of this
N.

52c. Make him sweet with thyself; glorify him with thyself.

53a. Make him to have power over his body (himself); put his fear in the
eyes of all spirits

53b. who shall look at him, and of everyone who shall hear his name
through thee. *Ḥȝt.t ‘š*.

*Utterance 78*.

54a. Osiris N., I bring to thee the eye of Horus, which he took from thy
brow. *Ḥȝt.t <u>T</u>ḥnw*.

*Heading to Utterances 79-80*.

54b. Bring (an offering) before his face.

*Utterance 79*.

54c. To say four times: Osiris N., join thou the sound eye of Horus to
thy face.

*Utterances 79-80*.

54d. Two bags of green cosmetic.

<span id="page_36">p. 36</span>

*Utterance 80*.

55a. To say: Horus, who is in Osiris N., take to thyself the sound eye
of Horus.

55b. Horus, who is in Osiris N., join thou it to thy face

55c. (as) Horus joined his sound eye (to his face).

55d. O N., I join for thee thy sound eyes to thy face that thou mayest
see with them.

*Utterance 81*.

56a. Awake thou in peace, (as) *Tȝi.t* awakes, in peace, (as) *Tȝit.t*
(she of *Tȝi.t*) awakes in peace,

56b. (as) the eye of Horus in Buto (awakes) in peace, (as) the eye of
Horus which is in the houses of the Lower Egyptian crown (awakes) in
peace,

56c. (the eye) which the weavers wove (?), (the eye) which the
sedan-chairman planned (?).

57a. Cause thou (0 Eye) the two lands to bow to N., as they bow to
Horus,.

57b. Cause the two lands to fear N., as they fear Set.

57c. Sit thou before N., as his god; open thou his way before the
spirits,

57d. that be may stand before the spirits like Anubis, "First of the
Westerners."

57e. To say four times: Forward, forward to Osiris. Two rolls of linen.

*Heading to Utterances 82-84*.

58a. To say.

*82*.

58b. To say: It is Thot who brings himself (here) with it. He comes
forth with the eye of Horus. One table of offerings. To make a mortuary
offering.

*83*.

58c. To say: The eye of Horus is given to him. He is satisfied with it.
O come with the royal offering.

*84*.

59a. To say: Osiris N., take to thyself the eye of Horus. He was
satisfied with it. Royal offering, twice.

<span id="page_37">p. 37</span>

*Heading to Utterances 85-92*.

59b. Place on the ground the table of offerings.

*85*.

59c. To say: Osiris N., take to thyself the eye of Horus; be satisfied
with it. Two offerings of the broad-hall.

*86*.

59d. To say: Make it return to thee; sit in silence. A royal mortuary
offering.

*87*.

60a. To say: Osiris N., take to thyself the eye of Horus; unite it with
thy mouth. Food: One loaf; one beer.

*88*.

60b. To say: Osiris N., take to thyself the eye of Horus; take care lest
he trample it. One *ttw* (?)-bread.

*89*.

60c. To say: Osiris N., take to thyself the eye of Horus, which
intimidates him. One *tȝ-rtḥ*-loaf.

*90*.

61a. To say: Osiris N., take to thyself the eye of Horus; what Set has
eaten of it is little. One mug of *<u>d</u>śr.t*-beer.

*91*.

61b. To say: Osiris N., take to thyself the eye of Horus, which they put
out for him. One mug of *ḫnmś*-beer.

*92*.

61c. To say: Osiris N., take to thyself the eye of Horus, put it to thy
face. To lift up one bread, one beer.

*Utterance 93*.

62a. To lift up before his face. To say: Lift up thy face, Osiris; lift
up thy face, O N., whose spirit hastens.

62b. Lift up thy face, N., be mighty, be sharp (pre-eminent?),

<span id="page_38">p. 38</span>

62c. that thou mayest see that which cometh forth from thee. Praise it
(?); partake in it.

63a. Wash thyself, N.; open thy mouth with the eye of Horus.

63b. Summons, thy *ka*, like Osiris, that he may protect thee from all
anger of the dead.

63c. N., receive thy bread, even the eye of Horus. To deposit (an
offering) on the ground before him.

*Heading to Utterances 94-96*.

64a. To give food for offering; offering: One loaf, one beer.

*94*.

64b. To say: O Osiris N., take to thyself the eye of Horus, on which
thou mayest live. One *šnś*-cake.

*95*.

64c. To say: Equip thyself with the liquid which goes forth from
thee-four times. One mug of beer.

96\. 64d. To say: Osiris N., take to thyself the eye of Horus-a joint of
(*św.t.t*)- meat. One joint of (*św.t*-) meat.

*Utterances 97-99. Heading*.

65a. Placed in the left hand.

*97*.

65b. To say: Osiris N., this eye of Horus is that which he demanded from
Set.

*98*.

65c. To say: Osiris N., Horus has given his eye to thee in thy hand.

*99*.

66a. To say: Osiris N., O, I give to thee the eye of Horus; give me thy
hand, that I may give it to thee.

*Postscript*.

66b. Go thou there (?).

<span id="page_39">p. 39</span>

*Utterances 100-102*.

*Heading*.

67a. Placed in his left hand.

*100*.

67b. To say: Osiris N., he has fought a little; (but) I have loved thee;
(I have?) avenged (thee?) -----

*101*.

67c. To say: Osiris N., I who avenge thee am come; seize the eye of
Horus --------

*102*.

68a. To say: I am Horus, Osiris, N -------------------

68b. Give (me) thy hand -------------------------

68c. Seize ---------------------------------

*Postscript*.

68d ----------

*Heading to Utterances 103-105*.

68e. Placed in his left \[hand\].

*103*.

68f. To say: Osiris \[N.\] --------------- \[to\] thee

*104*.

68g. Tosay: Osiris \[N.\] ------------- thy left ---

*105*.

68h. \[To say\]: ------------------------ in it

*105A*.

68i (N. Jéquier, V 392 + I) ----------------- thou

*105B*.

68j (N. V392 + 2) ----- thou ---------------- thou

<span id="page_40">p. 40</span>

*105C*.

68k (N. V392 + 3). To say: He who lives is living, lived(?) --to them
\[life\]

*105D*.

681 (N. V392 + 4). To say: Father, Osiris N ----------------

*105E*.

68m (N. V392 + 5). To say: He intimidates thee, (but) hinder (take care)
lest thou yield; fill thyself, Osiris N. ----

*105F*.

68n (N. V392 + 6). \[To say\]: N., I am come to av\[enge\] -------

*105G*.

68c, (N. V392 + 7). \[To say\]: N., given (?) ----------

*105H*.

68p (N. V392 + 8) -------- to thee, Osiris, I give ----- to thee.

*105I*.

68q (N. V392 + 9) -------- thee, to thee, to thee.

*Utterance 106*.

69a. To say: O N., I am thy son; I am Horus.

69b. I am come; I have brought to thee the two bodily eyes of Horus.

69c. Take them; unite them to thyself.

70a. I have collected them for thee; I have united them for thee--they
are whole (?).

70b. Horus \[has placed?\] them before N.,

70c. that they may lead N. \[to *ḳbḥ.w*, to Horus, to heaven to the\]
Great \[God\],

70d. \[that they may avenge\] N. of a\[ll\] his enemies.

71a. \[O N., I bring to thee the two eyes of\] Horus, which make his
heart glad.

<span id="page_41">p. 41</span>

*Utterance 107*.

71b. I col\[lect them for thee; take them for thyself\].

71c. ----------------------------------

*Utterances 108-110*.

*108*.

72a. To say: Osiris N., unite to thyself the water which is in it (the
eye).

72b. To say four times: For N., a lifting up of the offering, four
times. Two cups of water.

*109*.

72c. To say: Osiris N., take to thyself the eye of Horus, which purifies
his mouth.

72d. To say four times: For N., a lifting up of the offering, four
times. Two pots of natron.

*110*.

72e. To say: Osiris N., take to thyself the eye of Horus; unite it to
thy mouth.

72f. To say four times: For N., a lifting up of the offering, four
times. Food: One loaf, one beer.

*Utterances 111-113*.

*111*.

73a. To say: Osiris N., take to thyself the eye of Horus, which Set
trampled.

73b. To say four times: For N., a lifting up of the offering, four
times. One (or two) loaves.

*112*.

73c. To say: Osiris N., take to thyself the eye of Horus, which
intimidates him (Set).

73d. To say four times: For N., a lifting up of the offering, four
times. One *tȝ-rtḥ*-loaf.

*113*.

73e. To say: Osiris N., take (it) upon thee.

<span id="page_42">p. 42</span>

73f. To say four times: For N., a lifting up of the offering, four
times. Two *ḥ<u>t</u>*-loaves.

*Utterances 114-116*.

*114*.

74a. To say: Osiris N., I bring to thee that which is befitting to thy f
ace.

74b. To say four times: For N., a lifting up of the offering, four
times. Two *nḥr*-loaves.

*115*.

74c. To say: Osiris N., I put in place thine eye.

74d. To say four times: For N., a lifting up of the offering, four
times. Four *dp.t*-loaves.

116\.

74e. To say: Osiris N., take to thyself the eye of Horus. Prevent him
(Horus) from suffering because of it.

74f. To say four times: For N., a lifting up of the offering, four
times. Four *psn*-cakes.

*Utterances 117-119*.

*117*.

75a. To say: Osiris N., receive thy head.

75b. To say four times: For N., a lifting up of the offering, four
times. Four *šnś*-loaves.

*118*.

75c. To say: Osiris N., take thine eye; seize it (or, take it to
thyself).

75d. To say four times: For N., a lifting up of the offering, four
times. Four *’im-tȝ*-loaves.

*119*.

76a. To say: Osiris N., take to thyself the eye of Horus, which he
swallowed

76b. To say four times: For N., a lifting up of the offering, four
times. Four cake-baskets.

<span id="page_43">p. 43</span>

*Utterances 120-122*.

*120*.

76c. To say: Osiris N., take to thyself the eye of Horus,; come, cause
it to be respected.

76d. To say four times: For N., a lifting up of the offering, four
times. Four *ḥbnn.t*-baskets.

*121*.

77a. To say: Osiris N., take to thyself the eye of Horus, which
intimidates him (Set).

77b. To say four times: For N., a lifting up of the offering, four
times. Four *ḳmḥ*-loaves.

*122*.

77c. To say: Osiris N., take to thyself the eye of Horus, which thou
shalt put in thy mouth.

77d. To say four times: For N., a lifting up of the offering, four
times. Four *’idȝ.t*-cakes of thy North

Utterances 123-125.

*123*.

78a. To say: Osiris N., take to thyself the eye of Horus; (it is) thy
cake; eat thou.

78b. To say four times: For N., a lifting up of the offering, four
times. Four *pȝ.t*-cakes.

*124*.

78c. To say: Osiris N., take to thyself the eye of Horus, which
intimidates him.

78d. To say four times: For N., a lifting up of the offering, four
times. Four baskets of *tȝ-ȝšr*-bread.

*125*.

79a. To say: Osiris N., take to thyself his teeth, white, sound.

79b. To say four times: For N., a lifting up of the offering, four
times. Four bunches of garlic.

<span id="page_44">p. 44</span>

*Utterances 126-128*.

*126*.

79c. To say: Osiris N., take the joint of meat, the eye of Horus.

79d. To say four times: For N., a lifting up of the offering, four
times. One joint of meat.

*127*.

80a. To say: Osiris N., dance (for joy), Geb is not angry with his
legitimate heir.

80b. To say four times: For N., a lifting up of the offering, four
times. One joint of meat.

*128*.

80c. To say: Osiris N., take to thyself the eye of Horus, which thou
shalt embrace.

80d. To say four times: For N., a lifting up of the offering, four
times. One joint of *śḫnw*-meat.

*Utterances 129-131*.

*129*.

81a. To say: Osiris N., take to thyself the *św.t.t*, the eye of Horus.

81b. To say four times: For N., a lifting up of the offering, four
times. One joint of *św.t*-meat.

*130*.

81c. To say: Osiris N., take to thyself those who rebel against thee.

81d. To say four times: For N., a lifting up of the offering, four
times. Four ribs of meat.

*131*.

82a. To say: Osiris N., take to thyself the *’iśšȝwk*.

82b. To say four times: For N., a lifting up of the offering, four
times. One pot of roast, one liver (?), one spleen, one limb, one breast
of meat.

<span id="page_45">p. 45</span>

*Utterances 132-134*.

*132*.

82c. To say: Osiris N., take to thyself the eye of Horus; mayest .thou
go to it.

82d. To say four times: For N., a lifting up of the offering, four
times. One liver (?).

*133*.

83a. To say: Osiris N., take to thyself the eye of Horus, to which he
goes.

83b. To say four times: For N., a lifting up of the offering, four
times. One spleen.

*134*.

83c. To say: Osiris, N., take to thyself the eye of Horus, which is on
his brow.

83d. To say four times: For N., a lifting up of the offering, four
times. One limb.

*Utterances 135-137*.

*135*.

84a. To say: Osiris N., take the eye of Horus, which is on the brow of
Set.

84b. To say four times: For N., a lifting up of the offering, four
times. One breast of meat.

*136*.

84c. To say: Osiris N., take to thyself the severed heads of the
Followers of Set.

84d. To say four times: For N., a lifting up of the offering, four
times. One goose.

*137*.

85a. To say: Osiris N., take to thyself as much as the heart desires.

85b. To say four times: For N., a lifting up of the offering, four
times. One goose.

<span id="page_46">p. 46</span>

*Utterances 138-140*.

*138*.

85c. To say: Osiris N., take to thyself the eye of Horus, which he
brought.

85d. To say four times: For N., a lifting up of the offering, four
times. One goose.

*139*.

86a. To say: Osiris N., take to thyself those who come when they are
faint (?).

86b. To say four times: For N., a lifting up of the offering, four
times. One goose.

*140*.

86c. To say: Osiris N., take to thyself the eye of Horus, prevent him
from sickening on it.

86d. To say four times: For N., a lifting up of the offering, four
times. One pigeon.

*Utterance 141*.

86e. To say: Osiris N., take to thyself the eye of Horus, which
intimidates him.

86f. To say four times: For N., a lifting up of the offering, four
times. One *tȝ-sif*-bread.

*Utterances 142-143*.

*142*.

87a. To say: Osiris N., take to thyself the eye of Horus; it shall not
be sundered from thee.

87b. To say four times: For N., a lifting up of the offering, four
times. Two *š‘.t*-loaves.

*143*.

87c. To say: Osiris, N., the eye of Horus is assigned to thee.

*Utterances 143-145*.

*End of 143*.

87d. To say four times: For N., a lifting up of the offering, four
times. Two baskets of *npȝ.t*.

<span id="page_47">p. 47</span>

*144*.

88a. To say: Osiris N., take the eye of Horus, out of which he poured
(?) the water.

88b. To say four times: For N., a lifting up of the offering, four
times. Two pots of liver.

*145*.

88c. To say: Osiris N., take to thyself the eye of Horus; what Set has
eaten of it is little.

88d. To say four times: For N., a lifting up of the offering, four
times. Two bowls of *<u>d</u>śr.t*-beer.

*Utterances 146-148*.

*146*.

89a, To say: Osiris N., take to thyself the eye of Horus; the *’iśšnw*
come by means of it.

89b. To say four times: For N., a lifting up of the offering, four
times. Two bowls of *<u>d</u>śr.t*-Theban (beer?)

*147*.

89c. To say: Osiris N., take to thyself the eye of Horus, which they put
out for him.

89d. To say four times: For N., a lifting up of the offering, four
times. Two bowls of *ḫnmś*-beer.

*148*.

90a. To say: Osiris N., equip thyself with the liquid, which goes forth
from thee.

*Utterances 148-150*.

*End of 148*.

90b. To say four times: For N., a lifting up of the offering, four
times. Two bowls of beer.

*149*.

90c. To say: Osiris N., equip thyself with the liquid, which goes forth
from thee.

90d. To say four times: For N., a lifting up of the offering four times.
Two bowls of *śḫp-t*.

<span id="page_48">p. 48</span>

*150*.

90e. To say: Osiris N., equip thyself with the liquid, which goes forth
from thee.

90f. To say four times: For N., a lifting up of the offering, four
times. Two bowls of *pḫ*.

*Utterances 151-153*.

*151*.

91a. To say: Osiris N., equip thyself with the liquid, which goes forth
from thee.

91b. To say four times,: For N., a lifting up of the offering, four
times. Two mugs of Nubian beer.

*152*.

91c. To say: Osiris N., take to thyself the breast of Horus, which they
taste.

91d. To say four times: For N., a lifting up of the offering, four
times. Two baskets of figs.

*153*.

92a. To say: Osiris N., open thy mouth with it.

*Utterances 153-155*.

*End of 153*.

92b. To say four times: For N., a lifting up of the offering, four
times. Two jars of wine of the North. Wine: Two bowls of the North; two
jars of *‘bš*; two bowls of Buto; two bowls of (wine) Of *ḥȝmw*; two
bowls of Pelusium.

*154*.

92c. To say: Osiris N., take to thyself the eye of Horus, which they
spat out. Prevent him from swallowing it.

92d. To say four times: For N., a lifting up of the offering, four
times. Two jars of wine of *‘bš*.

*155*.

93a. To say: Osiris N., take to thyself the damsel who is in the eye of
Horus; open thy mouth with her.

<span id="page_49">p. 49</span>

*Utterances 155-157*.

*End of 155*.

93b. To say four times: For N., a lifting up of the offering, four
times. Two jars of wine of Buto.

*156*.

93c. To say: Osiris N., take to thyself the eye of Horus, which he
fished up. Open thy mouth with it.

93d. To say four times: For N., a lifting up of the offering, four
times. Two jars of wine of *ḥȝmw*.

*157*.

94a. To say: Osiris N., take to thyself the eye of Horus. It shall not
again be separated from thee.

94b. To say four times: For N., a lifting up of the offering, four
times. Two jars of wine of Pelusium.

*Utterances 158-160*.

*158*.

94c. To say: Osiris N., take to thyself the eye of Horus; honour it.

94d. To say four times: For N., a lifting up of the offering, four
times. Two baskets of *ḥbnn.t*-(fruit?).

*159*.

95a. To say: Osiris N., take to thyself the eye of Horus, which he
carried about with him (?), (or, which he swallowed?).

95b. To say four times: For N., a lifting up of the offering, four
times. Two baskets of *ḫnfw*-cakes (fruit ?).

*160*.

95c. To say: Osiris N., take to thyself the eye of Horus, which he took
from Set.

*Utterances 160-162*.

*End of 160*.

95d. To say four times: For N., a lifting up of the offering, four
times. Two baskets of *’išd*-fruit.

<span id="page_50">p. 50</span>

*161*.

96a. To say: Osiris N., take to thyself the white eye of Horus; prevent
him from tearing it out.

96b. To say four times: For N., a lifting up of the offering, four
times. Two baskets of *ś<u>h</u>.t*-fruit.

*162*.

96c. To say: Osiris N., take to thyself the green eye of Horus; prevent
him from tearing it out.

96d. To say four times: For N., a lifting up of the offering, four
times. Two baskets of *ś<u>h</u>.t*-fruit.

*Utterances 163-165*.

*163*.

97a. To say: Osiris N., take to thyself the eye of Horus; prevent him
from carrying it off.

97b. To say four times: For N., a lifting up of the offering, four
times. Two baskets of *sw.t-‘g.t*-corn.

*164*.

97c. To say: Osiris N., take to thyself the eye of Horus; prevent him
from carrying it off.

97d. To say four times: For N., a lifting up of the offering, four
times. Two baskets of *‘g.t*-corn.

*165*.

98a. To say: Osiris N., take to thyself the eye of Horus, which is like
*nbȝśbȝ*.

*Utterances 165-167*.

*End of 165*.

98b. To say four times: For N., a lifting up of the offering, four
times. Two baskets, of *bȝbȝ.t*-seedy-fruit.

*166*.

98c. To say: Osiris N., take to thyself the eye of Horus, which they
swallowed.

98d. To say four times: For N., a lifting up of the offering, four
times. Two baskets of *nbś*-fruit.

<span id="page_51">p. 51</span>

*167*.

99a. To say: Osiris N., open thine eyes that thou mayest see with them.

99b. To say four times: For N., a lifting up of the offering, four
times. Two baskets of *tȝ-nbś*-fruit.

*Utterances 168-170*.

*168*.

99c. To say: Osiris N., take to thyself the eye of Horus; prevent him
from seizing it.

99d. To say four times: For N., a lifting up of the offering, four
times,. Two baskets of *w‘ḥ*-fruit.

*169*.

100a. To say: Osiris N., take to thyself the sweet eye of Horus; cause
it to stay with thee.

100b. To say four times: For N., a lifting up of the offering, four
times. Two baskets of every sweet thing (fruit ?).

*170*.

100c. To say: Osiris N., take to thyself the eye of Horus; reclaim it
for thyself.

*Utterances 170-171*.

*End of 170*.

100d. To say four times: For N., a lifting up of the offering, four
times. Two baskets of all fresh plants.

*171*.

100e. To say: Osiris N., O may it be pleasing to thee, for thee, with
thee.

100f. To say four times,: For N., a lifting up of the offering, four
times. A *ḥnk.t*-offering.

*Utterance 172*.

*Heading*

101a. To say four times: An offering of a meal to N.

101b. To say: May Geb make an offering to N.

<span id="page_52">p. 52</span>

101c. I give to thee every festal offering, every oblation of food and
drink, which thou canst desire,

101d. wherewith thou shalt be happy with the god for ever and ever.

*Utterance 173*.

101e. To say: Osiris N., Horus is come to take care of thee; thou art
his father.

101f. *‘b.t*-barley.

*Utterances 174-176*.

*174*.

101g. To say: Betake thee to Geb. Two pots of natron.

*175*.

102a. Geb has given to thee thy two eyes, that thou mayest be satisfied.
One table of offerings.

*176*.

102b. To say: Osiris N., thou art his *ka*. One *kḥȝ*-loaf.

*Utterances 177-186*.

*177*.

103a. To say: Take the two eyes, Great One, Osiris N. Two *wr.t*-loaves.

*178*.

103b. To say: Be satisfied with them. Two tables of offerings of the
broad-hall.

*179*.

103c. To say: Be thou satisfied with Horus; thou art his father. One
offering of bread.

*180*.

104a. To say: Nekhbet takes the eye of Horus, *nbȝbȝ.ś*; Horus. has
given (it) to thee. Two baskets of *bȝbȝ.t*-fruit.

*181*.

104b. To say: Nekhbet takes the eye of Horus which they swallow. Horus
has given (it) to thee. Two baskets of *nbś*-fruit.

<span id="page_53">p. 53</span>

*182*.

105a. To say: Take the eye of Horus, which he seized; \[Horus\] has
given (it) to thee. One basket of *w‘ḥ*-fruit.

*183*.

105b. To say: Take to thyself the liquid which goes out of Osiris. Two
jugs of *ḥbi.t*.

*184*.

106a. To say: Osiris N., take the water which is in thee; Horus has
given (it) to thee. ---- of *<u>t</u>nm*.

*185*.

106b. To say: Take to thyself the eye of Horus; open thy mouth with it.
Two bowls of wine of the North.

*186*.

107a. To say: Osiris N., take the green eye of Horus, which he carried
off: Horus has given (it) to thee. Two dishes of fresh bread.

*Utterances 187-196*.

*187*.

107b. To say: Take the eye of Horus; honour (?) it; Horus has given (it)
to thee. Two baskets of *ḥbn.t*-fruit

*188*.

108a. To say: Take the eye of Horus, which he possesses; Horus has given
(it) to thee. Two baskets of *<u>h</u>rḫnf*, or, *ḫnfw*-fruit-cake.

*189*.

108b. To say: Take the white eye of Horus, which he tore out; Horus has
given (it) to thee. Two baskets of white *ś<u>h</u>.t*-fruit.

*190*.

108c. To say: Take the green eye of Horus, which he tore out; Horus has
given (it) to thee. Two baskets of green *ś<u>h</u>.t*-fruit.

<span id="page_54">p. 54</span>

*191*.

109a. To say: Take the eye of Horus, which he recognized; Horus has
given (it) to thee. Two *npȝ.t*-cakes.

*192*.

109b. To say: Take the eye of Horus, which he hastily carried off; Horus
has given (it) to thee. Two pots of corn.

*193*.

110\. To say: Osiris N., take to thyself the eye of Horus; regale
thyself with (it). Two baskets of figs.

*194*.

111a. To say: O Osiris N., this eye of Horus which is sweet, cause it to
stay with thee. Two baskets of every sweet fruit,

*195*.

111b. To say: Reclaim it for thyself. Two baskets of all fresh (fruit?).

*196*.

112\. To say: O may it be pleasing to thee. Two libations.

*Utterances 197-198*.

*197*.

113a. To say: Osiris N., this hard eye of Horus, take it for thyself, in
thyself, in thyself,

113b. that thine enemy may fear thee--he who carried (thee), during his
time.

*198*.

114\. To say: Osiris N., Horus has completely filled thee with his eye,
as an offering.

*Utterance 199*.

115a. To say: O Osiris N., turn thyself towards this thy bread;

115b. receive it from (my) hand. To say four times: May the eye of Horus
flourish (?) for thee.

115c. A *w<u>d</u>b* offering-which-the-god-gives of bread, cake and
liquid.

<span id="page_55">p. 55</span>

*Utterance 200*.

116a. Homage to thee, Incense; greetings to thee, Divine Brother;
greetings to thee *mnwr* (incense), in the limbs of Horus.

116b. Be great, my father; propagate thyself in thy name of *pȝ<u>d</u>*
(pellet of incense).

116c. Thine odour is for N.; thy perfume is f or N.

116d. Eye of Horus, thou art higher, thou art greater than N. Incense.

*Utterances 201-203*.

*201*.

117a. To say: Father N., take to thyself the eye of Horus, the bread of
the gods with which they nourish themselves.

*202*.

117b. To say: Father N., take to thyself the liquid (?) which comes from
Osiris.

*203*.

117c. To say: Osiris N., take it; the eye of Horus belongs to thee.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 3. A Group of Prayers And Charms, Utterances 204-212](pyt06)
