[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Egypt](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](pyt11)  [Next](pyt13) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_86">p. 86</span>

### 9. MEANS WHEREBY THE DECEASED KING REACHES HEAVEN, UTTERANCES 263-271.

*Utterance 263*.

337a. To say: The two reed-floats of heaven are placed for Rē‘, that he
may ferry over therewith to the horizon.

337b. The two reed-floats of heaven are placed for Harachte that
Harachte may ferry over therewith to Rē‘.

337c. The two reed-floats of heaven are placed for N. that he may ferry
over therewith to the horizon, to Rē‘.

337d. The two reed-floats of heaven are placed for N. that he may ferry
over therewith to Harachte, to Rē‘.

338a. It is good for N. (to be) with his *ka*; N. lives with his *ka*.

338b. His *bȝ*-loin-cloth is on him; his Horus-weapon is on his arm; his
sceptre is in his hands.

339a. He makes himself serviceable to those who have passed on.

339b. They bring to him those four spirits, the eldest, the first of the
wearers of side-locks,

339c. who stand on the eastern side of the sky and lean upon their
*d‘m*-sceptres,

340a. that they may speak the good name of N. to Rē‘

340b. and proclaim N. to *Nḥb-kȝ.w*,

340c. so that the entrance of N. may be greeted (or protected). The
Marshes of Reeds were filled (with water),

340d. so that N. might ferry over the Winding Watercourse.

341a. N. will certainly ferry over to the eastern side of the horizon;

341b. N. will certainly ferry over to the eastern side of heaven.

341c. His sister is Sothis; his mother is the *Dwȝ.t* (morning star).

*Utterance 264*.

342a. To say: The two reed-floats of heaven are placed for Horus that he
may ferry over therewith to the horizon, to Harachte.

342b. The two reed-floats of heaven are placed for N. that he may ferry
over therewith to the horizon, to Harachte.

342c. The two reed-floats of heaven are placed for *Šsm.ti* that he may
ferry over therewith to the horizon, to Harachte.

342d. The two reed-floats of heaven are placed for N. that he may ferry
over therewith to the horizon, to Harachte.

<span id="page_87">p. 87</span>

343a. The *mn‘*-canal is open; the Winding Watercourse is inundated;

343b. the Marshes of Reeds are filled (with water).

344a. N. will certainly ferry over to yonder eastern side of heaven,

344b. to the place where the gods will give him birth, where he will
certainly be born, new and young,

345a. when this hour of the morrow comes--the hour of the fifth -day,

345b. the hour of the sixth day, the hour of the seventh day, the hour
of the eighth day.

346a. N. will be summoned by Rē‘, he will be given something (to eat) by
*Nḥb-kȝ.w*,

346b. like Horus, like him of the horizon,

346c. when this hour of the morrow comes, the hour of the third day, the
hour of the fourth day.

347a. When N. stands there like this star which is on the under (side)
of the body of the sky;

347b. he judges as a god after he has listened like a prince.

348a. N. calls to them and they bring to him those four gods,

348b. who stand on the *<u>d</u>‘m*-sceptres of heaven,

348c. that they may speak the name of N. to Rē‘ and announce his name to
Horus who inhabits the horizon.

349a. He has come to thee; he has come to thee,

349b. that he may be loosed from the bands and unbound from the
fastenings.

350a. He (Rē‘) has freed N. from *<u>H</u>rti*; he has not given him to
Osiris.

350b. N. has not died the death;

350c. he has become an *ȝḫw* (or, *3ḫ*) in the horizon; he has become
everlasting in the *Ddw.t*.

*Utterance 265*.

351a. To say: The two reed-floats of heaven are placed for Rē‘ that he
may ferry over therewith to the horizon, to Harachte.

351b. The two reed-floats of heaven are placed for Harachte that he may
ferry over therewith to the horizon to Rē‘.

351c. The two reed-floats of heaven are placed for N. himself

351d. that he may ferry over therewith to the horizon, to Rē‘, to
Harachte.

<span id="page_88">p. 88</span>

352a. The *mn‘*-canal is open; the Winding Watercourse is inundated;

352b. the Marshes of Reeds are filled (with water).

353a. N. will certainly ferry over to the eastern side of heaven,

353b. to the place where the gods will be born,

353c. where N. will certainly be born with them, like Horus, like him of
the horizon.

354a. N. is justified.

354b. Praise be to N.; praise be to the *ka* of N.!

355a. Let them be called to N.;

355b. let them be brought to N., those four traffic-guards, the wearers
of side-locks,

355c. who stand on their *<u>d</u>‘m*-sceptres, on the eastern side of
the sky,

356a. that they may speak the name of N., the good, to Rē‘,

356b. (and) that they may proclaim the name of N., the good, to
*Nḥb-kȝ.w*.

356c. N. is justified.

356d. Praise be to N.; praise be to the *ka* of N.!

357a. The sister of N. is Sothis; the mother of N. is the morning star.

357b. N. is that (star) which is with Rē‘ on the under (side) of the
body of the sky.

357c. N. is justified.

357d. Praise be to N.; praise be to the *ka* of N.!

*Utterance 266*.

358a. To say: The two reed-floats of heaven are placed for Rē‘,

358b. that Rē‘ may ferry over with them to the horizon, to Harachte.

358c. The two reed-floats of heaven are placed for N.,

358d. that he may ferry over with them to the horizon, to Harachte.

358e. The two reed-floats of heaven are placed for Harachte,

358f. that Harachte may ferry over with them to the Horizon, to Rē‘.

358g. The two reed-floats of heaven are placed for N.,

358h. that N. may ferry over with them to the horizon, to Rē‘.

359a. The *mn‘*-canal is open; the Marsh of Reeds is filled with water;

359b. the Winding Watercourse is inundated.

<span id="page_89">p. 89</span>

360a. N. will certainly ferry over to the horizon, to Harachte.

360b. Let there be brought to N. these four friendly ones,

360c. the traffic-guards, the wearers of side-locks,

360d. who sit on their *<u>d</u>'m*-sceptres on the eastern side of
heaven.

361a. Ye shall say it (namely) the good name of N. to *Nḥb-kȝ.w*.

361b. Praise be to N.; praise be to his *ka*!

361c. N. is justified; the *ka* of N. is justified by the god.

362a. Rē‘ has \[taken\] N. to himself to heaven, on the eastern side of
heaven;

362b. he is like Horus, of the *Dȝ.t*; he is like that star which
radiates heaven.

363a. The sister of N. is Sothis; \[the mother of N. is the morning
star\];

363b. \[N. sits between\] them.

363c. Heaven will never be void of N.; never shall the earth be void of
N.

363d. By command -----------------------------

363e. ------------------------, bring this (boat) to N.

363f. he will be your third in Heliopolis (or, as a Heliopolitan).

*Utterance 267*.

364a. Thy heart belonged to thee, Osiris; thy legs belonged to thee,
Osiris; thine arm(s) belonged to thee, Osiris.

364b. The heart of N. belongs to himself; his legs belong to himself;
his arm(s) belong(s) to himself.

365a. A stairway to heaven shall be laid down for him, that he may
ascend to heaven thereon;

365b. he ascends on the smoke (incense) of the great censing.

366a. N. flies, as a goose; he alights as a scarab;

366b. he flies as a goose; he alights as a scarab

366c. upon the empty throne which is in thy boat, O Rē‘.

367a. Stand up, remove thyself, thou who knowest not the reed-thicket,

367b. that N. may sit in thy place and row (around) in heaven in thy
boat, O Re.

368a. N. pushes off from the earth in thy boat, O Rē‘;

368b. so when thou goest forth from the horizon, he (N.) has his sceptre
in his hand,

368c. as navigator of thy boat, O Rē‘,

<span id="page_90">p. 90</span>

369\. Thou (N.) mountest up to heaven; thou separatest thyself from the
earth, a separation from wife and office (royal-apron).

*Utterance 268*.

370a. To say: N. washes himself, Rē‘ appears, the Great Ennead sparkles;

370b. the Ombite is high as chief of the *’itr.t*-palace;

371a. N. puts humanity off from him as a limb;

371b. N. seizes the *wrr.t*-crown from the hand of the Ennead.

371c. Isis nurses him, Nephthys suckles him,

372a. Horus takes him by his fingers (to his side),

372b. he purifies N. in the lake of the jackal,

372c. he makes, the *ka* of N. clean in the lake of the *Dȝ.t*.

372d. He rubs down the flesh of the *ka* of N. and his own

372e. with that which is near Rē‘ in the horizon, that which he (Rē‘)
took,

373a. when the two lands beamed and when he bared the face of the gods.

373b. He brings the *ka* of N. and himself to the great palace,

373c. after offices (?) were made for him and the *ḥmȝ<u>tt</u>* was
knotted for him.

374a. N. leads the imperishable stars,

374b. he ferries over to the Marshes of Reeds,

374c. the inhabitants of the horizon row him, the inhabitants of *ḳbḥ.w*
navigate him.

375a. N. is very capable (mighty), his arms will not desert him;

375b. N. is very excellent (foremost), his *ka* comes to him (to his
aid).

*Utterance 269*.

376a. To say: The fire is laid, the fire shines;

376b. the incense is laid on the fire, the incense shines.

376c. Thy fragrance comes to N., O Incense; the fragrance of N. comes to
thee, O Incense.

377a. Your fragrance comes to N., O ye gods; the fragrance of N. comes
to you, O ye gods.

377b. May N. be with you, O ye gods; may you be with N., O ye gods.

377c. May N. live with you, O ye gods; may you live with N., O ye gods.

<span id="page_91">p. 91</span>

378a. May N. love you, O ye gods; love him, O ye gods.

378b. The *pȝḳ*-pellet (of incense) comes, the *pȝ<u>d</u>*-pellet (of
incense) comes, (they) come forth from the thigh (or lap, *m3ś.t*) of
Horus.

379a. Those who have ascended are come, those who have ascended are
come; those who have climbed are come, those who have climbed are come.

379b. Those who lifted themselves up like Shu are come; those who have
lifted themselves up like Shu are come.

379c. N. ascends on the hips of Isis; N. climbs up on the hips of
Nephthys.

380a. The father of N., Atum, lays hold of the arm of N.; he assigns N.

380b. to those gods, who are the nimble, the wise, the imperishable
stars.

381a. Mother of N., ’Ipii,

381b. give to N. thy breast,

381c. that N. may pass it over his mouth (taste it),

381d. and that N. may suck thy milk, which is white, light and sweet.

382a. That (yonder) land in which (where) N. goes,

382b. N. will not thirst in it, N. will not hunger in it for ever.

*Utterance 270*.

383a. To say: Awake thou in peace, (thou) whose face is behind him in
peace, (thou) who seest behind him in peace,

383b. ferryman of heaven in peace, ferryman of Nut in peace,

383c. ferryman of the gods in peace.

384a. N. comes to thee,

384b. that thou mayest ferry him over in that ferry in which thou
ferriest the gods over.

385a. N. comes to his side as a god comes to his side,

385b. he comes to his temple as a god comes to his side,

385c. N. comes to his temple as a god comes to his temple.

386a. There is no accuser of the living who is against N., there is no
accuser of the dead who is against N.;

386b. there is no accuser of a goose who is against N., there is no
accuser of an ox who is against N.

387a. If thou dost not ferry N. over, he will spring up

<span id="page_92">p. 92</span>

387b. and set himself upon the wing of Thot.

387c. He it is who will ferry N. over to yonder side.

*Utterance 271*.

388a. It is N. who inundated the land after it had come out of the
ocean; it is N. who pulled up the papyrus;

388b. it is N. who reconciled the two lands; it is N. who united the two
lands;

388c. it is N. with whom his mother, the great wild-cow, will be united.

389a. Mother of N., thou wild-cow, who is upon the herb (-overgrown)
hill, who is upon the hill of the *sḥsḥ*-bird.

389b. the two *<u>d</u>d*-pillars are standing, the broken steps are
falling down.

390a. N. ascends on the ladder which his father Rē‘ made for him,

390b. Horus and Set lay hold of the arm of N.; they take him to the
*Dȝ.t*.

391a. He (Horus) to whom it was signalled (winked): "Guard thyself
against him to whom (this) is ordered";

391b. he (Set) to whom it was ordered: "Guard thyself against him to
whom (this) is signalled (winked)."

391c. The face of god is open (revealed) to N.; N. sits (takes his
place) upon the great throne at the side of the god.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 10. The Deceased King in Heaven, Utterances 272-274.](pyt13)
