[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Egypt](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](pyt32)  [Next](pyt34) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 30. RESURRECTION, MEAL, AND ASCENSION OF THE DECEASED KING, UTTERANCE 553.

*Utterance 553*.

1353a. To say: Geb has raised thee up; this thy spirit has been guarded
for thee.

1353b. Thy *mns*-jar remains; thy *mns*-jar is caused to remain.

1353c. Thou art more exalted than Shu and Tefnut in the house of
*Ḥtmw.t* (the destroyer), N.,

1354a. for thou art verily a spirit who wast nursed by Nephthys with her
left breast.

1354b. Osiris has given to thee the spirits; take the eye of Horus to
thee.

1355a. These thy four ways which are before the grave of Horus

1355b. are those whereon one goes (lit. goes a going) to the god

<span id="page_220">p. 220</span>

as soon as the sun sets (or, as far as the setting of the sun).

1356a. He takes hold of thine arm, after Seker, chief of *P<u>d</u>w-š*
purified thee,

1356b. (and he conducted thee) to thy throne which is in *ḳbḥ.w*.

1357a. Raise thyself up, spirit of N.; sit, eat thou;

1357b. let thy *ka* be seated, that he may eat bread and beer with thee
without ceasing for ever and ever.

1358a. Thy going is as a representative of Osiris;

1358b. thy feet hit thine arms;

1358c. they bring thee to thy feasts,

1358d. to thy white teeth, (to) thy fingernails, (to) the
*<u>D</u>w.f*-nome.

1359a. Thou ferriest over as the great bull to the green fields,

1359b. to the pure places of Rē‘.

1360a. Raise thyself up, spirit of N.; thy water belongs to thee, thine
abundance belongs to thee;

1360b. thine efflux belongs to thee, which issued from the secretion of
Osiris.

1361a. The double doors of heaven are open for thee; the double doors of
*ḳbḥ.w* are undone for thee;

1361b. the double doors of the tomb are open for thee; the double doors
of Nut are unfastened for thee.

1362a. "Greeting," says Isis; "ferry on in peace," says Nephthys,

1362b. after she had seen thy father, Osiris, on the day of the
*mm.t*-feast (or, of feasting him who is in need ?).

1362c. Elevated is the *<u>d</u>db.t*-chapel of the double
*’itr.t*-palace of the North, thy *Grg.w-bȝ*.

1363a. Raise thyself up; shake off thy dust;

1363b. remove the dirt which is on thy face; loose thy bandages.

1363c. They are indeed not bandages; they are the locks of Nephthys.

13 64a. Travel over the southern regions; travel over the northern
regions;

1364b. be seated on thy firm throne.

1364c. Anubis, who is chief of the *sḥ-n<u>t</u>r*, commands that thy
spirit be behind thee, that thy might be in thy body,

1364d. that thou remain Chief of the mighty ones (or, spirits).

1365a. Thou purifiest thyself with these thy four *nmś.t*-jars,

1365b. (with) the *špn.t* and *‘ȝt*-jar, which come from the
*sḥ-n<u>t</u>r* for thee, that thou mayest become divine.

<span id="page_221">p. 221</span>

1365c. The sky weeps for thee; the earth trembles for thee;

1366a. the *śmnt.t*-woman laments for thee; the great *min.t* mourns for
thee;

1366b. the feet agitate for thee; the hands wave for thee,

1366c. when thou ascendest to heaven as a star, as the morning star.

1367a. N. is come to thee, his father; he is come to thee, Geb;

1367b. he is united with your dead, O gods.

1367c. Let him sit on the great throne, on the lap of his father
*Mḫnti-'irti*;

1368a. let him purify his mouth with incense and natron; let him purify
his nails upper and lower.

1368b. Let one do for him what was done for his father, Osiris, on the
day of assembling the bones,

1368c. of making firm (or, adjusting) the sandals, of crossing the feet
(i.e. when ferrying over).

1369a. To thee come the wise and the understanding;

1369b. to thee comes the southern *’itr.t*-palace,

1369c. to thee comes the northern *’itr.t*-palace, with a salutation,

1369d. (thou) who endurest eternally at the head of the mighty ones.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 31. Texts of Miscellaneous Contents, Utterances 554-562](pyt34)
