[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Ancient Near
East](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](ham00)  [Next](ham02) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# The Code of Hammurabi

## Introduction

Charles F. Horne, Ph.D.

1915

. . .\[Hammurabi\] was the ruler who chiefly established the greatness
of Babylon, the world's first metropolis. Many relics of Hammurabi's
reign (\[1795-1750 BC\]) have been preserved, and today we can study
this remarkable King . . . as a wise law-giver in his celebrated code. .
.

. . . \[B\]y far the most remarkable of the Hammurabi records is his
code of laws, the earliest-known example of a ruler proclaiming publicly
to his people an entire body of laws, arranged in orderly groups, so
that all men might read and know what was required of them. The code was
carved upon a black stone monument, eight feet high, and clearly
intended to be reared in public view. This noted stone was found in the
year 1901, not in Babylon, but in a city of the Persian mountains, to
which some later conqueror must have carried it in triumph. It begins
and ends with addresses to the gods. Even a law code was in those days
regarded as a subject for prayer, though the prayers here are chiefly
cursings of whoever shall neglect or destroy the law.

The code then regulates in clear and definite strokes the organization
of society. The judge who blunders in a law case is to be expelled from
his judgeship forever, and heavily fined. The witness who testifies
falsely is to be slain. Indeed, all the heavier crimes are made
punishable with death. Even if a man builds a house badly, and it falls
and kills the owner, the builder is to be slain. If the owner's son was
killed, then the builder's son is slain. We can see where the Hebrews
learned their law of "an eye for an eye." These grim retaliatory
punishments take no note of excuses or explanations, but only of the
fact--with one striking exception. An accused person was allowed to cast
himself into "the river," the Euphrates. Apparently the art of swimming
was unknown; for if the current bore him to the shore alive he was
declared innocent, if he drowned he was guilty. So we learn that faith
in the justice of the ruling gods was already firmly, though somewhat
childishly, established in the minds of men.

Yet even with this earliest set of laws, as with most things Babylonian,
we find ourselves dealing with the end of things rather than the
beginnings. Hammurabi's code was not really the earliest. The preceding
sets of laws have disappeared, but we have found several traces of them,
and Hammurabi's own code clearly implies their existence. He is but
reorganizing a legal system long established.

Charles F. Horne, Ph.D.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Babylonian Law--The Code of Hammurabi (Encyclopedia Britanica,
11th Ed.)](ham02)
