[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Ancient Near
East](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](ham07) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## THE EPILOGUE

LAWS of justice which Hammurabi, the wise king, established. A righteous
law, and pious statute did he teach the land. Hammurabi, the protecting
king am I. I have not withdrawn myself from the men, whom Bel gave to
me, the rule over whom Marduk gave to me, I was not negligent, but I
made them a peaceful abiding-place. I expounded all great difficulties,
I made the light shine upon them. With the mighty weapons which Zamama
and Ishtar entrusted to me, with the keen vision with which Ea endowed
me, with the wisdom that Marduk gave me, I have uprooted the enemy above
and below (in north and south), subdued the earth, brought prosperity to
the land, guaranteed security to the inhabitants in their homes; a
disturber was not permitted. The great gods have called me, I am the
salvation-bearing shepherd, whose staff is straight, the good shadow
that is spread over my city; on my breast I cherish the inhabitants of
the land of Sumer and Akkad; in my shelter I have let them repose in
peace; in my deep wisdom have I enclosed them. That the strong might not
injure the weak, in order to protect the widows and orphans, I have in
Babylon the city where Anu and Bel raise high their head, in E-Sagil,
the Temple, whose foundations stand firm as heaven and earth, in order
to bespeak justice in the land, to settle all disputes, and heal all
injuries, set up these my precious words, written upon my memorial
stone, before the image of me, as king of righteousness.

The king who ruleth among the kings of the cities am I. My words are
well considered; there is no wisdom like unto mine. By the command of
Shamash, the great judge of heaven and earth, let righteousness go forth
in the land: by the order of Marduk, my lord, let no destruction befall
my monument. In E-Sagil, which I love, let my name be ever repeated; let
the oppressed, who has a case at law, come and stand before this my
image as king of righteousness; let him read the inscription, and
understand my precious words: the inscription will explain his case to
him; he will find out what is just, and his heart will be glad, so that
he will say:

"Hammurabi is a ruler, who is as a father to his subjects, who holds the
words of Marduk in reverence, who has achieved conquest for Marduk over
the north and south, who rejoices the heart of Marduk, his lord, who has
bestowed benefits for ever and ever on his subjects, and has established
order in the land."

When he reads the record, let him pray with full heart to Marduk, my
lord, and Zarpanit, my lady; and then shall the protecting deities and
the gods, who frequent E-Sagil, graciously grant the desires daily
presented before Marduk, my lord, and Zarpanit, my lady. In future time,
through all coming generations, let the king, who may be in the land,
observe the words of righteousness which I have written on my monument;
let him not alter the law of the land which I have given, the edicts
which I have enacted; my monument let him not mar. If such a ruler have
wisdom, and be able to keep his land in order, he shall observe the
words which I have written in this inscription; the rule, statute, and
law of the land which I have given; the decisions which I have made will
this inscription show him; let him rule his subjects accordingly, speak
justice to them, give right decisions, root out the miscreants and
criminals from this land, and grant prosperity to his subjects.

Hammurabi, the king of righteousness, on whom Shamash has conferred
right (or law) am I. My words are well considered; my deeds are not
equaled; to bring low those that were high; to humble the proud, to
expel insolence. If a succeeding ruler considers my words, which I have
written in this my inscription, if he do not annul my law, nor corrupt
my words, nor change my monument, then may Shamash lengthen that king's
reign, as he has that of me, the king of righteousness, that he may
reign in righteousness over his subjects. If this ruler do not esteem my
words, which I have written in my inscription, if he despise my curses,
and fear not the curse of God, if he destroy the law which I have given,
corrupt my words, change my monument, efface my name, write his name
there, or on account of the curses commission another so to do, that
man, whether king or ruler, patesi, or commoner, no matter what he be,
may the great God (Anu), the Father of the gods, who has ordered my
rule, withdraw from him the glory of royalty, break his scepter, curse
his destiny. May Bel, the lord, who fixeth destiny, whose command can
not be altered, who has made my kingdom great, order a rebellion which
his hand can not control; may he let the wind of the overthrow of his
habitation blow, may he ordain the years of his rule in groaning, years
of scarcity, years of famine, darkness without light, death with seeing
eyes be fated to him; may he (Bel) order with his potent mouth the
destruction of his city, the dispersion of his subjects, the cutting off
of his rule, the removal of his name and memory from the land. May
Belit, the great Mother, whose command is potent in E-Kur (the
Babylonian Olympus), the Mistress, who harkens graciously to my
petitions, in the seat of judgment and decision (where Bel fixes
destiny), turn his affairs evil before Bel, and put the devastation of
his land, the destruction of his subjects, the pouring out of his life
like water into the mouth of King Bel. May Ea, the great ruler, whose
fated decrees come to pass, the thinker of the gods, the omniscient, who
maketh long the days of my life, withdraw understanding and wisdom from
him, lead him to forgetfulness, shut up his rivers at their sources, and
not allow corn or sustenance for man to grow in his land. May Shamash,
the great Judge of heaven and earth, who supporteth all means of
livelihood, Lord of life-courage, shatter his dominion, annul his law,
destroy his way, make vain the march of his troops, send him in his
visions forecasts of the uprooting of the foundations of his throne and
of the destruction of his land. May the condemnation of Shamash overtake
him forthwith; may he be deprived of water above among the living, and
his spirit below in the earth. May Sin (the Moon-god), the Lord of
Heaven, the divine father, whose crescent gives light among the gods,
take away the crown and regal throne from him; may he put upon him heavy
guilt, great decay, that nothing may be lower than he. May he destine
him as fated, days, months and years of dominion filled with sighing and
tears, increase of the burden of dominion, a life that is like unto
death. May Adad, the lord of fruitfulness, ruler of heaven and earth, my
helper, withhold from him rain from heaven, and the flood of water from
the springs, destroying his land by famine and want; may he rage
mightily over his city, and make his land into flood-hills (heaps of
ruined cities). May Zamama, the great warrior, the first-born son of
E-Kur, who goeth at my right hand, shatter his weapons on the field of
battle, turn day into night for him, and let his foe triumph over him.
May Ishtar, the goddess of fighting and war, who unfetters my weapons,
my gracious protecting spirit, who loveth my dominion, curse his kingdom
in her angry heart; in her great wrath, change his grace into evil, and
shatter his weapons on the place of fighting and war. May she create
disorder and sedition for him, strike down his warriors, that the earth
may drink their blood, and throw down the piles of corpses of his
warriors on the field; may she not grant him a life of mercy, deliver
him into the hands of his enemies, and imprison him in the land of his
enemies. May Nergal, the might among the gods, whose contest is
irresistible, who grants me victory, in his great might burn up his
subjects like a slender reedstalk, cut off his limbs with his mighty
weapons, and shatter him like an earthen image. May Nin-tu, the sublime
mistress of the lands, the fruitful mother, deny him a son, vouchsafe
him no name, give him no successor among men. May Nin-karak, the
daughter of Anu, who adjudges grace to me, cause to come upon his
members in E-kur high fever, severe wounds, that can not be healed,
whose nature the physician does not understand, which he can not treat
with dressing, which, like the bite of death, can not be removed, until
they have sapped away his life.

May he lament the loss of his life-power, and may the great gods of
heaven and earth, the Anunaki, altogether inflict a curse and evil upon
the confines of the temple, the walls of this E-barra (the Sun temple of
Sippara), upon his dominion, his land, his warriors, his subjects, and
his troops. May Bel curse him with the potent curses of his mouth that
can not be altered, and may they come upon him forthwith.

THE END OF THE CODE OF HAMMURABI
