[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Classics](../../index.md) 
[Lucian](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](tsg04)  [Next](tsg06.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002ECE91S/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Syrian Goddess*, by Lucian, tr. by Herbert A. Strong and John
Garstang, \[1913\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_29">p. 29</span>

### LIFE OF LUCIAN

THERE is no ancient biography of Lucian extant excepting an
unsatisfactory sketch by Suidas; but we can gather many facts as to his
life from his own writings. He expressly tells us that he was a Syrian
or Assyrian, and that Samosata was his native place, the capital of
Commagene, situated on the right or western bank of the Euphrates. He
was probably born about the year 125 A.D., and his career extends over
the greater part of the second century after the Christian era. He was
of humble extraction; he tells us that his mother's family were
hereditary sculptors (λιθοξόοι). This fact is interesting as enabling us
to suppose that he would examine with an accurate and critical eye the
different statues which he saw and described in his various travels, and
especially those in the great temple at Hierapolis. He tells us,
however, that he proved but a sorry sculptor, and nothing was left him
but to apply himself to the study of literature and to adopt the
profession of a sophist. He could not even, according to his own
account, speak pure Greek, and with the view of purifying his language
he visited successively the rhetorical schools of Ionia and Greece
proper, where he made the acquaintance of the Platonic philosopher
Nigrinus,

<span id="page_30">p. 30</span>

and no doubt contracted much of the admiration for Plato which reveals
itself in his writings. We see him next at Antioch practising as a
lawyer in the Courts; he enjoyed in this capacity such a reputation for
oratory that he felt entitled to gratify his spirit of restlessness and
intellectual curiosity by travel, and adopting the career of a
travelling sophist. In this capacity he visited Syria, Phœnicia and
Egypt, probably in the years 148 and 149 A.D. He tells us in the *De Dea
Syria* that he had been at Hierapolis, Byblus, Libanus, and Sidon; and
we know from his own description how carefully he inspected these great
seats of Oriental beliefs.

He likewise tells us that he visited Egypt, but that he went to no other
part of Libya. He arrived at Rome about 150 A.D., suffering from bad
eyesight and anxious to consult a good oculist. After a sojourn of two
years in Italy he passed into Gaul, where he had heard that there was a
good opening for a public lecturer, and here he stayed for some ten
years. He learned so much while among the Gauls that he was able to
retire from the profession of lecturer and to devote himself to the
study of philosophy. He returned to the East .through Macedonia, staying
to lecture at Thessalonica, and travelling through Asia Minor reached
Samosata in 164 A.D. There he found his father still living, and removed
him and his family to Greece, whither he followed them in the following
year. On his way he visited Abonoteichos, afterwards Ionopolis, in
Cappadocia, where he visited the false prophet Alexander, and nearly met
his end owing to a trick

<span id="page_31">p. 31</span>

played upon him by that impostor. He passed by Aegialos and proceeded to
Amastris, whence he travelled into Greece with Peregrinus Proteus, and
he says that he was present when that most marvellous of charlatans
burnt himself alive at Olympia. He then settled down at Athens, devoting
himself to the study of philosophy, and he seems to have passed a happy
and prosperous life of learned leisure. At the end of the century he
found his resources failing and once more betook himself to the
employment of his youth; and he was glad to be relieved from this
drudgery by a good and lucrative appointment conferred on him by the
Emperor Severus in connexion with the Law Courts of Alexandria. Of the
date of his death we know nothing.

The tract on "The Syrian Goddess" is thought to have been one of his
earliest works, written when he was fresh from the East, as appears
among other things from his calling Deucalion by his Syrian name,
Σκύθης, meaning Σικύδης, *i.e.*, Xisuthrus. <span
id="fr_72"></span>[1](#fn_72.md) It has been doubted by some scholars
whether this tract was really by Lucian, on the ground that it is
written in the Ionic dialect, the employment of which Lucian derides in
*Quomodo Historiam*, § 18. But the scholiast on the Nubes of
Aristophanes certainly ascribes it to Lucian, and it is quite in keeping
with the versatility of his genius to adopt a style at an early period
of his literary career, and, at a later period to mock at the
affectations of his early productions. In

<span id="page_32">p. 32</span>

any case, whether the tract is by Lucian or not, it gives a singular
picture of the beliefs and practices in Hierapolis, and is worthy of the
attention of archæologists and students of comparative religions.

"Lucian was at one time secretary to the prefect of Egypt, and he boasts
that he had a large share in writing the laws and ordering the justice
of that province. Here this laughing philosopher found a broad mark for
his humour in the religion of the Egyptians, their worship of animals
and water-jars, their love of magic, the general mourning through the
land on the death of the bull Apis, their funeral ceremonies, their
placing their mummies round the dinner table as so many guests, and
pawning a father or a brother when in want of money."—Sharpe's *History
of Egypt*, Chap. xv., § 51.

It is especially noteworthy that he wrote this treatise in the Ionic
dialect in imitation of Herodotus, who adopted that form of Greek for
his great work, and it speaks much for the powers of Lucian as a
linguist and as a stylist that he was able to pass from the Ionic
dialect to the pure Attic Greek in which the rest of his works are
composed.

It is no part of our aim to criticise Lucian fully [as](errata.htm#0.md) an
author; it will be plain from the short sketch of his life that he was
singularly attracted by the spirit of curiosity to obtain all possible
information about the strange Oriental cults among which he had been
brought up. He gives us information at first hand on the religion of the
Assyrians, and much of this is of extreme interest as tallying with what
we read in the Old Testament. The flood

<span id="page_33">p. 33</span>

which destroyed all mankind for their wickedness; the salvation of one
man and his family; the animals which went into the ark in pairs; the
special sanctity ascribed to pigeons among the Syrians, all recall
memories of Jewish traditions. Stratonice's guilty love for Combabus and
his rejection of her advances recall other passages of the Old
Testament; and the consecration of their first beard and their locks by
the young men and maidens respectively recalls passages in Catullus and
Vergil, and seems to show that this custom was an importation from the
East. The tract on the Dea Syria differs from Lucian's other works by
its simplicity and freedom from persiflage. It is the work of an
intelligent traveller conversant with architecture and with the
technique of statuary, and anxious to record the facts that he had been
able to ascertain as to the strange Oriental cults practised in his
native country. His attitude is that of an interested sceptic, but he
confesses himself unable to explain all the miracles which he witnessed
at Hierapolis, though he probably deemed that they owed their existence
to some tricks of the priests such as he had seen performed on other
occasions.

The following passage from one of a series of lectures to clergy at
Cambridge <span id="fr_73"></span>[1](#fn_73.md) may be added to this brief
account:—

"It is the peculiar distinction of Lucian in the history of letters that
he was the first to employ the form of dialogue, not on grave themes,
but as a

<span id="page_34">p. 34</span>

vehicle of comedy and satire. He intimates this claim in the piece
entitled *The Twice Accused*, which is so called because Lucian is there
arraigned by personified Rhetoric on the one part and by Dialogue on the
other. Rhetoric upbraids him with having forsaken her for the bearded
Dialogus, the henchman of philosophy: while Dialogus complained that the
Syrian has dragged him from his philosophical heaven to earth, and given
him a comic instead of a tragic mask. Lucian's dialogues blend an irony
in which Plato had been his master with an Aristophanic mirth and fancy.
His satire ranges over the whole life of his time, and he has been an
originating source in literature. His true history is the prototype of
such works as *Gulliver's Travels*: his *Dialogues of the Dead* were the
precursors of Landor's Imaginary Conversations."

Müller and Donaldson quote Sir Walter Scott as affirming that "from the
*True History of Lucian* Cyrano de Bergerac took his idea of a Journey
to the Moon, and Rabelais derived his yet more famous *Voyage of
Pantagruel*."

As the tract *De Dea Syria* is mainly descriptive it is unnecessary here
to enter fully into Lucian's views of religion and philosophy. It may,
however, be remarked that the belief in religion, whether as represented
by the ancient and national gods of Rome and Greece, or by the Oriental
deities, had lost its hold on both the educated and uneducated classes.
The disappearance of religion was succeeded by superstition in various
forms, which was exploited to their own advantage by such charlatans and

<span id="page_35">p. 35</span>

adventurers as Alexander and Peregrinus Proteus. Lucian's attitude is
that of a detached and scornful observer, who, however, in spite of his
contempt for the silliness of his fellow men, sees the pathos of human
affairs, and would fain make them regard conduct as the standard of
life. Professor Dill <span id="fr_74"></span>[1](#fn_74.md) has remarked
that the worldly age in which Lucian's lot was cast was ennobled by a
powerful protest against worldliness. This protest was none other than
the lives of the best of the philosophers who waged unceasing war
against selfishness and superstition in a selfish and superstitious age.
Lucian mocks indeed at these philosophers without, however, apparently
having thought it worth his while to study any system of philosophy very
deeply. "Yet the man who was utterly sceptical as to the value of all
philosophic effort, in the last resort approaches very nearly to the
view of human life which was preached by the men whom he derides. . . .
There are many indications in the dialogues that if Lucian had turned
Cynic preacher he would have waged the same war on the pleasures and
illusory ambitions of man, he would have outdone the Cynics in brutal
frankness of exposure and denunciation, as he would have surpassed them
in rhetorical and imaginative charm of style."

Lucian has heard of Christianity, but seems to have regarded it as an
ordinary Oriental cult. He refers to it twice; the first passage is in
the memoirs of Alexander, in which the false prophet is alleged to

<span id="page_36">p. 36</span>

have proclaimed: "If any atheist, Christian, or Epicurean has come to
spy out the sacred rites, let him flee"; and in the same tract (§ 25) he
couples Christians and atheists. The second passage is in the treatise
on the death of Peregrinus the impostor, who, according to Lucian, was a
renegade from Christianity and indeed had occupied an important post
among that community. The translation is Sir Richard Jebb's.

"He had thoroughly learnt," says Lucian, "the wondrous philosophy of the
Christians, having consorted in Palestine with their priests and
scribes. What would you expect? He speedily showed that they were mere
children in his hands: he was their prophet, the chief of their
religious fraternity (θιασιάρχης), the convener of their meetings
(συναγωγεύς) —in short, everything to them. Some of their books he
interpreted and elucidated; many of them he wrote himself. They regarded
him as a god, made him their law-giver, and adopted him as their
champion (προστάτην ἐπεγράφοντο)."

Concerning their tenets he says, "They still reverence that great one
(τὸν μέγαν ἐκεῖνον), the man who was crucified in Palestine because he
brought this new mystery into the world. The poor creatures have
persuaded themselves that they will be altogether immortal and live for
ever; wherefore they despise death and in many cases give themselves to
it voluntarily. Then their first Law-giver (*i.e.*, Christ) persuaded
them that they were all brethren, when they should have taken the step
of renouncing all the Hellenic gods, and worshipping that crucified

<span id="page_37">p. 37</span>

one, their sophist, and living after his laws. So they despise all
things alike (*i.e.*, all dangers and sufferings) and hold their goods
in common: though they have received such traditions without any certain
warrant. If then an artful impostor comes among them, an adroit man of
the world, he very soon enriches himself by making these simple folk his
dupes."

It is fair to say that by some writers of repute <span
id="fr_75"></span>[1](#fn_75.md) Peregrinus is regarded as a conscientious
mystic, and Lucian as unqualified to understand mysticism and religious
enthusiasm. In any case it is clear that Lucian for all the scorn with
which he regards the various religions and philosophies of his age,
showed considerable interest in collecting facts about them, and those
which he gives us in the tract on *The Syrian Goddess* are as
instructive as any.

The tract on *The Syrian Goddess* has been translated at the instance of
the Liverpool Institute of Archæology. The text followed is that of
Dindorf (Paris, 1884). The memoir on Lucian is mainly based upon the
*History of the Literature of Ancient Greece* (Müller and Donaldson),
Sir Richard Jebb's "Lucian" in his *Essays and Addresses* (Cambridge
University Press), Sir Samuel Dill's *Roman Society from Nero to Marcus
Aurelius*, and Glover's *Conflict of Religions in the Early Roman
Empire*.

H. A. S.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_72"></span>[31:1](tsg05.htm#fr_72.md) See the references in
Müller and Donaldson, Vol. III., p. 223, from whose work most of these
facts have been taken.

<span id="fn_73"></span>[33:1](tsg05.htm#fr_73.md) *Essays and Addresses*
(Cambridge University Press, 1907).

<span id="fn_74"></span>[35:1](tsg05.htm#fr_74.md) See *Roman Society from
Nero to Marcus Aurelius* (Macmillan, 1905), p. 339.

<span id="fn_75"></span>[37:1](tsg05.htm#fr_75.md) *E.g.*, Mr. T. R. Glover
in *The Conflict of Religions in the Early Roman Empire*, p. 212.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Analysis of the Subject-Matter](tsg06.md)
