[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Sagas &
Legends](../../index)  [England](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](crt14)  [Next](crt16) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_99">p. 99</span>

# The Book of Sir Tristram

<span id="page_100">p. 100</span>

<span id="img_10000"></span>

[![Sir Tristram of Lyonesse.](tn/10000.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/10000.jpg)  
Sir Tristram of Lyonesse.  

<span id="page_101">p. 101</span>

<span id="img_10100"></span> ![](img/10100.jpg)

### Prologue.

THERE was a certain kingdom called Lyonesse, and the King of that
country was hight Meliadus, and the Queen thereof who was hight the Lady
Elizabeth, was sister to King Mark of Cornwall.

In the country of Lyonesse, there was a very beautiful lady, who was a
cunning and wicked sorceress. This lady took great love for King
Meliadus, who was of an exceedingly noble appearance, and she meditated
continually how she might bring him to her castle so as to have him near
her.

Now King Meliadus was a very famous huntsman, and he loved the chase
above all things in the world, excepting the joy he took in the love of
his Queen, the Lady Elizabeth. So, upon a certain day, in

|                                  |
|----------------------------------|
| *King Meliadus rides a-hunting*. |

the late autumn season he was minded to go forth a-hunting, although the
day was very cold and bleak.

About the prime of the day the hounds started, of a sudden, a very
wonderful stag. For it was white and its horns were gilded very bright,
shining like pure gold, so that the creature itself appeared like a
living miracle in the forest. When this stag broke cover, the hounds
immediately set chase to it with a great outcry of yelling, as though
they were suddenly gone frantic, and when the King beheld the creature,
he also was immediately seized as with a great fury for chasing it. For,
beholding it, he shouted aloud and drove spurs into his horse, and
rushed away at such a pass that

<span id="page_102">p. 102</span>

his court was, in a little while, left altogether behind him, and he and
the chase were entirely alone in the forest.

The stag, with the hounds close behind it, ran at a great rate through
the passes of the woodlands, and King Meliadus pursued it with might and
main until the chase burst out of the forest into an open plain beyond
the

|                                  |
|----------------------------------|
| *King Meliadus chases the stag*. |

woodland. Then King Meliadus beheld that in the midst of the plain was a
considerable lake of water; and that in the midst of the water was an
island; and that upon the island was a very tall and stately castle.
Toward this castle the stag ran with great speed, and so, coming to the
lake, it leaped into the water and swam across to the island--and there
was a thin sheet of clear ice upon the water close to either bank.

But when the hounds that pursued the stag came to that frozen water,
they stinted their pursuit and stood whimpering upon the brink, for the
ice and the water repelled them. But King Meliadus made no such pause,
but immediately leaped off from his horse, and plunged into the water
and swam across in pursuit of the stag. And when he reached the other
side, he chased the stag afoot with great speed, and therewith the stag
ran to the castle and into the court-yard thereof, and King Meliadus ran
after it. Then, immediately he had entered in, the gates of the castle
were shut and King Meliadus was a prisoner.

(Now you are to know that that castle was the abode of the beautiful
enchantress afore spoken of, and you are to know that she had sent that

|                                                          |
|----------------------------------------------------------|
| *King Meliadus is made prisoner at an enchanted castle*. |

enchanted stag to beguile King Meliadus to her court, and so she made
King Meliadus her captive. Further, it is to be told that when she had
him there within her castle, she wove a web of enchantment all about him
so that he forgot the Lady Elizabeth and his court and his kingdom and
thought of nothing but that beautiful sorceress who had thus beguiled
him into her power.)

Now, when those who were with the King returned to the castle of
Lyonesse without him, and when the King did not return that day nor the

|                                              |
|----------------------------------------------|
| *The Lady Elizabeth grieves to distraction*. |

next day nor at any time, the Lady Elizabeth grew more and more
distracted in her anxiety because of him. And when a fortnight had gone
by and still there was no news of the King, her grief and apprehension
became so great that she turned distracted and they had to set watch and
ward upon her lest she do herself a harm in her madness.

So for a long time they kept her within the castle; but upon a certain
day she broke away from her keepers and ran out from the castle and into
the forest ere those in attendance upon her knew she had gone. Only

<span id="page_103">p. 103</span>

one gentlewoman saw her, and she called upon a young page to follow her,
and thereupon ran after the Queen whither she went, with intent to bring
her back again.

But the Lady Elizabeth ran very deep into the forest, and the
gentlewoman and the page ran after her; and the Queen thought that she
was going to find her lord in the forest. So she ran very rapidly

|                                               |
|-----------------------------------------------|
| *The Lady Elizabeth escapes into the forest.* |

for a great distance, until by and by she waxed faint with weariness
from running and sank down upon the ground; and there they that followed
her found her lying. And they found that the Queen was in a great
passion of pain and sick to death. For the day was very wintry, with a
fine powder of snow all over the ground, so that the cold of the weather
pierced through the garments of the Lady Elizabeth and entered into her
body and chilled her to the heart.

Now the gentlewoman, seeing how it was with the Queen, called the page
to her and said: "Make haste! Go back to the castle of Lyonesse, and
bring some of the knights of the castle with all speed, else the Queen
will die at this place." And upon that the page ran off with great speed
to do her bidding and the Queen was left alone with her gentlewoman.

Then the gentlewoman said, "Lady, what cheer?" And the Queen said,
"Alas, I am sick to death." The gentlewoman said, "Lady, cannot you bear
up a little until help cometh?" Thereupon the Lady Elizabeth fell to
weeping very piteously, and said, "Nay, I cannot bear up any longer, for
the cold hath entered into my heart." (Yea, even at that time death was
upon her because of the cold at her heart.)

Then by and by in the midst of her tears and in very sore travail a
man-child was born to the Queen, and when that came to pass a great
peace fell suddenly upon her.

Then she said, speaking to the nurse like one in great weariness, "What
child is it that I have given unto the world?" The nurse said, "It is a
man-child." The Queen said to her, "Hold him up until I see him."

|                                       |
|---------------------------------------|
| *How Tristram is born in the forest*. |

Thereupon the nurse held the child up and the Queen looked at him,
though she could hardly see him because it was as though a mist lay upon
her eyes which she could not clear away from her sight; for at that time
she was drawing deep draughts of death. Then, when she had seen the
child and had beheld that he was very strong and lusty and exceedingly
comely, she said: "Behold, this is my child, born in the midst of sore
travail and great sorrow; wherefore his name shall be called Tristram
because he hath caused so many tears to be shed."

Then in a little while the Lady died, and the gentlewoman stood weeping
beside her, making great outcry in that cold and lonely forest.

<span id="page_104">p. 104</span>

Anon there came those knights who were sent from the castle to find the
Queen; and when they came to that place, they beheld that she lay upon
the ground all cold and white like to a statue of marble stone. So they
lifted her up and bare her away upon a litter, and the gentlewoman
followed weeping and wailing in great measure, and bearing the child
wrapped in a mantle.

So Tristram was born in that wise, and so his name was given to him
because of the tears that were shed at his birth.

 

And now it is to be told how King Meliadus returned from that castle of
enchantment where he was held prisoner.

At this time Merlin was still living in the world, for Vivien had not
yet bewitched him, as hath been told in the Book of King Arthur. So by
and

|                                           |
|-------------------------------------------|
| *King Meliadus is released from durance*. |

by it came to pass that he discovered where King Meliadus was imprisoned
and how it fared with him in the castle of that enchantress. So he made
greater spells than those that enmeshed King Meliadus, and he brought
King Meliadus back into his memory of the Queen and his kingdom. Then
straightway the King broke out from the castle of the enchantress and
returned to his kingdom. But when he came there it was to find
everything in great sorrow and dole; for the Lady Elizabeth was no
longer upon this earth to bring joy to the heart of the King. So for a
long while after his return King Meliadus lay altogether stricken down
with the grief of that bereavement.

Here followeth the story of Tristram, how he passed his youth, and how
he became a knight of Cornwall of King Mark's making.

<span id="img_10400"></span> ![](img/10400.jpg)

 

<span id="page_105">p. 105</span>

# PART I

### The Story of Sir Tristram and the Lady Belle Isoult

HERE followeth the story of Sir Tristram of Lyonesse, who, with Sir
Launcelot of the Lake, was deemed to be one of the two most worthy and
perfect knights champion of his day.

Likewise herein shall be told the story Of the Lady Belle Isoult, who
next to Queen Guinevere, was reckoned to be the most fair, gentle lady
in all of the world.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter First](crt16)
