[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Earth Mysteries](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](boe10)  [Next](boe12) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### The Egyptian Universe

IN THE METROPOLITAN MUSEUM of the City of New York, rests the grey
diorite sarcophagus of Uresh-Nofer, one time priest of the "watery"
goddess Mut, in Egypt. On the upper half of the sarcophagus lid is
engraved the figure of the Sky goddess Nut "bending over the Earth," a
marvellous picture of the Egyptian Universe.

"The Sky Goddess Nut bending over the Earth," and the succeeding Plate,
"The Goddess Nut represented Double," bring up so clearly the first of
the major traditional catastrophes of the Earth, that it would be timely
just now to consider them briefly. There have been five, one so dimly
related that it shall be left till the last. But there are four great
timeless traditions of great disasters. The first is the violent
separation of Earth from Heaven. The second is the appalling Earth-Moon
catastrophe. The third is the Deluge, and the fourth is the sinking of
Atlantis. Or, it may be, the third in point of "time" is the sinking of
Atlantis, and the fourth is the Deluge. Or, again, it may be that these
two catastrophes, though individual,

<span id="page_64">p. 64</span>

were coincident with each other. Tradition however is, happily, not
logic, and so, even in a disorderly order, we may take up the
outstanding afflictions of the planet we call Earth.

First, then, the violent separation of Earth from Heaven, which these
Egyptian world-pictures illustrate so beautifully.

Nut was goddess of the starry sky. Sometimes she is represented as
powdered with stars; sometimes, as here, with but a line of them along
her spine; once at least, on the sarcophagus lid of Uresh-Nofer, with
the three discs or spheres of universal significance--body, spirit,
soul--connected by eight stars and by six. Sometimes the band of stars
was accompanied by a band of water flowing over her spine--the celestial
Nile, as the Egyptians called the mysterious heavenly waters that
covered the world. Sometimes the path of the celestial Nile is called
the path of the Milky Way; and often the path of the Milky Way is called
the path of souls." Through her husband, Seb, she gave birth to the Sun,
which was ever after re-born each morning: daily it made its journey
from east to west beneath her body until, sinking below the western
horizon, it passed into the mouth of Nut, traversed her body during the
night, to be born again at dawn. Nut also gave birth to the Moon, which
came forth from her breasts as milk. And to countless other heavenly
bodies as well whose genealogy would take us too far.

This is the story of Nut or Heaven and of Seb or Earth.

In the beginning--that stirless rest in which all myths of the original
Creation begin--Heaven and Earth were

 

<span id="img_pl09"></span>

[![PLATE IX THE SKY GODDESS NUT BENDING OVER THE EARTH&lt;br&gt;
&lt;i&gt;From the Sarcophagus of Uresh-Nofer, Priest of the Goddess
Mut&lt;/i&gt; (XXX&lt;i&gt;th dynasty&lt;/i&gt;, &lt;i&gt;378-341
B.C.&lt;/i&gt;)&lt;br&gt; (In the Metropolitan Museum of the City of New
York)](tn/pl09.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/pl09.jpg)  
PLATE IX THE SKY GODDESS NUT BENDING OVER THE EARTH  
*From the Sarcophagus of Uresh-Nofer, Priest of the Goddess Mut* (XXX*th
dynasty*, *378-341 B.C.*)  
(In the Metropolitan Museum of the City of New York)  

 

<span id="page_65">p. 65</span>

together, wedded gods, from whom was to spring all that has been, is,
and shall ever be. Time was not yet, sings one of the old world-hymns,
nor Universal Mind, nor Thought, nor Word. Bliss was not. Misery was
not. Darkness alone filled the boundless All, for Father-Mother-Son were
once more one, and the Son had not yet awakened for the new Wheel and
his new Pilgrimage. The Universe was still concealed in the Divine
Thought and the Divine Bosom.

But the day of Creation came, and a new god, Shu, god of Air or of
Sunlight, sprang out of the primordial waters. He slipped between the
two, and tearing Nut with force from the body of Seb her husband, raised
her to the sky. Her star-spangled body marked the extent of the
firmament; and her hands and feet hanging down were the four pillars of
the firmament and the four quarters of the Earth. There ever since she
has remained, bending over the Earth, eternally watching the Earth and
the children of Earth.

Of Seb the Earth it is related that he did not endure the violent
separation from Nut without a struggle. He sought to rise, that he might
fight and overcome the newly created god. But as he struggled, just
roused from deep dreamless sleep, he was arrested and held in the
curious position he has ever since maintained ([Plate X,
B](boe12.htm#img_pl10b)), without power to change it. He has been veiled
each spring with plants and herbs and grasses; and winter has wrapped
him in ice an now; while along his back has passed the endless panorama
of the generations of animals and men. Through him is given to them all
they have; he gives and

<span id="page_66">p. 66</span>

they ungratefully take, never asking if he has a need they might supply,
a sorrow they might soothe. Often he sleeps, and, sleeping, dreams of
Nut, forgetting for a time his grief and pain; forgetting for a time
that between him and his mate, forever separating them, stands Shu, god
of Air or of Sunlight. But he may never again sink into dreamless sleep;
sooner or later the circle of his dreams rounds on itself, and he is
roused by pain to his state of suffering again. This is why Earth
eternally questions Heaven until, wearied with waiting for answers that
never come, he sinks again into slumber. Some say that Heaven answers
Earth when he dreams, but because the path of his dreaming is a circle,
he has forgotten most of Heaven's answers when he awakes.

And some have quite another story of Seb the Earth; namely, that Seb is
concealed under the form of a colossal gander, whose mate laid the Sun
Egg, and perhaps still lays it every day. Or again there is another
story of Shu, which is that as the divine Son, he had later in his turn
begotten Seb and Nut, the two deities he had separated.

Such then is the first catastrophe--every religion has recognised it;
that the Earth is cut off, disinherited, a troubled, troublesome,
perturbed, perturbating, turbulent, storm-swept, dream-sodden,
staggering, breathless, complaining planet; and that all of its children
have inherited its qualities.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Earth-Moon Catastrophe](boe12)
