[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Earth Mysteries](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](boe25)  [Next](boe27) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### The Earth of Columbus

<span id="page_208">p. 208</span>

IT IS ONE OF THE LITTLE IRONIES of life that the man who more than any
other popularised the notion that the Earth was "shaped like a ball,"
himself believed it was shaped like a pear. Privately Columbus affirmed
that the Earth was pear-shaped. We find this in his letters, and in the
writings of his contemporaries. One of these latter, Pietro Martire, who
accompanied Columbus on the voyage

<span id="img_fig089"></span> ![FIGURE 89. &lt;i&gt;The pear-shaped
Earth of Columbus&lt;/i&gt;.&lt;br&gt; (From &lt;i&gt;Paradise
Found&lt;/i&gt;; William Fairfield Warren, 1885.)](img/fig089.jpg)  
FIGURE 89. *The pear-shaped Earth of Columbus*.  
(From *Paradise Found*; William Fairfield Warren, 1885.)

of 1498, in his *Decades of the newe worlde* published in 1555, said
that "the Admirall" declared such things, "the which because they seeme
contrarye to the oppinions of all the Astronomers, I wyll touche them
but with a drye foote as sayeth the proverbe. . . . For he sayeth, that
he . . . conjectured, that the earth is not perfectly rownde; But that
when it was created, there was a certeyne heape reysed theron, much
hygher than the other partes of the same. So that (as he saith), it is
not rownde after the form of an apple or a bal (as others thynke) but
rather lyke a peare as it hangeth on the tree. And that *Paria* is

208

the Region which possesseth the super-eminente or hyghest parte thereof
nerest unto heaven. In soo muche that he earnestly contendeth, the
earthly Paradise to bee situate in the toppes of those three hylles,
which wee sayde before, that the watche man sawe owte of the toppe
castell of the shippe: And that the outragious streames of the freshe
waters which soo violently issewe out of the sayde goulfes and stryve
soo with the salte water, faule head-longe from the toppes of the sayde
mountaynes."

Columbus himself, in a letter to Ferdinand and Isabella regarding his
third voyage, wrote: <span id="fr_16"></span>[1](#fn_16)

"I have always read that the world comprising the land and water was
spherical, and the recorded experiences of Ptolemy and all the others
have proved this by the eclipses of the moon and other observations made
from East to West, as well as the elevation of the Pole from North to
South. But as I have already described, I have now seen so much
irregularity that I have come to another conclusion respecting the
Earth, namely, that it is not round, as they describe, but of the form
of a pear, which is very round except where the stalk grows, at which
part it is most prominent; or like a round ball, upon part of which is a
prominence like a woman's nipple, this protrusion being the highest and
nearest the sky, situated under the equinoctial line, and at the eastern
extremity of this sea. \[He is in the Gulf of Paria, to the north or the
north-west of the mouth of the Orinoco.\] . . . Ptolemy and the other
philosophers who have written upon the globe

<span id="page_210">p. 210</span>

thought that it was spherical; . . . but this western half of the world,
I maintain, is like half a very round pear, having a raised projection
for the stalk, as I have already described."

When Columbus wrote this letter to his royal helpers, he supposed
himself to be in Asia's easternmost waters, but he was really in the
northern part of South America, which he himself went on to describe as
the Paradise of the Earth or the Mountain of the World. But the World
Mountain of Columbus had dropped from its northern quarter to the
western.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_16"></span>[208:1](boe26.htm#fr_16) *Select Letters of
Columbus*: Hakluyt Soc. Pub., and ed. pp. 134-138.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Dante's Universe](boe27)
