[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Earth Mysteries](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](boe26)  [Next](boe28) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Dante's Universe

COLUMBUS WAS OF GENOA a century after Dante had died at Florence.
Probably he had never read his countryman's *Divina Commedia*; even if
he had, he might have seen little of value or significance in Dante's
cosmology. Dante had one, however, and his scheme brought back into
modern times, that most ancient of the figures of Earth, the hills of
the gods, the antipodal mountains.

But, in Dante's Earth-figure also, as in Columbus's, the mountains have
shifted. If Columbus, for some strange reason--and his reason is not at
all clear--had put his mountain of Paradise at the western end of the
Earth, Dante's two mountains give a still odder figure. In his *Paradise
Found*, Dr. Warren has worked out this construction of Dante's Earth,
showing that the Mountain of Paradise has slipped all of 30° below the
equator. He bases this construction mainly on a few lines regarding the
location

<span id="page_211">p. 211</span>

of the Mountain of Purgatory (*Purgatorio*, Canto iv, 67-70): "Zion
stands with this mountain in such wise on the earth that both have a
single horison and diverse hemispheres;" and he adds: ". . . no careful
reader of the Divina Commedia can fail to see that its 'Mount Zion' and
the Purgatorial *Montagna malagevole altissima et cinta de* 

<span id="img_fig090"></span> ![FIGURE 90. &lt;i&gt;The Earth of
Dante&lt;/i&gt;.&lt;br&gt; &lt;i&gt;a&lt;/i&gt;. City of Jerusalem.
&lt;i&gt;b&lt;/i&gt;. Mountain of Purgatory. &lt;i&gt;c&lt;/i&gt;.
Inferno within the Earth.&lt;br&gt; (From &lt;i&gt;Paradise
Found&lt;/i&gt;; William Fairfield Warren, 1885.)](img/fig090.jpg)  
FIGURE 90. *The Earth of Dante*.  
*a*. City of Jerusalem. *b*. Mountain of Purgatory. *c*. Inferno within
the Earth.  
(From *Paradise Found*; William Fairfield Warren, 1885.)

*mare* are simply unrecognised 'survivals' of prehistoric
thought--antipodal world-mountains once situate at the poles, but here
relocated to suit the demands of sacred mediæval geography. They are the
Su-Meru and Ku-Meru of India figuring in Christian poetry."

Another construction of Dante's universe is given (Fig. 91), from
*Studies in the History and Method of Science*, edited by Charles
Singer. It is Caetani's diagram of Dante's Hell, Purgatory, Earthly
Paradise and the nine Heavens. Dante describes Hell as a funnel or
inverted cone descending in nine diminishing whorls through the

<span id="page_212">p. 212</span>

 

<span id="img_fig091"></span>

[![FIGURE 91. &lt;i&gt;Dante's Scheme of the
Universe&lt;/i&gt;.&lt;br&gt; Slightly modified from Michelangelo
Caetani, duca di Sermoneta, &lt;i&gt;La materia della Divina Commedia di
Dante Alighieri dichiarata in Vi tavole, Monte Cassino,
1855&lt;/i&gt;.&lt;br&gt; (From &lt;i&gt;Studies in the History and
Method of Science&lt;/i&gt;, ed. by Charles Singer, 1917, Vol. I, Fig.
4.)](tn/fig091.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/fig091.jpg)  
FIGURE 91. *Dante's Scheme of the Universe*.  
Slightly modified from Michelangelo Caetani, duca di Sermoneta, *La
materia della Divina Commedia di Dante Alighieri dichiarata in Vi
tavole, Monte Cassino, 1855*.  
(From *Studies in the History and Method of Science*, ed. by Charles
Singer, 1917, Vol. I, Fig. 4.)  

 

 

<span id="page_213">p. 213</span>

hemisphere until the centre is reached, which is also the centre of the
universe, and is situated just under Jerusalem, the centre of the
habitable Earth. Or, according to Caetani, he pictures it as a circular
mountain, cone-like. Purgatory, Dante places at the antipodes, that is,
on an island in the ocean of the uninhabitable Earth. From this island
springs a mountain ascending in a series of stages up to the summit on
which is Eden, the Earthly Paradise, home of the First Pair. Paradise
includes all the spheres of heaven, through all of which Dante ascends,
finding himself always on the planet that governs each sphere, until at
last the Empyrean Paradise is attained, which crowns the universe.

Two regions, of air and of fire, must be crossed before the sphere of
the Moon, the first star, which bounds the region of fire, is reached;
and on the lower right-hand quarter of Earth is the dark forest in which
Dante spent a night before he began, or in which he began, his journey.
At its end he is at the foot of a hill, confronting three great beasts,
from whom he is rescued by Virgil, who is to be his guide through Hell
and Purgatory. The poets enter the Inferno at twilight--a world of
eternal night whose ruler is the Moon. They go through the ten Pits
until in the very centre of the Earth they see Lucifer, its king, at
this centre of gravity, encased in eternal ice.

The passage through the centre of Earth is one of the greatest
difficulty, and above it is ocean only, except for the Island of
Purgatory. This division of land and water is explained to Dante thus:
When Lucifer fell, all the land which existed in the mysterious
hemisphere fell with him,

<span id="page_214">p. 214</span>

and "fled for fear of him" escaping in what way it might around the
globe, settling finally in the inhabited hemisphere. It is possible that
the Earth in the interior fled also, but in the opposite direction, to
form an island of land in the Purgatorial hemisphere. But, between land
and land, there was left an empty space, and up this space they might
climb to the island of refuge. Then comes the ascent of the stages of
Purgatory to Paradise, and the flight through the heavenly spheres,
until at last from the Heaven of the Stars the universe lies spread out
under their feet, and Dante sees below him the purgatorial Earth, heart
of the cosmos, "small and round as a threshing floor."

<span id="img_sep00"></span> ![](img/sep00.jpg)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Earth the Heart of the Cosmos](boe28)
