[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Earth Mysteries](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](boe21)  [Next](boe23) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_185">p. 185</span>

### The Peruvian Universe

THERE IS ANOTHER "SQUARE EARTH" shown in one of the rarer world-pictures
in this collection--the Universe of the ancient Peruvians. Juan de Santa
Cruz Pachacuti Yamqui Salcamayha, a native Peruvian, left the drawing in
his *Account of the Antiquities of Peru*, written about 1620. His
manuscript reached Spain, where it lay long forgotten among the
treasures of the Biblioteca Nacional at Madrid. Salcamayha was not only
a Peruvian, but he is credited with being one of the chosen recipients
of the traditions of his people, and in close touch with the final
glories of the Ynca empire; for his great-grandparents were living at
the time of the Spanish conquest of Peru, and stories of the vanished
days came to him almost from the lips of those who had witnessed them.

Salcamayha left no reading of this crudely sketched cosmos, and what
follows is based largely on Beuchat's interpretation.

The World, says Beuchat, <span id="fr_14"></span>[1](#fn_14) was called
*Pacha*. It was a square World, with a roof indicated, ridge-shaped,
where dwelt the great God. The lowest plane was Earth, which gave
support to the four quarters where dwelt the gods.

Outside the World, above it, to the left, is a small disc, so Beuchat
calls it, but it far more resembles a figure of the Cosmic or Mundane
Egg, surrounded, though not en-circled, by five stars. Within, in the
centre of the pointed roof, this outer design appears again, much
enlarged, slightly rearranged, and with the addition of a single star.
In the rearrangement of the design, three of the stars have

<span id="page_186">p. 186</span>

 

<span id="img_fig079"></span>

[![FIGURE 79. &lt;i&gt;World-picture of the ancient Peruvians&lt;/i&gt;.
&lt;i&gt;In&lt;/i&gt; ](tn/fig079.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/fig079.jpg)  
FIGURE 79. *World-picture of the ancient Peruvians*. *In*  

 

<span id="page_187">p. 187</span>

been connected along a thread, and from these three is suspended the
oval figure of *Huiracocha*, the Creator of the World. On his left is
the Sun or *Inti*; on his right the Moon or *Quilla*. The bright star
below the Sun is *Chasca* or the planet Venus, and under Venus lies a
star representing *Catachillay*, or the Milky Way. Between the Milky Way
and Venus is a group of stars--thirteen--which are the constellations.

Below *Huiracocha* are five stars, but arranged differently from the
group above. One is separated entirely from the other four, but the four
are united by crossed lines. Beuchat ventures to believe that these also
represent constellations.

Beneath the Milky Way, *Catachillay*, are a number of concentric
semi-circles, which signify the Rainbow; the two wave-lines at the left
are Thunder, and below them is the River *Pillcomayo*. To the right of
the river and immediately beneath the rainbowed circle are "eyes,"
"dont," says Beuchat, "on ne voit point clairmant la signification." Far
to the right is an irregular figure labelled *mamacocha*--"the sea,"
says Beuchat, and a little above it a black puma. Below these two is
*mallqui*, "a tree." At the bottom of the picture is a rectangle, which
represents *Coricancha*, and above the figures of a man and a woman.

In his manuscript Salcamayha explains *Coricancha*, accompanying the
text with another oval "creation" figure. A certain Ynca, he says, after
he and his people had settled at *Coricancha* on whose site was reared
the Temple of the Sun, "ordered the smiths to make a flat plate of fine
gold, which signified that there was a Creator of Heaven and

<span id="page_188">p. 188</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Earth, and that it was of this shape. He caused
it to be fixed in a great house, called *Couricancha pachaya-chachipac
huasin*," which is to say, "the golden place, the house of the teacher
of the world."

Another reading of this world-picture gives some interesting literal
translations of some of the old Indian and Spanish text. Outside of the
diagram are two Indian words, *Uamado* and *Orcorara*, followed by a bit
of Spanish commentary--"which is to say (*quiere decir*) three stars all
equal." Inside the figure at the peak of the "roof," mingled with the
Sun and Moon are many Indian words, with a Spanish translation outside:
"Which is to say that this is the image, or pattern, of the maker of
both heaven and earth; yet this plate was simply (or crudely) (made) and
not to be perceived (easily by all), because there was a lack in all the
tablet (or design) of the radiance of the resurrection of Jesus the
Lord."

"Lucera" written about the star *Chasca*, beneath the Sun, and
designated by Beuchat as Venus, is a Spanish word meaning "luminous
stars," as differing from fixed stars, and is applied to Venus as the
morning, and to "Lucifer" as the evening, star. Under *Chasca* are
Indian words and, in Spanish, "This is the luminous star of the
morning." To the right, the star beneath the Moon carries several Indian
words and, in Spanish, "This is the Evening (star)."

The five stars below *Huiracocha* are designated by two Indian words,
*Saramania* and *Chacana*, followed by "en general." "Perhaps they mean
*Cosmogony*, but this is only a guess."

<span id="page_189">p. 189</span>

The group of thirteen stars signify "summer season." And the
corresponding design at the right reads "Clouds in winter (season)." The
two wave-lines at the extreme left are in this reading, "Lightning." To
their right, the Rainbow, above "El mundo o la tierra"--"the world or
the earth."

The seven "eyes" under the "world" are said here to be Indian words.

The "black puma" above the Tree of Life is said to signify hail, "and
since hail is bad for crops, they represent it by a little animal."

<span id="img_sep00"></span> ![](img/sep00.jpg)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_14"></span>[185:1](boe22.htm#fr_14) *Manuel d’Archeologie
américaine*: H. Beuchat, 1912, pp. 630-631.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Aztec Universe](boe23)
