[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Tarot](../index.md)  [Tarot
Reading](../pkt/tarot0)  [Index](index)  [Previous](sot18.md) 
[Next](sot20.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_55">p. 55</span>

### CARD XIV.

# TIME (TEMPERANCE).

An angel in a white robe, touching earth and heaven, appeared. His wings
were flame and a radiance of gold was about his head. On his breast he
wore the sacred sign of the book of the Tarot--a triangle within a
square, a point within the [triangle](errata.htm#8.md); on his forehead the
symbol of life and eternity, the circle.

In one hand was a cup of silver, in the other a cup of gold and there
flowed between these cups a constant, glistening stream of every colour
of the rainbow. But I could not tell from which cup nor into which cup
the stream flowed.

In great awe I understood that I was near the ultimate mysteries from
which there is no return. I looked upon the angel, upon his symbols, his
cups, the rainbow stream between the cups,--and my human heart trembled
with fear and my human mind shrank with anguish and lack of
understanding.

"Yes", said the voice, "this is a mystery that is revealed at
Initiation. 'Initiation' is simply the revealing of this mystery in the
soul. The Hermit receives

<span id="page_56">p. 56</span>

the lantern, the cloak and the staff so that he can bear the light of
this mystery.

"But you probably came here unprepared. Look then and listen and try to
understand, for now understanding is your only salvation. He who
[approaches](errata.htm#9.md) the mystery without complete comprehension
will be lost.

"The name of the angel is Time. The circle on his forehead is the symbol
of eternity and life. Each life is a circle which returns to the same
point where it began. Death is the return to birth. And from one point
to another on the circumference of a circle the distance is always the
same, and the further it is from one point, the nearer it will be to the
other.

"Eternity is a serpent, pursuing its tail, never catching it.

"One of the cups the angel holds is the past, the other is the future.
The rainbow stream between the cups is the present. You see that it
flows both ways.

"This is Time in its most incomprehensible aspect.

"Men think that all flows constantly in one direction. They do not see
that everything perpetually meets and that Time is a multitude of
turning circles. Understand this mystery and learn to discern the
contrary currents in the rainbow stream of the present.

"The symbol of the sacred book of the Tarot on the angel's breast is the
symbol of the correlation of God, Man and the Universe.

<span id="page_57">p. 57</span>

"The triangle is God, the world of spirit, the world of ideas. The point
within the triangle is the soul of man. The square is the visible world.

"The consciousness of man is the spark of divinity, a point within the
triangle of spirit. Therefore the whole square of the visible universe
is equal to the point within the triangle.

"The world of spirit is the triangle of the twenty-one signs of the
Tarot. The square represents fire, air, water and earth, and thus
symbolises the world.

"All this, in the form of the four symbols, is in the bag of the Fool,
who himself is a point in a triangle. Therefore a point without
dimension contains an infinite square".

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Card X. The Wheel of Chance](sot20.md)
