[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Tarot](../index)  [Tarot
Reading](../pkt/tarot0)  [Index](index)  [Previous](sot11) 
[Next](sot13) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_39">p. 39</span>

### CARD VI.

# THE LOVERS.

I saw a blooming garden in a green valley, surrounded by soft blue
hills.

In the garden I saw a Man and a Woman naked and beautiful. They loved
each other and their Love was their service to the Great Conception, a
prayer and a sacrifice; through It they communed with God, through It
they received the highest revelations; in Its light the deepest truths
came to them; the magic world opened its gate; elves, undines, sylphs
and gnomes came openly to them; the three kingdoms of nature, the
mineral, plant and animal, and the four elements--fire, water, air and
earth-served them.

Through their Love they saw the mystery of the world's equilibrium, and
that they themselves were a symbol and expression of this balance. Two
triangles united in them into a six-pointed star. Two magnets melted
into an ellipsis. They were two. The third was the Unknown Future. The
three made One.

I saw the woman looking out upon the world as though enraptured with its
beauty. And from the tree on which ripened golden fruit I saw a serpent
creep.\[paragraph continues\]

<span id="page_40">p. 40</span>

It whispered in the woman's ear, and I saw her listening, smiling at
first suspiciously, then with curiosity which merged into joy. Then I
saw her speak to the man. I noticed that he seemed to admire only her
and smiled with an expression of joy and sympathy at all she told him.

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

"This picture you see, is a picture of temptation and fall", said the
voice. "What constitutes the Fall? Do you understand its nature"?

"Life is so good", I said, "and the world so beautiful, and this man and
woman wanted to believe in the reality of the world and of themselves.
They wanted to forget service and take from the world what it can give.
So they made a distinction between themselves and the world. They said,
'We are here, the world is there'. And the world separated from them and
became hostile."

"Yes", said the Voice, this is true. "The everlasting mistake with men
is that they see the fall in love. But Love is not a fall, it is a
soaring above an abyss. And the higher the flight, the more beautiful
and alluring appears the earth. But that wisdom, which crawls on earth,
advises belief in the earth and in the present. This is the Temptation.
And the man and woman yielded to it. They dropped from the eternal
realms and submitted to time and death. The balance was disturbed. The
fairyland was closed upon them. The elves, undines, sylphs and gnomes
became invisible.

<span id="page_41">p. 41</span>

The Face of God ceased to reveal Itself to them, and all things appeared
upside down.

"This Fall, this first 'sin of man', repeats itself perpetually, because
man continues to believe in his separateness and in the Present. And
only by means of great suffering can he liberate himself from the
control of time and return to Eternity--leave darkness and return to
Light".

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Card XVII. The Star](sot13)
