[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Tarot](../index.md)  [Tarot
Reading](../pkt/tarot0)  [Index](index)  [Previous](sot20.md) 
[Next](sot22.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_59">p. 59</span>

### CARD. XIII.

# DEATH.

Fatigued by the flashing of the Wheel of Life, I sank to earth and shut
my eyes. But it seemed to me that the Wheel kept turning before me and
that the four creatures continued sitting in the clouds and reading
their books.

Suddenly, on opening my eyes, I saw a gigantic rider on a white horse,
dressed in black armour, with a black helmet and black plume. A
skeleton's face looked out from under the helmet. One bony hand held a
large, black, slowly-waving banner, and the other held a black bridle
ornamented with skulls and bones.

And, wherever the white horse passed, night and death followed; flowers
withered, leaves drooped, the earth covered itself with a white shroud;
graveyards appeared; towers, castles and cities were destroyed.

Kings in the full splendour of their fame and their power; beautiful
women loved and loving; high priests invested by power from God;
innocent children--when they saw the white horse all fell on their knees
before him, stretched out their hands in terror and despair, and fell
down to rise no more.

<span id="page_60">p. 60</span>

Afar, behind two towers, the sun sank.

A deadly cold enveloped me. The heavy hoofs of the horse seemed to step
on my breast, and I felt the world sink into an abyss.

But all at once something familiar, but faintly seen and heard, seemed
to come from the measured step of the horse. A moment more and I heard
in his steps the movement of the Wheel of Life!

An illumination entered me, and, looking at the receding rider and the
descending sun, I understood that the Path of Life consists of the steps
of the horse of Death.

The sun sinks at one point and rises at another. Each moment of its
motion is a descent at one point and an ascent at another. I understood
that it rises while sinking and sinks while rising, and that life, in
coming to birth, dies, and in dying, comes to birth.

"Yes," said the voice. The sun does not think of its going down and
coming up. What does it know of earth, of the going and coming observed
by men? It goes its own way, over its own orbit, round an unknown
Centre. Life, death, rising and falling--do you not know that all these
things are thoughts and dreams and fears of the Fool"?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Card XI. Justice](sot22.md)
