[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Southeast](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](wsgr28)  [Next](wsgr30) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*When the Storm God Rides*, by Florence Stratton, collected by Bessie M.
Reid \[1936\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_168">p. 168</span>

### Why Arrows Have Feathers

A baby hawk once fell from its nest in a high tree and lay on the
ground, too young to fly. The little bird would have soon died from lack
of food, or it would have been caught by an animal and eaten, if an
Indian boy had not found it. The boy took the young hawk home with him
and cared for the bird. He made it a nest on the top of a stump and fed
the bird day after day until it at last was ready to fly, but the hawk
did not leave. It liked the Indian boy who had saved its life. When the
boy was playing around in the village the hawk sat on the stump where it
had been raised and watched him.

<span id="page_169">p. 169</span>

One day the young Indian was making arrows from slim branches of trees
and shooting them from his bow. At that time Indians did not put
feathers on their arrows. Each time the boy shot an arrow it would fly
straight for a little way and then turn over and over. The hawk saw this
and had an idea. Why could not one of its wing feathers make an arrow
fly straight?

The bird could not talk to the boy, but it pulled out a long feather and
dropped it at the boy's feet upon one of the arrows that lay on the
ground. The boy paid no attention to the feather. Then the hawk dropped
another and whistled. So the young Indian saw that the hawk was trying
to tell him something about

<span id="page_170">p. 170</span>

the feathers. He picked up one that lay on the arrow at his feet,
fastened it to the blunt end of the arrow and aimed at a tree far away.
This time the arrow flew straight as the hawk. The Indians in the
village gave a great shout, for at last they had found out how to make
their arrows fly straight through the air.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Cottonwood Remembers](wsgr30)
