[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Southeast](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](wsgr17)  [Next](wsgr19.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*When the Storm God Rides*, by Florence Stratton, collected by Bessie M.
Reid \[1936\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_91">p. 91</span>

### Why Hummingbirds Drink Only Dew

Hummingbirds like to build their nests near water. The tiny little
fellows like to skim over the surface of rivers and ponds and throw
spray on themselves with the tips of their wings. They also like to
flutter around in the first light drops of a rain. Yet hummingbirds do
not drink the water in which they bathe. They sip nothing but the dew
which sparkles on flowers and leaves. Why they are so careful about the
water they drink is told in a legend.

Once a hummingbird and a great blue heron owned a lake together. It was
a long lake which ran through the low country for many miles. Around the

<span id="page_92">p. 92</span>

edges of this lake were moss-covered trees and low bushes which hung
over the water. In the shade made by the trees and bushes the
hummingbird liked to hover and drink the cool water.

Like many people the hummingbird and the heron had the bad habit of
gambling. They liked to bet, and they bet about many things. One day the
hummingbird bet the heron that he could fly from one end of their lake
to the other faster than the heron. The one who lost the bet was to give
up drinking in that lake and also in all others. Both birds agreed. They
went to one end of the lake and started off together.

The hummingbird thought he would surely win the race, for he could fly
much

<span id="page_93">p. 93</span>

faster than the big heron, but he didn't know that he couldn't fly
across the lake in one day. They flew on and on. The heron was left far
behind, but still the hummingbird was a long way from the other end of
the lake. Finally it began to get dark, and the hummingbird could not
fly in the darkness. At last he had to fly to one side of the lake and
spend the night in a tree, but the heron could fly at night, and he kept
coming after the sun went down. The hummingbird didn't know it.

Early the next day the hummingbird jumped out of his tree and started on
his way again. He expected to reach the end of the lake long before the
heron, but when he got there he found the heron

<span id="page_94">p. 94</span>

sitting in a cypress tree and laughing at him. By flying all night the
heron had won the race. The hummingbird kept his word and never drank
from that lake or any other lake or river again. That is why he sips
nothing but dew today.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: When the Stars Took Root](wsgr19.md)
