[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Southeast](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](wsgr08)  [Next](wsgr10.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*When the Storm God Rides*, by Florence Stratton, collected by Bessie M.
Reid \[1936\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_40">p. 40</span>

### The Woodpecker's Stumpy Tail

The woodpecker, who knocks on the trees and cuts holes in them to find
the bugs he eats, has a ragged, stumpy tail. He once had a long tail
like other birds, but a fish bit part of it off.

It happened this way. Long ago a tribe of Indians lived in a country
where floods often came in the spring and covered the earth and bushes
with water. One spring a big flood was coming and only the frogs knew
it. One old frog had lived close to the Indians so long that he could
talk some of their language, and this old frog climbed upon a stump near

<span id="page_41">p. 41</span>

the village where the Indians lived and warned them.

"Run for your lives! Flood's a-coming! Run for your lives! Flood's
a-coming!" he boomed with his deep voice as he squatted on the stump.

Nobody paid any attention to him. The old frog puffed out his chest and
boomed louder than before, "Run for your lives! Flood's a-coming! Run
for your lives! Flood's a-coming!"

Now the Indians heard him and laughed at the old fellow. A woodpecker
was sitting in a tree over his head, and he also began to laugh at the
old frog. The other birds did not laugh, but flew out of the low trees
and bushes and went to trees high enough to be above the flood when

<span id="page_42">p. 42</span>

it came. The woodpecker kept on laughing and stayed with the foolish
Indians by the bank of the river.

That night the rain began to pour down from the black sky. The river
rose and rose. At last it tumbled over its bank and began running
through the bushes and into the Indian village. The thunder boomed. The
lightning cracked open the clouds. As the Indians jumped from their beds
and began climbing into the trees the rain poured from the sky in sheets
and the flood began rising over the boughs of the trees and washing the
Indians away.

Now the woodpecker was frightened. He could not see to fly at night, and
all he could do was to flutter from tree to

<span id="page_43">p. 43</span>

tree hoping to find one high enough to be above the water. He perched on
the very highest limb he could find, but even then his long black tail
was hanging in the water running under him. As he was clinging to the
limb and wishing he had listened to the old frog, a fish saw him there
and made a snap at his tail. The lower end of it came off in the fish's
sharp teeth. That is why the woodpecker has a short tail with jagged
ends that look as if they had been bitten off.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chief Two Hawks' Trail](wsgr10.md)
