[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Southeast](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](wsgr21)  [Next](wsgr23.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*When the Storm God Rides*, by Florence Stratton, collected by Bessie M.
Reid \[1936\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_123">p. 123</span>

### How Sickness Entered the World

Sickness did not always exist among men. It used to be that all Indians
lived long lives and were never ailing until time came for them to die,
as the time comes to all. Sickness was unknown in the world until two
young Indians killed a messenger from the Great Spirit.

An old medicine man lay dying in his wigwam. He had been a great leader
for his people, wiser than any medicine man had ever been before. He
knew so many things that the Great Spirit decided to tell him how to
leave his wisdom with his tribe before he died. The Great Spirit sent
down word that he was sending a

<span id="page_124">p. 124</span>

messenger who would meet him under a certain tree in the forest and tell
what he should do.

But the medicine man became so weak that he could not get up to go into
the forest to meet the messenger. He called two young men from the
tribe. They should go to the tree, he told them, and hear what the
messenger had to say and then they should come back to the wigwam and
tell the medicine man. The young men went out and found the tree and sat
down to wait. As they sat there a large snake came through the grass and
raised its head to look at them. In great fear the young Indians took up
sticks. They beat at the snake. When they had killed it they hung it
across a

<span id="page_125">p. 125</span>

limb and waited for the messenger, but nobody came. At last they went
away and told the medicine man about seeing and killing the snake.

"You have killed the messenger of the Great Spirit!" cried the old
Indian. "Some great trouble is to come to us, because the Great Spirit
will be angry." Then he fell back on his blanket and breathed no more.

Full of fright the young men decided they should bring back the dead
snake and leave it before the wigwam of one of their enemies, so that
the bad luck would come to him instead of to them. When the enemy came
out of his wigwam and saw the dead snake he ran with it to another
wigwam and left it there. Everybody

<span id="page_126">p. 126</span>

in the camp did the same thing, for everybody was made fearful.

That night the mate of the snake came into the camp. She was very angry.
At each wigwam where the dead snake had been laid she left an egg. By
the time morning had come every egg had hatched out some kind of
sickness, and so the first sickness was born into the world.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Evil Water Spirits](wsgr23.md)
