[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Southeast](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](wsgr05)  [Next](wsgr07) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*When the Storm God Rides*, by Florence Stratton, collected by Bessie M.
Reid \[1936\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_26">p. 26</span>

### The Sweet Gum's Amber Tears

There was no finer looking tree in the forests than the sweet gum in the
days before the sweet gum knew what it was to cry. High and straight in
the woods it rose. Its leaves were like stars of shining green. Its
green seed balls, covered with tiny spikes to keep the seeds away from
birds, swung on their stems as the wind blew. Birds liked to build their
nests among the sweet gum's branches in spring. These things made the
tree proud. It lifted its green head as high as it could, and it reached
higher toward the sky than all the other trees.

There was one thing the sweet gum did

<span id="page_27">p. 27</span>

not understand. The redbirds never built their nests in its boughs. One
day a redbird came to the tree and the sweet gum asked why it never
built a nest there. "Why do you never stay long when you light on my
boughs?" asked the tall tree.

The redbird answered, "I like to sit among your branches and look over
the country, but you grow too tall, like the pine tree. Those who dwell
in the sky do not want things on earth to come too close to them. They
send down the lightning to keep the things of earth away from the
clouds. Lightning strikes the pine tree, and one of these days it might
strike you."

It happened at last just as the wise redbird had said. A storm came up
one

<span id="page_28">p. 28</span>

day. The lightning lashed its forked tongues across the sky and with a
loud crash it struck into the top of the tall sweet gum. Ever since then
the children of the sweet gum tree have been weeping clear amber tears
down their trunks, because they fear that when they are grown and their
heads are over those of the other trees the lightning will strike them
too. It often happens that way.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Plant That Grows in Trees](wsgr07)
