[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Southeast](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](wsgr23)  [Next](wsgr25.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*When the Storm God Rides*, by Florence Stratton, collected by Bessie M.
Reid \[1936\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_137">p. 137</span>

### Why the Irises Hold Hands

There is a pretty blue and purple flower with a heart of gold which
blooms in early spring in the swamps and along the streams of the gulf
coast. It is called the blue flag or the wild iris. As long as it blooms
it holds its head up as if looking for something. It seems to be waiting
for something to happen. There is an old Indian legend that tells how
this lovely flower came to be and why it lifts its head above the
grasses around it.

There used to be along the coast of Texas a tribe of Indians who were
more clever than any other Indian tribe had ever been. This tribe was an
old one, and for many years the people had remembered

<span id="page_138">p. 138</span>

what their fathers knew, and they taught the children all that the tribe
had learned. Because of this the Indians knew how to do things no other
tribes knew. They built large houses. They knew how to plant seeds in
the soil and make them grow food. They knew how to paint on skins, carve
bones and write the sign language.

Because these Indians were so clever the Great Spirit loved them very
much. He would stretch himself out on a soft cloud high in the sky on
summer days and look down on the Indians as they worked and played in
their camp. Because he loved them he sent them gentle rains when their
crops needed water. He made it easy for them to find birds

<span id="page_139">p. 139</span>

and animals to eat. He answered their prayers.

But these Indians at last stopped praying. They began to forget about
the Great Spirit who was so good to them, and to think they could do
everything for themselves. They grew proud. They no longer looked toward
the sky to talk with the Great Spirit, but began to look upon themselves
as gods.

When the Great Spirit saw this he became very angry. He no longer loved
the proud Indians. He decided to punish them. So it happened that while
the people of the tribe were walking about their camp a great dark cloud
came quickly over the sun in the blue sky, and the sky became black.
Then the

<span id="page_140">p. 140</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Great Spirit, who
had sent the cloud, waited to see if this made the Indians afraid of
him. They were not afraid, but went into their strong houses and laughed
at the rain coming down. As the Great Spirit saw this he was more angry
than ever. He decided to destroy the proud tribe.

He took a deep breath and blew strong winds across the Gulf of Mexico
towards the camp. The clouds began to rush through the sky when he
hurled them with his hands, and they hit each other and broke into sharp
rain. He opened his mouth and shouted and out came thunder. Lightning
darted from his angry eyes. Then the winds began to drive the waters of
the gulf upon the

<span id="page_141">p. 141</span>

land and into the camp of the Indians. Even now they were not afraid.
They would not pray to the Great Spirit, though they saw the waves
pounding into their camp and they knew the Great Spirit was making war
against them. The water rose higher about their houses. At last they
climbed to the roofs. Husbands and wives and children joined hands to
die together. Still they did not cry out. Finally the rushing waters
covered them all. Together they went down into the dark, rolling waves.

They were brave. As the Great Spirit saw this he thought that such
people ought to have another chance to live. Perhaps they would become
wiser and better if they lived again, so he decided

<span id="page_142">p. 142</span>

that they would come alive when the last of the flood waters had rolled
back into the Gulf.

While they waited to be brought to life once more they should have the
form of a new kind of plant. The Great Spirit decided this. He turned
them into plants as they lay under water, and because they were in the
water they grew roots which could live in it and could live nowhere
else. As they had died with their hands linked together they now took
the form of plants with their roots linked together. When spring came
the plants put forth blue flowers which lifted their heads to see if the
last of the flood waters had rolled back into the Gulf so they could
take the shape of people once more.

<span id="page_143">p. 143</span>

This is the way they grow to this day. We call them wild irises or flag
lilies. They still grow in low and watery places. Their roots still
cling together. Their heads are still lifted, for they are waiting to
see when the last of the waters return to the Gulf. Each year they find
the marshes and low places still filled with water and so they must wait
a while longer.

And this is the legend of the wild iris.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Pecan Tree's Best Friend](wsgr25.md)
