[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Southeast](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](wsgr11)  [Next](wsgr13) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*When the Storm God Rides*, by Florence Stratton, collected by Bessie M.
Reid \[1936\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_55">p. 55</span>

### Old Woolly Bird's Sacrifice

In the forests the big flowers of the magnolia tree are like white stars
scattered among the leaves. When warm days of spring come the broad
white petals of the flowers unfold and fill the forests with sweet
perfume. The magnolia is a fine, tall, evergreen tree. The story of its
beginning on the earth is also the story of how an old Indian named
Woolly Bird gave up his life for his people.

After a cold, windy spring in the days when the call of the wild turkey
and the whoop of the Indian still sounded in the woods a drouth began.
For almost a year a blazing sun, whose fires were cooled by

<span id="page_56">p. 56</span>

no rain-filled cloud, baked the rich soil of the prairie country where
an Indian village was standing. Hot days stretched into months. The
prairie grasses shrivelled and died. Streams and ponds gazed into the
fiery sun day after day until they dried up and left only their hard,
dry beds to show where they had been. The earth was burned into powder
which the hot winds blew into the sky in choking red clouds.

Drouth, thirst, and hunger came among the Indians of the village where
old Woolly Bird lived. Though the hunters of the tribe kept to the
trails from dawn to dark they found no game, for the deer and the turkey
and the bear had fled from the nearby woods where the Indians

<span id="page_57">p. 57</span>

hunted. Birds kept away from the waterless prairie. Roots had died in
the earth, and the berries had failed to appear on their vines.

The Indians had to leave the prairie or die of starvation and thirst.
They decided to leave their homes. As his people were making their plans
to leave the village Woolly Bird, the oldest of them all, stood feebly
leaning on his stick. His old heart was heavy with sadness. He was weak.
He could do nothing for himself. While the other men and the women
toiled, making ready for the journey that was to begin tomorrow, Woolly
Bird could do nothing but tremble and murmur and stare through watery
eyes, like an old grandmother.

<span id="page_58">p. 58</span>

They were preparing to take him along with them, Woolly Bird knew. They
would share with him the little dried meat and the acorns they had left.
The children and the women would have to give him food they need. When
the tribe was ready to leave the next day they would put him with the
weaker women and small children upon a drag made of young saplings
pulled along by strong squaws. All this made old Woolly Bird full of
sadness. He was useless to his people and he was eating their food and
letting them take care of him. No Indian who had once been a strong man
and a great hunter of buffalo liked to be a burden to his people in his
old age. Death was better, Woolly Bird decided.

<span id="page_59">p. 59</span>

That night, when a dry blood-red moon was riding high above the hot
prairie and gazing down upon the sleeping Indians, Woolly Bird rose from
his bed and stole out of the village like a crippled ghost. He went as
far as his feeble legs would take him and at last he fell down and
dragged himself through the dust into the shadows of a dead thorn bush.
The old man turned on his back and murmured his thanks to the Great
Spirit. No more would Woolly Bird be a burden to his people. When
tomorrow came, and they prepared to leave, there would be o crippled
Woolly Bird to care for and feed, no whimpering Woolly Bird to be nursed
like a papoose. Without him they would travel faster and their food
would

<span id="page_60">p. 60</span>

last longer. Woolly Bird turned his face to the moon and smiled with the
pale smile of a man who has won a battle with himself. He was a man
again.

But Woolly Bird's people did not leave him. When the next day came they
found him gone from his bed, and they set out to look for him. Under the
thorn bush on the prairie they found him at last, covered with dust and
lying on his back, looking up at the sky.

"Come with us, Woolly Bird," said the chief, raising up the old man's
head. "The tribe will not forsake its brave men. You have proved
yourself brave. Get up and come back with us." They raised him and
carried him back to the village.

It was not long after the prairie Indians

<span id="page_61">p. 61</span>

reached their kinsmen who lived in the forests that the drouth blew its
burning breath even upon the country that lay beneath the trees. Springs
dried up. Creeks no longer ran in the dry beds. Fish and frogs buried
themselves or died and turned to white bones on the hot, baked earth
where the creeks and ponds had been. Birds flew from the dying trees,
and there was no more food for the hungry Indians. Again they must pull
up their wigwams and flee from the country which was turning to dust and
ashes beneath the sun. Again must they find a new home, and this time,
they decided, it would be along the Gulf coast, far from where they
were. There was the great blue water, and its fish, and

<span id="page_62">p. 62</span>

the white birds flying in the clouds that brought rain from the sea.
Once more the Indians prepared to break camp.

As they worked to make the drags on which would be carried the weaker
women and children and old people of the tribes Woolly Bird hobbled
around to all the wigwams where lived old people like himself. With each
of these old people he talked in a low voice, and what they talked about
none of the others knew.

The Indians had fallen asleep the night before they were to begin their
long journey to the gulf when from their wigwams silently crept the old
grandfathers and grandmothers as Woolly Bird awakened them. Softly they
took down their little

<span id="page_63">p. 63</span>

white wigwams and folded them across their bent shoulders. With Woolly
Bird they slipped out of the village. They made no sound but that of
their tired breathing as they crept through the leafless bushes, over
the dusty, dead grass and across the dry creek bottoms. For a long time
these old Indians walked, with hardly a whisper among themselves. There
was something they must do, and they could afford to waste none of their
feeble strength in talk.

At last Woolly Bird led them down a steep hill and far into a grove of
dead, rotting cypress trees whose bare limbs gleamed like bones in the
faint starlight. Bravely they followed their leader as he pushed through
thickets of brown, dry

<span id="page_64">p. 64</span>

reeds and over fallen limbs. Now they had come to the center of the
cypress grove.

"Here is where we stop," said Woolly Bird, dropping his wigwam at his
feet. "Here is our camp, Old Ones Not Afraid to Die. Our people will
never find us tomorrow. We will trouble them no more. Let us make our
camp here. Here will the Great Spirit come to us and take us up to the
sky to be once again with our fathers."

In the shadows of the lost place where no bird sang, no frog lived to
grunt at the moon, and no living thing grew amid the dead reeds and the
rotten limbs, the old people helped one another set up their little
white wigwams. Then they lay

<span id="page_65">p. 65</span>

down to wait. But the Great Spirit did not bring death to them. Because
they were brave, and because they were willing to die to keep from
troubling their tribesmen the Great Spirit loved them. He sent down to
the still grove a great whirlwind. It ripped out the dead cypress trees
as it roared through the grove, and in the holes where the trees had
stood now sprang up tall living trees with silvery trunks and tops heavy
with dark, shining leaves. And this whirlwind found the old Indians. It
whirled their white wigwams about their bodies and then it lifted them
in their wrappings high up among the boughs of the strange new trees.

There they remained. The Great Spirit

<span id="page_66">p. 66</span>

turned them into the buds of a noble tree that is now called the
magnolia. In the spring these buds open to form lovely flowers whose
creamy white petals were the white wigwams of the old Indians, and whose
brown centers were the Indians themselves. When the petals are ready to
fall, bright red beads, laid there by the Great Spirit, appear around
the necks of the brown centers of the flower. Then the beads drop to
earth and there take root, for they are the seeds of the magnolia. The
Great Spirit wants the tree always to live to tell the story of
unselfishness.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: A Tribe That Left Its Shoes](wsgr13)
