[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Southeast](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](wsgr25)  [Next](wsgr27) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*When the Storm God Rides*, by Florence Stratton, collected by Bessie M.
Reid \[1936\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_152">p. 152</span>

### When the Rainbow Was Torn

There are flowers whose petals have in them part of the very colors
belonging to the rainbow. These are the cactus flowers, the blooms which
burst out like orange, red or yellow flame from the tips of the thorny
cactus plants. It used to be that all these flowers were white, as some
are now. But one day the rainbow gave most of them colors which they
have kept up to this time.

The white cactus flowers used to turn up their faces and look at the
bright bow that arched across the sky whenever the sun shone through the
rain or mist. The two ends of the rainbow always

<span id="img_15200"></span>

[![](tn/15200.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/15200.jpg)

<span id="page_153">p. 153</span>

touched the earth somewhere, and where they touched everything on the
ground seemed to be washed in the rainbow's colors. But the rainbow had
never touched the cactus plants. Perhaps it was afraid of the sharp
thorns that grew on them. The white cactus flowers always hoped that
some day they would be bathed in misty colors. Yet the rainbow would
never come near them.

Once after a heavy rain the rainbow was up in the sky getting ready to
send its two ends down to earth. The rainbow itself was heavy with
raindrops. As its ends sank down it took care not to let them fall upon
the thorns of the cactus plants. But, just as one of the ends was about
to dip to the ground the rainbow

<span id="page_154">p. 154</span>

suddenly saw a bed of cactus plants hidden in a little cluster of high
grass. When it saw the plants the rainbow tried to lift its end again,
but the end was so heavy with the raindrops that it kept sinking down,
and at last it brushed across the cactus plants with their white
flowers.

When this happened the thorns caught at the misty bands of colors to try
to keep them for the flowers. The violet, indigo, blue and green bands
slipped out of their way, but the yellow, red and orange bands became
hung on the thorns. Just as soon as this happened the happy cactus
flowers opened their petals wide and began to drink in the colored mists
that were clinging to the plants. Before the rainbow had

<span id="page_155">p. 155</span>

pulled itself loose from the thorns the white flowers had filled
themselves with the colors and were now red and orange and yellow
themselves.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Paisano, Hater of the Rattlesnake](wsgr27)
