[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Southeast](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](wsgr13)  [Next](wsgr15.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*When the Storm God Rides*, by Florence Stratton, collected by Bessie M.
Reid \[1936\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_74">p. 74</span>

### The Cloud That Was Lost

In the country of high mountains the little white clouds that float
around in the sky during the day go to sleep on the tops of the peaks.
They do this because they become tired while waiting in the sky to grow
heavy enough to send down the rains. All day the wind blows them this
way and that, they bump into one another, and the sun makes them hot.
Because of this they are glad when the sun at last goes down, for then
they can float gently down to the mountain tops and curl themselves up
among the trees and rest there until next morning. This is why people
can see white clouds like

<span id="page_75">p. 75</span>

fog on the mountains at night and at dawn.

Late one afternoon one little cloud had sailed off from its brothers and
sisters. It had been chasing its tiny white tail like a puppy, had
whirled and whirled head over heels until it was far away from the
others. At last, when it was time to go to bed on the mountain tops, and
all the other clouds were gone from the sky, the little cloud found
itself all alone over a broad, flat land. It looked for the mountains
but could not see them. The little cloud was lost. The sun was down and
it was time to go to bed, but there were no mountains to be seen. A few
drops of rain fell from the little lost cloud because it was crying.

<span id="page_76">p. 76</span>

After a while, just as the day was gone, the cloud was so sleepy it
floated down and stretched itself out on the flat country, all by
itself. Under it, where it was lying on the ground, were some
sweet-scented, white flowers. These flowers were tired of being white.
They had long hoped to find some way to color themselves. Now the little
sleeping cloud was colored light pink and lavender, and when the flowers
felt the cloud float down upon them they opened their eyes and saw the
lovely colors. They opened their throats and began to drink in the
little cloud. They drank and they drank until at last the little cloud
was all gone.

When morning came nothing was there but the flowers. Some were still

<span id="page_77">p. 77</span>

white, but those which had drunk in the cloud were now pink and
lavender, as the cloud had been. This is how the flowers called the wild
phlox got their soft colors that look like the evening clouds.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Swift Blue One](wsgr15.md)
