[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Southeast](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](wsgr19)  [Next](wsgr21) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*When the Storm God Rides*, by Florence Stratton, collected by Bessie M.
Reid \[1936\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_109">p. 109</span>

### The Maiden Who Loved a Star

There was once a young and beautiful Indian girl who went from her home
into a desert of the western country to gather there the purple ripe
fruit of the prickly pear. She left the desert late one day after the
sun had gone down, and when she set out for home the bright stars were
beginning to sparkle in the sky. One star was much brighter than the
others, and seemed closer to earth than the others. The Indian maiden
stopped in the sand and watched it. Was the star winking down at her?
She thought it was. She dreamed of the shining star that night, and she
saw in her dream

<span id="page_110">p. 110</span>

that the star was the home of a fine, tall youth, a sky dweller.

The next day the maiden went again into the desert to gather the fruit
of the prickly pear. Again she stayed until the sun had gone down behind
the distant hills on the far edge of the desert, and she watched her
star winking once more at her. That was the sky youth, she knew. For
seven days she visited the desert and each night she dreamed of this
fair young man. She dreamed that he spoke of his love to her, but he
could not join her on earth as long as she lived there and as long as he
lived in the sky. He could not come down to the desert. She could not
visit him in his star home.

The maiden was full of love, but she

<span id="page_111">p. 111</span>

was unhappy because she was so far away from her lover in the
star-frosted sky. She decided she did not want to live any longer. An
old witch woman lived with the tribe, and the Indian maiden went to her
and asked the woman how to die in order that she might be taken up to
the sky to live in the star with her lover.

"Life is too great a gift to be flung aside," said the witch woman as
she looked at the poor girl weeping on the other side of the old woman's
fire. "You must live out the life the Great Spirit has given to you, but
I can change you into a form that will permit you to live always out
upon the desert under the loving smiles of the star youth."

Her words filled the maiden with joy.

<span id="page_112">p. 112</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> She went with the
witch woman upon the desert that night. There the old woman made a
powerful drink from desert plants and told the maiden to drink it. As
soon as she had done so her feet began to take root in the dry, sandy
soil. Her arms turned to branches. Her black hair turned to leaves, and
the maiden had become a new shrub which no Indian had seen in the desert
before. As the wind blew the shrub seemed to murmur thanks to the witch
woman.

When the sky youth saw what had happened he leaned far out of an opening
in his star lodge. He leaned so far out that the edges of the star broke
with his weight, and he fell with sparkling pieces of star straight
towards the maiden who

<span id="page_113">p. 113</span>

had become a bush. The starry bits were shattered to fine dust that
powdered the leaves of the bush with white. The youth was changed to
purple blossoms. At last the maiden and the sky youth were together.

The bush with white-dusted leaves and beautiful blossoms became known as
the cenisa, or ash-covered bush. Today it is called the purple sage. Not
many white people know the story of how it came to the desert.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Old Quanah's Gift](wsgr21)
