[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Southeast](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](wsgr33)  [Next](wsgr35) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*When the Storm God Rides*, by Florence Stratton, collected by Bessie M.
Reid \[1936\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_186">p. 186</span>

### About the Tejas Indians

#### The White Man Finds the Tejas Indians

Texas is the largest state in this great land of ours. Long ago, long
before Columbus came to the New World, the people who lived in Texas
were not white. They had bronze-colored skins. They were called Indians,
because the first white people who found them thought they had come to
the far-off land of India.

In a number of ways the Indians of the New World were like us. We like
to tell stories, and so did they. They did not write their stories on
paper because they

<span id="page_187">p. 187</span>

did not know what paper was, and so they learned their stories by heart
and remembered them. Fathers and mothers told the stories to their
children and the children told them again to their children when they
had grown up.

The stories in this book came mostly through the Tejas Indians, who
belonged to certain tribes of east Texas, but the Comanches, Alabamas,
Wacos, Wichitas, Tonkewas, Attakapas, and Karankawas <span
id="fr_0"></span>[\*](#fn_0) gave us some of the stories. The peaceful
Tejas Indians made treaties with the warlike tribes west of their
country, such as the Comanches and Wacos. By doing this the Tejas people
could go out of their own country to get the hides and meat of

<span id="page_188">p. 188</span>

the buffaloes, which roved the western lands in great herds. Living
between the Tejas tribes and the Comanches and other tribes of central
and western Texas were the Wichitas, the Tonkewas and Attakapas. Along
the gulf coast lived the Karankawas.

As we read the legends we shall find out what the Indians of long ago
believed about the flowers that grew in the fields and the fish that
swam in the rivers and the birds that sang and flew in the air. The
Indians lived close to these things. They lived in the woods and on the
open fields, gathered into villages. They knew how little animals lived
in the bushes and trees. They walked under the trees and watched the
animals eating and

<span id="page_189">p. 189</span>

playing. At night they sat in their camps around their fires and heard
owls hooting and wolves howling far away in the dark.

They watched the flowers grow by the rivers and in the woods and fields
in the spring time. They knew where to find the pink azaleas, which grew
on tall bushes. In the spring the woods were full of yellow jasmine
flowers. Indian girls liked to pick these and tie them in their long
black hair. Another flower which the Indians knew was the dogwood. This
big white flower grew on trees. When the trees were in bloom the
blossoms that covered them looked like large white butterflies resting
on the green leaves. In the open marsh glades

<span id="page_190">p. 190</span>

grew the purple gentians, and on the prairies the bluebonnets. Sometimes
these flowers looked like purple ponds of water because there were so
many of them growing together. When the wind blew across them their
purple and blue heads moved like waves. The Indians liked these flowers
and others which grew where they lived, and many of the legends in this
book are about them.

The bronzed people who knew the animals and flowers and told stories
about them were friendly. When the first white people came to east Texas
from France and Spain they found that the Indians were good and
peaceful, and so they called them Tejas Indians, which means friendly
Indians. The white men

<span id="page_191">p. 191</span>

named the country the land of the Tejas. Today that land is called Texas
because of this old Indian name.

The Tejas Indians were happy and friendly when the first white people
came to their country more than two hundred years ago. It was a land of
woods and fields. The only people who lived there were the Indians, and
they did not live in big towns. They lived in villages. The villages did
not have roads between them. When the Indians wanted to go from one to
another they had to walk through the open fields or the forests,
sometimes on narrow trails and sometimes without any trail at all.

When the white people came to the land of the Tejas the Indians were
glad

<span id="page_192">p. 192</span>

to see them. These white people came from Spain. Their leader was a
soldier named Captain de Leon. He brought with him his soldiers, and
also a good man named Father Massanet, who came to tell the Indians
about the white man's God. When Captain de Leon came to the place where
Father Massanet was later to build the first church in Texas the chief
of the Indians met the white people. He could not speak their language,
but he talked with them by making signs with his fingers. Captain de
Leon gave the chief some clothes like those the white people were
wearing, and this made the chief happy. He put them on and led the
captain and his men to the Indian village. As they marched

<span id="page_193">p. 193</span>

into the village they sang and waved their flags.

The Indians were glad to see the strange white people because the chief
told them Captain de Leon was their friend. They always obeyed their
chief. He ruled all the tribes of the Tejas Indians and the leaders of
those tribes. When he needed to find out something he wanted to know or
help in time of war he called the leaders of the tribes to his big
grass-covered house. They all sat around the fire inside and talked
about things with their chief. When they decided what to do the leaders
would go home to their tribes and tell them what the chief had said.

Father Massanet soon set to work building

<span id="page_194">p. 194</span>

the first church in Texas, named San Francisco de los Tejas. With the
help of his priests he cut down trees and built the church out of logs.
He had brought some bronze bells with him, and he put these on the
little log church, which was in Cherokee county and near the Neches
river. He started teaching the Indians. The Indians began learning the
ways of the white people and the white people began to learn about the
Indians. In this way the two races of people came together.

The white people began to come in great numbers. They killed the wild
animals which the Indians had been eating and they took or bought the
land where the Indians had their small farms.

<span id="page_195">p. 195</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Now and then
whites married Indian women, and in this way the blood of the Tejas
people was mingled with the blood of the whites. Today only a small
number of the pure-blooded Indians are left. Two tribes called the
Coushattas and Alabamas in east Texas are not native to the state. A few
Indians of other tribes live among the white people and work small farms
and hunt for a living.

#### How the Indians Looked

The Indians had reddish-brown or bronze-colored skin. They stood tall
and straight. They had strong arms and legs because they walked much
when they were hunting or fishing or

<span id="page_196">p. 196</span>

moving their camps from one place to another. Their hair was long and
black. They did not cut it short, but let it grow long. Because they
lived out of doors so much their eyes were bright and sharp. They could
see little animals and birds moving high in the trees, far away on the
hills and even in the twilight. Their ears were keen. They could hear
small sounds like rabbits running in the grass, or birds singing high in
the air over their heads, or deer calling to their mates in the woods.

#### How the Indians Dressed

In summer, when it was warm, the men wore only pieces of animal skin

<span id="page_197">p. 197</span>

around their waists. In the winter they wrapped themselves in robes made
of skins with fur on them or blankets which the women made. Indian women
also wore skins and blankets. When the babies were still too little to
walk their mothers carried them in sacks of skin tied to the mothers'
backs. When the babies were in these sacks only their heads peeped out.

On their feet the Indians wore soft shoes made of skin. These shoes were
called moccasins. They were soft because the skin had been beaten with
rocks or chewed. Indians could walk through the woods in moccasins and
not make a sound if they were careful not to step on dry sticks and
break them.

<span id="page_198">p. 198</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> The Indians were
always careful not to make noises while hunting or when engaged in wars
with other tribes.

These people who lived in the land of the Tejas so long ago liked pretty
things, as do most people everywhere. They liked bright colors. They
sewed colored feathers on their clothes and on their blankets and tied
them on their hunting bows. From the little redbird they got red
feathers, blue feathers from the blue-jay, white ones from herons and
geese, black ones from the crow and buzzard, yellow feathers from the
oriole and meadow lark, and spotted feathers from the wild turkey, the
prairie chicken, the hawk, and the eagle. Sometimes they could not find
the colored feathers they

<span id="page_199">p. 199</span>

wanted, and so they dyed white feathers with the juices of berries or
roots. They liked to wear feathers in their hair. They would braid their
long hair and stick two or three feathers in the braids. The chiefs of
the tribes wore bonnets made of many feathers.

On their moccasins and clothes the Indians sewed little colored beads.
They made these beads from many things. Some were made from red, black,
yellow or blue clay rolled into balls. When the clay was still soft
after they dug it from the earth they made holes in the balls by pushing
little twigs through them. Then they heated the balls in fires. This
made the beads hard. Today these beads are sometimes found on the banks
of

<span id="page_200">p. 200</span>

rivers or around the places where the Indians used to have their
villages. Beads were also made from hard nuts and seeds. Sometimes the
Indians made them out of the teeth of animals, and also out of the bones
of animals and fish. When they could find soft stones they would make
these stones into beads and cut pictures on them. Shells found in the
rivers or at the seashore were made into beads by punching holes into
parts of them. Parts of certain shells were used as money.

Indians used paint on their faces, arms and legs. They made their paint
out of the juices of berries and also out of different colored clays by
mixing the clay with water or with grease. They got this

<span id="page_201">p. 201</span>

grease from animals. When they went to war the men put paint on their
faces to make them look ugly so they could scare their enemies. When
they danced in their villages they put red and yellow and white and
black paint all over themselves and shouted and danced. We would not
think they were very pretty, but they thought they were, and that made
them happy.

#### Indian Homes

The Indians lived in strange houses. They did not have such things as
bricks and the kind of wood with which we build houses now. When they
could find young trees growing close together they bent them over until
their tops were touching

<span id="page_202">p. 202</span>

and then they tied the tops together. Most of the time they stuck poles
into the ground in the shape of a circle and tied the poles together at
the top. Around these poles they made the walls of their houses by tying
thick branches from trees or bunches of grass. Their houses looked like
round haystacks. They did not have any windows. The only way light could
get into them was through the door; which could be closed by hanging
skins over it, or through holes in the walls used to let out smoke from
the fires.

Some of the Indians lived in tents. These Indians did not live long in
one place, but moved around and followed the animals which they killed
and used for meat. They made their tents by stretching

<span id="page_203">p. 203</span>

skins over poles set up in the ground and tied together at the top. When
the skins were stretched over the poles the tents looked like ice cream
cones upside down. On the skins the Indians painted pictures of trees,
the sun, animals, birds, fish and Indians fighting or playing. When a
tribe got ready to move to a new place the Indians took the skins off
the poles, and rolled up the poles in the skins. They carried the
bundles with them when they went to a new camp. In this way they could
move their villages without much trouble.

The Tejas people did not travel much. They had gardens. They could not
move their gardens, so they stayed where these were. On the inside of
their houses they

<span id="page_204">p. 204</span>

did not have wood floors, but walked on mats made of grass or on
blankets or skins laid on the bare earth. They slept on beds made by
driving four short sticks into the ground like the legs of a bed. On
these legs they tied vines and the soft branches of trees, then laid on
top of these their skins and blankets. Their beds were quite soft.

There were not many things in their houses. They had no chairs or
tables, but sat on the floor or on their beds. There were no lights.
When night came they would lay wood on the fire inside the house and
this would make a bright blaze. The Indians did not have any books to
read, so they did not need lights very much. They did most of their work

<span id="page_205">p. 205</span>

while sitting outside their houses during the daytime. Those who went
away from their homes to work did so in gardens or fished or hunted.
When night came they were tired, and went to bed early. On cold winter
nights they piled wood on their fires to make a big, bright blaze to
keep them warm while the winds blew and whistled high in the trees
outside. They cooked some of their food on these fires.

#### How Food Was Cooked

The Indians cooked their food in several ways. One way was to boil
things in jars or dishes made of clay. When an Indian woman wanted to
make soup or boil meat or vegetables she put the food into one of these
pottery dishes, poured water into it

<span id="page_206">p. 206</span>

and set it on her fire until the food was cooked.

Sometimes the Indians cooked food in pottery that could not be put on
fires without cracking. When they used this kind of pottery they boiled
the water and food in the jar by dropping into it rocks which had first
been heated in a fire. As soon as one rock had cooled it was taken out
and another hot one put in its place. At last the water came to a boil.
It was a slow way to cook, but the Indians had plenty of time.

Indians knew how to bake food, such as corn bread and beans. They baked
these in ovens made of dried clay or mud into which they put burning
wood or hot rocks. They baked some food, such as

<span id="page_207">p. 207</span>

fish, by rolling the food in wet clay and covering it up in red hot
ashes for a while.

They cooked their meat by cutting it into strips and smoking it over
fires or by boiling it. They often did not cook it, but cut it into
strips and hung it outside their houses in the sun on long poles until
the sun had dried it. They dried their meat in the summer and ate it
during the winter months when animals were hard to find.

### Indian Pottery and Baskets

The Indians kept their food and water in dishes or bottles made of clay
or in baskets of woven grass and branches from trees. The women made
these

<span id="page_208">p. 208</span>

things. When they needed a dish of clay they would go out to find the
kind of clay they wanted on the banks of rivers or in fields where rains
had washed away the soft dirt till the clay could be seen. This clay was
mixed with water until it was soft and could be pressed into shape. The
woman who was making the dish would roll it and pound it with her hands
until it was the right shape and size. Sometimes she painted it with
paint made from clay of another color. Sometimes she scratched pictures
or lines on the dish when it was still soft. At last she put the dish
into a fire and burned it and made it hard, so that it would hold water
without leaking or falling to pieces.

<span id="page_209">p. 209</span>

These clay dishes and bottles are called pottery. They were made in many
different shapes. Some were like bottles. These were used to hold water
and berry juices. Others were like bowls. In them were kept the foods
which the Indians raised in their gardens, and fruits, nuts and berries.
They were all easy to break and had to be used with care. Many are to be
found today in the places where the Indians had their villages.
Sometimes they are broken into many pieces, but if all the pieces are
found they can be glued together and made to look just as they were when
the Indians used them many years ago.

Baskets which the Indian women made were often very pretty. Some were of

<span id="page_210">p. 210</span>

long, tough grass. Others were of strips of bark or wood cut from trees.
Baskets could also be woven out of vines and the long, slim branches of
willow trees growing near the rivers and ponds. The baskets the Indians
used looked very much like those which are made now. Some were painted
with different colors. Some had beads and feathers on them, and handles
made of strips of skin. In these baskets the Indians kept foods.

#### Indian Gardens, Fruits and Berries

The Tejas Indians had gardens and small farms from which they got part
of their food. This was one of the reasons they did not roam far over
the country as most Indians did. The women, not

<span id="page_211">p. 211</span>

the men, did the work in these gardens. Men hunted and fished and fought
battles and left the work in the villages to their women.

The Tejas people did not have big farms with fences around them. They
planted only little pieces of ground because they did not have such
things as ploughs. Most of the time two or three Indian women would work
on the same garden together, and when the crops were ready everything
was taken from the garden and put into one pile. From that pile each
Indian took vegetables as these were needed by a family.

The land where they lived was very rich and would grow anything they
wanted to plant in it. There was not

<span id="page_212">p. 212</span>

much cold weather in the winter, so that their gardens were not killed
by hard freezes. There was plenty of rain to make their seeds grow in
the spring. They did not have to dig big rocks out of the ground because
there were not many rocks where they lived.

They raised corn, beans, calabashes, berries, melons and pumpkins. Corn
and beans could be kept and used in the winter by putting them away in
baskets or jars. Peppers could be kept the same way.

In the woods the Indians found many things to eat. They knew where to
find the wild pecan trees, the hickory nut trees and the walnut trees.
They knew where vines with grapes grew. There

<span id="page_213">p. 213</span>

were many kinds of berries growing wild, such as blackberries,
dewberries, and huckleberries. Wild plum trees also grew in the woods.
When the fruit and berries were ripe the Indian women and children would
take baskets into the woods and go from tree to tree and from bush to
bush until the baskets were full. Sometimes they were gone all day and
did not go back to their camp before night began to fall in the woods.
They liked the fruits and did not mind working hard to get them.

### How They Hunted and Fished

Indians liked to hunt. It was fun to walk through the woods looking for
rabbits or wild turkeys or to run after the

<span id="page_214">p. 214</span>

deer and buffalo which roamed over the country. These Indian people had
to hunt because it was the only way to get the meat they ate. Each
father had to go out hunting meat for his own family. While the women
stayed at home tending the gardens and keeping house the men spent much
of their time going through the woods or across the open prairies with
their bows and arrows.

The Indians used bows and arrows for shooting animals. The bow which the
Indian used was much like the bows from which boys shoot arrows today.
It was about five feet long and was made of the wood of different kinds
of trees growing where the Indians lived. A cord made of skin was tied
to each end of the bow and

<span id="page_215">p. 215</span>

was pulled tight until the bow was bent. The arrows which were shot from
the bow were also made of wood. An arrow had to be very straight so it
would fly in a straight line. It had a point shaped from hard rock. Each
tribe of Indians had a man who did nothing but make arrow points,
because a man could not make these well unless he made many of them. The
arrow maker would look on the ground for the kind of rock which he
wanted. Then he would take another piece of rock and pound the first so
that it was broken into flat, thin pieces shaped like leaves. From each
of these pieces he would make an arrow point. He did this by chipping
little bits off of them with a sharp stone until they had

<span id="page_216">p. 216</span>

the right shape. Arrow points were both big and little. Indians used big
ones on their arrows when they wanted to shoot large animals like deer
or bears. When they wanted to shoot birds, such as wild turkeys, cranes
and hawks, they used arrows with little points so as not to tear the
birds to pieces.

Each hunter carried many arrows in a long leather sack which was called
a quiver. He hung the quiver full of arrows over his shoulder so that he
could quickly pull an arrow out of it when he wanted to shoot something.

A good hunter could hit an animal with an arrow when the animal was
running fast, and he could hit birds as they flew in the air. All little
Indian boys were

<span id="page_217">p. 217</span>

taught how to use the bow and arrow just as soon as they were strong
enough to hold them, and that is why Indians were such good hunters.
Today the woods where the Indians hunted are full of arrow points. They
can be found lying in ditches where the water has washed the dirt away
from them. Sometimes one can be found sticking in a tree where the arrow
hit when an Indian shot at an animal and missed it.

One of the animals which the Indians hunted was the buffalo, that once
roamed in thousands over the plains. The buffalo was of great use to the
Indians. They used his meat for food and his shaggy hide for making
clothes, tents or blankets. Indians killed the buffaloes by

<span id="page_218">p. 218</span>

driving them in large numbers into narrow paths between rocky walls
until the animals came to high cliffs and fell over. Sometimes they
drove them into rivers or muddy places and shot them with arrows.
Another way to shoot the buffaloes was for the Indian hunters to dress
themselves in buffalo hides to fool the animals and then creep up close
enough to shoot arrows at them. After the white man came to America the
Indians used horses for hunting. The Indians skinned the dead animals
and carried parts of the meat back to their camps. When they had so much
meat that they could not eat it all at once they cut it into thin
strips, and hung it in the sun to dry. Dried meat lasted a long time.

<span id="page_219">p. 219</span>

In the woods the Indians hunted rabbits, squirrels, coons, turkeys and
bears. They did not shoot animals just for fun. They only killed when
they were hungry. Because of this the woods were always full of things
which they needed for food. On still summer days they could hear the big
turkey gobblers calling to their flocks. They could hear squirrels
barking and scolding one another up in the oak trees. If they stood
still and hid themselves they could see the little rabbits hopping along
in the grass and nibbling leaves. They knew where to find the tracks
which the little black coon made in soft mud with his paws on the banks
of rivers when he came to drink at night or to catch crawfish in

<span id="page_220">p. 220</span>

the water. They knew where the big bear had been walking when they saw
his footprints looking like the hand of a giant in the dirt. At night
when they heard something howling on the plains they knew it was a wolf.

The best hunters could call animals and birds to them. They could
whistle like the larks and bob-whites. They could call the wild turkeys
close to them. They could bark and scold like the squirrels. Hunters who
could do these things did not have to walk, but stood still in the woods
and called the animals close enough to shoot them.

#### How They Got Food from the Water

The Indians also fished. They got part

<span id="page_221">p. 221</span>

of their food from the rivers and lakes, which were full of fish of many
kinds. They caught them with hooks and lines. They made hooks out of
thin rock and bones, much as they made their arrow-points. It was hard
work to make hooks, and they were easy to break. The hooks were tied on
lines made of long strips of skin, sinews, long vines or hair. On these
hooks and lines the fishermen caught the large fish, such as the
catfish, the gar, the buffalo fish and the drum. Once in a while they
would catch a big turtle, but the Indians got most of their turtles by
digging them out of the ground after the turtles had buried themselves
for the winter.

Sometimes the Indians shot fish with

<span id="page_222">p. 222</span>

their bows and arrows. They would stand very still near the river and
wait until a fish swam close to the top of the water, then shoot it with
an arrow and catch it before it could float away. The fishermen also
used nets made of vines. They would drag them through the water and
catch the big fish in them, or would put food in the nets and leave them
in the water where fish would become caught in them.

Indians liked to eat clams, and these were easy to get. They waded in
rivers and picked up the clams lying on the bottom. Some clams buried
themselves in mud or sand in the rivers. The Indians found these by
digging with their feet or hands where they knew the clams

<span id="page_223">p. 223</span>

were hiding. Indians who lived near the waters of the Gulf of Mexico
waded into the shallow water near the shores and found many oysters,
which taste somewhat like clams.

#### The Gods of the Indians

The people of the Tejas country believed in many spirits. They thought
some of these were good and that others were bad. Everywhere, they
believed, the spirits were watching them. When a storm arose and howled
through the trees it was evil spirits wailing and shouting. When leaves
rustled and whispered in the tops of trees in summer it was good spirits
talking among themselves or playing together. Spirits caused

<span id="page_224">p. 224</span>

the lightning to shoot across the sky, made water bubble out of the
ground, caused the snow to fall and ice to form on ponds of water,
turned the leaves red and yellow when winter came, made the flowers
bloom in the spring and caused fire to leap and dance.

Each Indian tribe had what was called a medicine man, who was able to
talk with these spirits. The medicine man believed that he could talk
with spirits who lived in the woods and sky, and he told the Indians
what the spirits were doing and what they said.

There were the evil spirits, which the Indians feared. There were also
the good spirits, which helped the Indians. The medicine man thought he
knew how to

<span id="page_225">p. 225</span>

keep the bad spirits from hurting the Indians and how to get the good
spirits to give them what they wanted. He kept a fire burning night and
day in the big house where he lived. From it all the Indians got burning
bits of wood which they took to their homes to build their own fires
with, because they thought the medicine man's fire had magic in it. The
medicine man did not have to work like other people of the tribe.
Indians brought him fish and birds and other things to eat, and the
women cooked for him and made his clothes. Even the chief thought he was
a very wise man.

The medicine man helped the great chief of the Indian tribes. When the
chief wanted to know something which

<span id="page_226">p. 226</span>

nobody else could tell him he went to the house of the medicine man. He
asked the wise man things about hunting or where to find water, or how
to make the rain stop, or how to cure sick people. Then the medicine man
painted his body with bright colors and put a cap of feathers on his
head. Sometimes he would shout and dance until he was so tired he fell
to the ground. He often swallowed a magic drink which he had made, and
this drink would make him say strange things, and the Indians thought he
was talking with the spirits. After that he would tell the chief what he
wanted to know.

The medicine man was many times wrong, but the Indians did not remember

<span id="page_227">p. 227</span>

when he was wrong, and they always remembered it when he was right.
Because of this they thought he was a very wise man with magic powers.
When they wanted to go to war they asked him how they should begin and
where they should fight. When they needed rain for their crops they
asked him to pray for the spirits to send it down from the sky. When the
hot sun burned from the sky for day after day they asked him to pray to
the spirits to send clouds to make it cool and make the rain fall.

Sometimes, the Indians thought, an evil spirit would get into a man and
make him sick or crazy. They had ways to drive out this evil spirit. The
medicine man of the tribe would make medicine

<span id="page_228">p. 228</span>

out of different things and give it to the man, or he would put seeds,
hair, bones and other things into little bags called charms and tie
these about the man's neck to drive out the evil spirits. If many people
of the tribe got sick the other Indians would dance and shout and pound
on drums to make a great noise so that the evil spirits which caused the
people to be sick would become scared and would go away from the camp.

When the people wanted the good spirits to give them something they
often danced and sang and prayed in their camps so the spirits would
hear them and be pleased. They would paint their faces and put flowers
and feathers in their hair. The medicine man would

<span id="page_229">p. 229</span>

make magic drinks and swallow them so he could talk better with the
spirits. Then everybody would begin to dance. Sometimes they danced all
day and all night. The weaker Indians would soon fall to the ground, but
the others kept on leaping around and shouting their songs to the sky,
where they thought the spirits were watching and listening. When night
came some of the Indians piled logs on the campfires. The bright flames
roared and climbed high in the air and made the camp as light as day.
The dogs barked, the Indian children laughed and the dancers sang as
loud as they could. At last the Indians were so tired they fell to the
ground and slept there or crawled to their houses and went to bed.

<span id="page_230">p. 230</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Sometimes the
spirits gave them what they wanted. At other times they did not, for the
good spirits did not always hear the Indians, so the medicine man said.

The Indians had a god they called the Great Spirit, who ruled all the
other spirits, both good and bad. He lived somewhere up in the sky,
where he could see all things that happened on the earth. He knew when a
baby died. He saw every wolf on the prairie. He knew when it was going
to rain, when a storm was about to come, when an Indian was going to get
hurt and when a little ant fell off a leaf in the woods. He knew these
things because he ruled everything on the earth and nothing could happen
unless he wanted it to happen.

<span id="page_231">p. 231</span>

The people of the Tejas country believed that when they died the Giver
of Life took them to heaven, where they lived just as they had done on
this earth but did not have the troubles they had here. They believed
that they needed their bows and arrows for hunting up there in the sky.
They thought that after they died they would need everything they used
on the earth. Because of this they buried their people with all the
things used and loved when they were alive. When a hunter died his
family would put in the grave with him his clothes, his bow and arrows
and his knife. When a little child died they would bury it with dolls or
other things it liked to play with. When an Indian

<span id="page_232">p. 232</span>

woman died they would bury her with her pretty clothes, beads,
moccasins, necklaces and bone needles.

The Indians loved and worshipped the Great Spirit or Giver of Life. Some
of the legends in this book tell how the Great Spirit brought help to
the Indians when they were in trouble. The legend named "Why the Irises
Hold Hands," tells how the Great Spirit grew angry and sent a flood upon
some Indians who did not thank him for the good things he had given
them. In the legend called "Kachina Brings the Spring" it is told how
the Great Spirit sent down rain to the Indians after a little girl had
burned her doll to please him.

We have seen how the Indians lived

<span id="page_233">p. 233</span>

close to the animals and fish and birds and how much they knew about
these little things that ran, swam and flew. We have found that the
Indians believed in good and evil spirits and a Great Spirit who was
most powerful of all. Now we know why the legends in this book tell us
about these things. The Indians thought about them all the time, and
because of that they put them into their stories. The legends tell us
what the Indians thought about the world in which they lived.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_0"></span>[187:\*](wsgr34.htm#fr_0) Wich´itas, Tom´kewas,
Attak´apas, Karank´awas.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Interesting Things to Do](wsgr35)
