[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](aph03)  [Next](aph05) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B000EP89M2/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Aphrodite*, by Pierre Louys, \[1932\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_37">p. 37</span>

### Chapter Three

### DEMETRIOS

ON the plaza abandoned by the musicians Demetrios remained  alone,
resting on his elbows. He heard the sea murmur, the vessels creak
slowly, the wind pass beneath the stars. The whole town was lighted by a
little dazzling cloud which had lingered over the moon and the light in
the sky was softened.

The young man looked about him; the tunics of the flute-players had left
two imprints in the dust. He recalled their faces; they were two
Ephesians. The eldest had seemed pretty to him, but the youngest was
without charm; and, as ugliness made him suffer, he avoided thinking of
her.

At his feet shone an object of ivory. He picked it up; it was a writing
tablet whence hung a silver stylus. Its wax was almost used up but the
letters must have been traced over several times so that, the last time,
they were cut into the ivory.

He saw but three words written there:

MYRTIS LOVES RHODOCLEIA

And he asked himself to which of the two women this belonged and whether
the other were the loved woman or, indeed, some unknown, abandoned at
Ephesos. Then he thought a moment of rejoining the musicians to give
back what was, perhaps, the souvenir

<span id="page_38">p. 38</span>

of some dead beloved; but he could not have found them again without
trouble and as he was already ceasing to be interested in them he turned
around idly and threw the little object into the sea.

It fell rapidly, gliding like a white bird, and he heard the splash the
distant black water made. This little noise made him feel the vast
silence of the port.

Leaning with his back against the cold parapet, he tried to drive away
every thought and began to look about him.

He had a horror of life. He left his dwelling only at the hour when life
ceased and returned when the first dawn drew the fishermen and the
kitchen gardeners toward the town. The pleasure of seeing in the world
only the shadow of the town and his own figure became such a delight to
him that, for several months, he no longer remembered having seen the
sun at mid-day.

He was wearied. The queen was fastidious.

He could hardly understand, this night, the joy and the pride which had
filled him when, three years before, the queen, seduced perhaps more by
the rumor of his beauty than by the reports of his genius, had ordered
him invited to the palace and announced at the Gate of Evening by the
blowing of silver trumpets.

This entrance enlightened his memory sometimes with one of those
souvenirs which, by reason of too much sweetness, become more and more
acute in the soul to the point of becoming intolerable. The queen had
received him alone in her private apartments which were composed of
three little rooms enviably soft and soundless. She was lying on her
left side and as though buried in a cavern of greenish silks which
bathed the black locks of het head-dress in purple reflections. Her
young body was robed in a fantastically embroidered costume.

<span id="page_39">p. 39</span>

Demetrios, kneeling respectfully, had taken in his hand the little bare
foot of the queen Berenice, as a precious and sweet object, to be
kissed.

Then she had risen.

Simply, like a handsome slave who serves as a model, she had undone her
corselet, her little bands—taken even the circlets from her arms, even
the rings from her toes, and she had stood, hands open before her
shoulders which lifted her head beneath the coral ornaments that swayed
in long strings by her cheeks.

She was the daughter of a Ptolemy and of a Syrian princess descended
from all the gods through Astarte, whom the Greeks called Aphrodite.
Demetrios knew this and that she was proud of her Olympian lineage.
Therefore he was not troubled when the sovereign, without moving, said
to him: "I am Astarte. Take marble and thy chisel and reveal me to the
people of Egypt. I wish my image to be adored."

Demetrios gazed at her, and guessing beyond all doubt what simple and
fresh emotion moved this young girl, he said, "I am the first to adore
it."

The queen was not angry at this precipitancy, but demanded, drawing
back, "Dost think thyself Adonis, to touch the goddess?"

He replied, "Yes."

She gazed at him, smiled a little, and concluded, "Thou art right."

 

It was for this reason that he became insupportable and that his best
friends were lost to him; but the hearts of all women doted upon him.

When he passed into a hall of the palace the slaves stopped, the

<span id="page_40">p. 40</span>

women of the court became silent, the strangers listened to him also,
for the sound of his voice was ravishing. If he retired to the queen
they came even there to importune him under pretexts always new. If he
wandered through the streets, the folds of his tunic became filled with
little papyri on which the passers-by had written their names with
anguished words but which he, tired of such matters, crumpled without
reading. When they had put his work in place in the temple of Aphrodite
the enclosure was filled at every hour of the night by the crowds of
adoring women who came to read his name in the stone and to offer to
their living god all the doves and all the roses.

Soon his house was encumbered with gifts which he at first accepted
indifferently but which later he invariably refused when he understood.
Even his slaves besought him. He had them whipped and sold. Then his
male slaves, bribed by presents, opened the door to unknown women. The
little objects of his toilette and of his table disappeared one after
another. More than one woman in the town had a sandal or a girdle of
his, a cup from which he had drunk, even the kernels of fruit he had
eaten. If he dropped a flower while walking he found it no more behind
him. They would have gathered up even the dust crushed by his feet.

Beyond the fact that this persecution became dangerous and threatened to
kill all his sensitiveness he had arrived at the epoch of youth where
the man who thinks believes it necessary to make two parts of his life
and to mingle no longer the affairs of the spirit with the necessities
of the senses. The statue of Aphrodite-Astarte was for him the sublime
pretext for this moral conversion. All that the queen had of beauty, all
that could be invented of

<span id="page_41">p. 41</span>

ideals around the supple lines of her body, Demetrios had evoked from
the marble and from that day he imagined no other woman on earth would
ever again attain the level of his dreams. His statue became the object
of his desire; henceforth he adored nothing save it alone, and madly
separated from the flesh the supreme Idea of the goddess, all the more
immaterial if he had attached it to life.

When he again saw the queen herself, he found her despoiled of all which
had constituted her charm. She was at once too different from the Other
One and too similar, as though an intruder had taken the semblance of
the admired woman. Her arms were slighter, her hips narrower, than those
of the True One. In the end he tired of her.

His adorers knew it and though he continued his daily visits it was
known that he had ceased to love Berenice. And around him the ardor
redoubled. He did not notice it. In fact, the change which he needed was
of another nature.

It is rare that, between two mistresses, a man should not have an
interval of life where vulgar debauch tempts and satisfies him.
Demetrios abandoned himself to it. When the necessity of going to the
palace displeased him more than usual, he went at night to the garden of
the sacred courtesans which surrounded the temple on all sides. The
women who were there did not know him at all. They had no more cries or
tears, and there at least he was not troubled by the amorous whining
with which the queen enervated him. The conversation that he held with
these beautiful calm persons was idle and without research. The visitors
of the day, the weather of the morrow, the sweetness of the grass and of
the night, were its charming subjects. They did not beseech him to
expose his theories on sculpture and did not give their

<span id="page_42">p. 42</span>

opinions of the Achilles of Skopas. If they happened to thank the
visitor, to find him well made and to tell him so, he had the right not
to believe in their disinterestedness.

Leaving them, he would mount the steps of the temple and fall into
ecstasy before the statue.

Between the slender columns topped with Ionian volutes, the goddess, on
a pedestal of rosy stone laden with pendent treasures, appeared as
though living. She was nude, softly tinted in feminine tones; she held
in one hand her symbolic mirror, and with the other adorned her beauty
with a seven-fold necklace of pearls. One pearl, larger than the others,
silvery and elongated, shone upon her bosom like a crescent moon between
two snowy clouds.

Demetrios contemplated her tenderly and longed to believe, like the
people, that those were the true sacred pearls born of the water drops
which had rolled in the shell of the Anadyomene.

"O divine Sister," he said, "O flowering, O transfigured one! thou art
no longer the little Asiatic whom I made thine unworthy model. Thou art
her immortal Idea, the terrestrial Soul of the Astarte who was the
progenitor of her race. Thou didst shine in her ardent eyes, thou didst
burn in her somber lips, thou didst faint in her soft hands, thou didst
pant in her swelling bosom, in former times, before thy birth; and that
which would please the daughter of a fisherman would delight thee also,
thee, goddess, thee—mother of gods and men—the joy and the sorrow of the
world! But I have seen, evoked, seized thee, O marvelous Cytheræa! I
have revealed thee to the earth. It is not thine image, it is thyself to
whom I have given thy mirror and whom I have covered with pearls as on
the day when thou wert born of the bleeding sky and the foamy smile of
the waters, and Aurora, dripping

<span id="page_43">p. 43</span>

with dew, with a cortege of blue tritons, acclaimed thee to the shores
of Cypros."

He had adored her thus when he entered upon the jetty at the hour when
the crowd was dispersing and heard the sorrowful song of the
flute-players. But this evening he had refused to visit the women of the
temple. because a couple, half seen under the branches, had filled him
with disgust and revolted his very soul.

Little by little, the gentle influence of the night worked upon him. He
turned his face toward the wind which had passed over the sea and seemed
to draw toward Egypt the scent of the roses of Amathus.

Lovely feminine forms sketched themselves in his thought. He had been
requested to make, for the garden of the goddess, a group of the three
Charities enlaced; but his youth revolted at copying conventions and he
dreamed of uniting on the same block of marble three gracious movements
of woman: two of the Charities would be clothed, one holding a fan and
half closing her eyelids at the breath of the swaying plumes; the other
dancing among the folds of her robe. The third, behind her sisters,
would be nude and her raised arms would twist upon the nape of her neck
the mass of her rolled hair.

He engendered in his spirit still other projects—as to attach to the
rocks of the Pharos an Andromeda of black marble before the rough
monster of the sea; to enclose the hill of Bruchion between the four
horses of the rising sun, each one a mettlesome Pegasus—and with what
intoxication did he not exult at the idea which was coming to birth in
him of a Zagreus terrified before the approach of the Titans. Ah! how he
was seized by all beauty! How he tore

<span id="page_44">p. 44</span>

himself from love! How he "separated from the flesh the supreme Idea of
the goddess!" How free he felt, at last!

Now he turned his head toward the quays and saw, shining in the
distance, the yellow veil of a sauntering woman.

<span id="img_04400"></span> ![](img/04400.jpg)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter Four. The Passer-by](aph05)
