[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](aph24)  [Next](aph26) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B000EP89M2/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Aphrodite*, by Pierre Louys, \[1932\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_197">p. 197</span>

### Chapter Three

### THE MULTITUDE

IN the morning on which the bacchanalia at Bacchis’s came to an end,
there was an event at Alexandria: rain fell. Immediately, contrary to
what usually occurs in countries less African, everyone was out of doors
to welcome the downpour.

The phenomenon was neither torrential nor tempest-like. Large warm
drops, from the height of a violent cloud, traversed the air. The women
felt them moistening their breasts and their hastily knotted hair. Men
gazed at the sky with interest. Little children burst into laughter,
dragging their bare feet in the surface mud.

Then the cloud vanished amidst the light; the sky stood implacably pure,
and a little after noon the mud had again become dust under the sun's
rays.

But this momentary shower. had sufficed. The town was cheered by it. The
men remained together upon the flagstones of the Agora and the women
clustered in groups, mingling their bright voices.

Only the courtesans were there, for, the third day of the Aphrodisian
Festivals being reserved for the exclusive devotions of the married
women, these latter had just assembled in a procession upon the road to
the Astarteion, and upon the square there were only flowered robes and
eyes black with fard.

<span id="page_198">p. 198</span>

As Myrtocleia passed, a young girl named Philotis, who was talking with
several others, pulled her by the knot of her sleeve.

"Ah, little one! thou didst play at Bacchis’s yesterday? What happened
there? What did they do? Has Bacchis put on a new necklace of discs to
hide the valleys of her neck? Does she wear breastplates of wood or of
brass? Did she forget to dye the little white hairs on her temples,
before putting on her wig? Come, speak, little stupid!"

"Dost thou think that I looked? I came after the dinner, I played my
scene, I received my pay and then left at once."

"Oh! I know thou dost not corrupt thyself!"

"To spot my robe and receive blows? No, Philotis. Only rich women can
afford to take part in orgies. Little flute-players gain only tears."

"If thou wouldst not spot thy robe, leave it in the ante-chamber. When
thou receivest buffets, make them pay thee. That is elementary. Then
thou hast nothing to tell us? Not an adventure, not a jest, not a
scandal? We are yawning like ibises. If thou knowest nothing, invent
something."

"My friend Theano stayed later than I. When I awoke just now, she had
not returned. Perhaps the festival still continues."

"It is ended," said another woman. "Theano is down there, by the Ceramic
Wall."

The courtesans ran thither, but at some distance they stopped with
smiles of pity.

Theano, dizzy in the most ingenuous drunkenness, was pulling obstinately
at an almost dismantled rose whose thorns clung to her hair. Her yellow
tunic was soiled, as though the whole orgy had passed over her. The
bronze brooch which should have held the

<span id="page_199">p. 199</span>

convergent folds of her garment upon her left shoulder, hung lower than
her girdle, disarranging all her clothing.

As soon as she perceived Myrtocleia, she went off suddenly into the
burst of singular laughter, known to everyone in Alexandria, which had
given her the nickname of "The Hen." It was the interminable cackling of
a laying hen, a cascade of gayety which descended as her breath failed,
recommenced on a sharp cry, and repeated its cadence, rhythmically, like
the joy of a triumphant fowl.

"An egg! An egg!" jeered Philotis.

But Myrtocleia made a gesture. "Come, Theano. Thou must go to bed. Thou
art not well. Come with me."

"Ah! ha! . . . Ah! ha! . . ." laughed the child.

And she beat her breast with her little hand, crying in a changed voice,
"Ah! ha! . . . The mirror . . ."

"Come!" repeated Myrto, impatiently.

"The mirror . . . It is stolen, stolen, stolen! Ah! ha! I will never
laugh so much again if I live longer than Cronos. Stolen, stolen; the
silver mirror!"

The singer tried to draw her away, but Philotis had understood. "Oh!"
she cried to the others, raising her arms in the air.

"Come quickly! here is news! Bacchis’s mirror is stolen!"

And all exclaimed: "Papaie! Bacchis’s mirror!"

In an instant, thirty women crowded around the flute-player. "What are
they saying?"

"What?"

"Bacchis’s mirror has been stolen. Theano has just said so."

"But when?"

"Who took it?"

<span id="page_200">p. 200</span>

The child shrugged her shoulders. "How should I know?"

"Thou didst pass the night down there. Thou shouldst know. It is not
possible. Who has entered her house? Surely they told thee. Try to
remember, Theano."

"How should I know? . . . There were more than twenty in the hall . . .
They had hired me as a flute-player, but they kept me from playing
because they did not like music. They asked me to mimic the dance-figure
of Danæ and they threw pieces of gold, and Bacchis took them all from me
. . . And what more? They were crazy. They made me drink, head down, in
a crater much too full where they had poured seven cups because there
were seven wines on the table. My face was all wet. Even my hair was
soaking and my roses."

"Yes," interrupted Myrto, "thou art a very naughty girl. But the mirror?
Who took it?"

"Exactly! When they put me back on my feet, the blood had run to my head
and the wine to my ears. Ha! ha! They all began to laugh . . . Bacchis
sent for the mirror . . . Ha! ha! It wasn't there. Someone had taken
it."

"Who? I am asking thee, who?"

"It wasn't I, that is all I know. They could not search me, I was quite
naked. I could not hide a mirror, like a drachma, under my eyelid. It
wasn't I, that is all I know. She crucified a slave, perhaps for that .
. . When I saw they were not looking at me any more, I picked up the
Danæ pieces. See, Myrto, I have five of them. Thou shalt buy robes for
us three."

The report of the robbery had spread, little by little, over the whole
square. The courtesans did not conceal their envious satisfaction. A
noisy curiosity animated the shifting groups.

<span id="page_201">p. 201</span>

"It is a woman," said Philotis. "It is a woman who turned the trick."

"Yes, the mirror was well hidden. A robber could have carried off
everything in the house and turned everything upside down without
finding the stone."

"Bacchis has enemies, her former women-friends above all. They know all
her secrets. One of them could have drawn her off somewhere and entered
her house at the hour when the sun is hot and the streets almost
deserted."

"Oh! perhaps she has had the mirror sold to pay her debts."

"Could it have been one of her visitors? They say she is careless, now,
of whom she receives."

"No, it is a woman. I am sure of it."

"By the two goddesses! It is well done."

Suddenly a still more tempestuous crowd pushed toward a point of the
Agora, followed by an increasing murmur which attracted all passers.

"What is it? What is it?"

And a shrill voice, dominating the tumult, cried over the anxious heads:

"Someone has slain the wife of the High Priest!"

 

A violent emotion seized all the crowd. No one believed it. No one could
imagine that, in the midst of the Aphrodisian Festivals, such a murder
had come to draw the wrath of the gods upon the town. But in all
directions the same words passed from mouth to mouth:

"The wife of the High Priest has been slain! The temple festival is
suspended!"

<span id="page_202">p. 202</span>

The news arrived rapidly. The body had been found, lying upon a bench of
rose-marble, in a solitary place at the summit of the gardens. A long
golden pin pierced the left breast; the wound had not bled but the
assassin had cut off all the young woman's hair and carried away the
antique comb of the queen Nitocris.

After the first cries of anguish, a profound stupor spread. The
multitude increased each moment. The entire town was there, a sea of
bare heads and women's headgear, an immense troop which debouched
simultaneously from streets full of blue shadow into the dazzling light
of the Agora of Alexandria. No such gathering had been seen since the
day when Ptolemy Auletes was overthrown by the partisans of Berenice.
And yet, political revolutions appeared less terrible than this crime of
sacrilege upon which the welfare of the city might depend. The men
thronged around the witnesses. New details were demanded. New
conjectures were offered. Women imparted to late arrivals the theft of
the celebrated mirror. The best informed affirmed that the two
simultaneous crimes had been committed by the same hand. But whose hand?
Girls who, the day before, had presented their offerings for the
following year, feared lest the goddess withhold her consideration and
sobbed, crouching, their heads in their robes.

An ancient superstition would have it that two such events would be
followed by a more serious third. The crowd awaited this. After the
mirror and the comb, what had the mysterious thief taken? A stifling
atmosphere, inflamed by the south wind and full of dusty sand, weighed
upon the motionless crowd.

Imperceptibly, as though this human mass were a single being, it was
seized by a shudder which increased by degrees to panic, and all eyes
became fixed on the same point of the horizon.

<span id="page_203">p. 203</span>

This was the distant extremity of the great rectilinear avenue which
traversed Alexandria from the Canopic Gate, and led from the Temple to
the Agora. There, at the highest point of the gentle slope, where the
way opened upon the sky, a second terrified multitude had just appeared
and descended, running toward the first.

"The courtesans! The sacred courtesans!"

No one stirred. No one dared go to meet them for fear of learning of a
new disaster. They arrived like a living inundation, preceded by the
dull round of their course upon the ground. They raised their arms, they
elbowed each other. They seemed to flee an army. They could be
recognized, now. Their robes could be distinguished, their girdles,
their hair. Rays of light struck the golden jewels. They were quite
near. They opened their mouths . . . The silence was absolute.

"The [necklace](errata.htm#3) of the goddess has been stolen, the true
pearls of the Anadyomene!"

A clamor of despair greeted the fatal words. The crowd recoiled at first
like a wave, then surged forward, beating against the walls, filling the
road, engulfing the terrified women, into the long avenue of the Drome
toward the undone Holy Immortal.

<span id="img_03600"></span> ![](img/03600.jpg)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter Four. The Response](aph26)
