[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Native American](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](mmp09) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002E9HIF0/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Myths of Mexico and Peru*, by Lewis Spence, \[1913\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# CHAPTER VII: The Mythology of Peru

## The Religion of Ancient Peru

THE religion of the ancient Peruvians had obviously developed in a much
shorter time than that of the Mexicans. The more ancient character
inherent in it was displayed in the presence of deities many of which
were little better than mere totems, and although a definite monotheism
or worship of one god appears to have been reached, it was not by the
efforts of the priestly caste that this was achieved, but rather by the
will of the Inca Pachacutic, who seems to have been a monarch gifted
with rare insight and ability-a man much after the type of the Mexican
Nezahualcoyotl.

In Inca times the religion of the people was solely directed by the
state, and regulated in such a manner that independent theological
thought was permitted no outlet. But it must not be inferred from this
that no change had ever come over the spirit of Peruvian religion. As a
matter of fact sweeping changes had been effected, but these had been
solely the work of the Inca race, the leaders of which had amalgamated
the various faiths of the peoples whom they had conquered into one
official belief.

## Totemism

Garcilasso el Inca de la Vega, an early Spanish writer on matters
Peruvian, states that tradition ran that in ante-Inca times every
district, family, and village possessed its own god, each different from
the others. These gods were usually such objects as trees, mountains,
flowers, herbs, caves, large stones, pieces of jasper, and animals. The
jaguar, puma, and bear were worshipped for their strength and
fierceness, the monkey and fox for their cunning, the condor for its
size and because several tribes believed themselves to be descended from
it. The screech-owl was worshipped for its beauty, and the common owl
for its power of seeing in the dark. Serpents, particularly the larger
and more dangerous varieties, were especially regarded with reverence.

Although Payne classes all these gods together as totems, it is plain
that those of the first class-the flowers, herbs, caves, and pieces of
jasper-are merely fetishes. A fetish is an object in which the savage
believes to be resident a spirit which, by its magic, will assist him in
his undertakings. A totem is an object or an animal, usually the latter,
with which the people of a tribe believe themselves to be connected by
ties of blood and from which they are descended. It later becomes the
type or symbol of the tribe.

## Paccariscas

Lakes, springs, rocks, mountains, precipices, and caves were all
regarded by the various Peruvian tribes as *paccariscas*-places whence
their ancestors had originally issued to the upper world. The
*paccarisca* was usually saluted with the cry, "Thou art my birthplace,
thou art my life-spring. Guard me from evil, O Paccarisca!" In the holy
spot a spirit was supposed to dwell which served the tribe as a kind of
oracle. Naturally the *paccarisca* was looked upon with extreme
reverence. It became, indeed, a sort of life-centre for the tribe, from
which they were very unwilling to be separated.

## Worship of Stones

The worship of stones appears to have been almost as universal in
ancient Peru as it was in ancient Palestine. Man in his primitive state
believes stones to be the framework of the earth, its bony structure. He
considers himself to have emerged from some cave-in fact, from the
entrails of the earth. Nearly all American creation-myths regard man as
thus emanating from the bowels of the great terrestrial mother. Rocks
which were thus chosen as *paccariscas* are found, among many other
places, at Callca, in the valley of the Yucay, and at Titicaca there is
a great mass of red sandstone on the top of a high ridge with almost
inaccessible slopes and dark, gloomy recesses where the sun was thought
to have hidden himself at the time of the great deluge which covered all
the earth. The rock of Titicaca was, in fact, the great *paccarisca* of
the sun itself.

We are thus not surprised to find that many standing stones were
worshipped in Peru in aboriginal times. Thus Arriaga states that rocks
of great size which bore some resemblance to the human figure were
imagined to have been at one time gigantic men or spirits who, because
they disobeyed the creative power, were turned into stone. According to
another account they were said to have suffered this punishment for
refusincr to listen to the words of Thonapa, the son of the creator,
who, like Quetzalcoad or Manco Ccapac, had taken upon himself the guise
of a wandering Indian, so that he might have an opportunity of bringing
the arts of civilisation to the aborigines. At Tiahuanaco a certain
group of stones was said to represent all that remained of the villagers
of that place, who, instead of paying fitting attention to the wisc
counsel which Thonapa the Civiliser bestowed upon them, continued to
dance and drink in scorn of the teachings he had brought to them.

Again, some stones were said to have become men, as in the old Greek
creation-legend of Deucalion and Pyrrha. In the legend of Ccapac Inca
Pachacutic, when Cuzco was attacked in force by the Chancas an Indian
erected stones to which he attached shields and weapons so that they
should appear to represent so many warriors in hiding. Pachacutic, in
great need of assistance, cried to them with such vehemence to come to
his help that they became men, and rendered him splendid service.

## Huacas

Whatever was sacred, of sacred origin, or of the nature of a relic the
Peruvians designated a *huaca*, from the root *huacan*, to howl, native
worship invariably taking the form of a kind of howl, or weird,
dirge-like wailing. All objects of reverence were known as *huacas*,
although those of a higher class were also alluded to as *viracochas*.
The Peruvians had, naturally, many forms of *huaca*, the most popular of
which were those of the fetish class which could be carried about by the
individual. These were usually stones or pebbles, many of which were
carved and painted, and some made to represent human beings. The llama
and the ear of maize were perhaps the most usual forms of these sacred
objects. Some of them had an agricultural significance. In order that
irrigation might proceed favourably a *huaca* was placed at intervals in
proximity to the acequias, or irrigation canals, which was supposed to
prevent them leaking or otherwise failing to supply a sufficiency of
moisture to the parched maize-fields. *Huacas* of this sort were known
as *ccompas*, and were regarded as deities of great importance, as the
foodsupply of the community was thought to be wholly dependent upon
their assistance. Other *huacas* of a similar kind were called
*chichics* and *huancas*, and these prcsided over the fortunes of the
maize, and ensured that a sufficient supply of rain should be
forthcoming. Great numbers of these agricultural fetishes were destroyed
by the zealous commissary Hernandez de Avendaño.

## The Mamas

Spirits which were supposed to be instrumental in forcing the growth of
the maize or other plants were the *mamas*. We find a similar conception
among many Brazilian tribes to-day, so that the idea appears to have
been a widely accepted one in South American countries. The Peruvians
called such agencies "mothers," adding to the generic name that of the
plant or herb with which they were specially associated. Thus *acsumama*
was the potato-mother, *quinuamama* the quinua-mother, *saramama* the
maize-mother, and *cocamama* the mother of the coca-shrub. Of these the
*saramama* was naturally the most important, governing as it did the
principal source of the food-supply of the community. Sometimes an image
of the *saramama* was carved in stone, in the shape of an car of maize.
The *saramama* was also worshipped in the form of a doll, or huantay.
sara, made out of stalks of maize, renewed at each harvest, much as the
idols of the great corn-mother of Mexico were manufactured at each
harvest-season. After having been made, the image was watched over for
three nights, and then sacrifice was done to it. The priest or
medicine-man of the tribe would then inquire of it whether or not it was
capable of existing until that time in the next year. If its spirit
replied in the affirmative it was permitted to remain where it was until
the following harvest. If not it was removed, burnt, and another figure
took its place, to which similar questions were put.

## The Huamantantac

Connected with agriculture in some degree was the Huamantantac (He who
causes the Cormorants to gather themselves together). This was the
agency responsible for the gathering of sea-birds, resulting in the
deposits of guano to be found along the Peruvian coast which are so
valuable in the cultivation of the maize-plant. He was regarded as a
most beneficent spirit, and was sacrificed to with exceeding fervour.

## Huaris

The *huaris*, or "great ones," were the ancestors of the aristocrats of
a tribe, and were regarded as specially favourable toward agricultural
effort, possibly because the land had at one time belonged to them
personally. They were sometimes alluded to as the "gods of strength,"
and were sacrificed to by libations of *chicha*. Ancestors in general
were deeply revered, and had an agricultural significance, in that
considerable tracts of land were tilled in order that they might be
supplied with suitable food and drink offerings. As the number of
ancestors increased more and more land was brought into cultivation, and
the hapless people had their toil added to immeasurably by these
constant demands upon them.

## Huillcas

The *huillcas* were *huacas* which partook of the nature of oracles.
Many of these were serpents, trees, and rivers, the noises made by which
appeared to the primitive Peruvians-as, indeed, they do to primitive
folk all over the world-to be of the quality of articulate speech. Both
the Huillcamayu and the Apurimac rivers at Cuzco were *huillca* oracles
of this kind, as their names, "Huillca-river " and "Great Speaker,"
denote. These oracles often set the mandate of the Inca himself at
defiance, occasionally supporting popular opinion against his policy.

## The Oracles of the Andes

The Peruvian Indians of the Andes range within recent generations
continued to adhere to the superstitions they had inherited from their
fathers. A rare and interesting account of these says that they "admit
an evil being, the inhabitant of the centre of the earth, whom they
consider as the author of their misfortunes, and at the mention of whose
name they tremble. The most shrewd among them take advantage of this
belief to obtain respect, and represent themselves as his delegates.
Under the denomination of *mohanes*, or *agoreros*, they are consulted
even on the most trivial occasions. They preside over the intrigues of
love, the health of the community, and the taking of the field. Whatever
repeatedly occurs to defeat their prognostics, falls on themselves; and
they are wont ta pay for their deceptions very dearly. They chew a
species of vegetable called *piripiti*, and throw it into the air,
accompanying this act by certain recitals and incantations, to injure
some, to benefit others, to procure rain and the inundation of the
rivers, or, on the other hand, to occasion settled weather, and a
plentiful store of agricultural productions. Any such result, having
been casually verified on a single occasion, suffices to confirm the
Indians in their faith, although they may have been cheated a thousand
times. Fully persuaded that they cannot resist the influence of the
*piripiri*, as soon as they know that they have been solicited in love
by its means, they fix their eyes on the impassioned object, and
discover a thousand amiable traits, either real or fanciful, which
indifference had before concealed from their view. But the principal
power, efficacy, and it may be said misfortune of the *mohanes* consist
in the cure of the sick. Every malady is ascribed to theit enchantments,
and means are instantly taken to ascertain by whom the mischief may have
been wrought. For this purpose, the nearest relative takes a quantity of
the juice of *floripondium*, and suddenly falls intoxicated by the
violence of the plant. He is placed in a fit posture to prevent
suffocation, and on his coming to himself, at the end of three days, the
*mohane* who has the greatest resemblance to the sorcerer he saw in his
visions is to undertake the cure, or if, in the interim, the sick man
has perished, it is customary to subject him to the same fate. When not
any sorcerer occurs in the visions, the first mohane they encounter has
the misfortune to represent his image." \[Skinner, *State of Peru*, p.
275\]

## Lake-Worship in Peru

At Lake Titicaca the Peruvians believed the inhabitants of the earth,
animals as well as men, to have been fashioned by the creator, and the
district was thus sacrosanct in their eyes. The people of the Collao
called it Mamacota (Mother-water), because it furnished them with
supplies of food. Two great idols were connected with this worship. One
called Copacahuana was made of a bluish-green stone shaped like a fish
with a human head, and was placed in a commanding position on the shores
of the lake. On the arrival of the Spaniards so deeply rooted was the
worship of this goddess that they could only suppress it by raising an
image of the Virgin in place of the idol. The Christian emblem remains
to this day. Mamacota was venerated as the giver of fish, with which the
lake abounded. The other image, Copacati (Serpent-stone), represented
the element of water as embodied in the lake itself in the form of an
image wreathed in serpents, which in America are nearly always
symbolical of water.

## The Lost Island

A strange legend is recounted of this lake-goddess. She was chiefly
worshipped as the giver of rain, but Huaina Ccapac, who had modern ideas
and journeyed through the country casting down *huacas* had determined
to raise on an island of Lake Titicaca a temple to Yatiri (The Ruler),
the Aymara name of the god Pachacamac in his form of Pachayachachic. He
commenced by raising the new shrine on the island of Titicaca itself.
But the deity when called upon refused to vouchsafe any reply to his
worshippers or priests. Huaina then commanded that the shrine should be
transferred to the island of Apinguela. But the same thing happened
there. He then inaugurated a temple on the island of Paapiti, and
lavished upon it many sacrifices of llamas, children, and precious
metals. But the offended tutelary goddess of the lake, irritated beyond
endurance by this invasion of her ancient domain, lashed the watery
waste into such a frenzy of storm that the island and the shrine which
covered it disappeared beneath the waves and were never thereafter
beheld by mortal eye.

## The Thunder God of Peru

The rain-and-thunder god of Peru was worshipped in various parts of the
country under various names. Among the Collao he was known as Con, and
in that part of the Inca dominions now known as Bolivia he was called
Churoquella. Near the cordilleras of the coast he was probably known as
Pariacaca, who expelled the *huaca* of the district by dreadful
tempests, hurling rain and hail at him for three days and ni hts in such
quantities as to form the great lake of Pariacaca. Burnt llamas were
offered to him. But the Incas, discontented with this local worship,
which by no means suited their system of central government, determined
to create one thunder-deity to whom all the tribes in the empire must
bow as the only god of his class. We are not aware what his name was,
but we know from mythological evidence that he was a mixture of all the
other gods of thunder in the Peruvian Empire, first because he
invariably occupied the third place in the triad of greater deities, the
creator, sun, and thunder, all of whom were more or less amalgamations
of provincial and metropolitan gods, and secondly because a great image
of him was erected in the Coricancha at Cuzco, in which he was
represented in human form, wearing a headdress which concealed his face,
symbolic of the clouds, which ever veil the thunder-god's head. He had a
special temple of his own, moreover, and was assigned a share in the
sacred lands by the Inca Pachacutic. He was accompanied by a figure of
his sister, who carried jars of water. An unknown Quichuan poet composed
on the myth the following graceful little poem, which was translated by
the late Daniel Garrison Brinton, an enthusiastic Americanist and
professor of American archæology in the University of Pennsylvania:

Bounteous Princess,  
Lo, thy brother  
Breaks thy vessel  
Now in fragments.  
From the blow come  
Thunder, lightning,  
Strokes of lightning;  
And thou, Princess,  
Tak'st the water,  
With it rainest,  
And the hail or  
Snow dispensest,  
Viracocha,  
World-constructor.

It will be observed that the translator here employs the name Viracocha
as if it were that of the deity. But it was merely a general expression
in use for a more than usually sacred being. Brinton, commenting upon
the legend, says: "In this pretty waif that has floated down to us from
the wreck of a literature now for ever lost there is more than one point
to attract the notice of the antiquary. He may find in it a hint to
decipher those names of divinities so common in Peruvian legends,
Contici and Illatici. Both mean 'the Thunder Vase,' and both doubtless
refer to the conception here displayed of the phenomena of the
thunderstorm." Alluding to Peruvian thunder-myth elsewhere, he says in
an illuminating passage: "Throughout the realms of the Incas the
Peruvians venerated as maker of all things and ruler of the firmament
the god Ataguju. The legend was that from him proceeded the first of
mortals, the man Guamansuri, who descended to the earth and there wedded
the sister of certain Guachimines, rayless ones or Darklings, who then
possessed it. They destroyed him, but their sister gave birth to twin
sons, Apocatequil and Piguerao. The former was the more powerful. By
touching the corpse of his mother he brought her to life, he drove off
and slew the Guachimines, and, directed by Ataguju, released the race of
Indians from the soil by turning it up with a spade of gold. For this
reason they adored him as their maker. He it was, they thought, who
produced the thunder and the lightning by hurling stones with his sling.
And the thunderbolts that fall, said they, are his children. Few
villages were willing to be without one or more of these. They were in
appearance small, round stones, but had the admirable properties of
securing fertility to the fields, protecting from lightning, and, by a
transition easy to understand, were also adored as gods of fire as well
material as of the passions, and were capable of kindling the dangerous
flames of desire in the most frigid bosoms. Therefore they were in great
esteem as love-charms. Apocatequil's statue was erected on the
mountains, with that of his mother on one hand and his brother on the
other. 'He was Prince of Evil, and the most respected god of the
Peruvians. From Quito to Cuzco not an Indian but would give all he
possessed to conciliate him. Five priests, two stewards, and a crowd of
slaves served his image. And his chief temple was surrounded by a very
considerable village, whose inhabitants had no other occupation but to
wait on him.'" In memory of these brothers twins in Peru were always
deemed sacred to the lightning.

There is an instance on record of how the *huillca* could refuse on
occasion to recognise even royalty itself. Manco, the Inca who had been
given the kingly power by Pizarro, offered a sacrifice to one of these
oracular shrines. The oracle refused to recognise him, through the
medium of its guardian priest, stating that Manco was not the rightful
Inca. Manco there. fore caused the oracle, which was in the shape of a
rock, to be thrown down, whereupon its guardian spirit emerged in the
form of a parrot and flew away. It is probable that the bird thus
liberated had been taught by the priests to answer to the questions of
those who came to consult the shrine. But we learn that on Manco
commanding that the parrot should be pursued it sought another rock,
which opened to receive it, and the spirit of the huillca was
transferred to this new abode.

## The Great God Pachacamac

Later Peruvian mythology recognised only three gods of the first rank,
the earth, the thunder, and the creative agency. Pachacamac, the great
spirit of earth, derived his name from a word *pacha*, which may be best
trans, lated as "things." In its sense of visible things it is
equivalent to "world," applied to things which happen in succession it
denotes "time," and to things connected with persons "property,"
especially clothes. The world of visible things is thus Mamapacha
(Earth-Mother), under which name the ancient Peruvians worshipped the
earth. Pachacamac, on the other hand, is not the earth itself, the soil,
but the spirit which animates all things that emerge therefrom. From him
proceed the spirits of the plants and animals which come from the earth.
Pachamama is the motherspirit of the mountains, rocks, and plains,
Pachacamac the father-spirit of the grain-bearing plants, animals,
birds, and man. In some localities Pachacamac and Pachamama were
worshipped as divine mates. Possibly this practice was universal in
early times, gradually lapsing into desuetude in later days. Pachamama
was in another phase intended to denote the land immediately contiguous
to a settlement, on which the inhabitants depended for their
food-supply.

## Peruvian Creation-Stories

It is easy to see how such a conception as Pachacamac, the spirit of
animated nature, would become one with the idea of a universal or even a
partial creator. That there was a pre-existing conception of a creative
agency can be proved from the existence of the Peruvian name
Conticsi-viracocha (He who gives Origin, or Beginning). This conception
and that of Pachacamac must at some comparatively early period have
clashed, and been amalgamated probably with ease when it was seen how
nearly akin were the two ideas. Indeed, Pachacamac was alternatively
known as Pacharurac, the "maker" of all things-sure proof of his
amalgamation with the conception of the creative agency. As such he had
his symbol in the great Coricancha at Cuzco, an oval plate of gold,
suspended between those of the sun and the moon, and placed vertically,
it may be hazarded with some probability, to represent in symbol that
universal matrix from which emanated all things. Elsewhere in Cuzco the
creator was represented by a stone statue in human form.

## Pachayachachic

In later Inca days this idea of a creator assumed that of a direct ruler
of the universe, known as Pachayachachic. This change was probably due
to the influence of the Inca Pachacutic, who is known to have made
several other doctrinal innovations in Peruvian theology. He commanded a
great new temple to the creator-god to be built at the north angle of
the city of Cuzco, in which he placed a statue of pure gold, of the size
of a boy of ten years of age. The small size was to facilitate its
removal, as Peruvian worship was nearly always carried out in the open
air, In form it represented a man with his right arm elevated, the hand
partially closed and the forefinger and thumb raised, as if in the act
of uttering the creative word. To this god large possessions and
revenues were assigned, for previously service rendered to him had been
voluntary only.

## Ideas of Creation

It is from aboriginal sources as preserved by the first Spanish
colonists that we glean our knowledge of what the Incas believed the
creative process to consist. By means of his word (*ñisca*) the creator,
a spirit, powerful and opulent, made all things. We are provided with
the formulæ of his very words by the Peruvian prayers still extant: "Let
earth and heaven be," "Let a man be; let a woman be," "Let there be
day," "Let there be night," "Let the light shine." The sun is here
regarded as the creative agency, and the ruling caste as the objects of
a special act of creation.

## Pacari Tampu

Pacari Tampu (House of the Dawn) was the place of origin, according to
the later Inca theology, of four brothers and sisters who initiated the
four Peruvian systems of worship. The eldest climbed a neighbouring
mountain, and cast stones to the four points of the compass, thus
indicating that he claimed all the land within sight. But his youngest
brother succeeded in enticing him into a cave, which he sealed up with a
great stone, thus imprisoning him for ever. He next persuaded his second
brother to ascend a lofty mountain, from which he cast him, changing him
into a stone in his descent. On beholding the fate of his brethren the
third member of the quartette fled. It is obvious that we have here a
legend concocted by the later Inca priesthood to account for the
evolution of Peruvian religion in its different stages. The first
brother would appear to represent the oldest religion in Peru, that of
the paccariscas, the second that of a fetishistic stone worship, the
third perhaps that of Viracocha, and the last sun-worship pure and
simple. There was, however, an "official" legend, which stated that the
sun had three sons, Viracocha, Pachacamac, and Manco Ccapac. To the last
the dominion of mankind was given, whilst the others were concerned with
the workings of the universe. This politic arrangement placed all the
power, temporal and spiritual, in the hands of the reputed descendants
of Manco Ccapac the Incas.

## Worship of the Sea

The ancient Peruvians worshipped the sea as well as the earth, the folk
inland regarding it as a menacing deity, whilst the people of the coast
reverenced it as a god of benevolence, calling it Mama-cocha, or
Mother-sea, as it yielded them subsistence in the form of fish on which
they chiefly lived. They worshipped the whale, fairly common on that
coast, because of its enormous size, and various districts regarded with
adoration the species of fish most abundant there. This worship can have
partaken in no sense of the nature of totemism, as the system forbade
that the totem animal should be eaten. It was imagined that the
prototype of each variety of fish dwelt in the upper world, just as many
tribes of North American Indians believe that the eponymous ancestors of
certain animals dwell at the four points of the compass or in the sky
above them. This great fish-god engendered the others of his species,
and sent them into the waters of the deep that they might exist there
until taken for the use of man. Birds, too, had their eponymous
counterparts among the stars, as had animals. Indeed, among many of the
South American races, ancient and modern, the constellations were called
after certain beasts and birds.

## Viracocha

The Aymara-Quichua race worshipped Viracocha as a great culture hero.
They did not offer him sacrifices or tribute, as they thought that he,
being creator and possessor of all things, needed nothing from men, so
they only gave him worship. After him they idolised the sun. They
believed, indeed, that Viracocha had made both sun and moon, after
emerging from Lake Titicaca, and that then he made the earth and peopled
it. On his travels westward from the lake he was sometimes assailed by
men, but he revenged himself by sending terrible storms upon them and
destroying their property, so they humbled themselves and acknowledged
him as their lord. He forgave them and taught them everything, obtaining
from them the name of Pachayachachic. In the end he disappeared in the
western ocean. He either created or there were born with him four beings
who, according to mythical beliefs, civilised Peru. To them he assigned
the four quarters of the earth, and they are thus known as the our
winds, north, south, east, and west. One legend avers they came from the
cave Pacari, the Lodging of the Dawn.

## Sun-Worship in Peru

The name "Inca" means "People of the Sun," which luminary the Incas
regarded as their creator. But they did not worship him totemically-that
is, they did not claim him as a progenitor, although they regarded him
as possessing the attributes of a man. And here we may observe a
difference between Mexican and Peruvian sun-worship, For whereas the
Nahua primarily regarded the orb as the abode of the Man of the Sun, who
came to earth in the shape of Quetzalcoatl, the Peruvians looked upon
the sun itself as the deity. The Inca race did not identify their
ancestors as children of the sun until a comparatively late date.
Sun-worship was introduced by the Inca Pachacutic, who averred that the
sun appeared to him in a dream and addressed him as his child. Until
that time the worship of the sun had always been strictly subordinated
to that of the creator, and the deity appeared only as second in the
trinity of creator, sun, and thunder. But permanent provision was made
for sacrifices to the sun before the other deities were so recognised,
and as the conquests of the Incas grew wider and that provision extended
to the new territories they came to be known as "the Lands of the Sun,
the natives observing the dedication of a part of the country to the
luminary, and concluding therefrom that it applied to the whole. The
material reality of the sun would enormously assist his cult among a
people who were too barbarous to appreciate an unseen god, and this
colonial conception reacting upon the mother-land would undoubtedly
inspire the military class with a resolve to strengthen a worship so
popular in the conquered provinces, and of which they were in great
measure the protagonists and missionaries.

## The Sun's Possessions

In every Peruvian village the sun had considerable possessions. His
estates resembled those of a territorial chieftain, and consisted of a
dwelling-house, a chacra, or portion of land, flocks of llamas and
pacos, and a number of women dedicated to his service. The cultivation
of the soil within the solar enclosure devolved upon the inhabitants of
the neighbouring village, the produce of their toil being stored in the
inti-huasi, or sun's house. The Women of the Sun prepared the daily food
and drink of the luminary, which consisted of maize and chicha. They
also spun wool and wove it into fine stuff, which was burned in order
that it might ascend to the celestial regions, where the deity could
make use of it. Each village reserved a portion of its solar produce for
the great festival at Cuzco, and it was carried thither on the backs of
llamas which were destined for sacrifice.

## Inca Occupation of Titicaca

The Rock of Titicaca, the renowned place of the sun's origin, naturally
became an important centre of his worship. The date at which the worship
of the sun originated at this famous rock is extremely remote, but we
may safely assume that it was long before the conquest of the Collao by
the Apu-Ccapac-Inca Pachacutic, and that reverence for the luminary as a
war-god by the Colla chiefs was noticed by Tupac, who in suppressing the
revolt concluded that the local observance at the rock had some
relationship to the disturbance. It is, however, certain that Tupac
proceeded after the reconquest to establish at this natural centre of
sun-worship solar rites on a new basis, with the evident intention of
securing on behalf of the Incas of Cuzco such exclusive benefit as might
accrue from the complete possession of the sun's *paccarisca*. According
to a native account, a venerable *colla* (or hermit), consecrated to the
service of the sun, had proceeded on foot from Titicaca to Cuzco for the
purpose of commending this ancient seat of sun-worship to the notice of
Tupac. The consequence was that Apu-Ccapac-Inca, after visiting the
island and inquiring into the ancient local customs, re-established them
in a more regular form. His accounts can hardly be accepted in face of
the facts which have been gathered. Rather did it naturally follow that
Titicaca became subservient to Tupac after the revolt of the Collao had
been quelled. Henceforth the worship of the sun at the place of his
origin was entrusted to Incas resident in the place, and was celebrated
with Inca rites. The island was converted into a solar estate and the
aboriginal inhabitants removed. The land was cultivated and the slopes
of the hills levelled, maize was sown and the soil consecrated, the
grain being regarded as the gift of the sun. This work produced
considerable change in the island. Where once was waste and idleness
there was now fertility and industry. The harvests were skilfully
apportioned, so much being reserved for sacrificial purposes, the
remainder being sent to Cuzco, partly to be sown in the *chacras*, or
estates of the sun, throughout Peru, partly to be preserved in the
granary of the Inca and the huacas as a symbol that there would be
abundant crops in the future and that the grain already stored would be
preserved. A building of the Women of the Sun was erected about a mile
from the rock, so that the produce might be available for sacrifices.
For their maintenance, tribute of potatoes, ocas, and quinua was levied
upon the inhabitants of the villages on the shores of the lake, and of
maize upon the people of the neighbouring valleys.

## Pilgrimages to Titicaca

Titicaca at the time of the conquest was probably more frequented than
Pachacamac itself. These two places were held to be the cardinal shrines
of the two great huacas, the creator and the sun respectively. A special
reason for pilgrimage to Titicaca was to sacrifice to the sun, as the
source of physical energy and the giver of long life; and he was
especially worshipped by the aged, who believed he had preserved their
lives.

Then followed the migration of pilgrims to Titicaca, for whose shelter
houses were built at Capacahuana, and large stores of maize were
provided for their use. The ceremonial connected with the sacred rites
of the rock was rigorously observed. The pilgrim ere embarking on the
raft which conveyed him to the island must first confess his sins to a
*huillac* (a seaker to an object of worship); then further confessions
were required at each of the three sculptured doors which had
successively to be passed before reaching the sacred rock. The first
door (Puma-puncu) was surmounted by the figure of a puma; the others
(Quenti-puncu and Pillco-puncu) were ornamented with feathers of the
different species of birds commonly sacrificed to the sun. Having passed
the last portal, the traveller beheld at a distance of two hundred paces
the sacred rock itself, the summit glittering with gold-leaf. He was
permitted to proceed no further, for only the officials were allowed
entry into it. The pilgrim on departing received a few grains of the
sacred maize grown on the island. These he kept with care and placed
with his own store, believing they would preserve his stock. The
confidence the Indian placed in the virtue of the Titicaca maize may be
judged from the prevalent belief that the possessor of a single grain
would not suffer from starvation during the whole of his life.

## Sacrifices to the New Sun

The Intip-Raymi, or Great Festival of the Sun, was celebrated by the
Incas at Cuzco at the winter solstice. In connection with it the
Tarpuntaita-cuma, or sacrificing Incas, were charged with a remarkable
duty, the worshippers journeying eastward to meet one of these
functionaries on his way. On the principal hill-tops between Cuzco and
Huillcanuta, on the road to the rock of Titicaca, burnt offerings of
llamas, coca, and maize were made at the feast to greet the arrival of
the young sun from his ancient birthplace. Molina has enumerated more
than twenty of these places of sacrifice. The striking picture of the
celebration of the solar sacrifice on these bleak mountains in the depth
of the Peruvian winter has, it seems, no parallel in the religious rites
of the ancient Americans. Quitting their thatched houses at early dawn,
the worshippers left the valley below, carrying the sacrificial knife
and brazier, and conducting the white llama, heavily laden with fuel,
maize, and coca leaves, wrapped in fine cloth, to the spot where the
sacrifice was to be made. When sunrise appeared the pile was lighted.
The victim was slain and thrown upon it. The scene then presented a
striking contrast to the bleak surrounding wilderness. As the flames
grew in strength and the smoke rose higher and thicker the clear
atmosphere was gradually illuminated from the east. When the sun
advanced above the horizon the sacrifice was at its height. But for the
crackling of the flames and the murmur of a babbling stream on its way
down the hill to join the river below, the silence had hitherto been
unbroken. As the sun rose the Incas marched slowly round the burning
mass, plucking the wool from the scorched carcase, and chanting
monotonously: "O Creator, Sun and Thunder, be for ever young! Multiply
the people; let them ever be in peace!"

## The Citoc Raymi

The most picturesque if not the most important solar festival was that
of the Citoc Raymi (Gradually Increasing Sun), held in June, when nine
days were given up to the ceremonial. A rigorous fast was observed for
three days previous to the event, during which no fire must be kindled.
On the fourth day the Inca, accompanied by the people *en masse*,
proceeded to the great square of Cuzco to hail the rising sun, which
they awaited in silence. On its appearance they greeted it with a joyous
tumult, and joining in procession, marched to the Golden Temple of the
Sun, where llamas were sacrificed, and a new fire was kindled by means
of an arched mirror, followed by sacrificial offerings of grain,
flowers, animals, and aromatic gums. This festival may be taken as
typical of all the seasonal celebrations. The Inca calendar was purely
agricultural in its basis, and marked in its great festivals the renewal
or abandonment of the labours of the field. Its astronomical
observations were not more advanced than those of the calendars of many
American races otherwise inferior in civilisation.

## Human Sacrifice in Peru

Writers ignorant of their subject have often dwelt upon the absence of
human sacrifice in ancient Peru, and have not hesitated to draw
comparisons between Mexico and the empire of the Incas in this respect,
usually not complimentary to the former. Such statements are
contradicted by the clearest evidence. Human sacrifice was certainly not
nearly so prevalent in Peru, but that it was regular and by no means
rare is well authenticated. Female victims to the sun were taken from
the great class of Acllacuna (Selected Ones), a general tribute of
female children regularly levied throughout the Inca Empire. Beautiful
girls were taken from their parents at the age of eight by the Inca
officials, and were handed over to certain female trainers called
*mamacuna* (mothers). These matrons systematically trained their
protégées in housewifery and ritual. Residences or convents called
*aclla-huasi* (houses of the Selected) were provided for them in the
principal cities.

## Methods of Medicine-Men

A quaint account of the methods of the medicinemen of the Indians of the
Peruvian Andes probably illustrates the manner in which the
superstitions of a barbarian people evolve into a more stately ritual.

"It cannot be denied," it states, "that the *mohanes* \[priests\] have,
by practice and tradition, acquired a knowledge of many plants and
poisons, with which they effect surprising cures on the one hand, and do
much mischief on the other, but the mania of ascribing the whole to a
preternatural virtue occasions them to blend with their practice a
thousand charms and superstitions. The most customary method of cure is
to place two hammocks close to each other, either in the dwelling, or in
the open air: in one of them the patient lies extended, and in the other
the *mohane*, or *agorero*. The latter, in contact with the sick man,
begins by rocking himself, and then proceeds, by a strain in falsetto,
to call on the birds, quadrupeds, and fishes to give health to the
patient. From time to time he rises on his seat, and makes a thousand
extravagant gestures over the sick man, to whom he applies his powders
and herbs, or sucks the wounded or diseased parts. If the malady
augments, the *agorero*, having been joined by many of the people,
chants a short hymn, addressed to the soul of the patient, with this
burden: 'Thou must not go, thou must not go.' In repeating this he is
joined by the people, until at length a terrible clamour is raised, and
augmented in proportion as the sick man becomes still fainter and
fainter, to the end that it may reach his ears. When all the charms are
unavailing, and death approaches, the *mohane* leaps from his hammock,
and betakes himself to flight, amid the multitude of sticks, stones, and
clods of earth which are showered on him. Successively all those who
belong to the nation assemble, and, dividing themselves into bands, each
of them (if he who is in his last agonies is a warrior) approaches him,
saying: 'Whither goest thou? Why dost thou leave us? With whom shall we
proceed to the aucas \[the enemies\]?' They then relate to him the
heroical deeds he has performed, the number of those he has slain, and
the pleasures he leaves behind him. This is practised in different tones
while some raise the voice, it is lowered by others and the poor sick
man is obliged to support these importunities without a murmur, until
the first symptoms of approaching dissolution manifest themselves. Then
it is that he is surrounded by a multitude of females, some of whom
forcibly close the mouth and eyes, others envelop him in the hammock,
oppressing him with the whole of their weight, and causing him to expire
before his time, and others, lastly, run to extinguish the candle, and
dissipate the smoke, that the soul, not being able to perceive the hole
through which it may escape, may remain entangled in the structure of
the roof. That this may be speedily effected, and to prevent its return
to the interior of the dwelling, they surround the entrances with filth,
by the stench of which it may be expelled.

## Death by Suffocation

"As soon as the dying man is suffocated by the closing of the mouth,
nostrils, &c, and wrapt up in the covering of his bed, the most
circumspect Indian, whether male or female, takes him in the arms in the
best manner possible, and gives a *gentle* shriek, which echoes to the
bitter lamentations of the immediate relatives, and to the cries of a
thousand old women collected for the occasion. As long as this dismal
howl subsists, the latter are subjected to a constant fatigue, raising
the palm of the hand to wipe away the tears, and lowering it to dry it
on the ground. The result of this alternate action is, that a circle of
earth, which gives them a most hideous appearance, is collected about
the eyelids and brows, and they do not wash themselves until the
mourning is over. These first clamours conclude by several good pots of
*masato*, to assuage the thirst of sorrow, and the company next proceed
to make a great clatter among the utensils of the deceased: some break
the kettles, and others the earthen pots, while others, again, burn the
apparel, to the end that his memory may be the sooner forgotten. If the
defunct has been a *cacique*, or powerful warrior, his exequies are
performed after the manner of the Romans: they last for many days, all
the people weeping in concert for a considerable space of time, at
daybreak, at noon, in the evening, and at midnight. When the appointed
hour arrives, the mournful music begins in front of the house of the
wife and relatives, the heroical deeds of the deceased being chanted to
the sound of instruments. All the inhabitants of the vicinity unite in
chorus from within their houses, some chirping like birds, others
howling like tigers, and the greater part of them chattering like
monkeys, or croaking like frogs. They constantly leave off by having
recourse to the masato, and by the destruction of whatever the deceased
may have left behind him, the burning of his dwelling being that which
concludes the ceremonies. Among some of the Indians, the nearest
relatives cut off their hair as a token of their grief, agreeably to the
practice of the Moabites, and other nations. . . .

## The Obsequies of a Chief

"On the day of decease, they put the body, with its insignia, into a
large earthen vessel, or painted jar) which they bury in one of the
angles of the quarter, laying over it a covering of potter's clay, and
throwing in earth until the grave is on a level with the surface of the
ground. When the obsequies are over, they forbear to pay a visit to it,
and lose every recollection of the name of the warrior. The Roamaynas
disenterre their dead, as soon as they think that the fleshy parts have
been consumed, and having washed the bones form the skeleton, which they
place in a coffin of potter's clay, adorned with various symbols of
death, like the hieroglyphics on the wrappers of the Egyptian mummies.
In this state the skeleton is carried home, to the end that the
survivors may bear the deceased in respectful memory, and not in
imitation of those extraordinary voluptuaries of antiquity, who
introduced into their most splendid festivals a spectacle of this
nature, which, by reminding them of their dissolution, might stimulate
them to taste, before it should overtake them, all the impure pleasures
the human passions could afford them. A space of time of about a year
being elapsed, the bones are once more inhumed, and the individual to
whom they belonged forgotten for ever." \[Skinner, *State of Peru*, pp.
271 *et seq*.\]

## Peruvian Myths

Peru is not so rich in myths as Mexico, but the following legends well
illustrate the mythological ideas of the Inca race:

## The Vision of Yupanqui

The Inca Yupanqui before he succeeded to the sovereignty is said to have
gone to visit his father, Viracocha Inca. On his way he arrived at a
fountain called Susur-pugaio. There he saw a piece of crystal fall into
the fountain, and in this crystal he saw the figure of an Indian, with
three bright rays as of the sun coming from the back of his head. He
wore a *hauiu*, or royal fringe, across the forehead like the Inca.
Serpents wound round his arms and over his shoulders. He had ear-pieces
in his ears like the Incas, and was also dressed like them. There was
the head of a lion between his legs, and another lion was about his
shoulders. Inca Yupanqui took fright at this strange figure, and was
running away when a voice called to him by name telling him not to be
afraid, because it was his father, the sun, whom he beheld, and that he
would conquer many nations, but he must remember his father-in his
sacrifices and raise revenues for him, and pay him great reverence. Then
the figure vanished, but the crystal remained, and the Inca afterwards
saw all he wished in it. When he became king he had a statue of the sun
made, resembling the figure as closely as possible, and ordered all the
tribes he had conquered to build splendid temples and worship the new
deity instead of the creator.

## The Bird Bride

The Canaris Indians are named from the province of Canaribamba, in
Quito, and they have several myths regarding their origin. One recounts
that at the deluge two brothers fled to a very high mountain called
Huacaquan, and as the waters rose the hill ascended simultaneously, so
that they escaped drowning. When the flood was over they had to find
food in the valleys, and they built a tiny house and lived on herbs and
roots. They were surprised one day when they went home to find food
already prepared for them and *chicha* to drink. This continued for ten
days. Then the elder brother decided to hide himself and discover who
brought the food. Very soon two birds, one Aqua, the other Torito
(otherwise *quacamayo* birds), appeared dressed as Canaris, and wearing
their hair fastened in the same way. The larger bird removed the
*Ilicella*, or mantle the Indians wear, and the man saw that they had
beautiful faces and discovered that the bird-like beings were in reality
women. When he came out the bird-women were very angry and flew away.
When the younger brother came home and found no food he was annoyed, and
determined to hide until the bird-women returned. After ten days the
*quacamayos* appeared again on their old mission, and while they were
busy the watcher contrived to close the door, and so prevented the
younger bird from escaping. She lived with the brothers for a long time,
and became the mother of six sons and daughters, from whom all the
Canaris proceed. Hence the tribe look upon the *quacamayo* birds with
reverence) and use their feathers at their festivals.

## Thonapa

Some myths tell of a divine personage called Thonapa, who appears to
have been a hero-god or civilising agent like Quetzalcoatl. He seems to
have devoted his life to preaching to the people in the various
villages, beginning in the provinces of Colla-suya. When he came to
Yamquisupa he was treated so badly that he would not remain there. He
slept in the open air, clad only in a long shirt and a mantle, and
carried a book. He cursed the village. It was soon immersed in water,
and is now a lake. There was an idol in the form of a woman to which the
people offered sacrifice at the top of a high hill, Cachapucara. This
idol Thonapa detested, so he burnt it, and also destroyed the hill. On
another occasion Thonapa cursed a large assembly of people who were
holding a great banquet to celebrate a wedding, because they refused to
listen to his preaching. They were all changed into stones, which are
visible to this day. Wandering through Peru, Thonapa came to the
mountain of Caravaya, and after raising a very large cross he put it on
his shoulders and took it to the hill Carapucu, where he preached so
fervently that he shed tears. A chief's daughter got some of the water
on her head, and the Indians, imagining that he was washing his head (a
ritual offence), took him prisoner near the Lake of Carapucu. Very early
the next morning a beautiful youth appeared to Thonapa, and told him not
to fear, for he was sent from the divine guardian who watched over him.
He released Thonapa, who escaped, though he was well guarded. He went
down into the lake, his mantle keeping him above the water as a boat
would have done. After Thonapa had escaped from the barbarians he
remained on the rock of Titicaca, afterwards going to the town of
Tiya-manacu, where again he cursed the people and turned them into
stones. They were too bent upon amusement to listen to his preaching. He
then followed the river Chacamarca till it reached the sea, and, like
Quetzalcoatl, disappeared. This is good evidence that he was a solar
deity, or man of the sun, who, his civilising labours completed, betook
himself to the house of his father.

## A Myth of Manco Ccapac Inca

When Manco Ccapac Inca was born a staff which had been given to his
father turned into gold. He had seven brothers and sisters, and at his
father's death he assembled all his people in order to see how much he
could venture in making fresh conquests. He and his brothers supplied
themselves with rich clothing, new arms, and the golden staff called
*tapac-yauri* (royal sceptre). He had also two cups of gold from which
Thonapa had drunk, called *tapacusi*. They proceeded to the highest
point in the country, a mountain where the sun rose, and Manco Ccapac
saw several rainbows. which he interpreted as a sign of good fortune,
Delighted with the favouring symbols, he sang the song of Chamayhuarisca
(The Song of Joy). Manco Ccapac: wondered why a brother who had
accompanied him did not return, and sent one of his sisters in search of
him, but she also did not come back, so he went himself, and found both
nearly dead beside a *huaca*. They said they could not move, as the
*huaca*, a stone, retarded them. In a great rage Manco struck this stone
with his tapac-yauri. It spoke, and said that had it not been for his
wonderful golden staff he would have had no power over it. It added that
his brother and sister had sinned, and therefore must remain with it
(the huaca) in the lower regions, but that Manco was to be "greatly
honoured." The sad fate of his brother and sister troubled Manco
exceedingly, but on going back to the place where he first saw the
rainbows he got comfort from them and strength to bear his grief.

## Coniraya Viracocha

Coniraya Viracocha was a tricky nature spirit who declared he was the
creator, but who frequently appeared attired as a poor ragged Indian. He
was an adept at deceiving people. A beautiful woman, Cavillaca, who was
greatly admired, was one day weaving a mantle at the foot of a *lucma*
tree. Coniraya, changing himself into a beautiful bird, climbed the
tree, took some of his generative seed, made it into a ripe *lucma*, and
dropped it near the beautiful virgin, who saw and ate the fruit. Some
time afterwards a son was born to Cavillaca. When the child was older
she wished that the *huacas* and gods should meet and declare who was
the father of the boy. All dressed as finely as possible, hoping to be
chosen as her husband. Coniraya was there, dressed like a beggar, and
Cavillaca never even looked at him. The maiden addressed the assembly,
but as no one immediately answered her speech she let the child go,
saving he would be sure to crawl to his father. The infant went straight
up to Coniraya, sitting in his rags, and laughed up to him. Cavillaca,
extremely angry at the idea ot being associated with such a poor, dirty
creature, fled to the seashore. Coniraya then put on magnificent attire
and followed her to show her how handsome he was, but still thinking of
him in his ragged condition she would not look back. She went into the
sea at Pachacamac and was changed into a rock. Coniraya, still following
her, met a condor, and asked if it had seen a woman. On the condor
replying that it had seen her quite near, Coniraya. blessed it, and said
whoever killed it would be killed himself. He then met a fox, who said
he would never meet Cavillaca, so Coniraya told him he would always
retain his disagreeable odour, and on account of it he would never be
able to go abroad except at night, and that he would be hated by every
one. Next came a lion, who told Coniraya he was very near Cavillaca, so
the lover said he should have the power of punishing wrongdoers, and
that whoever killed him would wear the skin without cutting off the
head, and by preserving the teeth and eyes would make him appear still
alive; his skin would be worn at festivals, and thus he would be
honoured after death. Then another fox who gave bad news was cursed, and
a falcon who said Cavillaca was near was told he would be highly
esteemed, and that whoever killed him would also wear his skin at
festivals. The parrots, giving bad news, were to cry so loud that they
would be heard far away, and their cries would betray them to enemies.
Thus Coniraya blessed the animals which       gave him news he liked,
and cursed those which gave the opposite. When at last he came to the
sea he found Cavillaca and the child turned into stone, and there he
encountered two beautiful young daughters of Pachacamac, who guarded a
great serpent. He made love to the elder sister, but the younger one
flew away in the form of a wild pigeon. At that time there were no
fishes in the sea, but a certain goddess had reared a few in a small
pond, and Coniraya emptied these into the ocean and thus peopled it. The
angry deity tried to outwit Coniraya and kill him, but he was too wise
and escaped. He returned to Huarochiri, and played tricks as before on
the villagers.

Coniraya slightly approximates to the Jurupari of the Uapès Indians of
Brazil, especially as regards his impish qualities. \[See Spence,
article "Brazil" in *Encyclopedia of Religion and Ethics* vol. ii.\]

## The Llama's Warning

An old Peruvian myth relates how the world was nearly left without an
inhabitant. A man took his llama to a fine place for feeding, but the
beast moaned and would not eat, and on its master questioning it, it
said there was little wonder it was sad, because in five days the sea
would rise and engulf the earth. The man, alarmed, asked if there was no
way of escape, and the llama advised him to go to the top of a high
mountain, Villa-Coto, taking food for five days. When they reached the
summit of the hill all kinds of birds and animals were already there.
When the sea rose the water came so near that it washed the tail of a
fox, and that is why foxes' tails are black! After five days the water
fell, leaving only this one man alive, and from him the Peruvians
believed the present human race to be descended.

## The Myth of Huathlacuri

After the deluge the Indians chose the bravest and richest man as
leader. This period they called Purunpacha (the time without a king). On
a high mountain-top appeared five large eggs, from one of which
Paricaca, father of Huathiacuri, later emerged. Huathiacuri, who was so
poor that he had not means to cook his food properly, learned much
wisdom from his father, and the following story shows how this assisted
him. A certain man had built a most curious house, the roof being made
of yellow and red birds' feathers. He was very rich, possessing many
llamas, and was greatly esteemed on account of his wealth. So proud did
he become that he aspired to be the creator himself; but when he became
very ill and could not cure himself his divinity seemed doubtful. Just
at this time Huathiacuri was travelling about, and one day he saw two
foxes meet and listened to their conversation. From this he heard about
the rich man and learned the cause of his illness, and forthwith he
determined to go on to find him. On arriving at the curious house he met
a lovely young girl, one of the rich man's daughters. She told him about
her father's illness, and Huathiacuri, charmed with her, said he would
cure her father if she would only give him her love. He looked so ragged
and dirty that she refused, but she took him to her father and informed
him that Huathiacuri said he could cure him. Her father consented to
give him an opportunity to do so. Huathiacuri began his cure by telling
the sick man that his wife had been unfaithful, and that there were two
serpents hovering above his house to devour it, and a toad with two
heads under his grinding-stone. His wife at first indignantly denied the
accusation, but on Huathiacuri reminding her of some details, and the
serpents and toad being discovered, she confessed her guilt. The
reptiles were killed, the man recovered, and the daughter was married to
Huathiacuri.

Huathiacuri's poverty and raggedness displeased the girl's
brother-in-law, who suggested to the bridegroom a contest in dancing and
drinking. Huathiacuri went to seek his father's advice, and the old man
told him to accept the challenge and return to him. Paricaca then sent
him to a mountain, where he was changed into a dead llama. Next morning
a fox and its vixen carrying a jar of *chicha* came, the fox having a
flute of many pipes. When they saw the dead llama they laid down their
things and went toward it to have a feast, but Huathiacuri then resumed
his human form and gave a loud cry that frightened away the foxes,
whereupon he took possession of the jar and flute. By the aid of these,
which were magically endowed, he beat his brother-in-law in dancing and
drinking.

Then the brother-in-law proposed a contest to prove who was the
handsomer when dressed in festal attire. By the aid of Paricaca
Huathiacuri found a red lion-skin, which gave him the appearance of
having a rainbow round his head, and he again won.

The next trial was to see who could build a house the quickest and best.
The brother-in-law got all his men to help, and had his house nearly
finished before the other had his foundation laid. But here again
Paricaca's wisdom proved of service, for Huathiacuri got animals and
birds of all kinds to help him during the night, and by morning the
building was finished except the roof. His brother-in-law got many
llamas to come with straw for his roof, but Huathiacuri ordered an
animal to stand where its loud screams frightened the llamas away, and
the straw was lost. Once more Huathiacuri won the day. At last Paricaca
advised Huathiacuri to end this conflict, and he asked his
brother-in-law to see who could dance best in a blue shirt with white
cotton round the loins. The rich man as usual appeared first, but when
Huathiacuri came in he made a very loud noise and frightened him, and he
began to run away. As he ran Huathiacuri turned him into a deer. His
wife, who had followed him, was turned into a stone, with her head on
the ground and her feet in the air, because she had given her husband
such bad advice.

The four remaining eggs on the mountain-top then opened, and four
falcons issued, which turned into four great warriors. These warriors
performed many miracles, one of which consisted in raising a storm which
swept away the rich Indian's house in a flood to the sea.

## Paricaca

Having assisted in the performance of several miracles, Paricaca set out
determined to do great deeds. He went to find Caruyuchu Huayallo, to
whom children were sacrificed. He came one day to a village where a
festival was being celebrated, and as he was in very poor clothes no one
took any notice of him or offered him anything, till a young girl,
taking pity on him, brought him *chicha* to drink. In gratitude Paricaca
told her to seek a place of safety for herself, as the village would be
destroyed after five days, but she was to tell no one of this. Annoyed
at the inhospitality of the people, Paricaca then went to a hill-top and
sent down a fearful storm and flood, and the whole village was
destroyed. Then he came to another village, now San Lorenzo. He saw a
very beautiful girl, Choque Suso, crying bitterly. Asking her why she
wept, she said the maize crop was dying for want of water. Paricaca at
once fell in love with this girl, and after first damming up the little
water there was, and thus leaving none for the crop, he told her he
would give her plenty of water if she would only return his love. She
said he must get water not only for her own crop but for all the other
farms before she could consent. He noticed a small rill, from which, by
opening a dam, he thought he might get a sufficient supply of water for
the farms. He then got the assistance of the birds in the hills, and
animals such as snakes, lizards, and so on, in removing any obstacles in
the way, and they widened the channel so that the water irrigated all
the land. The fox with his usual cunning managed to obtain the post of
engineer, and carried the canal to near the site of the church of San
Lorenzo. Paricaca, having accomplished what he had promised, begged
Choque Suso to keep her word, which she willingly did, but she proposed
living at the summit of some rocks called Yanacaca. There the lovers
stayed very happily, at the head of the channel called Cocochallo, the
making of which had united them; and as Choque Suso wished to remain
there always, Paricaca. eventually turned her into a stone.

In all likelihood this myth was intended to account for the invention of
irrigation among the early Peruvians, and from being a local legend
probably spread over the length and breadth of the country.

## Conclusion

The advance in civilisation attained by the peoples of America must be
regarded as among the most striking phenomena in the history of mankind,
especially if it be viewed as an example of what can be achieved by
isolated races occupying a peculiar environment. It cannot be too
strongly emphasised that the cultures and mythologies of old Mexico and
Peru were evolved without foreign assistance or intervention, that, in
fact, they were distinctively and solely the fruit of American
aboriginal thought evolved upon American soil. An absorbing chapter in
the story of human advancement is provided by these peoples, whose
architecture, arts, graphic and plastic, laws and religions prove them
to have been the equals of most of the Asiatic nations of antiquity, and
the superiors of the primitive races of Europe, who entered into the
heritage of civilisation through the gateway of the East. The aborigines
of ancient America had evolved for themselves a system of writing which
at the period of their discovery was approaching the alphabetic type, a
mathematical system unique and by no means despicable, and an
architectural science in some respects superior to any of which the Old
World could boast. Their legal codes were reasonable and founded upon
justice; and if their religions were tainted with cruelty, it was a
cruelty which they regarded as inevitable, and as the doom placed upon
them by sanguinary and insatiable deities and not by any human agency.

In comparing the myths of the American races with the deathless stories
of Olympus or the scarcely less classic tales of India, frequent
resemblances and analogies cannot fail to present themselves, and these
are of value as illustrating the circumstance that in every quarter of
the globe the mind of man has shaped for itself a system of faith based
upon similar principles. But in the perusal of the myths and beliefs of
Mexico and Peru we are also struck with the strangeness and remoteness
alike of their subject-matter and the type of thought which they
present. The result of centuries of isolation is evident in a profound
contrast of "atmosphere." It seems almost as if we stood for a space
upon the dim shores of another planet, spectators of the doings of a
race of whose modes of thought and feeling we were entirely ignorant.

For generations these stories have been hidden, along with the memory of
the gods and folk of whom they tell, beneath a thick dust of neglect,
displaced here and there only by the efforts of antiquarians working
singly and unaided. Nowadays many well-equipped students are striving to
add to our knowledge of the civilisations of Mexico and Peru. To the
mythical stories of these peoples, alas! we cannot add. The greater part
of them perished in the flames of the Spanish *autos-de-fé*. But for
those which have survived we must be grateful, as affording so many
casements through which we may catch the glitter and gleam of
civilisations more remote and bizarre than those of the Orient, shapes
dim yet gigantic, misty yet many-coloured, the ghosts of peoples and
beliefs not the least splendid and solemn in the roll of dead nations
and vanished faiths.
