[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Critical Views](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](wscs03) 
[Next](wscs05) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/093281395X/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The World's Sixteen Crucified Saviors*, by Kersey Graves, \[1875\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_13">p. 13</span>

### INTRODUCTION

#### IMPORTANT FACTS CONSTITUTING THE BASIS OF THIS WORK.

IGNORANCE of science and ignorance of history are the two great bulwarks
of religious error. There is scarcely a tenet of religious faith now
propagated to the world by the professed disciples of Christ but that,
if subjected to a rigid test in the ordeal of modern science, would be
found to contain more or less error. Vast acquisitions have been made in
the fields of science and history within the last half century, the
moral lessons of which have done much to undermine and unsettle our
popular system of religious faith, and to bring into disrepute or
effectually change many of its long-cherished dogmas. The scientific and
historical facts thus brought before the intelligent public, have served
as keys for explaining many of the doctrines comprised in the popular
creed. They have poured a flood of light upon our whole system of
religion as now taught by its popular representatives, which have had
the effect to reveal many of its errors to those who have had the
temerity, or the curiosity, to investigate it upon these grounds. Many
of the doctrines and miraculous events which have always been assigned a
divine emanation by the disciples of the Christian faith, are, by these
scientific and historical disclosures, shown to be explainable upon
natural grounds, and to have exclusively a natural basis. Some of them
are shown to be solvable by recently developed

<span id="page_14">p. 14</span>

spiritual laws, while others are proven to be founded wholly in error.
The intelligent community are now acquainted with many of these
important facts, so that no man of science can be found in this
enlightened age who can popularly be termed a Christian. No man can be
found in any Christian country who has the established reputation of
being a man of science, or who has made any proficiency in the whole
*curriculum* of the sciences, whose creed, when examined by an orthodox
committee, would not be pronounced unsound. It is true that many of the
scientific class, not possessing the conviction that duty imposes the
moral necessity of making living martyrs of themselves, have refrained
from fully avowing or disclosing to the public their *real convictions*
of the popular faith.

The changes and improvements in religious ideas now observant in the
most intelligent portion of the community, are due in part to the rapid
progress of scientific discovery and the dissemination of scientific
knowledge in Christian countries. The explorer in the field of religious
history, however, comes in here for his meed of praise. New stores of
historic facts and data may be reckoned among the recent acquisitions of
the laborious archeologist; new fountains of religions history have
recently been unsealed, which have had the effect to reveal many errors
and false claims set up for the current religion of Christendom—a
religion long regarded as settled and stereotyped. For many centuries
subsequent to the establishment of the Christian religion, but little
was known by its disciples of the character, claims and doctrines of the
oriental systems of worship. These religions, in fact, were scarcely
known to exist, because they had long been veiled in secrecy. They were
found, in some cases, enshrined in religious books printed or written in
a language so very ancient and obscure, as to bid defiance for centuries
to the labors of

<span id="page_15">p. 15</span>

the most indefatigable, profound and erudite archeological scholar to
decipher it. That obstacle is now partially surmounted.

The recent translation for the first time of the Hindoo Vedas into the
English language (the oldest bible now extant or ever written) has
revealed to the unwelcome gaze of the Christian reader the startling
fact that "the heathen" had long been in possession of "holy books,"
possessing essentially the same character, and teaching essentially the
same doctrines as the Christian bible—there being, as Horace Greeley
expressed it, "No doctrine of Christianity but what has been anticipated
by the Vedas." (See Vol. II., Chap. I, of this work.)

If, then, this heathen bible (compiled, according to the Christian
missionary, Rev. D. G. Allen, 1400 B.C.), contains *all* the *doctrines*
of Christianity, then away goes over the dam all claim for the Christian
bible as an original bible as an original revelation, or a work of
divine inspiration.

Bibles are thus shown to be of *heathen* and human origin, instead of
*heavenly* and *divine* authorship, as claimed for them by their
respective disciples—the Christian bible forming no exception to this
statement. The latter, being essentially like other bibles, it must, of
course, have had the same or a similar origin—a fact which, though it
may be new and startling to millions, will be universally accepted as
truth before the lapse of many generations, and a fact which confronts
with open denial the claims of two hundred millions of Christian
professors, who assert with unscrupulous boldness that every doctrine,
principle and precept of their bible is of divine emanation.

How utterly groundless and untenable is such a claim when arranged by
the side of modern discoveries in religious history!

Equally unsupportable is the declaration that "there is

<span id="page_16">p. 16</span>

no other name given under heaven whereby men can be saved, than that of
Jesus Christ and him crucified," when viewed in the light of the modern
explorations of Sir Godfrey Higgins, which have disclosed the history of
nearly a score of crucified Gods and sin-atoning Saviors, who, we have
equal proof, died for the sins of mankind.

Thus, the two prime articles of the Christian faith—Revelation and
Crucifixion—are forever established as human and heathen conceptions.
And the hope might be reasonably entertained that the important
historical facts disclosed in this work will have the effect to open the
eyes of the professors or the Christian religion to see their serious
error in putting forth such exalted claims for their bible and their
religion as that of being perfect products of infinite wisdom, did not
the past history of all religious countries furnish sad proof that
reason and logic, and even the most cogent and convincing facts of
science and history often prove powerless when arrayed against a
religious conviction, enstamped upon the mind for thousands of years in
the past, and transmitted from parent to child until it has grown to a
colossal stature, and become a part of the living tissues of the soul.

No matter how glaringly absurd, how palpably erroneous, or how
demonstrably false an opinion or doctrine is shown to be, they cannot
see it, but will still continue to hug it to their bosoms as a
divinely-revealed truth. No facts or evidence can prove an overmatch for
the inherited convictions of a thousand generations. In this respect the
Mohammed, the Hindu and the Christian all stand upon a level. It is
about as easy to convince one as the other of their easily demonstrated
errors.

#### RELIGION OF NATURAL ORIGIN.

Among the numerous errors traceable in the history of every religious
sect, commemorated in the annals of the

<span id="page_17">p. 17</span>

world, none possesses a more serious character, or has been attended
with more deplorable consequences, than that of assigning a wrong origin
to religion. Every bible, every sect, every creed, every catechism, and
every orthodox sermon teaches that "religion is the gift of God," that
"it is infused into the soul by the spirit and power of the Lord." Never
was a greater mistake ever committed. Every student of anthropology,
every person who has read any of the numerous modern works on mental
science, and tested their easily-demonstrated facts, knows that religion
is of *natural* and not *supernatural* origin; that it is a *natural
element* of the *human mind*, and not a "*direct gift from God;*" that
it grows as spontaneously out of the soul as flowers spring out of the
ground. It is as natural as eating, sleeping or breathing. This
conclusion is not the offspring of mere imagination. It is no
hastily-concocted theory, but an oft-demonstrated and
scientifically-established fact, which any person can test the truth of
for himself.

And this modern discovery will, at no distant day, revolutionize all
systems of religious faith in existence, and either dissolve and
dissipate them, or modify and establish them upon a more natural and
enduring basis, expurgated of their dogmatic errors.

Let us, then, labor to banish the wide-spread delusion believed and
taught by a thousand systems of worship—Jew, Pagan and Christian—that
"religion is of supernatural or divine origin," and the many ruinous
errors; senseless dogmas and deplorable soul-crushing superstitions so
thoroughly inwrought into the Christian system will vanish like fog
before the morning sun, and be replaced by a religion which sensible,
intelligent and scientific men and women can accept, and will delight to
honor and practice.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Address to the Clergy](wscs05)
