[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Critical Views](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](wscs42) 
[Next](wscs44) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/093281395X/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The World's Sixteen Crucified Saviors*, by Kersey Graves, \[1875\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_370">p. 370</span>

### CHAPTER XXXVIII.

#### A HISTORICAL VIEW OF THE DIVINITY OF JESUS CHRIST

A MOST fatal distrust is thrown upon the miraculous portions of the
history of Jesus Christ, as found in his Gospel narratives, by the
discovery of the fact (brought to light through recent archaeological
researches), that the same marvelous feats, the same miraculous
incidents, which were recorded in his life, were long previously
ingrafted into the sacred biographies of Gods and demigods no less
adored and worshipped as beings possessing divine attributes. We shall
leave the reader to account for the long list of astonishing
coincidences, as we proceed to recapitulate and abridge from previous
chapters, the almost innumerable parallel incidents running through the
legendary history of the many demigods and sin-atoning saviors of
antiquity. The historical vouchers are given. We shall first direct
attention to the long string of corresponding events recorded in the
sacred histories of ancient Hindoo Gods, as compared with those of Jesus
Christ at a much later period.

As far back as 1200 B.C., sacred records were extant and traditions were
current, in the East, which taught that the heathen Savior (Chrishna)
was, 1st, Immaculately conceived and born of a spotless virgin, "who had
never known man." 2d, That the author of, or agent in, the conception,
was a spirit or ghost (of course a Holy Ghost). 3d, That he was
threatened in early infancy with death by the ruling tyrant, Cansa. 4th,
That his

<span id="page_371">p. 371</span>

parents had, consequently, to flee with him to Gokul for safety. 5th,
That all the young male children under two years of age were slain by an
order issued by Cansa, similar to that of Herod in Judea. 6th, That
angels and shepherds attended his birth. 7th, That his birth and advent
occurred on the 25th of December. 8th, That it occurred in
[accordance](errata.htm#12) with previous prophecy. 9th, That he was
presented at birth with frankincense, myrrh, &c. 10th, That he was
saluted and worshipped as "the Savior of men," according to the report
of the late Christian Missionary Huc. 11th, That he led a life of
humility and practical moral usefulness. 12th, That he wrought various
astounding miracles, such as healing the sick, restoring sight to the
blind, casting out devils, raising the dead to life, &c. 13th, That he
was finally put to death upon the cross (i.e., crucified) between two
thieves. 14th. After which he descended to hell, rose from the dead, and
ascended back to heaven "in the sight of all men," as his biblical
history declares. For hundreds of other similar parallels, including his
doctrines and precepts, see Chapter XXXII.

Now, all these were matters of the firmest belief, more than three
thousand years ago, in the minds of millions of the most devout
worshippers that ever bowed the knee in humble prayer to the Father of
Mercies. The reader can draw his own deduction.

And then we have presented similar brief lists of parallels in Chapter
XXIII, comprised in a comparative view of the miraculous lives of the
Judean and Egyptian Saviors, Christ, Alcides, Osiris, Tulis, &c. In this
analogous exhibition, it will be observed the Egyptian Gods are
reported, as remotely as 900 B.C., as performing, besides several of the
miraculous achievements enumerated above, other miracles equally
indicative of divine power, such as converting water into wine, causing
"rain to descend

<span id="page_372">p. 372</span>

from heaven," &c. And on the occasion of the crucifixion of Tulis we are
told "the sun became darkened and the moon refused to shine."

We find, also, several well-authenticated instances of raising the dead
to life, in works portraying the miraculous achievements of the Egyptian
Gods, the relation being given in such specific detail in some cases
that the names of the reanimated dead are furnished. Tyndarus and
[Hippolitus](errata.htm#13) were instances of this kind, both (according
to Julius) having been raised from the dead. Descending the line of
history, until we arrive at the confines of Grecian theology, we find
here the same train of marvelous events recorded in the histories of
their virgin-born Gods, as we have shown in Chapter XXXIII, such as
their healing the sick and the cripples, causing the blind to see, the
lame to walk, the dead to be resuscitated to life, &c. And cases, as we
have shown, are reported of their reading the thoughts of their
disciples, as Jesus did those of the woman of Samaria. Apollonius
declares he knew many Hindoo saints to perform this achievement with
entire strangers.

Likewise Apollonius of Tyana and Simon Magus, both contemporary with
Jesus Christ, we have arranged in the historic parallel (see Chapter
XXXIII), with their long train of miracles, constituting an exact
counterpart with those related in the Gospel history of Christ, and
including in Apollonius's case, besides those specified in the histories
of the Gods above named, the miracle of transfiguration, the
resurrection from the dead, his visible ascent to heaven, &c., while
Simon Magus was very expert in casting out devils, raising the dead,
allaying storms, walking on the sea, &c.

But without recapitulating further, we will recite some new historic
facts not embraced in any of the preceding chapters of this work, and
tending to demonstrate still

<span id="page_373">p. 373</span>

further the universal analogy of all religions, past and present, in
their claims for a miraculous power for their Gods and incarnate
Saviors. The "New York Correspondent," published in 1828, furnishes us
the following brief history of an ancient Chinese God, known as Beddou:—

"All the Eastern writers agree in placing the birth of Beddou 1027 B.C.
The doctrines of this Deity prevailed over Japan, China, and Ceylon.
According to the sacred tenets of his religion, 'God is incessantly
rendering himself incarnate,' but his greatest and most solemn
incarnation was three thousand years ago, in the province of Cashmere,
under the name of Fot, or Beddou. He was believed to have sprung from
the right intercostal of a virgin of the royal blood, who, when she
became a mother, did not the less continue to be a virgin; that the king
of the country, uneasy at his birth, was desirous to put him to death,
and hence caused all the males that were born at the same period to be
put to death, and also that, being saved by shepherds, he lived in the
desert to the age of thirty years, at which time he opened his
commission, preaching the doctrines of truth, and casting out devils;
that he performed a multitude of the most astonishing miracles, spent
his life fasting, and in the severest mortifications, and at his death
bequeathed to his disciples the volume in which the principles of his
religion are contained."

Here, it will be observed, are some very striking counterparts to the
miraculous incidents found related in the Gospel history of Jesus
Christ. And no less analogous is the no less well-authenticated story of
Quexalcote of Mexico, which the Rev. Mr. Maurice concedes to be, and
Lord Kingsborough and Niebuhr (in his history of Rome) *prove* to be
much older than the Gospel account of Jesus Christ. According to
Maurice's "Ind. Ant.,"

<span id="page_374">p. 374</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Humboldt's
"Researches in Mexico," Lord Kingsborough's "Mexican Ant.," and other
works, the incarnate God Quexalcote was born (about 300 B.C.) of a
spotless virgin, by the name Chimalman, and led a life of the deepest
humility and piety; retired to a wilderness, fasted forty days, was
worshipped as a God, and was finally crucified between two thieves;
after which he was buried and descended into hell, but rose again the
third day. The following is a part of Lord Kingsborough's testimony in
the case: "The temptation of Quexalcote, the fast of forty days ordained
by the Mexican ritual, the cup with which he was presented to drink (on
the cross), the reed which was his sign, the 'Morning Star,' which he is
designated, the 'Teoteepall, or Divine Stone,' which was laid on his
altar, and which was likewise an object of adoration,—all these
circumstances, connected with many others relating to Quexalcote of
Mexico, but which are here omitted, are very curious and mysterious."
(Vol. Vi. p. 237, of Mexican Ant.)

Again "Quexalcote is represented, in the painting of Codex Borgianus, as
nailed to the cross." (See Mex. Ant. vol. vi. p. 166.) One plate in this
work represents him as being crucified in the heavens, one as being
crucified between two thieves. Sometimes he is represented as being
nailed to the cross, and sometimes as hanging with the cross in his
hands. The same work speaks of his burial, descent into hell, and his
resurrection; while the account of his immaculate conception and
miraculous birth are found in a work called "Codex Vaticanus."

Other parallel incidents could be cited, if we had space for them,
appertaining to the history of this Mexican God. And parallels might
also be constructed upon the histories of other ancient Gods,—as that of
Sakia of India, Salivahana of Bermuda, Hesus, or Eros, of the

<span id="page_375">p. 375</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Celtic Druids,
Mithra of Persia, Hil and Feta of the Mandaites, &c.

But we will close with the testimony of a French philosopher (Bagin) on
the subject of deific incarnations. This writer says, "The most ancient
histories are those of Gods who became incarnate in order to govern
mankind. All those fables are the same in spirit, and sprang up
everywhere from confused ideas, which have universally prevailed among
mankind,—that Gods formerly descended upon earth."

Now, we ask the Christian reader,—and it will be the first query of
every man whose religious faith has not made shipwreck of his
reason,—"What does all this mean? How are you going to sustain the
declaration that Jesus Christ was the only son and sent of God, in view
of these historic facts? Where are the superior credentials of his
claim? How will you prove his apparently legendary history (that is, the
miraculous portion of his history) to be real, and the others false?" We
boldly aver it cannot be done. Please answer these questions, or
relinquish your doctrine of the divinity of Jesus Christ.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXXIX: The Scriptural View of Christ's Divinity](wscs44)
