[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Critical Views](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](wscs41) 
[Next](wscs43) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/093281395X/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The World's Sixteen Crucified Saviors*, by Kersey Graves, \[1875\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_366">p. 366</span>

### CHAPTER XXXVII.

#### PHYSIOLOGICAL ABSURDITIES OF THE DOCTRINE OF THE DIVINE INCARNATION.

THERE is also a physiological principle (discovered by the author)
comprised in the doctrine of the Divine Incarnation fatal in its
practical and logical application to the divinity of Jesus Christ, and
all the other incarnate or flesh-invested Gods of antiquity. It is
evidently fraught with much logical force. It is based upon the law of
mental and physical correspondence. *As is the physical conformation, so
is the mentality*, is a law of analogy which pilots us to nearly all our
practical knowledge of the natural world. A knowledge of either serves
as an index to the other.

When we observe an animal possessing that physical form and construction
peculiar to its species, we expect to find it practically exhibiting the
nature, character, disposition, and habits peculiar to that class of
animals. If it possesses, for example, the conformation of a sheep, we
infer at once that it has the disposition of a sheep, and we are never
disappointed in this conclusion. And when we encounter an animal with
the tiger form, we expect to see exhibited the tiger spirit. If it
possesses the well-known physical conformation of the tiger, we are
never deceived or misled when we assign it a predatory disposition. If
it is a tiger form, it is sure to be a tiger in character and habits.
And so of all the genera and species of animals that range upon the face
of the globe. We may travel through the whole field of animated

<span id="page_367">p. 367</span>

nature, and observe the infallible operation of this beautiful law of
correspondence till we come, however, to the crowning work of God,
called Man. Here we find this law, this beautiful chain of analogy,
broken by the doctrine of the "divine incarnation." God becomes a man,
at least is made to exhibit every external appearance of a man. All
external distinction between God and man is thus obliterated. So that
the very first being we meet in the street or on the highway possessing
the form, size, and physical conformation of a man, and presenting every
other external appearance of being a man, may nevertheless be a *God*.
And no less is this objection practically exemplified, and not less is
the infraction of this beautiful law of analogy observable in the case
of Jesus Christ, than in the numerous other incarnate Gods and demigods
of antiquity. Being in appearance a man, *how was he to be, or how could
he be*, visually distinguished from a man? Or how could those men who
were contemporary with him, know, as they approached him, or as they
approached each other, whether they were meeting a man or a God? Seeing
that "he was found in fashion as a man" (Phil. ii. 8), either he might
be mistaken for a man, or they for a God. They were constantly liable to
be confounded. If, then, the infinite deityship was lodged in the person
of Jesus Christ, it is evident that that important fundamental law of
nature—"as is the form, so is the character"—was utterly annulled,
prostrated, annihilated, and banished from the world by the act. So that
all was, and is henceforth and forever, chaos, confusion, and
uncertainty. For if the principle can be violated in one instance, it
may be in another, and in thousands of cases, ad infinitum. If one case
could be allowed to occur, the principle is established, and nature's
universal chain of analogy is broken and destroyed; for to intercept the
law is to "break the tenth and ten thousandth link alike."

<span id="page_368">p. 368</span>

Hence it is evident that if a being resembling a man may be a God, an
animal resembling a cow may be a horse, and yonder stick a poisonous
adder; and fatal may be the consequences, in thousands of instances, in
judging or inferring the nature and character of an animal by its form
and size. A supposed innocent animal might be a deadly enemy, or *vice
versa*. Can we then believe, or dare we believe, a doctrine so
atheistical in its tendencies as that the Infinite Deity was
incorporated in the person of the meek and lowly Jesus, when it would
thus set at naught, violate, prostrate, and utterly cancel from the
world one of God's own fundamental laws, and one of the essential
principles of natural science, and banish forever the coordinate harmony
of the universe, and thus inaugurate a state of universal disorder,
incertitude, anarchy, and misrule into the otherwise beautifully
law-governed, well-regulated domain of nature? Certainly, most certainly
not! If the incarnation of the Deity, should or could take place, there
should be something *strikingly* peculiar, ay, *infinitely* peculiar, in
his figure, size, and general appearance, in order to make him
susceptible of being distinguished from the human. Otherwise, men would
be liable to be constantly mistaking and worshiping each other for the
Great Almighty and Ubiquitous God, and thus constantly blundering into
idolatry. And we actually find several cases reported in the Scriptures
(mark the fact well) of men, ay, the saints themselves, being led into
this error; being led to commit "the high-handed sin of idolatry" in
consequence of their previous acceptance of the belief in a man-God—that
is, a God of human size and type. St. John, in two instances, was in the
act of worshipping a being possessing the human form, whom he mistook
for the omnipotent and omnipresent God. (See Rev. xix. 10, and xxii. 4.)
Having, perhaps, been taught that "the fullness of the

<span id="page_369">p. 369</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Godhead dwelt
bodily in Christ Jesus," he probably mistook the being he met for *Him*,
and hence offered to worship him. If, then, Christ's own "inspired
disciples" could thus be betrayed into "the sin of idolatry" by having
abolished the infinite distinction between the divine and the human, we
surely find here a very weighty argument against such a leveling and
equalizing doctrine. And certainly nothing could be better calculated to
promote "the sin of idolatry" than thus to obliterate the broad, the
infinitely grand line of demarkation between the infinite God and his
finite creature man. Indeed, may we not here find the very origin and
the cause of the now general prevalence of idolatry in pagan countries?
Is it not directly traceable to the demolition of the broad, high, and
insurmountable wall of distinction which ought forever to stand between
a God of infinite attributes, and a being caged up in the human form?
Certainly, most certainly it is. Hence here I would ask, How can
Christians, after subscribing to the doctrine, "that the fullness of the
Godhead dwelt bodily in the man Christ Jesus" (as Paul very
appropriately calls him), condemn the people of any age or nation for
worshipping as God their fellow-beings—that is, beings with the human
form? Certainly the man who could believe that the infinite God could be
comprehended or incorporated in the person of Jesus, could easily be
brought to believe that the Grand Lama of Tibet is a proper object of
divine worship. He only lacks the substitution of names. Substitute the
*Grand Lama* for that of *Jesus Christ*, and the thing is done. And
idolatry thus becomes an easily established institution, and its
abolition in any country an absolute moral impossibility.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXXVIII: A Historical View of the Divinity of Jesus
Christ](wscs43)
