[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Critical Views](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](wscs40) 
[Next](wscs42) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/093281395X/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The World's Sixteen Crucified Saviors*, by Kersey Graves, \[1875\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_362">p. 362</span>

### CHAPTER XXXVI.

#### PHILOSOPHICAL ABSURDITIES OF THE DOCTRINE OF THE DIVINE INCARNATION.

THERE is a philosophical principle underlying the doctrine of the Divine
Incarnation, whose logical deductions completely overthrow the claim of
Jesus of Nazareth to the Godhead, and which we regard as settling the
question as conclusively as any demonstrated problem in mathematics.
This argument is predicated upon the philosophical axiom, that two
infinite beings of any description of conception, cannot exist, either
in whole or in part, at the same time; and per consequence, it is
impossible that the Father and Son should both be God in a divine sense,
either conjointly or separately. The word infinite comprehends all; it
covers the whole ground; it fills the immensity of the universe, and
fills it to repletion, so that there is no room left for any other being
to exist. And whoever and whatever does exist must constitute a part of
this infinite whole.

Now, the Christian world concedes (for it is the teaching of their
Scriptures), that the Father is God, always and truly, perfect,
complete, and absolute; that there is nothing wanting in him to
constitute him God in the most comprehensive and absolute sense of the
term; that he is all we can conceive of as constituting God, "the one
only true God" (John xvii. 3), and was such from all eternity, before
Jesus Christ was born into the world; and Paul puts the keystone into
the arch by proclaiming, "To us there is but one God, the Father." (1
Cor. viii. 6.) Hence

<span id="page_363">p. 363</span>

we have here a logical proposition (despite the sophistry of
Christendom) as impregnable as the rocks of Gibraltar, that the Father
alone is or can be God, which effectually shuts out every other and all
other beings in the universe from any participation in the Godhead with
the Father. And thus this parity of reasoning demonstrates that the very
moment you attempt to make Christ God, or any part of the Godhead, you
attempt a philosophical impossibility. You cannot introduce another
being as God in the infinite sense until the first-named infinite God is
dethroned and put out of existence, and this, of course, is a
self-evident impossibility. If it were not such, then we should have two
Gods, both absolute and infinite. On the other hand, if that other being
(who with the Christians is Jesus Christ, with the Hindoos Chrishna,
with the Buddhists Sakia, &c.) is introduced as only a part of the
infinite and perfect God, then it is evident to every mind with the
least philosophical perception, that some change or alteration must take
place in the latter before such a union can be effected. But such a
change, or any alteration, in a perfect infinite being would at once
reduce him to a changeable and finite being, and thus he would cease to
be God. For it is a clear philosophical and mathematical axiom, that a
perfect and infinite being cannot become more than infinite. And if he
could and should become less than infinite, he would at once become
finite, and thus lose all the attributes of the Godhead. To say or
assume, then, that Christ was God in the absolute or divine sense, and
the Father also God absolute, and yet that there is but one God, or that
the two could in any manner be united, so as to constitute but one God,
is not only a glaring solecism, but a positive contradiction in terms,
and an utter violation of the first axiomatic principles of philosophy
and mathematics. It also asserts the illogical hypothesis, that a part
can be equal to the

<span id="page_364">p. 364</span>

whole; it first assumes the Father to be absolutely God, then assumes
the Son also to be absolutely God, and finally assumes each to be only a
part, and has to unite them to make a whole and complete God; and
thereby culminates the theological farce. Such is Christian
ratiocination.

Again, it is conceded by Christians, that the Father is an omnipresent
being; and we have shown that it is a mathematical impossibility for two
omnipresent beings, or two beings possessing any infinite attributes, to
exist at one and the same time. Hence the clear logical deduction that
the Son could not be omnipresent, and per sequence, *not* God. Again, we
have another philosophical maxim or axiom familiar to every schoolboy,
that no two substances or beings can occupy the same place at the same
time; the first must be removed before the second can by any possibility
be introduced, in order thus to make room for the latter. But as
omnipresent means existing everywhere, there can be no place to remove
on omnipresent being to, or rather there can be no place or space he can
be withdrawn from in order to make room for another being, without his
ceasing to be omnipresent himself, and thereby ceasing to be God.

It is thus shown to be a demonstrable truth that the omnipresence of the
Father does and must exclude that of the Son, and thus exclude the
possibility of his apotheosis or incarnated deityship. In other words,
it is established as a scientific principle upon a philosophical and
mathematical basis, that Jesus Christ was not and could not be "the
great I AM," "the only true God."

We will notice one other philosophical absurdity involved in the
doctrine of the divine incarnation—ne other solecism comprehended in the
childish notion which invests the infinite God with finite attributes.
It is a well-established and well-understood axiom in philosophy,

<span id="page_365">p. 365</span>

that "the less cannot be made to contain the greater." A pint bottle
cannot be made to contain a quart of wine. For the same reason a finite
body cannot contain an infinite spirit. Hence philosophy presses the
conclusion that "the man Christ Jesus" could not have comprehended in
himself "the Godhead bodily," inasmuch as it would have required the
infinite God to be incorporated in a finite human body. We are therefore
compelled to reject the doctrine of the incarnate divinity, the belief
in the deityship of Jesus Christ, because (with many other reasons
enumerated elsewhere) it involves a direct tilt against some of the
plainest principles of science, and challenges, ay, virtually
overthrows, some of the fundamental laws of both natural and moral
philosophy. No philosopher, therefore, does or can believe in the
absolute divinity of Jesus Christ.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXXVII: Physiological Absurdities of the Doctrine of the
Divine Incarnation](wscs42)
