[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Earth Mysteries](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](cc15)  [Next](cc17) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# The Only True Science Is Founded on a Demonstrated Premise

THE Copernican system of astronomy (built upon an hypothesis) seems to
satisfy the minds which will not and cannot thing. The Koreshan
Astronomy has its foundation on *the* rock. We present an experimental
fact, the result of invention and months of

<span id="page_122">p. 122</span>

careful labor by the Geodetic Staff of the Koreshan Unity, thus
furnishing unquestionable proof of the Cellular Cosmogony advocated by
the discoverer since 1870.

In view of the fact that the so called scientists declare "That
hypothesis or guesswork, indeed, lies at the foundation of all
scientific knowledge," we maintain the right to call a halt, while we
declare from positive experiment . . . that the only true science is
founded upon a demonstrated premise, and not upon an assumption or mere
guesswork. We know we are right. We know, as well, that no man can guess
at a premise and claim that he knows the conclusion reasonably; for it
is admitted by all scientists that their premises are hypothetical.

It has been said that the man who cannot think is a fool; the man who
will not think is a bigot; and the man who dares not think is a coward.
It matters not to us what excuses are offered for ignoring us, . . . we
can show to the people--by methods so simple that all can
understand--that we are right, and that the astronomical guessers are
wrong, and, through the common masses, compel the humbug scientists to
admit their folly and blundering hypothetical processes.

Schiaparelli discovered seas, and also land covered with canals on Mars.
More critical (?) observation may discover that the canals on Mars
traverse the seas, and the scientist (?) changes the conclusion of
yesterday to an opposite conclusion today. Yesterday he observed seas on
Mars; but today what he declared to be water is land, because the
Martian contractors have run the canals across what the other scientists
(?) declared to be seas or oceans. Now we ask in

<span id="page_123">p. 123</span>

good faith, Is this science (knowledge) or is it guesswork? Are these
hypothetical conjurers, scientists or quacks? And we ask, How long must
the world be gulled by the sham and nonsense of pretended experts in
science?

We are absolutely sure of our ground; and we reiterate, that no man who
builds a theory upon the basis of an hypothesis, and who declares that
"hypothesis or guesswork, indeed, lies at the foundation of all
scientific knowledge," has any reasonable claims to consideration.
Guesswork is not science.

A statement made by a so called scientist today and contradicted
tomorrow is not science; and yet this is the stuff that has been palmed
off as scientific upon a credulous public for hundreds of years, and the
men who have the audacity to eject these emanations are dubbed as
scientists.

"I cannot see why the universe should be limited to a single cosmic
cell. The analogy of cell structure in the human body, with groups
co-ordinated in interdependent series, would seem to suggest a plurality
of worlds, limited in number, and forming, in their serial aggregate,
that larger cosmic structure which Swedenborg designated as the 'Grand
Man.' Does the logic of your premise inexorably limit the universe to a
single world?"

We are frequently met with the above inquiry. The cosmic cell, which we
claim includes the universe, focalizes its universal imprint upon
myriads of stellar points through the subtension of its pencilings of
potency. These focal stellar nuclei are grouped in clusters according to
the geometric action of reflection and refraction. These constellations,
fixed in their positions and relations according to the "inexorable"

<span id="page_124">p. 124</span>

laws of geometrization, correspond to nations and individuals of
humanity; and in the lesser form of creation (the microcosm), to the
arrangement of cells in the infolded or incubated form of the vidual.

Were the ordinary human form opened out or evolved into the form of the
cosmic shell, as it is before incubation, it would be in the form of the
grand cosmic structure, with its rind or circumference and its stellar
groups, though in magnitude the correspondent of the microcosm or the
little universe,--the universe in its least form.

Every star in the grand cell (the universe) is the imprint of the whole
in proportion to its attitude toward all other stars, and is complete in
proportion to its approximation to the astral nucleus. The stellar
nucleus is the point at the center of the great *camera obscura*, where
the photograph (light writing) is taken of the great shell and all
contained in it.

As the astral center is the photograph of the alchemico-organic
(physical) cosmos as an entirety, it is (in the least form) the kinetic
nucleus of the essences of the cosmic structure, and therefore the point
of both the inception and exception; that is, the point of the
limitation of the afferent tendency, and beginning of the efferent flow,
that is, of radiation.

### Astral Nucleus of the Physical Cosmos an Eternally Fixed Point

This astral point is not the Lord God, but it is the point in the
alchemico-organic whole which co-ordinates with and corresponds to the
astral nucleus in humanity; that is, to the Lord. The astral nucleus is
an eternally fixed point near the center of the alchemico-organic
structure, because it is in and related to space.

<span id="page_125">p. 125</span>

The corresponding stellar nucleus in humanity appears and disappears as
the Lord, the Son of God, at stated periods of the world's progress.
These changes of state with man correspond to the varied qualities of
stellar nuclei in the space of the alchemico-organic cosmos.

When man attains to the perfection reached by the Lord Jesus, he is so
related to all things in the natural and spiritual humanity as to render
him as central to this whole as the astral (alchemico-organic) nucleus
is central to the alchemico-organic cosmos. For this reason, when the
crucifixion of the Lord obstructed the flow of the anthropostic nucleus,
the current of the physical cosmos was interrupted and the sun was
darkened.

A principal lesson is found here in the general law of astrology. The
central man (the Lord Jesus Christ, the bright and Morning Star of the
anthropostic cosmos) was so related to the central star of the
alchemico-organic world as to interrupt its currents (its vibrations)
when the current of his humanity was for the time being obscured.

### Descending or Gravic, and Ascending or Levic Eliminations

In the Koreshan Cosmogony it is announced that immediately above our
common atmosphere of oxygen and nitrogen there obtains one of pure
hydrogen. In the activities which comprise the life and perpetuity of
that atmospheric field there are combinations of spirit and matter
which, if not precipitated, would constitute deleterious elements. These
are thrown down and at once appropriated by the field below.

The gravic (descending) essences produced by

<span id="page_126">p. 126</span>

the contiguity of the hydrogen with the oxygen upon which it rests,
unite in our own atmosphere with co-ordinate levic essences produced at
the point of contact of our atmosphere with the surface upon which it
rests.

The descending or gravic eliminations of the hydrogen sphere combine, in
our atmosphere, with the levic eliminations of the surface below; and in
the union of the two the cloud is formed and thence the water is
produced, which, precipitated (dejected as water), clarifies the
atmosphere and becomes a supporter of life in the field beneath. There
is not a domain in existence, either in the alchemico-organic world or
in the lower biologic, anthropostic, angelic, or theo-anthropostic, in
which this law does not prevail and operate.

The hells themselves generate the forms of life they cannot endure, and
spew them upward in their ascending flight to realms of joy above.
Christ the Lord in his ascending development came from the hells, and
was the first begotten of the dead; and when created, had he remained a
tangible personality among the inhabitants of earth, would have done so
as an effete element of the nether world, a cause of disintegration, a
disease in the body politic and a disrupter of society; but being
eliminated as an ejection from the sphere of brutality whence he arose,
he operated as the conservator of the less brutal field of benign
activity in his spiritual power.

### Cosmogonical Limitations as to Time and Space

The physical universe is limited by virtue of the fact that an organic
whole could not exist without all of the properties of form. The
physical universe has

<span id="page_127">p. 127</span>

form because it is a material structure governed by operations which
have their co-ordinating influences at the central pole of regulation.
One of the properties of form is limitation. Without limitation there
could be no form of the universe.

Everything in the universe flows toward and into the center; and
inversely, from the center into the circumference. These relative
fluxions are mutual and compensative, and in their reciprocal
interfluxions they maintain the equilibrium of the circulations of the
universe, which makes it an eternal, self-recreative structure.

Time limitations are governed by definite cycles, which are determined
by the solar, lunar, stellar, and planetary motions. All cycles are
primarily determined by the momentum of the stellar nucleus, from which
all other motions are derived. The momentum of all the operations and
activities of the universe is imparted from the reactive forces of the
stellar center, which derives its momentum from a continuous influx from
the circumference, which is a complex and composite material form with a
corresponding function.

The shell of this universe (which is sole and unique as the entire
universal field of activity, and which constitutes being) is about one
hundred miles thick, composed of seven outside metallic strata,
superimposed upon which is an inner shell, rind, or crust of mineral
layers, of which there are five; and upon this are the geologic strata.
These seventeen layers or strata comprise the rind of the material
universe, of which, in its involuntary and evolutionary processes, the
perfect man is the highest power of development.

The universe has an anatomical structure like the anatomy of man, with
the exception that with man

<span id="page_128">p. 128</span>

the incubated form is manifest for the convenience of human activity and
use. The incubated form of the universe is the form of man. This is the
macro-cosmic man. The microcosm is the man in the least form of the
universe.

### Relation of Central Star to Circumferences

The motions of the universe, by which times are determined and
perpetuated, depend upon the motions of the central star as related to
the circumferences which reflect the forces which the central nucleus
radiates. The rotation of the central star--which, because of its
positive and negative reactions is forced into an excentric revolution,
and thence into a spiral--determines first, day and night, and thence
the seasons.

The seasons are produced by the spiral motion, which moves the astral
nucleus or central star north and then south about forty-seven degrees;
that is, twenty-three and a half degrees north and south of the equator.
The cause of the motion is the reciprocal action of the inflowing
essences of dematerialized matter, with a co-ordinating outflowing
radiation reacting and from the rotary motion thus induced, merging into
the spiral.

The electro-magnetic center is made to heap up within its helical cone
of electro-magnetic essence, a surplus "energy" (rather electro-magnetic
substance) until the motion toward the north, or toward the apex of the
cone, is discharged into the solar zone. The star then starts backward
toward its base of the conic helix, or toward the southern aspect of its
motion. The helical motion thus engendered constitutes the eternal
spiral momentum of the universe.

The precession of the equinoxes (which is about

<span id="page_29">p. 29</span>

fifty seconds of a degree every year) determines one cycle, which is
about twenty-four thousand years, because there are processes of the
foreshortening of time which reduce what would otherwise be twenty-five
thousand eight hundred and sixteen years, to the limit of twenty-four
thousand years. This period of time carries the sign through all of the
twelve constellations of the Zodiac, returning the sign to its own house
(or to the constellation Aries) at the end of the twenty-four-thousand
year period.

There is a co-ordinate movement of the ecliptic on the equator, which
embraces a period of seventy-two thousand years; and one of the ecliptic
on the solstitial colure, which embraces twelve distinct periods of
twelve thousand years each, including in all a period of 144,000
thousand years.

These time periods on the solstitial colure are determined by
catastrophal times, caused by a sudden movement of the ecliptic thirty
degrees on the solstitial cycle. The world is now preparing for one of
these movements. The one now impending will carry the ecliptic down to
seven degrees below what is now the equator. The earth will be shortened
in its longitudinal axis proportionably, and the sun will then become a
zone encircling the earth, making light all of the time, modified by one
half of the annulus being less bright than the other half. Then there
will be no night, as Scripturally predicted.

There are twelve sudden movements on the colure (solstitial), one in
twelve thousand years. These are all accompanied by universal
catastrophes. One of these movements as noted above is almost due, and
we are about entering upon one of the world's greatest phenomenal
periods.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Plumbline Is First Step in Rational Demonstration](cc17)
