[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Earth Mysteries](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](cc24)  [Next](cc26) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# Results and Inevitable Conclusions

### Details of Measurements and Extension of the Air Line into the Water

WHEN we suspended the plumbline at the first adjustment of the Geodetic
Apparatus, we established beyond all doubt the direction of the earth's
radius, or the perpendicular at the initial station.

Poised upon the pivot of adjustment, the bubble in the graduated vial of
the spirit level measured equal distances from the central division of
the scale. The mercury in the 12-foot mercurial geodetic level stood

<span id="page_186">p. 186</span>

at equal altitudes in the perpendicular tubes, in demonstration of the
fact that the level is at right angles with the perpendicular radius of
the earth.

The plumb and level invariably tell the truth; they are silent witnesses
testifying from the standpoint of unseen "energies," which man cannot
bribe nor change to suit a theory. The bubble-shifts at the various
stations throughout the line of survey, whether corroborating or denying
preconceived opinions, must be accepted as conclusive.

With perpendicular and horizontal definitely fixed at the starting point
in our survey and in our argument concerning the evidences afforded in
the line projected, we have factors which constitute an indisputable
basis of reference. Once leveled, the direction of our line was fixed,
from which it was not possible to depart; the bolts which held together
the brass facings on the adjusted right-angled cross-arms would admit of
no change.

The very principles of construction of the apparatus compelled the
maintenance of the rectiline from the beginning to the end. The line
projected must terminate somewhere, either in space or in the water,
according as the earth would be found to be convex or concave.

If the earth were convex, the line would extend into space, as before
explained; as the line would proceed, the bubble in the spirit level
would shift at each successive application, more and more toward the
south from the central division of the scale, while the plumbline
hanging in the direction of the perpendicular, or the earth's radii at
the various stations, would hang toward the initial station. If concave,
the

<span id="page_187">p. 187</span>

conditions and positions of the levels and plumb would be the reverse of
those on a convex surface; if flat, they would be the same continually,
as at the beginning of the line.

By reference to Cut 4, Plate 1, the relations of the plumb to an
extension of the horizontal at the initial station may be clearly seen,
as regards the convex, the flat, and the concave theories. In
conjunction with the tests of levels and plumb, the observations of the
Gulf horizon were made, as before explained.

At the beginning of the line, the straight-edges of the apparatus when
in adjustment were parallel with the horizon. On a convex arc, the
straight-edges and the horizon line would appear to converge toward the
north with increasing angle, as the line proceeded; if flat, their
original parallel relations would be apparent throughout the line; and
if concave, the apparent convergence would be toward the south, or in
the direction of the movement of the apparatus.

### The Testimony of Levels, Plumbs, and Horizon

We present the evidences of the readings of the levels, plumb, and
horizon, because the evidences afforded by these means are independent
of any measurements of altitude of the line surveyed above the mean tide
level; we offer them as corroborative of the measurements obtained.

It will be found upon comparison with the table of measurements in this
chapter, that these evidences are in harmony with the measurements and
facts which constitute the factors of our direct demonstration.

The spirit level was applied in test of position of sections at every
twelfth adjustment throughout the

<span id="page_188">p. 188</span>

line. For the first several tests, the divergence of the water line and
the air line was too slight to be detected by means of the level; and it
was not until near the end of the first eighth-of-mile division of the
line that any difference was thus manifest. The bubble had shifted a
little--toward the north, or rear section of the apparatus. From the
first point of the manifest deviation until the end of the line, the
angle increased proportionately to the distance traversed.

This was corroborated also by the position of the plumbline, and the
observed increase of angle between the straight-edges and horizon,
always converging toward the south.

We have thus far referred to these angles in general terms; the question
would arise, What were the actual angle measurements as ascertained by
the levels, plumb, and horizon, at points where all these tests were
applied? If there were variations, how great or small were the
variations?

The divisions on the graduated scale of the spirit level were .075 of an
inch apart; the plumb was suspended from top of the 4-foot right-angled
cross-arms, and the angle read on plate at the bottom of the cross-arms;
the 12-foot mercurial level determined the angle for 12 feet, while the
observed horizon was related to straight-edges 36 feet in length, and
therefore determined the angle for 36 feet.

We give below the results observed at the end of the first mile, the
second mile, and at end of 2⅜ miles, at last adjustment of the apparatus
in the southerly direction.

Spirit Level, shift of bubble toward north end of the vial, as measured
on the graduated scale:

1 mi., .0375 in.; 2 miles, .077 in.; 2⅜ mi., .089 in.

<span id="page_189">p. 189</span>

Plumbline, measurement on arc of 4 feet radius, as related to
right-angled cross-arms: .

1 mi., .015 in.; 2 mi., .037 in.; 2⅜ mi., .044 in.

Mercurial geodetic level, indicating angle of divergence of air line and
horizontal at points of test, for the space of 12 feet:

1 mi., .042 in.; 2 mi., .094 in.; 2⅜ mi., .115 in.

The Horizon, indicating angle for space of 36 feet, as accurately as
could be measured with the eye at a distance of 15 feet from the
apparatus:

1 mi., .15 in.; 2 mi., .34 in.; 2⅜ mi., .51 in.

These readings, taken as a basis of mathematical calculations, will be
found to very nearly conform to the relations of chord and radii, over
an arc of 25,000 miles circumference, and are evidences of the angles
increased in about the proper ratio, as the surveyed line progressed
from the beginning to the end. The chord, tangibly constructed, was
constantly converging with the arc, as we have shown by the four
independent sources of evidence; and we now purpose presenting such a
network of facts of absolute and direct demonstration as to render our
position invulnerable, and our premise impregnable.

### Details of Visual Projection of Air Line Over Gordon's Pass

From the Naples dock looking south, a white line in the Florida sand
marks the line of excavations for emplacement of the standards of the
Rectilineator, extending to Gordon's Pass, in the southern horizon. This
white line is the actual mark we have made in the world,--our path to
success, the route of demonstration. Carefully and patiently for eight
weeks we followed this course, making precise adjustments,--

<span id="page_190">p. 190</span>

painstaking, careful, tedious, and trying work, by which the facts we
are publishing were obtained.

We diagram the Air Line, the coast line, and the water's surface to the
extremity of the line, covering the space of 4⅛ miles. A is the point of
beginning of the line at altitude of 128 inches; B is the point where
the rectiline extended into the waters of the Gulf of Mexico. The coast
line can be easily traced without lettering; C is Gordon's Pass; D, the
long sand-bar extending into the Gulf, through an excavation in which
the Air Line was projected; the excavation admitted of vision of the
water horizon from the 2⅜ mile station, where the final adjustments of
the apparatus were made.

<span id="img_19000"></span> ![Map of Coast Line and Gordon's Pass,
Showing Course of Air Line and Point of Projection Into the
Gulf](img/19000.jpg)

All of the definite measurements of altitude of the line and of the
minute angles of divergence were made with reference to the position of
the apparatus from the beginning of the line to the end of the
adjustments, covering a distance of 2⅜ miles; the line was tangibly
built for this distance. The cross-arms extended 2 feet below the
horizontal axis or middle line of the sections, and at the end of 2⅜
miles were within 7 inches of the ground; the axis of the apparatus was
rapidly converging with the water level.

We had manipulated the apparatus as far as practicable and possible,
within the limits of our conveniences

<span id="page_191">p. 191</span>

for operation from the starting point of 128-inch altitude. The Air Line
at this point was 54 inches nearer the water's surface than at the
beginning; whereas, if the earth were convex, the line would have been
54 inches above the vertical point of the original 128 inches, making a
difference of 108 inches, or 9 feet, in the position of the apparatus
from that really obtained.

### Extension of Air Line into the Water

For the reasons given above, the extension of the Air Line into the
water, or a continuance of the line in any direction, we had to employ
another method of survey. As the line would extend across the Pass and
over the sand-bar, through the excavation, and into the Gulf south of
the Pass, it was necessary to finish the line by a visual process.

In order that this might be done as accurately as possible, obviating
any errors that might arise from the adjustment of such an apparatus as
the engineer's level, parallel with the horizontal axis of the
apparatus, two points on the Air Line surveyed by the apparatus,
one-eighth of a mile apart, were taken as tile sighting stations; these
points were tide staffs Nos. 19 and 20.

On these staffs we had left the record of the altitude of the Air Line.
The large telescope provided with horizontal cross-hair, was adjusted at
staff No. 19, so that its line of collimation was at the same altitude
as the surveyed line at that point. On staff No. 20, one-eighth of a
mile distant, a steel strip was fixed horizontally at altitude of Air
Line at that point, upon which to train the telescope. When the
telescope was adjusted so that the cross-hair was in line with the steel

<span id="page_192">p. 192</span>

strip, the simple matter of projecting the remainder of the line
visually is easily comprehended.

At these distances from the beginning of the line, with the tending
divergence toward the water, refraction and visual curvilineation would
involve so small a factor of departure from the rectiline for the
remaining distance as to give an approximately correct reading on the
staffs to the end. Through the telescope, the steel strip and the
cross-hair were observed to a point below the Gulf horizon--the visual
line extending into the water south of the Pass.

The following diagram gives a perpendicular view of the line, showing
the land elevation. XY represents

<span id="img_19200"></span> ![Profile View of Land Elevation, Showing
Process of Visual Projection of Air Line Into the Gulf](img/19200.jpg)

the arc of curvature; A, the beginning of the survey; B, the point of
projection into the water; C, the Pass, and D, the sand-bar through
which excavation was made; E, tide staff No. 19, with telescope; F, tide
staff No. 20. The continuous line is the line surveyed by section
adjustments; the dotted line is the portion of the Air Line projected
visually.

For the purposes of measurement and calculation of ratio of curvature,
it was necessary to locate the point on the Gulf where the line extended
into the water. This was done by directing our sail-boat beyond the
Pass, in line with the telescope axis. When the lower part of the hull
appeared just above the cross-hair, it was obvious that the point was
marked.

<span id="page_193">p. 193</span>

By means of our signal code, the observer at the telescope transmitted
the information that the point was reached by the sailors in the boat,
and the occupants on getting signal, went directly ashore, and
consulting stakes, gave the distance as approximately 4⅓ miles from
beginning of survey.

These observations were participated in by the visiting and
investigating committee, as well as the Operating Staff, who conducted a
repetition of the observations three days later.

At the time of the observations, sketches of the telescopic view were
made, showing the boat on the Gulf where the Air Line was projected into
the water, as the converging chord of arc; and for the benefit of the
reader we herewith produce sketch, showing the cross-hair in telescope
at tide staff No. 19, the picture of tide staff No. 20, with steel strip
attached in line with the cross-hair.

The visual line connecting the same, extending beyond and projecting
into the water, completed the experiment, the results having been
proclaimed by the Founder of the Koreshan Cosmogony twenty-seven years
previous to the demonstration on the Florida west coast.

For the purpose of further testing the apparatus, we retraced the
surveyed line by means of the apparatus for the distance of ⅜ mile,
taking the last forward adjustment as the first adjustment on the return
survey. If the hair-line of the apparatus returned to the same point on
the tide staffs, it would be a further demonstration of the accuracy of
our work. An error of deviation from the rectiline would be applied on
the return, and would consequently be

<span id="page_194">p. 194</span>

made manifest by having fixed points as bases of reference, such as were
recorded upon the tide staffs on the forward survey.

<span id="img_19400"></span>

[![Sketch of the Telescopic View&lt;br&gt; Showing Extension of the Air
Line Into the Gulf Through Excavation South of Gordon's Pass; also
Relation of Cross-hair and Steel Strip to Horizon and Boat in the
Distance](tn/19400.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/19400.jpg)  
Sketch of the Telescopic View  
Showing Extension of the Air Line Into the Gulf Through Excavation South
of Gordon's Pass; also Relation of Cross-hair and Steel Strip to Horizon
and Boat in the Distance  

Upon return to the staffs the hair-line of the apparatus fell upon
nearly the same points, as per the figures in the table of measurements
under the following subhead, demonstrating the remarkable accuracy and
efficiency of the apparatus employed to make the

<span id="page_195">p. 195</span>

 

<span id="img_19500"></span>

[![TABLE SHOWING ALTITUDE OF AIR LINE ABOVE DATUM LINE AT EVERY STATION
OF SURVEY, WITH THE MEASURES COMPARED WITH THE CALCULATED CURVATURE
SKETCH OF THE TELESCOPIC VIEW](tn/19500.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/19500.jpg)  
TABLE SHOWING ALTITUDE OF AIR LINE ABOVE DATUM LINE AT EVERY STATION OF
SURVEY, WITH THE MEASURES COMPARED WITH THE CALCULATED CURVATURE SKETCH
OF THE TELESCOPIC VIEW  

<span id="page_196">p. 196</span>

first direct test of the earth's surface in the history of the world.

### Measurement of Altitude of Air Line on 25 Tide Staffs

As the Rectilineator was moved forward, section by section, in the
direction of the tide staffs, the relation of the hair-line of the
sections to the 128-inch altitude, or secondary datum line, was easily
obtained by measurement. At no place throughout the line of survey did
the sections rise above the original 128-inch altitude.

At the end of the first 660 feet, where the calculated ratio would
indicate .125 of an inch curvation, the hair-line of the apparatus fell
.15 of an inch below the 128-inch altitude, being a difference of only
.025 of an inch. This is in easy contrast with the conditions that would
result if the earth curved downward instead of upward. If it were
convex, the hair-line of the sections would have fallen about .125 of an
inch above the 128-inch altitude. The tide staffs marked brilliant
points of interest throughout the survey; for each measurement was a
demonstration not only of the fact that the earth curved toward its
chord, but also the ratio of its concavity.

For easy reference and definite record, we have condensed all of the
facts of measurements of the Koreshan Geodetic Survey into the preceding
table of distances and altitudes, by means of which the results of our
work may be easily compared with the calculated ratio, and how nearly,
at each tide staff, the hair-line of the apparatus came to indicating
the ratio which we have since calculated, and here present for
comparison and study.

<span id="page_197">p. 197</span>

It will be noticed that the difference between the measured and. the
calculated ratios increases toward the end of the survey; the apparent
rapid approach of the line to the water's surface after 2¼ miles had
been surveyed is due, not to actual approach to the mean water level of
even curvature, nor to inaccurate work or measurements of the tide
levels, but to the crowding of the waters around the mouth of the Pass,
creating a slight irregularity in the water level in that vicinity.

It will also be noticed that the line projected into ( the water at the
distance of approximately 4¼ miles instead of 4 miles, which is due to
refraction and incurvation of the visual lines from the 2⅜ miles station
to the water's surface beyond the Pass.

### Comparative Results of Altitude Measurements on Concave and Convex Surfaces

It may be asked, What would be the facts of measurement if such survey
as ours were made upon a *convex* surface? We append table of
comparative results for reference, study, or test by calculation. Having
two parallel arcs; the mean tide level, and the secondary datum line,
connected by staffs of 128 inches altitude as fixed bases of reference,
it may be seen that on a *convex* earth, instead of the air line
*falling below* the vertical point of every staff, it would *rise
above*, and increase in excess of altitude above the original 128 inches
as to the square of the distance.

For instance; at the end of the first mile, instead of the surveyed line
falling 8.02 inches below the secondary datum line, it would rise about
as far above, making a difference of about 16 *inches* in the altitude
of the line on the concave, and the line on the convex

<span id="page_198">p. 198</span>

earth; while at the end of 4⅛ miles, instead of the line extending into
the water, the line would be projected

<span id="img_19800"></span>

[![TABLE CONTRASTING AIR LINE AS SURVEYED, WITH CALCULATED RESULTS UPON
CONVEX SURFACE](tn/19800.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/19800.jpg)  
TABLE CONTRASTING AIR LINE AS SURVEYED, WITH CALCULATED RESULTS UPON
CONVEX SURFACE  

out into space, 136.125 inches above the original 128 inches, making a
difference between the two theories of 264.125 inches, or about 22 feet,
in 4⅛ miles.

<span id="page_199">p. 199</span>

If the reader will study the construction of the Rectilineator and the
methods used in operating same, it will be clearly understood that we
did not make an error of 22 feet in running 4⅛ miles.

In presenting the foregoing line of experiments, both optical and
mechanical, we are giving to the world the benefit of much painstaking
effort in deter-mining facts as to the real contour of the surface of
the earth upon which we live.

In conducting the different lines of investigation presented, we have
tried to be honest with ourselves and those who investigate our work as
detailed. The conclusions reached are irrefutable. The character,
honesty of purpose, and ability of those who conducted these experiments
we willingly leave to the decision of the reader.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Cause of Variation of the Pendulum](cc26)
