[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Earth Mysteries](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](cc27)  [Next](cc29) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_209">p. 209</span>

# Astronomical Mysteries and Hypotheses

(KORESH in FLAMING SWORD, Dec. 12, 1902)

IF HERE is a whole lot of astronomical wisdom (?) being imparted through
the Chicago *American*, written up by Garrett P. Serviss. Mr. Serviss
says, referring to a recent astronomical work issued by the West Hendon
House Observatory, England, that "The author, Mr. T. W. Backhouse, has
devoted his time liberally to the observation of phenomena in the
heavens, about which the great majority, even of astronomers, know
little or nothing. Yet they are phenomena of surpassing and increasing
interest, and when they are fully understood they may revolutionize some
of the views now entertained concerning the constitution of the
universe."

What an admission for a scientific (?) man to make. A possible
revolution in the minds of "scientists," men who know--for science means
knowledge! If astronomical knowledge may be revolutionized, then the
science of modern astronomy hangs upon a very brittle thread. The
revolution, however, is coming because the whole Copernican system is
predicated upon the basis of assumption, which every astronomer is
willing to confess.

Mr. Serviss declares that few discoveries of modern times "affect the
imagination with so deep a sense of mystery as does that of the
existence of vast invisible masses in the stellar interspaces. Some of
these are demonstrably solid bodies of immense magnitude and
gravitational power, intimately and inseparably associated with bright
stars.

<span id="page_210">p. 210</span>

"Others still more strange, are enormously expanded nebulous clouds
\[which means, literally, cloudy clouds\], that radiate not light, but
energy \["mere mode of motion"\], which, like the Roentgen rays, affect
photographic plates and thus render the invisible indirectly visible."

Mr. S. also refers, in his notice of this book, to "a third mysterious
form of substance contained in the depths of space, whose presence is
manifested by such phenomena as the 'coal sacks' and the 'dark lanes'
that are principally in the Milky Way."

All of this impresses us with the vast amount of ignorance which is
accumulated in the modern star-gazing mind, and which, from mere
modesty, is denominated knowledge--astronomical knowledge. The amount of
this kind of wisdom stored and taught is almost as vast as the
"illimitable" thing which the "finite," limited mind attempts to
comprehend.

The astronomer says the universe is illimitable, therefore
incomprehensible, and then sets his mind--which he says is "finite"--at
work to comprehend what he denominates the "infinite." The remarkable
thing is, that he knows enough to plan the universe without boundaries,
making it illimitable, then sets measurable boundaries to his own mind,
and does not know enough to comprehend the fact that he cannot
comprehend the "infinite" with the "finite," yet still persists in
conjuring fables for one generation, which the succeeding generation may
discard,

The fact is, the universe is within the boundaries of mental possibility
to encompass, but the mind must start right. It cannot assume a premise
and reach, by processes of reasoning, anything but the logical

<span id="page_211">p. 211</span>

deduction; namely, assumption. The premise must be demonstrated to
insure a correct conclusion for a rational consecution of argument. The
basis of the Copernican system of astronomy is assumption, according to
the testimony of Copernicus himself, as herein quoted:

"Neither let any one, so far as hypotheses are concerned, expect
anything certain from astronomy, since that science can afford nothing
of the kind. The hypothesis \[guess\] of the terrestrial motion of the
earth was nothing but an hypothesis, valuable only so far as it
explained phenomena, and not to be considered with reference to absolute
truth."

This is an honest confession of ignorance in the mind of the originator
of the present system of astronomy. The modern astronomer has simply
added an accumulation of guesses, which he has made to fit into the
original guess, and which Mr. S. says is threatened with revolution in
the mind, providing it does not call a halt upon the attempt of the
finite mind to fathom the mysteries of the "infinite."

Finally, Mr. Serviss says: "There is, perhaps, nothing which gives rise
to so keen a desire to have knowledge advanced in that particular
direction, as does the part of the book relating to the structure of the
sidereal universe." That which has no limitation has no structure,
because form is the fundamental factor of structure, and limitation is a
fundamental property of form.

The material universe has length, breadth, and thickness, or it does not
exist. These properties are ever, one of them limitable. What interests
Mr. S. the most, are "the 'gaps,' 'rifts,' and 'wisps' in the

<span id="page_212">p. 212</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Milky Way, and the 'radiated systems' and
'flower-like structures' visible amid the infinitely varied array of
stars."

Now all this is simplified when we start out with a demonstrated
premise. Start with the thing you know, not the thing you guess at, (see
the CELLULAR COSMOGONY,) then everything comes easy. The universe is
within the comprehension of the mind which, as the offspring of the
parent mind, can grow into the amplification of the parent.

A star is the result of a defined focalization of convergent rays of
spirit within the luminous ether, which is encompassed by the shell of
the universe, and within our own atmosphere.

The nebulæ (clouds) are incomplete focalizations. The "energies" do not
merge into a complete focus, therefore the combustion is not so absolute
as at the complete focal point; all these manifestations in the stellar
space are reflections merely from the shell which comprises the
circumference.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Force of Vibration Applicable to Aerial Navigation](cc29)
