[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Earth Mysteries](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](cc28)  [Next](cc30) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# Force of Vibration Applicable to Aerial Navigation

KORESH

IT IS a publicly known fact that the application of the law of vibration
to the neutralization of the so called force of gravity, to be utilized
for the development of aerial navigation, has been advocated by the
Founder of the Koreshan System for years. . .

It matters little to us who takes advantage of the laws of motion to
neutralize the direction of motion

<span id="page_213">p. 213</span>

called gravity, for the purpose of aeronautic navigation. We merely
reiterate the statement that aerial ship service will be a success in
the near future, but not on the basis of balloons or flying machines.
The law of reverse motion will be applied to an airship, cutting the
gravic "energy" in two, and electro-magnetic currents will be utilized
for the propulsion of the ship. . . .

One of the highest phases of the application of the law of splenic
agitation was exhibited when the Lord walked upon the water. The flight
of the bird is effected not by the action of the wind or air, but by an
action of the brain, producing a vibratory force which buoys the body by
an innate "energy." The supreme operation, of this law of vibration has
been active in all cases of translation, the specifically recorded
instances being those of Enoch, Elijah, and Jesus. These instances may
be specifically illustrated by the notable one of the Lord Jesus. The
vibration of the atoms of his body was caused by the conspiring
operation of ten fundamental principles of being. This conspiration
centralized in his visible form to the destruction of the atoms of his
body,--not their destruction as *substance*, but their destruction as
material atoms and their reduction to "energy."

The utilization of the principle of vibration will be through the
application of electro-magnetic potency concentrated upon a series of
octaves of vibrating reeds and the conduction of this through magnets to
induced currents. There will be no limit to the lifting power, for
weight will be actually destroyed with the proper application of this
force to the neutralization of the force of gravity.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Synoptical Outline of the Universal Egg or Shell](cc30)
