[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Earth Mysteries](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](cc29)  [Next](cc31) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_214">p. 214</span>

# SYNOPTICAL OUTLINE OF THE UNIVERSAL EGG OR SHELL

KORESH

THE UNIVERSE is an egg or shell, obtaining as a structure perpetually
recreative and existent.

2\. It is limited by the environment of its shell, circumferentially,
and by the astral nucleus, centrally.

3\. Its circumference has seven metallic layers of superimposed strata,
five mineral strata, and, above or interior to these, the strata of
earth and water.

4\. The inner surface of the shell is land and water, comprising a
concave surface inhabited by every form and quality of life.

5\. Within the environment of the complex circumference of the cell or
egg are three distinct atmospheres. Within this is the solar sphere, and
within the whole, and constituting its nucleus, is the astral or stellar
center.

6\. Within the shell and distributed through the three atmospheres are
three distinct domains of stars, focalized through the reflecting and
refracting powers of the atmospheres and spheres of substance which
also, at intervals, occupy the interspace between the center and the
circumference.

7\. There are seven aggregations of substance, denominated planets,
reflected from the strata or laminæ which comprise the outer crust of
the environing shell.

8\. The stars are not worlds, but focal points of substance or centers
of combustion.

9\. The planets are not inhabited worlds, but spheres of substance
aggregated through the impact of afferent and efferent fluxions of
essence proceeding from the circumference and nucleus of the cell.

10\. The nucleus is near the center, which is half the diameter of eight
thousand miles, the inner surface of the sphere (land and water)
constituting the circumference of said diameter. At this astral or
stellar nucleus the aggregation resultant from the flow of efferent and
afferent substances assumes, naturally, certain geometric lines, curves,
and angles, taking the shape of the cone, cube, and oblong in a
correlate

<span id="page_215">p. 215</span>

union of the tent, tabernacle, and courts. This is the description of
the astral nucleus of the physical universe, and the geometrical
tablature of the materially expressed and unfolded type of the human
brain when perfected in the, image and likeness of God.

11\. The astral nucleus, owing to the influence of the impinging
substances which aggregate and conspire to comprise and determine its
form, also assumes motions to correspond with the conspiration and
determination of substances.

### Motion and Form Are Correlates

1\. Motion is not a thing or quality independent of substance.

2\. There can be no motion without substance in motion.

3\. All motion is the product of combustion of matter.

4\. The combustion of matter, through the motion and consequent friction
(agitation) of the same, generates spirit.

5\. Physical or mental spirit is substance, and is the product of
.atomic dissolution.

6\. Spirit, though substance, is not matter. Substance is a term
applying equally to matter and spirit, whether physical or mental.
Spirit and matter are terms to distinguish the two qualities of
substance.

7\. "Potential energy," so called, though a modern "scientific" term, is
not strictly a correct use of language, because where spirit ceases to
be kinetic (in motion) it has been deposited as matter.

8\. Matter is potential, and when destroyed as matter-substance it
becomes spirit-substance.

9\. There are two general kinds of alchemico-organic motion: the first
is the motion of spirit-substance as spirit-substance; the second, the
impulse of matter as an atom, molecule, or mass. The first may be
represented by the current of electricity through the wire; the second,
by the motion of a ball thrown from the hand, or a projectile from a
cannon.

10\. Motion of both kinds can be direct, revolutionary, gyrate, and
corruscate.

11\. Physical or mental spirit is not a mere mode of motion, but
substance in motion; and kinds, combinations, and determinations of
motion govern the qualities and limitations of form proceeding from the
operations of motion.

<span id="page_216">p. 216</span>

12\. The most complex mind is the correlate of the most complex organic
structure. They are so reciprocally related that one cannot, never did,
and never will, exist without the other.

13\. There can be no greater absurdity than that conception which
supposes that spirit, physical or mental, independently of form, could
produce anything.

14\. Form and function, as matrix and vivifier, exhibited to our
inspection in the form and motions of the alchemico-organic universe,
never had a beginning, nor will they ever have an ending. The complex
world or universe of function, through its varied channels of
vitalization, flows into, vitalizes, and is transposed to, the forms and
qualities of matter adapted to the genius of its quality, and through
the dematerialization of atom, molecule, and complex life, receives
again the products of its genius.

### Alchemico-Organic World Is a Macrocosm; Its Astral Nucleus Is the Alchemic Microcosm

1\. There are two macrocosms; namely, the alchemico-organic and the
anthropostic. By this we mean that man, as a universal organism, is a
macrocosm in the form and function, as anthropostic, of the
alchemico-organic as natural alchemic. In other words, man as a whole is
as a shell, rind or pediment of a stellar or astral nucleus, with
intermediate organic masses. The Astral Center or nucleus appears
epochally, as in Jesus the Christ in the beginning of the Christian era.

2\. As the astral nucleus of the alchemico-organic cosmos is the point
of congeries of all influent substances, and constitutes the point,
contact or touch of all things, looking out to circumferences, and
receiving from the same the response of that radiation, so the Astral
Center of the anthropostic cosmos, the Man Jesus Christ, or any final
manifestation of the Jehovah, is the nucleus or focal point of touch or
contact of the human environments of the universal man.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Important Admissions](cc31)
