[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Earth Mysteries](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](cc31)  [Next](cc33) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# Principles of the New Geodesy

LUCIE PAGE BORDEN

THE ORDINARY READER is not so familiar with the term geodesy as the
surveyor, because the latter is in the habit of making use of geodetic
instruments in the pursuit of his own vocation. These instruments are
designed to aid the mechanic and the civil engineer in laying out public
works and surveying large tracts of land, where it is necessary to
introduce the question of the earth's curvature.

It is quite enough for the ordinary reader if he be able to define the
word geodesy, from its root meaning. Not so with the student of
Koreshanity. He knows that the fundamental proposition of this cult
calls for a more extended knowledge of the subject than is held by the
casual reader. He is therefore required at the outset to acquaint
himself with the application of the term. He knows that while he is
studying Koreshan Science, it is one of the first requisites to
understand what is meant by a geodetic survey.

The most interesting account of the authenticity of the claims made by
Koreshan Science would be unintelligible to one who was not aware of the
significance

<span id="page_219">p. 219</span>

of the terms used. The New Geodesy has not departed from any of the
known facts of mathematics. It simply rests upon the assertion which
nobody can deny, that the chord of an arc is not a tangent. It is
certain to all who know them, that the Koreshan geodesists were sincere
and indefatigable in their efforts to ascertain whether the direction of
the earth's curvature is correctly stated by the ordinary works on
surveying.

It was necessary to invent an apparatus which should be capable of
determining whether a line extended horizontal to a plumb vertical would
prove to be a tangent or a chord. The ordinary surveyor takes it for
granted in all his measurements that the surface upon which they are
drawn is convex. The Koreshan does not incline to work from an
assumption. His method is to use the new apparatus, which is perfectly
simple, to settle a question which the ordinary surveyor takes for
granted.

It becomes necessary in every extended geodetic operation to devise some
method of constructing an instrument to extend a right line. The
ordinary surveyor uses the theodolite or engineer's level, and does not
understand why there must be an allowance made for perspective
foreshortening. He is actually obliged to allow two or three inches to
the mile for this factor, but he puts it down as an example of
refraction. The Koreshan does not trust to any optical instrument, but
tries to make his line absolutely straight by the use of the mechanical
principle of right angles.

The civil engineer knows that when he has leveled his telescope or
transit instrument, and trains it on his pole a mile away, he will find
that the altitude of the

<span id="page_220">p. 220</span>

cross hair is five or six inches below the height of the pole. Believing
that the earth's surface is convex, he is puzzled to know why the
difference should not be eight inches to agree with the calculated
estimate.

He considers the discrepancy is due to refraction, and claims that he is
obliged to allow two or three inches to the mile for this optical
factor. The Koreshan geodesist understands the law of perspective
foreshortening, and differs from the engineer in his theory of
refraction; but the Koreshan prefers to eliminate optical factors and to
run a mechanical line.

So much for the differences between the old geodesy and the new. The
most intricate problems of surveying are hot unnoticed by the latter,
but the out-look of the New Geodesy is so wholly dissimilar to that of
the old, that it will be obvious why theoretical problems raised by
competent surveyors would be of no interest to the student who has
proved to his own satisfaction that the basis of their work is an
erroneous assumption.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Copernican Hypothesis in the Schools](cc33)
