[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Earth Mysteries](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](cc33) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

These advertisements were included at the end of the book, *Cellular
Cosmogony*. They are included for completeness--JBH.

<span id="page_225">p. 225</span>

# The Immortal Manhood

Deals with the laws and processes of attainment of immortality in the
flesh through the office and function of the Messiah. There can be no
attainment of immortality without the God-appointed Messiah, the
Messenger of the Covenant. The Messiah is the advance fruit, and it is
through the raising up of this fruit, and its final absorption into the
mental consciousness of the invisible Deities, that the eternal cycle is
perpetuated, and the Sons of God are manifest. Perfect obedience to the
laws which the Messiah enunciates is absolutely essential for the
attainment of physical immortality. Therefore, the perusal of this work
is that of the student who thinks and reasons along the line of
Universology, as set forth by the Author (KORESH), and not according to
preconceived notions. The climax of arch-natural being is physical
immortality, and its goal eternal life.

Address, Guiding Star Publishing House, Estero, Fla.

<span id="page_226">p. 226</span>

# The Flaming Sword

### A MONTHLY MAGAZINE

Devoted to religio-scientific, sociological, political, and other
pertinent subjects of vital interest to humanity. It discusses all the
great issues of the day, and presents the doctrines of Koreshanity,
termed by its illustrious Founder, the Science of Universology. THE
FLAMING SWORD is the only exponent of the great truth that the universe
is a comparatively stationary concave cell, about 8,000 miles in
diameter, with the people, sun, moon, planets, and stars on the inside,
the whole constituting the only physical universe in existence.

Subscription, $1.00 a year, published monthly; on the inside of the
cover are given "Some of the Fundamental Principles of Koreshan
Universology." Send 10 cents for a copy.

Address, Guiding Star Publishing House, Estero, Fla.
