<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Islam](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](taa06)  [Next](taa08) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Tarjuman al-Ashwaq*, by Ibn al-Arabi, tr. Reynold A. Nicholson,
\[1911\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### IV

1\. Greeting to Salmá and to those who dwell in the preserve, for it
behoves one who loves tenderly like me to give greeting.

<span id="page_57">p. 57</span>

2\. And what harm to her if she gave me a greeting in return? But fair
women are subject to no authority.

3\. They journeyed when the darkness of night had let down its curtains,
and I said to her, 'Pity a passionate lover, outcast and distraught,

4\. Whom desires eagerly encompass and at whom speeding arrows are aimed
wheresoever he bends his course.'

5\. She displayed her front-teeth and a levin flashed, and I knew not
which of the twain rent the gloom,

6\. And she said, 'Is it not enough for him that I am in his heart and
that he beholds me at every moment? Is it not enough?'

#### COMMENTARY

1\. 'Salmá': he alludes to a Solomonic ecstasy (\#\#\#), which descended
upon him from the station of Solomon in virtue of a prophetic heritage.

'In the preserve,' i.e. an unattainable station, viz. prophecy, whereof
the gate was closed by Muḥammad, the last of the prophets. Solomon's
experience of this Divine wisdom (\#\#\#) in so far as he was a prophet
is different from his experience of it in so far as he was a saint, and
we share it with him only in the latter case, since our experience of it
is derived from the saintship which is the greatest circle (\#\#\#).

2\. God does nothing of necessity: whatever comes to us from Him is by
His favour. The author indicates this Divine Solomonic apparition
(*nukta*) by the term 'marble statues' (i.e. women fair as marble
statues). He means that she does not answer by speech, for if she did so
her speech would be other than her essence, whereas her essence is
single, so that her advent is identical with her speech and with her
visible presence and with her hearing; and in this respect all the
Divine Realities and Attributes resemble her.

3\. 'They journeyed,' etc.: the ascension of the prophets always took
place during the night, because night is the time of mystery and
concealment.

<span id="page_58">p. 58</span>

'The darkness of night,' i.e. the veil of the Unseen let down the
curtains of gross corporeal existence, which is the night of this animal
organism, throwing a shroud over the spiritual subtleties and noble
sciences which it enshrines. These, however, are not to be reached
except by journeying through bodily actions and sensual thoughts, and
whilst a man is thus occupied the Divine wisdom goes away from his
heart, so that on his return he finds her gone and follows her with his
aspiration.

4\. 'Speeding arrows': he describes this celestial form as shooting his
heart, wherever it turns, with the arrows of her glances, as God said,
'*Wheresoever ye turn, there is the face of Allah*' (Kor. ii, 109).

5\. 'She displayed her front-teeth,' etc., i.e. this lover found his
whole being illuminated, for '*God is the light of the heavens and the
earth*' (Kor. xxiv, 35), and the Prophet also said in his prayer, 'O
God, put a light into my ear and into my eye,' and after mentioning the
different members of his body he concluded, 'and make the whole of me
one light,' viz. by the manifestation of Thy essence. Such a
manifestation is compared to a flash of lightning on account of its not
continuing. The author says that he did not know whether his being was
illuminated by the manifestation proceeding from this Divine wisdom,
which smiled upon him, or by a simultaneous manifestation of the Divine
Essence.

6\. 'She said,' etc., i.e. let him not seek me from without and let it
satisfy him that I have descended into his heart, so that he beholds me
in his essence and through his essence at every moment.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: V](taa08)

</div>
