<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Islam](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](taa24)  [Next](taa26) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Tarjuman al-Ashwaq*, by Ibn al-Arabi, tr. Reynold A. Nicholson,
\[1911\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### XXII

1\. Turn the camels aside towards the stony tract of Thahmad, where are
the tender branches and the humid meadow,

2\. Where the lightnings show to thee their flashes, where the clouds
pass at eve and morn,

3\. And lift thy voice at dawn to invoke the bright-faced damsels and
the fair lissome virgins,

<span id="page_92">p. 92</span>

4\. Who murder with their black eyes and bend their supple necks.

5\. Among them is she who loves and assails with glances like arrows and
Indian swords every frenzied heart that loves the fair.

6\. She takes with a hand soft and delicate, like pure silk, anointed
with *nadd* and shredded musk.

7\. When she looks, she gazes with the deep eye of a young gazelle; to
her eye belongs the blackness of antimony.

8\. Her eyes are adorned with languishment and killing magic, her sides
are girt with amazement and incomparable beauty.

9\. A slender one, she loves not that which I love and she does not
fulfil her threats with sincerity. <span id="fr_24"></span>[1](#fn_24)

10\. She let down her plaited lock as a black serpent, that she might
frighten with it those who were following her.

11\. By God, I fear not death; my only fear is that I shall die and
shall not see her to-morrow.

#### COMMENTARY

1\. 'The camels,' i.e. the clouds.

2\. 'The lightnings.' The author of these poems always uses the term
'lightning' to denote a centre of manifestation for the Divine Essence.

3\. 'The bright-faced damsels,' i.e. intelligences derived from Idrís
which have descended from the fourth heaven.

'Lissome,' i.e. inclining towards the phenomenal world, to replenish it.
He means all realities that are connected with the phenomenal world,
e.g. the Divine Names.

4\. 'Who murder with their black eyes,' referring to the sciences of
contemplation.

5\. 'Indian,' because India is the place where Adam fell, and there the
fountains of wisdom which were in Adam first gushed forth.

<span id="page_93">p. 93</span>

6\. 'Pure silk,' i.e. undyed, in reference to her being removed from all
contamination.

'Anointed with *nadd*,' i.e. with mixed perfumes. He means that she is
invested with Divine qualities.

9\. 'She loves not that which I love,' i.e. she is not limited by the
will of anyone, and if it happens that her will is in accord with mine,
that is due to the effect produced by her upon me, not to the effect
produced by me upon her.

'She does not fulfil,' etc., i.e. she is clement and forgiving.

10\. 'Her plaited lock;' i.e. a chain of evidences and proofs. A black
serpent,' referring to the science of the Divine majesty and awe.

11\. He says that he is only afraid of missing the contemplation of his
Beloved, and that he hesitated to follow her because he wished to
acquire such Divine faculties as would enable him to face this
manifestation.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_24"></span>[92:1](taa25.htm#fr_24) The author expressly
says in his commentary that \#\#\# (to promise) has here the meaning of
\#\#\# (to threaten). This is a defiance of the established usage, just
as \#\#\# (for \#\#\#) is a violation of grammar.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XXIII](taa26)

</div>
