[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](mog03)  [Next](mog05) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0520021630/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 1. ARGOLIS

I commence of course with Argolis, for this province held the primacy
both in Mycenaean civilization and in Greek mythology. It is the richest
in Mycenaean remains as well as in myths. Its capital was Mycenae, and
that this city should give its name to the age and the civilization with
which we have to deal is justified by discoveries which have been
surpassed nowhere; <span id="fr_34"></span>[4](#fn_34) for in this
connection we do not speak of Crete and the Minoan civilization. Mycenae
was the proudest and wealthiest town of Mycenaean Greece. The
architectural remains are imposing: the city wall with the Lion Gate,
the only monumental sculpture from prehistoric times,

<span id="page_37">p. 37</span>

the unfortunately very ruinous remains of the great palace, the nine
bee-hive tombs which in number and size surpass those found on any other
site. The so-called tomb of Atreus is the largest and stateliest dome
erected before the building of the Pantheon in Rome nearly a millenium
and a half later. The famous shaft-graves yielded the finds through
which the Mycenaean civilization was first discovered; their richness is
still unsurpassed. There are also numerous chamber tombs; Professor
Tsoundas excavated some of them long ago and the English School in
Athens explored recently the extensive cemetery of Kalkani. <span
id="fr_35"></span>[5](#fn_35) Their great number proves that Mycenae was
populous and their contents, that its inhabitants were prosperous.

Tiryns seems almost to rival Mycenae because of its mighty walls with
their galleries and the well preserved remains of the palace, although
it is a distinctly smaller town, and what has been found there of other
remains and objects is not so important as the finds at Mycenae. There
is, however, an extensive lower town and a well built bee-hive tomb.
Quite recently an extensive work was discovered through which a river
southeast of Tiryns was diverted in order to protect the lower town from
being flooded.

The third Mycenaean fortress in Argolis is Midea. Its imposing walls
enclose an area larger than that of any Mycenaean site except Gla; it is
still unexplored, but in the neighborhood hardly a mile to the south at
the village of Dendra, Professor Persson had the

<span id="page_38">p. 38</span>

luck to discover a collapsed but untouched bee-hive tomb and several
chamber tombs. The finds are famous and rival in value those of
Mycenae. <span id="fr_36"></span>[6](#fn_36)

It is proved by archaeological facts that on the site where the famous
temple of Hera, the Heraeum, stood later, there once was another
Mycenaean city. There are traces of Mycenaean walls and houses;
Mycenaean sherds and idols are found; <span
id="fr_37"></span>[7](#fn_37) there is a bee-hive tomb in the
neighborhood, and, finally, rich chamber tombs from all periods of the
Mycenaean age were recently excavated by American archaeologists. <span
id="fr_38"></span>[8](#fn_38)

The remains from Argos, the capital of Argolis in historical times, are
less significant. On a low hill called Aspis, Mycenaean sherds were
found and on Deiras, the ridge which unites this hill with the imposing
acropolis, the Larissa, some chamber tombs were excavated. On the
Larissa some remains of Mycenaean walls were discovered recently. <span
id="fr_39"></span>[9](#fn_39)

There are also several minor sites in Argolis; e.g., in the neighborhood
of Corinth, Nauplia, and Asine, where a Swedish expedition has unearthed
a small

<span id="page_39">p. 39</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Mycenaean town and
found a series of chamber tombs. <span id="fr_40"></span>[10](#fn_40)

This brief recalling of the outstanding archaeological facts will be
sufficient for our purpose. Turning to the myths, we commence with the
capital in the Mycenaean age, Mycenae. There are two series of
strikingly different tombs, the shaft-graves and the bee-hive tombs,
both testifying to great wealth and power. It has been said that this
difference in funeral customs is accounted for in the mythical
narratives telling of two royal houses at Mycenae, one of which
succeeded the other, the Perseidae and the Atreidae. The earlier series
of tombs, the shaft-graves, have been said to be those of the Perseidae
and the later, the bee-hive tombs, to have been erected by the later
dynasty, the Atreidae; but this parallelism can hardly be held reliable.
It is more specious than founded on facts and had better be left out of
account. <span id="fr_41"></span>[11](#fn_41) We turn to the myths
themselves.

<span id="page_40">p. 40</span>

The most prominent hero of Mycenae in the earlier mythical generation is
Perseus. The kernel of his myth is the slaying of the monster Gorgo, and
is perhaps the best instance of a folk-tale received into Greek heroic
mythology. <span id="fr_42"></span>[12](#fn_42) To this kernel his birth
story had already been added in Mycenaean times, but the episode taking
place on the island of Seriphus seems to be of a rather late date and
may be passed over here. The myth of Perseus is unusually crowded with
folk-tale motifs and this is in some measure a proof of a high
antiquity. Folk-tales are told in all countries everywhere and they are
not localized by other peoples. In Greece, however, they were localized
because of the innate tendency of heroic mythology to localize its
heroes, and because the folk-tale was preserved only when it was
received into the heroic mythology.

It is generally recognized that Perseus belongs to Mycenae. He is said
to be the founder of the city. An etymological explanation was invented
later. <span id="fr_43"></span>[13](#fn_43) That the founding of the
city had to be fitted with some pains into the series of his adventures
seems to make it probable that his connection with the city of Mycenae
depended on old tradition. There was a heroön said to be that of Perseus
on the road from Mycenae to Argos, but that may be late, as was
certainly the altar on Seriphus. <span id="fr_44"></span>[14](#fn_44)
There is better evidence for his cult at Mycenae. An inscription in
archaic letters found between the

<span id="page_41">p. 41</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Lion Gate and the
so-called tomb of Clytaemestra speaks of some officials connected with
Perseus to whom judicial functions are attributed in certain
cases. <span id="fr_45"></span>[15](#fn_45) This proves that these
officials were an old and venerable corporation. Professor Robert
assumes that it was sent from Argos to provide for the cult of Perseus,
following the destruction of Mycenae by the Argives some time after the
Persian war. If this is right, the cult was so old and venerable that
the Argives felt themselves bound not to discontinue it. The inscription
seems, however, to be too early to permit such an interpretation. In
regard to the date of the cult, we can only infer that it existed in the
archaic age, a fact which proves that Perseus' connection with Mycenae
is of old date. During the Roman age it was a matter of course. <span
id="fr_46"></span>[16](#fn_46)

The genealogies are of little or no value, being invented in order to
fit Perseus into the common pseudo-historical scheme. I gave voice above
to the opinion that the story of his birth was already in Mycenaean
times joined with the folk-tale of his slaying of the Gorgon. This
cannot be proved by the story of the subterranean bronze thalamus in
which his mother was enclosed and where she was sought by Zeus in the
shape of a golden rain. For even if a bee-hive tomb decorated with
bronze

<span id="page_42">p. 42</span>

ornaments is rightly recognized in the description of this subterranean
thalamus, it has been justly remarked that such a story may have been
invented only after the bee-hive tombs had fallen into disuse. Some of
them may have been accessible for a long time after being opened by
plunderers.

There is, however, a more certain indication to the same effect: the
name of Perseus' mother Danaë signifies nothing but "the Danaan
maiden." <span id="fr_47"></span>[17](#fn_47) In the beginning the
Danaan maiden had of course no father, or if she had one he was
evidently a Danaan man, a Danaüs, just as Chryses is the father of
Chryseis, the maiden from Chryse. Acrisius was introduced later and made
the father of Danaë in order to attach the genealogy of Perseus to
Argos, the historical capital of Argolis. Danaoi is a tribal name,
already obsolete in Homer, and the same name is recognized in Egyptian
inscriptions from the times of Echenaton and Ramses III: it is Mycenaean
and was out of daily use in the Homeric age. The consequence is that
such a name as "the Danaan maiden" cannot have been imposed upon the
mother of Perseus except in Mycenaean times and that the birth story
therefore had already been created in this age. This result leads to the
conclusion that the birth story was joined in this age with the tale of
his slaying of the Gorgo. Thus the Perseus myth is in its essential
parts of Mycenaean origin.

The second kingly house of Mycenae is that of the Atreidae, whose cruel
deeds and misfortunes have been celebrated in so many famous tragedies.

<span id="page_43">p. 43</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> This house and
especially its chief representative in Homer, Agamemnon, seem to be
firmly localized at Mycenae, but even this has been denied. Professor
Wilamowitz has said that the artificial make-up of the name of Atreus is
apparent; <span id="fr_48"></span>[18](#fn_48) i.e., he is of the
opinion that this name is formed from the family name attributed to
Agamemnon, the Atreides. This seems hardly to be a happy idea. We have
seen that names ending in -*eus* make up an older series of mythical
names and go back to a great antiquity. <span
id="fr_49"></span>[19](#fn_49) Of course a name may have been formed
later with this ending, but in this case one would expect the stem of
the name to be clear, as it is, e.g., in the name of Eurystheus' herald
Copreus, "the Dung-man." This is not true of the name Atreus. Or if
Atreides is the primary form from which an eponymous hero Atreus was
abstracted, as Minyas was abstracted from the Minyans, it would be in
fact a tribal name, and this is very unlikely. On the other hand, if
Atreides is a true gentilicial name, the name of an ancestor Atreus is
its basis, and this seems to be by far the most probable view. Atreus is
certainly an old mythical personage and no late invention.

This opinion is corroborated by the famous passage describing the
scepter of Agamemnon, <span id="fr_50"></span>[20](#fn_50) in which the
genealogy of the house of the Atreidae is given. The scepter carried by
Agamemnon is said to have been wrought by Hephaestus and given to Zeus;
Zeus gave it to Hermes, Hermes to Pelops,

<span id="page_44">p. 44</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Pelops to Atreus,
Atreus at his death to Thyestes, and Thyestes left it to Agamemnon to
carry, and so to rule over all Argos and many islands. Even those
scholars who embrace the opinion that Homer's description of the
kingship reflects the conditions of the early historical age recognize
in this passage a relict of a much older age, in which the king was
invested with a really kingly power; it can but be the Mycenaean
age. <span id="fr_51"></span>[21](#fn_51) But the genealogy is so
closely linked up with this description of the kingly power that the
former cannot be separated from the latter. Both go back into the
Mycenaean age.

The most questionable and at the same time a superfluous figure of the
genealogy is the father of Atreus, Pelops. The house being called after
Atreus, Pelops appears to have been put at the head of the genealogy
secondarily. He is recognized to be nothing but the eponymous hero of
the Pelopes, the vanished tribe which gave its name to the
Peloponnese. <span id="fr_52"></span>[22](#fn_52) The form is that of a
number of Greek tribal names ending in -*ops*, plur. -*opes*. That is
the reason why at an early date he was made the ancestor of the kingly
house which ruled the peninsula or at least the most important part of
it. Other myths connected with Pelops are late. He plays an important
part in the myths of Olympia, which are post-Mycenaean, <span
id="fr_53"></span>[23](#fn_53) and his connections with Asia Minor are
certainly also of late date. Pelops himself is by his name proved to be
of Greek origin.

<span id="page_45">p. 45</span>

Of the many cruel deeds attributed to the house of the Atreidae there is
no word in this passage nor was there any place for them. In the Iliad,
Clytaemestra is barely named as the wife of Agamemnon, but in the
Odyssey her seduction by Aegisthus and the murder of Agamemnon are fully
related. It is impossible to pronounce any well founded judgment on the
age of this tragic myth, but it is the oldest of the family tragedies of
the Atreidae, and it was followed by other myths of a similar nature
attached to this house. The story of the Atreidae and the story of the
Labdacidae are similar, being of a highly tragic nature, but there is a
marked difference between them: on one side unwittingly committed guilt
and internecine feuds, on the other, cunning cruelty and deceptive ruse.

One would think that at any rate Agamemnon's localization at Mycenae is
firm and well attested, but even this has been denied. When Professor
Bethe says <span id="fr_54"></span>[24](#fn_54) that in the Iliad
Agamemnon is only twice or thrice called king of Mycenae and in other
passages is said to be from Argos, <span id="fr_55"></span>[25](#fn_55)
and from this pretended discrepancy concludes that he was originally not
king of Mycenae but a war king, a commander-in-chief of the Greek
troops, he is using a logic by which it would be possible to argue that
the king of Prussia was not at the same time emperor of Germany. I
confess that I cannot imagine a war king without a city and country of
his own. <span id="fr_56"></span>[26](#fn_56)

<span id="page_46">p. 46</span>

There are other more specious arguments to the same effect. The best one
is the oft repeated contention that Agamemnon originally was a god. I do
not enter upon the question of principles. <span
id="fr_57"></span>[27](#fn_57) Some time ago scholars preferred to
regard Greek heroes as faded gods. This theory has lost much of its
attractiveness, although there are certainly such heroes even if there
are not so many as was imagined. But for Agamemnon's godhead no good
evidence exists, as has been proved in a searching analysis. <span
id="fr_58"></span>[28](#fn_58) The idea is founded upon an expression in
the enigmatical poem of Lycophron, <span id="fr_59"></span>[29](#fn_59)
but here the expression is partly a copy of the Hellenistic cult of the
rulers, partly a synecdoche; Agamemnon is used for Zeus and vice versa.
The scholiast commenting on the passage or his source was guilty of the
conclusion that Agamemnon was venerated as Zeus Agamemnon and gave him a
temple, too, whose emplacement he deduced from a following verse <span
id="fr_60"></span>[30](#fn_60) to be a deme in Laconia which elsewhere
is unknown, Lapersai. The temple is not mentioned elsewhere, but there
was a memorial of Agamemnon in the temple of Alexandra at Amyclae. <span
id="fr_61"></span>[31](#fn_61) This Zeus

<span id="page_47">p. 47</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Agamemnon was of
course welcome to the Euhemerist authors and their followers, the
ecclesiastical writers. Thus there is no wonder that he appears in
Clemens Alexandrinus and Athenagoras. The source is said to be a certain
Staphylus from Naucratis who has written about different Greek
provinces, of course a Hellenistic author.

Still worse is the second testimony. Pausanias relates that the
inhabitants of Chaeronea venerated Agamemnon's scepter, of which Homer
speaks, but states that they called it a spear and that it had been
found together with some golden objects on the boundary between
Chaeronea and Panopeus. <span id="fr_62"></span>[32](#fn_62) I cannot
see why this information should be rejected. Why is it improbable that
people had discovered an old tomb containing gold objects and a spear or
staff which they took the fancy to venerate? But apart from this the
inhabitants of Chaeronea called it a spear, not a scepter, and the title
*Agamemnon's scepter* is clearly nothing but the usual attribution of
old and curious things to Homeric heroes. Moreover, if Agamemnon's
scepter was venerated, this in no wise proves that Agamemnon himself was
a god.

Other so-called testimony quoted to the same effect is most
futile. <span id="fr_63"></span>[33](#fn_63) It is related that
Agamemnon dug wells at Aulis and in other places of Greece, that he was
honored in baths at Clazomenae, and that the inhabitants of Smyrna
called a bath by

<span id="page_48">p. 48</span>

his name. <span id="fr_64"></span>[34](#fn_64) In the same way warm
springs, even baths, were attributed to another hero, Heracles. It is
hardly necessary to state that this is no proof of the existence of a
cult. A god Agamemnon never existed except in the fancy of the
interpreters of Lycophron.

Others do not believe in the old god Agamemnon but contend that the hero
Agamemnon originally belongs to Asia Minor; his family is said to have
survived on Lesbos and at Cyme. Only Homer brought him to Greece, for
Perseus was the hero of Mycenae. <span id="fr_65"></span>[35](#fn_65) To
begin with, I cannot see why a town cannot have two heroes or more; most
of them have. In regard to the descendants of Agamemnon in Asia Minor,
the testimony is as follows. A passage in Pollux <span
id="fr_66"></span>[36](#fn_66) speaks about those who invented the
process of coining money, mentioning Pheidon and Demodike from Cyme,
wife of the Phrygian king, Midas, and daughter of a King Agamemnon of
Cyme. That the kingly house of Cyme claimed descent from Agamemnon
because one of its members bore his name is not a very striking
inference, and if they did ennoble their pedigree by attaching to it one
of the famous heroes of Greek mythology, so also did others, for
example, the kingly house of Lydia. For my part I am inclined to draw
quite another conclusion; namely, that in the end of the eighth century
B.C. <span id="fr_67"></span>[37](#fn_67) Agamemnon was still used

<span id="page_49">p. 49</span>

as a human name, for names of heroes were not given to men before the
Hellenistic age. It follows that Agamemnon was not venerated as a hero
at that time and still less was he believed to be a god.

On Lesbos there was a town, Penthile, <span
id="fr_68"></span>[38](#fn_68) and to this belongs probably the noble
family of the Penthelidae. Aristoteles relates that the members of this
family were wont to go about at Mytilene striking people with clubs but
were overcome by Megacles and his friends. <span
id="fr_69"></span>[39](#fn_69) Further, it is related in several
differing versions that Orestes or his descendants emigrated to Asia
Minor. <span id="fr_70"></span>[40](#fn_70) The tradition here relevant
says that the son of Orestes and Erigone, Penthilus, or his grandson
Gras, went to Lesbos and founded cities there. This Penthilus is of
course taken to be the ancestor of the Penthelidae, but their claim to
descent from Agamemnon is no better founded than the descent from
Heracles claimed by the Mermnades in Lydia or by the royal house of
Macedonia. Penthilus is a late invention akin to Megapenthes, the
bastard son of Menelaus, or the son of Proetus who exchanged Tiryns for
Argos with Perseus; his name hints at the calamities of the house of the
Atreidae. The fact that a noble family of Lesbos was called
Penthelidae <span id="fr_71"></span>[41](#fn_71) facilitated a
connection with heroic genealogy, such as noble families loved. Their
name was certainly derived from that of the town.

<span id="page_50">p. 50</span>

There are no valid grounds either for the godhead of Agamemnon or for
the theory that he belonged originally to Asia Minor; he exists only as
a mythical personage, and the attempt to sever him from Mycenae is vain.
The arguments adduced to prove the contrary are as fallacious and vain
as arguments are wont to be when somebody tries to give reasons for a
preconceived opinion.

Corresponding to the paramount importance of Mycenae in the Mycenaean
age, two of the most famous cycles of Greek myths are attached to this
town, that of Perseus and that of the Atreidae. It would have been
necessary only to point to this fact, not to enter upon a discussion of
the myths, if doubt had not been cast upon the connection of Agamemnon
and his house with Mycenae. His position as overlord of the Greek
princes is another heritage from the Mycenaean age, due to the wealth
and power of his city; I shall recur to this topic in my last
chapter. <span id="fr_72"></span>[42](#fn_72) Finally, it is to be
observed that it is quite incomprehensible how the wealth of myths
attached to Mycenae came into existence if they were created in
historical times, when Mycenae was a very small and unimportant town;
but it is perfectly comprehensible if the origins of the cycles go back
into the time of the glory of Mycenae, the Mycenaean age. They were
popular from of old and were taken up by literature and developed by
means of new accretions and inventions, for many details of the cycles
are evidently of later date.

In regard to Tiryns, things are not quite so clear as in the case of
Mycenae and need more discussion.

<span id="page_51">p. 51</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> The foremost hero
of Tiryns is of course Heracles, for the Heracles who performs his
labors on the injunction of his suzerain, Eurystheus, the king of
Mycenae, is at home at Tiryns. But, as I propose to treat the Heracles
cycle in a separate chapter, I only note the fact here, emphasizing its
bearing on our judgment as to the mythological importance of Tiryns, and
proceed to another hero whose connection with Tiryns seems more
questionable.

Bellerophon is always said to be a Corinthian by birth, the son of
Glaucus, and the grandson of the wily Sisyphus. At Corinth he had a
sacred precinct, a cypress grove on the road to the harbor town
Kenchreai, <span id="fr_73"></span>[43](#fn_73) and Athena Chalinitis,
who had a temple at Corinth, was said to have this epithet because she
had tamed Pegasus, placed a bit in his mouth, and given him to
Bellerophon. <span id="fr_74"></span>[44](#fn_74) More important than
this tradition is the fact that Pegasus appears on the coins of Corinth
and of the neighboring town of Sicyon from the earliest time of coinage.
In the sixth century B.C., Corinth and Sicyon laid claim to Bellerophon.

Homer, who narrates his story at length, <span
id="fr_75"></span>[45](#fn_75) says that he was the son of Glaucus and
the grandson of Sisyphus, but states that he came from Ephyre in the
interior of horse-breeding Argos. The current identification of Ephyre
with Corinth is questionable. <span id="fr_76"></span>[46](#fn_76)
Further, Homer has no mention of Pegasus, and Aristarchus may be right
in concluding that he

<span id="page_52">p. 52</span>

did not know this feature of the myth. <span
id="fr_77"></span>[47](#fn_77) Hesiod has it, just as he has many other
innovations.

Genealogies are not to be trusted very much in proving the old
localization of a myth. A more reliable indication is provided by the
locality of the chief myth of a cycle; i.e., that part of the myth which
must be considered to be the old kernel, especially if there is no
apparent reason why this myth should be localized in a certain place.
Such a localization depends presumably upon old, good tradition.
Genealogies cannot be admitted without being tested, for they were often
invented in order to transfer a hero from one place to another and to
bring him into connections which for some reason it was desired to
establish. So Corinth, and probably Sicyon also, laid claim to
Bellerophon and succeeded in appropriating him for themselves.

The kernel of the cycle of Bellerophon is a series of adventures, the
killing of the Chimaera, the battles with the Solymi and with the
Amazons, and finally the ambush which Iobates laid for him; but, as in
many other such cycles, this chain of adventures is preceded by a story
which seeks to explain why the hero was driven out to stand these
hardships. Here we have the old motif known from the biblical story of
Joseph and the wife of Potiphar. Potiphar is called Proetus and his wife
is called Anteia by Homer, Stheneboia by later authors. Proetus is
unanimously said to be king of Tiryns; the Cyclopes built its mighty
walls for him. Homer says that Proetus drove Bellerophon out from the
people of the Argives because Bellerophon, though subject

<span id="page_53">p. 53</span>

to him, was a better man than he. <span id="fr_78"></span>[48](#fn_78)
This is the regular epical opinion concerning a king's jealousy of a
brave vassal; it may have been introduced surreptitiously or it may have
preserved an earlier tradition; in the next lines the Potiphar motif is
substituted for it.

The scene of this introductory myth is laid at the court of Tiryns, and
as there appears no reason whatever why it should have taken place
precisely at Tiryns, which in a later age was highly unimportant, I
venture to refer this localization to the heyday of Tiryns. This
reference to the Mycenaean age receives perhaps a certain corroboration
from Homer's hint at a vassalship of Bellerophon, such as was unknown in
historical times and even in the Homeric age, if by the Homeric age we
understand that age in which the poems were ultimately composed.

The series of adventures which make up the kernel of the myth take place
in far-off Lycia. The Amazons are at home in Asia Minor, whatever fact
or people may be underlying the myth. The Solymi are always located in
the neighborhood of Lycia, although it cannot be proved that references
in later authors are independent of Homer. Professor Malten proved in a
substantial paper <span id="fr_79"></span>[49](#fn_79) that the Chimaera
and the winged horse are of Oriental origin; he thinks that Bellerophon
is a Lycian hero

<span id="page_54">p. 54</span>

who was taken over by the Greeks during their wanderings and wars on the
eastern shores of the Mediterranean in the Mycenaean age. If this kernel
of the cycle dates from the Mycenaean age, it may seem strange that its
setting is far-off Lycia, and that may perhaps be adduced as an argument
against this dating. Happily a Mycenaean representation, the glass
plaque from Dendra, <span id="fr_80"></span>[50](#fn_80) shows that the
adventure with the Chimaera was known in the Mycenaean age.

If we consider things closely, it is not to be wondered at that a
Mycenaean myth has its setting in Lycia. It is contended that the
Bellerophon myth was introduced into Homer by the Ionians. <span
id="fr_81"></span>[51](#fn_81) It is, however, to be observed that there
is a wide tract of land between Ionia and Lycia inhabited by Dorians and
Carians, and the question is relevant, why have not the Ionians
introduced their own myths? The answer is that they had none. Ionia is
singularly devoid of myths except for foundation legends of the Ionian
cities. Here is a remarkable fact which ought to be well observed and
which requires an explanation.

This fact agrees with certain outstanding omissions in Homeric
geography. <span id="fr_82"></span>[52](#fn_82) The islands situated in
the neighborhood of Troy, Lesbos, Tenedos, Lemnos, and Samothrace, are
mentioned, but not the rich Ionian islands, Chios and Samos. On the
contrary the Dorian islands Cos and Rhodes are mentioned,

<span id="page_55">p. 55</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Cos in connection
with a myth of Heracles <span id="fr_83"></span>[53](#fn_83) and Rhodes
in a passage considered to be a later addition, in which is described at
length how the Rhodian hero Tlepolemus was killed by Sarpedon. <span
id="fr_84"></span>[54](#fn_84) It is really curious that the Ionian
minstrels had nothing from their own country to put into their poems.
This fact is notable, for it agrees in a surprising manner with the
well-known but too little appreciated fact that Mycenaean remains are
almost entirely lacking in Ionia. Mycenaean vases and sherds were found
at Troy, at Phocaea, and at Miletus, a single tomb was discovered at the
Heraeum of Samos, <span id="fr_85"></span>[55](#fn_85) and a bee-hive
tomb was discovered at Colophon. <span id="fr_86"></span>[56](#fn_86)
That is all, and nobody will doubt that if there were Mycenaean tombs
their contents would have appeared in the hands of the dealers. This was
the case on Rhodes, which, on the contrary, is full of Mycenaean tombs
and finds. It is a remarkable coincidence that a Rhodian hero has found
a place in Homer, and I am not disposed to think it accidental.

The curious facts and connections put forward here are further stressed
by a consideration of the peoples allied with the Trojans. <span
id="fr_87"></span>[57](#fn_87) If we take the relevant passages into
consideration, omitting the Catalogue, it appears that the range is
strictly limited to north-western Asia Minor and the neighboring parts
of

<span id="page_56">p. 56</span>

Europe. <span id="fr_88"></span>[58](#fn_88) Most prominent are the
Thracians of Europe, with one exception to which I recur below, even if
the Doloneia is left out of account. Next to them come the Paeones, a
more western Thracian tribe. For the description of the death of the two
Paeonian heroes is more full than that of the death of the two
Paphlagonian heroes. With the Paphlagonians we cross to Asia Minor. Less
important is the mention of the Halizones and of the Mysi; each

<span id="page_57">p. 57</span>

people has the death of a hero briefly mentioned. The Caucones are
mentioned twice in passing. No Phrygian hero takes part in the war, but
the country appears in the background as the mighty empire it was, in
the description of Priam's visit and in the fact that Hecabe was a
Phrygian princess. The Maeones, who belonged to Lydia and lived south of
the Mysians, are mentioned only in passing, and some knowledge of the
country is displayed in another passage. The Carians occur only in the
enumeration of the Trojan allies in the Doloneia.

This is a very consistent limitation to the neighboring peoples north
and east of Troy, and it is most natural in view of the situation of
Troy. It is obvious and reasonable that the Homeric poets took the
conditions of their own age into account in describing the allies of
Troy, of whom old myths had not much to tell. I have dwelt more fully
upon this in order to emphasize the astonishing fact that none of the
Trojan allies plays such a prominent part as the people hitherto not
mentioned, the Lycians who lived in the far-off south of Asia Minor.

The passages where Lycia and the Lycians are mentioned are too numerous
to be enumerated, and I need only point to the prominent part played by
the Lycian heroes Sarpedon, Glaucus, and Pandarus in various songs of
the Iliad. <span id="fr_89"></span>[59](#fn_89) But in the fourth book
it is said that Pandarus came from the town of Zeleia and the river
Aesepus, <span id="fr_90"></span>[60](#fn_90) which flows from Mount Ida
to the sea, <span id="fr_91"></span>[61](#fn_91) and these indications
are

<span id="page_58">p. 58</span>

reproduced in the Catalogue. <span id="fr_92"></span>[62](#fn_92) This
contradicts the Lycian localization of Pandarus, but scholars have
generally held the opinion that the habitat of the Lycians was
erroneously transferred to the Troas and the shores of Aesepus.
Professor Wilamowitz and Dr. Finsler on the contrary have put forward
the view that the Lycians were originally at home there and that their
name was transferred to the Termiles, <span
id="fr_93"></span>[63](#fn_93) as the native inhabitants of Lycia called
themselves. There is no apparent reason for such a transference and the
mythological expression which usually is given to such a change is
wanting. It would of course imply that Sarpedon and Glaucus also were at
home in the Troas, but the above-mentioned scholars have not been
inclined to draw this conclusion. The old opinion is certainly right.
The Homeric poets, who did not know the south of Asia Minor,
transplanted Pandarus to the Troas, naturally placing the allies of the
Trojans in the neighborhood of Troy.

Moreover, the same thing seems to have happened in the case of the
Cilicians. Andromache is said to be the daughter of Eëtion, ruler of the
Cilicians and king of Thebes beneath Mount Plakos, a town which was
taken by Achilles. <span id="fr_94"></span>[64](#fn_94) Evidently this
Thebes is not far from Troy, but the existence of Cilicians elsewhere
than in southeastern Asia Minor

<span id="page_59">p. 59</span>

is unknown. I can but think that the poet had vaguely heard about the
Cilicians but did not know their habitat and made them, offhand,
inhabitants of Thebes beneath Mount Plakos.

Be this as it may, the enigmatical fact remains that the most prominent
adversaries of the Greeks next to the Trojans themselves are a people in
the far-off south of Asia Minor. And this fact is connected with the
other, that the myth of Bellerophon, of which the Mycenaean date is
attested by a Mycenaean work of art, is localized in Lycia. Here the
observation comes into play that the middle part of the western coast of
Asia Minor, Ionia, is almost devoid of Mycenaean remains. On the other
hand, Rhodes has both myths and Mycenaean remains, and a Rhodian hero
appears in the Iliad, though many scholars think that the passage is an
interpolation.

There is, however, a very obvious explanation of these facts, one which,
moreover,, corroborates the Mycenaean origin of the myth and the
Mycenaean background of epics. I have pointed to the scarcity of
Mycenaean remains in Ionia. <span id="fr_95"></span>[65](#fn_95)
Archaeology proves that the western coast of Asia Minor was colonized by
the Greeks only at the very end of the Mycenaean age. Prior to this time
the wandering Greek tribes followed the highway toward the east, enticed
by the great and rich civilization of Syria

<span id="page_60">p. 60</span>

and Egypt. In doing so they followed the lure of wealth and civilization
just as other barbarous peoples have followed it, e.g., the Teutonic
tribes when they flooded the Roman empire. These wanderings have left
their traces in the early colonization of Cyprus and its numerous
Mycenaean remains. Here the statement in the Iliad may be noticed, that
Agamemnon received a valuable gift, a richly decorated cuirass, from the
Cyprian king Cinyras. <span id="fr_96"></span>[66](#fn_96) Mycenaean
finds are fairly numerous also on the coast of Syria. Greek tribes
appeared in the Delta about 1200 B.C. Dr. Forrer's great Achaean kingdom
with possessions on the southern coast of Asia Minor coincides
remarkably with this movement of the Greek tribes.

The road which the Greeks followed went along the southern shore of Asia
Minor. They colonized the islands of Rhodes and Cyprus and seem to have
had a stronghold or trading station on the Syrian coast near Laodicea
*ad mare*. <span id="fr_97"></span>[67](#fn_97) We must surmise that
they also tried to take booty and to gain a foothold on the southern
coast of Asia Minor. Unhappily this country is almost unknown
archaeologically. But Dr. Gjerstad who visited Cilicia recently informs
me that there is evidence of Mycenaean colonization in this district. If
Dr. Forrer is right, the Achaean king had possessed himself of Pamphylia
about 1330 B.C. But apart from this it must be presumed that the Greeks
during their voyages along the southern

<span id="page_61">p. 61</span>

coast of Asia Minor had numerous opportunities of coming into conflict
with the peoples who lived there, and these were the Lycians and the
Cilicians.

The memory of these fights was preserved in the myths and in the epics.
Hence the Lycians came to play a prominent part, and the adventures of
Bellerophon were localized in Lycia. The woeful signs of the message
which he carried from the king of Tiryns to the king of Lycia refer of
course to the Minoan script which the Greeks took with them to Cyprus.
The battles with the Lycians were celebrated in early epics and were
from these introduced into the Trojan epos with that disregard for
geography and chronology which is peculiar to epics, when events are
incorporated into them. While the Lycians loomed largely in earlier
recitals, they became the chief adversaries of the Greeks next to the
Trojans themselves in the Trojan cycle. <span
id="fr_98"></span>[68](#fn_98)

The same thing happened in the case of the Cilicians. The Greeks had
learned to know them also during their voyages toward the east, and for
this reason they were mentioned in epics and recitals. The Homeric poet
took over the tradition and had heard that they were a mighty people,
but not knowing their whereabouts he thought them fit to be the people
over whom the father-in-law of the most brilliant hero of the Trojans
ruled, just as Hecabe

<span id="page_62">p. 62</span>

came from the mighty Phrygian empire. King Cinyras of Cyprus who gave
Agamemnon an artfully wrought cuirass may have been introduced into
Homer from the same source.

As far as I can see, this is the most natural explanation of the
relevant facts. I have dwelt upon it at length because it not only
corroborates the Mycenaean origin of the Bellerophon myth but also gives
a valuable outlook on the Mycenaean background of the epics.

I touch only lightly upon another myth connected with Tiryns, because
its association with Mycenaean times is very uncertain. This is the
story of the daughters of King Proetus, who went mad and, according to
the common version, were healed by the seer Melampus. The earliest
testimony, the Catalogue of Hesiod, says that Hera punished the maidens
because of their excessive indulgence in love affairs. In a late epos,
the Melampodeia, the tale is transferred into the usual Dionysiac
scheme. The Proetides are driven mad by Dionysus because they resisted
his cult. Melampus, who is said by Herodotus to have taught the name and
the cult of Dionysus and the phallic processions, belongs evidently to
the religious movement of the archaic age in which the cult of Dionysus
was received and regulated. The version according to which Hera caused
the madness is earlier and moreover connected with Tiryns, where Hera
was the chief goddess, but it is impossible to say how old it may be.

It has been remarked pertinently that the myth of the Proetides has the
same basic idea as that of Io. Although the statement that the Proetides

<span id="page_63">p. 63</span>

believed that they had been metamorphosed into cows occurs only in late
writers, the same elements are conspicuous--the wrath of Hera, the
madness, and the extensive wanderings, but in the case of Io the love of
Zeus is given as the cause, and Argus is said to have watched Io and to
have been killed by Hermes. There is no certain clue for unraveling this
myth. I am content to point to the fact that it is attached to the
Heraeum, which was built upon a Mycenaean site of importance, and that
it especially established the connection of Hera with the cow. <span
id="fr_99"></span>[69](#fn_99) There is certainly reason to think that
the cult of Hera at the Heraeum is of Mycenaean date, and this may
perhaps be surmised in regard to the myth, too, although there is no
specific proof. If some explanation is wanted, it may be guessed that
the ecstatic cult of the nature goddess, with dances, which is so
conspicuous on Mycenaean monuments, gave rise to this myth, just as the
somewhat kindred ecstatic cult of Dionysus gave rise to many similar
myths in a later age. But this is of course a mere guess, and the myth
of Io may be dismissed, not being very essential for our purpose.

At last we come to Argos, the capital of Argolis in historical times. In
the Mycenaean age it was but one of the minor sites and its remains from
this age are not important. Of the myths connected with the city of
Argos, we may pass over that of the culture hero Phoroneus, who is much
less prominent than the hero of Nauplia, Palamedes, and the eponymous
hero Argos; in a later chapter I shall recur to the attempt to make him
a rival of Heracles. <span id="fr_100"></span>[70](#fn_100)

<span id="page_64">p. 64</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> The only myth of
interest, but, nevertheless, of a very great interest, is that of the
Danaides.

The kernel of this myth was always the murder on the bridal night of the
fifty sons of Aegyptus by the fifty daughters of Danaüs. The reason why
this mass murder was perpetrated and the relations between the fathers,
Danaüs and Aegyptus, differ in various versions and are of secondary
importance. The events which followed are also related variously, but it
is well to observe that, according to the current versions, the Danaides
were not punished for their cruel deed. <span
id="fr_101"></span>[71](#fn_101)

What does this deed of the Danaides, the murder of their husbands,
signify? The nature symbolism, according to which this myth like many
others was interpreted formerly, need hardly be discussed
seriously. <span id="fr_102"></span>[72](#fn_102) If we disregard such
more or less far-fetched interpretation, the tale which seems to present
the closest analogy is that of Judith and Holophernes, the tale of the
Jewish woman who enticed the oppressor of her people into love and slew
him on the bridal night. It may be worth while

<span id="page_65">p. 65</span>

to try to proceed on this analogy. It implies that the motif, which is
so conspicuous in the legend of Judith, the heroism of the woman, had
been forgotten in the Greek tradition. The Greek shuddered always in
telling the story, but if the deed was originally a crime, it is
impossible to understand why no punishment followed, or if a punishment
was given, why that was forgotten. So much seems to be absolutely
certain, that the killing of the husbands, the sons of Aegyptus, was
originally no crime. It cannot have been an action neither good nor bad.
Was it then a heroic deed?

There is a curious question to which very little attention has been
paid. Why are the Danaides so many, not less than fifty? We may
understand why, to prove his heroic strength, it is told that Heracles
in one night begat fifty sons, but there is no apparent reason why the
Danaides should be so many and the killing of their husbands a wholesale
massacre. If we take the word Danaides in the original sense of Danaan
maidens <span id="fr_103"></span>[73](#fn_103) and not according to the
usual interpretation as the daughters of Danaüs, a way to understanding
this feature will perhaps be opened; Danaüs is moreover a very shadowy
personage.

The current opinion is that the husbands of the Danaides were originally
nameless and that they were made sons of Aegyptus only after the Greeks
had learned to know Egypt in the seventh century B.C. <span
id="fr_104"></span>[74](#fn_104) As they found animals venerated in this

<span id="page_66">p. 66</span>

country, they transferred the myth of Io, who was metamorphosed into a
cow, to Egypt, and with the Io myth that of the Danaides also was
transferred to Egypt; thus their husbands were made sons of Aegyptus.
The elaboration of the cycle is ascribed to the author of a lost epos,
the Danais, of which only one fragment is preserved, telling that the
daughters of Danaüs armed themselves near the river of the Nile. <span
id="fr_105"></span>[75](#fn_105) This seems prima facie to refer to the
killing of their husbands, and if this is so, the locality where the
drama was enacted was changed. For in the current version Danaüs and his
daughters flee to Argos, the sons of Aegyptus pursue them and compel
them there to the disastrous wedding. To avoid this contradiction others
refer the words to a fight in which the maidens engaged before leaving
Egypt. <span id="fr_106"></span>[76](#fn_106) This seems to be a very
doubtful means of evading the localization in Egypt, which probably is
really the old version.

The Greeks, however, knew Egypt not only in the seventh century B.C.,
but also in the twelfth century B.C., when Greek tribes and in fact the
Danaans tried to invade Egypt; and we know, moreover, that these
migrating peoples came with wives and children. There is a circumstance
pointing to the probability that the myth goes back to this time. For
the tribal name of the Danaans is already obsolete in Homer and it is
hardly probable that it was picked up and applied to a myth invented in
the seventh century B.C. If the myth goes back to

<span id="page_67">p. 67</span>

the time when the Danaans raided Egypt, its origin may be explainable
under the conditions of this time. A crowd of Danaan women had been
captured and made concubines of Egyptians; they slew their husbands and
escaped. The wholesale slaughter of the Greeks on Lemnos by their
indigenous wives is a somewhat kindred story, explaining why this island
was lost to Greek colonization. <span id="fr_107"></span>[77](#fn_107)
This may be the simple underlying fact; certainly it explains why the
deed was not considered a crime. It is a simple story from the life of
that stormy age, simpler than the dramatic episode of Judith and
Holophernes, but the analogy is there. <span
id="fr_108"></span>[78](#fn_108)

This explanation of the myth of the Danaides as an historical
reminiscence from the time when the Danaans attacked Egypt may seem
hazardous to many, and I am quite aware of its hypothetical character;
but it is perhaps not less probable than other interpretations which
have been proposed. If my guess hits the mark, this fable is the only
one connected with the city of Argos which goes back into the Mycenaean
age. But it is evident that it in fact refers to the whole province of
Argos and not to its later capital, with which it was connected only
loosely and secondarily. The unimportance of the city of Argos from a
mythological standpoint corresponds

<span id="page_68">p. 68</span>

to its obscurity in the Mycenaean age. When Argos became the capital of
the province, it tried of course to build up a mythology of its own; we
have noticed these efforts, but they cannot deceive anybody.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_33"></span>[36:3](mog03.htm#fr_33) The standard work on
Greek Mythology is the fourth edition of L. Preller's *Griechische
Mythologie*, edited by C. Robert. The volumes treating heroic mythology
are a quite new and most substantial and learned work with the separate
title: *Die griechische Heldensage* (1920--26); only the indexes are
still wanting. The best English handbook on the subject is H. J. Rose, A
*Handbook of Greek Mythology* (1928).

<span id="fn_34"></span>[36:4](mog04.htm#fr_34) The important results of
the recent excavations of the English School are published in the
*Annual of the British School at Athens*, XXV (1921-23).

<span id="fn_35"></span>[37:5](mog04.htm#fr_35) The report on these
excavations is forthcoming in the periodical *Archaeologia*.

<span id="fn_36"></span>[38:6](mog04.htm#fr_36) A. W. Persson,
*Kungagraven i Dendra* (1928), is a popular survey in Swedish. The final
publication of these most important finds is forthcoming in the *Acta*
of the R. Society of Letters of Lund.

<span id="fn_37"></span>[38:7](mog04.htm#fr_37) Tiryns, Vol. I (1912),
pp. 114 *et seq*.; cp. my *Minoan-Mycenaean Religion*, pp. 410 *et seq*.

<span id="fn_38"></span>[38:8](mog04.htm#fr_38) Preliminary reports in
the *American Journal of Archaeology*, XXIX (1925), pp. 413 *et seq*.,
XXXI (1927), p. 105, and in the *Journal of Hellenic Studies*, XLVI
(1926), pp. 226 *et seq*.; XLVII (1927), pp. 237 *et seq*.; XLVIII
(1928), p. 184.

<span id="fn_39"></span>[38:9](mog04.htm#fr_39) For the recent finds on
the Larissa see Vollgraff in Mnemosyne, LVI (1928), pp. 313 *et seq*.,
and in *Mededeelingen der K. Akad. van Wetenschappen, Letterkunde*, Vol.
LXVI (1928), Ser. B, No. 4.

<span id="fn_40"></span>[39:10](mog04.htm#fr_40) Concerning the sites
near Corinth, see Blegen, *American Journal of Archaeology*, XXIV
(1920), pp. 1 *et seq*. A preliminary report of the excavations at Asine
is published in the *Bulletin of the R. Society of Letters of Lund*,
1924-25, but this does not include the still more important finds of the
campaign in 1926, especially the results of the excavation of the Lower
Town, in which the sanctuary described in my *Minoan-Mycenaean
Religion*, pp. XX *et seq*., was discovered. A supplementary excavation
having been made in this year (1930), the final publication is in
preparation.

<span id="fn_41"></span>[39:11](mog04.htm#fr_41) Consequently I need not
discuss the recent theory of Sir Arthur Evans reversing the old view
referred to in the text. He thinks that the bodies and objects found in
the shaft-graves were transferred thither from the bee-hive tombs, and
adds vivacious polemics against the dating of the bee-hive tombs
proposed by Mr. Wace (A. J. Evans, *The Shaft-Graves and Bee-Hive Tombs
of Mycenae and their Interrelation*, 1929).

<span id="fn_42"></span>[40:12](mog04.htm#fr_42) E. S. Hartland, *The
Legend of Perseus*, I-III (1894-96).

<span id="fn_43"></span>[40:13](mog04.htm#fr_43) Paus. ii. 16, 3. See
[p. 123](mog09.htm#page_123), n. [46](mog09.htm#fn_234).

<span id="fn_44"></span>[40:14](mog04.htm#fr_44) Paus. ii. 18, 1.

<span id="fn_45"></span>[41:15](mog04.htm#fr_45) *Inscr. Graec.*, IV.
No. 493, which mentions ἱαρομνάμονες τὸς ἐς Περσε̃. Judicial functions
are attributed to them when there is no σαμοργία. Cp. Wilamowitz,
*Aristoteles and Athen*, II., p. 48, n. 26.

<span id="fn_46"></span>[41:16](mog04.htm#fr_46) During the Roman age
the honors of Heracles and Perseus were decreed for citizens of merit
(*Inscr. Graec.*, iv., No. 606, cp. No. 586). The noble family of T.
Statilius Lamprias attached its genealogy to Perseus and the Dioscuri
(*ibid*. Nos. 590 and 940).

<span id="fn_47"></span>[42:17](mog04.htm#fr_47) So Ed. Meyer also,
*Forschungen zur alten Geschichte*, I (1892), p.73. Cp. below [p.
65](#page_65).

<span id="fn_48"></span>[43:18](mog04.htm#fr_48) "Agamemnon führt einen
Vatersnamen, dessen künstliche Mache klar ist," Wilamowitz, "*Die
griech. Heldensage*, II," *Sitzungsberichte der preuss. Akad. der
Wissenschaften*, 1925, p. 242.

<span id="fn_49"></span>[43:19](mog04.htm#fr_49) See above [p.
26](mog02.htm#page_26).

<span id="fn_50"></span>[43:20](mog04.htm#fr_50) *Il*. ii. vv. 101 *et
seq*.

<span id="fn_51"></span>[44:21](mog04.htm#fr_51) See my paper, "Das
homerische Königtum" in *Sitzungsberichte der preuss. Akad. der
Wissenschaften*, 1927, p. 27; cp. below pp. [240](mog14.htm#page_240)
*et seq*.

<span id="fn_52"></span>[44:22](mog04.htm#fr_52) By Ph. Buttmann,
Mythologus, II (1829), p. 170.

<span id="fn_53"></span>[44:23](mog04.htm#fr_53) See below pp.
[91](mog07.htm#page_91) *et seq*.

<span id="fn_54"></span>[45:24](mog04.htm#fr_54) E. Bethe, *Homer*, III
(1927), pp. 11 and 50; P. Cauer, *Grundfragen der Homerkritik*; ed. 3
(1923), pp. 274 *et seq*.

<span id="fn_55"></span>[45:25](mog04.htm#fr_55) E.g. *Il*. ii. v. 108.

<span id="fn_56"></span>[45:26](mog04.htm#fr_56) Cp. my above-quoted
([p. 44](#page_44), n. ) paper, p. 27.

<span id="fn_57"></span>[46:27](mog04.htm#fr_57) For this view I quote
only H. Usener, "Der Stoff des griech. Epos," *Sitzungsberichte der
Akad. der Wissenschaften in Wien*, CXXXVII (1897), III, pp. 5 *et seq*.,
reprinted in his *Kleine Schriften* IV (1913), pp. 203 *et seq*.

<span id="fn_58"></span>[46:28](mog04.htm#fr_58) I. Harrie, "Zeus
Agamemnon," *Archiv für Religionswissenschaft*, XXIII (1925), pp. 359
*et seq*.

<span id="fn_59"></span>[46:29](mog04.htm#fr_59) Lykophron, *Alexandra*,
vv. 1123 *et seq*., ἑμὸς δ᾽ ἀκοίτης, δμωΐδος νύμφης ἄναξ, Ζεὺς
Σπαρτιάταις αἱμύλοις κληθήσεται τιμὰς μεγίστας Οἰβάλου ιέκνοις λαχών.
Inversely Agamemnon is named instead of Zeus, v. 335, ὁ δ᾽ ἀμφὶ τύμβῳ
τάγαμέμνονος δαμείς; i. e., Priamus who was killed on the altar of Zeus
Herkeios.

<span id="fn_60"></span>[46:30](mog04.htm#fr_60) *Ibid*., v. 1369
(Agamemnon) Ζηνὶ τῷ Λαπερσίῳ ὁμώνυμος Ζεύς.

<span id="fn_61"></span>[46:31](mog04.htm#fr_61) Paus. iii. 19, S.

<span id="fn_62"></span>[47:32](mog04.htm#fr_62) Paus. ix. 40, 11, who
states that it was a δόρυ.

<span id="fn_63"></span>[47:33](mog04.htm#fr_63) I refer to the only
attested cult, at Tarentum, in a note, because it is evidently
secondary. The cult applied more justly to the descendants of Atreus and
Agamemnon and other heroes; cp. my *Griechische Feste* (1906), p. 457,
n. 8.

<span id="fn_64"></span>[48:34](mog04.htm#fr_64) See Usener, *op. cit*.,
p. 6 or 203 resp. with notes.

<span id="fn_65"></span>[48:35](mog04.htm#fr_65) Wilamowitz in the paper
quoted, p. 43, n. 18, p. 242.

<span id="fn_66"></span>[48:36](mog04.htm#fr_66) Pollux, ix. 83.

<span id="fn_67"></span>[48:37](mog04.htm#fr_67) For the Midas in
question ought to be the last king of Phrygia, whose empire was crushed
and who was killed by the Cimmerian invasion in the very beginning of
the 7th century B.C.

<span id="fn_68"></span>[49:38](mog04.htm#fr_68) Steph. Byz. *s.v.*
Πενθίλη.

<span id="fn_69"></span>[49:39](mog04.htm#fr_69) Aristot., *Polit*., v.
10, p. 1311 b.

<span id="fn_70"></span>[49:40](mog04.htm#fr_70) Pindar, *Nem*., xi. 44,
says of a victorious athlete from Tenedos that his ancestors emigrated
from Amyclae with Orestes; for other testimony see Robert, *Griech.
Heldensage*, pp. 1340 *et seq*.

<span id="fn_71"></span>[49:41](mog04.htm#fr_71) The names are not quite
identical, differing in the second vowel. Steph. Byz., however, calls
the town Πενθίλη and its inhabitants Πενθελείς.

<span id="fn_72"></span>[50:42](mog04.htm#fr_72) Below pp.
[240](mog14.htm#page_240) *et seq*.

<span id="fn_73"></span>[51:43](mog04.htm#fr_73) Paus. ii. 2, 4.

<span id="fn_74"></span>[51:44](mog04.htm#fr_74) Paus. ii. 4, 1.

<span id="fn_75"></span>[51:45](mog04.htm#fr_75) *Il*. vi. vv. 152 *et
seq*.

<span id="fn_76"></span>[51:46](mog04.htm#fr_76) E. Bethe, *Thebanische
Heldenlieder* (1891), pp. 182 *et seq*.

<span id="fn_77"></span>[52:47](mog04.htm#fr_77) *Schol. Il. A*, vi.
183, and *T*, vi. 192.

<span id="fn_78"></span>[53:48](mog04.htm#fr_78) Il. vi., vv. 157 *et
seq*. The words ἐκ δήμου ἔλασσεν - - - Ἀργείωον are of course not to be
taken as a contradiction of the localization of Proetus at Tiryns;
similarly Agamemnon sometimes is called king of Mycenae and sometimes
king of the Argives.

<span id="fn_79"></span>[53:49](mog04.htm#fr_79) L. Malten,
"Bellerophon," *Jahrbuch des deutschen archäolog. Instituts*, XL (1925),
pp. 121 *et seq*.

<span id="fn_80"></span>[54:50](mog04.htm#fr_80) See above pp.
[33](mog02.htm#page_33) *et seq*.

<span id="fn_81"></span>[54:51](mog04.htm#fr_81) Wilamowitz, *Die Ilias
and Homer* (1916), p. 305.

<span id="fn_82"></span>[54:52](mog04.htm#fr_82) I do not take the
Catalogue of the Ships into account, since it is to be judged on its own
merits.

<span id="fn_83"></span>[55:53](mog04.htm#fr_83) *Il*. xiv. v. 255; xv.
v. 28.

<span id="fn_84"></span>[55:54](mog04.htm#fr_84) *Il*. v. vv. 628 *et
seq*.

<span id="fn_85"></span>[55:55](mog04.htm#fr_85) Comptes rendus de
l’académie des inscriptions et belles lettres, 1921, p. 122. *Gnomon*,
III, 1927, p. 189.

<span id="fn_86"></span>[55:56](mog04.htm#fr_86) *Art and Archaeology*,
xiv (1922), p. 259.

<span id="fn_87"></span>[55:57](mog04.htm#fr_87) Cp. the interesting
survey by W. Leaf, *Troy* (1912), pp. 269 *et seq*.

<span id="fn_88"></span>[56:58](mog04.htm#fr_88) I give herewith a
survey. Thrace and the Thracians are mentioned fairly often. The death
of Peirous from Ainus is described at some length (*Il*. iv. vv. 517 *et
seq*.); another Thracian chief is mentioned (v. 462) and killed by Aias
(vi. 7). Especially in the Doloneia the Thracians play a prominent part.
A leader of the Kikones is killed (xvii. 73). The Trojan allies are
enumerated in this book (x. vv. 428-434). Following this list we inquire
what their parts are in the Iliad. The Paeones dwelt at the river of
Axius in Macedonia. A Paeonian hero, Pyraichmes, is killed by Patroclus
(xvi. 285 *et seq*.) and another, Asteropaeus, by Achilles; the latter
description especially (xxi. 140 *et seq*.) is rather full; he is
mentioned in several other passages and with him (xvii. 348 *et seq*.)
Apisaon. The Paphlagones are not mentioned in the quoted enumeration,
but their chief, Pylaimenes, is killed by Menelaus (v. 577), and his
son, Harpalion, by Meriones (xiii. 656 *et seq*.). The Caucones lived to
the west of the Paphlagones; except in the enumeration they are
mentioned only in passing (xx. 329). The chief of the Halizones, Odius,
is killed by Agamemnon (v. 39); their town, according to the Catalogue
(ii. 856), was Alybe, but their habitat is unknown. A Mysian hero is
killed by Aias (xiv. 511). It is told that Priamus received gifts from
them (xxiv. 278); and their country is mentioned (xiii. 5), so that it
seems to belong to Europe. The Mysi are a part of the Moesian tribe
which emigrated to Asia Minor. Phrygia is said to be the neighboring
country to the empire of Priamus (xxiv. 545); his queen was a Phrygian
princess. Apollo appears to Hector in the figure of her brother Asius
who lived on the shores of Sangarius (xvi. 715 *et seq*.). The Maeones
were a tribe living in Lydia. Their country is mentioned in passing
(iii. 401; and xviii. 291), and the people are mentioned in the quoted
enumeration. A Maeonian woman is said to be skilled in dyeing (iv. 142);
and Iphition who was born at Hyde near Mount Tmolus is killed by
Achilles (xx. 385 *et seq*.), and in this connection the Gygaean lake
and the rivers of Hyllus and Hermus are mentioned.

<span id="fn_89"></span>[57:59](mog04.htm#fr_89) Especially in v, xi,
and xvi.

<span id="fn_90"></span>[57:60](mog04.htm#fr_90) *Il*. iv. vv. 105 and
91.

<span id="fn_91"></span>[57:61](mog04.htm#fr_91) *Il*. xi. v. 21.

<span id="fn_92"></span>[58:62](mog04.htm#fr_92) Il. ii. vv. 824 *et
seq*.

<span id="fn_93"></span>[58:63](mog04.htm#fr_93) Wilamowitz, *Hermes*,
XXXVIII (1903), p. 585; Finsler, *Homer* (ed. 3; 1924), p. 17.

<span id="fn_94"></span>[58:64](mog04.htm#fr_94) *Il*. vi. vv. 395 *et
seq*.; cp. i. vv. 366 *et seq*. and xxii. vv. 479 *et seq*. E. Bethe,
*Neue Jahrbücher für klass. Altertumswissenschaft*, VII (1901), p. 671,
proposed the hypothesis that this Thebe is the Thessalian town with that
name. This view was supported by O. Kern, *ibid*., XIII (1904), p. 16,
and by P. Cauer, *Grundfragen der Homerkritik* (ed. 3, 1921), <span
id="page_59">p. 59</span> p. 261. It was also developed by F. Staehlin,
*Das Hypoplakische Thebe, eine Sagenverschiebung bei Homer* (Programm,
München, 1907), but it fails to account for the inhabitants being
Cilicians, and is most unlikely. It is a remarkable fact that the names
of the cities which are by Homer attributed to the Cilicians, Thebes and
Lyrnessus, recur in Pamphylia (Steph. Byz. *s.v.* Θήβη and Σάρδησσος;
cp. P. Kretschmer, *Glotta*, XIII (1924), p. 209 *et seq*.)

<span id="fn_95"></span>[59:65](mog04.htm#fr_95) In my *Minoan-Mycenaean
Religion*, p. 27, and above [p. 53](#page_53).

<span id="fn_96"></span>[60:66](mog04.htm#fr_96) *Il*. xi. v. 20.

<span id="fn_97"></span>[60:67](mog04.htm#fr_97) Lively connections with
the Mycenaean world are proved by numerous Mycenaean finds in the recent
excavations at Minet el Beida north of Laodicea *ad mare* on the Syrian
coast; see the periodical *Syria*, X (1929), pp. 285 *et seq*.

<span id="fn_98"></span>[61:68](mog04.htm#fr_98) Wilamowitz, *Die Ilias
and Homer* (1916), p. 305, contends that the Ionians introduced the
Lycians because their kings claimed descent partly from the Lycian hero
Glaucus (Herodotus i. 147); *Inschr. von Magnesia a. M.*, No. 17; O.
Kern, *Die Gründungsgeschichte von Magnesia a. M.* (1894). I have above
given my opinion of similar instances. The fame of Glaucus is due to the
Homeric epics, and that is the reason why the genealogies were attached
to him.

<span id="fn_99"></span>[63:69](mog04.htm#fr_99) See my *Griechische
Feste* (1906), pp. 42 *et seq*.

<span id="fn_100"></span>[63:70](mog04.htm#fr_100) Below [p.
212](mog13.htm#page_212).

<span id="fn_101"></span>[64:71](mog04.htm#fr_101) Except in a single
late version, *Schol. Eurip. Hec.* 886, according to which Lynceus, the
only son of Aegyptus who was saved, put them to death. P. Friedländer,
who treats the myth at length in his dissertation, *Argolica* (Berlin,
1905), pp. 5 *et seq*., takes this version to be the oldest, quite
arbitrarily. This is one weak point of his reasoning; the other is that
there is no apparent reason why the brother of Danaüs, ejected from
Argos, should retire to Egypt. The well-known myth that the Danaides
were compelled to carry water in perforated vessels is Hellenistic and
was transferred to them from those who were not initiated into the
mysteries. I agree with Robert, *Griech. Heldensage*, p. 277, that it is
an Orphic invention.

<span id="fn_102"></span>[64:72](mog04.htm#fr_102) The connection of the
Danaides with the spring at Lerna, Apollodorus, ii. 1, 5, 11, and Paus.,
ii. 24, 2, is superficial. Amymone was not originally one of the
Danaides.

<span id="fn_103"></span>[65:73](mog04.htm#fr_103) The alternative form
Δανααί occurs in a quotation from Hesiod in Strabo, viii. p. 371; frag.
24 Rzach, ed. 3.

<span id="fn_104"></span>[65:74](mog04.htm#fr_104) E.g. Ed. Meyer,
*Forschungen zur alten Geschichte* I (1892), p. 84.

<span id="fn_105"></span>[66:75](mog04.htm#fr_105) *Frag. epic. graec.*
ed. Kinkel, p. 78.

<span id="fn_106"></span>[66:76](mog04.htm#fr_106) For another attempted
explanation see Ed. Meyer, *loc. cit.*, p. 82, n. 3.

<span id="fn_107"></span>[67:77](mog04.htm#fr_107) I agree with
Wilamowitz, *Sitzungsberichte der preuss. Akademie der Wissenschaften*,
1906, p. 76, that this is the meaning of the myth, which was very much
enlarged and remodeled. The latest treatment, by G. Dumézil, *Le crime
des Lemniennes* (1924), takes up other points of view.

<span id="fn_108"></span>[67:78](mog04.htm#fr_108) In the first edition
of his *Geschichte des Altertums*, I (1884), p. 264, Ed. Meyer found a
reminiscence of old wanderings of the peoples in the story of the
emigration of Danaüs from Egypt; later in his *Forschungen*, *loc.
cit.*, he changed his view.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2. Laconia](mog05)
