[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](mog08)  [Next](mog10) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0520021630/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 6. SOUTHERN BOEOTIA

Boeotia comes next to Argolis and takes the second place in the richness
both of its myths and of its Mycenaean remains. There we find two
important Mycenaean cities; though the perversity of Fate has left less
than elsewhere of past splendor, there is enough to prove that they once
were mighty and populous. We find the large and strong fortress of Gla
and the extensive works for the improvement of cultivation by the
draining of the lake of Copais, which better than anything prove the
high standard of Mycenaean civilization in peaceful work; they are far
superior to the roads radiating from Mycenae, and I shall recur to them
in a later place.

But if we take a survey of the province as a whole in regard to
Mycenaean remains, they do not appear to be so numerous as might be
expected from these outstanding examples, <span
id="fr_189"></span>[1](#fn_189) in fact, elsewhere in Boeotia both
Mycenaean habitations and isolated finds seem to be scarce. <span
id="fr_190"></span>[2](#fn_190) Not to speak of Argolis, Attica is

<span id="page_101">p. 101</span>

much more thickly strewn with Mycenaean sites, tombs, and finds. This
state of things is only partly due to the lack of exploration and
knowledge of Mycenaean remains in Boeotia. This province has not been so
thoroughly searched as have Argolis and Attica, but much attention has
been paid to Boeotia also, and it is hardly likely that such an
explanation would cover the whole truth. It seems as if Boeotia had been
a kind of new land of the Mycenaean civilization which, coming of course
from the south, occupied two great centers and penetrated less into the
country. The draining of the lake of Copais, which provided a vast area
of arable land for the profit of the town doing the work corroborates
this view.

This is of course only a suggestion and it may be judged on its own
merits. For our purpose the important fact is the existence of Mycenaean
centers. I begin with Thebes, postponing the mention of the others until
I treat their myths. Extensive remains of a Mycenaean palace have been
found at Thebes; unhappily it was possible to excavate them only partly,
because they are situated in the midst of the modern town. <span
id="fr_191"></span>[3](#fn_191) This was the emplacement of ancient
Thebes also, and this continuous habitation of the site was of course
catastrophic to the Mycenaean remains. In spite of this, enough is left
to show the outstanding importance of Mycenaean Thebes. Especially
remarkable are fragments of wall paintings belonging to an earlier
period than

<span id="page_102">p. 102</span>

those of Orchomenus, <span id="fr_192"></span>[4](#fn_192) a potter's
kiln, and a number of big stirrup jars or fragments of such jars with
painted short inscriptions. <span id="fr_193"></span>[5](#fn_193)
Further, a great number of tombs with rich contents has been
found, <span id="fr_194"></span>[6](#fn_194) proving that Thebes had a
prosperous and numerous population in the Mycenaean age.

Thus, though the later ages have been fatal to the Mycenaean remains of
Thebes, enough is left to show that the city was a most important center
of Mycenaean civilization; and the myths attached to Thebes are of a
corresponding richness and importance. It would perhaps be sufficient to
point to the well-known Theban cycles of myths, but they show some
peculiar features which make it a duty to enter upon them more closely,
in spite of the uncertainty which is inevitably bound up with research
of this kind.

The Theban cycles were treated in post-Homeric epics of which we have
some slight knowledge and were especially taken up and favored by the
great tragic poets. The chief figure is Oedipus. Professor Robert has
treated his myths exhaustively and has given a model piece of
mythographical research in his great work *Oidipus*; here we must try to
get

<span id="page_103">p. 103</span>

behind the traditional myths and see what their origin and their
connections with the Mycenaean age may be. I cannot share Professor
Robert's opinion that Oedipus is an old depossessed god. <span
id="fr_195"></span>[7](#fn_195) From the fact that three of the tombs
and cult places ascribed to Oedipus are certainly late, Professor Robert
draws the conclusion that the fourth, the tomb at Eteonus in Boeotia,
was the original and old one. Oedipus is, however, no old vegetation god
but simply a *Märchen*-hero, a folk-tale personage who, by vanquishing
the sphinx won the hand of the queen and the kingdom, although this
simple and common motif was complicated by the addition of a great many
others. That his name is a descriptive one, corroborates this view. Such
a mythical personage has of course no tomb; even that at Eteonus is a
late creation. <span id="fr_196"></span>[8](#fn_196) Nor can I side with
Professor Rose who takes Oedipus to be a historical personage, a prince
who had been exposed as a child and who at the head of a Corinthian army
conquered Thebes, slew King Laius, and wedded Queen Epikaste, his
mother. <span id="fr_197"></span>[9](#fn_197) He fully recognizes the
folk-tale elements but thinks that Oedipus is a nickname. In view of the
fact that it is one of the few characteristic *Märchen* names in Greek
mythology, I am persuaded that the origin of Oedipus is to be found not
in history but in folk-tales.

<span id="page_104">p. 104</span>

The myth was localized at Thebes; consequently Oedipus became king of
Thebes and was inserted in the genealogy of the kingly Theban house. A
detailed analysis of the Oedipus cycle is out of place here, but I am
bound to point to certain circumstances of importance for our subject.
To begin with I remark that the reception of folk-tale motifs in this
cycle, just as, e.g., in the Perseus cycle, shows its popularity and
age.

Concerning the ancestors of Oedipus a few words will suffice. His
grandfather Labdacus is an empty name, and if the guess deriving his
name from the name of the letter, *labda*, Λ, hits the mark, he is of
very late origin. On the other hand, the myth in its developed form
implies an important rôle for Oedipus' father.

If the myth of Oedipus told only that he guessed the riddle of the
sphinx, or simply that he slew her and in reward won the hand of the
queen and with her the kingdom, it would have been a very simple
folk-tale of a well-known kind. But other motifs were added, drawn from
the conflicts in family and ethical life of an early people: the queen
was his mother and the man he slew his father. The addition of these
motifs created the real Oedipus myth and its essential greatness. In a
later chapter <span id="fr_198"></span>[10](#fn_198) we shall treat the
naming of the mythical personages and we shall see that the name Oedipus
belongs to a class of names, rare in Greek mythology but of frequent
[occurrence](errata.htm#2) in folk-tales, in which the hero's name is
descriptive of certain peculiar characteristics which he possesses.
Oedipus signifies "the man with

<span id="page_105">p. 105</span>

the swollen feet." The formation of the name is of great antiquity,
showing a kind of derivation which was obsolete in the Greek language of
the historic age. <span id="fr_199"></span>[11](#fn_199) The feature
that his feet were pierced, though irrational as has been said, is bound
up with the story that as a newborn child he was exposed to die, but was
saved, and when grown up was recognized by his parents. This motif is on
the other hand essential only in connection with the myth telling that
Oedipus married his mother. That is to say, in this case, because of the
formation of the name, we are able to state that the tale of the
exposure of Oedipus and of his marrying his mother was joined in an age
which long preceded the historical age with the folk-tale of the young
man who by guessing the riddle of the sphinx won the queen and the
kingdom. I confidently ascribe the origin of this myth complex to the
Mycenaean age.

Folk-tales have a logic of their own which sometimes is rather
penetrating, though it may seem

<span id="page_106">p. 106</span>

puzzling to us. When it was asked how the queen became a widow, the myth
answered by applying another motif of the same kind: Oedipus had without
knowing it killed his father. Thus the terrific logic of events was
still more emphasized. The slaying of his father is not so essential for
the myth and may have been added later; but this motif also is certainly
very old, <span id="fr_200"></span>[12](#fn_200) and with it the cycle
is established in all its essential parts. Other features are more
loosely bound up with it and must be passed over here. <span
id="fr_201"></span>[13](#fn_201) The history of Greek literature proves
that this myth was perhaps the most dramatic of all Greek myths. I
venture to think that in its essential parts it was already created in
the Mycenaean age and attached to Thebes. The reasons for its
localization at Thebes we are of course unable to discover or to
guess--they may have been quite fortuitous, as often happens in
localizing current tales--but a necessary condition for the recognition
of this localization was that Thebes in this age was a famous town.

The second part of the Theban cycle is from our point of view perhaps of
still greater interest. This cycle resembles the cycle of Mycenae in
that the kernels of the first part of each--the Oedipus and the Perseus
myth respectively are closely linked up with folk-tales; whereas the
second parts--the myths of the Atreidae and of the Seven against Thebes
respectively--belong to those myths which have a historical aspect and
kernel. With certain scholars I have assumed this historical kernel in
the case of

<span id="page_107">p. 107</span>

the Atreidae, and in making the same assumption in regard to the War of
the Seven against Thebes I only follow the footsteps of Wilamowitz, Ed.
Meyer, and Robert, who take this myth to be a historical reminiscence of
a war waged against Thebes by a confederation of Argive princes. <span
id="fr_202"></span>[14](#fn_202)

But the matter is not so simple as it may appear. Difficulties arose
when the myth of the war was joined with the myth of Oedipus, and we
must try to grasp these. The common form of the myth is well known. The
two sons of Oedipus, Eteocles and Polyneices, quarreled about the
throne; Polyneices was driven out by his brother, and collected with the
help of the Argive prince Adrastus the great army of the Seven, but
failed to conquer Thebes; he and his brother slew each other in the
battle, the army was routed, and the other leaders were killed, except
Amphiaraus, who was swallowed alive by the earth. The sons of the Seven
marched a second time against Thebes with an army, conquered, and
destroyed the town. This complex form of the myth was known to Homer,
for in the fifth book of the Iliad <span
id="fr_203"></span>[15](#fn_203) it is related that Tydeus, one of the
Seven, went to Thebes as a messenger, and that he challenged and
vanquished all the Cadmeans in athletic contests. In a later passage in
the preceding book, <span id="fr_204"></span>[16](#fn_204) the same
adventure is told more fully; it is added that Tydeus came to Mycenae
accompanied by Polyneices in

<span id="page_108">p. 108</span>

order to collect soldiers, and in his reply to Agamemnon, Sthenelus, the
comrade of Tydeus' son Diomedes, says that he and his fellows conquered
Thebes of the Seven Gates.

On the other hand, it is told in another passage of the Iliad that
Mecisteus, who according to later sources was a brother of Adrastus,
went to Thebes after the fall of Oedipus, to his funeral games, and
vanquished all the Cadmeans. <span id="fr_205"></span>[17](#fn_205)
Moreover, a passage in the Nekyia <span id="fr_206"></span>[18](#fn_206)
says that Oedipus ruled at Thebes, enduring many evils, even after the
discovery of his crimes. Professor Robert is quite right in rejecting
the attempts to harmonize this version with the usual ones. <span
id="fr_207"></span>[19](#fn_207) We have to admit frankly that the
last-quoted Homeric version tells that Oedipus, even after having
recognized the frightful deeds of which he was guilty, ruled as king at
Thebes and eventually met his death in a war. This version recurs in
Hesiod, <span id="fr_208"></span>[20](#fn_208) where it is said that
Zeus destroyed the generation of the heroes in two great wars, some of
them beneath Thebes of the Seven Gates, warring because of Oedipus'
sheep, and others whom he conducted in the ships oversea to Troy because
of the fair-haired Helen.

Professor Robert argues conclusively that in this version Oedipus lives,
is king and leader in a great war; and this must be admitted; but when
he tries to point out the war in question I cannot follow him. He
reminds us of the many wars which the

<span id="page_109">p. 109</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Thebans waged,
according to the myths, with their traditional foes the Minyans, the
Teleboans, and others, and concludes that the war in which Oedipus fell,
according to the Iliad, cannot be the War of the Seven against
Thebes. <span id="fr_209"></span>[21](#fn_209) This last-mentioned was
only one of the many wars which the Thebans fought with their neighbors
in the mythical age. He thinks that the epos called the Thebais fused
all these wars into one Great War.

This solution of the difficulty is only seemingly easy. For the passages
quoted from Homer and Hesiod, which differ from the usual version, refer
evidently, as Professor Robert admits, to the same war, and if the war
because of Oedipus' sheep was one of the many casual wars which myths
attribute to Thebes, how was it possible that Hesiod puts it on the same
footing as the most famous war of mythology, that against Troy, and
counts it as the second in which the generation of the heroes perished?
This being so, it is established beyond possible doubt that the war in
which Oedipus fell was the one Great War of Thebes, just as there was
one Great War of Troy, although mythology knew other wars of the Trojans
too. That is to say, Professor Robert's theory is no real solution of
the dilemma and another way must be found.

From the standpoint of principles Professor Robert's view of the Theban
war is the same as that advanced by Professor Bethe in regard to the
Trojan war. <span id="fr_210"></span>[22](#fn_210) He thinks that of old
only scattered elements of myths existed, although he admits that the
War

<span id="page_110">p. 110</span>

of the Seven has a historical kernel going back into the Mycenaean age.
But it was only one of many wars, he says. He tries to demonstrate this
opinion by proving that the two foremost of the Seven, Tydeus and
Amphiaraus, were not Peloponnesians by origin but were brought into
connection with Adrastus, being made his sons-in-law. He thinks that
emigrants to Ionia from Euboea, Boeotia, and Argos brought their myths
with them and that these separate myths originating in different
provinces of the mainland coalesced in Ionia into the cycle of the War
of the Seven, and that the myth of the hostile brothers was invented in
order to give a cause for this war. <span
id="fr_211"></span>[23](#fn_211) In a following chapter he attempts to
reconstruct the epos which created this cycle, the Thebais. I pass over
his reconstruction and his criticism of the earlier reconstruction of
this epos by Professor Bethe. <span id="fr_212"></span>[24](#fn_212)

Here also I am unable to embrace the opinion that the great mythical
ideas were conceived in a later age, say in the seventh century B.C. Of
course Thebes may have waged many wars in the prehistoric age, but
popular recollection was unable to keep them apart in the lapse of the
centuries, and one war became at an early date more prominent than
others. Consequently I consider it as granted that old mythology knew
one great war against Thebes, as it knew one great war against Troy, and
these two wars were the most famous wars of the mythical age. This is
the kernel of the question. The simple mythical fact stated above was of
course

<span id="page_111">p. 111</span>

not sufficient, the myth had to tell details too, and we may surmise
that these were likely to be varied and enlarged. It is only natural
that the most famous king of Thebes was made the leader in this war. The
cause of the war does not take hold on popular fancy. Cattle-lifting is
a very common pastime among early peoples, who breed cattle and value
them highly, as the Greeks did, and it is accordingly very frequently
given as the cause of wars in the myths just as is the abduction of a
woman.

On the other hand, the Theban cycle was distinguished by the reception
of motifs, already mentioned above, <span
id="fr_213"></span>[25](#fn_213) which were derived from the ethical
conflicts and family life of an early people. Still another familiar
motif of this kind is that of the hostile brothers. Mythology knows
plenty of such pairs, e.g., Proetus and Acrisius, Romulus and Remus, and
many others. The hostility of the brothers gave a very good reason for
the war: one brother had been expelled by the other and tried to regain
his throne. It may moreover be surmised that an accident of this kind
happened more than once in the heroic age. When such a quarrel was given
as the cause of the war, Oedipus was out of place: not he but another,
Eteocles, must be made king and leader of the Thebans in the Great War.

It seems to me to be difficult to decide what was the original form of
the myth in this respect, whether Oedipus himself or one of the hostile
brothers was the Theban leader in the Great War. Oedipus is manifestly
an intrusive personage in the myth of the War, for he belongs originally
to a different

<span id="page_112">p. 112</span>

cycle; but because of his mythological fame he was connected with the
Great War also. For the same reason he was introduced into the story of
the hostile brothers, and made their father. This led to quite a series
of difficulties which mythical fiction did not succeed in solving in a
probable manner. These difficulties appear in the two questions: who was
the mother of the brothers, and what happened in the time between the
discovery of the crime of Oedipus and the Great War? I do not enter upon
these questions, which are of no importance for this discussion. <span
id="fr_214"></span>[26](#fn_214)

We turn to the other side, to the foes of the Thebans, who also are
essential to the myth. We are wont to regard the Theban war from the
stand-point of the besieged, whilst we regard the Trojan war from the
standpoint of the besiegers. There is a certain reason for these
different standpoints, because, unlike the Trojan war, the Theban war
ended in the failure of the besiegers; but this point of view ought not
to be so overemphasized as to make the foes of Thebes of only incidental
importance. On the contrary, the myth, as we know it, takes a far
greater interest in the leaders of the hostile party than in the Theban
leaders; the latter are, except for Eteocles, rather insignificant
mythical personages. There is not the least reason for supposing that
the rôles have been reversed in importance.

The foes too belong to the original myth, but in such a series of
heroes, names are apt to be changed, left out, or added. How old the
canonical number of seven may be, is of course uncertain, although it is

<span id="page_113">p. 113</span>

intimately bound up with the myth as we know it. But this number may
have determined the number of the gates of Thebes, for, as it has been
observed, the historical city of Thebes never had, seven gates. There
is, however, one personage who is essential and hardly can have been
subject to a change; namely, the leader of the hostile army, Adrastus;
and this is in fact acknowledged by the scholars who think that the
historical kernel of the myth is an expedition of Argive princes against
Thebes. The myth of the War of the Seven was not created at Thebes but
like other myths was a product of the general creative genius of the
Greeks and was told everywhere. This inference follows from the
localization of Adrastus.

Adrastus belongs to the northeastern Peloponnese, but as to the town
where he ruled mythological sources differ. He is commonly said to be
king of Sicyon, and the special reason for this is Herodotus' account of
how Cleisthenes, the tyrant of Sicyon, managed to get rid of his cult by
introducing the cult of his death-foe Melanippus. <span
id="fr_215"></span>[27](#fn_215) Herodotus says that Adrastus had a
heroön on the market place of Sicyon, but a learned Hellenistic author
contends that this heroön was a cenotaph and that his real tomb was at
Megara. <span id="fr_216"></span>[28](#fn_216) Such localizations must
always be regarded with a certain diffidence, because well-known hero
names were applied to nameless tombs and cults, or ousted less known
names. Thus it may be understood that a hero might have two or more
tombs, no one of which was necessarily the

<span id="page_114">p. 114</span>

real one. <span id="fr_217"></span>[29](#fn_217) The story of how
Adrastus became king of Sicyon gives grounds for suspicion. He is said
to be the son of Talaus, the king of Argos, and of the daughter of
Polybus, the king of Sicyon. Expelled from Argos because of a quarrel,
he went to Sicyon and inherited the kingdom from his mother's father.
Talaus is said to be the son of Bias, a brother of Melampus, the seer
who, during the reign of King Anaxagoras, cured the women stricken with
frenzy by Dionysus. This is a later version of the myth of the daughters
of Proetus, which belongs to Tiryns, and may be dismissed. Adrastus was
not king of the city of Argos, though he is genealogically annexed to
the kingly house of Argos. We may safely say that he ruled as king
somewhere in the province of Argos, but we cannot tell for certain which
Argive city was his.

That Adrastus was king in some other Argive town and leader of the
expedition against Thebes is not incompatible with the overlordship of
the king of Mycenae as it is described in Homer. Myths and monuments
prove that Mycenae was the richest and mightiest city, but they prove
also that there were several other rich and mighty cities in Argolis. We
have taken their rulers to be vassals of the king of Mycenae, but we
have also emphasized the facts that the power of the suzerain depended
on his personal energy and that the vassals strove to assert their
independence, a goal which was attained at last at the breakdown of
Mycenaean power and civilization. There is place for many changes and

<span id="page_115">p. 115</span>

vicissitudes in the half-millenium, more or less, during which the
Mycenaean age lasted. We know now, e.g., that the great constructions at
Tiryns belong to a very late period of the Mycenaean age, about 1200
B.C. This flourishing of Tiryns seems to imply a decline of the power of
Mycenae. When the suzerain's power was decaying, an energetic and
successful prince of some other city may have tried to play politics in
his own interests. He may have collected soldiers and appeared as leader
of an expedition for the purpose of establishing a dominion of his own
in a neighboring province, just as William the Conqueror did. Adrastus
seems to have been such a personage, using certain circumstances in
order to make himself ruler of Thebes.

The series of the Seven heroes was, as we have observed, subject to
changes, but some of the heroes, especially Amphiaraus and Tydeus,
appear in all versions as more important than the others. Amphiaraus is
already in the Odyssey inserted into the genealogy of the seer Melampus
and of the kingly house of Argos, and is said to be a son-in-law of
Adrastus, but we have seen that this genealogy is not trustworthy. <span
id="fr_218"></span>[30](#fn_218) The fact that Amphiaraus is at home in
Boeotia is established by cults so important that they cannot be
suspected to be later creations. He had a sanctuary at Oropus on the
confines of Attica where, giving oracles during sleep, he cured the
sick. Another oracle of his, already famous in the times of Croesus,
seems, according to Herodotus, <span id="fr_219"></span>[31](#fn_219) to
have been near Thebes. We are unable to say whether it was identical
with his temple at Harma

<span id="page_116">p. 116</span>

in Boeotia mentioned by Strabo, or with his temple at Potniae between
Plataeae and Thebes, mentioned by Pausanias. <span
id="fr_220"></span>[32](#fn_220) The myth telling that he was swallowed
alive by the earth is consistent and without any doubt part of the old
tradition. It is of course an aetiologic myth meant to explain why
Amphiaraus was thought of as living beneath the earth and why his cult
place was under the ground, like that of Trophonius at Lebadeia. <span
id="fr_221"></span>[33](#fn_221) We have to admit that a Boeotian cult
hero was received into the myth of the Seven against Thebes.

The fact that Tydeus always is said to be a son of the Aetolian king of
Calydon, though versions differ in regard to his mother, seems to prove
that this genealogy is old and trustworthy and that Tydeus is at home in
Aetolia. He also is made a son-in-law of Adrastus. Tydeus' name is one
of the old type and moreover his character shows traces of a high and
crude antiquity which was detested by the Homeric age. He belongs to
that older generation of heroes who possessed an admirable strength and
did valiant deeds but met an evil fate. <span
id="fr_222"></span>[34](#fn_222) His violent temper and his hasty deeds
are prominent characteristics. Like so many other heroes he was exiled
because he had slain a relative; that is a consistent feature of the
tradition, although there are variations as to the names and the number
of the slain. Further, he is always represented as the special protégé
of the goddess Athena. He appears as a

<span id="page_117">p. 117</span>

knight-errant, capable of valorous but also of cruel deeds, a character
consistent with the stormy Mycenaean age but antiquated in the more
humanized Homeric society, which set up, higher moral standards than did
the Mycenaean Vikings. This character is certainly a heritage from
Mycenaean times.

Of the others, Capaneus is the most interesting. His genealogy and
localization are unknown. The fact that his son Sthenelus always appears
in Homer as the faithful comrade of Diomedes, Tydeus' son, gives perhaps
a hint at an old connection even between the fathers. His character is
depicted as exactly like that of Tydeus. Striving to conquer Thebes, he
defied even Zeus. The myth, first found in Euripides, that at his
funeral his wife Euadne threw herself upon the flaming pyre of her
husband, is very remarkable. For it is absolutely inconceivable that
such a myth was invented under the conditions which we know to have
existed in Greece from Homer onward; but the custom is well attested for
certain Aryan peoples. Among the Thracians, the Indians, and the
Scandinavians of the Viking age the wife accompanied her husband in
death in this terrible manner. From the funeral of Patroclus as
described in Homer we know that captives were killed in order to
accompany the deceased into the Other World, and this description is
recognized as a most valuable testimony of old, crude funeral
customs. <span id="fr_223"></span>[35](#fn_223) In several cases it has
been assumed that the same custom has left traces in Mycenaean burials,
and though this supposition is certainly wrong in

<span id="page_118">p. 118</span>

certain cases, e.g., in regard to the shaft-graves at Mycenae, and in
others is doubtful, the discovery of the untouched burials in the
bee-hive tomb at Dendra proves that a similar custom actually existed.
One of the sacrificial pits in the tomb contained half-burned animal and
human bones which must have survived from a sacrifice at the funeral,
and the king and the queen were buried at the same time. Professor
Persson thinks it likely that in fact we here have an instance of the
self-sacrifice of the queen at her husband's funeral. <span
id="fr_224"></span>[36](#fn_224) At all events we have an example of
human sacrifice at the funeral. The myth of Euadne's voluntary death on
her husband's pyre is pre-Greek and, I venture to think, a precious
testimony as to Mycenaean funeral customs.

We have, consequently, good reason to think that the three foremost of
the Seven have come down from Mycenaean times; but at least two of these
three were not Argives or Peloponnesians, one being a Boeotian and the
other an Aetolian. Professor Robert has duly emphasized this fact, <span
id="fr_225"></span>[37](#fn_225) and according to his point of view he
draws the inference that both had waged a war of their own against
Thebes, that the emigrants from Boeotia and Aetolia respectively had
brought the myths of these wars with them to Ionia, and that there the
wars had been fused with other wars by the Ionian epic poetry, so that
the cycle of the Great War of the Seven against Thebes was formed.

<span id="page_119">p. 119</span>

I cannot see any reasonable ground for this supposition except the
preconceived opinion that the great mythical cycles were first formed by
the Ionian minstrels by the fusion of several minor myths into one
cycle. We have found reasons to suppose that the idea of one Great War
against Thebes was an old heritage from the Mycenaean age, and we have
seen that the leader and the three most prominent heroes go back into
the same times. Hence it is a fair inference that the cycle in its
outlines also goes back into the Mycenaean age. For a great war and a
few prominent personages, among them the leader, are intimately bound up
with each other. Certainly one of the Seven is a Boeotian hero and
another an Aetolian knight-errant, but why should not the Argive
aggressor have secured the help of a valorous knight-errant and a
Boeotian adversary of Thebes, or, at least, why should not the myth have
presented him as doing so? In historical times it is almost a rule that
discord between neighbors provides the lever for aggression by
foreigners. These are of course nothing but possibilities, but they are
mentioned in order to show that there is no interior improbability in
drawing the inference which the myth makes likely; namely, that not only
the idea of the Great War against Thebes but also its chief heroes have
come down from Mycenaean times.

Concerning other parts of the cycle I am unable to proffer any well
founded opinion. Eriphyle, the sister of Adrastus and the wife of
Amphiaraus, and her treacherous conduct toward her husband, have a
prominent place, but I see no means for reaching

<span id="page_120">p. 120</span>

any opinion as to the time when this motif was joined with the cycle, or
as to the time when Amphiaraus and Tydeus were made sons-in-law of
Adrastus.

The feeling that a great undertaking ought not to end with a great
disaster has created the myth of the Epigonoi, the sons of the Seven,
who conquered and sacked Thebes. This myth is obviously late, some
scholars think very late. It may be post-Mycenaean, but cautiousness
bids me to leave the question undecided. <span
id="fr_226"></span>[38](#fn_226) One of the Epigonoi, Diomedes, derives
certainly from Mycenaean times.

There is another well-known Theban myth which cannot be passed over in
silence, although it is very difficult to judge and will not be of much
importance for our purpose--the myth of Cadmus, the founder of Thebes.
The opinion now current <span id="fr_227"></span>[39](#fn_227) reverses
the traditional view. Cadmus is assumed to be at home at Miletus, where
a noble family counted him as its ancestor. Not far from Miletus there
were a mountain and a river both called Cadmus and the inhabitants of
Priene were called Cadmeans. <span id="fr_228"></span>[40](#fn_228) At
Miletus the tradition arose which ascribed the introduction of the
Phoenician alphabet to Cadmus. Even the genealogy which makes Cadmus a
brother of Phoenix, Cilix, and Thasos is said to point to Asia Minor.
The deduction will of course be that Cadmus was at a rather late age
transferred from Ionia to Thebes.

<span id="page_121">p. 121</span>

In Homer Cadmus is mentioned only once, as Ino's father; <span
id="fr_229"></span>[41](#fn_229) in Hesiod's Theogony he occurs as
husband of Harmonia and father of Semele, Ino, and others. <span
id="fr_230"></span>[42](#fn_230) Here at last the myth seems to be fully
developed. The salient point is, however, another; viz., that Homer
always calls the Thebans Cadmeans; <span
id="fr_231"></span>[43](#fn_231) the town is on the contrary called
Thebe or Thebae. The names of the people, Cadmeans, and of the
acropolis, Cadmea, cannot of course be separated from the hero Cadmus,
and this proves the lack of foundation of the current opinion. For it is
not to be believed that epic poetry would have given the inhabitants of
the old town of Thebes a name derived from a hero who at the time was
quite recently invented and transferred from Asia Minor to Boeotia. The
names of tribes and peoples belong generally to the old epic stock, and
epic poetry is quite unwilling to receive recent names, especially for
old famous peoples. That the inhabitants of Thebes were called Cadmeans
is one of the not uncommon cases in which a town and its inhabitants had
different names; e.g., Ilios and the Trojans, Orchomenus and the
Minyans, etc. It is further to be observed that Boeotia is richer than
other Greek provinces in old tribal names. One of these was the name of
the Cadmeans and with that Cadmus is linked inseparably. Professor
Crusius came nearer to the truth than later writers, though he neglected
the last mentioned argument

<span id="page_122">p. 122</span>

and argued only from the oldest, rather scanty sources. <span
id="fr_232"></span>[44](#fn_232)

If Cadmus is the old eponymous hero of the Cadmeans, the people who
inhabited Thebes, we are bound to find an explanation for the mythical
fact that he was made a Phoenician immigrant and that wide wanderings
were ascribed to him which have found an expression in his genealogy
also. It will, however, be necessary to take up another important detail
of his myth before proceeding to this question.

The myth of Cadmus is the foundation myth of Thebes in the strict sense
of the term. The oracle commanded Cadmus to follow a cow and to found a
town on the spot where she lay down. When she did so, he intended to
sacrifice her, but in fetching water for the sacrifice he encountered
the dragon of Ares and slew him. He sowed the dragon's teeth, and from
them men grew up, the Spartoi, who killed one another until only five
were left. For expiation he had to do service to Ares for a long year;
at the end of this time he received the god's daughter, Harmonia, for
his bride, and the wedding was celebrated with great pomp.

It is a curious fact that this is a true foundation myth; the site of
the town is determined by divine intervention, the origin of the people
and of the noble families is explained. Such myths are numerous but they
are almost always told of colonies or of towns, such as Rome and
Carthage, put on an equality with them. It will be hard to find another
true foundation myth referring to a town in Greece,

<span id="page_123">p. 123</span>

except perhaps in the case of Alos in Thessaly. <span
id="fr_233"></span>[45](#fn_233) I do not of course take the many
etymological myths into account; their late make is so transparent that
it is needless to dwell upon them. <span
id="fr_234"></span>[46](#fn_234) There are not a few myths telling how
the walls of a city were built. E.g., Apollo and Poseidon built the
walls of Troy for King Laomedon, the Cyclopes the walls of Tiryns for
King Proetus, and Athena helped in erecting the walls of the Acropolis
of Athens. But these legends are not foundation myths in the true sense
of the word; the existence of the city is presupposed and they relate
only how it was fortified. They are evidently late aetiologic myths.

Except for these rather doubtful or worthless instances, only one other
example may be cited, and

<span id="page_124">p. 124</span>

that also concerns Thebes. It is told that this city was founded by
Amphion and Zethus. The best known feature is that these twin brothers
built the walls of Thebes; hence one may reasonably be inclined to
consider this myth as one of the common type describing the erection of
the city walls; but as early as in the Nekyia it is expressly stated
that the brothers founded the city of Thebes of the Seven Gates and
built the walls. <span id="fr_235"></span>[47](#fn_235) The well-known
version of the myth occurs, however, first in the Antiope of Euripides,
the earlier tradition being very meager. It has a feature which is found
in true foundation myths. The twins were exposed to die but were saved
by shepherds, just as were Romulus and Remus or Cyrus. But as told by
Euripides the myth is not a foundation myth. The brothers recognized
their mother and punished their stepmother Dirce. It is supposed that
the city of Thebes existed already, for their stepfather Lycus is king
of Thebes. We have no way of knowing what may have been the earlier form
of the myth which Euripides used and transformed. We cannot say whether
or not it was a true foundation myth. The constantly recurring fact is
that Amphion and Zethus built the walls of Thebes and from this detail
alone we can surmise that it is old. The statement in the Nekyia that
the brothers founded the city may be deduced simply from their building
its walls.

Thus Thebes has one foundation myth, or perhaps two. At all events
Amphion and Zethus appear to be intrusive in the Theban cycle. They fit
very badly into it. That is the reason why Professor

<span id="page_125">p. 125</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Robert, relying
upon a passage in Apollodorus, ascribes them to another Boeotian town,
Hyria. <span id="fr_236"></span>[48](#fn_236) But even so we do not get
rid of the most embarrassing fact, that they built the walls of Thebes,
for it is related only that they lived at Hyria and were exiled because
of a murder; i.e., there is nothing to prove that the supposed
foundation myth belongs to the town of Hyria. We should not demand
consistency and sequence of myths; both these myths were attributed to
one town without consideration of how they fitted together. The
inconsistencies appeared when the myths were brought into a kind of
pseudo-historical system by means of genealogies.

The remarkable fact is that Thebes in contrast to other Greek towns has
a true foundation myth. It is very easy to understand why the colonies
have foundation myths and the cities in Greece have not. The founding of
a colony was a fact which was present to all; the towns in Greece, on
the contrary, had very often been inhabited since immemorial times; many
of them show traces of human habitation not only from Mycenaean but from
pre-Mycenaean times also. Therefore foundation myths were precluded;
they were out of place. Thus I am inclined to believe that the Theban
foundation myth is really a reminiscence of a historical fact and that a
Mycenaean tribe really founded a new town here. If this is so, it falls
in with the opinion which I gave above that Boeotia was an outpost of
Mycenaean civilization. The site of Thebes was of course inhabited in
pre-Mycenaean times, but what has

<span id="page_126">p. 126</span>

been found from this age is not so much as to be a serious objection to
this view. <span id="fr_237"></span>[49](#fn_237)

If I am right, an old myth, of course handed down from Mycenaean times,
told that Thebes was founded by the eponymous hero of the tribe which
inhabited the town, the Cadmeans. The founder, Cadmus, came consequently
from abroad. The old myth did not tell or had forgotten whence he came,
and the field was left open for guesses. At the beginning of the
historical age the foreigners who constantly visited Greece were the
Phoenicians. <span id="fr_238"></span>[50](#fn_238) If we take these
conditions into consideration, we may perhaps be able to understand why
the myth hit upon the idea of making Cadmus a Phoenician. At that time
other foreigners were hardly known in Greece, and as Cadmus was
acknowledged to be a foreigner, he became a Phoenician. The myth of

<span id="page_127">p. 127</span>

his wanderings, which are somewhat similar to the voyages of the
Phoenicians in the Aegean, and his genealogy were but consequences of
his alleged Phoenician origin. The fact that his name recurs in Ionia is
more probably to be explained by the theory that emigrants from Boeotia
brought him with them, counted him as their ancestor, and applied his
name to certain localities than by the opposite hypothesis that he came
from Ionia to Boeotia, which involves unsurmountable difficulties. We
know, moreover, that the immigrants in Ionia were a very mixed lot.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_189"></span>[100:1](mog09.htm#fr_189) See D. Fimmen, "Die
Besiedelung Böotiens bis in frühgriechische Zeit," *Neue Jahrbücher für
klass. Altertumswissenschaft*, XXIX (1912), pp. 524 *et seq*.,
supplemented by his *Kretisch-mykenische Kultur*, pp. 5 *et seq*.

<span id="fn_190"></span>[100:2](mog09.htm#fr_190) The Mycenaean remains
unearthed at Eutresis between Thebes and Creusis on the Corinthian gulf
are not numerous, but in Mycenaean times the place was fortified with a
heavy Cyclopean wall. See Hetty Goldman, *Excavations at Eutresis* (Fogg
Art Museum, Harvard University, 1927), p. 82 *et seq*. The like at
Haliartus, *Annual of the British School at Athens*, XXVIII (1926-27),
p. 129; the walls *ibid*. XXVII (1925-26), p. 82.

<span id="fn_191"></span>[101:3](mog09.htm#fr_191) They were explored by
Professor Keramopoullos; see *Ephemeris archaiologike*, 1909, p. 57 *et
seq*.; *Praktika*, 1911, p. 143 *et seq*.; 1912, p. 85 *et seq*. For a
summary see the *American Journal of Archaeology*, XXXIV (1930), p. 219
*et seq*.

<span id="fn_192"></span>[102:4](mog09.htm#fr_192) See *Tiryns*, II, p.
199. Cp. G. Rodenwaldt, *Der Fries des Megaron von Mykenai* (1921), p.
69, n. 152; and in regard of the dating of the earlier period, W. Lamb,
in the *Annual of the British School at Athens*, XXV (1921-23), p. 254
*et seq*.

<span id="fn_193"></span>[102:5](mog09.htm#fr_193) For a brief mention
see my *Minoan-Mycenaean Religion*, p. 20, n. 8. J. Sundwall discussed
the script in the periodical *Klio*, XXII (1928-29), p. 228 *et seq*. A.
W. Persson in his interesting attempt to decipher the Minoan-Mycenaean
script reads on three of the Theban jars *ku-te-me-se va-na tei-vo-e*,
which very much resembles Κάδμος ϝάναξ Θηβῶν (*Schrift and Sprache in
Alt-Kreta*, Program of the Promotion of Doctors of Letters, Uppsala,
1930, p. 28 *et seq*.).

<span id="fn_194"></span>[102:6](mog09.htm#fr_194) A. Keramopoullos,
*Deltion archaiologikon*, III (1917), p. 25 *et seq*.

<span id="fn_195"></span>[103:7](mog09.htm#fr_195) C. Robert, Oidipus, I
(1915), p. 44 *et seq*. For a criticism see L. R. Farnell, *Greek Hero
Cults* (1921), p. 332 *et seq*.

<span id="fn_196"></span>[103:8](mog09.htm#fr_196) Cp. my review of
Robert's book in *Göttingischer gelehrter Anzeiger* (1922), pp. 36 *et
seq*.

<span id="fn_197"></span>[103:9](mog09.htm#fr_197) H. J. Rose, *Modern
Methods in Classical Mythology* (St. Andrews, 1930), p. 24 *et seq*. An
analysis from the point of view of folk-tale motifs is made by S. Luria
in *Raccolta di scritti in onore di F. Ramorino* (1930), p. 289 *et
seq*. I prefer to leave the treasure of Thisbe out of account.

<span id="fn_198"></span>[104:10](mog09.htm#fr_198) See below pp.
[189](mog13.htm#page_189) *et seq*.

<span id="fn_199"></span>[105:11](mog09.htm#fr_199) H. Petersson in my
above-quoted ([p. 103](#page_103) n. [8](#fn_196)) review, p. 45. I
repeat Petersson's convincing argument: It is evident that the first
compound part of Οἰδίπους is connected with the stem in οἰδάω, οἰδέω,
but the difficulty consisting in the difference of vowels (ι instead of
α, ε) has not been overcome. There exists, however, a type of
corresponding words and compounds such as κυδρός and Κυδιάνειρα, and
this type is found in Sanskrit and Old Persian also. (See J.
Wackernagel, "Vermischte Beiträge zur griech. Sprachkunde," *Programm*
zur Rektoratsfeier der Universität Basel (1897), p. 8 *et seq*.) If we
suppose that a Greek adjective \*οἰδρός once existed, the formation of
the name Οἰδίπους falls in with this type, and the existence of this
adjective may be assumed with much probability, formations corresponding
to it being found in other languages; e.g., Old German *eitar*,
"poison," from Old Teutonic \**aitra*, "venomous tumor;" Indo-eur.
\**oid-ro*, Lettish *idra*, "rotten marrow of a tree." Cp. P.
Kretschmer, in *Glotta* XII (1923), p. 59, but I cannot approve of his
chthonic interpretation of Oedipus.

<span id="fn_200"></span>[106:12](mog09.htm#fr_200) The earliest mention
is found in the Nekyia, *Od*., xi. v. 273.

<span id="fn_201"></span>[106:13](mog09.htm#fr_201) Cp. my above-quoted
([p. 103](#page_103), n. [8](#fn_196)) review.

<span id="fn_202"></span>[107:14](mog09.htm#fr_202) Wilamowitz,
*Hermes*, XXVI (1891), p. 240, and "Die griech. Heldensage, I,"
*Sitzungsberichte der preuss. Akad. der Wissenschaften*, 1925, p. 58;
Robert, *Oidipus*, I, p. 120; Ed. Meyer, *Geschichte des Altertums*, II,
p. 189 *et seq*.

<span id="fn_203"></span>[107:15](mog09.htm#fr_203) *Il*. v. v. 800 *et
seq*.

<span id="fn_204"></span>[107:16](mog09.htm#fr_204) *Il*. iv. v. 370 *et
seq*.

<span id="fn_205"></span>[108:17](mog09.htm#fr_205) *Il*. xxiii. v. 678
*et seq*.

<span id="fn_206"></span>[108:18](mog09.htm#fr_206) *Od*. xi. v. 273 *et
seq*.

<span id="fn_207"></span>[108:19](mog09.htm#fr_207) Robert, *Oidipus*,
I, p. 115.

<span id="fn_208"></span>[108:20](mog09.htm#fr_208) Hesiod, *Works and
Days*, vv. 161 *et seq*.

<span id="fn_209"></span>[109:21](mog09.htm#fr_209) Robert, *Oidipus*,
I. p. 121.

<span id="fn_210"></span>[109:22](mog09.htm#fr_210) Cp. above p. 6 *et
seq*.

<span id="fn_211"></span>[110:23](mog09.htm#fr_211) Robert, *Oidipus*,
I, p. 143 *et seq*.

<span id="fn_212"></span>[110:24](mog09.htm#fr_212) E. Bethe in his
brilliant book *Thebanische Heldenlieder* (1891).

<span id="fn_213"></span>[111:25](mog09.htm#fr_213) Above [p.
104](#page_104).

<span id="fn_214"></span>[112:26](mog09.htm#fr_214) I touched upon them
in my review quoted [p. 103](#page_103), n. [8](#fn_196), pp. 43 *et
seq*.

<span id="fn_215"></span>[113:27](mog09.htm#fr_215) Herodotus, v. 67.

<span id="fn_216"></span>[113:28](mog09.htm#fr_216) Dieuchidas in the
*Scholion* to Pindarus, *Nem*., ix. v. 30.

<span id="fn_217"></span>[114:29](mog09.htm#fr_217) think it hardly
necessary to discuss the hypothesis that Adrastus originally was a name
of the Lord of the Underworld. I cannot see why it should not be a
purely human name.

<span id="fn_218"></span>[115:30](mog09.htm#fr_218) *Od*. xv. v. 225 *et
seq*.; see above [p. 114](#page_114).

<span id="fn_219"></span>[115:31](mog09.htm#fr_219) Herodotus, viii.
134.

<span id="fn_220"></span>[116:32](mog09.htm#fr_220) Paus. ix. 8, 3.
Strabo, ix, p. 404.

<span id="fn_221"></span>[116:33](mog09.htm#fr_221) This is a valid
objection to Farnell's euhemeristic view, *Greek Hero Cults*, p. 58 *et
seq*.

<span id="fn_222"></span>[116:34](mog09.htm#fr_222) E.g., Meleager. This
feeling seems to me to underlie the passage *Il*. i. v. 266 *et seq*.
also.

<span id="fn_223"></span>[117:35](mog09.htm#fr_223) By E. Rodhe,
*Psyche* (ed. 10, 1925), I. p. 14 *et seq*.

<span id="fn_224"></span>[118:36](mog09.htm#fr_224) A. W. Persson,
*Kungagraven i Dendra* (1928), p. 130 *et seq*.

<span id="fn_225"></span>[118:37](mog09.htm#fr_225) It matters little
that he thinks that both Amphiaraus and Tydeus (in regard to Tydeus I
cannot see why) belong to the tribe of the Graikoi, which was settled on
both sides of the Euripus: Robert, *Oidipus*, I., p. 121.

<span id="fn_226"></span>[120:38](mog09.htm#fr_226) Robert, *Griech.
Heldensage*, p. 949 *et seq*.; and Wilamowitz, *Hermes*, XXVI (1891), p.
239, hold that it is very late.

<span id="fn_227"></span>[120:39](mog09.htm#fr_227) Summarized by K.
Latte in his article in Pauly-Wissowa's *Realenzyklopädie der klass.
Altertumswissenschaft*.

<span id="fn_228"></span>[120:40](mog09.htm#fr_228) The sources are
quoted by O. Crusius in his able article in Roscher's *Lexikon der
Mythologie*, II, p. 872 *et seq*.

<span id="fn_229"></span>[121:41](mog09.htm#fr_229) *Od*. v. v. 333 *et
seq*.

<span id="fn_230"></span>[121:42](mog09.htm#fr_230) Hesiod, *Theogony*,
v. 937 and v. 975.

<span id="fn_231"></span>[121:43](mog09.htm#fr_231) Καδμείωνες or
Καδμεϊοι , occurs eight times; Θηβαϊος  occurs in the Odyssey, as an
epithet of the seer Teiresias only.

<span id="fn_232"></span>[122:44](mog09.htm#fr_232) I am glad to note
that Dr. Fimmen embraces the same opinion (*Neue Jahrbücher für das
klass. Altertum*, XXIX (1912), p. 534 *et seq*.).

<span id="fn_233"></span>[123:45](mog09.htm#fr_233) The town of Alos in
Thessaly has a foundation myth. Its founder is said to be either Aloeus
(*Schol. Apoll. Rhod.* i. v. 482 = Hesiod, *frag*. 9 Rzach, ed. 3; the
town is here said to be Aetolian) or Athamas (*Schol. Apoll. Rhod.* ii.
v. 514). The myth runs: An oracle commanded Athamas to settle on the
spot where he would be entertained by wild beasts. He encountered wolves
devouring their prey, and as they fled he settled in that country and
called it Athamania; or he founded a town on the spot and called it Alos
from his wanderings (ἄλη) or from his servant maid Alos (*Et. magnum*,
p. 70, 8; Steph. Byz. *s.v*. Ἀθαμανία). Though the myth differs in
regard to the locality, and the usual etymological interpretation is
prominent, it undeniably has features which appear to be old. It is
impossible to say how old it may be, but it ought not to be forgotten
that the foundation legend was implied by the mythical fact that Athamas
went from Boeotia to Thessaly. Another myth tells that Ilus, the
eponymous hero of the city of Ilion, went out from Phrygia with fifty
youths and fifty maidens, following a cow, and founded the city of Ilion
where she lay down. This myth appears only in Apollodor, ii. 12, 3, and
is a late invention.

<span id="fn_234"></span>[123:46](mog09.htm#fr_234) E.g. the myth that
Perseus founded the city of Mycenae where he lost the chape (μύκη) of
his sword, Paus., ii. 16, 3; or the myth that Coroebus founded
Tripodiskos in Megara where the tripod which he carried from Delphi fell
from his shoulders, Paus., i. 43, 8.

<span id="fn_235"></span>[124:47](mog09.htm#fr_235) *Od*. xi. v. 262 *et
seq*.

<span id="fn_236"></span>[125:48](mog09.htm#fr_236) Robert, *Oidipus*,
I, p. 398, referring to Apollodor, iii. 10, 1. 1, from Hellanicus.

<span id="fn_237"></span>[126:49](mog09.htm#fr_237) Keramopoullos in
*Deltion archaiologikon*, III (1917), p. 2 *et seq*. A nest of
pre-Mycenaean vases mentioned in the *Journal of Hellenic Studies*, XLIX
(1929), p. 233. In 1929 sherds of Minyan ware and some sherds of good L.
H. II. pottery were found beneath a wall of the palace of the period
before the reconstruction; see *American Journal of Archaeology*, XXXIV
(1930), p. 220.

<span id="fn_238"></span>[126:50](mog09.htm#fr_238) The name of the
Phoenicians (Φοίνικες) signifies etymologically "the Red Men." According
to a sagacious hypothesis put forth by H. R. Hall, *Proceedings* of the
Society of Biblical Archaeology, XXXI (1909), p. 282, "the Red Men" were
originally Minoan colonists from Crete and the name was later
transferred to the Phoenicians of the Syrian coast. Such a hypothesis
would of course very well explain the special features of the myth which
are treated above. But I cannot accept this explanation because there is
overwhelming evidence that the Mycenaean civilization was introduced
into Greece by Greek Vikings and not by Minoan colonists. A. Fick,
*Vorgriechische Ortsnamen* (1905), p. 123 *et seq*. and R. Burrows, *The
Discoveries in Crete* (1907), p. 141 advanced the opinion that this name
was first applied to all the brown-complexioned people whom the Greeks
met and only later restricted to the Semites of Canaan.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 7. Northern Boeotia and Thessaly](mog10)
