[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](mog05)  [Next](mog07) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0520021630/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 3. THE DOMINION OF PYLOS

West of Laconia and separated from it by the high and steep Mount
Taygetus is Messenia, but the boundaries of this province toward the
north are not so neatly fixed as those of Laconia. In historical times
they varied not a little. <span id="fr_134"></span>[1](#fn_134)
Triphylia, the coastal district north of Messenia between Neda and
Alpheus, was long a province in its own right, and thus can hardly be
reckoned as part of one of the great provinces until the Eleans
subjugated it together with the district of Olympia, Pisatis, in the
middle of the fifth century B.C. Later the Arcadians laid claim on
Triphylia. We have to turn to archaeology and mythology in order to see
what parts of the southwestern Peloponnese are to be reckoned with in
the early age.

That we are able to discern the traces of Mycenaean settlements in
Messenia better than we previously could is to a great extent due to the
strenuous work which Dr. Valmin through several years has devoted to
this province, together with the earlier explorations of other scholars.
Contrary to its expansion in Argolis, Boeotia, and Attica, Mycenaean
civilization in the western Peloponnese

<span id="page_80">p. 80</span>

clings to the coast, with one exception, which will be discussed below.
This is unparalleled elsewhere in Mycenaean Greece except in southern
Thessaly. A nice tholos tomb was found at Kampos on the eastern side of
the Messenian gulf. The seven cities which Agamemnon promised to
Achilles are not identified, with two exceptions, but relying upon these
identified places scholars believe them all to have been situated around
the gulf. Some Mycenaean sherds, but as yet very few, have been found in
sites near this coast, at Samarina, Pidima, and Karteroli. The upper
plain is as yet devoid of Mycenaean remains. <span
id="fr_135"></span>[2](#fn_135) On the western coast a few Mycenaean
finds were made at Mothone and at Cyparissia. A really important
Mycenaean site was that Pylus near which the island of Sphacteria is
situated. A little toward the north at Tragana are a prehistoric
acropolis and two tholos tombs, of which one has been excavated and has
yielded beautiful late Mycenaean vases. Near by at Osman Aga are other
tholos tombs. <span id="fr_136"></span>[3](#fn_136)

The place in the western Peloponnese where the most important
discoveries from the Mycenaean age have been made is the village of
Kakovatos on the coast about six miles north of the mouth of the Neda
and the boundary of Messenia. Here are an acropolis with remains of
walls, a palace, Mycenaean sherds, and three tholos tombs of fair size;
though they

<span id="page_81">p. 81</span>

have been robbed, enough remains to show that they once were very rich.
Especially notable are the beautiful ceramics belonging to the second
Mycenaean period. To the same period belong also the ceramics found in
the tholus tomb of the Messenian Pylos, and others from Kleidi, which is
on the coast somewhat north of Kakovatos, near Samikon, and which
Professor Dörpfeld identifies with the Homeric Arene. <span
id="fr_137"></span>[4](#fn_137) Following certain ancient authors who
sought the Homeric Pylos in this neighborhood, he put forward the
opinion that the Mycenaean site at Kakovatos is to be identified with
the Homeric Pylos, the city of Nestor. This view has attracted attention
to this place and is widely accepted, but is also contested.

To the west of the Upper Messenian plain is the plain of Sulima through
which the railway to Cyparissia now passes. Here Dr. Valmin made
interesting discoveries. <span id="fr_138"></span>[5](#fn_138) The two
plains are separated by a ridge now called Malthi. On this ridge was a
Mycenaean settlement built upon an earlier Helladic one, with an apsidal
house. A Mycenaean house of fairly large proportions has been excavated.
In the plain below this ridge are two tholos tombs of which one has been
excavated, and a little farther toward the west near Kopanaki four
others have been discovered, of which one has been cleared. The tombs
excavated had been thoroughly plundered so that the finds were poor;
they belong to

<span id="page_82">p. 82</span>

the Late Mycenaean period, thus proving that the Mycenaean settlement in
the Sulima plain is decidedly later than that on the western coast. The
great number of tholos tombs shows that this district in the interior
but not far from the western coast had a certain importance in the Late
Mycenaean age.

This tract, viz., westernmost Messenia and Triphylia, was thus much more
covered with Mycenaean settlements than any other in the western
Peloponnese, while finds from the Mycenaean age are elsewhere very
scarce. It appears that the Mycenaean settlers came over the sea, first
taking possession of some suitable points on the coast and only at a
late period proceeding along the river of Cyparissia upward to the
Sulima plain. The settlers in this plain cannot have come from the south
or east, for the Upper Messenian plain shows no traces of Mycenaean
habitation.

This fairly dense Mycenaean population on the western coast of the
Peloponnese cannot but be brought into relation with the Homeric
tradition of the dominion of Nestor, king of Pylos. Dr. Leaf passed over
this dominion in his suggestive book on *Homer and History*, but it is
worth an inquiry since archaeological discoveries have lent color to the
old tradition and to the fragments of a Pylian epos incorporated into
Homer. But here the perplexing question arises: Which site was Nestor's
Pylos? Professor Dörpfeld holds it to be identical with Kakovatos, but
many scholars adhere to the old opinion that it was the Messenian Pylos.
The settlements of the Sulima plain are separated by a considerable
distance from those on the coast and hardly

<span id="page_83">p. 83</span>

contribute to the solution of this problem; access to them may be a
little more difficult from the Messenian Pylos than from
Kakovatos-Pylos.

It is of course a good argument in support of Professor Dörpfeld's
opinion that the site of Kakovatos was evidently the most important in
this region, to judge from the number, size, and richness of its tholos
tombs; it is moreover, according to the finds, earlier than the
Messenian Pylos. The journey of Telemachus in a carriage from Pylos to
Sparta, described in the Odyssey, has been vigorously discussed in this
connection; <span id="fr_139"></span>[6](#fn_139) I pass over it because
the question cannot be solved with certainty; I think that too much
importance has been attached to it. Dörpfeld's other arguments, drawn
from the Pylian epos incorporated into Homer, a source which ought to
possess far better local information than the late poem of the
Telemachia, seem to be irrefutable. The war with the Epeans or Eleans on
the borders of the river of Alpheus, the situation of the town besieged
by the Elean foes of the Pylians--Thryoessa, far-off at Alpheus in the
extreme part of the sandy Pylos <span
id="fr_140"></span>[7](#fn_140)--prove that the Pylian dominion extended
to this river and included Triphylia and Pisatis. There was also
friendly intercourse with the Eleans; Nestor was victorious in the
funeral games of Amarynceus, an Epean prince. <span
id="fr_141"></span>[8](#fn_141) That the Pylians had intercourse
principally with the Eleans or Epeans makes it more probable that
Kakovatos rather than the distant Messenian Pylos was Nestor's Pylos.
Even the war with the Arcadians <span id="fr_142"></span>[9](#fn_142) is
better suited for the Triphylian

<span id="page_84">p. 84</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Pylos than for the
Messenian. The latter town may have belonged to the dominion but the
capital was Kakovatos-Pylos.

Thus the extent of the dominion of Pylos is determined except for the
problem involved in the much discussed verses of the Iliad in which
Agamemnon promises to give to Achilles, if he lets himself be appeased,
along with the hand of his daughter, seven towns all near the sea at the
extreme of the sandy Pylos. <span id="fr_143"></span>[10](#fn_143) Most
of these towns were unknown in historical times and their situation is
uncertain, but Cardamyle is situated on the eastern side of the
Messenian gulf and Pherae is identified with Pharai near the innermost
recess of the gulf. Consequently the inference is that the other towns
also were situated around the gulf, <span
id="fr_144"></span>[11](#fn_144) and from this the further conclusion is
deduced that the dominion of Pylos included the whole of the historical
province of Messenia. It seems, however, not certain that the word
"extreme," νέαται Πύλου, necessarily is to be understood "in the extreme
part of the dominion of Pylos," as it certainly must be in the case of
Thryoessa. The translation "at the confines of the dominion of Pylos" is
also possible, and if this is adopted nothing is said of the political
situation of the seven towns. This may certainly have varied. For if
Agamemnon promises to give away the seven towns they must needs be in
his hands; he cannot give away what is in the possession of a vassal,
the prince of Pylos. This passage implies that the seven towns on the
Messenian gulf did not belong

<span id="page_85">p. 85</span>

to the dominion of Pylos but bordered on it. Only the latter
interpretation can be admitted here, if it is not to be surmised that
the poet has taken over the phrase carelessly from the Pylian epos.

In view of this discussion it is comprehensible that scholars have
thought according to the usual geographical units and have identified
the dominion of Pylos with the historical province of Messenia in
general, perhaps with the addition of Triphylia. But this has, in my
opinion, vitiated the problem. The boundaries were not the same in the
Mycenaean age as in the historical age. The fact that the Mycenaean
civilization at the beginning of its second period gained a foothold on
the coast and only much later spread inward to the plain of Sulima
proves that the Mycenaeans came oversea. Both the Messenian and the
Triphylian Pylos are typical Viking towns founded at suitable places
near the coast far from the base of emigration. <span
id="fr_145"></span>[12](#fn_145) Thence the Mycenaeans spread inward at
a later time only. The fact that a denser Mycenaean habitation is found
only in the Sulima plain, the Upper Messenian plain showing no traces of
Mycenaean settlements, proves that the Mycenaean center was on the
western coast. In the beginning the Mycenaean Vikings may have passed
the Messenian gulf without stopping, if they did not perhaps come from
the Corinthian

<span id="page_86">p. 86</span>

gulf. Later on they tried to gain a foothold even on the coasts of the
Messenian gulf, and this is reflected in the Homeric passage concerning
the seven Messenian towns.

The fact that the Mycenaean civilization came to the western Peloponnese
oversea is retained by the mythical tradition according to which the
Minyans immigrated to these parts. Much has been written about the
Minyans of Orchomenus and we must recur to them and their relations with
Pylos at length in a later chapter. Here I only state that the tradition
cannot be disregarded and that its reliability is proved by the mention
in the Iliad of a river, Minyeios, in the district of Pylos. <span
id="fr_146"></span>[13](#fn_146) Discussing its identity, Strabo
proposes that it got its name either from the Minyans who came with
Neleus' wife, Chloris, from Orchomenus in Boeotia, or from the Minyans
who were descendants of the Argonauts and from Lemnos were expelled to
Laconia and from there to Triphylia. <span
id="fr_147"></span>[14](#fn_147) His theories are in themselves of no
value, being only attempts to explain the persistent tradition of
Minyans in Triphylia. This tradition is corroborated by genealogies
which seem not to be idle inventions, nor does it seem to be an idle
tradition that the descendants of Neleus and the Pylians emigrated to
Ionia. Since it is possible to treat this tradition fully only in
connection with the problem of the Minyans, we shall recur to it in
another chapter. <span id="fr_148"></span>[15](#fn_148) Here I add only
the observation that it appears in the Pylian epos, of which fragments
were incorporated into Homer, that the situation of the Pylians was
precarious.

<span id="page_87">p. 87</span>

We have to consider what is left of this Pylian epos <span
id="fr_149"></span>[16](#fn_149). Its contents are extremely little
concerned with mythology, for its character is more historical, as is
frequently the case with epics. Professor Robert thinks that even if the
episodes in Homer are derived from an Ionian epos, the myths originally
belonged to the Pylians whose natural foes were the Arcadians. <span
id="fr_150"></span>[17](#fn_150) Professor Wilamowitz gives voice to
another opinion. <span id="fr_151"></span>[18](#fn_151) He calls
attention to the Pylian origin of the Colophonians and thinks that the
Pylian epos originated in the town of Colophon in Asia Minor. In order
to disprove its Pylian origin he proceeds to point to some geographical
impossibilities and errors in the description of the war and the march
of the troops, drawing the inference that the situation of Pylos was
undetermined. The name Pylos, he thinks, designated, originally, the
entrance of the Nether World, then the western part of the Peloponnese,
and finally a certain locality but never a town.

Certainly the Gate of the Underworld and Nestor's Pylos were mixed
together in a myth to which we shall recur presently, but that does not
prove that Nestor's Pylos was originally that Gate. That would be the
same mythological point of view which once made Troy the castle East of
the Sun and West of the Moon. Pylos appears in the epos as a

<span id="page_88">p. 88</span>

real town, and the geographical inconsistencies are not good arguments,
for as Professor Wilamowitz himself remarks, epics are always careless
in regard to geography and distances; but it ought to be added that this
carelessness does not disprove the real existence of the places and the
original connections of the myths with them. It is unlikely that such
inconsistencies prove that the epos originated among people who were
ignorant of the actual geography of the places mentioned; blunders were
sure to creep in during the repeated rehandling of the epics.

I cannot but think that the Pylian epos originated, as epics usually do,
among people who were concerned with the events described, viz., among
the Pylians themselves; that with them it came to Ionia, where parts
were incorporated into the Iliad; and that its contents are historical
traditions subjected to epical and mythical remodeling. At all events
they are not mere fiction. <span id="fr_152"></span>[19](#fn_152)

The story is remarkable that Heracles, evidently at the head of the
Epeans or in their company, had dealt severe blows to the Pylians and
killed eleven sons of Neleus, only the youngest one, Nestor, being
left. <span id="fr_153"></span>[20](#fn_153) That is no glorious
tradition and consequently we may believe that it has some real
foundation; viz., that the Pylians had been very severely dealt with by
their foes in Elis. The story must, however, be compared with another
often

<span id="page_89">p. 89</span>

quoted episode; viz., that Heracles wounded Hades, fighting with him at
Pylos among the Dead. <span id="fr_154"></span>[21](#fn_154) It is
justly recognized, and we shall have more to say of it when we come to
Heracles, <span id="fr_155"></span>[22](#fn_155) that this Pylos is the
Gate of the Underworld and that the myth is an old form of Heracles'
victory over Death. Because of the resemblance of the names it was
applied to the city of Pylos and thus Heracles became the foe of the
Pylians. It is the oldest of his Deeds and the starting point for these,
and has perhaps given rise to the idea that Heracles was a leader and a
hero of the Dorians.

The Pylian epos which, in fact, glorified the last struggles of the old
Viking empire against the invaders was certainly not conceived in a
foreign country by people to whom the Pylians were mythical figures
only. To quote Professor Robert, its mythical contents are
extraordinarily small. But even if Professor Wilamowitz' view is
accepted, the fact remains that epical traditions of a certain richness
cling to the western coast of the Peloponnese and that the same tract is
the only one on this side of the peninsula which is comparatively rich
in Mycenaean remains. The traditions may be more historical than
mythical; if so, their value is the same or still greater for our
purpose. For the traditions here treated are such as are handled by
epics. Epical traditions and Mycenaean remains cover the same district.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_134"></span>[79:1](mog06.htm#fr_134) For the latest
discussion see N. Valmin, *Études topographiques sur la Messénie
ancienne* (Dissertation, Lund 1930), pp. 5 *et seq*.

<span id="fn_135"></span>[80:2](mog06.htm#fr_135) Another very
remarkable fact is that no Geometric ceramics are found in Messenia.

<span id="fn_136"></span>[80:3](mog06.htm#fr_136) Excavated by Professor
Kourouniotes, see *Ephemeris archaiologike*, 1914, p. 99 *et seq*.; cp.
*Bulletin de correspondence hellénique*, L (1926), pp. 552 *et seq*. The
tombs must be dated to LH III, not with Kourouniotes to LH II.

<span id="fn_137"></span>[81:4](mog06.htm#fr_137) *Athen.
Mittheilungen*, XXXIII (1908), p. 321.

<span id="fn_138"></span>[81:5](mog06.htm#fr_138) See his dissertation
quoted n. 1, pp. 103 and 112 *et seq*. and his papers, "Two Tholos Tombs
at Bodia in Eastern Triphylia," *Bulletin of the R. Society of Letters
of Lund*, 1926-27, pp. 53 *et seq*.; also his "Continued Explorations in
Eastern Triphylia," *ibid*., 1927-28, pp. 171 *et seq*.

<span id="fn_139"></span>[83:6](mog06.htm#fr_139) *Od*. iii. vv. 447 *et
seq*.; the journey back, xv. vv. 182 *et seq*.

<span id="fn_140"></span>[83:7](mog06.htm#fr_140) *Il*. xi. vv. 670 *et
seq*.

<span id="fn_141"></span>[83:8](mog06.htm#fr_141) *Il*. xxiii. v. 630.

<span id="fn_142"></span>[83:9](mog06.htm#fr_142) *Il*. vii. v. 133.

<span id="fn_143"></span>[84:10](mog06.htm#fr_143) *Il*. xi. vv. 291 *et
seq*.

<span id="fn_144"></span>[84:11](mog06.htm#fr_144) The last discussion
in Valmin's dissertation, pp. 206 *et seq*.

<span id="fn_145"></span>[85:12](mog06.htm#fr_145) N. Gardiner,
*Olympia*, p.35, believes that the invaders came overland from Argolis,
because Kakovatos is harborless; but he remarks, p. 38, that nowhere
else has such a quantity of amber been found as was found here, and sees
herein an unmistakable evidence of a trade route from the head of the
Adriatic. The two statements seem to contradict each other somewhat, but
I should be more inclined to agree with the latter. The best harbor in
an early age is a fine sand shore on which the ships can be drawn up,
such as exists at the "sandy" Pylos.

<span id="fn_146"></span>[86:13](mog06.htm#fr_146) *Il*. xi. v. 722.

<span id="fn_147"></span>[86:14](mog06.htm#fr_147) Strabo, viii. p. 347.

<span id="fn_148"></span>[86:15](mog06.htm#fr_148) Below pp.
[143](mog10.htm#page_143) *et seq*.

<span id="fn_149"></span>[87:16](mog06.htm#fr_149) A. Lörcher, *Wie, wo,
wann ist die Ilias entstanden?* (1920), attributes great importance to
the many passages concerning Nestor and gives the title "Die Nestoris"
to one of his chapters. But the inference that this preference given to
Nestor and the Pylians came about because the Iliad was conceived at
Olympia at the games is very unlikely.

<span id="fn_150"></span>[87:17](mog06.htm#fr_150) C. Robert, *Die
griech. Heldensage*, p. 191.

<span id="fn_151"></span>[87:18](mog06.htm#fr_151) Wilamowitz, *Die
Ilias and Homer* (1916), pp. 207 *et seq*.

<span id="fn_152"></span>[88:19](mog06.htm#fr_152) It is not to be
wondered at that the Pylians are called Achaeans, for they were
pre-Dorians, or that their foes are called both Epeans and Eleans;
Epeans is the name of a tribe, Elis of a province (Ἦλις Lat. *vallis*,
ϝαλις, ϝαλειοι are the native forms); i.e., a local name from which that
of the inhabitants was derived.

<span id="fn_153"></span>[88:20](mog06.htm#fr_153) *Il*. xi. vv. 689 *et
seq*.

<span id="fn_154"></span>[89:21](mog06.htm#fr_154) *Il*. v. vv. 395 *et
seq*.

<span id="fn_155"></span>[89:22](mog06.htm#fr_155) Below pp.
[203](mog13.htm#page_203) *et seq*. For the evidence see E. Drerup, *Das
fünfte Buch der Ilias* (1913), p. 180 *et seq*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 4. The Rest of the Peloponnese](mog07)
