[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](mog01)  [Next](mog03) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0520021630/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_1">p. 1</span>

### CHAPTER I

# HOW OLD IS GREEK MYTHOLOGY?

The question: *How old is Greek mythology?* may at first sight seem
idle, for Greek mythology is obviously of many different ages. For
example, many genealogies and eponymous heroes created for political
purposes are late, such inventions having been made through the whole
historical age of Greece; yet most of them are earlier than the very
late myths like the campaigns of Dionysus, or the great mass of the
metamorphoses, especially the catasterisms, which were invented in the
Hellenistic age. The great tragic poets reshaped the myths and left
their imprint upon them, so that the forms in which the myths are
commonly known nowadays often have been given them by tragedy.
Similarly, before the tragic poets, the choric lyric poets reshaped
them. The cyclical epics also are thought to have exercised a profound
influence upon the remodeling of the myths. In Homer we find many
well-known myths, often in forms differing, however, from those in which
they are related later. Finally, it cannot be doubted that myths existed
before Homer.

Our question concerns, however, not the reshaping and remodeling of
myths, which often consists only of an imitation of current patterns,
but the real creation of myths, especially the creation of the great
cycles of myths. From this standpoint, the Hellenistic and many earlier
myths may be put to

<span id="page_2">p. 2</span>

one side. The tragic poets hardly invent new myths but do reshape old
ones, often in a very thorough fashion, and the same is to be said of
the choric lyric poets. For the glory and fame of ancient poets depended
not, like that of modern poets, on their invention of something quite
new and original, but rather on their presentation of the old
traditional material in new and original fashion.

Consequently our question concerns the old stock of mythology after all
secondary inventions have been discarded and is really not so idle as
may appear at first glance. In fact various attempts have been made to
give an answer, although the question has not been put so simply and
straightforwardly as it is here, but has been enveloped in inquiries and
reasonings having other purposes. The point, however, which I wish to
emphasize is the importance of the principles which underlie our
research and determine our procedure.

I pass over comparative mythology very lightly, because it began to lose
favor in my youth, thirty years ago or more, and nowadays is very little
reckoned with in scientific discussion. But I should like to draw
attention to one point of some interest in this connection. Comparative
mythology was so called because it compared Greek myths with those of
other Aryan peoples and by this means tried to discover the original
myths and religion of the Aryan people from whom the peoples of Europe
and some peoples of Asia are descended, just as comparative philology
discovered by similar means that the languages of these peoples were
derived from the language once spoken by the old Aryans.

<span id="page_3">p. 3</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> The underlying
supposition was clearly that the Greek myths were pre-Greek in the sense
that the Greeks had taken them over from the Aryans and brought them
with them when they immigrated into Greece. Comparative mythology
overlooked, however, the very important distinction between divine and
heroic mythology and thought erroneously that the heroic myths were
derived from the same source as the myths concerning the gods. This
source it found in the phenomena of nature. If the view of comparative
mythology were right, these lectures would really be pointless, for then
it must needs be admitted that Greek mythology existed not only in the
pre-Homeric age but also before the Greeks immigrated into Greece. But
since the seventies of the last century the whole problem has been
extraordinarily deepened and complicated. We have learned to distinguish
between religion and mythology and we have learned to know a new epoch
of Greece which cannot be considered as wholly prehistoric in the usual
sense of the word--the Mycenaean age.

Max Müller and his followers condemned Euhemerism, but this theory has
come to the fore again in recent years. In my opinion the reaction is
just but goes too far. Certain English scholars take mythology as
reproducing actual historical facts, just as the logographers did when
they brought the myths into a historical system. They do not, of course,
overlook the fabulous elements of the myths but think that the mythical
persons and such exploits as are not of a fabulous character are good
history, and they go so far as to accept without question the

<span id="page_4">p. 4</span>

mythical genealogies and the mythical chronology. I am unable to do
this. I know and appreciate the tenacity of folk memory, but I know also
how popular tradition is preserved--and confused and remodeled. The
remodeling affects especially the chronological relations of the
personages, which are changed freely. <span id="fr_0"></span>[1](#fn_0)
In so far as epical tradition is concerned, the right analogy is not the
traditions which have an historical aspect but the Nibelungenlied and
the Beowulf and similar epical traditions which I shall characterize
later. We know how badly historical connections fared in them, how
history was confused and mixed up with fabulous elements. If good
historical tradition is to be preserved, an undisturbed life both in
regard to settling and to civilization is an absolute condition, but the
downfall of the Mycenaean civilization was a most stormy and turbulent
age, and its turmoils, which mixed up the Greek tribes and changed their
places of settlement, mixed up and confused their traditions, too. The
historical aspect of Greek mythology and especially the mythical
chronology are products of the systematizing of the myths by the poets
of cyclical epics and still more the product of rationalization and
historification by the logographers. <span id="fr_1"></span>[2](#fn_1)

<span id="page_5">p. 5</span>

A very different standpoint is taken by German scholars, whose
preoccupation is a historical treatment of the myths; in opposition to
the theories of comparative mythology, this school is called the
historical school. The answer given by this school is not so simple as
that proposed by nature mythology. I must therefore try to clear up the
underlying principles to the best of my ability, although the numerous
works of the school often are contradictory in details and it is very
difficult to do full justice in a short analysis of principles.

The historical school acknowledges that elements of myths existed in an
early period, before the development of epic poetry, but supposes that
these rather simple elements were brought into connection with one
another and composed so as to form more complex myths through the agency
of poetry. From this process a very deep-going reshaping and even
creation of myths resulted. The poetry to which this creative expanding
of mythology is ascribed is the epic poetry; viz., the Homeric and
post-Homeric epics, the cyclical epics, and many lost epics of which we
have only a scanty and fragmentary knowledge. Further, it is reasonably
inferred that epics existed also before Homer and were used in composing
the extant Homeric poems.

The historical school assumes not only a remodeling and reshaping of
myths but indeed a creation of cycles of myths--and that is what
concerns us here--for it is supposed that the mythical cycles came into
being through the union of various simple mythical elements. If this
process were ascribed to the Mycenaean age, I should have little to say

<span id="page_6">p. 6</span>

against it; but as it is ascribed to the Homeric and the immediately
preceding and following periods, I must disagree. I shall use a few
examples to illustrate the methods of the historical school and the
discrepancies to which they lead.

Several years ago Professor Friedländer tried to trace the development
of the Heracles cycle. <span id="fr_2"></span>[3](#fn_2) According to
his theory, the fundamental fact is the belief of the Tirynthians in
their helpful hero. From the Peloponnese, Heracles emigrated to the
island of Rhodes and here new adventures were added to those which had
been brought from the Peloponnese. Thus the cycle of the twelve
adventures was developed and formed on Rhodes.

The most comprehensive and significant example, however, is Professor
Bethe's attempt to explain the origin and development of the Trojan
cycle. <span id="fr_3"></span>[4](#fn_3) He finds the old kernels of
this cycle in the duels between heroes who, according to him, were
originally localized on the mainland of Greece. These simple and
unconnected myths were brought to Aeolia by the different tribes to
which the heroes belonged when these tribes immigrated to northwest Asia
Minor shortly before or in the seventh century B.C. The Aeolians brought
their Achilles, the Locrians their Aias, the Arcadians Aeneas, and the
Troes, who originally were a tribe living in the mother country, the
name of the Troes (Trojans), etc. The various myths of the various
immigrant tribes met and were fused in Aeolia and were attached to

<span id="page_7">p. 7</span>

the ruins of the city of Ilion. In this manner the Trojan cycle was
created. The destruction of the sixth city of Troy is ascribed to
barbarians immigrating from the north. If this view of the development
of Homeric poetry were right, it would of course imply not a reshaping
but an actual creation of myths, for the fundamental idea of the Trojan
cycle would be due to the epic poets of the seventh century B.C.
Although space forbids my entering upon a criticism, I cannot but point
to the improbability involved in assuming three different waves of
immigration into Aeolia about which tradition is absolutely silent. They
are invented only in order to suit a hypothesis which is very artificial
and has not succeeded in gaining approval.

Another great scholar, Professor Wilamowitz, differs from Professor
Bethe in the analysis of the poems but takes the same point of view in
regard to the development of the myths. In a recent paper <span
id="fr_4"></span>[5](#fn_4) he states briefly that Phthiotians and
Magnesians who emigrated from Thessaly to Aeolia brought Achilles with
them; that the house of Agamemnon originated at Cyme and in Lesbos,
whilst his appearing as king on the mainland of Greece is due to epic
poetry; and that Ionians, in whose towns descendants of Glaucus and
Sarpedon were rulers, introduced these heroes into the epos. But, and in
this he differs essentially from Professor Bethe, who takes the Trojan
war to be an invention of the seventh century B.C., he gives voice to
the opinion that the historical fact underlying the

<span id="page_8">p. 8</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Homeric story of
the Trojan war was an old one, a vain attempt of the Greeks to gain a
foothold in the Scamander Valley.

The underlying presumption is an echo of the tribal mythology of K. O.
Müller, the founder of the historical school. The leading idea is that
the myths were transferred to other regions with the wanderings of the
tribes and that, as the tribes met and mixed, their myths met and were
fused. If this leading principle were applied to Teutonic epics, we must
needs date the Scandinavian invasion of England two or three centuries
earlier than it actually took place, for Beowulf tells only of Danes,
Swedes, and Geatas, nothing of the English. And we must needs assume an
immigration of Teutonic tribes from the Continent to Scandinavia before
the ninth or tenth century A. D. in order to explain the fact that the
myth of Sigurd appears in the Edda songs. I omit the Russian *bylinas*
and their wanderings. I cannot but think that in regard to the
wanderings of myths and songs, conditions in Greece were not altogether
dissimilar to those in other countries. Consequently I cannot but
suppose that even in Greece myths and songs wandered independently of
the wanderings of the tribes. As soon as we know anything of the
minstrels, we find that they are wandering people. The localizations of
cults and heroes must be regarded with a critical eye and must not be
used as arguments unless their reliability is tested, for they are often
due to the influence of epics. The localizations of Agamemnon are
illuminating examples to which I shall recur in another place. <span
id="fr_5"></span>[6](#fn_5)

<span id="page_9">p. 9</span>

All that we know of other epics tends to show that the fundamental
principle, the doctrine that the wanderings and the amalgamating of the
myths depend on the wanderings and the amalgamating of the tribes, is
erroneous. With this presumption another is connected which, according
to my view, is the fundamental error of the method; namely, that two
things are identified which must be distinguished--the development of
the myths and the development of epic poetry. Moreover, epic poetry is
taken into account only to the extent to which it can be reached through
an analysis of the extant poems and fragments. It has very often been
said that a lost epos of Heracles created the cycle of Heracles, and
this may seem not improbable in this case where we do not have the epos
but are free to reconstruct it according to our fancy. The attempt to
carry through the same idea in regard to the Trojan cycle proved to be a
failure and showed the frailty of the principle, for in this case we
have the epos and can use it as a control. To take another instance,
Professor Wilamowitz contends that the bravery of Diomedes is the oldest
song of the Iliad and an imitation of the Thebais. <span
id="fr_6"></span>[7](#fn_6) If this is true, it is extremely remarkable
that the Theban myths in Homer and Hesiod differ so markedly from the
common version. <span id="fr_7"></span>[8](#fn_7) The unavoidable
conclusion would be that the Thebais, supposed to be earlier than Homer,
has not been able to impress its version either upon Homer or upon
Hesiod. Wild shoots of the myth have lived in spite of epical
cultivation.

<span id="page_10">p. 10</span>

The fundamental but hardly expressed principle underlying the work of
the historical school is that a mythological cycle is created and
developed through the agency of and contemporaneously with the
development of epic poetry; and furthermore, only that epic poetry is
taken into account of which we have some knowledge through literary
sources. But this principle does not stand the test. The opposite
alternative also must be considered; namely, that a cycle of myths
existed in its chief outlines and was the store from which the Homeric
poets drew, of course not without remodeling the material, in composing
their chants. If this view is accepted, the epic poets followed the same
line as the choric lyric and the tragic poets, who took over and
utilized the old store of myths, remodeling them, sometimes profoundly.
This is the case with epic poetry in countries where our knowledge of
its development is fuller than is our knowledge of the development of
the Greek epics. Neither of the two alternatives is strictly
demonstrable, but it ought to be evident that both are to be taken into
consideration.

The view of the development of mythology which I have tried to
characterize here is, however, closely bound up with the methods of
Homeric research prevailing among the scholars who have adopted it;
namely, with the literary analysis of the poems. In England and America
this method is now little heeded, and Homeric research follows different
lines. I think in fact that full justice has hardly been done to this
method and the many works produced by its adherents. In spite of the
apparent discrepancies in their results, they have brought about a
profounder

<span id="page_11">p. 11</span>

apprehension of Homer and Homeric problems and have obtained important
results. But literary analysis is not the last word in the Homeric
question. To shut our eyes to a further development than that which can
be traced through literary analysis leads us astray, if the earlier
development is regarded as irrelevant because it is hard to unravel.
Such a standpoint is unjustifiable, but it is in fact taken up by those
who ascribe the development of the mythical cycles to the Homeric and
post-Homeric periods, neglecting what may have happened in an earlier
age of which no literary records are preserved. The Homeric question
must be widened so as to be the epic question. The proverb says: *vixere
etiam ante Agamemnona fortes viri*; I think: *vixere etiam ante Homerum
poetae*. Homeric poetry is an issue of countless generations. That is
recognized, generally speaking, but we must try to work out in earnest
the implications of this thesis.

The gap is apparent if the two following questions are put side by side:
*How far can literary analysis be carried back*? and *How old are the
oldest elements in Homeric poetry which can be dated with certainty*?

Literary analysis discovers earlier poems which the Homeric poets
utilized and partly took over in composing their poems. Not even the
most zealous unitarians deny that such poems may have existed. Nobody
will of course believe that these earlier poems were written down, so
that they could have been preserved for a long time. But if they were
preserved by the memory of the minstrels and handed down by oral
tradition, it is difficult to imagine that they survived more than two
or at most

<span id="page_12">p. 12</span>

three generations. However, I have nothing against granting them a life
of four or five generations, although that they survived so long seems
extremely unlikely. The unavoidable conclusion is that the earliest
poems incorporated in the Homeric poems and utilized in their
composition cannot be more than a century or a little more older than
the Homeric poems themselves. That is the limit which literary analysis
cannot transgress.

Archaeology affords means of dating certain elements appearing in
Homeric poetry. The latest of these elements belong to the Orientalizing
period; here we are concerned with the oldest. These go back to the
Mycenaean age and moreover, what is most remarkable, many of them to its
earliest phase. <span id="fr_8"></span>[9](#fn_8) At this point a few
hints concerning this important subject must suffice. Homeric arms have
given rise to a vast literature, and Nestor's cup is often mentioned;
yet the body shield was already superseded by the small shield in late
Mycenaean times--the attempts to vindicate it for later periods are
proved by archaeology to be futile. Nestor's cup was found in the fourth
shaft-grave at Mycenae, one of the earlier group. To this another most
remarkable observation is to be added; namely, that these Mycenaean
elements appear not only in the earliest and earlier parts of the
Homeric poems but in the latest and later parts also. For example, the
boars' tusk helmet which we had been unable to understand until aided by
the Mycenaean finds is described in one of the very latest parts, the
lay of Dolon.

<span id="page_13">p. 13</span>

Archaeology is, however, not the sole means of dating some elements of
Homeric poetry; there are also references to conditions of history and
civilization which may serve the same end. When we meet the Phoenicians
as masters of the sea and traders who bring the most appreciated and
valuable articles to Greece, we recognize of course the end of the
Geometric and the beginning of the Orientalizing period. On the other
hand, Homer hardly mentions the Dorians although at his time they had
already long inhabited the Peloponnese. The king of Mycenae is the
overlord of the Greeks, and the other heroes are his vassals. Mycenae
rich in gold is the foremost city of Greece and its king the mightiest
monarch of Greece. The attempt to derogate these facts <span
id="fr_9"></span>[10](#fn_9) is vain, for it is inconceivable that an
Ionian minstrel of the seventh century B.C. should have happened on the
idea of ascribing such a position to the town and the king of Mycenae,
which at that time was in fact a rotten borough. Nor has Agamemnon any
real existence except in the Trojan cycle, although the contrary often
is asserted. <span id="fr_10"></span>[11](#fn_10) Attempts to deny these
facts can only lead us into error and to the erection of frail
hypotheses. Here we ought also to speak of the really kingly power of
Agamemnon, but as this is not so evident I shall recur to it in a later
place.

In regard to these elements in Homer, derived from widely differing
times and civilizations, scholars have divided themselves into two
parties engaging in a tug of war. One party tries to put as much as
possible in a time as late as possible; namely, into

<span id="page_14">p. 14</span>

the developed Geometric and the Orientalizing periods, and to treat the
elements which it is impossible to fit into this scheme as irrelevant
survivals. The other party treats the elements which undoubtedly belong
to a late age as irrelevant additions and takes Homer on the whole to be
Mycenaean. It appears that neither of these two methods is the right
one. We have to concede without circumlocutions that Homer contains
elements from very differing periods and to try to comprehend and
explain this state of things, not to obliterate it and get rid of it
through artificial interpretations.

The gap between the earliest and the latest elements in Homer comes
nearer to a whole millenium than to a half-millenium. Literary analysis
of the extant poems can reach only the time immediately preceding the
latest elements and so can cover only a very small part of this gap, say
a century or at most a little more. Some scholars who think that we
cannot attain a well founded opinion of the stages preceding the
literary evidence have confined themselves to literary analysis. The
unitarians by principle are still less interested in the preceding
stages. But this voluntary restriction makes them shut their eyes to
more far-reaching vistas and vitiates the fundamental problem. The epic
question has been unduly limited to the Homeric question. The extant
Homeric poems are, however, the final achievement of a lengthy
development--*fuere etiam ante Homerum poetae*; the epic question, i.e.,
the problem of the origin and development of Greek epics from their
beginnings, cannot be put on one side.

<span id="page_15">p. 15</span>

It can be understood why some scholars have done so, for they are of the
opinion that all means are wanting for attacking a problem which goes so
far back into an unknown age. That is not literally true; for there is a
method which may be utilized. Since, however, it is neither strictly
philological nor strictly historical but is comparative in a general
sense, it is viewed with undue diffidence by many who know it only from
the outside.

Many years ago Professor Steinthal tried to introduce a comparative
study of epics, but his attempt had no decided success, chiefly because
he was hampered by the romantic presumption of collective popular
poetry. A comprehensive study of this vast subject has never been taken
up, only hints and minor attempts have been made. Professor von Pöhlmann
drew attention to living epic poetry and pointed to the failure of
Homeric research in not taking this into account, <span
id="fr_11"></span>[12](#fn_11) but in vain. Professor Drerup gave a
survey of various popular epics <span id="fr_12"></span>[13](#fn_12) but
seems to have been forgotten, perhaps because these materials were not
utilized by him in their true bearing upon Greek epics. English works
are one-sided, and that is true not only of Professor Andrew

<span id="page_16">p. 16</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Lang's more
cursory comparison of Homeric epics with the *chansons de geste* <span
id="fr_13"></span>[14](#fn_13) but also of Professor Chadwick's
important book, in which he institutes a detailed comparison between
Greek and Teutonic epics. <span id="fr_14"></span>[15](#fn_14) It is
self-evident that a comparison ought to be instituted on the largest
possible basis, and that everything which is accidental and not
essential ought to be discarded. <span id="fr_15"></span>[16](#fn_15)

It is impossible here to give an account of the numerous instances of
popular epics. I simply enumerate them. We have, in the first place,
Teutonic epics in their branches: old German, Anglo-Saxon, and
Scandinavian epics. Their offshoots are, at least in part,
Finnish-Esthonian, Russian, and even old French epics (*bylinas* and
*chansons de geste*). In Serbia popular epics are still living; in Asia
we find epics among several tribes, the Kara-Kirgizes and the Abakan
Tartars in Siberia and the Atchinese on Sumatra. The historical
incidents underlying Greek mediaeval epics (Digenis Akritas) are too
little known. From a comparative study of these epics the following
statements may be deduced. Epics do not originate in collective popular
poetry but are the creation of a heroic age, a fact which Professor
Wundt stated and Professor Chadwick developed at length. They originate
in an aristocratic or even feudal society, praising the deeds of living
men and describing contemporary events, but mythical traits and
folk-tale elements

<span id="page_17">p. 17</span>

may be attributed even to living men. The exaggerated praise of heroes
and the still undeveloped intellectualism of the age, from the very
beginning, open the doors for the supernatural. Epic poetry is composed
not by the people in general but by certain gifted individuals, who live
as minstrels and often as court minstrels in the entourage of some great
man. But there is no intellectual cleavage between persons of higher and
of lower standing; the lower classes share the warlike spirit and the
admiration of valorous deeds and take up epics enthusiastically.

This is the original stage, which usually is short-lived. It is
impossible to confine the subsequent development within a scheme, as
Professor Chadwick has attempted, but two alternatives are to be
considered. The heroic age may continue; epics chant ever fresh
materials which change according to circumstances. Or the heroic age may
come to an end and the people settle down to a less eventful life. But
the interest in great deeds and the zeal for epic poetry do not die out
immediately. Epic poetry is preserved but it sings now of the deeds of a
past age and shows a tendency to limit itself to one cycle or to very
few cycles of adventures, from which the minstrels choose their
subjects, although fresh songs are invented, additions made, and changes
devised. Under such conditions epics may be still more popular than
before and may spread among the common people but they are in a certain
sense stagnant.

This state of things may be interrupted by a new heroic age and by new
epics dealing with contemporary

<span id="page_18">p. 18</span>

men and events, but the stagnant conditions may also continue until
epics are abandoned for other kinds of literature or obliterated by a
higher culture. The epics may also wander far abroad and be received by
people who lead a monotonous life on a low cultural plane but love
poetry and preserve the epic chants. Of course epic poetry will undergo
many and varied changes under such varying conditions.

Epic poetry is a floating mass confined within certain limits. This it
is essential to know and to understand, and to this end the art and
technique of composition must be considered; they seem to be similar
everywhere. The art of singing is always exercised by certain gifted
persons; but talents vary, and the most gifted become craftsmen,
minstrels who chant in the courts or to the people according to
circumstances. Everyone learns through hearing, consequently family
tradition is important. Families, even schools, of minstrels appear.

The art of singing and of composing epic poetry is learned, and hence a
question of fundamental importance is, how this art is learned. First,
it is to be stated that every one learns through hearing; but that a
poem is never learned and repeated word by word, even if a minstrel
takes over and repeats a chant, as occurs frequently. In fact the forms
of a poem are just as many as its recitals. The variability differs
considerably, however, according to time, individuals, and other
conditions.

For that which is learned is essentially not single poems, even though a
successful chant may be learned and repeated by others, but is the
epical

<span id="page_19">p. 19</span>

technique, the poetical art by which the material is formed; the subject
may be taken from the usual store or a new one may be chosen. Every
chant is in its form more or less an improvisation, so that the
minstrels may claim divine inspiration as Phemius does in the Odyssey.
Such an art of singing is possible because the minstrel through lengthy
practice possesses a language which puts words and phrases on his lips.

In the epical language of all peoples occurs a store of stock
expressions, constantly recurring phrases, half and whole verses and
even verse complexes; and repetitions are characteristic of the epic
style. E.g., when a message is delivered it is repeated word for word.
Of the 27,853 verses in Homer, 2,118 verses occur two or more times
making a total of 5,162 repeated verses, or one-fifth of Homer.
Furthermore, typical descriptions are characteristic of all epics.
Though they are not repeated in identical words, they are substantially
identical. These are the elements which the epical technique delivers
ready for use to the minstrel forming his chant. What is said of the
Kara Kirgiz minstrels is applicable to all: The singer has a large store
of poetical parts ready, and his art consists in coordinating these
parts according to the course of events and connecting them by the aid
of new-made verses. A skilled poet is able to improvise a poem on every
subject. <span id="fr_16"></span>[17](#fn_16)

<span id="page_20">p. 20</span>

gone days always archaize both in contents and in language. The stock
expressions and typical descriptions preserve the old elements, even if
they are no longer understood, and introduce them into even the latest
chants. The old background of events is kept because the singer is
conscious of chanting the past and not his own time, but with the
naïveté characteristic of his cultural stage the minstrel mixes up the
old elements with new taken from his own time.

These general statements agree completely with what Greek epics
themselves, especially the Odyssey, say as to the art and manner of the
recital of Greek [minstrels](errata.htm#0), and we may surmise with
certainty that it was not otherwise in the pre-Homeric age. The fact
that the stock expressions often are philologically very old-fashioned
and that their meaning was no longer understood by the minstrels
themselves proves a great antiquity in the epical technique and in the
epics themselves. If this high degree of antiquity of epical tradition
is considered earnestly, a natural explanation ensues of the fact that
Homer contains elements which differ in age by more than half a
millenium, in fact by nearly a whole millenium. This long lapse of time
is not amazing though it may seem so; Russian epics vegetated nearly a
millenium, preserving reminiscences of the empire of Kieff and the age
of the Vikings.

To this view that the origins of Greek epics must be carried back into
the Mycenaean age a serious objection may be made. For the Mycenaean
civilization is essentially Minoan, and it is an acknowledged fact that
the Minoan civilization

<span id="page_21">p. 21</span>

sprang from a non-Greek and not Aryan people at all. Consequently Sir
Arthur Evans himself and many scholars take the Mycenaeans to be Minoans
who have established themselves on the mainland of Greece and subjugated
the indigenous population. He admits the view that epics go back into
the Mycenaean age and supposes consequently that they were at first
chanted in the Minoan language and afterwards, in a bilingual society,
transferred into Greek. <span id="fr_17"></span>[18](#fn_17) A similar
process took place elsewhere, but the result was in reality new epics,
and such a process would of course invalidate the above reasoning
concerning the preservation of old elements through the epical
technique.

Like epics, mythology, too, would consequently originate among the
Minoan people. But this seems to be disproved through the fact that
almost all mythical names are clearly Greek; those which are certainly
Minoan are extremely few. One would of course expect a considerable
number of Minoan mythical names if the epos descended from the Minoans.
In spite of the great authority of the scholar I have mentioned, I am
firmly convinced that the Mycenaeans were immigrated Greeks who took
over the Minoan civilization. It would take too long to set forth my
reasons and I refer the reader to previous writings in which I have
dwelt upon this question. <span id="fr_18"></span>[19](#fn_18) This view
is prevailing nowadays. Younger archaeologists are prone to throw back
the commencement of the Greek immigration

<span id="page_22">p. 22</span>

to the end of the Early Helladic age or earlier, whilst I find it
probable that it began at the end of the following Middle Helladic age.
Thus I take it for granted that the Mycenaeans were Greeks, and I hope
that the following exposition will corroborate this view.

Epics praise heroes and originate in a heroic age. They belong to a
social milieu in which certain persons become prominent through power,
wealth, or deeds, and desire to be praised and chanted. Such an age was
the Mycenaean age; for although opinions differ, it was admittedly an
age of great wanderings of tribes and peoples, and its wealth and power
are proved by the treasures of the shaft-graves of Mycenae, and of the
bee-hive tombs at Dendra, Vaphio, etc., not to mention the bee-hive
tombs themselves, the palaces, and the mighty walls of the cities. To
this age the oldest elements in Homer go back, and I hesitate not the
least in stating that in this age Greek epics originated. The minstrels
chanted their songs at first to the princes and their retainers, but the
people, who shared this admiration for valorous deeds, took over the
epics and preserved them.

The stormy Mycenaean age came to an end and the subsequent transitional
period between the Mycenaean and the Geometric ages is the poorest and
darkest in all Greek history and prehistory. Conditions were poor and
straitened; people were attached to the soil; and Greece was split up
into a great number of cantons without much intercommunication, as the
marked local varieties of Geometric ceramics prove as contrasted with
the uniformity of Mycenaean pottery. Moreover, the

<span id="page_23">p. 23</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Phoenicians became
masters of the sea. It seems unthinkable that epics originated in such a
time, but epics which already existed may very well have been preserved,
stagnant and vegetating, just as they were, e.g., in Russia or Finland.
The subjects were limited to one or two cycles, to the Trojan and
perhaps even the Theban cycle. Why these were preferred to others is
just as difficult to say as why the unimportant skirmish of Roncevaux
was put into the foreground of French epics. How epics were transmitted
we have already seen. The elements were at hand and they were repeatedly
composed anew and mixed up with new elements.

In the ninth and the following centuries a fresh life cropped up in
Greece; wealth commenced to increase; the Greeks began again to sail the
sea and to make expeditions on a large scale; the period of colonization
began, which in a certain sense is another heroic age; but aristocracy
preserved still its social and political privileges. Thus the ground was
prepared for a renascence of epics, but the old tradition was so
vigorous that the old cycle was kept and the new elements incorporated
with it. The really new creation is the Odyssey, which does not deny the
stamp of the age of colonization which it glorifies. The salient point
was, however, the appearance of a great poet, whom I should like to call
Homer. He infused new life and vigor into epic poetry, putting the
psychology of his heroes into the foreground and planning a
comprehensive composition under this aspect.

I may seem to have given an only too dogmatic exposition of my opinions
of the Homeric question

<span id="page_24">p. 24</span>

instead of entering upon the subject of the Mycenaean origin of Greek
mythology. But this exposition could not be passed over, because some
scholars neglect the previous stages of Homeric poetry, and others
adhere to the opinion that before the time which on an average may be
called the Homeric age only single and disconnected myths existed and
that these myth elements were composed into cycles of myths by the poets
whose chief representative is Homer. If this were right, my thesis that
the cycles of myths go back into the Mycenaean age would evidently be
wrong.

In opposition to this view I have tried to prove two things: The first
is that the development of epics lasted much longer and that epics go
back into an early period of the Mycenaean age, a fact which is proved
by the Mycenaean elements imbedded in the epos. It is clear that this
first point must be still more valid for mythology than for
archaeological objects or for elements of civilization and social life,
because both the latter are much more liable to be altered and changed
through assimilation to the conditions prevailing at the time when the
poems were composed. Thus we have a great general probability that the
myths occurring in Homer go back into the Mycenaean age, though nothing
is proved in detail for specific myths.

Secondly, it appears that the background of the Greek epos, i.e., the
Trojan cycle in its chief features, the power of Mycenae, and the
kingship of Mycenae, cannot possibly have come into existence through
the joining together of minor chants and myths, but that it existed
beforehand, being the cycle

<span id="page_25">p. 25</span>

from which the minstrels took their subjects. A cycle of events with
certain chief personages invariably appears in all the epic poetry of
which we have a more definite knowledge than we have of Greek epics as
the background from which episodes are taken and to which episodes are
joined; it is a premiss of epics, not their ultimate result. I refer to
the tale of the Nibelungen in German epics, to that of Roland in old
French epics, to the narratives of Vladimir the Great and his men in the
*bylinas*, of Marko Kraljevitch and the battle on the Throstle Field in
Servian epics, of the Islamic prince Manas and the heathen prince Joloi
in the Kara Kirgiz epics, etc. In the same manner the background of the
Homeric epos--the story of the war of Troy between the Trojans and the
Greek heroes under Agamemnon's leadership, or, in other words, the chief
features of the Trojan cycle--must be the primary fact and originate in
the Mycenaean age. From this the minstrels chose and to this they added
episodes. It is of course in detail uncertain and questionable what is
of ancient origin and what is added later; here we are concerned with
the fundamental idea, which we call the Trojan cycle, and we have tried
to prove that this idea originated in the same age as the epos, the
Mycenaean age.

I have drawn attention to the fact that the minstrels limited their
choice to one or two cycles of myths. Other myths may have been chanted
at an earlier age and have gone out of fashion. It may not be inferred
that other cycles did not exist or were quite forgotten. We have to take
account not only of epics but also of plain tales told in prose

<span id="page_26">p. 26</span>

and preserving a great number of myths which lyric and tragic poets made
famous in a later age. Such prose epics are not unparalleled. The cycle
of the Nartes, heroes of the Ossetes and other peoples of the Caucasus,
is told in prose. <span id="fr_19"></span>[20](#fn_19)

It can be demonstrated that numerous other myths and cycles of myths go
back into the Mycenaean age. I begin by referring to an acute
philological observation which proves that a number of mythical heroes
must go back to an age much earlier than that of Homer. Professor
Kretschmer drew attention to the fundamental difference between two
series of heroic names. <span id="fr_20"></span>[21](#fn_20) The names
of the older series have the ending -*eus* and are generally abbreviated
forms; the names of the sons of these mythical personages are on the
contrary chiefly common compound names; e.g., Peleus, Achilleus, as
compared with Neoptolemus; Odysseus--Telemachus; Atreus--Agamemnon,
Menelaus; Tydeus--Diomedes; Neleus--Nestor; Oeneus--Meleager, etc. The
names of the older series are often difficult to explain etymologically;
those of the younger series are clear and explicable. It is evident that
the heroes whose names belong to the series ending in -*eus* go back to
earlier times than the heroes with common names, and to this
philological fact corresponds the mythological fact that the latter are
said to be sons and descendants of the former. But the latter are quite
current in Homeric poetry; their ancestors must consequently go back to
much earlier, pre-Homeric times. That this time is the Mycenaean

<span id="page_27">p. 27</span>

age is of course not demonstrable through philology solely, but the span
of time necessary for the development of this difference must be
supposed so great that these heroes are thrown back some centuries and
very probably into the Mycenaean age. And if the names are so old, the
myths attached to them must also be so to a certain extent.

It may be rightly objected that hereby only the great antiquity of
isolated myths is demonstrated, but it can also be proved that the great
mythical cycles are very much older than Homer, that, in fact, they go
back to the Mycenaean age. I have briefly given the proof of this in
earlier writings <span id="fr_21"></span>[22](#fn_21) and a detailed
discussion will be the chief content of my subsequent lectures; here I
dwell only on the question of principles. We know that mythology was the
guide which led to the discovery of the Mycenaean and Minoan sites; it
conducted Mr. Schliemann to Troy and Mycenae and Sir Arthur Evans to
Cnossus. In these cases myths served as a heuristic means and the
success of the investigations thus induced proved a connection between
mythological centers and Mycenaean centers. My proof is nothing but a
consequent application of this principle, a thorough-going comparison of
the cities to which mythological cycles are attached with the cities
where finds from the Mycenaean age have been made. If the correlation is
constant; i.e., if we find that the cities to which the mythological
cycles are attached were the centers of the Mycenaean

<span id="page_28">p. 28</span>

civilization also, this constant correlation cannot be considered as
accidental; it will prove the connection between the mythological cycles
and the Mycenaean civilization; i.e., that the mythological cycles in
their chief outlines go back into the Mycenaean age.

The proof however goes much further. For a close inspection shows that
the mythical importance of a site closely corresponds to its importance
in Mycenaean civilization. The mythical importance of a city is, to use
a mathematical term, a function of its importance in Mycenaean
civilization. This close and constant correspondence precludes any
thought of casual coincidence. There are additional proofs also,
elements inherent in certain myths which are of Mycenaean origin, but as
these are less frequent and sometimes doubtful, they must be discussed
separately.

To the application and elaboration of this principle of the close
relationship between mythology and Mycenaean sites the following
exposition will be devoted. But I am well aware of the difficulties and
pitfalls of the detailed discussion and therefore it will be to the
purpose to add some methodological remarks.

In regard to the Mycenaean remains, it may be objected that they are
known only incompletely and that they have not been methodically
explored all over Greece. <span id="fr_22"></span>[23](#fn_22) That is
true, for every year new

<span id="page_29">p. 29</span>

discoveries are made. In time their distribution will certainly be much
better known than now, but on the other hand it seems not likely that
the picture will be changed essentially. The primacy of Argolis and next
to it of Boeotia will remain. And so much is already known concerning
other provinces that it is hardly to be expected that new discoveries
will greatly change their relative importance. The map of Mycenaean
sites and civilization will be completed, not turned upside down nor
even substantially altered. Certain irregularities exist which will be
treated in due course. <span id="fr_23"></span>[24](#fn_23)

In regard to mythology, certain points ought to be emphasized. We have
noted that myths were remodeled in late and even in very late times. The
science of mythography sets forth the development of the myths as far as
it can be traced with the aid of literary and monumental evidence. As
mythographic research is concerned with the historical period of the
development of the myths, we have here only to accept its results, when
it proves that certain forms of myths are developed or added in
historical times. Far-reaching deductions concerning the development of
the myths have often been connected with the reconstructions of lost
epics or of those preserved only in fragments, but these reconstructions
are very hypothetical and conflicting and must be regarded with a
certain diffidence. The

<span id="page_30">p. 30</span>

form in which a myth appears in Homer is often treated with a certain
disesteem; nevertheless it must be considered thoroughly because it is
the oldest recorded form, although of course not always the oldest form
which has existed.

Further, a distinction is to be made between myths of different kinds
and especially between divine and heroic mythology. The divine mythology
consists of myths concerning the gods, and cult myths. I cannot dwell
here upon this important distinction; we are little concerned with
divine mythology and only casually with cult myths. Nor are we concerned
with the many minor and isolated myths which crop up everywhere. For
every town had its heroes or made them, and eponymous heroes were
created freely. We are chiefly concerned with the cycles of heroic
mythology and our aim is to test to what extent their distribution and
varying importance correspond to the Mycenaean remains.

Well marked differences appear even in heroic mythology, since it
incorporated very different elements, beginning with folk-tales and
ending with incidents having a rather historical appearance. Motifs of
the folk-tale are, e.g., prominent in the myths of Perseus and of
Achilles, whilst on the contrary the Pylian myths seem very little
mythical, but rather almost historical. This is intelligible in view of
the lengthy development of myths and of epics. The Pylian cycle is a
late creation referring to the deeds of princes who were very little
mythologized, whilst Perseus and Achilles are older and more popular
heroes. The Oedipus myth is in its kernel a folk-tale, but the War of
the Seven is an historical

<span id="page_31">p. 31</span>

myth and the same seems to be true of the Minyans of Orchomenus.

I am quite aware of the difficulty of the subject and I am prepared to
be met with objections. It will perhaps be said that I resuscitate the
old and justly condemned method of eliciting history from myths. There
are certainly historical facts underlying heroic myths to a certain
extent, but mythology can never be converted into history, and we can
never attain a knowledge of these historical facts if there is not an
independent historical tradition as there is, e.g., in the case of the
Nibelungenlied. For myths are always myths and largely fiction; the
underlying facts have been reshaped and confused by fiction. For Greek
myths no historical tradition exists which can serve as a control. There
is only archaeology, and control by archaeology does not suffice for
proving historical events but serves at most to present the cultural
milieu. This cultural background, however, carries weight. If details in
my reasoning may be contradicted or proved to be erroneous, this does
not ruin the whole. The historical background of Greek heroic mythology
is amply proved by its close correspondence to the geographical
distribution of Mycenaean civilization.

That the thesis of the Mycenaean origin of Greek mythology has not been
set forth and recognized earlier is due to some peculiar circumstances.
Although numerous works of art and various sculptural or pictorial
representations from the Mycenaean age have been discovered, mythical
scenes seemed to be wanting in these works. They have been eagerly
sought for, but those representations which

<span id="page_32">p. 32</span>

until lately were claimed to have mythical contents are very doubtful.
One is the so-called Scylla of a Cretan seal impression depicting a man
in a boat who seems to fight with a marine monster rising up from the
sea. The monster is not like Scylla and it is very doubtful whether a
mythical incident is here represented. <span
id="fr_24"></span>[25](#fn_24) The second instance is a gold ring from a
find near Tiryns, the engravings on which represent a ship and two
couples, each consisting of a man and a woman. The scene is called the
abduction of Helen, but this interpretation has never been taken in
earnest; it is quite arbitrary; the scene may as well be a scene of
salutation or of congée. It belongs probably to the scenes of daily life
which sometimes occur in Mycenaean art. <span
id="fr_25"></span>[26](#fn_25) I prefer to pass over the famous treasure
from Thisbe in silence. <span id="fr_26"></span>[27](#fn_26)

In the light of these facts one must needs reason as follows: the Minoan
art, which had no mythical but only cultual representations, was taken
over wholly and without change by the Mycenaeans. It is practically
certain that Minoan artists worked for the Mycenaean sires; as mythical
representations were absent from their art, Mycenaean myths were not
depicted although they were related. Even elsewhere Mycenaean
characteristics were ousted by Minoan art and appear only rarely and
hesitatingly. It seems, however, somewhat astonishing that the

<span id="page_33">p. 33</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Mycenaeans had a
rich supply of myths but did not depict them in spite of their high
standard of art, although such a fact would not be inconceivable. The
same thing occurs in Geometric art, which loves to depict men, women,
horses, and ships but does not represent mythical scenes--though there
are one or two exceptions belonging to its late phase. But the Geometric
period is the Homeric age, which had plenty of myths.

Quite recently, however, a new discovery has put it beyond doubt that
myths were represented occasionally even in Mycenaean art. Among the
very rich and beautiful contents of the bee-hive tomb at Dendra, near
old Mideia, which was excavated in 1926 by Professor Persson, were eight
plaques of blue glass, evidently made in a mold, for they are identical.
They show a woman sitting on the back of a big bull. <span
id="fr_27"></span>[28](#fn_27) The representation is very similar to
that of the well-known metope from Selinus, and if it had belonged to
classical times everybody would have immediately recognized Europa on
the back of the bull. I am unable to see why we should not accept this
identification, even if the object is Mycenaean.

Among the same finds there are also another glass plaque and fragments
of two others which represent a big standing lion and before it a
man. <span id="fr_28"></span>[29](#fn_28) From the back of the lion a
head seems to grow up; the lion's tail is very long. The plaques are in
a bad state of preservation so that details are uncertain, but it

<span id="page_34">p. 34</span>

cannot reasonably be doubted that this is another mythical
representation, the Chimaera and Bellerophon. It may seem astonishing
that of the two myths illustrated the scenes of both are laid in foreign
countries--I shall recur to this topic later. <span
id="fr_29"></span>[30](#fn_29) A third representation referring to a
Greek myth is that of two centaurs, each with a dagger in his hand, on a
steatite gem found by Dr. Blegen in a Late Mycenaean tomb during his
excavations at the Argive Heraeum. <span id="fr_30"></span>[31](#fn_30)
Here I wish only to stress the fact that Mycenaean representations of
Greek myths actually have come to light. If it is proved that the myths
of Europa, of Bellerophon, and of the Centaurs go back into the
Mycenaean age, the view will be still more justified that the great
mythical cycles also which are attached to the Mycenaean centers go back
into the Mycenaean age.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_0"></span>[4:1](mog02.htm#fr_0) See my article "Ueber die
Glaubwürdigkeit der Volksüberlieferung bes. in Bezug auf die alte
Geschichte" in the Italian periodical *Scientia*, 1930, pp. 319 *et
seq*.

<span id="fn_1"></span>[4:2](mog02.htm#fr_1) The lectures of one of my
predecessors in the Sather professorship, Professor Myres, came into my
hands through the kindness of the author after my lectures had already
been written down. Professor Myres thinks that heroic genealogy makes up
a fairly reliable chronological scheme. My different standpoint I hope
to justify in the following pages. I have tried to take justly into
account the circumstances of time, of popular tradition, and of the
transmission of epic poetry.

<span id="fn_2"></span>[6:3](mog02.htm#fr_2) P. Friedländer, "Herakles,"
*Philologische Untersuchungen*, H. XIX (1907).

<span id="fn_3"></span>[6:4](mog02.htm#fr_3) E. Bethe, Homer, I-III
(1914-27; Vol. II, ed. 2, with only slight additions, 1929).

<span id="fn_4"></span>[7:5](mog02.htm#fr_4) U. v.
Wilamowitz-Moellendorff, "*Die griechische Heldensage*, II,"
*Sitzungsberichte der preussischen Akademie der Wissenschaften*, 1925,
p. 241.

<span id="fn_5"></span>[8:6](mog02.htm#fr_5) Below pp.
[148](mog10.htm#page_148) *et seq*.

<span id="fn_6"></span>[9:7](mog02.htm#fr_6) U. v.
Wilamowitz-Moellendorff, *Die Ilias and Homer* (1916), p. 339.

<span id="fn_7"></span>[9:8](mog02.htm#fr_7) *Il*. xxiii, v. 676 *et
seq*.; Hesiod, *Erga*, v. 161 *et seq*.

<span id="fn_8"></span>[12:9](mog02.htm#fr_8) H. L. Lorimer, "Defensive
Armour in Homer," *Liverpool Annals of Archaeology and Anthropology*, XV
(1928), pp. 89 *et seq*.; and "Homer's Use of the Past," *Journal of
Hellenic Studies*, XLIX (1929), pp. 145 *et seq*.

<span id="fn_9"></span>[13:10](mog02.htm#fr_9) Bethe, *loc. cit.*; cp.
below [p. 45](mog04.htm#page_45).

<span id="fn_10"></span>[13:11](mog02.htm#fr_10) *Vide* below, pp.
[46](mog04.htm#page_46) *et seq*.

<span id="fn_11"></span>[15:12](mog02.htm#fr_11) R. v. Pöhlmann, "Zur
geschichtlichen Beurteilung Homers," *Sybel's historische Zeitschrift*,
LXXIII (1894), pp. 385 *et seq*.; reprinted in his "Gesammelte
Abhandlungen," *Aus Altertum und Gegenwart*, I., pp. 56 *et seq*. What
he says, p. 59, is true to this day: "Es ist ein wesentlicher Mangel der
modernen Homer-Forschung, dass sie dieses gerade für die geschichtliche
Seite der homerischen Frage so überaus wichtige Material bei weitem noch
nicht in dem Umfang herangezogen und verwertet hat, in welchem es uns
jetzt vorliegt."

<span id="fn_12"></span>[15:13](mog02.htm#fr_12) E. Drerup, "Homerische
Poetik," I., *Das Homerproblem in der Gegenwart* (1921), pp. 27 *et
seq*. Cp. the brief survey by John Meier, *Werden und Leben des
Volksepos* (1909).

<span id="fn_13"></span>[16:14](mog02.htm#fr_13) A. Lang, *Homer and his
Age* (1906), pp. 297 *et seq*.

<span id="fn_14"></span>[16:15](mog02.htm#fr_14) H. M. Chadwick, *The
Heroic Age* (1912).

<span id="fn_15"></span>[16:16](mog02.htm#fr_15) I hope to be able to
give a fuller exposition of this subject in a forthcoming book with the
title *Homer and Mycenae*, the basis of which is a series of lectures
delivered in the University of London in 1929.

<span id="fn_16"></span>[19:17](mog02.htm#fr_16) W. Radloff, "Die
Sprachen der nördlichen Türkstämme," V, *Der Dialekt der Kara-Kirgizen*
(1885), p. xvi.

<span id="fn_17"></span>[21:18](mog02.htm#fr_17) A. J. Evans, *Journal
of Hellenic Studies*, XXXII (1912), pp. 387 *et seq*.

<span id="fn_18"></span>[21:19](mog02.htm#fr_18) In my *Minoan-Mycenaean
Religion*, pp. 11 *et seq*.

<span id="fn_19"></span>[26:20](mog02.htm#fr_19) G. Dumézil, *Légendes
sur les Nartes* (1930).

<span id="fn_20"></span>[26:21](mog02.htm#fr_20) P. Kretschmer, in the
periodical *Glotta*, X (1920), pp. 305 *et seq*.

<span id="fn_21"></span>[27:22](mog02.htm#fr_21) See my article, "Der
mykenische Ursprung der griechischen Mythologie," Ἀντίδωρον,
*Festschrift für J. Wackernagel* (1924), pp. 137, *et seq*. and my
*History of Greek Religion*, pp. 38 *et seq*.

<span id="fn_22"></span>[28:23](mog02.htm#fr_22) A good but very summary
review of the prehistoric sites and find-places is given by Dr. Fimmen
in his book, *Die kretisch-mykenische Kultur* (1921). The second edition
(1924) is merely a reprint with very slight additions. In particular, a
better map is needed than the rather poor one which has been added;
moreover, the Mycenaean sites ought <span id="page_29">p. 29</span> to
be sharply distinguished from the pre-Mycenaean sites. A summary of the
reports on excavations and finds with very rich illustrative material is
given by the late Professor O. Montelius in his work, *La Grèce
préclassique*, I, II:2 (1924-28). It is to be regretted that this
posthumous work has not been brought up to date.

<span id="fn_23"></span>[29:24](mog02.htm#fr_23) Cp. below pp.
[128](mog10.htm#page_128) and [182](mog12.htm#page_182).

<span id="fn_24"></span>[32:25](mog02.htm#fr_24) British School at
Athens, *Annual*, IX, p. 58, fig. 36; the latest treatment by S.
Marinatos, Μινωικὴ καὶ Ὁμηρικὴ Σκύλλα in Δελτίον ἀρχαιολογικόν, X, pp.
51 *et seq*.

<span id="fn_25"></span>[32:26](mog02.htm#fr_25) See e.g. my
*Minoan-Mycenaean Religion*, p. 44, n. 3.

<span id="fn_26"></span>[32:27](mog02.htm#fr_26) A. J. Evans, "The Ring
of Nestor, etc.", *Journal of Hellenic Studies*, XL (1925), pp. 1 *et
seq*. The genuineness of this most amazing find is vigorously contested;
I have given some objections in my *Minoan-Mycenaean Religion*, pp. 304
*et seq*.

<span id="fn_27"></span>[33:28](mog02.htm#fr_27) A. W. Persson,
*Kungagraven i Dendra* (1928), p. 123; cp. below [p.
38](mog04.htm#page_38), n. [6](mog04.htm#fn_36).

<span id="fn_28"></span>[33:29](mog02.htm#fr_28) *Loc. cit.*, p. 125.

<span id="fn_29"></span>[34:30](mog02.htm#fr_29) Below pp.
[53](mog04.htm#page_53) *et seq*.

<span id="fn_30"></span>[34:31](mog02.htm#fr_30) Dr. Blegen has kindly
shown me a design of this gem, which will be published in his
forthcoming work, *Prosymna*, and has given me his permission to mention
it.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter II: Introduction](mog03)
