[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](mog10)  [Next](mog12) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0520021630/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 8. ATTICA

Attica is strewn with Mycenaean remains. Best known are those from the
Acropolis of Athens. The hill is surrounded by an old Cyclopean wall
which follows the natural sinuosities of the rock and is probably of
Mycenaean date. On the Acropolis are the remains of Mycenaean buildings,
and beneath the so-called old temple of Athena are walls of a Mycenaean
palace with column bases. Not a few Mycenaean sherds were found here
during the excavations, but they are all of a late period. Notable but
little known is a hoard of bronze utensils found near the Cyclopean
wall. <span id="fr_319"></span>[1](#fn_319) Tombs with sub-Mycenaean
pottery were found on the southern slope of the Acropolis.

A fairly large bee-hive tomb was explored at Menidi, old Acharnae, and
yielded interesting finds. A most remarkable fact is that the cult at
this tomb

<span id="page_160">p. 160</span>

was continued down to the time of the Peloponnesian war. <span
id="fr_320"></span>[2](#fn_320) At Aphidna in northern Attica Professors
Wide and Kjellberg excavated long ago a big tumulus. This excavation is
remarkable because here for the first time Middle Helladic vases were
found in a regular excavation and taken up in scientific discussion. The
place was inhabited in the Mycenaean age also. The acropolis was not
explored, but walls of an uncertain date are recorded and on the
terraces toward the east Mycenaean sherds were found. We shall presently
see that the mythological importance of this site is such that it ought
to be searched more thoroughly. In the interior of the province two or
three necropolises were discovered near the modern village of Markopoulo
in the Mesogaia. At Spata on the road from Athens to Marathon Mycenaean
chamber tombs were found which contained not a few remains of funeral
furniture. <span id="fr_321"></span>[3](#fn_321) In a cave called
Lychnospelaion on Mount Parnes Mycenaean sherds of a late style were
discovered. <span id="fr_322"></span>[4](#fn_322)

On the eastern coast there are several Mycenaean sites. At Brauron, an
unexplored acropolis with traces of walls, both pre-Mycenaean and
Mycenaean sherds have been found. In a neighboring hill are Mycenaean
chamber tombs and others have been found not far to the south, at Porto
Raphti, north of the small bay; south of it is the site of old Prasiai.

<span id="page_161">p. 161</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> At Thorikus near
Cape Sunium houses with sherds, belonging partly to pre-Mycenaean,
partly to Mycenaean times, have been discovered. There is also a small
tholos tomb there, and another in the neighborhood. On the western coast
several Mycenaean chamber tombs have been found near Haliki (Halai
Aixonides), south of Athens. Mycenaean sherds are mentioned as having
been found at Phaleron.

Eleusis is a Mycenaean site. Mycenaean and pre-Mycenaean sherds were
collected on the surface of the acropolis and in other places also.
There is a small tholos tomb, and other traces of Mycenaean occupation
have been found. <span id="fr_323"></span>[5](#fn_323) The opinion that
the oldest walls of the sacred precinct and of the hall of mysteries go
back to the Mycenaean age <span id="fr_324"></span>[6](#fn_324) is,
however, contested. <span id="fr_325"></span>[7](#fn_325)

Thus Mycenaean remains are scattered over all Attica and prove that this
province was deeply penetrated by Mycenaean civilization; but on the
other hand they are not very significant and cannot be compared with
those of Boeotia, not to speak of those of Argolis. To this state of
things the mythical importance of Attica corresponds closely. In the
great days of Athens the Athenians and their great poets strove to
surround the city with a mythical glory corresponding to its renown in
their own age; but it is recognized that the prominence of Attic
mythology is late; we ought not to let ourselves be deceived by it. In
reality heroic mythology in

<span id="page_162">p. 162</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Attica is on the
whole poor, with one great exception, the Theseus cycle--but this is a
special case to which we must recur at length below. It is a well-known
and curious fact that the Athenians play a most unimportant part in
Homer.

The list of the Athenian kings is a rather late compilation, pieced
together from different elements and various heroes, who often were
doubled in order to make up a sufficiently long list and to smooth over
discrepancies. It need not detain us for long. Certain of the kings
belong, moreover, to hieratic mythology.

The name of the aboriginal king, Cecrops, shows an ending well known
from tribal names, -*ops*, plur. -*opes*, and from this it has been
inferred that he was the eponymous hero of a vanished tribe formerly
inhabiting Athens. Such an explanation is possible but cannot be
demonstrated. The name of the second king appears in two forms,
Erichthonius and the abbreviated form Erechtheus, but there cannot be
any doubt concerning their fundamental identity, although Erichthonius
and Erechtheus have been split up into two persons. The name is
etymologically clear. Erichthonius is derived from χθών, "earth," with
the prefix ἐπι-, "much." For certain reasons which cannot be repeated
here I have inferred that Erichthonius is originally the Divine Child,
the newborn spirit of vegetation, of whom there are many traces in
connection with the Minoan-Mycenaean religion. <span
id="fr_326"></span>[8](#fn_326) King Pandion is also doubled; he has
hardly any importance for our subject. The connection of his myths with
Megara is notable.

<span id="page_163">p. 163</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> They can have been
created only in the early historical period in which Athens strove to
extend its power to the Megaris and succeeded in possessing itself of
the island of Salamis, which belonged to Megara, and of its hero Aias.
By reason of this tendency Megarian myths were joined with Attic ones.

Other Attic myths, among which the best known are those of Ion, of
Cephalus and Procris, and of Procne and Philomele, may be passed over as
being of slight importance for our subject; in other respects they are
interesting, but they cannot be proved to have any connection with the
Mycenaean age.

The most famous of all Athenian myths remains the great Theseus
cycle. <span id="fr_327"></span>[9](#fn_327) It is generally and justly
recognized that the mythical fame and glory of Theseus grew and
developed together with the power and glory of the state of Athens and
the self-consciousness of its people. Theseus was made the national hero
of Athens, the aspirations of which were, as usually happened, projected
back into the mythical age. In the Athenian monuments of the earlier
archaic period Heracles is prominent and Theseus almost absent. From the
days of the Peisistratidae Theseus gains ever more ground until, during
its heyday in the fifth century B.C., he is made

<span id="page_164">p. 164</span>

the hero of the Athenian democracy, the founder of the Athenian state
through the synoecism and of the democratic institutions of Athens.

In the development of the Theseus cycle the tendency appears clearly to
make it rival the Heracles cycle, i.e., to create a series of adventures
and great deeds attributed to Theseus resembling those performed by
Heracles, who, according to the monuments, was very popular in Athens in
the early archaic age. There must, however, have been an old kernel
around which these accretions were able to crystallize.

The later group of the cycle comprises the adventures of Theseus on his
way from Troezen to Athens; they appear first on late black-figured
vases. <span id="fr_328"></span>[10](#fn_328) According to
Pausanias, <span id="fr_329"></span>[11](#fn_329) Sinis is localized on
the Isthmus, near Cenchreai, a harbor of Corinth on the Saronian gulf.
Crommyon, where Theseus slew the wild sow, was a village on the boundary
between Megara and Corinth, to which it belonged in historical times.
Sciron dwelt on the steep rocks on the shores of Geraneia, nowadays
called *Kakais Skalais*, south of Megara. Cercyon lived near Eleusis,
and Procrustes farther westward on the river called Cephissus, which
flowed through the Thriasian plain; or on the mountain of Corydallus,
which must be identified with Mount Aegaleos, the mountain which
separates the Thriasian and the Athenian plains.

These localizations show very definitely the tendency which appears in
the myths of Pandion and

<span id="page_165">p. 165</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Nisus <span
id="fr_330"></span>[12](#fn_330) to carry the mythological claims of
Athens to the Isthmus and to Megara, and here they extend to Eleusis
also, which Athens succeeded in conquering in the seventh century B.C.
As to the importance of such claims there is an illuminating story told
by Plutarch <span id="fr_331"></span>[13](#fn_331) that when the
Spartans were called upon as arbitrators in the contention of Athens and
Megara concerning the island of Salamis, they adjudicated the island to
Athens because it is said in Homer that Aias of Salamis placed his ships
on the same place as the Athenians. If the hero of Athens, Theseus, had
liberated these tracts from wild beasts and highwaymen his city had a
mythical title to lay claim to them. Athens annexed Eleusis in the
seventh century B.C. and succeeded in wresting the island of Salamis
from the Megarians in the first half of the sixth century B.C. Mythology
proves that its aspirations went farther.

Consequently these myths cannot be older, at least as applied to
Theseus, than the early historical age. There may have been earlier
myths made over and reshaped in order that they might be attached to
Theseus, but we do not know what these myths may have been, nor are they
of any importance for our purpose.

Next to these exploits of Theseus on his way from Troezen to Athens we
have to consider the myth of his birth and his youth before these deeds.
He is a son of the Athenian king Aegeus, who in obedience to an oracle
went to Troezen and there wedded Aithra, the daughter of King Pittheus
of Troezen. This town is situated on the northern shore of the

<span id="page_166">p. 166</span>

Argive peninsula, not far from its easternmost end. Theseus' son
Hippolytus had a sanctuary at Troezen. Aithra, Pittheus' daughter, is
first mentioned in the Iliad as a servant of Helen. <span
id="fr_332"></span>[14](#fn_332)

Here opinions differ. Professor Wilamowitz admits no doubt that Theseus
was originally at home at Troezen. <span
id="fr_333"></span>[15](#fn_333) Professor Robert gives voice to the
opinion that the myth of the birth of Theseus was created in the sixth
century B.C. <span id="fr_334"></span>[16](#fn_334) It may be adduced as
an argument for the former view that the northern shore of the Argive
peninsula is said to have been inhabited by Ionians in early
times, <span id="fr_335"></span>[17](#fn_335) but on the other hand it
is a serious objection to the antiquity of the myth that nothing
Mycenaean, not even a single sherd, has been found at Troezen, though
remains have been sought for. <span id="fr_336"></span>[18](#fn_336) The
town seems to be a post-Mycenaean foundation.

It cannot possibly be doubted that Theseus is at home in Attica, for the
really and undoubtedly old myths about him, namely, the myths of the
Marathonian bull, of the rape of Ariadne, and of the rape of Helen, are
localized here, and these myths unquestionably go back into the
Mycenaean age. Then it would seem amazing if he were born and bred in
Troezen and not in Attica, and we had another case similar to that of
Heracles. <span id="fr_337"></span>[19](#fn_337) But

<span id="page_167">p. 167</span>

this can hardly be so. Theseus is no hero common to the Greek people or
even to the Ionians, but is of local Attic origin. The father of his
mother, Pittheus, is the eponymous hero of the demos of Pithus, a member
of which is called a Pittheus. Its exact situation is not known, but as
it belonged to the seventh tribe, Cecropis, together with Athmonon,
Phlya, and Sypalettus, it is reasonably inferred that it may be sought
for to the southwest of Mount Pentelicon. Thus Pittheus belongs
certainly to Attica and his genealogical connection with Pelops was
invented later, after his being transferred to the Peloponnese.

Professor Wilamowitz thinks that Theseus' mother Aithra must be at home
at Troezen, because there is no trace of her in Attica. That is true,
but on the other hand the trace of her in Troezenian cult legend is not
of much value. For that she founded the temple of Athena Apaturia on the
island of Sphairia <span id="fr_338"></span>[20](#fn_338) is a hieratic
legend of indeterminate and probably rather late date. If Pittheus'
daughter Aithra really is a Troezenian, it is very curious that in the
Iliad she appears as one of the servants of Helen. For this presupposes
the further development of the myth of Helen's rape by Theseus; viz.,
that Helen was rescued by her brothers, the Dioscuri, who abducted
Theseus' mother as a captive. The book of the Iliad in which the passage
is found belongs of course to its later parts, but in spite of this its
date is so early that it seems difficult to suppose that a Troezenian
legend transferred to Attica should be current at that time. For the

<span id="page_168">p. 168</span>

myth must have been a current one, from the casual manner in which it is
mentioned. The passage is not of such a nature as the Athenians would
have introduced in order to enhance the mythical fame of Athens, which
is almost passed over in Homer. Therefore it seems probable that Aithra,
like her father, was originally at home in Attica, although it ought to
be stated that there is no trace of her there. The myths of Hippolytus
and Phaidra are more loosely connected with Theseus and are of hardly
any importance for our subject.

We have seen that there are certain reasons for assuming that the
grandfather of Theseus and probably even his mother were originally at
home in Attica, but it is not to be concealed that this view implies
difficulties, for we cannot see any definite reason why they were
localized at Troezen. Although the political aspirations of Athens were
directed to the Megaris and the Isthmus, it would be hazardous to guess
that they laid claim to Troezen; i.e., to the southern coast of the
Saronian gulf, also. The birth of Theseus at Troezen is connected with
his wandering through the Isthmus but is not a necessary premiss for it.
There may have existed some myths or cults at Troezen by which the myth
of Theseus was attracted, since it had transgressed the boundaries of
Attica, but I am unable to point to such cults or myths; <span
id="fr_339"></span>[21](#fn_339) I can only point to the

<span id="page_169">p. 169</span>

fact that the same tribe that inhabited Attica once lived in the Argive
peninsula also. Happily this intricate question is of no importance for
our main purpose, for even if Theseus' ancestors should be Troezenian,
it can not be proved that they belong to a Mycenaean myth. At all events
the birth story is a later addition.

Three deeds of Theseus remain which are of earlier origin. The capture
of the bull of Marathon by Theseus is a close parallel to the capture of
the Cretan bull by Heracles; the bulls were identified by the ancient
mythographers. In this case it is supposed that, in contrast to what
usually happened, a deed of Theseus was transferred to Heracles. <span
id="fr_340"></span>[22](#fn_340) I cannot see any necessary reason for
assuming such a transference; nor can I see why Professor Bethe
identifies the Marathonian bull with the Minotaur. <span
id="fr_341"></span>[23](#fn_341) Bulls were among the beasts of chase,
and hunting such big game was a valued pastime in the Mycenaean age.
Such a simple adventure was told of more than one hero. <span
id="fr_342"></span>[24](#fn_342) Professor Bethe .is right in stating
that this deed belongs originally to Theseus as well as to
Heracles. <span id="fr_343"></span>[25](#fn_343) There may be so much
truth in his identification of the Minotaur with the Marathonian bull
that the myth of the latter was the starting point for developing the
Minotaur myth.

This deed of Theseus is represented in vase pictures at an earlier date
than his other deeds, <span id="fr_344"></span>[26](#fn_344) and this

<span id="page_170">p. 170</span>

fact is of a certain value, although the earliest representations belong
to the sixth century B.C. More important is the localization of the myth
at Marathon in northeastern Attica in that part of the province to which
the old Theseus myths belong. It is very probable that this myth belongs
to the old stock, although this cannot be demonstrated with arguments of
absolute certainty.

The two remaining myths, the rape of Ariadne and the rape of
Helen--their parallelism ought to be noticed from the outset--can with
certainty be proved to go back to the Mycenaean age. In discussing the
Laconian myths <span id="fr_345"></span>[27](#fn_345) I spoke of the
abduction of Helen by Theseus and stated that all attempts have failed
to separate this myth from Aphidna in northern Attica, a site with an
unexplored acropolis which was inhabited in Mycenaean times, not very
far to the northwest from the plain of Marathon. Helen belongs to Attica
also. In the epos called Cypria she was said to be a daughter of
Nemesis, who had a temple at Rhamnus on the coast north of
Marathon. <span id="fr_346"></span>[28](#fn_346) But in this connection
of Helen with Nemesis, the goddess of retaliation, there appears a
certain speculative strain which makes its date doubtful, and probably
late; and I have to acknowledge that the goddess Nemesis as a cult
goddess still seems to me to be an unsolved riddle. I should not venture
to emphasize this connection. We saw further that Helen is a pre-Greek
goddess of vegetation whose peculiarity it is to be carried off, just as
Kore was carried off by

<span id="page_171">p. 171</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Pluto. Thus we
have a pre-Greek hieratic myth, the rape of the goddess of vegetation by
a god, which was made a heroic myth in various ways. This myth was
secularized by the Greek invaders and transferred to an Asiatic prince
by epic poetry. It may be asked if the case of Theseus is similar. I am
distinctly disinclined to believe so, for in two other myths, those of
Ariadne and of Persephone, Theseus appears as the abductor of a goddess
of vegetation. He may have been originally the chief male personage of
the old hieratic myth. <span id="fr_347"></span>[29](#fn_347)

The myth telling how Theseus, with the help of Ariadne, entered the
Labyrinth, slew the Minotaur, rescued the Athenian children, and sailed
away, taking Ariadne with him, is well known. Of all the myths from the
Greek mainland, it has the most numerous and evident relations with
Crete and the Minoan world, so that there cannot be any reasonable doubt
that it goes back into the Mycenaean age and moreover to that early part
of this age in which Crete and Cnossus still flourished and were
powerful. It is generally recognized to contain reminiscences from the
Minoan age.

<span id="page_172">p. 172</span>

I have collected and discussed in earlier works <span
id="fr_348"></span>[30](#fn_348) the evidence concerning Ariadne and
need not repeat the discussion here. The conclusion is that Ariadne
seems to be a goddess of vegetation derived from Minoan times. She was
venerated especially on the islands of the Aegean but is said to have
had a festival in the Opuntian Locris too. The salient feature of her
myths is her death, which was told in various versions, but there was
also a joyous festival in her honor. Once she is said to have hanged
herself like Helen Dendritis. The most perplexing myth is, however, the
Homeric one, according to which she was killed by Artemis on the island
of Dia, because of information given by Dionysus. <span
id="fr_349"></span>[31](#fn_349) In the common myth Ariadne is the wife
of Dionysus. I have explained these contradicting myths by the
assumption that the Minoan vegetation goddess Ariadne entered into
competition with the kindred cult of Dionysus, and on one hand was
vanquished and ousted by him, or on the other hand became associated
with his cult. <span id="fr_350"></span>[32](#fn_350)

Both Ariadne and Helen are pre-Greek vegetation goddesses, and there are
some similarities in detail between them also, to which I have pointed
in another place. <span id="fr_351"></span>[33](#fn_351) The most
salient similarity is, however, that both were carried off by Theseus. I
cannot but find the same pre-Greek myth here, the carrying off of the
vegetation goddess, in two different versions. Consequently I take this
to be

<span id="page_173">p. 173</span>

the kernel of the Theseus myth and I have expressed my belief that
Theseus is originally the chief male personage in the myth of the rape
and that he was transferred to heroic mythology because the immigrated
Greeks did not grasp the sacred nature of the myth. Another form of the
same myth, with other names, was preserved in the tradition of the
mysteries, which seem to be a survival of Minoan religious ideas. This
myth is akin to another sacred vegetation myth the Minoan origin of
which I have tried to show, the myth of the Divine Child.

This view of the rape of Ariadne and of the rape of Helen is supported
by the third myth in which Theseus appears carrying off a woman or, to
speak more exactly, the myth in which he attempts to carry off the queen
of the Nether World, Persephone. <span id="fr_352"></span>[34](#fn_352)
It is highly improbable that this attempt was originally considered a
crime; success would have been the crowning end of the hero's career,
just as the victory over Hades or the fetching of Cerberus crowned the
career of Heracles. But the attempt of Theseus failed; he and his friend
Peirithous, whom he accompanied and on whose behalf he undertook the
adventure, according to the current myth were magically held fast on
their seats in the Underworld. The myth must be understood in a
different way.

Persephone was identified with Kore, the vegetation goddess carried off
by Pluto, who was identified with the Ruler of the Dead. Consequently
Theseus appears here also in his old rôle as carrying off the vegetation
goddess; but, as this goddess was identified with the Queen of the Dead,
his deed appeared of

<span id="page_174">p. 174</span>

course to be an attempt to vanquish the Empire of Death. This attempt
was bound to fail according to current Greek ideas concerning the
all-conquering and irresistible power of Death. The earlier and contrary
conception of the victory over Death and the Empire of the Dead was
preserved in the Heracles myth in traces only, and these were but half
understood. Here the current conception won; the Vegetation Goddess was
thought to be identical with the Queen of the Nether World, and thus
Theseus was doomed to remain in the Underworld.

The real difficulty of this myth lies in another point. It is told that
Peirithous helped Theseus to carry off Helen. But Helen was given over
to Theseus, who was therefore obliged to help his friend to carry off
another woman, and Peirithous conceived a desire for the Queen of the
Nether World. So much is clear, that the friendship of Theseus and
Peirithous serves as a means to harmonize two parallel myths which else
would seem to be incompatible. The difficulty hinted at lies not in the
friendship of the two heroes, for such a close friendship is a frequent
feature of myth and folk-tale; it consists in the localization of
Peirithous, for he is always said to be a Thessalian and king of the
Lapiths. It is very difficult to find a sufficient reason why a
Thessalian hero was brought to Attica; <span
id="fr_353"></span>[35](#fn_353) the connection between the two heroes

<span id="page_175">p. 175</span>

is, moreover, close and consistent. However, there is a family of
Peirithoidai in Attica after whom a demos belonging to the phyle of
Oineis and situated a little to the west of Athens was named. Peirithous
was of course the eponymous hero of this family, and thus it is possible
to imagine why he and Theseus were connected. <span
id="fr_354"></span>[36](#fn_354) Both were localized in Attica, not very
far from each other. But why is this hero said to be a Thessalian and
king of the Lapiths? I see no other way than to surmise that the Attic
Peirithous was identified with a better known Thessalian hero of the
same name, king of the Lapiths. Such homonymies occur in Greek
mythology.

The myth of the rape of Ariadne was enlarged and complicated, the
adventures of Theseus at Cnossus being added. Ariadne saved him from the
Labyrinth, giving him the thread as a guide--clearly a folk-tale
motif--or a crown by the splendor of which the Labyrinth was
illuminated. The latter is of course a late and rather silly explanatory
myth, for the crown was originally a wreath, which is appropriate to the
vegetation goddess. <span id="fr_355"></span>[37](#fn_355) It is
depicted earlier than any other detail of the Theseus myth. A late
Geometric vase picture <span id="fr_356"></span>[38](#fn_356) shows a
man embarking on a ship and leading a woman who carries a crown or a
wreath in the other hand. Though myths elsewhere are almost absent from
Geometric vases, there is no sufficient reason for denying that

<span id="page_176">p. 176</span>

the myth of Theseus and Ariadne is represented in this late and
characteristic picture.

That the myth of the Labyrinth is a reminiscence of the vast complexity
of the palace at Cnossus is generally admitted, and I need not dwell
upon this point nor speak of the etymology and explanation of the
name. <span id="fr_357"></span>[39](#fn_357) I wish only to emphasize
that this myth must needs go back to the time during which the palace at
Cnossus was still standing in its old splendor; i.e., to the time before
the final sack of Cnossus about 1400 B.C.

It is generally acknowledged that the myth of the Minotaur also is a
reminiscence from the Minoan age, but as to its explanation opinions
differ. The current opinion is that the bull-cult and the bull-god
played a prominent part in the Minoan religion, but in fact there is no
good evidence for this opinion. In the Minoan monuments, which often
depict scenes from the bull-ring and from bull-hunting, there is nothing
to prove that this was anything other than a popular, profane
pastime. <span id="fr_358"></span>[40](#fn_358) Both youths and girls
entered the bull-ring and took part in its performances, of which the
public was exceedingly fond. They were of course trained for this
perilous kind of sport; possibly the Minoans compelled captives to take
up these fights, just as the Romans sometimes compelled captives to
fight in the arena as gladiators. This pastime accounts for the origin
of the myth of the Minotaur, especially if we take the detail into
consideration that both girls and youths were sacrificed to the monster.
A

<span id="page_177">p. 177</span>

vague reminiscence of the vast palace at Cnossus, which seemed to a
simple man to be a true labyrinth in which everybody was unavoidably
lost, and a mythologically transformed reminiscence of the perilous
bull-fights in which captive youths and girls lost their lives, <span
id="fr_359"></span>[41](#fn_359) are at the back of the myth of Theseus'
rescue of the Athenian children from the Labyrinth and his slaying of
the Minotaur. These reminiscences derive of course from the days of the
glory of Cnossus. They were quite naturally attached to the hero who
carried off the vegetation goddess, because both myths were of Minoan
origin; and thus a very impressive myth was created. If it is stripped
of its characteristic detail, a tale remains which tells that in spite
of many perils a youth won and carried off a princess. That is perhaps
the most common plot of the folk-tale and it gives the frame into which
were put the elements derived from the Minoan world.

Quite a number of other myths in which Minos is implicated are enacted
in Attica and its neighborhood. <span id="fr_360"></span>[42](#fn_360)
One is the story of his son Androgeos, who went to Athens and in one way
or another, for it is differently told, met his death there. His death
is said to be the reason why King Minos went to war against the
Athenians and imposed upon them the tribute of the seven youths and the
seven girls. This myth is a later invention made in order to rationalize

<span id="page_178">p. 178</span>

and historicize the earlier myth. It has been justly observed that the
name of Androgeos has a form which is special to the Attic
dialect. <span id="fr_361"></span>[43](#fn_361)

Nor can great antiquity be accorded to the myth that Procris fled to
Minos and received from him the dog which nothing was able to escape,
and the never failing spear. <span id="fr_362"></span>[44](#fn_362) For
since Minos was a chief personage of the most famous Attic myth, it was
almost unavoidable that he should be introduced into other tales too.
Thus arose a certain exchange between Attic and Cretan myths. For
example, the builder of the Labyrinth, Daedalus, was introduced into
Attic myths.

Another myth localized in the Megaris is more worthy of consideration.
When Minos warred against Athens he besieged Megara also, and Scylla,
the daughter of Nisus, the king of Megara, fell in love with him and cut
off the purple lock from her father's head on which the luck of the city
depended. The faithless daughter was thrown into the sea by Minos. <span
id="fr_363"></span>[45](#fn_363) This myth is firmly localized. Nisus is
the eponymous hero of the Megarian harbor town, Nisaia, and was annexed
to the genealogy of the Athenian kings when Athens extended its
political aspirations to the Megaris. Minoa is a small island

<span id="page_179">p. 179</span>

outside of this harbor, and Cape Scyllaeum is the easternmost point of
the Argive peninsula. It is often to be observed that old mythical
elements are rearranged in order to afford an explanation of local
names, and here is probably an instance of this tendency.

The really important fact is the name of the small island, Minoa.
Professor Bethe very justly called attention to the many places in very
different countries with the name of Minoa. It is possible that they
imply a reminiscence of the power of the most famous king of Cnossus,
Minos, although we should not be deceived by the modern usage of
denoting the Cretan people of the Bronze Age as Minoans. Space forbids,
however, a discussion which does not immediately concern our subject.

The date of the last mentioned myths is consequently uncertain; they are
corollaries to the myth of Theseus, presupposing even the war of Minos
against Athens. It may be safer to take them to be post-Mycenaean. But
the myth of Theseus' adventures at Cnossus, of Ariadne and the Minotaur,
goes back to Mycenaean and even to Minoan days, and that suffices amply
for our purpose. Twenty years ago in a paper which has often been
quoted, Professor Bethe called attention to this fact and added that the
great antiquity of this myth is astonishing but ought not to frighten a
scientific mind, for there are many instances proving that historical
reminiscences in mythical form lived and were preserved through
centuries. <span id="fr_364"></span>[46](#fn_364) That is eminently true
and agrees completely with the view which is here advanced

<span id="page_180">p. 180</span>

throughout in regard to Greek mythology. The idea ought to be followed
to the end consistently.

I cannot leave this subject without emphasizing the fact that
reminiscences of Minoan Crete are found in Attic myths only. This fact
is really worth considering and an explanation is needed. Why, for
example, has Argive mythology, which is much richer, nothing to say of
Cnossus and Minos except for the faint reminiscence of the bull-ring
which may be contained in the localization of the capturing of the
Cretan bull? <span id="fr_365"></span>[47](#fn_365) An evident
explanation seems to be found in the view which I have sketched
elsewhere <span id="fr_366"></span>[48](#fn_366) as a probable
hypothesis concerning the immigration of the Greek tribes; viz., that
the Ionians came first, plundered Crete, and traded with its people
during the first and second late Minoan periods, but were ousted from
Argolis by a new invading Greek tribe, the Achaeans, who sacked Cnossus
finally about 1400 B.C. After the sack, and the downfall of the Minoan
civilization, there was nothing to carry off from Crete and nothing to
tell about it. Consequently Argive myths forgot the Minoans, but the
Ionians who had seen the proud palace of Cnossus in its splendor and had
learned to know the wealth and to fear the power of the king of Cnossus
kept the memory in mythical form in that province to which they were
thrown back, Attica.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_319"></span>[159:1](mog11.htm#fr_319) Now at last easily
accessible in O. Montelius, *La Grèce préclassique*, I, p. 153.

<span id="fn_320"></span>[160:2](mog11.htm#fr_320) See my
*Minoan-Mycenaean Religion*, p. 524 *et seq*.

<span id="fn_321"></span>[160:3](mog11.htm#fr_321) A survey in H.
Gropengiesser, *Die Gräber von Attika* (Dissertation, Heidelberg, 1907).
Recent discoveries of Mycenaean tombs at Porto-Raphti, Pikermi,
Velanideza, and Vourvatsi, *Deltion archaiologikon*, XI (1927-28), App.
p. 59 *et seq*.

<span id="fn_322"></span>[160:4](mog11.htm#fr_322) See my
*Minoan-Mycenaean Religion*, p. 61 *et seq*.

<span id="fn_323"></span>[161:5](mog11.htm#fr_323) F. Noack, *Eleusis*
(1927), p. 15.

<span id="fn_324"></span>[161:6](mog11.htm#fr_324) A. W. Persson,
*Archiv für Religionswissenschaft*, XXI (1922), p. 292 *et seq*.

<span id="fn_325"></span>[161:7](mog11.htm#fr_325) Noack, *loc. cit.*,
p. 14.

<span id="fn_326"></span>[162:8](mog11.htm#fr_326) In my
*Minoan-Mycenaean Religion*, p. 490 *et seq*.

<span id="fn_327"></span>[163:9](mog11.htm#fr_327) In addition to
Robert's exhaustive treatment of the cycle in his *Griechische
Heldensage*, p. 676 *et seq*., in which earlier papers are quoted fully,
the short but searching analysis by Wilamowitz, "Die griechische
Heldensage," II, *Sitzungsberichte der preuss. Akademie der
Wissenschaften*, 1925, p. 234 *et seq*. is especially to be consulted.
Cp. also the paper of V. Costanzi already quoted, [p.
74](mog05.htm#page_74) n. [15](mog05.htm#fn_123) and E. Kjellberg, "Zur
Entwicklung der attischen Theseussage" in *Strena philologica
Upsaliensis* (1922), p. 270 *et seq*. A. v. Salis, *Theseus and Ariadne*
(1930) appeared only after this section was written.

<span id="fn_328"></span>[164:10](mog11.htm#fr_328) E. Buschor in
Furtwängler and Reichhold, *Griech. Vasenmalerei*, Text, III, p. 119 *et
seq*., gives a survey of vase paintings representing Theseus and his
adventures.

<span id="fn_329"></span>[164:11](mog11.htm#fr_329) Paus. ii. 1, 4.

<span id="fn_330"></span>[165:12](mog11.htm#fr_330) Cp. below [p.
178](#page_178).

<span id="fn_331"></span>[165:13](mog11.htm#fr_331) Plutarch, *Solon*,
chap. 10.

<span id="fn_332"></span>[166:14](mog11.htm#fr_332) *Il*. iii v. 144.

<span id="fn_333"></span>[166:15](mog11.htm#fr_333) Wilamowitz, *loc.
cit.*, p. 235.

<span id="fn_334"></span>[166:16](mog11.htm#fr_334) Robert, *loc. cit.*,
p. 708.

<span id="fn_335"></span>[166:17](mog11.htm#fr_335) The passages concern
Epidaurus; quotations in Busolt, *Griech. Geschichte* (ed. 2), I, p.
216, n. 7.

<span id="fn_336"></span>[166:18](mog11.htm#fr_336) *Athenische
Mitteilungen*, XXXVI (1911), p. 33.

<span id="fn_337"></span>[166:19](mog11.htm#fr_337) The exploits of
Heracles belong to Tiryns and his birth story to Thebes; see below [p.
200](mog13.htm#page_200) *et seq*.

<span id="fn_338"></span>[167:20](mog11.htm#fr_338) Paus. II, 33, 1.

<span id="fn_339"></span>[168:21](mog11.htm#fr_339) There is no cult or
myth at Troezen which can be proved to be of great antiquity; cp. S.
Wide, *De sacris Troezeniorum*, etc. (Dissertation, Uppsala, 1888). In
the temple of Artemis Soteira were altars of the gods ruling underground
and Dionysus was said to have here brought up his mother Semele from the
Underworld, but this myth is localized elsewhere also and affords no
sufficient clue.

<span id="fn_340"></span>[169:22](mog11.htm#fr_340) Wilamowitz,
*Herakles*, I. p. 302; in opposition to this the myth is localized in
Argolis by P. Friedländer, *Herakles* (1907), p. 37.

<span id="fn_341"></span>[169:23](mog11.htm#fr_341) E. Bethe, "Minos,"
Rheinisches Museum, LXV (1910), p. 223.

<span id="fn_342"></span>[169:24](mog11.htm#fr_342) E.g. of Argos; see
below [p. 212](mog13.htm#page_212).

<span id="fn_343"></span>[169:25](mog11.htm#fr_343) Bethe, *loc. cit.*,
p. 218 *et seq*.

<span id="fn_344"></span>[169:26](mog11.htm#fr_344) References in
Robert, *Griech. Heldensage*, p. 678, n. 1.

<span id="fn_345"></span>[170:27](mog11.htm#fr_345) Above [p.
74](mog05.htm#page_74) *et seq*.

<span id="fn_346"></span>[170:28](mog11.htm#fr_346) Cp. Wide in the
*Athenische Mitteilungen*, XXI (1896), p. 387.

<span id="fn_347"></span>[171:29](mog11.htm#fr_347) The real
significance of the myth of the abduction of Kore by Pluto was well
explained by F. M. Cornford in *Studies and Essays presented to Sir W.
Ridgeway* (1913), p. 153 *et seq*. Kore is the Corn-maiden, the grains
which after the harvest are laid down in the subterranean silos or jars
to be preserved until the sowing; she is here in the power of Pluto, the
God of Wealth, i.e., precisely, of the store of corn by which men live.
These subterranean stores being called θησαυροί, I considered whether
the name {! 0x22 " !}"Δησεύς which seems to be derived from the same
stem is to be explained according to this view as the "One who puts the
corn down" (cp. Latin *Conditor*), but this guess seems to me to be too
uncertain to be mentioned except in a note, although it fits in
admirably with the opinion advanced in the text.

<span id="fn_348"></span>[172:30](mog11.htm#fr_348) In my *Griechische
Feste*, p. 382 *et seq*., and in my *Minoan-Mycenaean Religion*, p. 451
*et seq*.

<span id="fn_349"></span>[172:31](mog11.htm#fr_349) *Od*. xi. v. 323.

<span id="fn_350"></span>[172:32](mog11.htm#fr_350) In my *Griechische
Feste*, *loc. cit.*

<span id="fn_351"></span>[172:33](mog11.htm#fr_351) In my
*Minoan-Mycenaean Religion*, p. 453.

<span id="fn_352"></span>[173:34](mog11.htm#fr_352) First mentioned in
the very last part of the Nekyia, *Od*., ix., v.631.

<span id="fn_353"></span>[174:35](mog11.htm#fr_353) According to the
principles I follow, I am unable to approve of the treatment by J.
Toepffer in his *Beiträge zur griech. Altertumswissenschaft*, 1897, p.
148 *et seq*., reprinted from the volume *Aus der Anomia* (1890), p. 30
*et seq*. He takes up K. O. Müller's lines relying on the verse, *Il*.
i. 265, which introduces Theseus among the Lapiths, but this verse is
absent from good manuscripts and was taken from the *Scutum Herculis* of
Hesiod, as Wilamowitz emphasizes again, *loc. cit.*, p. 237.

<span id="fn_354"></span>[175:36](mog11.htm#fr_354) Cp. Wilamowitz,
*loc. cit.*, p. 238.

<span id="fn_355"></span>[175:37](mog11.htm#fr_355) It is so
represented, e. g., on the famous cup of Euphronius, Furtwängler and
Reichhold, *Griech. Vasenmalerei*, pl. v.

<span id="fn_356"></span>[175:38](mog11.htm#fr_356) *Journal of Hellenic
Studies*, XIX (1899), pl. 8; C. Robert, *Archäologische Hermeneutik*
(1919), p. 38, fig. 24.

<span id="fn_357"></span>[176:39](mog11.htm#fr_357) From λάβρυς, double
axe; I have discussed it in my *Minoan-Mycenaean Religion*, p. 189 *et
seq*.

<span id="fn_358"></span>[176:40](mog11.htm#fr_358) See my
*Minoan-Mycenaean Religion*, p. 322.

<span id="fn_359"></span>[177:41](mog11.htm#fr_359) I am afraid that we
all are a little hypnotized by the name Minotaur, writing it with a
capital letter and taking it to be a *nomen proprium*. If the original
sense is only Μίνωος ταῦρος "a bull of Minos’" (Pausanias, iii. 18, 11,
cp. 16, says τὸν Μίνω καλούμενον ταῦρον), it may be nothing but a bull
introduced into the bull-ring on the order of King Minos.

<span id="fn_360"></span>[177:42](mog11.htm#fr_360) Cp. Bethe in the
paper quoted [p. 169](#page_169), n. [23](#fn_341).

<span id="fn_361"></span>[178:43](mog11.htm#fr_361) L. Weber,
"Androgeos," *Archiv für Religionswissenschaft*, XXIII (1925), pp. 34
*et seq*. and 229 *et seq*., tries to show that Androgeos is an old
Cretan god who was transferred to Attica and to whom the human tribute
was due which, according to the common myth, was brought to the
Minotaur. The testimony referred to is, however, generally derived from
the Attidographers and late identifications and do not bear out so
far-reaching conclusions.

<span id="fn_362"></span>[178:44](mog11.htm#fr_362) Apollod. iii. 15, 1;
ii. 4, 7; Eratosthenes, *Catast*., 33; Hygin, *Astron*., ii. 35, etc. I
disagree in this with Bethe, *loc. cit.*, p. 223.

<span id="fn_363"></span>[178:45](mog11.htm#fr_363) The myth is first
found in Aeschylus, *Choeph*., v. 613 *et seq*.

<span id="fn_364"></span>[179:46](mog11.htm#fr_364) Bethe, *loc. cit.*,
p. 321.

<span id="fn_365"></span>[180:47](mog11.htm#fr_365) See below [p.
217](mog13.htm#page_217).

<span id="fn_366"></span>[180:48](mog11.htm#fr_366) In my
*Minoan-Mycenaean Religion*, p. 32 *et seq*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 9. Conclusion](mog12)
