[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](mog11)  [Next](mog13.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0520021630/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_181">p. 181</span>

### 9. CONCLUSION

In this chapter I have surveyed the Greek provinces; I have briefly
called attention to their Mycenaean monuments and to their relative
importance in the Mycenaean age; I have recapitulated the myths and
discussed their probable references to that age. The following summary
may be made:

Argolis is the province which far excels all others both in the number
and greatness of its Mycenaean sites and monuments and in the copious
richness of the finds from this age. It is also the only province of the
Peloponnese in which extensive and famous cycles of myths are found;
these, moreover, are attached to the Mycenaean sites, especially to the
two most famous sites, which by the beginning of the historical age had
become extremely unimportant. The cycles of the Perseidae and of the
Atreidae belong to Mycenae; the Heracles who performed his Labors is
localized at Tiryns as the vassal of the king of Mycenae, and the fable
which is the introduction to the adventures of Bellerophon is enacted at
the court of Tiryns--not to speak of minor myths. Other sites are far
inferior to these two, and the myths attached to them are
correspondingly less important. The myth of Io is connected with the
Heraeum, once a Mycenaean city, and that of the culture hero Palamedes
with Nauplia. The myths of Argos, the capital of the province in
historical times, are also unimportant, but the tendency is marked to
enhance its mythical glory by appropriating and inventing myths.

<span id="page_182">p. 182</span>

One site remains which is conspicuous for important monuments and
brilliant finds but from which myths are almost absent. It is the third
of the Mycenaean fortresses in Argolis, Midea, whose walls enclose a
larger area than that of any other site in Argolis and whose king was
buried together with a wealth of precious objects in the bee-hive tomb
at Dendra near by. This is a striking exception, but it finds its
natural explanation. The area within the walls is not yet excavated but
the sherds picked up on the surface are Middle Helladic and Mycenaean
only; later sherds are wanting. Unlike the sites of Mycenae and Tiryns,
Midea was not inhabited during the Geometric period. Through the
cessation of the occupation of the site the tradition was interrupted or
weakened. Midea was almost forgotten in myth and in the life of the age.
With this exception, there is a close correspondence between the
mythical importance of the Argive towns and their importance in the
Mycenaean age.

The same correspondence is evident in the other parts of the
Peloponnese. None of the other provinces can in any wise be compared
with Argolis in respect either to its myths or to its Mycenaean remains.
But two districts have yielded more numerous and remarkable finds than
others; namely, the Laconian plain and the western coast of the
peninsula. In both these districts there are hardly any great
mythological cycles to mention, but several myths with Mycenaean
connections are localized there. In Laconia, Helen and the Dioscuri are
at home and were probably pre-Greek gods metamorphosed into heroes and
received into heroic mythology.

<span id="page_183">p. 183</span>

The Mycenaean settlements on the western coast of the Peloponnese are
comprehended in Pylos, the Homeric dominion of Nestor. Here we may
perhaps speak of a cycle of myths, that of the Neleidae; and fragments
of an epos, the chief hero of which was Nestor, celebrating the
struggles of the Pylians with their foes in the north and in the east,
were incorporated into Homer. But this cycle is not very important and
has a special character, being more, so to speak, historical than
mythical, a fact which may be understood in view of its late origin.

In the remaining parts of the Peloponnese, Mycenaean remains are scarce
and poor. Mythology shows the same scarcity and poverty of heroic myths.
Arcadia has some myths, mostly cult myths; its heroic mythology is of
late make. The same is the case with Elis. The attempts to create a
mythical story of the founding of the Olympic games are evidently
post-Mycenaean, nor has anything Mycenaean been discovered at Olympia.
Achaea is almost devoid of myths. The close correspondence between the
occurrence of heroic mythology and of Mycenaean remains is obvious.

The parts of Greece farthest toward the west are the Ionian islands. The
search for the palace of Odysseus both on Ithaca and on Leucas failed,
for the plot of the Odyssey is no real myth but a romance; it is not a
reminiscence from Mycenaean times in mythical disguise. Mycenaean traces
proving a regular occupation are found on Cephallenia only, and the
tradition of the kingdom of the Cephallenes may perhaps be connected
with this late and unimportant settlement, but that must be regarded as
rather hypothetical.

<span id="page_184">p. 184</span>

We turn to Central Greece. Boeotia comes next to Argolis in the
importance both of its Mycenaean remains and of its myths. There were
two great centers of Mycenaean civilization, Thebes and Orchomenus. They
are too little known, because fate destroyed the remains thoroughly and
hindered their exploration, but enough is left of their past splendor
and greatness to allow us to discern their importance. A third site, the
fortress of Gla on an island in the lake of Copais, has an extensive
palace, but almost no finds have been made there. The fortress was
evidently abandoned very early and forgotten so thoroughly that not even
its ancient name is known. Thus its failure to play a part in mythology
is explained.

To Thebes two cycles of myths are attached which are hardly less famous
than those of Mycenae, the Cadmus-Oedipus cycle and the War of the Seven
against Thebes. This latter myth contains a reminiscence of a war waged
by an Argive prince and his allies against Thebes in the Mycenaean age.

The situation is very different in regard to the second great site,
Orchomenus. No mythical cycle is immediately attached to this city, but
the celebrated tribe of the Minyans is bound up with it, and in the
Homeric poems it was famous for its wealth. The Minyans are, however,
related to southern Thessaly also, and this relation is proved to be old
by myths and cults common to the district of Orchomenus and to southern
Thessaly. The northernmost important Mycenaean site is Iolcus on the
Gulf of Pagasae, whence the Argonauts started on their famous
expedition. Here myths and Mycenaean remains correspond

<span id="page_185">p. 185</span>

closely. The connections of the Minyans include the dominion of Pylos
also. We found reasons to think that the Minyans were more a trading
than a warring people. Thus they did not attain to the same mythological
fame as others in heroic mythology and epics, but their wide connections
and great wealth were not forgotten.

There remains another province penetrated by the Mycenaean civilization,
Attica. It has numerous Mycenaean remains and finds, but none of
first-rate importance. Attic heroic mythology is correspondingly poor
with one exception, the Theseus cycle, the elaboration of which belongs
to a great extent to historical times. But this cycle includes also
famous myths of certain Mycenaean origin, the slaying of the Minotaur,
the rape of Ariadne and the rape of Helen, and probably also the
capturing of the bull of Marathon. It is most interesting that the
first-mentioned myth goes back to the time before the final sack of
Cnossus, when the palace was still standing and the Minoan culture and
power still flourished. We found reasons to assume that the rape of
Ariadne and the rape of Helen are secularized forms of a Minoan hieratic
myth, the carrying off of the vegetation goddess, and are identical in
origin with the carrying off of Kore by Pluto.

Only one important myth is left, that of the Calydonian hunt, and this
may be thought to be an exception to the rule stating the correspondence
of mythical fame with Mycenaean remains. There is hardly any subject of
which we have such a vivid picture from Mycenaean art as the boar-hunt;
I mean the well-known wall paintings from the palace

<span id="page_186">p. 186</span>

of Tiryns which depict hunters and dogs charging a boar, and even ladies
driving in a chariot to the hunt. As was pointed out long ago, <span
id="fr_367"></span>[1](#fn_367.md) we have in these pictures, if not the
actual myth, its prototype from human life. It is interesting to note
also that a woman, Atalanta, plays the foremost part in this myth of the
hunt of the Calydonian boar. The myth of the Calydonian hunt ought, if
any, to go back to the Mycenaean age; the only objection is that Calydon
was not a center of Mycenaean civilization. But probably it was.
Numerous Mycenaean sherds were picked up on the surface of the acropolis
and there are walls of Mycenaean date; <span
id="fr_368"></span>[2](#fn_368.md) yet the excavations carried out by Dr.
Poulsen and Dr. Rhomaios in the last few years uncovered only remains
from historical times. There are, however, two hills at Calydon, and on
the higher hill, the acropolis of Calydon, Mycenaean remains are found.
They include a Mycenaean wall for fortification, and remains of two
houses of which one is apsidal; also Mycenaean sherds are found in the
earth. <span id="fr_369"></span>[3](#fn_369.md) This acropolis is still
left unexplored. The cursory observations which as yet are at our
disposal show that Calydon was inhabited in the Mycenaean age. As there
was a walled city with houses this settlement cannot have been
unimportant. It would be worth while to explore this Mycenaean town in
order to get an idea of its importance and to see whether the regular
connection between myths and Mycenaean civilization is not to be found
even here.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_367"></span>[186:1](mog12.htm#fr_367.md) H. R. Hall, *Aegean
Archaeology* (1915), p. 190.

<span id="fn_368"></span>[186:2](mog12.htm#fr_368) *Praktika* (1908.md), p.
9 *et seq*.

<span id="fn_369"></span>[186:3](mog12.htm#fr_369.md) Kindly communicated
by letter by Dr. Poulsen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter III. Heracles](mog13.md)
