[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [LGBT](../index.md)  [Sacred
Sexuality](../../sex/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](lca07.md) 
[Next](lca09.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_91">p. 91</span>

# MARRIAGE

### A FORECAST

IN answer to the last question it is not improbable that the casual
reader might suppose the writer of these pages to be in favor of a
general and indiscriminate loosening of all ties--for indeed it is
always easy to draw a large inference even from the simplest expression.

But such a conclusion would be rash. There is little doubt, I think,
that the compulsion of the marriage-tie (whether moral, social, or
merely legal) acts beneficially in a considerable number of
cases--though it is obvious that the more the compelling force takes a
moral or social form and the less purely legal it is, the better; and
that any changes which led to a cheap and continual transfer of
affections from one object to another would be disastrous both to the
character and happiness of a population. While we cannot help seeing
that the marriage-relation--in order to become the indwelling-place of
Love--must be made far more *free* than it is at present, we may also
recognise that a certain amount

<span id="page_92">p. 92</span>

of external pressure is not (as things are at least) without its uses:
that, for instance, it tends on the whole to concentrate affectional
experience and romance on one object, and that though this may mean a
loss at times in breadth it means a gain in depth and intensity; that,
in many cases, if it were not for some kind of bond, the two parties,
after their first passion for each other was past, and when the
unavoidable period of friction had set in, might in a moment of
irritation easily fly apart, whereas being forced for a while to
tolerate each other's defects they learn thereby one of the best lessons
of life-a tender forbearance and gentleness, which as time goes on does
not unfrequently deepen again into a more pure and perfect love even
than at first--a love founded indeed on the first physical intimacy, but
concentrated and intensified by years of linked experience, of twined
associations, of shared labors, and of mutual forgiveness; and in the
third place that the existence of a distinct tie or pledge discredits
the easily-current idea that mere pleasure-seeking is to be the object
of the association of the sexes--a phantasmal and delusive notion, which
if it once got its head, and the bit between its teeth, might soon dash
the car of human advance in ruin to the ground.

But having said thus much, it is obvious that

<span id="page_93">p. 93</span>

external public opinion and pressure are looked upon only as having an
*educational* value; and the question arises whether there is beneath
this any *reality* of marriage which will ultimately emerge and make
itself felt, enabling men and women to order their relations to each
other, and to walk freely, unhampered by props or pressures from
without.

And it would hardly be worth while writing on this subject, if one did
not believe in some such reality. Practically I do not doubt that the
more people think about these matters, and the more experience they
have, the more they must ever come to feel that there *is* such a thing
as a permanent and life-long union--perhaps a
many--life-long-union--founded on some deep elements of attachment and
congruity in character; and the more they must come to prize the
constancy and loyalty which rivets such unions, in comparison with the
fickle passion which tends to dissipate them.

In all men who have reached a certain grade of evolution, and certainly
in almost all women, the deep rousing of the sexual nature carries with
it a romance and tender emotional yearning towards the object of
affection, which lasts on and is not forgotten, even when the sexual
attraction has ceased to be strongly felt. This, in favorable cases,
forms

<span id="page_94">p. 94</span>

the basis of what may almost be called an amalgamated personality. That
there should exist one other person in the world towards whom all
openness of interchange should establish itself, from whom there should
be no concealment; whose body should be as dear to one, in every part,
as one's own; with whom there should be no sense of Mine or Thine, in
property or possession; into whose mind one's thoughts should naturally
flow, as it were to know themselves and to receive a new illumination;
and between whom and oneself there should be a spontaneous rebound of
sympathy in all the joys and sorrows and experiences of life; such is
perhaps one of the dearest wishes of the soul. It is obvious however
that this state of affairs cannot be reached at a single leap, but must
be the gradual result of years of intertwined memory and affection. For
such a union Love must lay the foundation, but patience and gentle
consideration and self-control must work unremittingly to perfect the
structure. At length each lover comes to know the complexion of the
other's mind, the wants, bodily and mental, the needs, the regrets, the
satisfactions of the other, almost as his or her own--and without
prejudice in favor of self rather than in favor of the other; above all,
both parties come to know in course of time, and after perhaps

<span id="page_95">p. 95</span>

some doubts and trials, that the great want, the great need, which holds
them together, is not going to fade away into thin air; but is going to
become stronger and more indefeasible as the years go on. There falls a
sweet, an irresistible, trust over their relation to each other, which
consecrates as it were the double life, making both feel that nothing
can now divide; and robbing each of all desire to remain, when death has
indeed (or at least in outer semblance) removed the other. <span
id="fr_15"></span>[1](#fn_15.md)

So perfect and gracious a union--even if not always realised--is still,
I say, the *bonâ fide* desire of most of those who have ever thought
about such matters. It obviously yields far more and more enduring joy
and satisfaction in life than any number of frivolous relationships. It
commends itself to the common sense, so to speak, of the modern
mind--and does not require, for its proof, the artificial authority of
Church and State. At the same time it is equally evident--and a child
could understand this--that it requires some rational forbearance and
self-control for its realisation, and it is quite intelligible too, as
already said, that there *may* be cases in which a little outside
pressure, of social opinion, or even actual

<span id="page_96">p. 96</span>

law, may be helpful for the supplementing or reinforcement of the weak
personal self-control of those concerned.

The modern Monogamic Marriage [96](lca15.htm#xref_96.md) however, certified
and sanctioned by Church and State, though apparently directed to this
ideal, has for the most part fallen short of it. For in constituting--as
in a vast number of cases--a union resting on nothing but the outside
pressure of Church and State, it constituted a thing obviously and by
its nature bad and degrading; While in its more successful instances by
a too great exclusiveness it has condemned itself to a fatal narrowness
and stuffiness.

Looking back to the historical and physiological aspects of the question
it might of course be contended--and probably with some truth--that the
human male is, by his nature and needs, polygamous. Nor is it necessary
to suppose that polygamy in certain countries and races is by any means
so degrading or unsuccessful an institution as some folk would have it
to be. <span id="fr_16"></span>[1](#fn_16.md) But, as Letourneau in his
"Evolution of Marriage" points out,

<span id="page_97">p. 97</span>

the progress of society in the past has on the whole been from confusion
to distinction; and we may fairly suppose that with the progress of our
own race (for each race no doubt has its special genius in such
matters), and as the spiritual and emotional sides of man develop in
relation to the physical, there is probably a tendency for our deeper
alliances to become more unitary. Though it might be said that the
growing complexity of man's nature would be likely to lead him into more
rather than fewer relationships, yet on the other hand it is obvious
that as the depth and subtlety of any attachment that will really hold
him increases, so does such attachment become more permanent and
durable, and less likely to be realised in a number of persons. Woman,
on the other hand, cannot be said to be by her physical nature
polyandrous as man is polygynous. Though of course there are plenty of
examples of women living in a state of polyandry both among savage and
civilised peoples, yet her more limited sexual needs, and her long
periods of gestation, render one mate physically sufficient for her;
while her more clinging affectional nature perhaps accentuates her
capacity of absorption in the one.

In both man and woman then we may say that we find a distinct tendency
towards the formation of

<span id="page_98">p. 98</span>

this double unit of wedded life (I hardly like to use the word Monogamy
on account of its sad associations)--and while we do not want to stamp
such natural unions with any false irrevocability or dogmatic
exclusiveness, what we do want is a recognition to-day of the tendency
to their formation as a natural *fact*, independent of any artificial
laws, just as one might believe in the natural bias of two atoms of
certain different chemical substances to form a permanent compound atom
or molecule.

It might not be so very difficult to get quite young people to
understand this--to understand that even though they may have to contend
with some superfluity of passion in early years, yet that the most
deeply-rooted desire within them will probably in the end point to a
permanent union with one mate; and that towards this end they must be
prepared to use self-control against the aimless straying of their
passions, and patience and tenderness towards the realisation of the
union when its time comes. Probably most youths and girls, at the age of
romance, would easily appreciate this position; and it would bring to
them a much more effective and natural idea of the sacredness of
Marriage than they ever get from the artificial thunder of the Church
and the State on the subject.

No doubt the suggestion of the mere possibility of

<span id="page_99">p. 99</span>

any added freedom of choice and experience in the relations of the sexes
will be very alarming to some people--but it is so, I think, not because
they are at all ignorant that men already take to themselves
considerable latitude, and that a distinct part of the undoubted evils
that accompany that latitude springs from the fact that it is not
recognised; not because they are ignorant that a vast number of
respectable women and girls suffer frightful calamities and anguish by
reason of the utter *inexperience* of sex in which they are brought up
and have to live; but because such good people assume that any the least
loosening of the formal barriers between the sexes must mean (and must
be meant to mean) an utter dissolution of all ties, and the reign of
mere licentiousness. They are convinced that nothing but the most
unyielding and indeed exasperating straight-jacket can save society from
madness and ruin.

To those, however, who can look facts in the face, and who see that as a
matter of fact the *reality* of Marriage is coming more and more to be
considered in the public mind in comparison with its *formalities*, the
first thought will probably be one of congratulation that after such
ages of treatment as a mere formality there should be any sense of the
reality of the tie left; and the second

<span id="page_100">p. 100</span>

will be the question how to give this reality its natural form and
expression. Having satisfied ourselves that the formation of a more or
less permanent double unit is--for our race and time--on the whole the
natural and ascendant law of sex-union, slowly and with whatever
exceptions establishing and enforcing itself independently of any
artificial enactments that exist, then we shall not feel called upon to
tear our hair or rend our garments at the prospect of added freedom for
the operation of this force, but shall rather be anxious to consider how
it may best *be* freed and given room for its reasonable development and
growth.

I shall therefore devote the rest of the chapter to this question. And
it will probably seem (looking back to what has already been said) that
the points which most need consideration, as means to this end, are (1)
the furtherance of the freedom and self-dependence of women; (2) the
provision of some rational teaching, of heart and of head, for both
sexes during the period of youth; (3) the recognition in marriage itself
of a freer, more companionable, and less pettily exclusive relationship;
and (4) the abrogation or modification of the present odious law which
binds people together for *life*, without scruple, and in the most
artificial and ill-assorted unions.

<span id="page_101">p. 101</span>

It must be admitted that the first point (1) is of basic importance. As
true Freedom cannot be without Love so true Love cannot be without
Freedom. You cannot truly give yourself to another, unless you are
master or mistress of yourself to begin with. Not only has the general
*custom* of the self-dependence and self-ownership of women, in moral,
social, and economic respects, to be gradually introduced, but the Law
has to be altered in a variety of cases where it lags behind the public
conscience in these matters--as in actual marriage, where it still
leaves woman uncertain as to her rights over her own body, or in
politics, where it still denies to her a voice in the framing of the
statutes which are to bind her.

With regard to (2) hardly any one at this time of day would seriously
doubt the desirability of giving adequate teaching to boys and girls.
That is a point on which we have sufficiently touched, and which need
not be farther discussed here. But beyond this it is important, and
especially perhaps, as things stand now, for girls-that each youth or
girl should personally see enough of the other sex at an early period to
be able to form some kind of judgment of his or her relation to that sex
and to sex-matters generally. It is monstrous that the first case of
sex-glamor--the true nature of which would be exposed

<span id="page_102">p. 102</span>

by a little experience--should, perhaps for two people, decide the
destinies of a life-time [102](lca15.htm#xref_102.md). Yet the more the
sexes are kept apart, the more overwhelming does this glamor become, and
the more ignorance is there, on either side, as to its nature. No doubt
it is one of the great advantages of co-education of the sexes, that it
tends to diminish these evils. Co-education, games and sports to some
extent in common, and the doing away with the absurd superstition that
because Corydon and Phyllis happen to kiss each other sitting on a gate,
therefore they must live together all their lives, would soon mend
matters considerably. Nor would a reasonable familiarity of this kind
between the sexes in youth necessarily mean an increase of casual or
clandestine sex-relations. But even if casualties did occur they would
not be the fatal and unpardonable sins that they now--at least for
girls--are considered to be. Though the recognition of anything like
common pre-matrimonial sex-intercourse would probably be foreign to the
temper of a northern nation; yet it is open to question whether Society
here, in its mortal and fetichistic dread of the thing, has not, by
keeping the young of both sexes in ignorance and darkness and seclusion
from each other, created worse ills and suffering than it has prevented,
and whether, by giving sexual acts so feverish an importance, it has

<span id="page_103">p. 103</span>

not intensified the particular evil that it dreaded, rather than abated
it.

In the next place (3) we come to the establishment in marriage itself of
a freer and broader and more healthy relationship than generally exists
at the present time. Attractive in some ways as the ideal of the
exclusive attachment is, it runs the fatal risk, as we have already
pointed out, of lapsing into a mere stagnant double selfishness. But,
after all, Love is fed not by what it takes, but by what it gives; and
the love of man and wife too must he fed by the love they give to
others. If they cannot come out of their secluded haven to reach a hand
to others, or even to give some boon of affection to those who need it
more than themselves, or if they mistrust each other in doing so, then
assuredly they are not very well fitted to live together.

A marriage, so free, so spontaneous, that it would allow of wide
excursions of the pair from each other, in common or even in separate
objects of work and interest, and yet would hold them all the time in
the bond of absolute sympathy, would by its very freedom be all the more
poignantly attractive, and by its very scope and breadth all the richer
and more vital--would be in a sense indestructible; like the relation of
two suns which, revolving in fluent and rebounding curves, only recede
from each other in

<span id="page_104">p. 104</span>

order to return again with renewed swiftness into close proximity--and
which together blend their rays into the glory of one double star.

It has been the inability to see or understand this very simple truth
that has largely contributed to the failure of the Monogamic union. The
narrow physical passion of jealousy, the petty sense of private property
in another person, social opinion, and legal enactments, have all
converged to choke and suffocate wedded love in egoism, lust, and
meanness. But surely it is not very difficult (for those who believe in
the real thing) to imagine so sincere and natural a trust between man
and wife that neither would be greatly alarmed at the other's friendship
with a third person, nor conclude at once that it meant mere
infidelity--or difficult even to imagine that such a friendship might be
hailed as a gain by both parties. And if it is quite impossible (to some
people) to see in such intimacies anything but a confusion of all
sex-relations and a chaos of mere animal desire, we can only reply that
this view exposes with fatal precision the kind of thoughts which our
present marriage-system engenders. In order to suppose a rational
marriage at all one must credit the parties concerned with *some*
modicum of real affection, candor, common sense and self-control.

Withal seeing the remarkable and immense *variety* 

<span id="page_105">p. 105</span>

of love in human nature, when the feeling is really touched--how the
love-offering of one person's soul and body is entirely different from
that of another person's, so much so as almost to require another
name--how one passion is predominantly physical, and another
predominantly emotional, and another contemplative, or spiritual, or
practical, or sentimental; how in one case it is jealous and exclusive,
and in another hospitable and free, and so forth-it seems rash to lay
down any very hard and fast general laws for the marriage-relation, or
to insist that a real and honorable affection can only exist under this
or that special form. It is probably through this fact of the variety of
love that it does remain possible, in some cases, for married people to
have intimacies with outsiders, and yet to continue perfectly true to
each other; and in rare instances, for triune and other such relations
to be permanently maintained.

 

We now come to the last consideration, namely (4) the modification of
the present law of marriage. It is pretty clear that people will not
much longer consent to pledge themselves irrevocably for life as at
present. And indeed there are already plentiful indications of a growing
change of practice. The more people come to recognise the sacredness and

naturalness of the real union, the less will they be willing to bar
themselves from this by a life-long and artificial contract made in
their salad days. Hitherto the great bulwark of the existing institution
has been the dependence of Women, which has given each woman a direct
and most material interest in keeping up the supposed sanctity of the
bond--and which has prevented a man of any generosity from proposing an
alteration which would have the appearance of freeing himself at the
cost of the woman; but as this fact of the dependence of women gradually
dissolves out, and as the great fact of the spiritual nature of the true
Marriage crystalises into more clearness--so will the formal bonds which
bar the formation of the latter gradually break away and become of small
import.

Love when felt at all deeply has an element of transcendentalism in it,
which makes it the most natural thing in the world for the two
lovers--even though drawn together by a passing sex-attraction--to swear
eternal troth to each other; but there is something quite diabolic and
mephistophelean in the practice of the Law, which creeping up behind, as
it were, at this critical moment, and overhearing the two thus pledging
themselves, claps its book together with a triumphant bang, and
exclaims:

<span id="page_137">p. 137</span>

\[paragraph continues\] "There now you are married and done for, for the
rest of your natural lives."

What actual changes in Law and Custom the collective sense of society
will bring about is a matter which in its detail we cannot of course
foresee or determine. But that the drift will be, and must be, towards
greater freedom, is pretty clear. Ideally speaking it is plain that
anything like a perfect union must have perfect freedom for its
condition; and while it is quite supposable that a lover might out of
the fulness of his heart *make* promises and give pledges, it is really
almost inconceivable that anyone having that delicate and proud sense
which marks deep feeling, could possibly *demand* a promise from his
loved one. As there is undoubtedly a certain natural reticence in sex,
so perhaps the most decent thing in true Marriage would be to say
nothing, make no promises--either for a year or a lifetime. Promises are
bad at any time, and when the heart is full silence befits it best.
Practically, however, since a love of this kind is slow to be realised,
since social custom is slow to change, and since the partial dependence
and slavery of Woman must yet for a while continue, it is likely for
such period that formal contracts of some kind [107](lca15.htm#xref_107.md)
will still be made; only these (it may be hoped) will lose

<span id="page_108">p. 108</span>

their irrevocable and rigid character, and become in some degree adapted
to the needs of the contracting parties.

Such contracts might of course, if adopted, be very various in respect
to conjugal rights, conditions of termination, division of property,
responsibility for and rights over children, etc. In some cases <span
id="fr_17"></span>[1](#fn_17) [108](lca15.htm#xref_108.md) possibly they
might be looked upon as preliminary to a later and more permanent
alliance; in others they would provide, for disastrous marriages, a
remedy free from the inordinate scandals of the present Divorce Courts.
It may however be said that rather than adopt any new system of
contracts, public opinion in this country would tend to a simple
facilitation of Divorce, and that if the latter were made (with due
provision for the children) to depend on mutual consent, it would become
little more than an affair of registration, and the scandals of the
proceeding would be avoided. In any case we think that
marriage-contracts, if existing at all, must tend more and more to
become matters of private arrangement as far as the relations of husband
and wife are concerned, and that this is likely to happen in proportion
as woman becomes more free, and therefore more competent to act in her
own right, It would be felt intolerable, in any decently

<span id="page_109">p. 109</span>

constituted society, that the old blunderbuss of the Law should
interfere in the delicate relations of wedded life. As it is to-day the
situation is most absurd. On the one hand, having been constituted from
times back in favor of the male, the Law still gives to the husband
barbarous rights over the person of his spouse; on the other hand, to
compensate for this, it rushes in with the farcicalities of Breach of
Promise; and in any case, having once pronounced its benediction over a
pair--however hateful the alliance may turn out to be to both parties,
and however obvious its failure to the whole world--the stupid old thing
blinks owlishly on at its own work, and professes itself totally unable
to undo the knot which once it tied!

The only point where there is a permanent ground for
State-interference--and where indeed there is no doubt that the public
authority should in some way make itself felt--is in the matter of the
children resulting from any alliance. Here the relation of the pair
ceases to be private and becomes social; and the interests of the child
itself, and of the nation whose future citizen the child is, have to be
safe-guarded. Any contracts, or any proposals of divorce, before they
could be sanctioned by the public authority, would have to contain
satisfactory provisions for the care and

<span id="page_110">p. 110</span>

maintenance of the children in such casualties as might ensue; nor ought
there to be maintained any legal distinction between 'natural' and
'legitimate' children, since it is clear that whatever individuals or
society at large may, in the former case, think of the conduct of the
parents, no disability should on that account accrue to the child, nor
should the parents (if identifiable) be able to escape their full
responsibility for bringing it into the world. If those good people who
make such a terrific outcry against folk entering into married life
without going through all the abracadabra of the Law, *on account of the
children*, would try and get the law altered so as to give illegitimate
children the same status and claim on their parents as legitimate
children, it would show more genuinely for their anxiety about the
children, and would really be doing something in the interests of
positive morality.

If it be objected that private contracts, or such facilitations of
Divorce as here spoken of, would simply lead to frivolous experimental
relationships entered into and broken-off *ad infinitum*, it must be
remembered that the responsibility for due rearing and maintenance of
children must give serious pause to such a career; and that to suppose
that any great mass of the people would find their good iii a kind of
matrimonial game of General Post is to

<span id="page_111">p. 111</span>

suppose that the mass of the people have really never acquired or been
taught the rudiments of common sense in such matters--is to suppose a
case for which there would hardly be a parallel in the customs of any
nation or tribe that we know of.

In conclusion, it is evident that no very great change for the better in
marriage-relations can take place except as the accompaniment of
deep-lying changes in Society at large; and that alterations in the Law
alone will effect but a limited improvement. Indeed it is not very
likely, as long as the present commercial order of society lasts, that
the existing Marriage-laws--founded as they are on the idea of
property--*will* be very radically altered, though they may be to some
extent. More likely is it that, underneath the law, the common practice
will slide forward into newer customs. With the rise of the new society,
which is already outlining itself within the structure of the old, many
of the difficulties and bugbears, that at present seem to stand in the
way of a more healthy relation between the sexes, will of themselves
disappear.

It must be acknowledged, however, that though a gradual broadening out
and humanising of Law and Custom are quite necessary, it cannot fairly
be charged against these ancient tyrants that they are responsible for
*all* the troubles connected with sex.

<span id="page_112">p. 112</span>

\[paragraph continues\] There are millions of people to-day who never
could marry happily--however favorable the conditions might be--simply
because their natures do not contain in sufficient strength the elements
of loving surrender to another; and, as long as the human heart is what
it is, there will be natural tragedies arising from the willingness or
unwillingness of one person to release another when the former finds
that his or her love is not returned. <span
id="fr_18"></span>[1](#fn_18.md) While it is quite necessary that these
natural tragedies should not be complicated and multiplied by needless
legal interference--complicated into the numberless artificial tragedies
which are so exasperating when represented on the stage or in romance,
and so saddening when witnessed in real life--still we may acknowledge
that, short of the millennium, they will always be with us, and that no
institution of

<span id="page_113">p. 113</span>

marriage alone, or absence of institution, will rid us of them. That
entire and unswerving refusal to 'cage' another person, or to accept an
affection not perfectly free and spontaneous, which will, we are fain to
think, be always more and more the mark of human love, must inevitably
bring its own price of mortal suffering with it; yet the Love so gained,
whether in the individual or in society, will be found in the end to be
worth the pang--and as far beyond the other love, as is the wild bird of
Paradise that comes to feed out of our hands unbidden more lovely than
the prisoner we shut with draggled wings behind the bars. Love is
doubtless the last and most difficult lesson that humanity has to learn;
in a sense it underlies all the others. Perhaps the time has come for
the modern nations when, ceasing to be children, they may even try to
learn it.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_15"></span>[95:1](lca08.htm#fr_15.md) It is curious that the
early Church Service had "Till death us depart," but in 1661 this was
altered to "Till death us do part."

<span id="fn_16"></span>[96:1](lca08.htm#fr_16.md) See R. F. Burton's
*Pilgrimage to El-Medinah and Meccah*, chap. xxiv. He says however, " As
far as my limited observations go *polyandry* is the only state of
society in which jealousy and quarrels about the sex are the exception
and not the rule of life!"

<span id="fn_17"></span>[108:1](lca08.htm#fr_17.md) *See*
Appendix. [108](lca15.htm#xref_108.md)

<span id="fn_18"></span>[112:1](lca08.htm#fr_18.md) Perhaps one of the most
sombre and inscrutable of these natural tragedies lies, for Woman, in
the fact that the man to whom she first surrenders her body often
acquires for her (whatever his character may be) so profound and
inalienable a claim upon her heart. While, either for man or woman, it
is almost impossible to thoroughly understand their own nature, or that
of others, till they have had sex-experience, it happens so that in the
case of woman the experience which should thus give the power of choice
is frequently the very one which seals her destiny. It reveals to her,
as at a glance, the tragedy of a life-time which lies before her, and
yet which she cannot do other than accept.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Intermediate Sex](lca09.md)
