[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [LGBT](../index.md)  [Sacred
Sexuality](../../sex/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](lca08.md) 
[Next](lca10.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_114">p. 114</span>

# THE INTERMEDIATE SEX <span id="fr_19"></span>[1](#fn_19) [114](lca15.htm#xref_114.md)

IN late years (and since the arrival of the New Woman amongst us) many
things in the relation of men and women to each other have altered, or
et any rate become clearer. The growing sense of equality in habits and
customs--university studies, art, music, politics, the bicycle,
etc.--all these things have brought about a *rapprochement* between the
sexes. If the modem woman is a little more masculine in some ways than
her predecessor, the modern man (it is to be hoped), while by no means
effeminate, is a little more sensitive in temperament and artistic in
feeling than the original John Bull. It is beginning to be recognised
that the sexes do not or should not normally form two groups hopelessly
isolated in habit and feeling from each other, but that they rather
represent the two poles of *one* group--which is the human race; so that
while certainly the extreme

<span id="page_115">p. 115</span>

specimens at either pole are vastly divergent, there are great numbers
in the middle region who (though differing corporeally as men and women)
are by emotion and temperament very near to each other. We all know
women with a strong dash of the masculine temperament, and we all know
men whose almost feminine sensibility and intuition seem to belie their
bodily form. Nature, it might appear, in mixing the elements which go to
compose each individual, does not always keep her two groups of
ingredients--which represent the two sexes--properly apart, but often
throws them crosswise in a somewhat baffling manner, now this way and
now that; yet wisely, we must think--for if a severe distinction of
elements were always maintained, the two sexes would soon drift into far
latitudes and absolutely cease to understand each other. As it is, there
are some remarkable and (we think) indispensable types of character, in
whom there is such a union or balance of the feminine and masculine
qualities that these people become to a great extent the interpreters of
men and women to each other.

There is another point which has become clearer of late. For as people
are beginning to see that the sexes form in a certain sense a continuous
group, so they are beginning to see that Love and Friendship--

<span id="page_116">p. 116</span>

which have been so often set apart from each other as things
distinct--are in reality closely related and shade imperceptibly into
each other. Women are beginning to demand that Marriage shall mean
Friendship as well as Passion; that a comrade-like Equality shall be
included in the word Love; and it is recognised that from the one
extreme of a 'Platonic' friendship (generally between persons of the
same sex) up to the other extreme of passionate love (generally between
persons of opposite sex) no hard and fast line can at any point be drawn
effectively separating the different kinds of attachment. We know, in
fact, of Friendships so romantic in sentiment that they verge into love,
we know of Loves so intellectual and spiritual that they hardly dwell in
the sphere of Passion.

A moment's thought will show that the general conceptions indicated
above--if anywhere near the truth--point to an immense diversity of
human temperament and character in matters relating to sex and love; but
though such diversity has probably always existed, it has only in
comparatively recent times become a subject of study.

More than thirty years ago, however, an Austrian writer, K. H. Ulrichs,
drew attention in a series of pamphlets (*Memnon*, *Ara Spei*,
*Inclusa*, etc.) to the

<span id="page_117">p. 117</span>

existence of a class of people who strongly illustrate the above
remarks, and with whom specially this paper is concerned. He pointed out
that there were people born in such a position--as it were on the
dividing line between the sexes--that while belonging distinctly to one
sex as far as their bodies are concerned they may be said to belong
*mentally* and *emotionally* to the other; that there were men, for
instance, who might be described as of feminine soul enclosed in a male
body (*anima muliebris in corpore virili inclusa*), or in other cases,
women whose definition would be just the reverse. And he maintained that
this doubleness of nature was to a great extent proved by the special
direction of their love-sentiment. For in such cases, as indeed might be
expected, the (apparently) masculine person instead of forming a
love-union with a female tended to contract romantic friendships with
one of his own sex; while the apparently feminine would, instead of
marrying in the usual way, devote herself to the love of another
feminine.

People of this kind (*i.e.*, having this special variation of the
love-sentiment) he called Urnings; <span id="fr_20"></span>[1](#fn_20.md)
and though we are not obliged to accept his theory about

<span id="page_118">p. 118</span>

the crosswise connexion between 'soul' and 'body,' since at best these
words are somewhat vague and indefinite; yet his work was important
because it was one of the first attempts, in modern times, to recognise
the existence of what might be called an Intermediate sex, and to give
at any rate some explanation of it. <span id="fr_21"></span>[1](#fn_21.md)

Since that time the subject has been widely studied and written about by
scientific men and others, especially on the Continent (though in
England it is still comparatively unknown), and by means of an extended
observation of present-day cases, as well as the indirect testimony of
the history and literature of past times, quite a body of general
conclusions has been arrived at--of which I propose in the following
pages to give some slight account.

Contrary to the general impression, one of the first points that emerges
from this study is that 'Urnings,' or Uranians, are by no means so very
rare; but that they form, beneath the surface of society, a large class.
It remains difficult, however, to get an exact statement

<span id="page_119">p. 119</span>

of their numbers; and this for more than one reason: partly because,
owing to the want of any general understanding of their case, these folk
tend to conceal their true feelings from all but their own kind, and
indeed often deliberately act in such a manner as to lead the world
astray--(whence it arises that a normal man living in a certain society
will often refuse to believe that there is a single Urning in the circle
of his acquaintance, while one of the latter, or one that understands
the nature, living in the same society, can count perhaps a score or
more)--and partly because it is indubitable that the numbers do vary
very greatly, not only in different countries, but even in different
classes in the same country. The consequence of all this being that we
have estimates differing very widely from each other. Dr. Grabowsky, a
well-known writer in Germany, quotes figures (which we think must be
exaggerated) as high as 1 man in every 22, while Dr. Albert Moll (*Die
Conträre Sexual-enphfindung*, chap. 3) gives estimates varying from 1 in
every 50 to as low as 1 in every 500. <span
id="fr_22"></span>[1](#fn_22.md) These figures apply to such as are
exclusively of the said nature, *i.e.*, to those whose deepest feelings
of

<span id="page_120">p. 120</span>

love and friendship go out only to persons of their own sex. Of course,
if in addition are included those double-natured people (of whom there
is a great number) who experience the normal attachment, with the
homogenic tendency in less or greater degree superadded, the estimates
must be greatly higher.

In the second place it emerges (also contrary to the general impression)
that men and women of the exclusive Uranian type are by no means
necessarily morbid in any way--unless, indeed, their peculiar
temperament be pronounced in itself morbid. Formerly it was assumed, as
a matter of course, that the type was merely a result of disease and
degeneration; but now with the examination of the actual facts it
appears that, on the contrary, many are fine, healthy specimens of their
sex, muscular and well-developed in body, of powerful brain, high
standard of conduct, and with nothing abnormal or morbid of any kind
observable in their physical structure or constitution. This is, of
course, not true of all, and there still remain a certain number of
cases of weakly type to support the neuropathic view. Yet it is very
noticeable that this view is much less insisted on by the later writers
than by the earlier. It is also worth noticing that it is now
acknowledged that even in the most healthy cases the special affectional
temperament

<span id="page_121">p. 121</span>

of the 'Intermediate' is, as a rule, ineradicable; so much so that when
(as in not a few instances) such men and women, from social or other
considerations, have forced themselves to marry, and even have children,
they have still not been able to overcome their own bias, or the leaning
after all of their life-attachment to some friend of their own sex.

This subject, though obviously one of considerable interest and
importance, has been hitherto, as I have pointed out, but little
discussed in this country, partly owing to a certain amount of doubt and
distrust which has, not unnaturally perhaps, surrounded it. And
certainly if the men and women born with the tendency in question were
only exceedingly rare, though it would not be fair on that account to
ignore them, yet it would hardly be necessary to dwell at great length
on their case. But as the class is really, on any computation, numerous,
it becomes a duty for society not only to understand them but to help
them to understand themselves.

For there is no doubt that in many cases people of this kind suffer a
good deal from their own temperament--and yet after all it is possible
that they may have an important part to play in the evolution of the
race. Anyone who realises what Love is, the dedication of the heart, so
profound, so absorbing, so

<span id="page_122">p. 122</span>

mysterious, so imperative, and always just in the noblest natures so
strong, cannot fail to see how difficult, how tragic even, must often be
the fate of those whose deepest feelings are destined from the earliest
days to be a riddle and a stumbling-block, unexplained to themselves,
passed over in silence by others. To call people of such temperament
'morbid,' and so forth, is of no use. Such a term is, in fact, absurdly
inapplicable to many, who are amongst the most active, the most amiable
and accepted members of society; besides, it forms no solution of the
problem in question, and only amounts to marking down for disparagement
a fellow-creature who has already considerable difficulties to contend
with. Says Dr. Moll, "Anyone who has seen many Urnings will probably
admit that they form a by no means enervated human group; on the
contrary, one finds powerful, healthy-looking folk among them"; but in
the very next sentence he says that they "suffer severely" from the way
they are regarded; and in the manifesto of a considerable community of
such people in Germany occur these words, "The rays of sunshine in the
night of our existence are so rare, that we are responsive and deeply
grateful for the least movement, for every single voice that speaks in
our favour in the forum of mankind." <span id="fr_23"></span>[1](#fn_23.md)

<span id="page_123">p. 123</span>

In dealing with this class of folk, then, while I do not deny that they
present a difficult problem, I think that just for that very reason
their case needs discussion. It would be a great mistake to suppose that
their attachments are necessarily sexual, or connected with sexual acts.
On the contrary (as abundant evidence shows), they are often purely
emotional in their character; and to confuse Uranians (as is so often
done) with libertines having no law but curiosity m self-indulgence is
to do them a great wrong. At the same time, it is evident that their
special temperament may sometimes cause them difficulty in regard to
their sexual relations. Into this subject we need not enter. But we may
point out how hard it is, especially for the young among them, that a
veil of complete silence should be drawn over the subject, leading to
the most painful misunderstandings, and perversions and confusions of
mind; and that there should be no hint of guidance; nor any recognition
of the solitary and really serious inner struggles they may have to
face! If the problem is a difficult one--as it undoubtedly is--the fate
of those people is already hard who have to meet it in their own
persons, without their suffering in addition from the refusal of society
to give them any help. It is partly for these reasons, and to throw a
little light where it may be

<span id="page_124">p. 124</span>

needed, that I have thought it might be advisable in this paper simply
to give a few general characteristics of the Intermediate types.

As indicated then already, in bodily structure there is, as a rule,
nothing to distinguish the subjects of our discussion from ordinary men
and women; but if we take the general mental characteristics it appears
from almost universal testimony that the male tends to be of a rather
gentle, emotional disposition--with defects, if such exist, in the
direction of subtlety, evasiveness, timidity, vanity, etc.; while the
female is just the opposite--fiery, active, bold and truthful, with
defects running to brusqueness and coarseness. Moreover, the mind of the
former is generally intuitive and instinctive in its perceptions, with
more or less of artistic feeling; while the mind of the latter is more
logical, scientific, and precise than usual with the normal woman. So
marked indeed are these general characteristics that sometimes by means
of them (though not an infallible guide) the nature of the boy or girl
can be detected in childhood, before full development has taken place;
and needless to say it may often be very important to be able to do
this.

It was no doubt in consequence of the observation of these signs that K.
H. Ulrichs proposed his theory; and though the theory, as we have said,
does not by

<span id="page_125">p. 125</span>

any means meet *all* the facts, still it is perhaps not without merit,
and may be worth bearing in mind.

In the case, for instance, of a woman of this temperament (defined we
suppose as "a male soul in a female body") the theory helps us to
understand how it might be possible for her to fall *bonâ fide* in love
with another woman. Krafft-Ebing, of Vienna, gives <span
id="fr_24"></span>[1](#fn_24) the case of a lady (A..md), 28 years of age,
who fell deeply in love with a younger one (B.). "I loved her divinely,"
she said. They lived together, and the union lasted four years, but was
then broken by the marriage of B. A. suffered in consequence from
frightful depression; but in the end--though without real love--got
married herself. Her depression however, only increased, and deepened
into illness. The doctors, when consulted, said that all would be well
if she could only have a child. The husband, who loved his wife
sincerely, could not understand her enigmatic behaviour. She was
friendly to him, suffered his caresses, but for days afterwards remained
"dull, exhausted, plagued with irritation of the spine, and nervous."
Presently a journey of the married pair led to another meeting with the
female friend--who had now been wedded (but also unhappily) for three
years. " Both ladies trembled with joy and

<span id="page_126">p. 126</span>

excitement as they fell into each other's arms, and were thenceforth
inseparable. The man found that this friendship relation was a singular
one, and hastened the departure. When the opportunity occurred, he
convinced himself from the correspondence between his wife and her
'friend' that their letters were exactly like those of two lovers."

It appears that the loves of such women are often very intense, and (as
also in the case of male Urnings) life-long. Both classes feel
themselves blessed when they love happily. Nevertheless, to many of them
it is a painful fact that--in consequence of their peculiar
temperament--they are, though fond of children, not in the position to
found a family.

We have so far limited ourselves to some very general characteristics of
the Intermediate race. It may help to clear and fix our ideas if we now
describe more in detail, first, what may be called the extreme and
exaggerated types of the race, and then the more normal and perfect
types. By doing so we shall get a more definite and concrete view of our
subject.

In the first place, then, the extreme specimens--as in most cases of
extremes--are not particularly attractive, sometimes quite the reverse.
In the male of this kind we have a distinctly effeminate type,
sentimental, lackadaisical, mincing in gait and manners,

<span id="page_127">p. 127</span>

something of a chatterbox, skilful at the needle and in woman's work,
sometimes taking pleasure in dressing in woman's clothes; his figure not
unfrequently betraying a tendency towards the feminine, large at the
hips, supple, not muscular, the face wanting in hair, the voice
inclining to be high-pitched, etc.; while his dwelling-room is orderly
in the extreme, even natty, and choice of decoration and perfume. His
affection too is often feminine in character, clinging, dependent and
jealous, as of one desiring to be loved almost more than to love. <span
id="fr_25"></span>[1](#fn_25.md)

On the other hand, as the extreme type of the homogenic female, we have
a rather markedly aggressive person, of strong passions, masculine
manners and movements, practical in the conduct of life, sensuous rather
than sentimental in love, often untidy, and *outré* in attire; <span
id="fr_26"></span>[2](#fn_26.md) her figure muscular, her voice rather low
in pitch; her dwelling-room decorated with sporting-scenes, pistols,
etc., and not without a suspicion of the fragrant weed in the
atmosphere; while her love (generally to rather soft and feminine

<span id="page_128">p. 128</span>

specimens of her own sex) is often a sort of furor, similar to the
ordinary masculine love, and at times almost uncontrollable.

These are types which, on account of their salience, everyone will
recognise more or less. Naturally, when they occur, they excite a good
deal of attention, and it is not an uncommon impression that most
persons of the homogenic nature belong to either one or other of these
classes. But in reality, of course, these extreme developments are rare,
and for the most part the temperament in question is embodied in men and
women of quite normal and unsensational exterior. Speaking of this
subject, and the connection between effeminateness and the homogenic
nature in men, Dr. Moll says: "It is, however, as well to point out at
the outset that effeminacy does not by any means show itself in all
Urnings. Though one may find this or that indication in a great number
of cases, yet it cannot be denied that a very large percentage, perhaps
by far the majority of them, do not exhibit pronounced effeminacy." And
it may be supposed that we may draw the same conclusion with regard to
women of this class--namely, that the majority of them do not exhibit
pronounced masculine habits. In fact, while these extreme cases are of
the greatest value from a scientific point of view as marking

<span id="page_129">p. 129</span>

tendencies and limits of development in certain directions, it would be
a serious mistake to look upon them as representative cases of the whole
phases of human evolution concerned.

If now we come to what may be called the more normal type of the Uranian
man, we find a man who, while possessing thoroughly masculine powers of
mind and body, combines with them the tenderer and more emotional
soul-nature of the woman--and sometimes to a remarkable degree. Such
men, as said, are often muscular and well-built, and not distinguishable
in exterior structure and the carriage of body from others of their own
sex; but emotionally they are extremely complex, tender, sensitive,
pitiful and loving, full of storm and stress, of ferment and fluctuation
of the heart; the logical faculty may or may not, in their case, be
well-developed, but intuition is always strong; like women they read
characters at a glance, and know, without knowing how, what is passing
in the minds of others; for nursing and waiting on the needs of others
they have often a peculiar gift; at the bottom lies the artist-nature,
with the artist's sensibility and perception. Such an one is often a
dreamer, of brooding reserved habits, often a musician, or a man of
culture, courted in society, which nevertheless does not understand
him--though sometimes a child of

<span id="page_130">p. 130</span>

the people, without any culture, but almost always with a peculiar
inborn refinement. De Joux, who speaks on the whole favourably of
Uranian men and women, says of the former: "They are enthusiastic for
poetry and music, are often eminently skilful in the fine arts, and are
overcome with emotion and sympathy at the least sad occurrence. Their
sensitiveness, their endless tenderness for children, their love of
flowers, their great pity for beggars and crippled folk are truly
womanly." And in another passage he indicates the artist-nature, when he
says: "The nerve-system of many an Urning is the finest and the most
complicated musical instrument in the service of the interior
personality that can be imagined."

It would seem probable that the attachment of such an one is of a very
tender and profound character; indeed, it is possible that in this class
of men we have the love sentiment in one of its most perfect forms--a
form in which from the necessities of the situation the sensuous
element, though present, is exquisitely subordinated to the spiritual.
Says one writer on this subject, a Swiss, "Happy indeed is that man who
has won a real Urning for his friend--he walks on roses, without ever
having to fear the thorns"; and he adds, "Can there ever be a more
perfect sick-nurse than an Urning?" And though

<span id="page_131">p. 131</span>

these are *ex parte* utterances, we may believe that there is an
appreciable grain of truth in them. Another writer, quoted by De Joux,
speaks to somewhat the same effect, and may perhaps be received in a
similar spirit. "We form," he says, "a peculiar aristocracy of modest
spirits, of good and refined habit, and in many masculine circles are
the representatives of the higher mental and artistic element. In us
dreamers and enthusiasts lies the continual counterpoise to the sheer
masculine portion of society--inclining, as it always does, to mere
restless greed of gain and material sensual pleasures."

That men of this kind despise women, though a not uncommon belief, is
one which hardly appears to be justified. Indeed, though naturally not
inclined to "fall in love" in this direction, such men are by their
nature drawn rather near to women, and it would seem that they often
feel a singular appreciation and understanding of the emotional needs
and destinies of the other sex, leading in many cases to a genuine
though what is called 'Platonic' friendship. There is little doubt that
they are often instinctively sought after by women, who, without
suspecting the real cause, are conscious of a sympathetic chord in the
homogenic which they miss in the normal man. To quote De Joux once more:
" It would be a mistake

<span id="page_132">p. 132</span>

to suppose that all Urnings must be women-haters. Quite the contrary.
They are not seldom the faithfulest friends, the truest allies, and most
convinced defenders of women."

To come now to the more normal and perfect specimens of the homogenic
*woman*, we find a type in which the body is thoroughly feminine and
gracious, with the rondure and fulness of the female form, and the
continence and aptness of its movements, but in which the inner nature
is to a great extent masculine; a temperament active, brave,
originative, somewhat decisive, not too emotional; fond of outdoor life,
of games and sports, of science, politics, or even business; good at
organisation, and well-pleased with positions of responsibility,
sometimes indeed making an excellent and generous leader. Such a woman,
it is easily seen, from her special combination of qualities, is often
fitted for remarkable work, in professional life, or as manageress of
institutions, or even as ruler of a country. Her love goes out to
younger and more feminine natures than her own; it is a powerful
passion, almost of heroic type, and capable of inspiring to great deeds;
and when held duly in leash may sometimes become an invaluable force in
the teaching and training of girlhood, or in the creation of a school of
thought or action

<span id="page_133">p. 133</span>

among women. Many a Santa Clara, or abbess-founder of religious houses,
has probably been a woman of this type; and in all times such women--not
being bound to men by the ordinary ties--have been able to work the more
freely for the interests of their sex, a cause to which their own
temperament impels them to devote themselves *con amore*.

I have now sketched--very briefly and inadequately it is true--both the
extreme types and the more healthy types of the 'Intermediate' man and
woman: types which can be verified from history and literature, though
more certainly and satisfactorily perhaps from actual life around us.
And unfamiliar though the subject is, it begins to appear that it is one
which modem thought and science will have to face. Of the latter and
more normal types it may be said that they exist, and have always
existed, in considerable abundance, and from that circumstance alone
there is a strong probability that they have their place and purpose. As
pointed out there is no particular indication of morbidity about them,
unless the special nature of their love-sentiment be itself accounted
morbid; and in the alienation of the sexes from each other, of which
complaint is so often made to-day, it must be admitted that they do much
to fill the gap.

The instinctive artistic nature of the male of this

<span id="page_134">p. 134</span>

class, his sensitive spirit, his wavelike emotional temperament,
combined with hardihood of intellect and body; and the frank, free
nature of the female, her masculine independence and strength wedded to
thoroughly feminine grace of form and manner; may be said to give them
both, through their double nature, command of life in all its phases,
and a certain freemasonry of the secrets of the two sexes which may well
favour their function as reconcilers and interpreters. Certainly it is
remarkable that some of the world's greatest leaders and artists have
been dowered either wholly or in part with the Uranian temperament--as
in the cases of Michel Angelo, Shakespeare, Marlowe, Alexander the
Great, Julius Caesar, or, among women, Christine of Sweden, Sappho the
poetess, and others.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_19"></span>[114:1](lca09.htm#fr_19.md) This paper, which
appeared originally in *The Reformer*, is now published as a separate
pamphlet, under the title "An Unknown People," by Messrs. A. and H. B.
Bonner, Took's Court, E. C. Price 6d.

<span id="fn_20"></span>[117:1](lca09.htm#fr_20.md) From *Uranos*, heaven;
his idea being that the Urning-love was of a higher order than the
ordinary attachment.

<span id="fn_21"></span>[118:1](lca09.htm#fr_21.md) Charles G. Leland
("Hans Breitmann") in his book *The Alternate Sex* (Wellby, 1904),
insists much on the frequent combination of the characteristics of both
sexes in remarkable men and women, and has a chapter on "The Female Mind
in Man," and another on "The Male Intellect in Woman."

<span id="fn_22"></span>[119:1](lca09.htm#fr_22.md) Some late statistical
inquiries (see *Statistische Untersuchungen*, von Dr. M. Hirschfeld,
Leipzig, 1904) yield 1.5 to 2.0 per cent. as a probable ratio.

<span id="fn_23"></span>[122:1](lca09.htm#fr_23.md) See De Joux, *Die
Enterbten des Liebes-glückes* (Leipzig, 1893), p. 21.

<span id="fn_24"></span>[125:1](lca09.htm#fr_24.md) *Psychopathia
Sexualis*, 7th ed., p. 276.

<span id="fn_25"></span>[127:1](lca09.htm#fr_25.md) A good deal in this
description may remind readers of history of the habits and character of
Henry III. of France.

<span id="fn_26"></span>[127:2](lca09.htm#fr_26.md) Perhaps like Queen
Christine of Sweden, who rode across Europe, on her visit to Italy, in
jack-boots and sitting astride of her horse. It is said that she shook
the Pope's hand, on seeing him, so heartily that the doctor had to
attend to it afterwards!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Free Society](lca10.md)
