[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [LGBT](../index.md)  [Sacred
Sexuality](../../sex/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](lca06.md) 
[Next](lca08.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_72">p. 72</span>

# MARRIAGE

### A RETROSPECT

OF the great mystery of human Love, and that most intimate personal
relation of two souls to each other--perhaps the firmest, most basic and
indissoluble fact (after our own existence) that we know; of that
strange sense--often, perhaps generally, instantaneous--of long
precedent familiarity and kinship, that deep reliance on and acceptation
of another in his or her entirety; of the tremendous strength of the
chain which thus at times will bind two hearts in lifelong dedication
and devotion, persuading and indeed not seldom compelling the persons
concerned to the sacrifice of some of the other elements of their lives
and characters; and, withal, of a certain inscrutable veiledness from
each other which so frequently accompanies the relation of the opposite
sexes, and which forms at once the abiding charm, and the pain,
sometimes the tragedy, of their union; of this palpitating winged living
thing, which one may perhaps call the real Marriage--I would say but
little; for indeed it is only fitting

<span id="page_73">p. 73</span>

or possible to speak of it by indirect language and suggestion, nor may
one venture to rudely drag it from its sanctuary into the light of the
common gaze.

Compared with this, the actual marriage, in its squalid perversity as we
too often have occasion of knowing it, is as the wretched idol of the
savage to the reality which it is supposed to represent; and one seems
to hear the Aristophanic laughter of the gods as they contemplate man's
little clay image of the Heavenly Love--which, cracked in the fire of
daily life, he is fain to bind together with rusty hoops of law, and
parchment bonds, lest it should crumble and fall to pieces altogether.

The whole subject, wide as life itself--as Heaven and Hell--eludes
anything like adequate treatment, and we need make no apology for
narrowing down our considerations here to just a few practical points;
and if we cannot navigate upward into the very heart of the
matter-namely, into the causes which make some people love each other
with a true and perfect love, and others unite in obedience to but a
counterfeit passion--yet we may fairly, I imagine, study some of the
conditions which give to actual marriage its present form, or which in
the future are likely to provide real affection, with a more
satisfactory expression than it has as a rule to-day.

As long as man is only half-grown, and woman is

<span id="page_74">p. 74</span>

a serf or a parasite, it can hardly be expected that Marriage should be
particularly successful. Two people come together, who know but little
of each other, who have been brought up along different lines, who
certainly do not understand each other's nature; whose mental interests
and occupations are different, whose worldly interests and advantage are
also different; to one of whom the subject of sex is probably a sealed
book, to the other perhaps a book whose most dismal page has been opened
first. The man needs an outlet for his passion; the girl is looking for
a 'home' and a proprietor. A glamor of illusion descends upon the two,
and drives them into each other's arms. It envelopes in a gracious and
misty halo all their differences and misapprehensions. They marry
without misgiving; and their hearts overflow with gratitude to the
white-surpliced old gentleman who reads the service over them.

But at a later hour, and with calmer thought, they begin to realise that
it is a life-sentence which he has so suavely passed upon them--not
reducible (as in the case of ordinary convicts) even to a term of 20
years. The brief burst of their first satisfaction has been followed by
satiety on the physical plane, then by mere vacuity of affection, then
by boredom, and even nausea. The girl, full perhaps of a tender

<span id="page_75">p. 75</span>

emotion, and missing the sympathy and consolation she expected in the
man's love, only to find its more materialistic side--"This, this then
is what I am wanted for;" the man, who looked for a companion, finding
he can rouse no mortal interest in his wife's mind save in the most
exasperating trivialities;--whatever the cause may be, a veil has fallen
from before their faces, and there they sit, held together now by the
least honorable interests, the interests which they themselves can least
respect, but to which Law and Religion lend all their weight. The
monetary dependence of the woman, the mere sex-needs of the man, the
fear of public opinion, all form motives, and motives of the meanest
kind, for maintaining the seeming tie; and the relation of the two
hardens down into a dull neutrality, in which lives and characters are
narrowed and blunted, and deceit becomes the common weapon which guards
divided interests.

A sad picture! and of course in this case a portrayal deliberately of
the seamy side of the matter. But who shall say what agonies are often
gone through in those first few years of married life? Anyhow, this is
the sort of problem which we have to face to-day, and which shows its
actuality by the amazing rate at which it is breaking out in literature
on all sides.

<span id="page_76">p. 76</span>

It may be said--and often of course is said--that such cases as these
only prove that marriage was entered into under the influence of a
passing glamor and delusion, and that there was not much real devotion
to begin with. And no doubt there is truth enough in such remarks.
But--we may say in reply--because two people make a mistake in youth, to
condemn them, for that reason, to lifelong suffering and mutual
degradation, or to see them so condemned, without proposing any hope or
way of deliverance, but with the one word "serves you right" on the
lips, is a course which can commend itself only to the grimmest and
dullest Calvinist. Whatever safe-guards against a too frivolous view of
the relationship may be proposed by the good sense of society in the
future, it is certain that the time has gone past when Marriage can
continue to be regarded as a supernatural institution to whose
maintenance human bodies and souls must be indiscriminately sacrificed;
a humaner, wiser, and less panic-stricken treatment of the subject must
set in; and if there are difficulties in the way they must be met by
patient and calm consideration of human welfare--superior to any law,
however ancient and respectable.

I take it then that, without disguising the fact

<span id="page_77">p. 77</span>

that the question is a complex one, and that our conclusions may be only
very tentative, we have to consider as rationally as we conveniently
can, first, some of the drawbacks or defects of the present marriage
customs, and secondly such improvements in these as may seem feasible.

And with regard to the former, one of the most important points--which
we have already touched on--is the extraordinary absence of any allusion
to these subjects in the teaching of young folk. In a day when every
possible study seems to be crammed into the school curriculum, it is
curious that the one matter which is of supreme importance to the
individual and the community is most carefully ignored. That one ought
to be able to distinguish a passing sex-spell from a true comradeship
and devotion is no doubt a very sapient remark; but since it is a thing
which mature folk often fail to do, how young things with no experience
of their own or hint from others should be expected to do it is not easy
to understand. The search for a fitting mate [77](lca15.htm#xref_77.md),
especially among the more sensitive and highly-organised types of
mankind, is a very complex affair; and it is really monstrous that the
girl or youth should have to, set out--as they mostly have to do
to-day--on this difficult quest without a word of help as to the choice
of

<span id="page_78">p. 78</span>

the way or the very real doubts and perplexities that beset it.

If the pair whom we have supposed as about to be married had been
brought up in almost any tribe of savages, they would a few years
previously have gone through regular offices of initiation into manhood
and womanhood, during which time ceremonies (possibly indecent in our
eyes) would at any rate have made many misapprehensions impossible. As
it is, the civilised girl is led to the 'altar' often in uttermost
ignorance and misunderstanding as to the nature of the sacrificial rites
about to be consummated. The youth too is ignorant in his way. Perhaps
he is unaware that love in the female is, in a sense, more diffused than
in the male, less specially sexual: that it dwells longer in caresses
and embraces, and determines itself more slowly towards the reproductive
system. Impatient, he injures and horrifies his partner, and
unconsciously perhaps aggravates the very hysterical tendency which
marriage might and should have allayed. <span
id="fr_12"></span>[1](#fn_12.md)

Among the middle and well-to-do classes

<span id="page_79">p. 79</span>

especially, the conditions of high civilisation, by inducing an overfed
masculinity in the males and a nervous and hysterical tendency in the
females, <span id="fr_13"></span>[1](#fn_13.md) increase the difficulties
mentioned; and it is among the 'classes' too that the special evils
exist of sex-starvation and sex-ignorance on the one hand, and of mere
licentiousness on the other.

Among the comparatively uncivilised mass of the people, where a good
deal of familiarity between the sexes takes place before marriage, and
where probably there is less ignorance on the one side and less
licentiousness on the other, these ills are not so prominent. But here
too the need for some sensible teaching is clear; and sheer neglect of
the law of Transmutation, or sheer want of self-control, are liable to
make the proletarian union brutish enough.

So far with regard to difficulties arising from personal ignorance and
inexperience. But stretching beyond and around all these are those
others that arise from the special property- relation between the two
sexes, and from deep-lying historic and economic

<span id="page_80">p. 80</span>

causes generally. The long historic serfdom of woman, creeping down into
the moral and intellectual natures of the two sexes, has exaggerated the
naturally complementary relation of the male and the female into an
absurd caricature of strength on the one hand and dependence on the
other. This is well seen in the ordinary marriage-relation of the
common-prayer-book type. The frail and delicate female is supposed to
cling round the sturdy husband's form, or to depend from his arm in
graceful incapacity; and the spectator is called upon to admire the
charming effect of the union--as of the ivy with the oak--forgetful of
the terrible moral, namely, that (in the case of the trees at any rate)
it is really a death-struggle which is going on, in which either the oak
must perish suffocated in the embraces of its partner, or in order to
free the former into anything like healthy development the ivy must be
sacrificed.

Too often of course of such marriages the egoism, lordship and physical
satisfaction of the man are the chief motive causes. The woman is
practically sacrificed to the part of the maintenance of these male
virtues. It is for her to spend her days in little forgotten details of
labor and anxiety for the sake of the man's superior comfort and
importance, to give up her needs to his whims, to 'humor' him in

<span id="page_81">p. 81</span>

all ways she can; it is for her to wipe her mind clear of all opinions
in order that she may hold it up as a kind of mirror in which he may
behold reflected his lordly self; and it is for her to sacrifice even
her physical health and natural instincts in deference to what is called
her 'duty' to her husband.

How bitterly *alone* many such a woman feels! She has dreamed of being
folded in the arms of a strong man, and surrendering herself, her life,
her mind, her all, to his service. Of course it is an unhealthy dream,
an illusion, a mere luxury of love; and it is destined to be dashed. She
has to learn that self-surrender may be just as great a crime as
self-assertion. She finds that her very willingness to be sacrificed
only fosters in the man, perhaps for his own self-defence, the egotism
and coldness that so cruelly wound her.

For how often does he with keen prevision see that if he gives way from
his coldness the clinging dependent creature will infallibly overgrow
and smother him!--that she will cut her woman-friends, will throw aside
all her own interests and pursuits in order to 'devote' herself to him,
and, affording no sturdy character of her own in which *he* can take any
interest, will hang the festoons of her affection on every ramification
of his wretched life-nor leave him a corner free--till he perishes

<span id="page_82">p. 82</span>

from all manhood and social or heroic uses into a mere matrimonial
clothespeg, a warning and a wonderment to passers by!

However, as an alternative, it sometimes happens that the Woman, too
wise to sacrifice her own life indiscriminately to the egoism of her
husband, and not caring for the 'festoon' method, adopts the middle
course of *appearing* to minister to him while really pursuing her own
purposes. She cultivates the gentle science of indirectness. While
holding up a mirror for the Man to admire himself in, *behind that
mirror* she goes her own way and carries out her own designs, separate
from him; and while sacrificing her body to his wants, she does so quite
deliberately and for a definite reason, namely, because she has found
out that she can so get a shelter for herself and her children, and can
solve the problem of that maintenance which society has hitherto denied
to her in her own right. For indeed by a cruel fate women have been
placed in exactly that position where the sacrifice of their
self-respect for base motives has easily passed beyond a temptation into
being a necessity. They have had to live, and have too often only been
able to do so by selling themselves into bondage to the man. Willing or
unwilling, overworked or dying, they have had to bear children to the
caprice of

<span id="page_83">p. 83</span>

their lords; and in this serf-life their very natures have been blunted;
they have lost--what indeed should be the very glory and crown of
woman's being--the perfect freedom and the purity of their love. <span
id="fr_14"></span>[1](#fn_14) [83](lca15.htm#xref_83.md)

At this whole spectacle of woman's degradation the human male has looked
on with stupid and open-mouthed indifference--as an ox might look on at
a drowning ox-herd--not even dimly divining that his own fate was
somehow involved. He has calmly and obliviously watched the woman drift
farther and farther away from him, till at last, with the loss of an
intelligent and mutual understanding between the sexes, Love with
unequal wings has fallen lamed to the ground. Yet it would be idle to
deny that even in such a state of affairs as that depicted, men and
women have in the past and do often even now find some degree of
satisfaction--simply indeed because their types of character are such as
belong to, and have been evolved in accordance with, this relation.

To-day, however, there are thousands of women--and everyday more
thousands--to whom such a lopsided alliance is detestable; who are
determined that they will no longer endure the arrogant lordship and
egoism of men, nor countenance in themselves

<span id="page_84">p. 84</span>

or other women the craft and servility which are the necessary
complements of the relation; who see too clearly in the oak-and-ivy
marriage its parasitism on the one hand and strangulation on the other
to be sensible of any picturesqueness; who feel too that they have
capacities and powers of their own which need space and liberty, and
some degree of sympathy and help, for their unfolding; and who believe
that they have work to do in the world, as important in its own way as
any that men do in theirs. Such women have broken into open warfare--not
against marriage, but against a marriage which makes true and equal love
an impossibility. They feel that as long as women are economically
dependent they *cannot* stand up for themselves and insist on those
rights which men from stupidity and selfishness will not voluntarily
grant them.

On the other hand there are thousands--and one would hope every day more
thousands--of men who (whatever their forerunners may have thought) do
*not* desire or think it delightful to have a glass continually held up
for them to admire themselves in; who look for a partner in whose life
and pursuits they can find some interest, rather than for one who has no
interest but in them; who think perhaps that they would rather minister
than be (like a monkey fed with nuts in a cage) the melancholy

<span id="page_85">p. 85</span>

object of another person's ministrations; and who at any rate feel that
love, in order to be love at all, must be absolutely open and sincere,
and free from any sentiment of dependence or inequality. They see that
the present cramped condition of women is not only the cause of the
false relation between the sexes, but that it is the fruitful
source--through its debarment of any common interests--of that fatal
boredom of which we have spoken, and which is the bugbear of marriage;
and they would gladly surrender all of that masterhood and authority
which is supposed to be their due, if they could only get in return
something like a frank and level comradeship.

Thus while we see in the present inequality of the sexes an undoubted
source of marriage troubles and unsatisfactory alliances, we see also
forces at work which are tending to reaction, and to bringing the two
nearer again to each other--so that while differentiated they will not
perhaps in the future be quite so *much* differentiated as now, but only
to a degree which will enhance and adorn, instead of destroy, their
sense of mutual sympathy.

There is another point which ought to be considered as contributing to
the ill-success of many marriages, and which no doubt is closely
connected with that just discussed--but which deserves

<span id="page_86">p. 86</span>

separate treatment. I mean the harshness of the line, the kind of
'ring-fence,' which social opinion (at any rate in this country) draws
round the married pair with respect to their relations to outsiders. On
the one hand, and within the fence, society allows practically the
utmost passional excess or indulgence, and condones it; on the other
hand (I am speaking of the middling bulk of the people, not of the
extreme aristocratic and slum classes) beyond that limit, the slightest
familiarity, or any expression of affection which might by any
possibility be interpreted as deriving from sexual feeling, is sternly
anathematised. Marriage, by a kind of absurd fiction, is represented as
an oasis situated in the midst of an arid desert--in which latter, it is
pretended, neither of the two parties is so fortunate as to find any
objects of real affectional interest. If they do they have carefully to
conceal the same from the other party.

The result of this convention is obvious enough. The married pair, thus
*driven* as well as drawn into closest continual contact with each
other, are put through an ordeal which might well cause the stoutest
affection to quail. To have to spend all your life with another person
is severe; but to have all outside personal interests, except of the
most abstract kind, debarred, and if there happens to be

<span id="page_87">p. 87</span>

any natural jealousy in the case, to have it tenfold increased by public
interference, is terrible; and yet unless the contracting parties are
fortunate enough to be, both of them, of such a temperament that they
are capable of strong attachments to persons of their own sex--and this
does not always exclude jealousy--such must be their fate.

It is hardly necessary to say, not only how dull a place this makes the
home, but also how narrowing it acts on the lives of the married pair.
However appropriate the union may be in itself it cannot be good that it
should degenerate--as it tends to degenerate so often, and where man and
wife are most faithful to each other--into a mere *égoisme à deux*. And
right enough no doubt as a great number of such unions actually are, it
must be confessed that the bourgeois marriage as a rule, and just in its
most successful and pious and respectable form, carries with it an
odious sense of Stuffiness and narrowness, moral and intellectual; and
that the type of Family which it provides is too often like that which
is disclosed when on turning over a large stone we disturb an insect
Home that seldom sees the light.

But in cases where the marriage does not happen to be particularly
successful or unsuccessful, when perhaps a true but not overpoweringly
intense

<span id="page_88">p. 88</span>

affection is satiated at a needlessly early stage by the continual and
unrelieved impingement of the two personalities on each other, then the
boredom resulting is something frightful to contemplate--and all the
more so because of the genuine affection behind it, which contemplates
with horror its own suicide. The weary couples that may be seen at
seaside places and pleasure resorts--the respectable working-man with
his wife trailing along by his side, or the highly respectable
stock-jobber arm-in-arm with his better and larger half--their blank
faces, utter want of any common topic of conversation which has not been
exhausted a thousand times already, and their obvious relief when the
hour comes which will take them back to their several and divided
occupations--these illustrate sufficiently what I mean. The curious
thing is that jealousy (accentuated as it is by social opinion)
sometimes increases in exact proportion to mutual boredom; and there are
thousands of cases of married couples leading a cat-and-dog life, and
knowing that they weary each other to distraction, who for that very
reason dread all the more to lose sight of each other, and thus never
get a chance of that holiday from their own society, and renewal of
outside interests, which would make a real good time for them possible.

<span id="page_89">p. 89</span>

Thus the sharpness of the line which society draws around the pair, and
the kind of fatal snap-of-the-lock with which marriage suddenly cuts
them off from the world, not only precluding the two, as might fairly be
thought advisable, from sexual, but also barring any openly affectional
relations with outsiders, and corroborating the selfish sense of
monopoly which each has in the other,--these things lead inevitably to
the narrowing down of lives and the blunting of general human interests,
to intense mutual ennui, and when (as an escape from these evils)
outside relations are covertly indulged in, to prolonged and systematic
deceit.

From all which the only conclusion seems to be that marriage must be
either alive or dead. As a dead thing it can of course be petrified into
a hard and fast formula, but if it is to be a living bond, that living
bond must be trusted to, to hold the lovers together; nor be too
forcibly stiffened and contracted by private jealousy and public
censorship, lest the thing that it would preserve for us perish so, and
cease altogether to be beautiful. It is the same with this as with
everything else. If we would have a living thing, we must give that
thing some degree of liberty--even though liberty bring with it risk. If
we would debar all liberty and all

<span id="page_90">p. 90</span>

risk, then we can have only the mummy and dead husk of the thing.

Thus far I have had the somewhat invidious task, but perhaps necessary
as a preliminary one, of dwelling on the defects and drawbacks of the
present marriage system. I am sensible that, with due discretion, some
things might have been said, which have not been said, in its praise;
its successful, instead of its unsuccessful, instances might have been
cited; and taking for granted the dependence of women, and other points
which have already been sufficiently discussed, it might have been
possible to show that the bourgeois arrangement was on the whole as
satisfactory as could be expected. But such a course would neither have
been sincere nor have served any practical purpose. In view of the
actually changing relations between the sexes, it is obvious that
changes in the form of the marriage institution are impending, and the
questions which are really pressing on folks' mind are: What are those
changes going to be? and, Of what kind do we wish them to be?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_12"></span>[78:1](lca07.htm#fr_12.md) It must be remembered
too that to many women (though of course by no means a majority) the
thought of Sex brings but little sense of pleasure, and the fulfilment
of its duties constitutes a real, even though a willing, sacrifice.
*See* Appendix.  [78](lca15.htm#xref_78.md)

<span id="fn_13"></span>[79:1](lca07.htm#fr_13.md) Thus Bebel in his book
on *Woman* speaks of the idle and luxurious life of so many women in the
upper classes, the nervous stimulant afforded by exquisite perfumes, the
overdosing with poetry, music, the stage--which is regarded as the chief
means of education, and is the chief occupation, of a sex already
suffering from hypertrophy of nerves and sensibility."

<span id="fn_14"></span>[83:1](lca07.htm#fr_14.md) *See*
Appendix. [83](lca15.htm#xref_83.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Marriage, A Forecast](lca08.md)
