[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [LGBT](../index.md)  [Sacred
Sexuality](../../sex/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](lca03.md) 
[Next](lca05.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_25">p. 25</span>

# MAN

### THE UNGROWN

MAN, the ordinary human male, is a curious animal. While mastering the
world with his pluck, skill, enterprise, he is in matters of Love for
the most part a child. The passion plays havoc with him; nor does he
ride the Lion, as Ariadne is fabled to have done.

In this he differs from the other sex; and the difference can be seen in
earliest years. When the boy is on his rocking horse, the girl is
caressing her doll. When the adolescent youth, burning to master a real
quadruped, is still somewhat contemptuous of Love's power, "sweet
seventeen" has already lost and regained her heart several times, and is
accomplished in all the finesse of feeling.

To the grown man love remains little more than a plaything. Affairs,
politics, fighting, moneymaking, creative art, constructive industry,
are his serious business; the affections are his relaxation; passion is
the little fire with which he toys, and

<span id="page_26">p. 26</span>

which every now and then flares out and burns him up. His affections,
his passions, are probably as a rule stronger than woman's; but he never
attains to understand them or be master of their craft. With woman all
this is reversed.

A man pelts along on his hobby--his business, his career, his latest
invention, or what not--forgetful that there is such a thing in the
world as the human heart; then all of a sudden he 'falls in love,'
tumbles headlong in the most ludicrous way, fills the air with his
cries, struggles frantically like a fly in treacle: and all the time
hasn't the faintest idea whether he has been inveigled into the
situation, or whether he got there of his own accord, or what he wants
now he is there. Suicides, broken hearts, lamentations, and certainly a
whole panorama, marvellous in beauty, of lyrical poetry and art, mark
the experience of love's distress in Man. Woman in the same plight
neither howls nor cries, she does not commit suicide or do anything
extravagant, she creates not a single poem or work of art of any
account; but she simply goes her way and suffers in silence, shaping her
life to the new conditions. Never for a moment does she forget that her
one serious object is Love; but never for a moment does she 'give
herself away' or lose her head, in the pursuit of that object.

<span id="page_27">p. 27</span>

It is perhaps in a kind of revenge for this that man for so many
centuries has made woman his serf. Feeling that she really somehow
mastered him on the affectional plane, he in revenge on the physical
plane has made the most of his superior strength, and of his power over
her; or, more probably, not thinking about it at all, he has simply
allowed all along the sex-passion (so strong in him) to prompt him to
this mastery.

For the sex-passion in man is undoubtedly a force--huge and
fateful--which has to be reckoned with. Perhaps (speaking broadly) *all*
the passions and powers, the intellect and affections and emotions and
all, are really profounder and vaster in Man than in Woman-are more
varied, root deeper, and have wider scope; but then the woman has this
advantage, that her powers are more co-ordinated, are in harmony with
each other, where his are disjointed or in conflict. A girl comes of age
sooner than a boy. And the coming-of-age of Love (which harmonises all
the faculties in the human being) may take place early in the woman,
while in the man it is delayed long and long, perhaps never completely
effected. The problem is so much bigger, so much more complex, with him;
it takes longer for its solution. Women are sometimes impatient with men
on this score; but then they

<span id="page_28">p. 28</span>

do not see, judging from their own little flock, what a big herd of
cattle the man has to bring home.

Anyhow, the point is that Man with his great uncoordinated nature *has*
during these later centuries dominated the other sex, and made himself
the ruler of society. In consequence of which we naturally have a
society made after his pattern--a society advanced in mechanical and
intellectual invention, with huge passional and emotional elements, but
all involved in whirling confusion and strife--a society ungrown, which
on its material side may approve itself a great success, but on its more
human and affectional side seems at times an utter failure.

This ungrown, half-baked sort of character is conspicuous in the class
of men who organise the modern world--the men of the English-speaking
well-to-do class. The boy of this class begins life at a public school.
He does not learn much from the masters; but he knocks about among his
fellows in cricket and football and athletics, and turns out with an
excellent organising capacity and a tolerably firm and reliable grip on
the practical and material side of life--qualities which are of
first-rate importance, and which give the English ruling classes a
similar mission in the world to the Romans of the early Empire. A

<span id="page_29">p. 29</span>

certain standard too (for what it is worth) of schoolboy honor and
fairness is thumped into him. It is very narrow and conventional, but at
its best rises as high as a conception of self-sacrifice and duty,
though never to the conception of love. At the same time a strong and
lavish diet and an easy life stimulate his functional energies and his
animal passions to a high degree.

Here certainly is some splendid material, and if well pounded into
shape, kneaded and baked, might result in a useful upper crust for
society. But alas! it remains, or actually degenerates into, a most
fatuous dough. The boy never learns anything after he leaves school. He
gets no more thumps. He glides easily into the higher walks of the
world--backed by his parents' money--into Law or Army or Church or Civil
Service or Commerce. He has really no serious fights to fight, or
efforts to make, sees next to nothing of actual life; has an easy time,
can marry pretty well whom he chooses, or console himself with unmarried
joys; and ultimately settles down into the routine and convention of his
particular profession--a picture of beefy self-satisfaction. Affection
and tenderness of feeling, though latent in him, have never, owing to
the unfortunate conditions of his life, been developed; but their place
begins

<span id="page_30">p. 30</span>

to be taken by a rather dreary cynicism. Sex, always strong, still even
now in its waning days, retains the first place; and the mature man,
having no adequate counterpoise to it in the growth of his sympathetic
nature, is fain to find his highest restraints or sanctions in the
unripe code of his school-days or the otiose conventions and prejudices
of the professional clique to which he belongs.

So it comes about that the men who have the sway of the world to-day are
in the most important matters quite ungrown; they really have never come
of age in any adequate sense. Like Ephraim they are "a cake not turned."
Wherever they turn up: in Lords or Commons, Civil or Military, Law or
Church or Medicine, the judge on the bench, the Bishop, the ruler of
India, the exploiter of South Africa, the man who booms a company in the
city, or who builds up a great commercial trust and gets a title for
supporting a Government: it is much the same. Remove the distinctive
insignia of their clique and office, and you find underneath--no more
than a public school-boy. Perhaps, indeed, rather less; for while the
school-boy mind is there, and the school-boy code of life and honor, the
enthusiasm and the promise of youth are gone.

It is certainly very maddening at times to think that the Destinies of
the world, the organisation of

<span id="page_31">p. 31</span>

society, the wonderful scope of possible statesman. ship, the mighty
issues of trade and industry, the loves of Women, the lives of
criminals, the fate of savage nations, should be in the hands of such a
set of general nincompoops; men so fatuous that it actually does not
hurt them to see the streets crammed with prostitutes by night, or the
parks by day with the semi-lifeless bodies of tramps; men, to whom it
seems quite natural that our marriage and social institutions should
lumber along over the bodies of women, as our commercial institutions
grind over the bodies of the poor, and our "imperial" enterprise over
the bodies of barbarian races, destroyed by drink and devilry. But then
no doubt the world is made like that. Assuredly it is no wonder that the
more go-ahead Women (who have come round to the light by their own way,
and through much darkness and suffering) should rise in revolt; or that
the Workmen (finding their lives in the hands of those who do not know
what life is) should do the same.

Leaving now the Middle-class man of to-day, the great representative of
modern civilisation, and the triumphant outcome of so many centuries of
human progress, to enjoy his distinctions--we may turn for a moment to
the only other great body of men who are of any importance: the more
capable and energetic manual workers.

<span id="page_32">p. 32</span>

In the man of this class we have a type superior in many ways to the
other. In the first place he knows something of what Life is; from an
early age probably he has had to do something towards his own living.
Anyhow he has been called upon in a thousand ways to help his parents,
or his brothers and sisters, and has developed a fair capacity of
sympathy and affection--a thing which can hardly be said of the public
school boy; while his work, narrow though it may be, has given him a
certain definite ability and grasp of actual fact. If, as is now
happening in hundreds of thousands of cases, there is superadded to all
this some of the general culture which arises from active reading and
study, it is clear that the result is going to be considerable. It may
not count much to-day, but it will to-morrow.

On the other hand this class is lamentably wanting in the very point
where the other man excels--the organising faculty. Take a workman from
the bench, where he has never so to speak had to look beyond his nose,
and place him in a position of responsibility and command, and he is
completely at sea. He turns out hopelessly slattern and ineffectual, or
a martinet or a bully; he has no sense of perspective and stickles
absurdly over little points while he lets the great ones go; and it is
almost

<span id="page_33">p. 33</span>

impossible for him to look before and after as he should do, or bring to
a proper focus a whole field of considerations. In all this he is a mere
child: and evidently by himself unfit to rule the world.

In many respects the newer Women and the Workmen resemble each other.
Both have been bullied and sat upon from time immemorial, and are
beginning to revolt; both are good at detailed and set or customary
work, both are bad at organisation; both are stronger on the emotional
than on the intellectual side; and both have an ideal of better things,
but do not quite see their way to carry it out. Their best hope perhaps
lies in their both getting hold of the Middle-class Man and thumping him
on each side till they get him to organise the world for them. The
latter has no ideal, no object, no enthusiasm, of his own. He cannot set
himself to work; and consequently he is just made use of by the
commercial spirit of the day. It is really lamentable to think how his
great organising capacity--which might create a holy Human empire of the
world--is simply at present the tool of the Jew and the Speculator. In
Parliamentary, Military, Indian, Home or Colonial politics, the quondam
public school-boy is just led by the nose by the money-grubbing
interest, to

<span id="page_34">p. 34</span>

serve its purposes; and half the time has not the sense to see that he
is being so led.

It might seem that it would be the greatest blessing and benefit to the
man of this class to find him an ideal to work to. Certainly it is his
only real and conceivable function to form an alliance with the two
other great classes of the modern nations-the women and the workmen-and
organise for them. Whether he will see it so, we know not; but if this
might come about great things would happen in the world.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Woman, the Serf](lca05.md)
