[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [LGBT](../index.md)  [Sacred
Sexuality](../../sex/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](lca04.md) 
[Next](lca06.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_35">p. 35</span>

# WOMAN

### THE SERF

A HALF-GROWN man is of course a tyrant. And so it has come about that
the rule of Man in the world has for many ages meant the serfdom of
Woman.

Far back in History, at a time when in the early societies the thought
of inequality had hardly arisen, it would appear that the female in her
own way--as sole authenticator of birth and parentage, as guardian of
the household, as inventress of agriculture and the peaceful arts, as
priestess or prophetess or sharer in the councils of the tribe--was as
powerful as man in his, and sometimes even more so. But from thence,
down to to-day, what centuries of repression, of slavehood, of dumbness
and obscurity have been her lot!

There is much to show that the greed of Private Property was the old
Serpent which brought about the fall of our first parents; for as this
sentiment--the chief incentive to modern Civilisation--rose and spread
with a kind of contagion over the advancing

<span id="page_36">p. 36</span>

races of mankind, the human Male, bitten by it, not only claimed
possession of everything he could lay hands upon, but ended by enslaving
and appropriating his own mate, his second self--reducing her also to a
mere chattel, a slave and a plaything.

Certainly it is curious that, with whatever occasional exceptions, the
periods of man's ascendancy have been the periods of so much sadness and
degradation of women. He, all through, more and more calmly assuming
that it must be her province to live and work for him; shutting her more
and more into the seclusion of the boudoir and the harem, or down to the
drudgery of the hearth; confining her body, her mind; playing always
upon her sex-nature, accentuating always that--as though she were indeed
nought else but sex; yet furious if her feelings were not always
obedient to his desire; arrogating to himself a masculine licence, yet
revenging the least unfaithfulness on her part by casting her out into
the scorned life of the prostitute; and granting her more and more but
one choice in life--to be a free woman, and to die, unsexed, in the
gutter; or for creature-comforts and a good name to sell herself, soul
and body, into life-long bondage. While she, more and more, has accepted
as inevitable the situation; and moved, sad-eyed, to

<span id="page_37">p. 37</span>

her patient and uncomplaining work, to the narrow sphere and petty
details of household labor and life, of patience and self-effacement, of
tenderness and love, little noticed and less understood; or twisted
herself into a ridiculous mime of fashion and frivolity, if so she might
find a use for her empty head, and some favor with her lord; her own
real impulses and character, her own talents and genius, all the while
smothered away and blighted, her brain dwarfed, and her outlook on the
world marred by falsity and ignorance.

Such, or something like it, has been the fate of woman through the
centuries. And if, like man, she had been light-armed for her own
defence, it might have been possible to say it was her own fault that
she allowed all this to take place; but when we remember that she all
the while has had to bear the great and speechless burden of Sex--to be
herself the ark and cradle of the Race down the ages--then we may
perhaps understand what a tragedy it has all been. For the fulfilment of
sex is a relief and a condensation to the Man. He goes his way, and, so
to speak, thinks no more about it. But to the Woman it is the
culmination of her life, her profound and secret mission to humanity, of
incomparable import and delicacy.

It is difficult, of course, for men to understand

<span id="page_38">p. 38</span>

the depth and sacredness of the mother-feeling in woman--its joys and
hopes, its leaden weight of cares and anxieties. The burden of pregnancy
and gestation, the deep inner solicitude and despondency, the fears that
all may not be well, the indrawing and absorption of her life into the
life of the child, the increasing effort to attend to anything else, to
care for anything else; her willingness even to die if only the child
may be born safe: these are things which man--except it be occasionally
in his rôle as artist or inventor--does but faintly imagine. Then, later
on, the dedication to the young life or lives, the years of daylong and
nightlong labor and forethought, in which the very thought of self is
effaced, of tender service for which there is no recognition, nor ever
will or can be--except in the far future; the sacrifice of personal
interests and expansions in the ever-narrowing round of domestic duty;
and in the end the sad wonderment and grievous unfulfilled yearning as
one by one the growing boy and girl push their way into the world and
disavow their home-ties and dependence; the sundering of heartstrings
even as the navel-cord had to be sundered before: for these things, too,
Woman can hope but little sympathy and understanding from the other sex.

But this fact, of man's non-perception of it, does

<span id="page_39">p. 39</span>

not make the tragedy less. Far back out of the brows of Greek goddess,
and Sibyll, and Norse and German seeress and prophetess, over all this
petty civilisation look the grand untamed eyes of a primal woman the
equal and the mate of man; and in sad plight should we be if we might
not already, lighting up the horizon from East and West and South and
North, discern the answering looks of those new corners who, as the
period of women's enslavement is passing away, send glances of
recognition across the ages to their elder sisters.

After all, and underneath all the falsities of this period, may we not
say that there is a deep and permanent relation between the sexes, which
must inevitably assert itself again?

To this relation the physiological differences perhaps afford the key.
In woman--modern science has shown--the more fundamental and primitive
nervous centres, and the great sympathetic and vaso-motor system of
nerves generally, are developed to a greater extent than in man; in
woman the whole structure and life rallies more closely arid obviously
round the sexual function than in man; and, as a general rule, in the
evolution of the human race, as well as of the lower races, the female
is less subject to variation and is more constant to and conservative of
the type of the

<span id="page_40">p. 40</span>

race than the male. <span
id="fr_5"></span>[1](#fn_5) [40](lca15.htm#xref_40.md) With these
physiological differences are naturally allied the facts that, of the
two, Woman is the more primitive, the more intuitive, the more
emotional. If not so large and cosmic in her scope, the great
unconscious processes of Nature lie somehow nearer to her; to her, sex
is a deep and sacred instinct, carrying with it a sense of natural
purity; nor does she often experience that divorce between the sentiment
of Love and the physical passion which is so common with men, and which
causes them to be aware of a grossness and a conflict in their own
natures; she is, or should be, the interpreter of Love to man, and in
some degree his guide in sexual matters. More, since she keeps to the
great lines of evolution and is less biassed and influenced by the
momentary currents of the day; since her life is bound up with the life
of the child; since in a way she is nearer the child herself, and nearer
to the savage; it is to her that Man, after his excursions and
wanderings, mental and physical, continually tends to return as to his
primitive home and resting-place, to restore his balance, to find his
centre of life, and to draw stores of energy and inspiration for fresh
conquests of the outer world. "In women men find beings who have not
wandered so far as they have from the typical life of earth's

<span id="page_41">p. 41</span>

creatures; women are for men the human embodiments of the restful
responsiveness of Nature. To every man, as Michelet has put it, the
woman whom he loves is as the Earth was to her legendary son; he has but
to fall down and kiss her breast and he is strong again." <span
id="fr_6"></span>[1](#fn_6.md)

If it be true that by natural and physiological right Woman stands in
some such primitive relationship to Man, then we may expect this
relationship to emerge again into clear and reasonable light in course
of time; though it does not of course follow that a relationship founded
on physiological distinctions is *absolutely* permanent--since these
latter may themselves vary to some degree. That a more natural and
sensible relation of some kind between the sexes is actually coming to
birth, few who care to read the signs of the times can well doubt. For
the moment, however, and by way of parenthesis before looking to the
future, we have to consider a little more in detail the present position
of women under civilisation. Not that the consideration will be
altogether gracious and satisfactory, but that it may--we are fain to
hope--afford us some hints for the future.

It was perhaps not altogether unnatural that

<span id="page_42">p. 42</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Man's craze for property and individual
ownership should have culminated in the enslavement of woman--his most
precious and beloved object. But the consequence of this absurdity was a
whole series of other absurdities. What between insincere flattery and
rose-water adorations on the one hand, and serfdom and neglect on the
other, woman was, as Havelock Ellis says, treated as "a cross between an
angel and an idiot." And after a time, adapting herself to the
treatment, she really became something between an angel and an idiot--a
bundle of weak and flabby sentiments, combined with a wholly undeveloped
brain. Moreover by being continually specialised and specialised in the
sexual and domestic direction, she lost touch with the actual world, and
grew, one may say, into a separate species from man--so that in the
later civilisations the males and females, except when the
sex-attraction has compelled them as it were to come together, have been
wont to congregate in separate herds, and talk languages each
unintelligible to the other. Says the author of the *Woman's Question*:
"I admit there is no room for pharisaical self-laudation here. The
bawling mass of mankind on a race-course or the stock-exchange is
degrading enough in all conscience. Yet this even is hardly so painful
as the sight which meets our eyes

<span id="page_43">p. 43</span>

between three and four in the afternoon in any fashionable London
street. Hundreds of women--mere dolls--gazing intently into shop-windows
at various bits of coloured ribbon. . . . Perhaps nothing is more
disheartening than this, except the mob of women in these very same
streets between twelve and one at night."

The 'lady,' the household drudge, and the prostitute, are the three main
types of woman resulting in our modern civilisation from the process of
the past-and it is hard to know which is the most wretched, which is the
most wronged, and which is the most unlike that which in her own heart
every true woman would desire to be.

In some sense the 'lady' of the period which is just beginning to pass
away is the most characteristic product of Commercialism. The sense of
Private Property, arising and joining with the "angel and idiot" theory,
turned Woman more and more--especially of course among the possessing
classes--into an emblem of possession--a mere doll, an empty idol, a
brag of the man's exclusive right in the sex--till at last, as her vain
splendors increased and her real usefulness diminished, she ultimated
into the 'perfect lady.' But let every woman who piques and preens
herself to the fulfilment of this ideal in her own person, remember what
is the cost

<span id="page_44">p. 44</span>

and what is the meaning of her quest: the covert enslavement to, and the
covert contempt of Man.

The instinct of helpful personal service is so strong in women, and such
a deep-rooted part of their natures, that to be treated as a mere target
for other people's worship and service--especially when this is tainted
with insincerity--must be most obnoxious to them. To think that women
still exist by hundreds and hundreds of thousands, women with hearts and
hands formed for love and helpfulness, who are brought up as 'ladies'
and have to spend their lives listening to the idiotic platitudes of the
Middle-class Man, and "waited upon" by wage-bought domestics, is enough
to make one shudder. The modern 'gentleman' is bad enough, but the
'lady' of bourgeois-dom, literally "crucified twixt a smile and
whimper," prostituted to a life which in her heart she hates--with its
petty ideals, its narrow horizon, and its empty honors--is indeed a
pitiful spectacle.

In Baronial times the household centred round the Hall, where the baron
sat supreme; to-day it centres round the room where the lady reigns. The
"with" is withdrawn from the withdrawing-room, and that apartment has
become the most important of all. Yet there is an effect of mockery in
the homage paid to the new sovereign; and, as far as

<span id="page_45">p. 45</span>

her rule is actual, a doubt whether she is really qualified yet for the
position. The contrast between the two societies, the Feudal and the
Commercial, is not inaptly represented by this domestic change. The
former society was rude and rough, but generous and straightforward; the
latter is polished and nice, but full of littleness and *finesse*. The
Drawing-room, with its feeble manners and effects of curtains and
embroidery, gives its tone to our lives now-a-days. But we look forward
to a time when this room also will cease to be the centre of the house,
and another--perhaps the Common-room--will take its place.

Below a certain level in society--the distinctively commercial--there
are no drawing-rooms. Among the working masses, where the woman is of
indispensable importance in daily life, and is not sequestered as an
idol, there is no room specially set apart for her worship-a curious
change takes place in her nominal position, and whereas in the supernal
sphere she sits in state and has her tea and bread and butter brought to
her by obsequious males, in the cottage the men take their ease and are
served by the women. The customs of the cottage, however, are rooted in
a natural division of labor by which the man undertakes the outdoor, and
the woman the indoor work; and there is, I

<span id="page_46">p. 46</span>

think, quite as much real respect shown to her here as in the
drawing-room.

In the cottage, nevertheless, the unfortunate one falls into the second
pit that is prepared for her--that of the household drudge; and here she
leads a life which, if it has more honesty and reality in it than that
of the lady,' is one of abject slavery. Few men again realise, or
trouble themselves to realise, what a life this of the working
house-wife is. They are accustomed to look upon their own employment,
whatever it may be, as 'work' (perhaps because it brings with it
'wages'); the woman's they regard as a kind of pastime. They forget what
monotonous drudgery it really means, and yet what incessant forethought
and care; they forget that the woman has no eight hours day, that her
work is always staring her in the face, and waiting for her, even on
into the night; that the body is wearied, and the mind narrowed down,
"scratched to death by rats and mice" in a perpetual round of petty
cares. For not only does civilisation and multifarious invention
(including smoke) make the burden of domestic life immensely complex,
but the point is that each housewife has to sustain this burden to
herself in lonely effort. What a sight, in any of our great towns, to
enter into the cottages or tenements which form the

<span id="page_47">p. 47</span>

endless rows of suburban streets, and to find in each one a working wife
struggling alone in semi-darkness and seclusion with the toils of an
entire separate household--with meals to be planned and provided, with
bread to be baked, clothes to be washed and mended, children to be kept
in order, a husband to be humored, and a house to be swept and dusted;
herself wearied and worried, debilitated with confinement and want of
fresh air, and low-spirited for want of change and society! How futile!
and how dreary!

There remains the third alternative for women; nor can it be wondered at
that some deliberately choose a life of prostitution as their only
escape from the existence of the lady or the drudge. Yet what a choice
it is! On the one hand is the caged Woman, and on the other hand is the
free: and which to choose? "How can there be a doubt," says one, "surely
freedom is always best." Then there falls a hush. "Ah!" says society,
pointing with its finger, "but a free *Woman*!"

And yet is it possible for Woman ever to be worthy her name, unless she
is free?

To-day, or up to to-day, just as the wage-worker has had no means of
livelihood except by the sale of his bodily labor, so woman has had no
means of livelihood except by the surrender of her bodily sex.

<span id="page_48">p. 48</span>

\[paragraph continues\] She could dispose of it to one man for life, and
have in return the respect of society and the caged existence of the
lady or the drudge, or she could sell it night by night and be a "free
woman," scorned of the world and portioned to die in the gutter. In
either case (if she really thinks about the matter at all) she must lose
her self-respect, What a choice, what a frightful choice!--and this has
been the fate of Woman for how long?

If, as a consequence of all this, woman has gone down hill, there is no
doubt that man has gravitated too. (Or was it really that Jack fell down
first, and "Jill came tumbling after"?) Anyhow I think that nothing can
be more clear--and this I believe should be taken as the basis of any
discussion on the relation of the sexes--than that whatever injures the
one sex injures the other; and that whatever defects or partialities may
be found in the one must from the nature of the case be tallied by
corresponding defects and partialities in the other. The two halves of
the human race are complementary, and it is useless for one to attempt
to glorify itself at the expense of the other. As in Olive Schreiner's
allegory of Woman ("Three Dreams in a Desert"), man and woman are bound
together by a vital band, and the one cannot move a step in advance of
the other.

<span id="page_49">p. 49</span>

If we were called upon to characterise these mutual defects (inbred
partly by the false property relation) we should be inclined to say they
were brutality and conceit on the one hand, and finesse and subtlety on
the other. Man, as owner, has tended to become arrogant and callous and
egotistic; woman, as the owned, slavish and crafty and unreal.

As a matter of fact, and allowing that sweeping generalisations of this
kind are open to a good many exceptions, we do find (at any rate in the
British Isles) a most wonderful and celestial indifference to anything
but their own affairs amongst the 'lords of creation,' an indifference
so ingrained and constitutional that it is rarely conscious of itself,
and which assumes quite easily and naturally that the weaker sex exists
for the purpose of playing the foil, so to speak, to the chief actor in
life's drama. Nor does the fact that this indifference is tempered, from
time to time, by a little gallantry afford much consolation--as may be
imagined--to the woman who perceives that the gallantry is inspired by
nothing more than a passing sex-desire.

On the other hand Jill has come tumbling after pretty quickly, and has
tumbled to the conclusion that though she cannot sway her lord by force,
she may easily make use of him by craft. *Finesse*,

<span id="page_50">p. 50</span>

developed through scores of generations [50](lca15.htm#xref_50.md),
combined with the skilful use of the glamor belonging to her sex, have
given her an extraordinary faculty of carrying out her own purposes,
often through the most difficult passes, without ever exposing her hand.
Possibly the knowledge of this forms one reason why women distrust each
other so much more than men distrust each other. Certainly one of the
rarest of God's creatures is a truly undesigning female, but--when
dowered with intellect such as might seem to justify it in being
designing--one of the most admirable and beautiful!

Looking a little deeper, and below the superficial contrast which an
unsatisfactory relation between the sexes has doubtless created, one
seems to discern some of those more vital and deep-rooted
differentiations spoken of on an earlier page. It is a commonly received
opinion that woman tends more to intuition and man to logic; <span
id="fr_7"></span>[1](#fn_7.md) and certainly the male mind seems better
able to deal with abstractions and generalisations, and the female mind
with the personal and the detailed and the concrete. And while this
difference may be in part attributable to the artificial confinement of
women to the domestic

<span id="page_51">p. 51</span>

sphere, there is probably something more organic in it than that. At any
rate it gives to Woman some of her best qualities--a quick and immediate
perception, appreciation of character, tact, and a kind of artistic
sense in the ordering of her own life, so that you do not see the tags
and unraveled ends which appear in man's conduct. While the man is
blundering about, fighting with himself, hesitating, doubting, weighing,
trying vainly to co-ordinate all the elements of his nature, the woman
(often no doubt in a smaller sphere) moves serene and prompt to her
ends. Her actions are characterised by grace and finality; she is more
at unity with herself; and she has the inestimable advantage of living
in the world of persons--which may well seem so much more important and
full of interest than that of things.

On the other hand, this want of the power of generalisation has made it
difficult for woman (at any rate up to to-day) to emerge from a small
circle of interests, and to look at things from the point of view of
public advantage and good. While her, sympathies for individuals are
keen and quick, abstract and general ideas such as those of justice,
Truth, and the like have been difficult of appreciation to her; and her
deficiency in logic has made it almost impossible to act upon her
through the

<span id="page_52">p. 52</span>

brain. A man, if he is on the wrong tack, can be argued with; but with a
woman of this type, if her motives are nefarious, there is no means of
changing them by appeal to her reason, or to the general sense of
justice and Right--and unless controlled by the stronger sway of a
determined personal will (of a man) her career is liable to be pretty
bad.

Generally it will be admitted, as we are dealing with points of mental
and moral difference between the sexes, Man has developed the more
active, and Woman the more passive qualities; and it is pretty obvious,
here too, that this difference is not only due to centuries of social
inequality and of property-marriage, but roots back in some degree to
the very nature of their respective sexual functions. That there are
permanent complementary distinctions between the male and female, dating
first perhaps from sex, and thence spreading over the whole natures,
physical, mental and moral, of each, no one can reasonably doubt. These
distinctions have however, we contend, been strangely accentuated and
exaggerated during the historic period--till at last a point of maximum
divergence and absolute misunderstanding has been reached. But that
point is behind us now.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_5"></span>[40:1](lca05.htm#fr_5.md) For other points of
difference see Appendix. [40](lca15.htm#xref_40.md)

<span id="fn_6"></span>[41:1](lca05.htm#fr_6.md) *Man and Woman*, by
Havelock Ellis. Contemporary Science Series, p. 371,

<span id="fn_7"></span>[50:1](lca05.htm#fr_7.md) Physiologically speaking a
certain excess of affectability and excitability in women over men seems
to be distinctly traceable.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Woman, In Freedom](lca06.md)
