[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [LGBT](../index.md)  [Sacred
Sexuality](../../sex/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](lca13.md) 
[Next](lca15.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_168">p. 168</span>

# ON THE FAMILY

A CHANGE somewhat similar to that in the position of jealousy has taken
place in the rôle of the Family during the progress of society into and
through the period of civilisation. In the primitive human association
the Family was large in extent, and in outline vague; the boundaries of
kinship, in cases where the woman might have several husbands, or the
husband several wives, were hard to trace; paternal feeling was little
or not at all developed; and the whole institution rested on the
maternal instinct of care for the young. In the middle societies of
civilisation, and with monogamic arrangements, the Family grew
exceedingly definite in form and circumscribed in extent. The growth of
property and competition, and the cellular system of society, developed
a kind of warfare between the units of which society was composed. These
units were families. The essential communism and fraternity of society
at large was dwarfed now and contracted into the limits of the family;
and this institution acquired an extraordinary importance from the fact
that it alone kept alive and showed in

<span id="page_169">p. 169</span>

miniature (intensified by the darkness and chaos and warfare outside)
the sacred fire of human fraternity. So great was this importance in
fact that the Holy Family became one of the central religious
conceptions of the civilised period, and it was commonly thought that
society owed its existence to the Family--instead of, as was the case,
the truth being the reverse, namely that the Family was the condensation
of the principle which had previously existed, though diffused and
unconscious, throughout society.

The third and future stage is of course easy to see--that is, the
expansion again of the conception of the family *consciously* into the
fraternity and communism of all society. It is obvious that as this
takes place the family will once more lose its definition of outline and
merge more and more again with the larger social groups in which it is
embedded--but not into the old barbaric society in which the conception
of human fellowship lay diffused and only dimly auroral, but into the
newer society in which it shall be clear and all-illuminating as the
sun.

Thus the Family institution in its present form, and as far as that form
may be said to be artificial, will doubtless pass away. Nevertheless
there remains of course, and must remain, its natural or physiological
basis--namely the actual physical

<span id="page_170">p. 170</span>

relation of the parents to each other and to the child. One perhaps of
the most valuable results of the Monogamic family institution under
civilisation has been the development of the paternal feeling for the
child, which in primitive society was so weak. To-day the love of man
and wife for each other is riveted, as it never was in ancient days, by
the tender beauty of the child-face, in which each parent sees with
strange emotion his own features blended with the features of his loved
one--the actual realisation of that union which the lovers so desired,
and which yet so often seemed to them after all not consummated. The
little prolongation of oneself, carrying in its eyes the star-look of
another's love, and descending a stranger into the world to face a
destiny all its own, touches the most personal and mortal-close feelings
(as well as perhaps the most impersonal) of the heart. And while to-day
this sight often reconciles husband and wife to the legal chains which
perforce hold them together, in a Free Society, we may hope, it will
more often be the sign and seal of a love which neither requires nor
allows any kind of mechanical bond.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: On Preventive Checks to Population](lca15.md)
