[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [LGBT](../index)  [Sacred
Sexuality](../../sex/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](lca10) 
[Next](lca12) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_151">p. 151</span>

# REMARKS AND NOTES

<span id="page_153">p. 153</span>

### SOME REMARKS

##### ON THE

# EARLY STAR AND SEX WORSHIPS

THERE seems to be a certain propriety in the fact that two of the oldest
and most universal cults have been the worship of the stars on the one
hand, and of the emblems of sex on the other. The stars, the most
abstract, distant and universal of phenomena, symbols of changeless law
and infinitude, before which human will and passion sink into death and
nothingness; and sex, the very focus of passion and desire, the burning
point of the will to live. Between these two poles the human mind has
swayed since the eldest time.

With these earlier worships, too, the later religions have mingled in
inextricable but not meaningless entanglement. The Passover, the
greatest feast of the Jews, borrowed from the Egyptians, handed down to
become the supreme festival of Christianity, and finally blending in the
North of Europe with the worship of the Norse goddess Eastre, is as is

<span id="page_154">p. 154</span>

well known closely connected with the celebration of the Spring equinox
and of the *passing over* of the sun from south to north of the
equator--*i.e.*, from his winter depression to his summer dominion. The
Sun, at the moment of passing the equinoctial point, stood 3000 years
ago in the Zodiacal constellation of the Ram or he-lamb. The Lamb,
therefore, became the symbol of the young triumphant god. The Israelites
(Exodus xii. 14.) were to smear their doorways (symbol of the passage
from darkness to light) with the blood of the Lamb, in remembrance of
the conflict of their god with the powers of darkness (the Egyptians).
At an earlier date--owing to the precession of the equinoxes--the sun at
the spring passage stood in the constellation of the Bull; so, in the
older worships of Egypt and of Persia and of India, it was the Bull that
was sacred and the symbol of the god. Moses is said to have abolished
the worship of the Calf and to have consecrated the Lamb at the
passover--and this appears to be a rude record of the fact that the
astronomical changes were accompanied or followed by priestly changes of
ceremonial. Certainly it is curious that in later Egyptian, times the
bull-headed god was deposed in favor of the ram-headed god Ammon; and
that Christianity adopted the Lamb for the symbol of its Savior.

<span id="page_155">p. 155</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Similarly, the Virgin Mary with the holy Child
in her arms can be traced by linear descent from the early Christian
Church at Alexandria up through the later Egyptian times to Isis with
the infant Horus, and thence to the constellation Virgo shining in the
sky. In the representation of the Zodiac in the Temple of Denderah (in
Egypt) the figure of Virgo is annotated by a smaller figure of Isis with
Horus in her arms; and the Roman church fixed the celebration of Mary's
assumption into glory at the very date (15th August) of the said
constellation's disappearance from sight in the blaze of the solar rays,
and her birth on the date (8th Sep.) of the same constellation's
reappearance <span id="fr_31"></span>[1](#fn_31).

The history of Israel reveals a long series of avowedly sexual and solar
worships carried on alongside with that of Jehovah--worships of Baal,
Ashtaroth, Nehushtan, the Host of Heaven, etc.--and if we are to credit
the sacred record, Moses himself introduced the notoriously sexual Tree
and Serpent worship (Numbers xxi. 9, and 2 Kings xviii. 4.); while
Solomon, not without dramatic propriety, borrowed from the Phoenicians
the two phallic pillars surmounted by pomegranate wreaths, called Jachin
and Boaz, and placed them in front of

<span id="page_156">p. 156</span>

his temple (I Kings Vii. 21). The Cross itself (identical as a symbol
with the *phallus* of the Greeks and the *lingam* of the East), the
Fleur de Lys, which has the same signification, and the Crux Ansata,
borrowed by the early Christians from Egypt and indicating the union of
male and female, are woven and worked into the priestly vestments and
altar-cloths of Christianity, just as the astronomical symbols are woven
and worked into its Calendar, and both sets of symbols, astronomical and
sexual, into the very construction of our Churches and Cathedrals. Jesus
himself--so entangled is the worship of this greatest man with the
earlier cults--is purported <span id="fr_32"></span>[1](#fn_32) to have
been born like the other sungods, Bacchus, Apollo, Osiris, on the 25th
day of December, the day of the sun's re-birth (*i.e.*, the first day
which obviously lengthens after the 21st December--the day of the
doubting apostle Thomas!) and to have died upon an instrument which, as
already hinted, was ages before and all over the world held in reverence
as a sexual symbol.

I have only touched the fringe of this great subject. The more it is
examined into the more remarkable is the mass of corroborative matter
belonging to it. The conclusion towards which one

<span id="page_157">p. 157</span>

seems to be impelled is that these two great primitive ideas,, sexual
and astronomical, are likely to remain the poles of human emotion in the
future, even as they have been in the past.

Some cynic has said that the two great ruling forces of mankind are
Obscenity and Superstition. Put in a less paradoxical form, as that the
two ruling forces are Sex and the belief in the Unseen, the saying may
perhaps be accepted. To call the two Love and Faith (as Dr. Bucke does
in his excellent book on *Man's Moral Nature*) is perhaps to run the
risk of becoming *too* abstract and spiritual.

Roughly speaking we may say that the worship of Sex and Life
characterised the Pagan races of Europe and Asia Minor anterior to
Christianity, while the worship of Death and the Unseen has
characterised Christianity. It remains for the modern nations to accept
both Life and Death, both the Greek and the Hebrew elements, and all
that these general terms denote, in a spirit of the fullest friendliness
and sanity and fearlessness.

 

A curious part of all the old religions, Pagan or Christian--and this
connects itself with the above--is Asceticism: that occasional instinct
of voluntary and determined despite to the body and its senses. Even in
the wildest races, rejoicing

<span id="page_158">p. 158</span>

before all things in the consciousness of Life, we find festivals of
fierce endurance and torments willingly undergone with a kind of savage
glee; <span id="fr_33"></span>[1](#fn_33) and during the Christian
centuries--monks, mystics, and world-spiting puritans--this instinct was
sometimes exalted into the very first place of honor. I suppose it will
have to be recognised--whatever absurd aberrations the tendency may have
been liable to--that it is a basic thing in human nature, and as
ineradicable in its way as the other equally necessary instinct towards
Pleasure. To put it in another way, perhaps the ordinary Hedonism makes
a mistake in failing to recognise the joy of Ascendancy, and (if it is
not a 'bull' to say so) the pleasure which lies in the denial of
pleasure. In order to enjoy life one must be a master of life--for to be
a slave to its inconsistencies can only mean torment; and in order to
enjoy the senses one must be master of *them*. To dominate the actual
world you must, like Archimedes, base your fulcrum somewhere beyond.

In such moods a man delights to feel his supremacy, not only over the
beasts of the field, but over his own bodily and mental powers: no
ordinary

<span id="page_159">p. 159</span>

pleasure so great, but its rejection serves to throw out into relief
this greater; no task so stern, but endurance is sterner; no pain so
fierce but it wakes the soul to secret laughter. If there is something
narrow in the creed of the ascetic on its negative side--that of
denial--one cannot but feel that on its positive side, the establishment
of authority and kingship, it has a real and vital meaning.

In another mood, however (equally undeniable and important), man
acknowledges his delight in life, and gives the rein to his desires to
chariot him to the extremest bounds of his kingdom. The kiss of the
senses is beautiful beyond all and every abstraction; the touch of the
sunlight, the glory of form and color, the magic of sweet sound, the joy
of human embraces, the passion of sex--all so much the more perfect
because they are as it were something divine made actual and realisable.
In such a mood asceticism in any form seems the grossest impiety and
folly, and the pursuit of the Unseen a mere abandonment of the world for
its shadow.

Are not these two moods both necessary--the great rhythmical heart-beat,
the *systole* and *diastole*, of the human soul? The one, a going forth
and gathering of materials from all sources, the other an organising of
them under the most perfect light,

<span id="page_160">p. 160</span>

or rather (it may be said) a consumption of them to feed the most
perfect flame; the one centrifugal, the other centripetal; the one
individual, the other universal; and so forth--each required for the
purposes of the other, and making the other possible?

Do we not want a truly experiential view of what may be called
Religion--derived from the largest actual acquaintance with, and
acceptance of, all the facts both of mundane and extra-mundane
consciousness--neither (like some secularists) denying the one, nor
(like some religionists) minimising or contemning the other? And is it
not possible that in the early Star and Sex worships we have evidence of
the attempt of the human mind to establish some such sane polarity?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_31"></span>[155:1](lca11.htm#fr_31) These dates have
shifted now by two or three weeks owing to the equinoctial precession.

<span id="fn_32"></span>[156:1](lca11.htm#fr_32) The date of his birth
was not fixed till A.D. 531--when it was computed by a monkish
astrologer.

<span id="fn_33"></span>[158:1](lca11.htm#fr_33) Note especially the
ordeals through which the youth of so many savage races have had to pass
before being admitted to manhood.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Note on the Primitive Group-Marriage](lca12)
