[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](pol06)  [Next](pol08.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002F9NQVE/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Talmud: Selections*, by H. Polano, \[1876\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_72">p. 72</span>

### CHAPTER IV.

#### FROM JOSEPH'S YOUTH TO HIS ELEVATION OVER EGYPT.

JOSEPH, the son of Jacob and Rachel, did not take part in the war of
Shechem: he was but a lad, too young to associate with his brothers. Yet
he experienced a desire to emulate their greatness, and he felt that his
fame would yet be superior to theirs. His father loved him tenderly as
the son of his old age, and as a token of this love he made him a
handsome coat, a garment of many colours. This especial mark of
distinction increased Joseph's natural feeling of superiority, and as he
found fault with his brothers' doings and carried tales to his father he
soon gained their enmity; they could not even speak to him in a
peaceable manner.

When Joseph was seventeen years of age he dreamed his well-known dream,
and related it to his brethren.

"What!" they exclaimed, "do you presume to tell us that you shall reign
over us?"

Joseph then related the dream to his father, who listened attentively,
and in his great love kissed and blessed the lad. And when the other
sons of Jacob learned of this action of their father they hated Joseph
still more. But when the second dream was told them, and Joseph stated
that the sun, the moon, and eleven stars bowed down to him, their anger
reached a climax, and even Jacob felt himself called upon to rebuke the
ambitious dreamer.

And it came to pass, on a certain day, the sons of Jacob started out to
feed their father's flocks, and remained away

<span id="page_73">p. 73</span>

so long a time that Jacob became troubled, for their welfare. He thought
that perhaps the men of Shechem had received aid and wrought vengeance
on his sons for the warfare they had brought upon that city.

So Jacob called Joseph to him; and said:

"Thy brothers started out to feed the flocks in Shechem, and they have
not yet returned. Go, I pray, and seek them, and bring me back word of
their well-doing."

Joseph wandered around some time in the neighbourhood of Shechem without
seeing aught of his brethren, and he did not know which way to turn to
seek them, when a man espied him straying aimlessly about, and asked,
"Whom seekest thou?" Joseph answered, "I am looking for my brethren;
knowest thou which way they have travelled?" "I do," replied the man; "I
saw thy brethren, and I heard them say, 'Let us go to Dothan.'"

When Joseph's brethren saw the lad approaching them they conspired
against him, and resolved to kill him.

"Behold," said Simeon, "the great master of dreams comes this way. Now
let us destroy him; we can cast his body into one of the pits in the
wilderness, and when our father inquires concerning him we can say that
a wild beast has devoured him."

But when Reuben heard these words he said:

"No, we must not do this thing. Our father could never pardon us for
such a crime. Rather cast him in one of the pits and let him perish
there, but shed not his blood."

This proposition was made by Reuben with the purpose of rescuing the lad
later, and returning him safely to his father.

When Joseph was cast into the pit, in accordance with this suggestion,
he cried loudly to his brethren:

<span id="page_74">p. 74</span>

"What are ye doing? wherefore are ye treating me thus? What have I
done,--what is my sin? Have ye no fear of the Lord that ye do this
thing, for am I not of your flesh and blood, the son of Jacob? Reuben,
Judah, Levi, Simeon," he cried, "lift me up out of this pit,--oh, sons
of Jacob, have mercy upon me! If I have sinned against you, remember the
precepts of your father, of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, to have mercy on
the fatherless, to give food to the hungry, drink to those who thirst,
clothing to the naked; and will ye deny mercy to your own flesh and
blood? If I have sinned against you, oh pardon me for the sake of our
father, Jacob."

His brothers, however, moved away from the pit, that they might not hear
his cries, and they sat down to partake of their usual meal. While
eating they consulted as to the final disposition of their brother; they
were undecided whether to leave him as he was, to kill him, or to
restore him to his father.

While considering the matter they saw a party of Ishmaelites
approaching, on their way down to Egypt, and Judah said to his brethren,
"What would it profit us to kill our brother? Let us sell him to this
party of Ishmaelites, let them carry him whither they will; perchance he
may be destroyed among the people of the earth; but our hands will not
have shed his blood."

The brothers agreed to this proposition, and resolved to sell Joseph to
the Ishmaelites.

But it happened that while they were discussing the question, a party of
Midianites on a journey were seeking for a well of water. They lighted
by chance upon the pit in which Joseph was concealed, and looking in,
they were astonished to meet the gaze of a bright and handsome lad. They
drew Joseph up from the pit and carried him along

<span id="page_75">p. 75</span>

with them. As they passed by, the sons of Jacob saw Joseph with them,
and called aloud:

"Hold! Wherefore have ye done this, to steal our slave whom we cast into
the pit for disobedience? Come, give him up."

"And is he your slave?" answered the Midianites; "does he serve you?
Likely it is the reverse, for he is handsomer and nobler than any among
ye. We found the lad in the pit, and we shall take him with us."

"Give us our slave," repeated the sons of Jacob, or peradventure we
shall kill you."

The Midianites drew their weapons, and were ready to enter upon a bloody
fray at once.

"Beware," said Simeon, "do ye not know that we killed a whole city?
Beware, if ye give us not our slave we may treat you as we treated the
city of Shechem."

Upon hearing these words the Midianites lowered their tone, and assumed
a more amicable attitude.

"What do you want," they asked, "with a disobedient slave? Sell him to
us; we will pay you whatever you may ask."

A bargain was at once concluded, and the sons of Jacob sold their
brother Joseph to the Midianites for twenty pieces of silver, for Reuben
was absent, unable to speak a word to change their purpose.

The Midianites, taking Joseph with them, journeyed on towards Gilead. As
they journeyed, however, they regretted the purchase which they had
made, and they said one to the other, "See, this is a lad of noble
appearance; doubtless the men from whom we bought him stole him from the
land of the Hebrews, and if search is made for him he may be found in
our hands; this will surely be death to us."

While they were speaking in this strain, the body of

<span id="page_76">p. 76</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Ishmaelites which
the sons of Jacob had seen, approached the Midianites, and the latter
hailing them, sold Joseph for the same amount they had paid for him,
glad to be rid of the fear which had seized them.

The Ishmaelites placed Joseph upon one of their camels and carried him
with them into Egypt. Joseph wept bitterly during this journey at the
thought that each step took him farther away from his father's house,
and shut the gates of hope more securely behind him. The Ishmaelites
were provoked at his sighs and weeping, and treated him quite cruelly.

On their way they passed the spot where Rachel, Joseph's mother, lay
buried. Joseph knew the spot, and throwing himself upon his mother's
grave, he gave free vent to the anguish of his soul.

"My mother, oh my mother," he cried, "rise from thy grave and look upon
thy son! He is sold for a slave, and there is no eye to pity him. Arise
and look upon thy son, weep with him for his trouble and his distress!
Answer me, oh my mother! Awake from thy sleep, and take up arms against
my brethren for thy son! My coat they have torn from me, and they have
consigned me into bondage; twice have I been sold, separated from my
father, from every compassionate heart, from every pitying eye. Arise,
my mother, call upon thy God! See, my mother, whom the Eternal will
justify, and whom He will condemn! Wake from thy sleep, my mother, seek
my father, stricken down in grief, whisper to him words of comfort and
glad tidings, that his heart may live again. Arise, my mother, and look
upon thy son!"

The Ishmaelites drove Joseph from his mother's grave with blows and
threats. Then Joseph spoke to them: "Let me find grace in your eyes,"
said he; "take me

<span id="page_77">p. 77</span>

home, I pray you, to my father's house, and he will make all of you
rich."

But they laughed, and answered him:

"Art thou not a slave? Who is thy father? Lo, thou hast been twice sold;
thou art a slave, and a disobedient slave; hadst thou been worthy thou
wouldst not have been twice sold."

Joseph wept, and pined, and grew sick; and his masters said:

"Behold, the boy will die upon our hands, and the money which we have
paid for him will be lost to us. He wishes to go home to his father's
house; let us carry him thither, and ‘tis likely we shall receive the
money that we paid for him."

But others answered, "No, the distance is too great; should we turn back
now, we shall be kept but so much longer from our own homes. Let us take
the lad to Egypt; we will be able to sell him there, and for a large
price."

This advice met with the approval of the majority of the party, and they
carried Joseph into Egypt.

Now when the sons of Jacob had sold their brother their consciences
smote them, and they wished to repurchase him; but on account of the
second sale they were unable to find him. While they were seeking for
him Reuben returned to the pit in which Joseph had been placed,
designing to release him. He stood at the edge of the pit, but he heard
no sound. Then he called aloud, "Joseph, Joseph!" but still there came
no answer--all was still. Reuben became greatly terrified; he thought
that Joseph had died of fright, and he descended into the pit, hoping
that the body might not be beyond resuscitation. When he found the pit
empty he rent his garments and cried aloud,

<span id="page_78">p. 78</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> "How can I return
to my father! How look upon his face and Joseph dead!"

He then hurried after his brethren, and found them consulting as to the
manner in which they should inform their father of Joseph's loss. Reuben
upbraided his brethren, and said to them, "Evil has been your behaviour;
our father's old age you bring in sorrow to the grave."

The brothers agreed to keep the fact of Joseph's fate a secret, and
acting upon the advice of Issachar, they took Joseph's coat, tore it in
several places, and killing a kid dipped the garment in its blood, and
then trampled it in the dust. Then they sent the coat to their father by
the hands of Naphtali, and these words they charged him to deliver with
the coat:

"Behold, we gathered our herds together and proceeded upon the read to
Sheehan, and this coat we found by the way, in the wilderness, torn,
smeared with blood, and trampled in the dust. Examine it, we pray thee,
and see whether or not it be the coat of thy son."

Jacob immediately recognised Joseph's coat, and fell with his face to
the ground. He remained motionless for a long time, and then he arose
and wept aloud, crying, "It is my son's coat."

Towards evening he sent for his sons, and the messenger found them with
their clothing rent and dust upon their heads.

When they reached home the bitter lamentation of their father touched
their hearts, and it was with self-accusing consciences that they denied
having seen Joseph and repeated their story of the finding of the coat.

Jacob gave himself up to the abandonment of grief, and lay with his face
to the ground. Judah raised his father's head and wiped the tears from
his father's eyes, but Jacob

<span id="page_79">p. 79</span>

refused to be comforted. "Some wild beast has devoured Joseph," he said,
"I shall never see him more;" and he mourned for Joseph many years.

The Ishmaelites carried Joseph down to Egypt, and when they came near to
the place they met four men, the descendants of Medan, the son of
Abraham and Ketura, and they said to them:

"Do you not wish to purchase this slave from us?"

The men saw that Joseph was a handsome and likely lad, and they bought
him from the Ishmaelites for nine shekels, and carried him into Egypt.

Then these Medanites said, "Behold, Potiphar, the officer of Pharaoh,
captain of the guard, desires to buy a slave, a trusty, active youth, to
superintend his household. Let us see whether we can sell this lad to
him."

The Medanites carried Joseph before Potiphar, and the latter was very
favourably impressed with his bearing and appearance.

"What is his price?" he inquired.

"Four pieces of silver," replied the Medanites.

"I will buy him," said Potiphar, "provided you bring before me the man
from whom you purchased him. He does not look like a slave, and I fear
he has been stolen from his country and his home."

The Medanites then hutted up the Ishmaelites from whom they had bought
Joseph, and Potiphar, satisfied with their account of the manner in
which they had obtained possession of the lad, paid the four pieces of
silver, and purchased Joseph for his slave.

Joseph found grace in the eyes of Potiphar, and was placed over the
house of the latter, and over all his possessions. And the Lord was with
Joseph, and for his sake blessed Potiphar and all his household.

<span id="page_80">p. 80</span>

At this time Joseph was about eighteen years of age, and a lad of such
beautiful appearance that his equal could not be found in the land of
Egypt. Being obliged, in the pursuance of his duties, to enter freely
all parts of his master's house, he attracted the attention of Zelicha,
Potiphar's wife. She was fascinated by his manners and handsome form and
face, and declared to him day by day her passion, praying for a return
upon his part of the favour with which she regarded him. Joseph refused
to listen to her, and endeavoured to rid himself of her attentions. When
she praised his beauty, and said, "Thou art fairer than all the rest of
the world," he replied, "The same One who created me created also all
mankind." When she admired his fine eyes, he replied, "What can they
avail me; they will not move or sparkle in the grave."

When Zelicha found that Joseph could not be induced by fair words to
desecrate his master's house, she tried threats of death and loss of
freedom in case of further obstinacy; but Joseph replied to them, "The
God who hath created man, looseneth the fetters of those who are bound,
and He will deliver me from thy chastisement."

Her female friends who called to see her also admired Joseph, and lauded
his beauty. On one occasion when fruit was set before the visitors, one
of them, paring the same, cut her fingers, and knew nothing of the
accident till her attention was called to the blood upon her garments,
for her eyes were fixed on Joseph, and her mind was filled with thoughts
of his appearance.

Thus time passed on, and though Zelicha still entreated, Joseph remained
cold to her allurements.

And it came to pass at the time of the overflowing of the Nile, that all
the inhabitants of Egypt left their houses, the king, the princes, and
all the people, to see the overflow

<span id="page_81">p. 81</span>

and make a holiday in its honour. And with the rest of the people the
family of Potiphar went also, all save Joseph, who remained to protect
his master's goods, and Zelicha, who remained to be alone with Joseph.

She attired herself in her richest garments, and was more ardent than
ever in her appeals to Joseph, so that to escape them he turned and fled
abruptly from her presence. As he did so she caught his garment to stay
him, but it sundered, and a portion remained in her hand. As she looked
upon it, and became conscious of how she had been shamed, a deep feeling
of hate entered her heart, and she was also terrified lest the affair
might now become known to her husband. She quickly replaced her elegant
clothing with her ordinary wear, and calling a lad she sent him to
summon home the men of the house. When they arrived she met them with
loud wailing, and related to them a story of Joseph's presumption,
crediting him with the entreaties and protestations which she had
herself made, and adding to them a charge of violence. "I caught hold of
his garment," she said, "and cried with a loud voice; he became
frightened and fled, leaving this portion of his cloth in my hand."

The men repeated these charges to Potiphar, who returned to his house in
a great rage against Joseph, and commanded at once that the lad should
be whipped severely. During the infliction of this punishment Joseph
cried aloud, raising his hands to Heaven, "Thou knowest, oh God," said
he, "that I am innocent of all these things; wherefore, shall I die
through falsehood!"

Potiphar carried Joseph before the judges, and made an accusation
against him, saying, "Thus and thus has the slave done." The judges then
addressed Joseph, and he gave his version of the story, saying, "Not so;
but thus

<span id="page_82">p. 82</span>

and thus did it occur." The judges then ordered that the rent garment
should be brought to them, and upon an examination of the same they
pronounced Joseph "not guilty." But still they sent him to prison, that
the character of the wife of one as high in the state as Potiphar might
not suffer.

For twelve long years Joseph was confined in prison, and during this
time Zelicha visited him, offering to restore him to honour and liberty
if he would but do her will. Yet steadfastly he refused, till finally
she abandoned the attempt. And while Joseph was thus in custody,
deprived of his freedom, his father Jacob, in Canaan, mourned for him as
a father mourns for a beloved child torn from him by death.

 

It came to pass about this time that Pharaoh gave a feast to his
officers and princes, and the chief butler and the chief baker waited
upon the guests. The princes found stone grits in the bread, and one of
them discovered a fly in his wine. Pharaoh was very angry at this, and
condemned the two officials to prison, where they remained a whole year.

Then a son, his first child, was born to Pharaoh, and there was great
rejoicing in the land. When the infant was three days old Pharaoh
ordered a grand banquet, and released the chief butler that he might
attend to the same. But the butler forgot his promise to Joseph to
remember him in the return to prosperity which he had predicted, and for
two years longer the prison was his home.

 

At this time Isaac, the son of Abraham, was still living in the land of
Canaan; he was one hundred and eight years old. Esau, his son, was
living then in Edom. When Esau learned that his father had grown very
feeble, and that his

<span id="page_83">p. 83</span>

last days on earth were approaching, he and his entire family journeyed
to Canaan, to his father's house. Jacob and his sons, from Hebron, also
journeyed thither, Jacob still mourning for the lost Joseph.

And Isaac said to Jacob, "Bring near to me thy children, in order that I
may bless them," and Jacob placed his eleven sons and one daughter by
his father's side.

Isaac laid his hands upon the heads of Jacob's children and embraced
them each in turn, and he said to them:

"The God of your fathers will bless you, and will increase your seed as
the stars of the heaven."

Isaac also blessed the children of Esau, saying:

"The dread of you shall be upon your enemies; your God will fill their
hearts with fear."

Then Isaac called them all together, children and grandchildren, and
thus addressed them, speaking especially to Jacob:

"The Lord, the God of the Universe, spoke unto me saying: 'Unto thy seed
will I give this land to possess it, it thy children will keep my
statutes and my ways; and I will establish the oath which I have sworn
unto thy father Abraham.' And now, my son, teach thy children, and thy
children's children, to fear the Lord and traverse the path which is
pleasing in his eyes; for if thou wilt diligently follow His statutes,
He will keep with you the covenant which He made with Abraham, and He
will look with favour on you and your seed for ever."

Then Isaac died, and Jacob and Esau wept together for their father's
demise. They carried his body to the cave of Machpelah, which is in
Hebron, and all the kings of Canaan followed with the mourners in the
funeral train of Isaac. He was buried with great reverence, even as
though he had been a king; his children mourned for him twelve

<span id="page_84">p. 84</span>

months, and the kings of Canaan lamented sorely for thirty days.

Isaac bequeathed his cattle and all his possessions to his two sons.

Esau said then to Jacob, "Behold, this which our father has left us must
be divided into two portions, then I will select my share."

Jacob divided all his father's possessions into two portions in the
presence of Esau and his sons, and then addressing his brother, said:

"Take unto thyself both these portions which thou seest before thee.
Behold, the God of Heaven and Earth spoke unto our ancestors, Abraham
and Isaac, saying, 'Unto thy seed will I give this land as an
everlasting possession.' Now, all that our father left is before thee;
if thou desirest the promised possession, the land of Canaan, take it,
and this other wealth shall be mine; or if thou desirest these two
portions, be it as it is pleasing in thy eyes, and the land of Canaan
shall be the share for me and mine."

Before Esau replied and made his choice, he sought Nebaioth, the son of
Ishmael, who was in that country, and asked his advice as to the
selection.

Nebaioth answered:

"Behold the Canaanites are now living in the land in peace and safety;
at present it is theirs; let Jacob believe that he may inherit it some
day; take thou the substance, the personal wealth of thy father."

Esau followed this advice, and taking the personal substance, he gave
Jacob for his portion the land of Canaan from the river of Egypt unto
the great river, the river Euphrates, also the cave of Machpelah, in
Hebron, which Abraham purchased from Ephron for a burying-place. Jacob
took it as a burying-place for himself and his seed

<span id="page_85">p. 85</span>

forever. Jacob drew up a deed and recorded all the particulars of the
contract, which was duly witnessed and sealed. The following is the
expression of the same:

"The land of Canaan and all the cities which it contains,--the Hittites,
the Hivites, the Jebusites, the Amorites, the Perizites, and all the
seven nations, from the river of Egypt to the river Euphrates; the city
of Hebron, which is *Kiriath arbah*, and the cave which is in it. All
this hath Jacob bought with money from his brother Esau, as a possession
to him and an inheritance to his sons and their descendants forever."

Jacob put this deed in an earthen vessel, that it might be kept safely,
and gave the same as a charge to his children.

Esau took what his father had left and parted from his brother Jacob, as
it is written:

"And Esau took his wives, and his sons, and his daughters, and all the
persons of his house, and his cattle and his beasts, and all his
substance which he had got in the land of Canaan, and went into another
country from the face of his brother Jacob" (Gen. 37: 6). He went with
all his possessions to the land of Sëir, and never returned to Canaan,
which became an inheritance unto Israel for everlasting.

 

Then Pharaoh, the king, issued a proclamation throughout the whole land
of Egypt to the wise men thereof. And he called upon all the wise men to
seek his presence and listen to the dreams which troubled him.

"He who can properly interpret to me the meaning of these visions, shall
have his dearest wishes granted as they issue from his lips; but he who
is able to read dreams and neglects my bidding, shall surely be put to
death.'

Then the wise men, and the soothsayers, and the

<span id="page_86">p. 86</span>

magicians of the land of Egypt, came and stood before the king.

And the king related to them his dream, and though many interpreted no
two agreed as to its meaning. They contradicted one another, and they
served but to confuse the king. Many were the interpretations. "The
seven fat cows," said one, "are seven kings who will arise over Egypt
from royal families, and the seven lean cows are seven princes who will
arise from them, and in the end of days destroy the seven kings. The
seven rank ears are seven great princes of this land who shall in a
coming time of war fall into the power of seven princes, now weak and in
no wise to be feared."

"The seven fat cows," said another, "are seven queens whom thou shalt
marry in the coming days, and the seven lean cows declare that these
queens shall die during thy life, oh king! The seven rank ears and the
seven lean ears are fourteen children whom thou shalt beget, and they
will fight among themselves, and the seven weaker ones shall conquer
their stronger brethren."

But the king was not satisfied with these interpretations. His mind was
still unquiet, for the Lord had ordained that Joseph was to be released
from his prison and elevated to a princely position therefore did
Pharaoh remain unsatisfied with the words of his wise men.

And the king was wroth, and he dismissed the wise men from his presence;
and all the wise men and the soothsayers and magicians of Egypt went out
from the presence of their king in shame and confusion. And the king
commanded in his wrath that all these men should be put to death.

When the chief butler heard this he sought the presence of the king, and
in deep obeisance before him spoke as follows:

<span id="page_87">p. 87</span>

"Oh king, live forever! May thy greatness, oh king, increase forever
through the land. Lo, thou wast wroth with thy servant, and thou didst
place him in confinement. For a year was I imprisoned, I and the chief
baker. And with us in our dungeon was a Hebrew servant who belonged to
the captain of the guard. His name was Joseph, and his master growing
wroth with him, had placed him in prison, where he served the captain of
the guard, and he served us also.

"And it came to pass when we had been in the prison for a year we
dreamed, each, a dream, and the Hebrew slave interpreted for each of us
his dream. And lo, as he interpreted our dreams so was the reality. As
he spoke so did it come to pass.

"Therefore, my lord king, I pray thee, do not kill the wise men of Egypt
for naught. Behold, this slave is still in the prison. If it be pleasing
in the eyes of the king let him be sent for. Let him listen to the
dreams which trouble the mind of the king, and he will be able to solve
them correctly."

The king listened to the words of the chief butler, and he ordered that
Joseph should be brought before him. But he commanded his officers to be
careful not to frighten the lad, lest through fear he should be unable
to interpret correctly.

And the servants of the king brought Joseph forth from his dungeon, and
shaved him and clothed him in new garments, and carried him before the
king. The king was seated upon his throne, and the glare and glitter of
the jewels which ornamented the throne dazzled and astonished the eyes
of Joseph.

Now the throne of the king was reached by seven steps and it was the
custom of Egypt for a prince or noble who

<span id="page_88">p. 88</span>

held audience with the king, to ascend to the sixth step; but when an
inferior or a private citizen of the land was called into his presence,
the king descended to the third step and from there spoke with him. So
when Joseph came into the presence of the king he bowed to the ground at
the foot of the throne, and the king descended to the third step and
spoke to him.

And he said:

"Behold, I have dreamed a dream, and among all the wise men and
magicians of the land there is not one able to read for me its meaning.
I have heard that thou art far-sighted and blest with the gift of
divination, and I have sent for thee to solve my dream."

And Joseph answered:

"Oh king, the power is not with me; but God will answer and give Pharaoh
peace."

And Joseph found favour in the eyes of the king, and he told to him his
dream. And the spirit of God was upon Joseph, and the king inclined his
ears and heart to the words of Joseph.

And Joseph said to Pharaoh:

"Let not the king think that his dreams are two and distinct; they have
but a single portent, and what the Lord intends doing upon the earth He
has shown to Pharaoh in a vision. Let me advise thee, oh king, how thou
mayest preserve thy life and the lives of all the inhabitants of thy
land from the grievous evils of the famine which is soon to drain and
dry up its fruitfulness and its plenty. Let the king appoint a man wise
and discreet, a man well versed in the laws of the country, and let him
appoint other officers under him to go out through all the length and
breadth of the land to gather food during the years of plenty and store
it carefully away for future use, that the land may not die

<span id="page_89">p. 89</span>

in the years of famine which will follow. And let the king command the
people of the land, that they shall each and every one gather and store
up in the years of plenty of the produce of the fields, to provide for
their wants when the ground shall be barren and the fields
unproductive."

And the king answered, "How knowest thou that thou hast read the dream
aright?"

And Joseph said, "Lo, this shall be a sign that my words are true. A son
shall be born to the king, and upon the day of his birth, thy first-born
son, who is now two years old, shall die."

And when Joseph finished speaking these words, he bowed low before the
king and departed from his presence.

The occurrence which Joseph predicted came to pass. The queen bore a
son, and upon the day when it was told to the king he rejoiced greatly.
But as the messenger of glad tidings retired, the servants of the king
found his first-born son dead, and there was a great crying and wailing
in the palace of the king.

And when Pharaoh inquired as to the cause of this great cry he was
informed of his loss, and remembering the words of Joseph he
acknowledged them as true.

After these things the king sent and gathered together all his princes,
officers, and men of rank, and when they came before him, he said, "You
have seen and heard all the words of this Hebrew, and you know that as
he spoke so has the thing occurred; therefore must we believe that his
solution of my dream was the correct one, and that his words of advice
were of good weight and consideration. We must take measures of
protection against the famine which is surely to come upon us. Therefore
search, I pray you, over all Egypt for a man with wisdom and knowledge

<span id="page_90">p. 90</span>

in his heart, that we may appoint him governor over the land."

And they answered the king, "The advice of this Hebrew was very good;
behold, the country is in the hands of the king to do with it what is
pleasing in his eyes; but the Hebrew has proved himself wise and
skilful, why should our lord the king not select and appoint him as
governor over the land."

"Yea, surely," said the king, "if God has made these things known to the
Hebrew, then there is none among us as wise and discreet as he is, What
you have suggested is in accordance with my own thoughts; we will
appoint the Hebrew our governor, and through his wisdom shall our
country be saved the pangs of want."

And Pharaoh sent for Joseph and said to him, "Thou didst advise me to
appoint a wise and discreet man to deliver the land from the anguish of
famine. Surely, there can be none more discreet than thyself to whom God
has made known all these things. Thy name shall no more be Joseph, but
'*Zaphenath-Päaneeth*' (Revealer of hidden things) shalt thou hereafter
be called among men.

"Thou shalt be second to me only, and according to thy words shall the
land of Egypt be ruled; only upon the throne shall I be greater than
thyself."

Then the king removed his ring from his finger and placed it upon the
hand of Joseph. And he dressed Joseph in royal apparel, and placed a
crown upon his head and a chain of gold about his neck. And Pharaoh
commanded that Joseph should ride in his second chariot throughout the
land of Egypt. And the people followed him with music, and a large
concourse accompanied him upon his journey.

Five thousand soldiers with drawn swords in their hands,

<span id="page_91">p. 91</span>

swords glittering in the sunlight, preceded him, and twenty thousand
soldiers followed. And the people of the land, men, women, and children
gazed upon the pageant from windows and from house-tops, and the beauty
of Joseph pleased all eyes.

And flowers were strewn in his path when he walked, and the air was made
sweet with perfume, and the savoury odour of balms and spices, And
proclamations were placed in prominent places declaring the authority of
Joseph, and threatening death to those who failed to pay him homage; for
he was considered as dishonouring his king who failed to honour the man
made second in the kingdom. The people bowed down and shouted, "Long
live the king and his viceroy!" And Joseph, seated in his chariot,
lifted his eyes to Heaven, and exclaimed in the fulness of his heart:

"He raiseth the poor from the dust; from the dunghill He lifteth up the
needy. Oh Lord of Hosts, happy is the man who trusteth in thee!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter V. Joseph's Greatness and Jacob's Entry Into
Egypt](pol08.md)
