[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](pol00)  [Next](pol02) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002F9NQVE/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Talmud: Selections*, by H. Polano, \[1876\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_v">p. v</span>

# PREFACE.

THE object of the following pages is to give to the student and general
reader a fair idea of the contents of the Talmud.

Some time since the translator was asked how it was that no English
translation of the Talmud was in existence, and being convinced that
many would be interested in its contents, he resolved upon the book
which he now presents to the public. It is merely a collection of
specimens, and makes no pretensions to any more advanced standing. The
only object has been to give in plain, easy language, a correct idea of
the scope, and as general an idea as possible of the varied sections of
the ancient and wonderful work.

A portion of the introduction is taken from the preface to the Mishna of
Maimonides; the chronology is from the "*Seder Haddoroth*" (Order of
Historical Ages), and the sketches of the Rabbis of the Talmud are taken
from various hints afforded by the book itself, joined with opinions of
the translator. The sketches of Maimonides, Rashi, and Rabbi Amnon of
Metz, are translated from the "*Seder Haddoroth*," while the incidents,
parables, legends, lectures, and aphorisms, all directly from the
Talmud, are placed in order thought suitable by the translator, and not
as they regularly occur. The portion devoted to the Holy Days is from a
work entitled "*Menorath Hammáore*" (The Lamp of the Light), the greater
part of which is originally from the Talmud.

The translator believes that a perusal of his work will

<span id="page_vi">p. vi</span>

not only aid in informing the reader of what the Talmud is, but excite
an interest in the same, which will make this book, and others of a
similar character following it, of interest and demand.

It is probable that some errors and mistakes may be discovered, despite
the care bestowed upon the pages of this book; for these the translator
craves the reader's kind indulgence. The work has been to him a labour
of love, and his satisfaction therewith would be incomplete, lacking
such kindness. In the spelling of the proper names, he has taken
advantage of a translator's arbitrary powers, and given that English
version which he deems nearest to the proper pronunciation of the
originals.

He desires to thank the friend who aided in the revision of the
manuscript and pages, for many a correction and kind suggestion; and in
the sincere hope and desire that his effort may tend to promote a
knowledge of God's Holy Word, he leaves his cause with the indulgent
reader.

 

TAMUZ, 5636

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Contents](pol02)
