[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](pol17)  [Next](pol19) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002F9NQVE/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Talmud: Selections*, by H. Polano, \[1876\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Rabbi Meir*.

"All that God made was very good."

Rabbi Simon, the son of Eleazer, uses the words "very good" in reference
to sleep. "Man sleeps," says he, "and in a few hours he gains renewed
strength." Rabbi Samuel, son of Nachman, said, "The incentive leading
man towards women is 'very good,' for thereby households are organised
and families are formed." Rabbi Hammuna was of the opinion that no more
forcible meaning could be given to the words "very good" than in
applying them to the ills of life, which, said he, "more than doctrines
and reasonings keep men temperate and dependent on a Higher Power."
Rabbi Simon, the son of Abba, applied the words "very good" to
retaliation; and Rabbi Simon, the son of Lakish, to political
government; but the teaching of Rabbi Meir was, that the death of man is
"very good."

Judaism aims not to separate, but to unite mankind,

<span id="page_216">p. 216</span>

and this was one of the great principles of Rabbi Meir's life.

Concerning the passage, "Man shall observe the law and live in it," he
said, "Holy Writ says not Israelites, not Levites, not priests, but
*men*; therefore the Gentile who observes the law stands on a level with
the High Priest."

"Walk before every man in modesty and humility," he said further. "Not
only before your co-religionists, but before every man."

Rabbi Meir was a great allegorist; it is said that he knew three hundred
allegories relating to the fox alone. Of these hut three fragments
remain to us.

"A fox said to a bear, 'Come, let us go into this kitchen; they are
making preparations for the Sabbath, and we shall he able to find food.'
The bear followed the fox, but being bulky he was captured and punished.
Angry thereat he designed to tear the fox to pieces, under the pretence
that the forefathers of the fox had once stolen his food; wherein occurs
the first saying, 'The fathers have eaten sour grapes, and the
[children's](errata.htm#3) teeth are set on edge.'

"' Nay,' said the fox, 'come with me, my good friend; let us not
quarrel; I will lead thee to another place where we shall surely find
food.' The fox then led the bear to a fountain, where two buckets were
fastened together by a rope, like balances. It was night, and the fox
pointed to the moon reflected in the water, saying, 'Here is a fine
cheese; let us descend and partake of it with an appetite.' The fox
entered his pail first, but being too light to balance the weight of the
bear he took with him a stone. As soon as the bear had gotten into the
other pail, however, the fox threw this stone away, and consequently he
rose, while the bear descended to the bottom."

Here he applies his second saying, "The righteous is

<span id="page_217">p. 217</span>

delivered out of trouble, and the wicked cometh in his stead." Each man
must suffer for his own sins, and for his own guilt alone. He who
follows the luminary of the night, sensuality, must perish, while the
righteous one, though carrying a stone (sin), will throw it away
betimes, and be delivered from death.

The libertine Elishah, the son of Abuyah, generally called Acher, a most
learned man, was one of Rabbi Meir's teachers, and they frequently
conversed on Biblical passages.

The people were not pleased that Rabbi Meir should so associate, and
they called him therefore *Acherim*, a word composed of the letters of
Meir and Acher. But Rabbi Meir referred them to the proverb, "Incline
thy ears to listen to the words of the sages, but direct thy heart to
what my thought is."

Rabbi Meir ate the date and threw away the seeds; he found a
pomegranate, and partaking of the fruit, he rejected the rind. His
generation did not comprehend him.

Acher upon one occasion said to Rabbi Meir, "Why is the law compared to
gold and glass?"

"Because," replied Rabbi Meir, "it is as hard to acquire as gold is hard
in substance, and forgotten with as much ease as glass is broken."

"No," returned the other, in the name of Rabbi Akiba, "the reason is
this: when gold and glass are broken they may be melted and worked over
into new shapes. So is it with the student of the law, though he may
commit many faulty actions there is still hope and help for him."

Rabbi Meir always favoured benevolence, and a care of self as well as of
others. "He only is truly rich," he asserted, "who enjoys his wealth."

The passage in Malachi 26: "Many he withheld from

<span id="page_218">p. 218</span>

iniquity," he interpreted as referring to Aaron, the first high priest,
who was so respected that the mere mention of his name, or the thought
of how he might regard a certain action were he present, prevented many
from falling into sin.

A heathen once said to Rabbi Meir, "Does it seem credible that God,
whose majesty you assert fills the universe, should have spoken from
between the two staves in the ark of the sanctuary?"

In answer Rabbi Meir held up before the heathen a large and a small
looking-glass, in each of which the inquirer beheld his image.

"Now," said the Rabbi, "in each mirror your body is reduced to
correspond with the size of the glass,--should the same thing be
impossible to God? The world is his large looking glass, the sanctuary
his small one."

In regard to instruction, Rabbi Meir always said, "Teach your pupils
concisely?" he also said, "Let your supplications be brief;" and his
exhortation to parents was, "Teach thy son an honest handicraft."

His favourite maxim was, "Be resolved to know my ways; be attentive at
the doors of the law, and guard the law in thy heart. Before thy eyes be
the fear of me; protect thy mouth from sinning; cleanse and sanctify
thyself from all guilt and iniquity, and God will be with thee."

From the sentence, "Be attentive at the doors of the law," Rabbi Meir
declared that every scholar should have at least three teachers, and
that the word "doors" possesses a peculiar idea or meaning. For
instance, a person in passing the door of the house in which he passed
his honeymoon, or the door of a hall of justice in which he has been
convicted or acquitted, or the door of a house in which he has sinned,
what different thoughts, feelings, and recollections will be awakened in
him. With equal strength should the

<span id="page_219">p. 219</span>

circumstances under which he studied the law be impressed upon his mind.
The Israelites are called the "children of God," and Rabbi Meir never
ceased to present this filial relation in its true light, filling to the
brim the goblet of family happiness, and displaying it to the eyes of
the people. "Jeremiah calls us 'foolish children,'" said he; "in
Deuteronomy we are called 'children lacking faith;' but under all
circumstances we remain 'the *children* of God.'"

Rabbi Meir's wife was good and pious as her husband.

There dwelt in his neighbourhood some co-religionists who were followers
of Greek customs, who annoyed the Rabbi very much. In his vexation he
would have prayed to God to destroy them, but said Beruryah, his wife:

"Be mindful of the teachings of thy faith. Pray not that sinners may
perish, but that the sin itself may disappear and no opportunity for its
practice remain."

During the Rabbi's absence from home two of his sons died. Their mother,
hiding her grief, awaited the father's return, and then said to him:

"My husband, some time since two jewels of inestimable value were placed
with me for safe keeping. He who left them with me called for them
to-day, and I delivered them into his hands?"

"That is right," said the Rabbi, approvingly. "We must always return
cheerfully and faithfully all that is placed in our care."

Shortly after this the Rabbi asked for his sons, and the mother, taking
him by the hand, led him gently to the chamber of death. Meir gazed upon
his sons, and realising the truth, wept bitterly.

"Weep not, beloved husband," said his noble wife; "didst thou not say to
me we must return cheerfully when ‘tis called for, all that has been
placed in our care? God

<span id="page_220">p. 220</span>

gave us these jewels; He left them with us for a time, and we gloried in
their possession; but now that He calls for His own, we should not
repine."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Hillel Hannasi.](pol19)
