[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](pol20)  [Next](pol22) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002F9NQVE/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Talmud: Selections*, by H. Polano, \[1876\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Maimonides*.

Moses Maimonides, one of the greatest of Jewish commentators, and a
descendant of Rabbi Judah, the compiler of the *Mishna*, was born in the
city of Cordova, Spain, March 30th, 1135. His father was somewhat
advanced in

<span id="page_225">p. 225</span>

life when he married, and it is said that he entered into the conjugal
state through having dreamed several successive times that he was wedded
to the daughter of a butcher in his neighbourhood; the lady whom he did
actually marry.

Moses was the only child of this lady, who died shortly after his birth.
His father lamented her demise for about a year, and then married again,
several children being the result of this second union.

Moses displayed no love for study in his youth; a fact which grieved his
father much. All efforts to induce him to become more studious failed;
his brothers called him "the butcher's boy," as a term of reproach for
his dulness; and finally, in anger, his father drove him from his home.

While travelling, entirely friendless, Moses fell in with a learned
Rabbi, and admired his wisdom and knowledge so much that he resolved to
study zealously and emulate such attainments.

Many years after this a new preacher was announced to lecture in the
synagogue, at Cordova, upon a designated Sabbath. Numerous rumours of
his wonderful learning and eloquence were rife, and all were anxious to
hear him. In matter, delivery, earnestness, and effect, the sermon
excelled all that the people had before listened to, and to the
amazement of Maimonides the elder, and his sons, they recognised in the
man all were eager to honour, their outcast relative.

The first commentary of Maimonides is upon the *Mishna*, and it
concludes with these words:

"I, Moses, the son of Maymon, commenced this commentary when
twenty-three years of age. I have finished it at the age of thirty in
the land of Egypt."

Maimonides fled from Spain to Cairo, in Egypt, from fanaticism and
persecution. There he studied the Greek

<span id="page_226">p. 226</span>

and Chaldaic languages, becoming master of both after seven years'
attention. His fame spread through the country. His scientific standing
and his general knowledge were universally recognised, and his books
were not only valued by his brethren in faith, but by all the cultured
and enlightened of his day.

It is said that the king of Egypt appointed him as one of his staff of
physicians. The enlightened men of the kingdom were divided into seven
grades, each grade occupying a corresponding position near the throne of
the king on state occasions. The monarch considered Maimonides so much
superior to the others that he made for him a special position. This,
Moses, a modest man, declined. The other physicians, however, were
jealous of his high standing, and being unable to injure him openly,
they endeavoured to accomplish his ruin in a secret manner.

The king was taken very sick, and Maimonides attended him. Taking
advantage of this, the physicians put poison in the draught which Moses
had prepared for him, and then informed the king that the latter
designed his death. To prove their words, they gave some of the mixture
to a dog, and the animal died.

The king was grieved and surprised, and Maimonides, struck dumb with
amazement, was unable to say a word.

"Death is the penalty for one who attempts to assassinate his ruler,"
said the king. "Choose now the mode of thy punishment."

Moses asked for three days for consideration, which the king granted.
During this time he prepared a certain mixture, and instructed his
pupils to have it ready and apply it according to his directions, when
he should be brought home senseless. He then appeared before the king,
and desired to have his veins opened. The vital artery was

<span id="page_227">p. 227</span>

missed, as he had anticipated, and the result was as he had foreseen.
After his recovery, he fled from Egypt, taking refuge in a cave, where
he wrote his "*Yad Hazakah*" (the "Strong Hand"), consisting of fourteen
divisions, typified by the word *Yad*, which also means fourteen.

Maimonides simplified the Talmudical rules and traditions, making them
clear to the comprehension of all. He was the author of an exhaustive
work, entitled, "*Mishne Torah*," the "Second Law," which was eagerly
copied and extensively disseminated. He also wrote many philosophical
treatises levelled against atheism, and designed to prove that God
produced the world from naught, and at the age of fifty gave to the
world his great work, *Moreh Nebuchim* (Guide of the Perplexed), to
which Rabbi Judah Charizi added an appendix.

Maimonides died at the age of seventy years, and his remains were
interred at Cairo, Egypt. Both Jews and Gentiles mourned his loss. The
lamentation in Jerusalem was intense, a fast was declared, the
synagogues were opened, and a portion of the law (Levit. 25: 12 to end),
and the fifth chapter of Samuel 1, were made parts of the service of the
day.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Rabbi Ammon, of Metz](pol22)
