[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](pol19)  [Next](pol21.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002F9NQVE/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Talmud: Selections*, by H. Polano, \[1876\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Rashi*.

*Ra*bbenu *Sh*elomo *Y*itzchaki (Our teacher, Solomon the

<span id="page_223">p. 223</span>

son of Isaac), generally known as *Rashi*, from the initial letters of
his name, was born about the year 1040 in Troyes, France. As a lad, his
progress was remarkable; he mastered the most abstruse studies without
difficulty, obtaining, in addition to his great proficiency in
philology, philosophy, medicine, astronomy, and civil law, a complete
mastery over the wide range of Scriptural and Talmudical lore.

He commenced his commentaries upon the Scriptures very early in life,
completing the work, it is said, in his thirty-third year. Before giving
it to the public, however, he travelled for seven years, visiting the
academies of Italy, Greece, Germany, Palestine, and Egypt, storing up
for the benefit of coming ages all that an observant eye, a gifted mind,
and a diligent scholar could glean.

Upon his return to France, Rashi published his commentaries on the
Bible, a book which has never been superseded, and which is now
frequently published in connexion with the Hebrew Bible, and he
supplemented the same, shortly after, with a commentary upon
twenty-three of the treatises of the Talmud.

Many of his works were never published; but among those given to the
world is a book of medicine, and a poem, "The Unity of God."

He died at the age of seventy-five years, leaving three daughters, one
of whom became the mother of Samuel den Meier, who edited and added to
the works of his grandfather.

His eminence, his piety, and his learning became traditional with
succeeding generations, and he became the hero of many legends of that
nature, which minds in those early days were so ready to grasp and
embellish.

It is said that his monarch sent for him upon one occasion, and said to
him:

<span id="page_224">p. 224</span>

"I have prepared a hundred thousand chariots and two hundred ships; I
desire to capture Jerusalem. My soldiers and officers are superior in
skill and courage to those now in possession; what thinkest thou of my
prospects for success?"

"Thou wilt capture Jerusalem," returned Rashi; "thou wilt reign over it
three days, and thou wilt return to this city with three horses and as
many men thereon."

"Take heed then that there be not four horses," exclaimed the monarch,
angered at this prediction, "for if I return with even one more than
thou hast said, I will give thy flesh to the fowls of the air."

The war lasted for four years. The monarch returned with but four
horsemen left of all his army, and as they passed through the gates of
the city a stone fell, killing one horse and its rider instantly. This
brought to mind the words of Rashi; but when the king sought for him, he
found that during his absence the old man had gone the way of all flesh.

It is claimed that the chair which Rashi used in the college is still in
existence.

Rashi was also called *Jarchi*, derived from the name of the city in
which he lived, "Lunel." *Jerach* being the Hebrew, as lune is the
French for moon.

In the words of the Talmud, "A righteous man never dies," and, "Happy
the man that hath found wisdom, and he that hath acquired
understanding."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Maimonides](pol21.md)
