[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](pol31)  [Next](pol33.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002F9NQVE/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Talmud: Selections*, by H. Polano, \[1876\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Death*.

Man is born with his hands clenched; he dies with his hands wide open.
Entering life he desires to grasp everything; leaving the world, all
that he possessed has slipped away.

Even as a fox is man; as a fox which seeing a fine vineyard lusted after
its grapes. But the palings were placed at narrow distances, and the fox
was too bulky to creep between them. For three days he fasted, and when
he had grown thin he entered into the vineyard. He feasted upon the
grapes, forgetful of the morrow, of all things but his enjoyment; and
lo, he had again grown stout and was unable to leave the scene of his
feast. So for three days more he fasted, and when he had again grown
thin, he passed through the palings and stood outside the vineyard,
meagre as when he entered.

So with man; poor and naked he enters the world, poor and naked does he
leave.

Very expressive is the legend, one of many woven around the name of
Alexander.

He wandered to the gates of Paradise and knocked for entrance,

"Who knocks?" demanded the guardian angel.

"Alexander."

Who is Alexander?"

<span id="page_264">p. 264</span>

"Alexander--*the* Alexander--Alexander the Great--the conqueror of the
world."

"We know him not," replied the angel; "this is the Lord's gate, only the
righteous enter here."

Alexander begged for something to prove that he had reached the gates of
Paradise, and a small piece of a skull was given to him. He showed it to
his wise men, who placed it in one scale of a balance. Alexander poured
gold and silver into the other scale, but the small bone weighed
heavier; he poured in more, adding his crown jewels, his diadem; but
still the bone outweighed them all. Then one of the wise men, taking a
grain of dust from the ground placed that upon the bone, and lo, the
scale flew up.

The bone was that which surrounds the eye of man; the eye of man which
naught can satisfy save the dust which covers it in the grave.

 

When the righteous dies ‘tis earth that meets with loss. The jewel will
ever be a jewel, but it has passed from the possession of its former
owner. Well may the loser weep.

Life is a passing shadow, say the Scriptures. The shadow of a tower or a
tree; the shadow which prevails for a time? No; even as the shadow of a
bird in its flight, it passeth from our sight, and neither bird nor
shadow remains.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Funeral Sermon over a dead Rabbi](pol33.md)
