[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](pol29)  [Next](pol31) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002F9NQVE/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Talmud: Selections*, by H. Polano, \[1876\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Rewards and Punishments*.

Samson sinned against the Lord through his *eyes*, as it is written, "I
have seen a woman of the daughters of the Philistines. . . . This one
take for me, for she pleaseth in my *eyes*" (Judges 14: 3). Therefore
through his *eyes* was he punished, as it is written, "And the
Philistines seized him, and put out his eyes."

Abshalom was proud of his *hair*. "And like Abshalom there was no man as
handsome in all Israel, so that he was greatly praised; from the sole of
his foot up to the crown of his head there was no blemish on him. And
when he shaved off the hair of his head, and it was at the end of every
year that he shaved it off, because it was too heavy do him so that he
had to shave it off, he weighed the hair of his head at two hundred
shekels by the king's weight," Therefore by his *hair* was he hanged.

<span id="page_261">p. 261</span>

Miriam *waited* for Moses one hour (when. he was in the box of
bulrushes). Therefore the Israelites *waited* for Miriam seven days,
when she became leprous. "And the people did not set forward until
Miriam was brought in again."

Joseph buried his father. "And Joseph went up to bury his father." There
was none greater among the children of Israel than Joseph. Moses
excelled him afterwards, however; therefore we find, "And Moses took the
bones of Joseph with him." But the world has seen none greater than
Moses, therefore ‘tis written, "And He (God) buried him in the valley."

 

When trouble and sorrow become the portion of Israel, and the
fainthearted separate from their people, two angels lay their hands upon
the head of him who withdraws, saying, "This one shall not see the
comfort of the congregation."

When trouble comes to the congregation it is not right for a man to say,
"I will go home; I will eat and drink; and things shall be peaceful to
me;" ‘tis of such a one that the holy book speaks, saying, "And behold
these is gladness and joy; slaying of oxen, and killing of sheep; eating
of flesh, and drinking of wine. 'Let us eat and drink, for to-morrow we
must die.' And it was revealed in my ears by the Lord of Hosts; surely
the iniquity shall not be forgiven ye until ye die" (Isaiah 22: 13).

Our teacher, Moses, always bore his share in the troubles of the
congregation, as it is written, "They took a stone and put it under him"
(Exodus 17: 12). Could they not have given him a chair or a cushion? But
then he said, "Since the Israelites are in trouble (during the war with
Amalek) lo, I will bear my part with them, for he who bears his

<span id="page_262">p. 262</span>

portion of the burden will live to enjoy the hour of consolation. Woe to
the one who thinks, 'Ah, well, I will neglect my duty; who can know
whether I bear my part or not;' even the stones of his house, aye, the
limbs of the trees, shall testify against him, as it is written, 'For
the stones will cry from the wall, and the limbs of the trees will
testify."'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Trades](pol31)
