[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](pol55)  [Next](pol57) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002F9NQVE/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Talmud: Selections*, by H. Polano, \[1876\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Pentecost*.

The Feast of Weeks, or "Pentecost," occurs upon the sixth day of the
third month, *Sivan* (June). It is called the Feast of Weeks because
forty-nine days, or seven weeks, duly numbered, elapse between the
second day of Passover, when (during the existence of the Temple) a
sheaf of green barley was offered, and this festival, when two loaves
made of the first flour of the wheat harvest were "brought before the
Lord." It is also the anniversary of the delivery of the commandment
from Mount Sinai.

<span id="page_334">p. 334</span>

Why does not the Bible particularise in this as on other occasions, and
say directly, "On the sixth day of the third month was the law given?"

Because in ancient times the men called "wise" placed their faith and
dependence upon the planets. They divided these into seven, apportioning
one to each day of the week. Some nations selected for their greatest
god the sun, other nations the moon, and so on, and prayed to them and
worshipped them. They knew not that the planets moved and changed
according to the course of nature, established by the Most High, a
course which He might change according to His will, and into their
ignorant ideas many of the Israelites had entered. Therefore, as they
considered the planets as seven, God made many other things depending on
that number, to show that as He made them, so had He made the planets.

The seventh day of the week He made the Sabbath; the seventh year he
made the year of rest; after seven times seven years, or after seven
Sabbatical years, He ordained the Jubilee, or year of release. Seven
days He gave to the Passover festival, and seven days to the Feast of
Tabernacles. Seven days was Jericho surrounded, and seven priests took
seven trumpets and marched round its walls seven times upon the seventh
day.

Therefore, after numbering seven weeks during the ripening time of the
grain, the Israelites were to hold a holy convocation, to praise the One
who can prevent all things, but who cannot be prevented; who can change
all things, but is unchangeable.

The first day the Israelites were redeemed from slavery and
superstition; the fiftieth day a law was given them for their guide
through life; therefore they are commanded to number these days and
remember them.

<span id="page_335">p. 335</span>

The children of Ishmael, says the legend, were asked to accept the law.
"What does it contain?" they asked. "Thou shalt not steal," was the
answer. "How can we then accept it," they returned, "when thus was our
forefather blessed, 'Thy hand shall be against every man?'"

The children of Esau were asked to accept the law, and they also
inquired, "What does it contain?" "Thou shalt not kill," was the answer.
"We cannot accept it, then," said they, "for thus did our father Isaac
bless us, 'By the sword shalt thou live.'"

When Israel was asked to accept the law, the people answered, "We will
do and obey."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: New Year, or the Day of Memorial](pol57)
