[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Swedenborg](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](pps02)  [Next](pps04) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Prophets and Psalms*, by Emanuel Swedenborg, \[1761\], tr. by J.E.
Schreck \[1900\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Prophets and Psalms

<span class="margnote"><span id="101.">101.</span></span>

Chapter 35 \[Jeremiah\] 1-10 Those who are of the Lord's celestial
church are represented by the "children of Jonadab," who were to "drink
no wine, nor build a house, nor sow seed, nor plant vineyards," which
signifies to learn truths and retain them in the memory, which belongs
to the spiritual church; but that they should "dwell in tents," which
signifies to receive in the life and obey. 11 11 From this they will
have the celestial church. 11 12-16 The Jewish church does not receive
nor obey, although they are taught continually. 3 17 Therefore they will
perish. 3 18, 19 But those who obey will be in the celestial church. 11

<span class="margnote"><span id="102.">102.</span></span>

Chapter 36 \[Jeremiah\] 1-10 The destruction of the Jewish church and
nation is foretold, and it is impressed upon them that they should
repent. 3 11-16 They might know it to be true. 3 17, 18 It was foretold
by the Lord. 3 19-24 They rejected it by profaning it; 3 25, 26 likewise
the Word. 3 27, 28, 32 The Divine truth will not perish. 11 29-31
Because they have made themselves obstinate, the destruction of the
church and of the kingdom is imminent. 3

<span class="margnote"><span id="103.">103.</span></span>

Chapter 37 \[Jeremiah\] Those who remained of the devastated church
profaned the holy truths of the church by reasonings from knowledges
\[scientifica\]. 2 1, 2 Those who remained did not live according to the
truths of doctrine from the Word. 2 3, 4 They had regard to doctrinals.
2 5 They consulted knowledges \[scientifica\]. 2 6-10 It is foretold
that they will be destroyed by reasonings from knowledges. 2 11-16 Thus
doctrine was repudiated and falsified. 17-21 Truths were perverted, but
not goods with the truths, until there was a lack of goods. 2

<span class="margnote"><span id="104.">104.</span></span>

Chapter 38 \[Jeremiah\] 1-3 Those who have not yet been vastated, will
be vastated. 2 4-6 They made themselves still more obstinate, by
perverting doctrine from the Word, and defiling it. 2 7-13 The remnants
that were not utterly falsified, were nevertheless tainted with
falsities. 2 14-18 If they pervert them still farther, they will perish.
2 19-21 Otherwise, if those remnants are not so perverted, they will not
perish. 2 22, 23 It is foreseen that all things of the church will be
perverted. 2 24-28 This was hidden from them. 2

<span class="margnote"><span id="105.">105.</span></span>

Chapter 39 \[Jeremiah\] 1-3 By reasonings from falsities the remnants of
doctrine will perish. 2 4-8 They have been wholly falsified, even until
there is no truth in them. 2 9, 10 The simple understanding of the Word
had not yet been devastated, 2 11-14 because they were not in reasonings
from falsities, but only in externals of doctrine. 2, 11 15-18 The
remnant of doctrine will be falsified, but not yet. 2

<span class="margnote"><span id="106.">106.</span></span>

Chapter 40 \[Jeremiah\] 1-6 The simple understanding of the Word
according to doctrine will still remain. 2 7-12 Beside the simple
understanding, reasonings from falsities have been tolerated, which were
commingled. 2 13-16 They began to be imbued with falsities of faith. 2

<span class="margnote"><span id="107.">107.</span></span>

Chapter 41 \[Jeremiah\] 1-3 Further falsification of truth, 2 4-7 and
abolition of worship from this, 2 8 with some exception, 2 9 by means of
falsities of faith, 2 10 and by means of falsification of truth. 2 11-15
But there were still remains, 2 16-18 some of which were perverted by
knowledges \[scientifica\] of the natural man. 2

<span class="margnote"><span id="108.">108.</span></span>

Chapter 42 \[Jeremiah\] 1-6 The remains or those left consulted
doctrine, 2 7-22 but they were told, that if they would continue simply
in their external worship, and would not consult knowledges
\[scientifica\] of the natural man, they would be saved; if they should
consult them, all truth and good of worship would perish. 2

<span class="margnote"><span id="109.">109.</span></span>

Chapter 43 \[Jeremiah\] 1-4 But this was not done. 2 5-7 They consulted
the knowledges \[scientifica\] of the natural man. 2 8-13 Thus they will
perish by reasonings from these, and the knowledges themselves would be
perverted by adapting them to falsities. 2

<span class="margnote"><span id="110.">110.</span></span>

Chapter 44 \[Jeremiah\] 1-6 Much of the church perished by departure
from the Lord and by falsities of every kind. 3 7-10 Now nearly all
things left perish by means of knowledges \[scientifica\] of the natural
man, nor do they refrain for fear of destruction, 3 11-14 because they
consult knowledges, and thus there is scarcely any residue. 3 15-19 They
make themselves obstinate, and love things that have been falsified by
knowledges. 3 20-23 Their destruction in consequence of this foretold, 3
24-27 even until nothing of the church was left, 3 28 except a few
things. 3 29, 30 True knowledges \[scientifica vera\] are perverted by
reasonings therefrom. 3

<span class="margnote"><span id="111.">111.</span></span>

Chapter 45 \[Jeremiah\] 1-5 Prediction that the whole church will be
destroyed. 3

<span class="margnote"><span id="112.">112.</span></span>

Chapter 46 \[Jeremiah\] The natural of man will perish by reasonings
from knowledges \[scientifica\]. 3 1-6 All such knowledges are no longer
of any avail, because they have been destroyed by means of reasonings. 3
7-10 Pride in these will be lowered, and they will become falsities. 3
11, 12 They cannot be healed, because the church has been destroyed by
means of these falsities. 3 13-19 The whole natural perishes, nor is
there anything there but falsity and evil. 3 20-24 All its learning
which confirms falsities will perish. 3, 11 25, 26 The like will happen
to others who trust in knowledges \[scientifica\]. 3, 11 27, 28 It is
otherwise with those who are in spiritual captivity, who will constitute
the church. 11

<span class="margnote"><span id="113.">113.</span></span>

Chapter 47 \[Jeremiah\] 1-7 All who are in faith alone, so-called, will
lapse into mere falsities, until they have no knowledges \[cognitiones\]
of truth and good and they will perish on 3 the day of judgment. 15

<span class="margnote"><span id="114.">114.</span></span>

Chapter 48 \[Jeremiah\] Of those who adulterate the goods of the word
and of the church, who are meant by "Moab." 3 1-5 The destruction of all
things with those who adulterate the goods of the church and of the
Word. 3 6-9 All truths have been destroyed thereby. 3 10, 11 It has not
been devastated for a long time, and therefore the evil is worse. 3
12-16 Nevertheless they will perish with their falsities. 3 17-26 There
will be devastation of all things of truth with them. 3 27, 28 They are
against the church, because against truths. 3 29 Its pride. 3 30-34
Grief on account of all this, 3 35-38 because there is nothing but evil,
3 39-42 because there is no longer any good or truth of the Word. 3
43-46 Every remnant of truth and good that is untouched is adulterated
at the same time. 3 47 Those who have not adulterated will be amended.
11

<span class="margnote"><span id="115.">115.</span></span>

Chapter 49 \[Jeremiah\] Of those who falsify the truths of the word and
of the church, who are meant by "the children of Ammon." 3 1 They
falsify truths. 3 2 Truths and goods with them will be destroyed. 3 3
Mourning over this. 3 4, 5 They will be dispersed. 3 6 Those who have
not falsified truths will be accepted. 11 Of those who have falsified
the external of the word who are meant by "Edom." 3 7, 8 They will be
destroyed by things falsified. 3 9-13 Nothing of truth remains. 3 14-18
Their total destruction. 3 19-22 The last judgment is executed upon
them, and they are cast down into hell. 15 Of those who pervert the
knowledges \[cognitiones\] of truth, who are meant by "Damascus." 3
23-26 The doctrine of truth has been destroyed thereby. 3 27 They will
perish. 3 Of those who pervert the knowledges \[cognitiones\] of good,
who are meant by "Arabia." 3 28-30 They have destroyed the knowledges
\[cognitiones\] of good and truth by reasonings. 3 31-33 Their
destruction. 3 Of the falsification of doctrine, which is meant by
"Elam." 3 34-36 The falsities of their doctrine will be dispersed. 3 37,
38 They will perish, 3 39 except those who have not falsified. 11

<span class="margnote"><span id="116.">116.</span></span>

Chapter 50 \[Jeremiah\] Of those who have adulterated and falsified the
goods and truths of the church, who are meant by "Babylon" and
"Chaldea." 3 1-3 They will no longer have any good or truth. 3 4-7 Then
those who are in ignorance of good and truth, because of a lack of them,
will be brought to the Lord. 11 8 They will depart from "Babylon." 11 9,
10 "Babylon" will perish, 3 11 because they have vastated the church. 3
12, 13 It is without any truth. 3 14-16 Their destruction at the time of
judgment, 15 17 because she has destroyed the church. 15, 3 18-20 After
"Babylon" has been destroyed, a new church will be established, which
will be acceptable to the Lord. 3, 11 21-24 Babylon will be destroyed
because she is against the Lord. 3 25-30 They are to be wholly
destroyed, 3 31, 32 on account of the love of ruling, 3 33, 34 because
they do not refrain from destroying the church which the Lord
establishes and redeems. 3 35-38 All things appertaining to them from
firsts to lasts have been destroyed by means of falsities. 3 39, 40 They
have horrible falsities and evils. 3 41-46 The last judgment upon them.
15

<span class="margnote"><span id="117.">117.</span></span>

Chapter 51 \[Jeremiah\] Of those who by traditions or reasonings from
the natural man have perverted the truths and goods of the church, who
are here meant by "Babylon." 3 1-4 All truths of doctrine with them will
be destroyed. 3 5 The Jewish church is such, and is against the Lord. 3
6 Let them beware of such. 3 7-10 Those who are there are vastated by
such things, and they do not refrain. 3 11-13 They pervert truths and
goods, which they have in abundance. 2, 3 14-18 They have the Word so
that they can be wise, but they falsify it. 2 19-23 When the judgment
overtakes them from the Lord, all things appertaining to them, from
firsts to lasts, are to be scattered. 15 24-26 Their destruction will
come, because they have destroyed everything of the church. 15 27-29
They will seize upon falsities of every kind. 3 30-32 Hence they will no
longer have any power. 2 33 Her last time is coming. 15 34-40 They will
perish because they have destroyed the church. 15 41-44 They will be
destroyed by mere falsities. 15 45-50 Let them not come near those who
are of the church, lest they perish together with them. 15 51-53 They
cannot resist, however much they trust in themselves. 15 54-58 Those who
trust in their own falsities will come to nothing and will be destroyed.
15 59-61 This is told to those who in the church have been taken captive
by such, and who have become "Babylon." 15 62-64 They are to be cast
into hell. 15

<span class="margnote"><span id="118.">118.</span></span>

Chapter 52 \[Jeremiah\] 1-7 After the Jewish church has been wholly
devastated in respect to all truths and goods by traditions or by
reasonings from falsities, 3 8-11 the church is destroyed, until nothing
of it is left remaining. 3 12-23 The destruction of all things of the
church in general and in particular is described. 3 24-27 They can no
longer be taught from the Word. 3 28-30 Their quality. 11 31-34
Beginning of the establishment of the church. 11

<span class="margnote"><span id="119.">119.</span></span>

Lamentations Chapter 1 Verses 1-3 The church and its doctrine from the
Word, which had been dominant, but now enslaved and laid waste. 3 4, 5
All of its truths and goods are perverted. 3 6 There is no power against
the hells. 3 7-11 All things of the church have been devastated, and
hence it is in evils and falsities. 3 12-16 Its grief on account of the
devastation. 3 17-22 There is no help from heaven. 3

<span class="margnote"><span id="120.">120.</span></span>

Chapter 2 \[Lamentations\] 1-9 Because all truths and goods have been
destroyed, that church has been rejected by the Lord, and there is
damnation. 3 10-12 Grievous mourning of the church on account of the
devastation. 3 13-15 The church has no conjunction with the Lord,
because it is wholly perverted, and hence rejected. 3 16, 17 Evils
prevail. 3 18-22 Lamentation of the church over her devastation. 3

<span class="margnote"><span id="121.">121.</span></span>

Chapter 3 \[Lamentations\] 1-64\[-66\] Description of the combats of the
Lord with hells, which were especially from the Israelitish and Jewish
church, with despair, because all had been in evils and in falsities
therefrom, and against the Lord; 7, 6 He invokes the Father that He may
not be forsaken and that He may conquer and subjugate these hells. These
things in a summary. 13

<span class="margnote"><span id="122.">122.</span></span>

Chapter 4 \[Lamentations\] 1-3 Holy truths and goods turned into
falsities, 3 4 so that there is a lack of all of them. 3 5-8 Their
spiritual things have become infernal. 3 9, 10 Affections of truth have
become cupidities of falsity. 3 11 They were against the Lord. 3 12-14
They falsified the truths of the Word. 3 15 It was impure. 3 16, 17 The
Word was rejected owing to their own intelligence. 3 18, 19 Nothing of
the church was left, and therefore came their destruction. 3 20 The Lord
was rejected. 9 21, 22 The external of the church was also vastated. 3

<span class="margnote"><span id="123.">123.</span></span>

Chapter 5 \[Lamentations\] 1-5 Lamentation to God, that there is a lack
of everything of the church, 3 6-9 because of falsities and evils. 3
10-18 They have become infernal. 3 19-22 Prayer to the Lord, that the
former church may be restored. 11

<span class="margnote"><span id="124.">124.</span></span>

Ezekiel Chapter 1 Verses 1-3 Prophecy concerning the Lord in respect to
the Word. 10 4 The Divine external sphere of the Word. 10 5 A
representative of it as a man. 10 6 Conjunction of celestial and
spiritual things there. 10 7 The quality of the natural of the Word. 10
8, 9 Its spiritual and celestial which are conjoined. 10 10, 11 The love
of spiritual good and truth, and the love of natural good and truth;
their distinction and oneness. 10 12 The turning or looking of all
toward one. 10 13, 14 The sphere of the Word from Divine good and Divine
truth, from which is the life of the Word. 10 15-21 The doctrine of good
and truth acting in unity with the Word. 10 22, 23 The Divine above and
in the Word. 10 24, 25 It is Divine truth \[verum\], and its influx. 10
26 The Lord above the heavens. 10 27, 28 The Divine love and the Divine
truth \[veritas\] pertaining to Him. 10

<span class="margnote"><span id="125.">125.</span></span>

Chapter 2 \[Ezekiel\] 1, 2 The Word from the Lord to the prophet, 1, 2
3-5 respecting the Jewish church, that it did not receive the Word. 1, 2
6, 7 It was against the Word and the Lord. 2 8-10 There is everywhere in
the Word a lamentation over that church. 2

<span class="margnote"><span id="126.">126.</span></span>

Chapter 3 \[Ezekiel\] 1-3 He should be instructed in the Word, which in
itself is delightful. 2 4-7 He should teach those that have the Word,
and consequently are able to live according to the Divine commandments,
but they do not so live; while with others it would be otherwise. 2, 11
8, 9 He should not fear their obduracy, 2 10, 11 but should teach them.
2 12, 13 It is perceived that the state of the church has been changed
entirely in respect to the Word and doctrine from the Word. 2 14, 15 He
was indignant that it should be so. 2 16, 17 But that He might represent
the Word, 2 18-21 he would be guilty if He did not reveal their
falsities and evils, and not guilty if He did reveal them. 2 22, 23 It
is according to the sense of the letter, which He must explain. 2, 16 16
24-27 He must not speak from Himself, but from the Lord.

<span class="margnote"><span id="127.">127.</span></span>

Chapter 4 \[Ezekiel\] Representation of the perverted church in the
church. 2 1, 2 He should represent the falsities of the church, and the
church besieged by them. 2 3 He should represent the hardness of their
heart, from which it is that they have no fear; 2 4-8 he should also
represent the church besieged by falsities of evil and evils of falsity.
2 \[9\]-14-16 He should represent the falsification and adulteration of
the sense of the letter of the Word, 2 17 by which everything of the
church has perished. 2

<span class="margnote"><span id="128.">128.</span></span>

Chapter 5 \[Ezekiel\] It is represented how they have destroyed the
sense of the letter. 2 1, 2 In part they have adulterated the sense of
the letter, in part have falsified it, and in part forsaken it;
nevertheless, they will continue to falsify it. 2 3, 4 They will profane
all the truths of the church. 2 5-7 Because they have perverted the
truths of the church more than others, 3 8-10 falsities have destroyed
goods, and evils truths until nothing of good and truth is left; 3 11,
12 and because they have destroyed the church by profaning it, they will
perish, as above. 3 13 Afterward the church will be instituted among
others, 11 14-17 since all things of the Word, of doctrine and of the
church have previously been consummated by profanities, and by evils and
falsities. 3

<span class="margnote"><span id="129.">129.</span></span>

Chapter 6 \[Ezekiel\] To all who are in evil love and in falsities from
such love in the church. 3 1-3 They will perish by reason of falsities.
3 4-6 All of the worship derived from truth and good has been destroyed,
because there is nothing but evil and falsity. 3 37-10 Those who depart
from evils and falsities will not perish. 3, 11 11 Lamentation over
this, 3 12-14 that all who are in evils and falsities will be destroyed.
3

<span class="margnote"><span id="130.">130.</span></span>

Chapter 7 \[Ezekiel\] The last judgment. 15 1-4 They are to be destroyed
on the day of the last judgment. 15 5-13 This will take place when the
Lord comes. 1, 15 14, 15 Then they will perish by their evils,
falsities, and profanities. 1, 15 3 16 Some will be left, 3 17-19 but
even these will have no truth or good. 3 20-22 They will draw near to
those who have perverted all things of the church. 3 23, 24
Falsification of the Word. 3 25-27 They cannot repent, because they
cannot be led away from evils and falsities. 3

<span class="margnote"><span id="131.">131.</span></span>

Chapter 8 \[Ezekiel\] Profanation of what is holy. 3 1, 2 The Lord is
represented in respect to Divine love, 1 3, 4 and it is shown how the
holy of the Word has been profaned, 3 5, 6 namely, that they have
separated themselves from the holy of the worship of the church. 3 7-10
Diabolical loves have perverted the lowest sense of the Word. 3 11, 12
They have instituted a worship in accordance with those loves, 3 13, 14
by adulterating all things of good, 3 15, 16 and adoring the devil in
place of the Lord. 3 17, 18 They have closed against themselves the way
to all mercy. 3

<span class="margnote"><span id="132.">132.</span></span>

Chapter 9 \[Ezekiel\] Visitation and judgment upon those who are of the
church. 15 1-3 Exploration of their quality as respects the Word. 15 4
Separation of the evil and the good. 15 5, 6 Destruction of those in
whom there is no good or truth. 15 7 Judgment upon the evil. 15 8-11
There is no compassion, because there is nothing but what has been
profaned. 15

<span class="margnote"><span id="133.">133.</span></span>

Chapter 10 \[Ezekiel\] The institution of the church by means of the
word and by means of doctrine therefrom. 11 1, 2 The Divine spiritual of
the Word there forming the church, is described, 11 3-5 from which the
internal and the external of the church is full of the Divine; 11 6-8
from this the doctrine is Divine. 11 9, 10 Doctrine from the Word, which
is spiritual within. 11 11 It should act in unity with the Word. 11 12,
13 It is full of Divine truths. 11 14, 15 \[It is known\] from the Word,
that it is such inwardly and outwardly. 11 16, 17 Doctrine is from the
Word. 11 18-20 Influx of the Lord therefrom into the church. 11 21, 22
Conjunction of all things of the Word, and consequent life. 11

<span class="margnote"><span id="134.">134.</span></span>

Chapter 11 \[Ezekiel\] Doctrine falsified. 2 1-3 Beginning of the
perversion of the church by means of falsities (the "caldron" here
meaning doctrine, and the "flesh" the people) 2 4-7 by falsifications of
the truth of doctrine. 2 8-11 It will be even worse, and they will
perish by reason of things falsified, 3 12 because they will pervert all
things. 3 13-16 All who are in falsities must be scattered; the church
will consist of few. 3, 11 17-20 A new church will be instituted by the
Lord, which will be in truths from Him, 11 21 at the time when the
former church is being destroyed. 3 22, 23 The Word will enlighten the
new church. 11 24, 25 This is made manifest to those who are in
spiritual captivity. 11

<span class="margnote"><span id="135.">135.</span></span>

Chapter 12 \[Ezekiel\] Vastation of the church, and fulfillment of the
prophecy. 3 1, 2 They are opposed to the Lord and the Word. 3 3-12 It is
represented that the church has departed from them, through the
falsification of the Word in respect to the sense of the letter, until
there is no longer any church. 3 13 They have destroyed the chief truths
by reasonings from the natural man, 3 14-16 and consequently the
remaining truths, so that there is little left. 3 17-20 It is not known
what good and truth are. 3 21-25 The Coming of the Lord will not be
delayed. 1 26-28 It is vain for them to say that the prophecies of the
Word concerning the Lord will be fulfilled after a long time. 2, 1

<span class="margnote"><span id="136.">136.</span></span>

Chapter 13 \[Ezekiel\] The doctrine of the church falsified. 2 1-3
Respecting those who from their own intelligence hatch out doctrine, or
falsify doctrine. 2 4, 5 They do not stand in the day of judgment. 15 6,
7 They say that it is the Word of the Lord, and yet it is not. 2 8, 9
They will be shut out from the church. 2 10-12 They falsely interpret
the truths of the Word. 2 13-15 They will be destroyed. 3 16 They will
have no protection against the hells. 3 17 The affection for falsifying.
3 18, 19 From such affections arise persuasions of falsity, by which
they lead astray. 3 20-23 They will perish, and those who do not suffer
themselves to be led astray will be protected. 3, 11

<span class="margnote"><span id="137.">137.</span></span>

Chapter 14 \[Ezekiel\] 1-4 Those who depart from the worship of the Lord
have no enlightenment from the Word. 2 5 The church is of this
description. 2 6, 7 If they do not become converted, they cannot be
enlightened in truths from the Word, 2 8 and the church will be
devastated, 2 9, 10 until there be nothing of the doctrine of truth in
it. \[2?\] 11 They must not go back, but must acknowledge the Lord. 1,
11 12-14 When there is no longer any truth or good in the church,
intercession will not avail in the least. 3 15, 16 Neither will
intercession be of any avail when evil desires take possession of the
church. 3 17, 18 So likewise when falsities take possession of the
church; 3 19, 20 likewise when adulteration of good takes possession of
it. 3 21-23 When these have taken possession of the church, another
church will be established, on which the Lord will have mercy. 3, 11

<span class="margnote"><span id="138.">138.</span></span>

Chapter 15 \[Ezekiel\] 1-3 There is no longer any spiritual good; 3 4, 5
none whatever, since that good has been utterly destroyed by evil love.
3 6 Such are those who are in the church. 3 7, 8 From evil love they
will perish, and thus they will have no church. 3

<span class="margnote"><span id="139.">139.</span></span>

Chapter 16 \[Ezekiel\] The successive states of the Jewish church. 2 1,
2 There was nothing in it but falsity and evil. 2 3-6 It was forsaken by
the Lord from the beginning, because it was without anything of the
church. 2 7-12 After a time truths and goods of every kind and species
were given to it through the Word, and thus evils and falsities were
removed. 2 13, 14 Thus it could have been in intelligence. 2 15-20 It
falsified all things of the Word. 2 21, 22 It extinguished truths and
goods, and became as in the beginning. 2 23-25 It turned truths into
falsities 2 26-28 by knowledges \[scientifica\] of the natural man, by
traditions, and by reasonings from them, 2 29, 30 finally profaning
\[truths\]. 2 31 It exalted itself above all men. 2 32-34 It obtruded
its falsities on others. 2 35-42 They will utterly perish by the
falsities by which the truths of the Word have been destroyed. 3 43-45
Thus they will be as in the beginning. 3 46-52 The like has come to pass
with the Israelitish church, but in a less degree. 3 53-55 Nevertheless
the church in general shall be restored. 11 56-58 It is everywhere
better than in the Jewish church. 11 59-63 A new church is to be
instituted among others. 11

<span class="margnote"><span id="140.">140.</span></span>

Chapter 17 \[Ezekiel\] How the Ancient Church was instituted by the
Lord, and what it became among the Jewish nation (the "eagle" meaning
the understanding, and "Lebanon" the rational of the church). 1-3 Those
who were in the capacity to understand were brought to the church. 11, 2
4, 5 They were brought into the Lord's spiritual church, and instructed.
11, 2 6 They became the church. 11, 2 7, 8 Others succeeded, who had not
the rational of the understanding, of whom the church was to consist,
and to whom all Divine truths were given, because the Word was given
them, 11, 2 9, 10 but they utterly rejected all things of the church, so
that they could not but be devastated of them. 2 11-13 They destroyed
them by reasonings from the natural man, 2 14 excepting as yet a few, 2
15, 16 who, however, were natural external without an internal. 2 17, 18
Therefore they have destroyed those things which were of the church. 2
\[19?\] 20, 21 They will perish by means of reasonings from the natural
man, and will therefore be dispersed. 2 22-24 The Lord will establish a
new church of others, in their place. 11

<span class="margnote"><span id="141.">141.</span></span>

Chapter 18 \[Ezekiel\] 1, 2 It is said, If the fathers are evil their
offspring also are evil; 2, 11 3, 4 but the offspring are not condemned
on the father's account, but everyone on His own account. 2, 11 5-9
There are some of the offspring who do not commit evils, or act contrary
to the goods and truths of the church, and these are saved. 2, 11 10-13
It is otherwise with the offspring who commit evils, or act contrary to
the goods and truths of the church; these are condemned. 2, 11 14-17 But
He who does not do this is saved, 11 18 although the fathers are
condemned. 2 19, 20 Everyone is dealt with according to His deeds. 2
21-23 The impious man who is converted is saved, 2 24 while the pious
man, if he becomes impious, is condemned. 2 25-29 Both are of Divine
justice. 2 30-32 Exhortation to be converted, because the Lord wishes
the salvation of all. 2

<span class="margnote"><span id="142.">142.</span></span>

Chapter 19 \[Ezekiel\] 1, 2 The first thing of the church among the
fathers of the Israelitish nation was destructive of all things of the
church. 2 3 That nation was likewise destroying all things of the
church. 2 4-7 They were natural external, and opposed to all things of
the church, and therefore they became perverted and were destroyed, 2
\[?8,\] 9 and afterwards they were wholly destroyed by means of
reasonings from the natural man. 2 10, 11 The Ancient Church was in
Divine truths, 2 12-14 but in the Israelitish and Jewish church all
Divine truth was perverted and rejected. 2

<span class="margnote"><span id="143.">143.</span></span>

Chapter 20 \[Ezekiel\] Successive states of the Jewish church. 2 1-3
Those who are of the Jewish church worship the Lord with the mouth and
not with the heart. 2 4 The first of them, that is, their fathers. 2 4-9
They worshipped other gods, and did not depart from them, however much
admonished, because they were natural external; this concerning them
when in Egypt. 2 10-12 They were let into temptations, and then
instructed. Also, respecting conjunction of the Lord with the church. 2
13 And they cannot even thus be brought to the worship of the Lord. 2
14-17 Although they were of such a character, yet they were not cast
off. 2 18-20 Their offspring were instructed in like manner. 2 21-24
They in like manner reprobated all things of the church. 2 25, 26 In
consequence they had representatives different from the former good
ones, because they had profaned them; this concerning them in the
wilderness. 2 27-29 When they had been introduced into the land of
Canaan, they worshipped other gods in every way. 2 30, 31 They profaned
things holy. 2 32-36 They are to be cast out of the church, because they
have been such from the beginning. 2,3 37-39 They will not return to the
church, but will be among the profaners of the holy things of the
church. 3 40-42 A new church will be instituted, which will worship the
Lord, 11 43, 44 and they will acknowledge their evils, and at the same
time the Lord's mercy. 11 The church has perished by reason of
falsities. 3 45, 46 (H.B. 21:1, 2) An external or natural church, which
is able to be in the light of truth. 3 47, 48 (H.B. 21:3, 4) It is
destroyed by evil love. 3 49, 21:1-3 (H.B. 21:5-8) It is the Jewish
nation, which is here further treated of. 3

<span class="margnote"><span id="144.">144.</span></span>

Chapter 21 \[Ezekiel\] 1-3 (H.B. 6-8) \[See above, end of chapter 20.\]
3 4, 5 (H.B. 9, 10) They will all perish by means of falsities of evil.
6, 7 (H.B. 11, 12) Grief of doctrine. 3 8-11 (H.B. 13-16) Destruction by
means of interior falsities of evil. 3 12, 13 (H.B. 17, 18) Grief of the
church because they cannot be converted. 3 14-17 (H.B. 19-22) All things
that remain will also perish, owing to falsities still more interior. 3
18-22 (H.B. 23-27) Destruction will come by reasonings from falsities,
and yet they will have worship, but from these falsities. 3 23, 24 (H.B.
28, 29) Their worship will be vain. 3 25-27 (H.B. 30-32) That church
will come to its end when the Lord comes. 1, 3 28, 29 (H.B. 33, 34) It
will be the same with those who have falsified the sense of the letter
of the Word. 3 30-32 (H.B. 35-37) They will be cast into hell.15

<span class="margnote"><span id="145.">145.</span></span>

Chapter 22 \[Ezekiel\] 1, 2 The church adulterating truths and goods of
doctrine. 2 3-6 It is coming nearer to its end. 2 7-9 They destroy
truths and goods by means of it. 2 10-12 They have been guilty of
various adulterations of truth and good. 2 13-16 They are destroyed. 3
17-22 Falsities and evils of every kind are mixed with truths and goods.
23-25 The truth of the Word has been adulterated, 3 26 also its good; 3
27-29 likewise the remaining things which, though false and evil, have
been made to appear as though they were true and good. 3 30 Nothing is
left over. 3 31 They will perish in hell. 15

<span class="margnote"><span id="146.">146.</span></span>

Chapter 23 \[Ezekiel\] The church which is in truth, and the church
which is in good. 2 1, 2 There are two churches, one which is in truth,
which is "Samaria," and the other which is in good, which is
"Jerusalem." 2 3, 4 Both are external natural, perverted in the
beginning. 2 5-8 "Samaria" falsified the truths of the Word by
reasonings from knowledges \[scientifica\]; 2, 3 9, 10 thus she became
corrupted. 2, 3 11-13 "Jerusalem" likewise falsified truths, 2, 3 14-17
and adulterated goods also by various means. 2, 3 18 Thereby she
separated herself from the Lord, 2 \[19,\] 20, 21 and defiled truths and
goods still further by knowledges \[scientifica\] of the natural man. 2
22-25 They will wholly perish on the day of judgment. 15 26, 27 Thus the
truths and goods of the church will no longer be perverted. 15 28-31
They will be in hell where there is nothing but evils and falsities. 15
15 32-34 They will also be in the falsification of all truth; 15 35 and
this, because they have denied the Lord. 4 36-39 They have destroyed all
the holy things of the church. 3 40-42 They boasted before others
because of their having the Word and the holy things of the church, 3
43-45 although these were entirely falsified and adulterated. 3 46-49
Falsities and evils will destroy all things of the church among them,
and such must be separated that they may no longer mislead. 3, 11

<span class="margnote"><span id="147.">147.</span></span>

Chapter 24 \[Ezekiel\] 1, 2 The end of the church among the Jewish
nation. 3 3-5 Through the Word truths together with goods have been
given them, also the Divine presence. 2 6-8 They are filthy by reason of
the adulteration and profanation of truth and good. 2 9-12 The Lord has
labored with all His might, that they might grow better, 2 13 but it
could not be done; 2 14 therefore they will die in their profanities.3
15-17 Everything of the church will be taken away from them, and yet
there will be no grief on that account. 3 18, 19 This will take place
when the Lord comes into the world. 1,3 \[20,\] 21-23 Then He will
destroy all the worship of that church, and there will be no grief on
that account. 1, 13 24-27 When the Lord comes, those who will be led to
the new church will be instructed. 1, 11

<span class="margnote"><span id="148.">148.</span></span>

Chapter 25 \[Ezekiel\] 1, 2 Against those who are in the sense of the
letter of the Word, and who pervert the truths of religion by things
which do not belong to religion, who are meant by the "children of
Ammon"; 2 3-5 because they wonder at the destruction of the church they
will not know truths; 2 6, 7 because they have rejoiced over this, they
will pervert truths. 2 8-11 Still more when they pervert goods of the
church. 2 12-14 Of those who destroy the external of the Word and of
doctrine: they will be rejected for a like reason. 3, 15 15-17 Those who
by falsities of faith devastate the church will be devastated and perish
on the day of judgment. 3, 15

<span class="margnote"><span id="149.">149.</span></span>

Chapter 26 \[Ezekiel\] Of the church as to knowledges \[cognitiones\] of
truth, which is meant by "Tyre." 2 1, 2 They imagine that all things of
the church consist in knowledges \[cognitiones\]. 2 3, 4 Thereby come
falsities, which destroy the ultimates of doctrine. 2 5, 6 These and
also affections for truth are destroyed by knowledges \[scientifica\]. 2
7-12 Much reasoning from the natural man will destroy all truths, from
which comes self-intelligence. 2 13, 14 Thus all affection for spiritual
truth will perish, so that nothing of the church will any longer remain.
3 15-18 Their end will be in hell, which will cause the rest of them to
be in terror. 3, 15 19-21 When they have been cast into the hells, the
knowledges \[cognitiones\] of truth will be evident to those who will be
in heaven and in the church. 15, 11

<span class="margnote"><span id="150.">150.</span></span>

Chapter 27 \[Ezekiel\] 1, 2 Further concerning the church in respect to
knowledges \[cognitiones\] of truth, which is "Tyre." 2 3-9 The Ancient
Church had knowledges of truth and good of every kind and species, and
by means of them it had intelligence. 2 10, 11 Truths that protected
that church. 2 12, 13 Acquisitions and communications of all the
knowledges. 2 14-20 Knowledge \[scientia\], intelligence, and wisdom by
means of them. 21-23 Divine worship from them. 2 24, 25 Truths and goods
of every kind and thus everything of the church acquired by means of
them. 2 26-29 Through natural knowledges \[scientiae\] they have
perished. 2 30-34 Lamentation over their destruction, 2 35, 36 and that
it is the countenance of hell. 2

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 151-200](pps04)
