[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](hby05)  [Next](hby07) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_63">p. 63</span>

# Râja Yoga

HATHA YOGA, as we have already seen, is wholly devoted to the control of
the functions of the body and to the mastery of the physical forces, its
ideal being a sound constitution, well-fitted to overcome those physical
and environmental conditions which stand as obstacles in the path of
spiritual progress. Râja Yoga, on the contrary, deals entirely with the
mind and psychic power and may be called the science of applied
psychology. Its aim is to remove all mental obstructions and to gain a
perfectly controlled, healthy mind. The main purpose of its training is
to develop and strengthen the will as well as the power of
concentration, and to lead the seeker after Truth through the path

<span id="page_64">p. 64</span>

of concentration and meditation to the ultimate goal of all religion.

This path is called Râja Yoga or the Royal method (Râja means "king")
because the power of concentration and will-power are not only greater
than any physical force, but are essential to the acquisition of all
other powers. The man who possesses a vigorous mind controlled by a
well-developed will, with strong power of concentration, can easily
become the master of physical nature and in a short time attain the
realization of Truth; and it is the special province of Râja Yoga to
teach how this can be accomplished. Its study has been encouraged by all
those who have come in contact with the Râja Yogis of India either in
ancient or modern times. It was extolled by Pythagoras, by Plato and the
Neo-Platonists like Plotinus and Proclus, by the Gnostics and the
Christian

<span id="page_65">p. 65</span>

mystics of the middle ages; and even to-day it is in some measure
practiced by some of the Roman Catholic monks and nuns of the higher
orders. Spinoza, Kant, Schopenhauer, Ralph Waldo Emerson, spoke in
praise of it, declaring its object to be the unravelling of the mystery
of the nature of the human soul and the enfoldment of the latent powers
existing in each individual. It has been proved by the living example of
Yogis that through its practice that power can be acquired by which all
other forces in the universe may be controlled; and Râja Yoga claims
that whoever has gained mastery over his mind, can govern all the
phenomena of nature.

It teaches that mind is the sovereign power of the universe, and that
when its forces are properly concentrated upon any particular object,
the true nature of that object will be revealed. Instead of using

<span id="page_66">p. 66</span>

an instrument, if we properly utilize the mental powers which we already
possess, and focus them absolutely upon one point, we can easily know
all the particulars regarding the thing upon which they are directed.
This object may be physical, mental, or spiritual. The concentrated mind
of a Yogi may be compared to an electric search-light. By throwing the
converged rays of his mind toward a distant object, whether gross or
subtile, all the details of that object are illumined and made known to
him. The vision of ordinary persons is not so penetrating because their
mental forces are dissipated like the scattered rays of an ordinary
light In the same way, if the mind can be concentrated upon internal
objects or upon truths that exist in the realm of the universal, perfect
knowledge of those things can be acquired.

Thus it becomes evident that the power,

<span id="page_67">p. 67</span>

of concentration is greater than sense-power, or than that which can be
gained by the help of instruments. If we can develop it by controlling
our mental faculties, by making the mind introspective, and by checking
all distractions which draw the mind outside; and can direct our
concentrated mental energy toward our higher Self, the true nature of
the individual ego will be revealed, and we shall realize that our
immutable Self is the Soul of all, and that it is the same as the
ultimate Reality of the universe. We shall then perceive that the Divine
Being, whom in ignorance we worship as separate from ourselves, is not
far from us, is not dwelling outside of us, but is our own omnipotent
Self residing within us. We shall also recognize that the same Spirit is
one and all-pervading, and that it is the Absolute Truth underlying the
name and form of every phenomenal

<span id="page_68">p. 68</span>

object. This knowledge will emancipate the soul from the bondage of
ignorance.

Râja Yoga maintains that the outer world exists only in relation to the
inner nature of each individual. What mind is to itself, the phenomenal
world of sense-perception is to the mind. The external is only the
reflection of the internal; that which we gain, that which we receive,
is only the likeness or reflection of that which we have already given.
Mental phenomena are merely the effects of invisible forces, which
cannot be discovered by the senses or by any instrument which the human
mind can invent. We may try forever to know these finer forces through
the medium of our sense-perceptions, but we shall never arrive at any
satisfactory result. A Râja Yogi understands this and therefore attaches
little value to instruments.

<span id="page_69">p. 69</span>

\[paragraph continues\] He does not depend upon his sense-powers, but
endeavors to gain all knowledge through the power of concentration. The
science of Râja Yoga gives the various steps which lead to the
attainment of this ideal. It explains clearly and scientifically the
processes and methods by which concentration can be developed. It does
not, however, ask the student to accept anything on hearsay, or to
believe anything on the mere authority of scriptures or of writers. But
it states certain facts, requests the student to experiment, experience
the results, and draw his own conclusions.

There is nothing mysterious in the system of Râja Yoga. On the contrary,
it points out the laws which govern so-called mysteries and explains
under what conditions the phenomena of mysteries are produced. It shows
that so long as the

<span id="page_70">p. 70</span>

real cause of an event is unknown it appears mysterious to us. Standing
upon the solid ground of logic and reason, the science of Râja Yoga
unravels the riddles of the universe and directs the individual soul
toward the attainment of the final end of all religions. Its principles
are highly moral and uplifting. It helps the student to understand the
true purpose of life and describes the way by which it may be fulfilled
here and now. Râja Yoga tells us that we should not think so much of
what will happen after death, but that we should make the best use of
the present and unfold the latent powers which we already possess, while
it reminds us again and again of the fact that the advancement made in
this life will be the foundation of future progress. If we gain or
develop certain powers before we die, those powers will not be lost, but
will remain with us wherever we go

<span id="page_71">p. 71</span>

after death; while external possessions, we know, cannot accompany us in
the grave. The only things that we can carry out of life are our
character, our experience and the knowledge gained therefrom. They are
our real possessions; and it is these which Râja Yoga will help us to
develop; since its chief object is to mould the character and lead the
student to the knowledge of the divine nature of the soul. The methods
which it teaches can be practiced without joining any secret
organization, but merely by following the directions of a true Râja
Yogi, who is pure and simple, whose mind is free from doubts, and who is
unattached to the objects of the phenomenal plane.

The practice of Râja Yoga is divided into eight steps. The first four
are the same as those of Hatha Yoga. The first and second, Yama and
Niyama, include all

<span id="page_72">p. 72</span>

the ethical laws that govern our moral nature. The strict observance of
these laws is necessary to the practice of the other steps of Râja Yoga.
All the fundamental principles of ethics expounded by Buddha and all the
truths proclaimed in the Sermon on the Mount are contained in these
first two steps. A beginner in the practice of Râja Yoga should live a
strictly moral and pure life, otherwise he will not advance in this
path, nor will he reach the highest Truth or realize the Divinity that
dwells within him. A neophyte must remember that purity, chastity, and
morality are the very cornerstones of the structure of the Science of
Yoga. In the requirements of the first step we find non-killing,
non-stealing, truthfulness, continence, forgivingness, firmness of
character, kindness to all living creatures, simplicity, moderation in
diet, and cleanliness. Non-killing

<span id="page_73">p. 73</span>

must be in thought, word, and deed, so with truthfulness and
non-stealing. The character must be firm, for the student must persist
in the face of all obstacles until spiritual perfection is reached. He
must not take up the study as a passing fad, only to satisfy his
momentary curiosity, but must continue with patience and perseverance
until the highest ideal is realized.

The second step includes austerities, forbearance, contentment, faith in
the Supreme Being, charity, study, and self-surrender to the Divine
will. All the physical exercises necessary for keeping the body in
perfect condition are to be found in the third step. <span
id="fr_1"></span>[1](#fn_1) Health is essential to the attainment of the
highest knowledge. Those who are suffering from disease cannot

<span id="page_74">p. 74</span>

make their mind steady, cannot fix their attention upon truths existing
on the spiritual plane, because naturally their minds will be centered
on the diseased parts of the body. A beginner, who possesses a healthy
body and a well-balanced mind, should choose any *Asâna* or posture of
the body in which he can sit firmly for a long time without feeling pain
in the limbs. In the practice of Râja Yoga, however, one need not be so
particular regarding the posture of the body. The student should simply
observe that the spinal column is kept perfectly straight while
practicing breathing lessons in a sitting posture.

Prânâyâma, or breathing exercises, constitute the fourth step. The
practice of certain breathing exercises will remove many obstacles like
dullness, laziness, and bodily weakness, and will be helpful in

<span id="page_75">p. 75</span>

gaining control over the senses, sense organs, and nerve centers, as
also in quieting the restlessness of the mind. Anyone who will practice
such breathing exercises regularly, will acquire wonderful power over
both his mind and his body. He who suffers from worry, anxiety,
nervousness, or insomnia, can obtain excellent results even in a few
days by the practice of proper breathing exercises. Those who have
studied the science of breathing will know what these results are; but
the main object of the Prânâyâma in Râja Yoga is to develop the power of
concentration.

Making the mind introspective is the fifth step. It is called
Pratyâhâra. If we can withdraw the mind from external objects, fix it on
some inner object, and bring it under the control of the will, we shall
accomplish all that is required in this step. Pratyâhâra is preparatory
to concentration.

<span id="page_76">p. 76</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Before the student is able to concentrate on any
particular object he must learn to gather up his scattered mental
powers. This process of collecting the powers of the mind and of
restraining it from going out to external objects is what the Yogis
designate as Pratyâhâra.

Concentration follows next. After going through the five preliminary
steps, if one takes up concentration, the results achieved will be
extraordinary. Those, however, who have not practiced the introductory
steps will find this one extremely difficult, for the ground must be
prepared before good results can be gained.

Meditation is the seventh stage, <span id="fr_2"></span>[1](#fn_2) and
through it one passes into Samâdhi or the state of superconsciousness,
which is the

<span id="page_77">p. 77</span>

eighth and last step. In this state the sixth sense of finer perception
is developed, the spiritual eye is opened, and one comes face to face
with the Divine Being dwelling within. In it the student realizes that
his true Self is one with the universal Spirit, and he receives all the
revelation and all the inspiration that can possibly come to the human
soul. It may be thought by many that revelation proceeds from some
external source, either through the favor of some angel or bright spirit
or the extra-cosmic personal God, but a Yogi knows that revelation or
inspiration is the disclosure of the higher Self within, and that the
realization of spiritual truths comes to that soul which has reached the
eighth step of Râja Yoga. Ceaseless effort, persistence, and
perseverance in practice are necessary to attain to the state of
superconsciousness. That

<span id="page_78">p. 78</span>

which is realized in it cannot be revealed by

intellect or by any other mental faculty; therefore it is said that
Truth cannot be attained by reading books or Scriptures, or by intellect
or sense-perception, but by reaching the state of superconsciousness.
Those who are longing to know the Truth, who are searching for the
ultimate Reality of the universe, and are not satisfied with the
knowledge gained through the senses or through the aid of instruments,
should struggle hard to go into Samâdhi, because through it alone will
they discover their ideal and reach the abode of happiness. Before,
however, they can arrive at this state, they will have to follow
faithfully the different steps already enumerated and with patience and
perseverance overcome all the obstacles which beset the way.

There are many obstructions to Samâdhi, such as grief, disease, mental
laziness,

<span id="page_79">p. 79</span>

doubt, cessation of the struggle to attain Samâdhi, heaviness of body
and mind, thirst for worldly things, false knowledge, non-attaining
concentration, falling away from the state once attained, irregular
breathing, etc. They can be easily avoided by regular practice under the
guidance of a Yogi teacher. If a student try to practice by himself any
of the exercises as given in Râja Yoga, <span
id="fr_3"></span>[1](#fn_3) he may have some unpleasant experiences
which may disturb his mind or nervous system; but if he have an
experienced Râja Yogi to direct him, then he will have no difficulty in
conquering all the obstacles and dangers, and in reaching the right
destination. Some of the powers generated by these practices are too
dangerous to be handled by an inexperienced student; they may not only

<span id="page_80">p. 80</span>

injure him but may even drive him to insanity. There have, indeed, been
many such cases among those who have tried to practice without the help
of a well-qualified Guru or spiritual teacher.

Having removed all obstructions in this path, the student should be
confident that he is approaching the final goal of Râja Yoga. When the
superconscious realization is acquired all doubts will cease forever,
all questions concerning the nature of the soul will be answered, the
search after Truth will stop, the mind will become tranquil, and the
soul will be emancipated from the bondage of ignorance and
self-delusion. The Yogi will never again fall a victim to the
attractions of the world or be distracted by objects of sense. The whole
universe will appear to him as the play-ground of the Divine Being; and
he will constantly feel that his body and mind are

<span id="page_81">p. 81</span>

like instruments moving under the direction of the Almighty Will which
is manifesting through all forms. Thus, having gained spiritual strength
and illumination, he will become the conqueror of himself and the master
of nature even in this life.

"He alone has reached happiness on this earth, he alone has conquered
the world, who has gained perfect control over his mind and body, whose
soul rests in tranquillity, and whose eyes behold Divinity in everything
and everything in that Eternal Being, which is the Infinite Abode of
existence, knowledge, and bliss absolute."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1"></span>[73:1](hby06.htm#fr_1) It is called *Asâna* in
Sanskrit. It has been described more fully in the chapter on Hatha Yoga.

<span id="fn_2"></span>[76:1](hby06.htm#fr_2) For further explanations
concerning concentration and meditation, see "Spiritual Unfoldment," by
the same author.

<span id="fn_3"></span>[79:1](hby06.htm#fr_3) See "Râja Yoga," by Swâmi
Vivekananda. Published by The Baker and Taylor Co., New York.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Karma Yoga](hby07)
