[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](hby02)  [Next](hby04) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_11">p. 11</span>

# Introductory

TRUE religion is extremely practical; it is, indeed, based entirely upon
practice, and not upon theory or speculation of any kind, for religion
begins only where theory ends. Its object is to mould the character,
unfold the divine nature of the soul, and make it possible to live on
the spiritual plane, its ideal being the realization of Absolute Truth
and the manifestation of Divinity in the actions of the daily life.

Spirituality does not depend upon the reading of Scriptures, or upon
learned interpretations of Sacred Books, or upon fine theological
discussions, but upon the realization of unchangeable Truth. In India

<span id="page_12">p. 12</span>

a man is called truly spiritual or religious not because he has written
some book, not because he possesses the gift of oratory and can preach
eloquent sermons, but because he expresses divine powers through his
words and deeds. A thoroughly illiterate man can attain to the highest
state of spiritual perfection without going to any school or university,
and without reading any Scripture, if he can conquer his animal nature
by realizing his true Self and its relation to the universal Spirit; or,
in other words, if he can attain to the knowledge of that Truth which
dwells within him, and which is the same as the Infinite Source of
existence, intelligence, and bliss. He who has mastered all the
Scriptures, philosophies, and sciences, may be regarded by society as an
intellectual giant; yet he cannot be equal to that unlettered man who,
having realized the eternal Truth, has

<span id="page_13">p. 13</span>

become one with it, who sees God everywhere, and who lives on this earth
as an embodiment of Divinity.

The writer had the good fortune to be acquainted with such a divine man
in India. His name was Râmakrishna. He never went to any school, neither
had he read any of the Scriptures, philosophies, or scientific treatises
of the world, yet he had reached perfection by realizing God through the
practice of Yoga. Hundreds of men and women came to see him and were
spiritually awakened and uplifted by the divine powers which this
illiterate man possessed. To-day he is revered and worshipped by
thousands all over India as is Jesus the Christ in Christendom. He could
expound with extraordinary clearness the subtlest problems of philosophy
or of science, and answer the most intricate questions of

<span id="page_14">p. 14</span>

clever theologians in such a masterly way as to dispel all doubts
concerning the matter in hand. How could he do this without reading
books? By his wonderful insight into the true nature of things, and by
that Yoga power which made him directly perceive things which cannot be
revealed by the senses. His spiritual eyes were open; his sight could
penetrate through the thick veil of ignorance that hangs before the
vision of ordinary mortals, and which prevents them from knowing that
which exists beyond the range of sense perception.

These powers begin to manifest in the soul that is awakened to the
ultimate Reality of the universe. It is then that the sixth sense of
direct perception of higher truths develops and frees it from dependence
upon the sense powers. This sixth sense or spiritual eye is latent in
each

<span id="page_15">p. 15</span>

individual, but it opens in a few only among millions, and they are
known as Yogis. With the vast majority it is in a rudimentary state,
covered by a thick veil. When, however, through the practice of Yoga it
unfolds in a man, he becomes conscious of the higher invisible realms
and of everything that exists on the soul plane. Whatever he says
harmonizes with the sayings and writings of all the great Seers of Truth
of every age and clime. He does not study books; he has no need to do
so, for he knows all that the human intellect can conceive. He can grasp
the purport of a book without reading its text; he also understands how
much the human mind can express through words, and he is familiar with
that which is beyond thoughts and which consequently can never be
expressed by words.

Before arriving at such spiritual illumination

<span id="page_16">p. 16</span>

he goes through divers stages of mental and spiritual evolution, and in
consequence knows all that can be experienced by a human intellect. He
does not, however, care to remain confined within the limit of sense
perception, and is not contented with the intellectual apprehension of
relative reality, but his sole aim is to enter into the realm of the
Absolute, which is the beginning and end of phenomenal objects and of
relative knowledge. Thus striving for the realization of the highest, he
does not fail to collect all relative knowledge pertaining to the world
of phenomena that comes in his way, as he marches on toward his
destination, the unfoldment of his true Self.

Our true Self is all-knowing by its nature. It is the source of infinite
knowledge within us. Being bound by the limitations of time, space, and
causation, we

<span id="page_17">p. 17</span>

cannot express all the powers that we possess in reality. The higher we
rise above these limiting conditions, the more we can manifest the
divine qualities of omniscience and omnipotence. If, on the contrary, we
keep our minds fixed upon phenomena and devote the whole of our energy
to acquiring knowledge dependent entirely upon sense perceptions, shall
we ever reach the end of phenomenal knowledge, shall we ever be able to
know the real nature of the things of this universe? No; because the
senses cannot lead us beyond the superficial appearance of sense
objects. In order to go deeper in the realm of the invisible we invent
instruments, and with their help we are able to penetrate a little
further; but these instruments, again, have their limit. After using one
kind of instrument, we become dissatisfied with the results and search
for some other which may

<span id="page_18">p. 18</span>

reveal more and more, and thus we struggle on, discovering at each step
how poor and helpless are the sense powers in the path of the knowledge
of the Absolute. At last we are driven to the conclusion that any
instrument, no matter how fine, can never help us to realize that which
is beyond the reach of sense-perception, intellect, and thought.

So, even if we could spend the whole of our time and energy in studying
phenomena, we shall never arrive at any satisfactory result or be able
to see things as they are in reality. The knowledge of to-day, gained by
the help of certain instruments, will be the ignorance of tomorrow, if
we get better instruments. The knowledge of last year is already the
ignorance of the present year; the knowledge of this century will be
ignorance in the light of the discoveries of a new century.

<span id="page_19">p. 19</span>

The span of one human life is, therefore, too short to even attempt to
acquire a correct knowledge of all things existing on the phenomenal
plane. The life-time of hundreds of thousands of generations, nay, of
all humanity, seems too short, when we consider the infinite variety to
be found in the universe, and the countless number of objects that will
have to be known before we can reach the end of knowledge. If a man
could live a million years, keeping his senses in perfect order during
that long period, and could spend every moment in studying nature and in
diligently endeavoring to learn every minute detail of phenomenal
objects, would his search after knowledge be fulfilled at the expiration
of that time? Certainly not; he would want still more time, a finer
power of perception, a keener intellect, a subtler understanding; and
then he might say, as did

<span id="page_20">p. 20</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Sir Isaac Newton after a life of tireless
research, "I have collected only pebbles on the shore of the ocean of
knowledge." If a genius like Newton could not even reach the edge of the
water of that ocean, how can we expect to cross the vast expanse from
shore to shore in a few brief years? Thousands of generations have
passed away, thousands will pass, yet must the knowledge regarding the
phenomena of the universe remain imperfect. Veil after veil may be
removed, but veil after veil will remain behind. This was understood by
the Yogis and Seers of Truth in India, who said: "Innumerable are the
branches of knowledge, but short is our time and many are the obstacles
in the way; therefore wise men should first struggle to know that which
is highest."

Here the question arises: Which is the highest knowledge? This question
is as

<span id="page_21">p. 21</span>

old as history; it has puzzled the minds of the philosophers,
scientists, and scholars of all ages and all countries. Some have found
an answer to it, others have not. The same question was voiced in
ancient times by Socrates, when he went to the Delphic oracle and asked:
"Of all knowledge which is the highest?" To which came the answer, "Know
thyself."

We read in one of the Upanishads that a great thinker, after studying
all the philosophies and sciences known at that time, came to a Seer of
Truth and said: "Sir, I am tired of this lower knowledge that can be
gained from books or through the study of the world of phenomena; it no
longer satisfies me, for science cannot reveal the ultimate Truth; I
wish to know that which is the highest. Is there anything by knowing
which I can know the reality of the universe?"

<span id="page_22">p. 22</span>

The sage replied: "Yes, there is; and that knowledge is the highest, by
knowing which you can know the true nature of everything in the
universe." And he continued, "Know thyself. If thou canst learn the true
nature of thine own self, thou wilt know the reality of the universe. In
thy true Self thou wilt find the Eternal Truth, the Infinite Source of
all phenomena. By knowing this thou wilt know God and His whole
creation." As by knowing the chemical properties of one drop of water,
we know the properties of all water wherever it appears, so by knowing
who and what we are in reality, we shall realize the final Truth. Man is
the epitome of the universe. That which exists in the macrocosm is to be
found in the microcosm. Therefore the knowledge of one's true Self is
the highest of all knowledge. Our real Self is divine and one with

<span id="page_23">p. 23</span>

\[paragraph continues\] God. This may seem to us at present a mere
theory, but the nearer we approach the ultimate Truth, the more clearly
shall we understand that it is not a theory but a fact, that now we are
dreaming in the sleep of ignorance and fancying ourselves this or that
particular person. But as all experience gained in dreams afterwards
appears of little consequence; so, waking up from this sleep, we shall
find that the knowledge of phenomenal nature, upon which we place so
much value at present, is of little importance. We shall then realize
that all research in the various branches of science depends upon
Self-knowledge, and that Self-knowledge is the foundation upon which the
structure of phenomenal knowledge is built.

Knowledge of the Self or Âtman is therefore the highest of all. It is
the ideal of the Science of Yoga, and should be the

<span id="page_24">p. 24</span>

aim of our life. We should hold it as our first duty to acquire this
Self-knowledge before we try to know anything concerning the objects of
sense-perception. How can we gain it? Not from books, not through the
study of external phenomena, but by studying our own nature, and by
practicing the different branches of Yoga.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: What is Yoga?](hby04)
