[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](hby04)  [Next](hby06) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_43">p. 43</span>

# Hatha Yoga

HATHA YOGA is that branch of the Science of Yoga which teaches how to
conquer hunger, thirst, and sleep; how to overcome the effects of heat
and cold; how to gain perfect health and cure disease without using
drugs; how to arrest the untimely decay of the body resulting from the
waste of vital energy; how to preserve youth even at the age of one
hundred without having a single hair turn grey, and how thus to prolong
life in this body for an indefinite period. Anyone who practices it will
in the course of time acquire marvellous powers; powers indeed, which
must dumbfound a psychologist or anatomist.

A few years ago a Hatha Yogi was brought to England. Although in middle

<span id="page_44">p. 44</span>

life he looked like a boy of eighteen. Not only was his physical
condition perfect, but through practice he had mastered eighty-four
postures of the body. He could bend his limbs in so astonishing a way
that it seemed as if his joints must be unattached, while his bones were
as though made of some elastic substance. Many English physicians and
surgeons came to see him and were amazed at the extraordinary positions
of his limbs. They brought a skeleton and tried to fix its bones in the
same positions, but could not do so without breaking them. Afterwards
they reached the conclusion that if the bones were once fixed in those
positions the limbs would be unfitted for any kind of work. Yet the
example of the Yogi openly contradicted their statements. His limbs were
strong and of good use to him in every possible way. He could walk,

<span id="page_45">p. 45</span>

lift heavy weights, and move about with absolute ease. The writer
himself saw him in India, and also other Hatha Yogis who could
accomplish equally wonderful feats. The primary object of these various
postures described in Hatha Yoga is to gain control over the involuntary
muscles of the body, which is impossible to the ordinary man. We all
possess this power latent within us, but the Hatha Yogis were the first
to discover a scientific method by which it could be developed.

All Hatha Yogis eat very little, but they can also go entirely without
food for days and even for months, and succeed in conquering sleep. The
author knew of one who had not slept for twelve years, and who was
nevertheless in perfect health. He has also seen a Hatha Yogi who
usually ate, for instance, a piece of unleavened bread in twenty-four
hours, and who refused to

<span id="page_46">p. 46</span>

wear warm clothing in the coldest winter weather, and yet who
voluntarily worked hard as a street laborer without showing the least
sign of fatigue. It may seem impossible to the majority of people, who
have made themselves such slaves to sleep and food as to imagine that if
they do not sleep eight or nine hours out of the twenty-four and eat
pounds of flesh, they cannot live. Hatha Yogis are the living
contradictions of such opinions. Perhaps the reader is familiar with the
account of that Yogi who was buried alive for forty days in an
hermetically sealed box, with a guard of English officers to watch the
spot night and day. During these forty days the Yogi could neither eat,
sleep, nor breathe, yet at their expiration he was brought back to
consciousness without any ill effects and he lived for many years. <span
id="fr_0"></span>[1](#fn_0)

<span id="page_47">p. 47</span>

Then again these same Yogis who do not eat, sleep, or drink for a long
period, can, if they wish, eat as much as ten persons at one time
without suffering any unpleasant consequences. Of course they do not eat
any kind of meat. They digest their food consciously, as it were. They
claim that by a third eye they can, so to speak, see what is going on in
their internal organs. Why should this seem incredible to us when the
discovery of the Roentgen rays has proved everything to be transparent?

Some of the Hatha Yogis have extraordinary eyesight. They can not only
perceive objects at a great distance, but can also see clearly in
complete darkness, even being able to pick up a pin from the floor
without the least glimmer of ordinary light to guide them. This will not
appear so strange when we remember that there is invisible

<span id="page_48">p. 48</span>

light in the atmosphere of a perfectly dark room. If we can learn to use
this atmospheric light, imperceptible to the common eye, and can develop
our eyesight, there is no reason why we should not see things in the
dark. The Yogis understand this and know the method by which the power
of eyesight can be developed. As regards distinguishing objects at a
great distance, this is not so difficult to believe since we know that
there are persons living, not Yogis, who can see the moons of Jupiter
without the help of any instrument.

This branch of optical science in Hatha Yoga is called in Sanskrit
"Trâtaka" Yoga. It teaches, among other things, how, through gazing on
one object and at the same time performing certain special breathing
exercises, many optical maladies can be cured as well as the power of
sight

<span id="page_49">p. 49</span>

strengthened. The authentic records of Hatha Yogis vouch for the fact
that it produces many beneficial effects when properly practiced under
the direction of a competent master of Hatha Yoga.

A Yogi who is expert in this science of optics can fascinate or madden
another by his optical powers. The process of hypnotism or mesmerism
verifies this claim. A Yogi can likewise read the thoughts of another by
looking at his eyes; for according to the Yogi the eye is the index of
the mind. Here it may be asked, how do the Yogis acquire these powers?
They do not get them from outside. These powers are dormant in every
individual, and through practice the Yogis bring them out. They say:
"Whatever exists in the universe (the macrocosm) exists also in the
human body (the microcosm)." That is, the finer forces exist potentially
in our own organism, and

<span id="page_50">p. 50</span>

if we study our nature carefully we shall be able to know all the forces
and the laws which govern the universe.

Hatha Yoga, again, teaches the cure of disease through breathing
exercises and the regulation of diet and of the general habits of the
daily life. But it does not claim that physical health is the same as
spirituality. On the contrary, it tells us that if a healthy body were a
sign of spirituality, then wild animals and savages who enjoy perfect
health would be exceedingly spiritual; yet they are not, as we know. The
principal idea of these Yogis is that physical maladies are obstacles in
the path of spiritual progress, while a healthy body furnishes one of
the most favorable conditions for the realization of the highest
spiritual truths in this life. Those who do not possess good health
should, therefore, begin to practice Hatha Yoga.

<span id="page_51">p. 51</span>

In the practice of Hatha Yoga strict dietetic rules must be observed.
Anything that is sharp, sour, pungent, or hot, like mustard, liquors,
fish, flesh of animals, curd, buttermilk, oil cakes, carrots, onions,
and garlic should not be eaten. Food, again, which, having been once
cooked, has grown cold and been rewarmed, should be avoided; as should
also excess of salt or acidity, or that which is hard to digest. Rice,
barley, wheat, milk, sugar, honey, and butter are good for a Hatha
Yogi's diet. The manner in which Americans live in hotels and
boarding-houses, where the food is often unclean, is far from favorable
to this practice. Food cooked for hundreds of people in a restaurant
cannot be equally good for all and may easily cause disease. Those who
wish to enjoy perfect health must be careful about what they eat; they
must also observe all

<span id="page_52">p. 52</span>

the laws of hygiene regarding cleanliness of the body, fresh air, and
pure water. They should not live in over-heated houses; neither should
they indulge in artificial stimulants, especially beer, wine, and
coffee. The habit of excessive coffee-drinking is a serious menace to
the American nation. Many people are already suffering from nervous
prostration as a result of indulgence in this direction, and there are
very few cases in which the nervous system will not be affected by it to
some extent.

He who wishes to practice Hatha Yoga should first of all find a Hatha
Yogi teacher, who has perfect control over his physical body; and having
found him, he should lead a life in strict accord with his instructions.
He should live in a secluded spot and where the changes of weather are
neither sudden nor extreme. He should

<span id="page_53">p. 53</span>

be a rigid vegetarian and abstain from all kinds of drinks that
stimulate the system. He should never fill the stomach with a large
quantity of food. He should observe the moral laws and practice absolute
continence. He should learn to control his senses, keep his body clean,
and purify his mind by arousing feelings of kindness and love towards
all living creatures.

The beginner in this branch of Yoga should gradually conquer the
different postures of the body and limbs. These postures are called in
Sanskrit *Asâna*. There are altogether eighty-four of them described in
the science of Hatha Yoga. Each of these, when practiced with special
breathing exercises, develops certain powers latent in the nerve centers
and the different organs of the system. Another object in practicing
*Asâna* is to remove the

<span id="page_54">p. 54</span>

\[paragraph continues\] *Tamas* element which causes heaviness of the
body, and to free the system from the effects of cold, catarrh, phlegm,
rheumatism, and many other diseases. Some of the exercises increase the
action of the stomach and liver, while others regulate the activities of
the other organs. Tremor of the body and restlessness of the limbs,
which are such frequent obstacles in the way of gaining control over the
mind, may easily be removed by the practice of *Asâna*.

The reader may get an idea of the *Asâna* from the following
descriptions:

I. Sit cross-legged on the floor, placing the left foot on the right
thigh and the right foot on the left thigh, and keeping the body, neck,
and head in a straight line.

II\. After sitting in this posture, hold the right great toe with the
right hand and the left great toe with the left hand (the hands

<span id="page_55">p. 55</span>

coming from behind the back and crossing each other).

III\. Sit straight on a level place, firmly inserting both insteps
between the thighs and the calves of the legs.

IV\. Assuming posture No. I, insert the hands between the thighs and the
calves, and, planting the palms firmly on the ground, lift the body
above the seat.

V. Sitting on the floor, stretch the legs straight in front, hold the
great toes with the hands without bending the knees.

VI\. Having accomplished this posture, touch the knees with the
forehead. This *Asâna* rouses gastric fire, makes the loins lean, and
removes many diseases.

VII\. Holding the toes as in posture V, keep one arm extended and with
the other draw the other toe towards your ear as you would do with the
string of a bow.

VIII\. Plant hands firmly on the ground,

<span id="page_56">p. 56</span>

support the weight of the body upon the elbows, pressing them against
the sides of the loins. Then raise the feet above the ground, keeping
them stiff and straight on a level with the head.

This *Asâna*, according to Hatha Yoga, cures diseases of the stomach,
spleen, and liver, and all disorders caused by an excess of wind, bile,
or phlegm. It also increases the power of digestion.

IX\. Lie upon the back on the floor at full length like a corpse,
keeping the head on a level with the body. This *Asâna* removes fatigue
and brings rest and calmness of mind.

The student of Hatha Yoga, having perfected himself in controlling some
of these postures, should next take up the breathing exercises. He
should carefully study the science of breathing in all its aspects.
Posture No. I is one of the easiest and best

<span id="page_57">p. 57</span>

\[paragraph continues\] *Asânas* for one who wishes to control the
breath. It favors a tranquil circulation and slow respiration.

A beginner should first practice abdominal breathing through both
nostrils, keeping a measured time for inspiration and expiration.
Gradually he should be directed by his master to hold the breath in and
out. Practicing this internal and external suspension of breath for a
few weeks, he should next take up alternate breathing. He may inspire
through the left nostril for four seconds and expire through the right
for four seconds, then reverse the order, breathing in through the right
and out through the left. The alternate breathing exercises will purify
the nerves and will make the student well-fitted for higher breathing
exercises. The student should then breathe in through one nostril for
four seconds, hold the

<span id="page_58">p. 58</span>

breath counting sixteen seconds, and breathe out through the other
nostril counting eight seconds. This exercise, if practiced regularly
for three months, will generate new nerve-currents and develop the
healing power that is latent in the system.

The Yogi who wishes to cure organic trouble or disease of any kind,
should combine the higher breathing exercises with the different
postures of the body which bear direct relation to the disturbed organ.
He should arouse the healing power stored up at the base of the spine
and direct it to the diseased part.

Hatha Yoga describes various methods for cleansing the internal organs.
Some of them are extremely beneficial to those who suffer from chronic
headache, or cold in the head, catarrh, dyspepsia, or insomnia.

<span id="page_59">p. 59</span>

The drinking of cold water through the nose removes headache or chronic
cold in the head. A Hatha Yogi cleanses the passage between the nose and
the mouth by passing soft cords of delicate thread through the nostrils
and bringing them out at the mouth. He can pass the cord through one
nostril and bring it out through the other. This purifies the head,
makes the sight keen, and removes disease in the parts above the
shoulders.

A Hatha Yogi cleanses the alimentary canal by swallowing a long piece of
fine muslin three inches wide. He purges the impurities of the
intestines by drawing water through the opening at the lower extremity
of the alimentary canal. This he does with the help of breathing
exercises without using any instrument. Then shaking the water by the
alternate exercise

<span id="page_60">p. 60</span>

of the rectimuscles of the abdomen, he throws out the water through the
same passage. An expert Yogi can wash the whole of the alimentary canal
by drinking a large quantity of water and letting it pass through the
opening at the lower extremity. Thus he becomes free from stomach or
intestinal disorder. These exercises are especially recommended for
those who are flabby, phlegmatic, or corpulent.

He cures insomnia by assuming posture No. IX, at the same time taking a
few deep breaths and holding them after each inspiration.

A Hatha Yogi can swallow his tongue. It is said that he who can swallow
his upturned tongue is freed from old age and death, conquers sleep,
hunger and thirst, and rises above time. The powers of a perfect Hatha
Yogi are indeed wonderful.

<span id="page_61">p. 61</span>

He can do and undo anything at his will. He is the master of all
physical laws.

Thus we see that perfect health and longevity are the immediate results
of the Hatha Yoga practices. To the real seeker after Absolute Truth,
however, they have small value except as they become a means of
attaining superconscious realization. According to him, if a man lives
five hundred years and yet in that time does not reach the state of
God-consciousness, he is little better than an oak tree which may
outlast many generations and grow to great size, but is in the end only
an oak tree. That man, on the contrary, who dies at the age of thirty,
having realized his oneness with Divinity, has achieved infinitely more
than he who possesses perfect health, longevity, psychic powers, or the
gift of healing; for he has become a living God in this world and can
point the way of

<span id="page_62">p. 62</span>

salvation to all mankind. Therefore the exercises of Hatha Yoga should
be practiced only so far as the earnest truth-seeker does not attain
Râja Yoga, which alone will lead the soul to God-consciousness and
perfect freedom.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_0"></span>[46:1](hby05.htm#fr_0) For fuller account see
"Law of Psychic Phenomena," by Thomas Jay Hudson, page 313.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Râja Yoga](hby06)
