[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](hby08)  [Next](hby10) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_106">p. 106</span>

# Jnâna Yoga

THE last is Jnâna Yoga, the path of wisdom. The word "Jnâna," being
derived from the Sanskrit root Jnâ," to know, means knowledge; and the
ideal which it holds up before its followers is the realization of that
Absolute Truth, which is the one common source of all subjective and
objective phenomena in the universe. It teaches that there is one life,
one Being, one Reality, and that all notions of distinction and
differentiation, that all beliefs in the permanent duality or
multiplicity of existence are unreal and illusory.

Jnâna Yoga is based entirely upon the monistic principles of the
*Advaita* or non-dualistic system of Vedânta. Its purpose is to show
that subject and object are but

<span id="page_107">p. 107</span>

the two expressions of one Absolute Being or Substance; that God and
man, the Creator and the created, are only different aspects of one
Universal Reality. Its aim is to resolve the divers phenomena into one
ultimate Being, from which proceed all powers and all forces manifested
in external and internal nature, and which is the abode of infinite
intelligence and eternal happiness.

According to Jnâna Yoga, matter, mind, intellect, sense-powers, names,
and forms are but the apparent manifestations of that one Substance
which is called in Sanskrit Brahman. They may appear to us as real, but
they have in truth only relative reality. The phenomena of the universe
are like the waves in the ocean of Brahman. As waves rise in the sea,
and after playing for a while, once more merge into it, so the waves of
subject and object rise, live, and dissolve

<span id="page_108">p. 108</span>

in the ocean of that Absolute Substance Brahman. Brahman is described in
Vedânta as "That of which all animate and inanimate objects are born, by
which they live, and into which they return after dissolution. It should
be known and realized by all." It is the essence of Divinity. It is like
the eternal canvas upon which the Creator or the Cosmic Ego and the
created or individual egos are painted by Maya, the inscrutable creative
power of the Infinite Being.

The chief object of Jnâna Yoga is to unify God and the individual Soul
and to show the absolute oneness that exists between them on the highest
spiritual plane. The individual ego; being the reflection or image of
Divinity or Brahman, in its true nature is divine, and this true Self is
known in Sanskrit as the *Âtman*. The knowledge of this oneness of the
Âtman or subjective

<span id="page_109">p. 109</span>

reality with Brahman, the Universal Truth, is described in Jnâna Yoga as
the only means of attaining to complete liberation from the bondage of
selfishness and from attachment to body and senses, which are the causes
of all worldliness, unhappiness, and misery. The light of the knowledge
of the Âtman and of its unity with Brahman alone will dispel the
darkness of ignorance which prevents us from reaching the abode of
Absolute Existence, Intelligence, and Bliss, and which now deludes us
into identifying the individual Self with the body, senses, mind, and
their modifications. This ignorance is designated in Sanskrit *Avidyâ*
or ne-science, and is the source of all false knowledge, egotism,
attachment to the lower self and to the world. Being deceived by the
illusive power of *Avidyâ*, we mistake body for soul and soul for body,
matter for spirit and

<span id="page_110">p. 110</span>

spirit for matter. In ignorance of our true Self, we work solely to
gratify selfish motives and to reap some result from our actions. But
Jnâna Yoga would waken us from this sleep of ignorance, by showing us
that the Âtman is immortal, unchangeable, all-knowing, and free by its
own nature from eternity to eternity; that through the influence of
*Avidyâ*, the individual ego thinks of itself as changeable and subject
to birth and death, and forgetting that the fountain-head of freedom,
knowledge, and everlasting happiness is abiding within, it seeks
knowledge and happiness from outside and becomes the slave of desires
and passions. It further reminds us that whatever we think or perform
mentally or physically is like a dream in the sleep of self-delusion
caused by the power of *Avidyâ*; that these dreams of the sleep of
ignorance can be removed neither by work, nor by

<span id="page_111">p. 111</span>

devotion, nor by meditation, but by the light and power of *Vidyâ*, the
knowledge of the Âtman or Self and of its relation to Brahman.

This knowledge cannot be obtained as the result of any virtuous act or
prayer, but comes to the soul when the intellect and heart have been
purified by unselfish and righteous works, and when the individual ego
begins to discriminate between the real and unchangeable Âtman and
apparent and changeable matter or force. Jnâna Yoga teaches that right
discrimination and proper analysis are indispensable to the acquisition
of knowledge of the true Self and of the Reality which underlies
phenomenal objects. It also declares that knowledge of the Self will
bring to the soul the realization of Absolute Truth more quickly than
the practice of Râja, Karma, or Bhakti Yoga.

<span id="page_112">p. 112</span>

The path of wisdom, therefore, is best fitted for those earnest and
sincere seekers after Truth who have no leaning towards active life, who
are not devotional in their nature, but who are preeminently
intellectual, and who, having realized the transitory and ephemeral
character of phenomenal objects, are no longer contented with
sense-pleasures. It is for those who wish to be free from all fetters
and attachments, and who care nothing for earthly prosperity, success,
social honor, fame, or the fulfilment of personal ambitions; but whose
sole desire is to know who they are in reality, what is their true
nature, and what relation exists between their soul, God, and the
universe.

A traveller along this path should be philosophical in tendency, should
have a sharp intellect and a keen power of analyzing the true nature of
things. He should

<span id="page_113">p. 113</span>

also have a firm conviction that the ultimate Truth or Reality of the
universe is unchangeable. Using the sword of right discrimination
between the Self and the non-self, he should sever all ties, and should
never allow himself to be overpowered by any external or internal
influence. His mind should be undisturbed by passions or desires, his
senses well controlled, and his body strong, healthy, and capable of
bearing all hardships as well as of overcoming all environmental
conditions. He should have dispassion; and be ever ready to renounce
anything that does not help him in his realization of Truth. He must
have absolute confidence in the teachings of Jnâna Yogins, or those who
have become Seers of Truth by following the path of wisdom; and he must
likewise have faith in the final Truths expounded by the monistic system
of Vedânta.

<span id="page_114">p. 114</span>

The mind of a beginner in Jnâna Yoga must possess the power of perfect
concentration and meditation; and his soul must be filled with the
longing for absolute freedom from all relative conditions and from the
laws which govern phenomena. He must realize that even the enjoyment of
heavenly pleasures is a kind of bondage, since it keeps the soul
entangled in the meshes of phenomenal relativity. Being well-armed with
all these noble qualities as his weapons, a Jnâna Yogi should fight
against phenomenal appearances, and with the ideal of the unity of the
true Self and the Absolute Brahman ever before his mind's eye, he should
march onward toward its realization, breaking down all names and forms
with the hammer of right analysis, and cleaving all ties of attachment
with the sword of proper discrimination. Nor should he stop until the
goal is

<span id="page_115">p. 115</span>

reached. He who goes through the path of wisdom, burns the vast forest
of the trees of phenomenal names and forms by starting in it the fire of
right knowledge. All these names and forms are produced by Maya, the
inscrutable power of Brahman; and according to Jnâna Yoga this power of
Maya is inseparable from Brahman as the power of heating is inseparable
from fire. A Jnâna Yogi, in his search after Brahman, should reject all
names and forms by saying "Not this," "Not this," until he realizes the
one nameless, formless, and absolute Being of the universe, where the
subject and the object, the knower, knowledge, and its object, losing
their relativity, merge into the infinite Ocean of Blissful Existence
and Supreme Intelligence.

A sincere seeker after Truth should hear over and over again that the
Âtman or

<span id="page_116">p. 116</span>

true Self is one with Brahman or the Eternal Truth; and should repeat
such phrases as "I am Brahman," "I am one with the Absolute Source of
knowledge, existence, and bliss." He should constantly think of the
meaning of "*Tat Twain asi*"--"That thou art," and should devote his
time to meditating upon this oneness until the light of Brahman
illumines his soul, dispelling the darkness of *Avidyâ* and transforming
his ego into the essence of Divinity.

Instead of worshipping a personal God like a Bhakta, a Jnâna Yogi should
clearly understand the true significance of all His attributes as given
in the different Scriptures--such as Creator or Governor of the
universe, He is Spirit, infinite, omniscient, all-powerful,
unchangeable, true, and one; and rejecting the worship of the personal
God as an act proceeding from *Avidyâ* or

<span id="page_117">p. 117</span>

ignorance of the divine nature of the Self or Âtman, he should seek that
which is above all attributes and beyond all descriptions, which
transcends the realm of thought and cannot be revealed by human
intellect or understanding. He should realize that all conceptions of a
personal God are more or less anthropomorphic, and that the Creator
himself must be phenomenal since He can exist only in relation to the
created object. A Jnâna Yogi, consequently, does not pray to the
personal God or to any other Spirit or Being. To him prayers and
devotions are useless and unnecessary. He does not seek any supernatural
help or Divine mercy, for he is conscious of the omnipotent and
omniscient nature of the Âtman, and knows that his true Self is beyond
good and evil, above virtue and vice, unlimited by all laws, and that it
reigns over nature in its own glory.

<span id="page_118">p. 118</span>

\[paragraph continues\] He feels that it is the same in essence as the
Creator or personal God. Instead of identifying himself with body, mind,
senses, or intellect, he always remembers that he is the Âtman, which is
birthless, deathless, sinless, fearless, immutable, eternally peaceful,
and ever undisturbed by pleasant or unpleasant experiences, sensations,
or mental and physical changes.

A true Jnâna Yogi constantly tries to keep himself above all phenomenal
conditions, and incessantly repeats "I am Brahman," "Soham"--I am He, I
am He. He says within himself:

"I am neither mind, nor intellect, nor ego, nor senses; I am neither
earth, nor water, nor air, nor fire, nor ether, but my true nature is
absolute existence, knowledge, and bliss. I am He, I am He."

"I am neither the organic activity nor am I the elements of the body,
neither the

<span id="page_119">p. 119</span>

sense of knowledge nor that of action, but I am absolute existence,
knowledge, and bliss. I am He, I am He."

"I have neither hatred nor love, neither greed nor delusion, neither
egotism nor pride nor vanity, neither creed nor faith, nor aim nor
desire for freedom. I am absolute existence, knowledge, and bliss. I am
He, I am He."

"I have neither virtue nor vice nor sin. neither pleasure nor pain,
neither Scriptures nor rituals nor ceremonies. I am neither food nor am
I the eater. I am absolute existence, knowledge, and bliss. I am He, I
am He."

"I have neither death nor fear of death, nor birth nor caste
distinction; neither father nor mother, neither friend nor foe, neither
master nor disciple. I am absolute existence, knowledge, and bliss. I am
He, I am He."

<span id="page_120">p. 120</span>

"I have neither doubt nor question. I am formless and all-pervading. I
am the eternal Lord of nature and the master of the senses. I am neither
bound nor free. I am one with Brahman. I am the omnipresent Divinity, I
am the immutable Lord of all. I am absolute existence, knowledge, and
bliss. I am He, I am He."

Thus constantly practicing discrimination and rising above all
relativity and phenomenal appearances, a Jnâna Yogi realizes the
Absolute, Unchangeable, Eternal Truth in this life and ultimately
becomes one with it; because Jnâna Yoga declares that he who knows
Brahman becomes Brahman, for the same reason that the knower of God can
be no other than God himself. A Jnâna Yogi never forgets that his true
Self is Brahman. Having attained to this supreme God-consciousness, he
lives in the world like an eternal witness of

<span id="page_121">p. 121</span>

all mental and physical changes. Ever happy and undisturbed, he travels
from place to place, pointing out to mankind the way to absolute freedom
and perfection. A perfect Jnâna Yogi, indeed, lives as the embodiment of
the Absolute Divinity on this earth.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Science of Breathing](hby10)
