[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends &
Sagas](../../index)  [Iceland](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](njal041)  [Next](njal043) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# 42. THE SLAYING OF THORD FREEDMANSON

Then Sigmund came from the east and those companions. Hallgerda told
them that Thord was at home, but that he was to ride straightway to the
Thing after a few nights' space. "Now ye will have a fair chance at
him," she says, "but if this goes off, ye will never get nigh him." Men
came to Lithend from Thorolfsfell, and told Hallgerda that Thord was
there. Hallgerda went to Thrain Sigfus' son, and his companions, and
said to him, "Now is Thord on Thorolfsfell, and now your best plan is to
fall on him and kill him as he goes home."

"That we will do," says Sigmund. So they went out, and took their
weapons and horses and rode on the way to meet him. Sigmund said to
Thrain, "Now thou shalt have nothing to do with it; for we shall not
need all of us."

"Very well, so I will," says he.

Then Thord rode up to them a little while after, and Sigmund said to
him, "Give thyself up," he says, "for now shalt thou die."

"That shall not be," says Thord, "come thou to single combat with me."

"That shall not be either," says Sigmund; "we will make the most of our
numbers; but it is not strange that Skarphedinn is strong, for it is
said that a fourth of a foster-child's strength comes from the
foster-father.

"Thou wilt feel the force of that," says Thord, "for Skarphedinn will
avenge me."

After that they fall on him, and he breaks a spear of each of them, so
well did he guard himself. Then Skiolld cut off his hand, and he still
kept them off with his other hand for some time, till Sigmund thrust him
through. Then he fell dead to earth. They drew over him turf and stones;
and Thrain said, "We have won an ill work, and Njal's sons will take
this slaying ill when they hear of it."

They ride home and tell Hallgerda. She was glad to hear of the slaying,
but Rannveig, Gunnar's mother, said, "It is said 'but a short while is
hand fain of blow,' and so it will be here; but still Gunnar will set
thee free from this matter. But if Hallgerda makes thee take another fly
in thy mouth, then that will be thy bane."

Hallgerda sent a man to Bergthorsknoll, to tell the slaying, and another
man to the Thing, to tell it to Gunnar. Bergthora said she would not
fight against Hallgerda with ill words about such a matter; "That,"
quoth she, "would be no revenge for so great a quarrel."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 43. Njal And Gunnar Make Peace For The Slaying Of Thord](njal043)
