[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends &
Sagas](../../index)  [Iceland](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](njal068)  [Next](njal070) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# 69. OLAF THE PEACOCK'S GIFTS TO GUNNAR

Gunnar thanked Njal for his aid, and Njal rode away under the
Threecorner, and told those namesakes that Gunnar would not break up his
band of men before he had fought it out with them.

They began to offer terms for themselves, and were full of dread, and
bade Njal to come between them with an offer of atonement.

Njal said that could only be if there were no guile behind. Then they
begged him to have a share in the award, and said they would hold to
what he awarded.

Njal said he would make no award unless it were at the Thing, and unless
the best men were by; and they agreed to that.

Then NjaI came between them, so that they gave each other pledges of
peace and atonement.

Njal was to utter the award, and to name as his fellows those whom he
chose.

A little while after those namesakes met Mord Valgard's son, and Mord
blamed them much for having laid the matter in Njal's hands, when he was
Gunnar's great friend. He said that would turn out ill for them.

Now men ride to the Althing after their wont, and now both sides are at
the Thing.

Njal begged for a hearing, and asked all the best men who were come
thither, what right at law they thought Gunnar had against those
namesakes for their treason. They said they thought such a man had great
right on his side.

Njal went on to ask, whether he had a right of action against all of
them, or whether the leaders had to answer for them all in the suit?

They say that most of the blame would fall on the leaders, but a great
deal still on them all.

"Many will say this," said Mord, "that it was not without a cause when
Gunnar broke the settlement made with those namesakes."

"That is no breach of settlement," says Njal, "that any man should take
the law against another; for with law shall our land be built up and
settled, and with lawlessness wasted and spoiled."

Then Njal tells them that Gunnar had offered land for Moeidsknoll, or
other goods.

Then those namesakes thought they had been beguiled by Mord, and scolded
him much, and said that this fine was all his doing.

Njal named twelve men as judges in the suit, and then every man paid a
hundred in silver who had gone out, but each of those namesakes two
hundred.

Njal took this money into his keeping but either side gave the other
pledges of peace, and Njal gave out the terms.

Then Gunnar rode from the Thing west to the Dales, till he came to
Hjardarholt, and Olaf the Peacock gave him a hearty welcome. There he
sat half a month, and rode far and wide about the Dales, and all
welcomed him with joyful hands. But at their parting Olaf said, "I will
give thee three things of price, a gold ring, and a cloak which
Moorkjartan the Erse king owned, and a hound that was given me in
Ireland; he is big, and no worse follower than a sturdy man. Besides, it
is part of his nature that he has man's wit, and he will bay at every
man whom he knows is thy foe, but never at thy friends; he can see, too,
in any man's face, whether he means thee well or ill, and he will lay
down his life to be true to thee. This hound's name is Sam."

After that he spoke to the hound, "Now shalt thou follow Gunnar, and do
him all the service thou canst."

The hound went at once to Gunnar and laid himself down at his feet.

Olaf bade Gunnar to be ware of himself, and said he had many enviers,
"For now thou art thought to be a famous man throughout all the land."

Gunnar thanked him for his gifts and good counsel, and rode home.

Now Gunnar sits at home for sometime, and all is quiet.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 70. Mord's Counsel](njal070)
