[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends &
Sagas](../../index)  [Iceland](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](njal091)  [Next](njal093) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# 92. KETTLE TAKES HAUSKULD AS HIS FOSTER-SON

Kettle of the Mark had to wife Thorgerda Njal's daughter, but he was
Thrain's brother, and he thought he was come into a strait, so he rode
to Njal's house, and asked whether he were willing to atone in any way
for Thrain's slaying?

"I will atone for it handsomely," answered Njal; "and my wish is that
thou shouldst look after the matter with thy brothers who have to take
the price of the atonement, that they may be ready to join in it."

Kettle said he would do so with all his heart, and Kettle rode home
first; a little after, he summoned all his brothers to Lithend, and then
he had a talk with them; and Hogni was on his side all through the talk;
and so it came about that men were chosen to utter the award; and a
meeting was agreed on, and the fair price of a man was awarded for
Thrain's slaying, and they all had a share in the blood-money who had a
lawful right to it. After that pledges of peace and good faith were
agreed to, and they were settled in the most sure and binding way.

Njal paid down all the money out of hand well and bravely; and so things
were quiet for a while.

One day Njal rode up into the Mark, and he and Kettle talked together
the whole day; Njal rode home at even, and no man knew of what they had
taken counsel.

A little after Kettle fares to Gritwater, and he said to Thorgerda,
"Long have I loved my brother Thrain much, and now I will shew it, for I
will ask Hauskuld Thrain's son to be my foster-child."

"Thou shalt have thy choice of this," she says; "and thou shalt give
this lad all the help in thy power when he is grown up, and avenge him
if he is slain with weapons, and bestow money on him for his wife's
dower; and besides, thou shalt swear to do all this."

Now Hauskuld fares home with Kettle, and is with him some time.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 93. Njal Takes Hauskuld To Foster](njal093)
