[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends &
Sagas](../../index)  [Iceland](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](njal014)  [Next](njal016) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# 15. THIOSTOLF GOES TO GLUM'S HOUSE

Thiostolf had beaten one of Hauskuld's house-carles, so he drove him
away. He took his horse and weapons, and said to Hauskuld, "Now, I will
go away and never come back."

"All will be glad at that," says Hauskuld.

Thiostolf rode till he came to Varmalek, and there he got a hearty
welcome from Hallgerda, and not a bad one from Glum. He told Hallgerda
how her father had driven him away, and begged her to give him her help
and countenance. She answered him by telling him she could say nothing
about his staying there before she had seen Glum about it.

"Does it go well between you?" he says.

"Yes," she says, "our love runs smooth enough."

After that she went to speak to Glum, and threw her arms round his neck
and said, "Wilt thou grant me a boon which I wish to ask of thee?"

"Grant it I will," he says, "if it be right and seemly; but what is it
thou wishest to ask?"

"Well," she said, "Thiostolf has been driven away from the west, and
what I want thee to do is to let him stay here; but I will not take it
crossly if it is not to thy mind."

Glum said, "Now that thou behavest so well, I will grant thee thy boon;
but I tell thee, if he takes to any ill he shall be sent off at once."

She goes then to Thiostolf and tells him, and he answered, "Now, thou
art still good, as I had hoped."

After that he was there, and kept himself down a little while, but then
it was the old story, he seemed to spoil all the good he found; for he
gave way to no one save to Hallgerda alone, but she never took his side
in his brawls with others. Thorarin, Glum's brother, blamed him for
letting him be there, and said ill luck would come of it, and all would
happen as had happened before if he were there. Glum answered him well
and kindly, but still kept on in his own way.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 16. Glum's Sheep Hunt](njal016)
