[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends &
Sagas](../../index)  [Iceland](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](njal157) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# 158. OF FLOSI AND KARI

Now it is to be told of Kari that the summer after he went down to his
ship and sailed south across the sea, and began his pilgrimage in
Normandy, and so went south and got absolution and fared back by the
western way, and took his ship again in Normandy, and sailed in her
north across the sea to Dover in England.

Thence he sailed west, round Wales, and so north, through Scotland's
firths, and did not stay his course till he came to Thraswick in
Caithness, to master Skeggi's house.

There he gave over the ship of burden to Kolbein and David, and Kolbein
sailed in that ship to Norway, but David stayed behind in the Fair Isle.

Kari was that winter in Caithness. In this winter his housewife died out
in Iceland.

The next summer Kari busked him for Iceland. Skeggi gave him a ship of
burden, and there were eighteen of them on board her.

They were rather late "boun," but still they put to sea, and had a long
passage, but at last they made Ingolf's Head. There their ship was
dashed all to pieces, but the men's lives were saved. Then, too, a gale
of wind came on them.

Now they ask Kari what counsel was to be taken; but he said their best
plan was to go to Swinefell and put Flosi's manhood to the proof.

So they went right up to Swinefell in the storm. Flosi was in the
sitting-room. He knew Kari as soon as ever he came into the room, and
sprang up to meet him, and kissed him, and sate him down in the high
seat by his side.

Flosi asked Kari to be there that winter, and Kari took his offer. Then
they were atoned with a full atonement.

Then Flosi gave away his brother's daughter Hildigunna, whom Hauskuld
the priest of Whiteness had had to wife to Kari, and they dwelt first of
all at Broadwater.

Men say that the end of Flosi's life was, that he fared abroad, when he
had grown old, to seek for timber to build him a hall; and he was in
Norway that winter, but the next summer he was late "boun"; and men told
him that his ship was not seaworthy.

Flosi said she was quite good enough for an old and deathdoomed man, and
bore his goods on shipboard and put out to sea. But of that ship no
tidings were ever heard.

These were the children of Kari Solmund's son and Helga Njal's
daughter--Thorgerda and Ragneida, Valgerda, and Thord who was burnt in
Njal's house. But the children of Hildigunna and Kari, were these,
Starkad, and Thord, and Flosi.

The son of Burning-Flosi was Kolbein, who has been the most famous man
of any of that stock.

 

And here we end the STORY of BURNT NJAL.
