[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends &
Sagas](../../index)  [Iceland](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](njal066)  [Next](njal068) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# 67. OF THORGEIR STARKAD'S SON

Sometime after Thorgeir Starkad's son fared to Kirkby to see his
namesake, and they went aside to speak, and talked secretly all day; but
at the end Thorgeir Starkad's son gave his namesake a spear inlaid with
gold, and rode home afterwards; they made the greatest friendship the
one with the other.

At the Thingskala-Thing in the autumn, Kolskegg laid claim to the land
at Moeidsknoll, but Gunnar took witness, and offered ready money, or
another piece of land at a lawful price to those under the Threecorner.

Thorgeir took witness also, that Gunnar was breaking the settlement made
between them.

After that the Thing was broken up, and so the next year wore away.

Those namesakes were always meeting, and there was the greatest
friendship between them. Kolskegg spoke to Gunnar and said, "I am told
that there is great friendship between those namesakes, and it is the
talk of many men that they will prove untrue, and I would that thou
wouldst be ware of thyself."

"Death will come to me when it will come," says Gunnar, "wherever I may
be, if that is my fate."

Then they left off talking about it.

About autumn, Gunnar gave out that they would work one week there at
home, and the next down in the isles, and so make an end of their
hay-making. At the same time, he let it be known that every man would
have to leave the house, save himself and the women.

Thorgeir under Threecorner goes to see his namesake, but as soon as they
met they began to talk after their wont, and Thorgeir Starkad's son,
said, "I would that we could harden our hearts and fall on Gunnar."

"Well," says Thorgeir Otkell's son, "every struggle with Gunnar has had
but one end, that few have gained the day; besides, methinks it sounds
ill to be called a peace-breaker."

"They have broken the peace, not we," says Thorgeir Starkad's son.
"Gunnar took away from thee thy cornfield; and he has taken Moeidsknoll
from my father and me."

And so they settle it between them to fall on Gunnar; and then Thorgeir
said that Gunnar would be all alone at home in a few nights' space, "and
then thou shalt come to meet me with eleven men, but I will have as
many."

After that Thorgeir rode home.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 68. Of Njal And Those Namesakes](njal068)
