[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends &
Sagas](../../index)  [Iceland](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](njal052)  [Next](njal054) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# 53. HOW OTKELL RODE OVER GUNNAR

It happened next spring that Otkell said that they would ride east to
the Dale, to pay Runolf a visit, and all showed themselves well pleased
at that. Skamkell and his two brothers, and Audulf and three men more,
went along with Otkell. Otkell rode one of the dun horses, but the other
ran loose by his side. They shaped their course east towards Markfleet;
and now Otkell gallops ahead, and now the horses race against each
other, and they break away from the path up towards the Fleetlithe.

Now, Otkell goes faster than he wished, and it happened that Gunnar had
gone away from home out of his house all alone; and he had a corn-sieve
in one hand, but in the other a hand-axe. He goes down to his seed field
and sows his corn there, and had laid his cloak of fine stuff and his
axe down by his side, and so he sows the corn a while.

Now, it must be told how Otkell rides faster than he would. He had spurs
on his feet, and so he gallops down over the ploughed field, and neither
of them sees the other; and just as Gunnar stands upright, Otkell rides
down upon him and drives one of the spurs into Gunnar's ear, and gives
him a great gash, and it bleeds at once much.

Just then Otkell's companions rode up.

"Ye may see, all of you," says Gunnar, "that thou hast drawn my blood,
and it is unworthy to go on so. First thou hast summoned me, but now
thou treadest me under foot, and ridest over me."

Skamkell said, "Well it was no worse, master, but thou wast not one whit
less wroth at the Thing, when thou tookest the selfdoom and clutchedst
thy bill."

Gunnar said, "When we two next meet thou shalt see the bill." After that
they part thus, and Skamkell shouted out and said, "Ye ride hard, lads!"

Gunnar went home, and said never a word to any one about what had
happened, and no one thought that this wound could have come by man's
doing.

It happened, though, one day, that he told it to his brother Kolskegg,
and Kolskegg said, "This thou shalt tell to more men, so that it may not
be said that thou layest blame on dead men; for it will be gainsaid if
witnesses do not know beforehand what has passed between you."

Then Gunnar told it to his neighbours, and there was little talk about
it at first.

Otkell comes east to the Dale, and they get a hearty welcome there, and
sit there a week.

Skamkell told Runolf all about their meeting with Gunnar, and how it had
gone off; and one man happened to ask how Gunnar behaved.

"Why," said Skamkell, "if it were a low-born man it would have been said
that he had wept."

"Such things are ill spoken," says Runolf, "and when ye two next meet,
thou wilt have to own that there is no voice of weeping in his frame of
mind; and it will be well if better men have not to pay for thy spite.
Now it seems to me best when ye wish to go home that I should go with
you, for Gunnar will do me no harm."

"I will not have that," says Otkell; "but I will ride across the Fleet
lower down."

Runolf gave Otkell good gifts, and said they should not see one another
again.

Otkell bade him then to bear his sons in mind if things turned out so.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 54. The Fight At Rangriver](njal054)
