[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends &
Sagas](../../index)  [Iceland](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](njal072)  [Next](njal074) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# 73. OF THE ATONEMENT

Then Njal spoke and said, "Now I can no longer sit still and take no
part. Let us go to where the neighbours sit on the inquest."

They went thither and challenged four neighbours out of the inquest, but
they called on the five that were left to answer the following question
in Gunnar's favour, "Whether those namesakes had gone out with that mind
to the place of meeting to do Gunnar a mischief if they could?"

But all bore witness at once that so it was.

Then Njal called this a lawful defence to the suit, and said he would
bring forward proof of it unless they gave over the suit to arbitration.

Then many chiefs joined in praying for an atonement, and so it was
brought about that twelve men should utter an award in the matter.

Then either side went and handselled this settlement to the other.
Afterwards the award was made, and the sum to be paid settled, and it
was all to be paid down then and there at the Thing.

But besides, Gunnar was to go abroad and Kolskegg with him, and they
were to be away three winters; but if Gunnar did not go abroad when he
had a chance of a passage, then he was to be slain by the kinsmen of
those whom he had killed.

Gunnar made no sign, as though he thought the terms of atonement were
not good. He asked Njal for that money which he had handed over to him
to keep. Njal had laid the money out at interest and paid it down all at
once, and it just came to what Gunnar had to pay for himself.

Now they ride home. Gunnar and Njal rode both together from the Thing,
and then Njal said to Gunnar, "Take good care, messmate, that thou
keepest to this atonement, and bear in mind what we have spoken about;
for though thy former journey abroad brought thee to great honour, this
will be a far greater honour to thee. Thou wilt come back with great
glory, and live to be an old man, and no man here will then tread on thy
heel; but if thou dost not fare away, and so breakest thy atonement,
then thou wilt be slain here in the land, and that is ill knowing for
those who are thy friends."

Gunnar said he had no mind to break the atonement, and he rides home and
told them of the settlement.

Rannveig said it was well that he fared abroad, for then they must find
some one else to quarrel with.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 74. Kolskegg Goes Abroad](njal074)
