[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends &
Sagas](../../index)  [Iceland](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](njal113)  [Next](njal115) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# 114. OF FLOSI THORD'S SON

Flosi hears of Hauskuld's slaying, and that brings him much grief and
wrath, but still he kept his feelings well in hand. He was told how the
suit had been set on foot, as has been said, for Hauskuld's slaying, and
he said little about it. He sent word to Hall of the Side, his
father-in-law, and to Ljot his son, that they must gather in a great
company at the Thing. Ljot was thought the most hopeful man for a chief
away there east. It had been foretold that if he could ride three
summers running to the Thing, and come safe and sound home, that then he
would be the greatest chief in all his family, and the oldest man. He
had then ridden one summer to the Thing, and now he meant to ride the
second time.

Flosi sent word to Kol Thorstein's son, and Glum the son of Hilldir the
Old, the son of Gerleif, the son of Aunund Wallet- back, and to Modolf
Kettle's son, and they all rode to meet Flosi.

Hall gave his word, too, to gather a great company, and Flosi rode till
he came to Kirkby, to Surt Asbjorn's son. Then Flosi sent after Kolbein
Egil's son, his brother's son, and he came to him there. Thence he rode
to Headbrink. There dwelt Thorgrim the Showy, the son of Thorkel the
Fair. Flosi begged him to ride to the Althing with him, and he said yea
to the journey, and spoke thus to Flosi, "Often hast thou been more
glad, master, than thou art now, but thou hast some right to be so."

"Of a truth," said Flosi, "that hath now come on my hands, which I would
give all my goods that it had never happened. Ill seed has been sown,
and so an ill crop will spring from it."

Thence he rode over Amstacksheath, and so to Solheim that evening. There
dwelt Lodmund Wolf's son, but he was a great friend of Flosi, and there
he stayed that night, and next morning Lodmund rode with him into the
Dale.

There dwelt RunoIf, the son of Wolf Aurpriest.

Flosi said to Runolf, "Here we shall have true stories as to the slaying
of Hauskuld, the Priest of Whiteness. Thou art a truthful man, and hast
got at the truth by asking, and I will trust to all that thou tellest me
as to what was the cause of quarrel between them."

"There is no good in mincing the matter," said Runolf, "but we must say
outright that he has been slain for less than no cause; and his death is
a great grief to all men. No one thinks it so much a loss as Njal, his
foster-father."

"Then they will be ill off for help from men," says Flosi; "and they
will find no one to speak up for them."

"So it will be," says Runolf, "unless it be otherwise foredoomed."

"What has been done in the suit?" says Flosi.

"Now the neighbours have been summoned on the inquest," says Runolf,
"and due notice given of the suit for manslaughter."

"Who took that step?" asks Flosi.

"Mord Valgard's son," says Runolf.

"How far is that to be trusted?" says Flosi.

"He is of my kin," says Runolf; "but still if I tell the truth of him, I
must say that more men reap ill than good from him. But this one thing I
will ask of thee, Flosi, that thou givest rest to thy wrath, and takest
the matter up in such a way as may lead to the least trouble. For Njal
will make a good offer, and so will others of the best men."

"Ride thou then to the Thing, Runolf," said Flosi, "and thy words shall
have much weight with me, unless things turn out worse than they
should."

After that they cease speaking about it, and Runolf promised to go to
the Thing.

Runolf sent word to Hafr the Wise, his kinsman, and he rode thither at
once.

Thence Flosi rode to Ossaby.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 115. Of Flosi And Hildigunna](njal115)
