[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends &
Sagas](../../index)  [Iceland](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](njal129)  [Next](njal131) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# 130. OF KARI SOLMUND'S SON

Now it is to be told of Kari Solmund's son that he fared away from that
hollow in which he had rested himself until he met Bard, and those words
passed between them which Geirmund had told.

Thence Kari rode to Mord, and told him the tidings, and he was greatly
grieved.

Kari said there were other things more befitting a man than to weep for
them dead, and bade him rather gather folk and come to Holtford.

After that he rode into Thurso-dale to Hjallti Skeggi's son, and as he
went along Thurso water, he sees a man riding fast behind him. Kari
waited for the man, and knows that he was Ingialld of the Springs. He
sees that he is very bloody about the thigh; and Kari asked Ingialld who
had wounded him, and he told him.

"Where met ye two?" says Kari.

"By Rangwater side," says Ingialld, "and he threw a spear over at me."

"Didst thou aught for it?" asks Kari.

"I threw the spear back," says Ingialld, "and they said that it met a
man, and he was dead at once."

"Knowest thou not," said Kari, "who the man was?"

"Methought he was like Thorstein Flosi's brother's son," says Ingialld.

"Good luck go with thy hand," says Kari.

After that they rode both together to see Hjallti Skeggi's son, and told
him the tidings. He took these deeds ill, and said there was the
greatest need to ride after them and slay them all.

After that he gathered men and roused the whole country; now he and Kari
and Ingialld ride with this band to meet Mord Valgard's son, and they
found him at Holtford, and Mord was there waiting for them with a very
great company. Then they parted the hue and cry; some fared the straight
road by the east coast to Selialandsmull, but some went up to
Fleetlithe, and other-some the higher road thence to Threecorner Ridge,
and so down into Godaland. Thence they rode north to Sand. Some too rode
as far as Fishwaters, and there turned back. Some the coast road east to
Holt, and told Thorgeir the tidings, and asked whether they had not
ridden by there.

"This is how it is," said Thorgeir, "though I am not a mighty chief, yet
Flosi would take other counsel than to ride under my eyes, when he has
slain Njal, my father's brother, and my cousins; and there is nothing
left for any of you but e'en to turn back again, for ye should have
hunted longer nearer home; but tell this to Kari, that he must ride
hither to me and be here with me if he will; but though he will not come
hither east, still I will look after his farm at Dyrholms if he will,
but tell him too that I will stand by him and ride with him to the
Althing. And he shall also know this, that we brothers are the next of
kin to follow up the feud, and we mean so to take up the suit, that
outlawry shall follow and after that revenge, man for man, if we can
bring it about; but I do not go with you now, because I know naught will
come of it, and they will now be as wary as they can of themselves."

Now they ride back, and all met at Hof and talked there among
themselves, and said that they had gotten disgrace since they had not
found them. Alord said that was not so. Then many men were eager that
they should fare to Fleetlithe, and pull down the homesteads of all
those who had been at those deeds, but still they listened for Mord's
utterance.

"That," he said, "would be the greatest folly." They asked why he said
that.

"Because," he said, "if their houses stand, they will be sure to visit
them to see their wives; and then, as time rolls on, we may hunt them
down there; and now ye shall none of you doubt that I will be true to
thee Kari, and to all of you, and in all counsel, for I have to answer
for myself."

Hjallti bade him do as he said. Then Hjallti bade Kari to come and stay
with him, he said he would ride thither first. They told him what
Thorgeir had offered him, and he said he would make use of that offer
afterwards, but said his heart told him it would be well if there were
many such.

After that the whole band broke up.

Flosi and his men saw all these tidings from where they were on the
fell; and Flosi said, "Now we will take our horses and ride away, for
now it will be some good."

The sons of Sigfus asked whether it would be worth while to get to their
homes and tell the news.

"It must be Mord's meaning," says Flosi, "that ye will visit your wives;
and my guess is, that his plan is to let your houses stand unsacked; but
my plan is that not a man shall part from the other, but all ride east
with me."

So every man took that counsel, and then they all rode east and north of
the Jokul, and so on till they came to Swinefell.

Flosi sent at once men out to get in stores, so that nothing might fall
short.

Folsi never spoke about the deed, but no fear was found in him, and he
was at home the whole winter till Yule was over.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 131. Njal's And Bergthora's Bones Found](njal131)
