[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends &
Sagas](../../index)  [Iceland](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](njal114)  [Next](njal116) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# 115. OF FLOSI AND HILDIGUNNA

Hildigunna was out of doors, and said, "Now shall all the men of my
household be out of doors when Flosi rides into the yard; but the women
shall sweep the house and deck it with hangings, and make ready the high
seat for Flosi."

Then Flosi rode into the town, and Hildigunna turned to him and said,
"Come in safe and sound and happy kinsman, and my heart is fain at thy
coming hither."

"Here," says Flosi, "we will break our fast, and then we will ride on."

Then their horses were tethered, and Flosi went into the sitting- room
and sat him down, and spurned the high seat away from him on the dais,
and said, "I am neither king nor earl, and there is no need to make a
high seat for me to sit on, nor is there any need to make a mock of me."

Hildigunna was standing close by, and said, "It is ill if it mislikes
thee, for this we did with a whole heart."

"If thy heart is whole towards me, then what I do will praise itself if
it be well done, but it will blame itself if it be ill done."

Hildigunna laughed a cold laugh, and said, "There is nothing new in
that, we will go nearer yet ere we have done."

She sat her down by Flosi, and they talked long and low.

After that the board was laid, and Flosi and his band washed their
hands. Flosi looked hard at the towel and saw that it was all in rags,
and had one end torn off. He threw it down on the bench and would not
wipe himself with it, but tore off a piece of the tablecloth, and wiped
himself with that, and then threw it to his men.

After that Flosi sat down to the board and bade men eat.

Then Hildigunna came into the room and went before Flosi, and threw her
hair off her eyes and wept.

"Heavy-hearted art thou now, kinswoman," said Flosi, "when thou weepest,
but still it is well that thou shouldst weep for a good husband."

"What vengeance or help shall I have of thee?" she says.

"I will follow up thy suit," said Flosi, "to the utmost limit of the
law, or strive for that atonement which good men and true shall say that
we ought to have as full amends."

"Hauskuld would avenge thee," she said, "if he had the blood-feud after
thee."

"Thou lackest not grimness," answered Flosi, "and what thou wantest is
plain."

"Arnor Ornolf's son, of Forswaterwood," said Hildigunna, "had done less
wrong towards Thord Frey's priest thy father; and yet thy brothers
Kolbein and Egil slew him at Skaptarfells-Thing."

Then Hildigunna went back into the hall and unlocked her chest, and then
she took out the cloak, Flosi's gift, and in it Hauskuld had been slain,
and there she had kept it, blood and all. Then she went back into the
sitting-room with the Cloak; she went up silently to Flosi. Flosi had
just then eaten his full, and the board was cleared. Hildigunna threw
the cloak over Flosi, and the gore rattled down all over him.

Then she spoke and said, "This cloak, Flosi, thou gavest to Hauskuld,
and now I will give it back to thee; he was slain in it, and I call God
and all good men to witness, that I abjure thee, by all the might of thy
Christ, and by thy manhood and bravery, to take vengeance for all those
wounds which he had on his dead body, or else to be called every man's
dastard."

Flosi threw the cloak off him and hurled it into her lap, and said,
"Thou art the greatest hell-hag, and thou wishest that we should take
that course which will be the worst for all of us. But 'women's counsel
is ever cruel.'"

Flosi was so stirred at this, that sometimes he was bloodred in the
face, and sometimes ashy pale as withered grass, and sometimes blue as
death.

Flosi and his men rode away; he rode to Holtford, and there waits for
the sons of Sigfus and other of his men.

Ingialld dwelt at the Springs; he was the brother of Rodny, Hauskuld
Njal's son's mother (1). Ingialld had to wife Thraslauga, the daughter
of Egil, the son of Thord Frey's priest (2). Flosi sent word to Ingialld
to come to him, and Ingialld went at once, with fourteen men. They were
all of his household. Ingialld was a tall man and a strong, and slow to
meddle with other men's business, one of the bravest of men, and very
bountiful to his friends.

Flosi greeted him well, and said to him, "Great trouble hath now come on
me and my brothers-in-law, and it is hard to see our way out of it; I
beseech thee not to part from my suit until this trouble is past and
gone."

"I am come into a strait myself," said Ingialld, "for the sake of the
ties that there are between me and Njal and his sons, and other great
matters which stand in the way."

"I thought," said Flosi, "when I gave away my brother's daughter to
thee, that thou gavest me thy word to stand by me in every suit."

"It is most likely," says Ingialld, "that I shall do so, but still I
will now, first of all, ride home, and thence to the Thing."

ENDNOTES:

\(1\) They were children of Hauskuld the White, the son of Ingialld the
Strong, the son of Gerfinn the Red, the son of Solvi, the son of
Thorstein Baresarks-bane.

\(2\) The mother of Egil was Thraslauga, the daughter of Thorstein
Titling; the mother of Thraslauga was Unna, the daughter of Eyvind Karf.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 116. Of Flosi And Mord And The Sons Of Sigfus](njal116)
