[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends &
Sagas](../../index)  [Iceland](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](njal135)  [Next](njal137) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# 136. OF THORGEIR CRAGGEIR

Thorgeir Craggier rode from the east with much people. His brothers were
with him, Thorleif Crow and Thorgrim the Big. They came to Hof, to Mord
Valgard's son's house, and bided there till he was ready. Mord had
gathered every man who could bear arms, and they could see nothing about
him but that he was most steadfast in everything, and now they rode
until they came west across the rivers. Then they waited for Hjallti
Skeggi's son. He came after they had waited a short while, and they
greeted him well, and rode afterwards all together till they came to
Reykia in Bishop's tongue, and bided there for Asgrim Ellidagrim's son,
and he came to meet them there. Then they rode west across Bridgewater.
Then Asgrim told them all that had passed between him and Flosi; and
Thorgeir said, "I would that we might try their bravery ere the Thing
closes."

They rode until they came to Baitvale. There Gizur the White came to
meet them with a very great company, and they fell to talking together.
Then they rode to the Upper Field, and drew up all their men in array
there, and so rode to the Thing.

Flosi and his men all took to their arms, and it was within an ace that
they would fall to blows. But Asgrim and his friends and their followers
would have no hand in it, and rode to their booths; and now all was
quiet that day, so that they had naught to do with one another. Thither
were come chiefs from all the Quarters of the land; there had never been
such a crowded Thing before, that men could call to mind.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 137. Of Eyjolf Bolverk's Son](njal137)
