[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends &
Sagas](../../index)  [Iceland](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](njal058)  [Next](njal060) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# 59. OF ASGRIM AND WOLF UGGIS' SON

Asgrim Ellidagrim's son had a suit to follow up at the Thing against
Wolf Uggis' son. It was a matter of inheritance. Asgrim took it up in
such a way as was seldom his wont; for there was a bar to his suit, and
the bar was this, that he had summoned five neighbours to bear witness,
when he ought to have summoned nine. And now they have this as their
bar.

Then Gunnar spoke and said,"I will challenge thee to single combat on
the island, Wolf Uggis' son, if men are not to get their rights by law;
and Njal and my friend Helgi would like that I should take some share in
defending thy cause, Asgrim, if they were not here themselves."

"But," says Wolf, "this quarrel is not one between thee and me."

"Still it shall be as good as though it were," says Gunnar.

And the end of the suit was, that Wolf had to pay down all the money.

Then Asgrim said to Gunnar, "I will ask thee to come and see me this
summer, and I will ever be with thee in lawsuits, and never against
thee."

Gunnar rides home from the Thing, and a little while after he and Njal
met. Njal besought Gunnar to be ware of himself, and said he had been
told that those away under the Threecorner meant to fall on him, and
bade him never go about with a small company, and always to have his
weapons with him. Gunnar said so it should be, and told him that Asgrim
had asked him to pay him a visit, "and I mean to go now this harvest."

"Let no men know before thou farest how long thou wilt be away," said
Njal; "but, besides, I beg thee to let my sons ride with thee, and then
no attack will be made on thee."

So they settled that among themselves.

Now the summer wears away till it was eight weeks to winter, and then
Gunnar says to Kolskegg, "Make thee ready to ride, for we shall ride to
a feast at Tongue."

"Shall we say anything about it to Njal's sons?" said Kolskegg.

"No," says Gunnar; "they shall fall into no quarrels for me."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 60. An Attack Against Gunnar Agreed On](njal060)
