[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Talmud](../talmud)  [Index](index)  [Previous](bet08)  [Next](bet10) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../img/tn_talm.jpg)](index)  
*Bablyonian Talmud, Book 4: Tracts Pesachim, Yomah and Hagiga*, tr. by
Michael L. Rodkinson, \[1918\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_60">p. 60</span>

# CHAPTER IV.

REGULATIONS CONCERNING THE CARRYING AND HANDLING OF THINGS ON THE
FESTIVAL.

MISHNA: If one has to transport jars of wine from one place to another
(on a festival) he must not carry them in a basket or a case, but on the
shoulder, or in his hand in front of his person. The same is the case
when he has to carry straw; he must not put the bundle on the shoulder
behind, but must carry it in his hand. One may commence to take a heap
of straw (for fuel), but not of stacks of wood in an unused yard behind
the house.

GEMARA: A Boraitha taught: If it is impossible to change the manner
usual on week-days, it may be done as ordinarily.

Rabha has ordered in Mehuzah as follows: "A heavy burden which a man
carries on a week-day with great trouble, if he has to bear it on a
festival, he may carry it with the help of a *Rigla* (a long, crooked
pole for bearing burdens), and though it is also heavy and a trouble, it
is a change of the manner, on weekdays. And what one man carries on
week-days with the help of a *Rigla*, two men shall carry. The burden
which two men carry on a pole on their shoulders, they shall carry on a
festival with the hand, and what is carried with the hand, shall on the
festival be carried with a cloth." All this shall be done, if possible;
but if it is impossible, it shall be carried as usually, because the
Master said: If it is impossible to change the manner it is allowed.

Rabha bar R. Hanin said to Abayi: A Mishna teaches: It is prohibited to
clap with the hands, strike on the hips, and to dance on a festival. And
in our time we see people do so, and we do not say to them anything. And
he answered: And according to your theory, come and see the women who
take their cans and go and stand at the gates of the entry, which is
also prohibited, and we say nothing to them (Would you also blame us for
this?). This is not so (because it is a rule). Let

<span id="page_61">p. 61</span>

Israel do things unintentionally rather than intentionally (*i.e.*, they
were sure that if it was told to them, they would not listen, and to
preserve them from conscious transgression, they keep silence). And
there is no difference in such a case between a biblical and a
rabbinical prohibition. Because the adding from the eve of the Day of
Atonement to the Day of Atonement (about half an hour) is biblical,
nevertheless we see women eating and drinking till dark, and we say
nothing.

"*But not of stacks of wood*," etc. R. Kahana said: From this it may be
inferred that we must not commence to take of a whole store (stock
storehouse), because it is "designated." Then it would be according to
R. Jehudah, who holds the theory of Muktzah. How then would be explained
the beginning of the Mishna, that one may begin to take of a heap of
straw, that would be according to R. Simeon, who does not hold the
theory of Muktzah? The Mishna refers to spoiled straw (which is no
longer fit for food of animals). But it may yet be used for bricks? It
refers to a case when there were thistles (or thorns) in the straw.

MISHNA: Wood may not be taken from a booth, but the pieces lying by may
be used.

GEMARA: R. Hyya bar Joseph taught before R. Johanan the following
Boraitha: Wood must not be taken from a booth, but only the pieces lying
near it. R. Simeon, however, permits it. But all agree that from a booth
made for the Festival of Tabernacles it must not be taken *then*. If the
booth was made conditionally, all must be done according to the
condition.

It has been said: R. Simeon permits it. But did he not demolish a tent?
Said R. Na'hman bar Itz'hak: The case is when the tent is already
demolished, or so weak as to *fall down* soon, so that even on the
preceding day he had the intention to take wood of it.

The Boraitha states: If the booth was made conditionally, etc. Can then
a condition affect it? Did we not learn in Succah (p. 10), that R.
Shesheth said in the name of R. Aqiba: that the wood of the Succah is
prohibited in all the seven days at all events? This part of the
Boraitha means an ordinary booth, not a tabernacle.

MISHNA: One may bring wood from the field when it is a stack, and from a
wood-shed, even of the dispersed pieces of wood. What is called a
wood-shed? If it is near the city. So is the decree of R. Jehudah. R.
Jose, however, said, If there is a door which can be locked, even if it
is within the legal limit.

<span id="page_62">p. 62</span>

GEMARA: R. Jehudah said in the name of Samuel: Wood may be brought only
from the stacks that are in the wood-shed, but not dispersed pieces. Did
not our Mishna teach that from a wood-shed may be taken even dispersed
pieces? The Mishna is only according to an individual Tana, but the
other sages differ from it. Rabha said: Leaves of a vineyard or of
branches, although they are gathered and lie together, because by a wind
they may be dispersed, are to be considered as dispersed already, and
may not be used. But if one had put a heavy thing on them the preceding
day, they may be used.

"*What is called a wood-shed*," etc. The schoolmen propound a question:
Did the Mishna mean both? Did it mean that it is near the city and has a
door, and R. Jose comes to teach if it has a door it is enough, if it is
not near the city, but within the legal limit, or when it has no door,
even near to a city, also not? Come and hear: Because R. Jose teaches
that if it can be entered through a door, and the door can be locked, it
is allowed even within the legal limit, we may infer that R. Jose
decides in both cases leniently. Said R. Sala in the name of R.
Jeremiah: The Halakha prevails according to R. Jose, leniently.

MISHNA: It is not permitted to cut wood from new beams, even from an old
beam that was broken on the festival; neither may wood be cleft with an
axe, or saw, or bite-hook, but with a chopping-knife only.

GEMARA: Has not the first part of the Mishna said that we must not cut
wood at all? Said R. Jehudah in the name of Samuel: The Mishna is not
completed, and must be read thus: It is not allowed to cut from a pile
of logs, neither from a beam that was broken on the festival; but from a
beam that was broken the preceding day. And when they cut it, they shall
not do it with an axe, etc. The same we have learned in the following
Boraitha: One may not cut wood from a pile of beams, nor from a beam
broken on the festival, because they are not considered prepared while
it is yet day.

"*But with a chopping-knife only*." Said R. Hinna bar Salmia in the name
of Rabh: It is only with the side of the blade used for chopping wood,
but with the broad side wherewith one can cleave beams, it is not
allowed. <span id="fr_25"></span>[1](#fn_25)

<span id="page_63">p. 63</span>

MISHNA: A house filled with fruits, if a hole was made, it is allowed to
take fruit through this hole. R. Meir, however, said one may make a hole
in the house, to commence with, for the purpose of taking the fruit.

GEMARA: Why so? Is he not demolishing a tent? Said R. Nehuma bar Adda in
the name of Samuel: The Mishna refers to a house of bricks without
mortar. R. Zera said: R. Meir allowed this only on a festival, but not
on Sabbath. The same we have learned plainly in a Boraitha. Samuel said:
If the doors of the cellars are tied with ropes, one may untie; but he
may not untwist the ropes themselves, nor cut them off. When, however,
with such ropes vessels were tied, he may untwist them and cut them off,
and there is no difference between Sabbath and a festival in this case.

An objection was raised from the following Boraitha: If the doors of the
cellars are tied with ropes, on Sabbath, one may untie, but he may not
untwist the ropes themselves, nor cut them off. On a festival, however,
all this is allowed? The Boraitha is according to R. Meir, who allows
this on a festival to commence with, but I say according to the rabbis.
But did the rabbis differ with R. Meir that if the doors of the cellars,
etc.? Have we not learned in another Boraitha, that the sages agree with
R. Meir concerning this case? Samuel holds with another Boraitha which
stated differently.

MISHNA: It is not permitted to make a cavity in a lump of potter's clay
for the purpose of using it as a lamp, because a utensil is thereby
formed; neither may charcoal be made on a festival, nor the wick of a
lamp be cut in two. R. Jehudah says: With fire it may be done.

GEMARA: Who is the Tana who holds that when a hole is made in such a
lump it is called a utensil? Said R. Joseph: That is R. Meir (who states
so in Tract Kelim).

The rabbis taught: One must not make a hole in a lump of clay to use it
as a lamp, nor plates used by rustics (who are not particular about fine
china, but use them as soon as made, before they have been hollowed out
and *baked* in fire). <span id="fr_26"></span>[1](#fn_26) R. Simeon b.
Gamaliel, however, allows it.

"*Neither may charcoal be made*," etc. Is this not self-evident? What
use can one make on that day of charcoal? Taught R.

<span id="page_64">p. 64</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Hyya: The Mishna
refers to those who need the charcoal for an *olearius* on this day
(*i.e.*, a machine to heat oil to be fit for the body and clothes). Is
it allowed then to take a bath on this day? As Rabha had explained in
another place that it was allowed to go to sweat before it was
prohibited, so also can this Mishna be explained to mean sweating,
before the prohibition was made (see Sabbath, pp. 71, 72).

"*Nor the wick of a lamp*," etc. Why is it not allowed to do it with a
knife? Because he makes of it a utensil (*i.e.*, he makes two out of
one). Is not the same with fire? Taught R. Hyya: R. Jehudah meant to say
that the ends shall be placed in two lamps, and shall be separated by
burning the middle part, (and he only kindles the lamps).

R. Nathan bar Abba said in the name of Rabh: One may snuff a wick on the
festival. Bar Qappara taught: Six things were said about a wick: three
rigorously and three leniently. Rigorously: One must not commence to
braid the wick, nor singe, nor cut it in two; and leniently: One may
*twist* it with the hand, soak in oil, and make two wicks by burning the
middle part. R. Nat an bar Abba in the name of Rabh said again: The rich
men of the Babylonians are among those who descend to Gehenna; as it
once happened Sabathai bar Merenus came to Babylon and asked them to
support him in some business, and they did not; and he asked that they
should feed him at least, and they also refused. Then he said: They are
descendants of the "mixed multitude," as it is written \[Deut. xiii.
18\]: "And grant thee mercy, and have mercy upon thee." From this we
infer that whosoever has mercy for creatures, he is surely of the
children of Abraham our father, but whosoever has not mercy for
creatures, it is certain he is not. The same says again in the name of
the same authority: Whosoever is dependent upon the table of his
neighbor, the whole world is dark for him. As it is written \[Job xv.
23\]: "He wandereth abroad for bread, (saying), Where is it? he knoweth
that there is ready at his hand the day of darkness." R. Hisda said: His
life is no life at all.

The rabbis taught: There are three men whose lives are not counted as
lives at all: He who is dependent on the table of his neighbor; he whose
wife dominates over him; and he who has bodily suffering. According to
others, he who has no more than one shirt.

MISHNA: One may not break pieces of earthenware, nor cut paper for the
purpose of roasting salted fish on it. Ashes

<span id="page_65">p. 65</span>

from the oven or hearth may not be removed, but they may be moved to one
side. Two barrels must not be brought near each other, to place a pot on
them over the fire, nor may a piece of wood be used to support a pot,
nor a door. Cattle may not be driven on the festival with a stick; but
R. Eliezer b. Simeon permits it.

GEMARA: Why so? Because he produces thereby utensils.

"*Ashes of the oven*," etc. R. Hyya b. Joseph taught in the presence of
R. Na'hman that if it is not possible to bake in the oven unless one
removes the ashes, one may do so. It happened to the wife of R. Hyya
that half a brick from the wall of the oven fell down into the oven on a
festival. Said R. Hyya to her: See to its removal, because I like to
have good bread. Rabha said to his servant: Roast for me a duck, and see
that it shall not be singed. Said Rabina to R. Ashi: We were told by R.
Aha of Hutzl that the Master's servants, when the oven is closed, smear
it with clay on the festival. And he answered: We live near the River
Euphrates, where clay is ready at hand. The case is, when he makes a
sign on the clay on the previous day. Said Rabina: To knead ashes, it is
permitted (because they cannot keep for a long period).

"*Nor may a piece of wood*," etc. The rabbis taught: A pot must not be
supported with a piece of wood nor a door, because wood is prepared only
for fuel. R. Simeon, however, allows this. Cattle must not be driven
with a stick, but R. Eliezer the son of R. Simeon permits it. Shall we
assume that R. Eliezer holds with his father, that no theory of Muktzah
exists? Nay, he is more lenient than his father; for his father would
assent that they must not be driven with a stick, because it seems as if
they are taken to the market.

Hizra (Abhazar in Arabic), R. Na'hman prohibited to use for the purpose
of roasting on it meat; but R. Shesheth permits it. If it was dry, all
agree it is permitted; they differ only when it is wet yet. Whosoever
prohibits it, does it because it is not fit for fuel, and whosoever
permits it, does it because in a great fire this also can be used. The
Halakha, however, prevails thus: That a dry one is allowed, but not a
wet one.

Rabha lectured: A woman shall not enter a wood-shed to take a crooked
piece of wood for a poker; and if a poker was broken on the festival, it
must not be burned, because fire may be made with vessels, but not
broken vessels (Sabbath, p. 270). Shall

<span id="page_66">p. 66</span>

we assume that Rabha holds with R. Jehudah regarding the theory of
Muktzah? Did not Rabha say to his servant: Roast me a duck, and throw
the entrails to the cat? With the entrails it is different; because, as
they become putrified he made up his mind the day before that they must
be given to the cat.

MISHNA: Rabbi Eliezer says: One may take a splinter from the wood lying
near him to clean his teeth with, and gather in the yard small pieces of
wood, and burn them, because whatever is in the yard may be considered
as prepared for the festival. But the sages allow one to pick up only
those pieces that lie near him, and only to burn them. Fire may not be
produced on the festival from wood, stones, dust or earth, or from
water; nor may one heat tiles to broil food on them.

GEMARA: R. Jehudah said: To food fit for cattle the law of making a
utensil does not apply (*e.g.*, to take straw or other fodder of cattle,
and break it for cleaning the teeth, or so, is permitted; because, being
fit for cattle, it may be handled, etc.).

R. Kahana objected him: We have learned that branches of spice-trees may
be handled to enjoy the odor, and to fan with them a sick man. One may
*grind*, also, to produce an agreeable odor; but one must not break them
for the purpose of enhancing the odor. If he did so, he is not liable to
a sin-offering; but if he broke them for the purpose of cleaning the
teeth with them, he is liable. And he answered: If the Boraitha had said
that one may not break them for the purpose of cleaning the teeth, it
would be a great difficulty to me; much more, when it says he is liable
to a sin-offering for it. The Boraitha must be incomplete and must be
stated thus: He may grind with his hand for the purpose of odor; he may
break them for this purpose, but the case is only when they are yet
soft. But when they are already hard, he shall not break them. If he did
so, however, he is not culpable, although it is prohibited; but if he
broke for the purpose of cleaning the teeth, he is liable to a
sin-offering.

In one Boraitha we have learned, he may break it in order to smell it,
and in another one--that he must not break it for this purpose? Said R.
Zera in the name of R. Hisda: It presents no difficulty. The Boraitha
which allows it means when they are soft, and the other one, when they
are dry. R. A'ha bar Jacob opposed: Why shall dry ones not be allowed?
Did not a Mishna (Sabbath, p. 332) state: One may break open a cask to
cut dry figs therefrom, etc.? Furthermore: Rabha and Rabbin, the sons of
R. Adda, both say: When we were at the house of R. Jehudah,

<span id="page_67">p. 67</span>

he used to break twigs off a spice-tree, and give us sticks of the same,
although the sticks were so large that they could be used for an axe or
a spade handle. Therefore we must say that of the two Boraithas
(mentioned above) one is according to R. Eliezer and one according to
the rabbis of the following Boraitha: "R. Eliezer said: One may take a
splinter from the wood lying near him to clean his teeth with; but the
sages say: He can take it only from a manger. All agree that he shall
not break it off, and if he did so, to clean the teeth or to open the
door with it, if unintentionally on a Sabbath, he is liable to a
sin-offering, and if intentionally on a festival, he is liable to the
punishment of stripes. So is the decree of R. Eliezer. The sages,
however, say: In both cases he is free, because this is only a *Shbuth*
(Sabbath-rest, rabbinically)." Now, the Boraitha which states that he
must not break it off is in accordance with R. Eliezer, who says there
that he is liable to a sin-offering; and the Boraitha which states that
he may do so is in accordance with the rabbis, who say there that he is
free, even if he broke it off for the purpose of cleaning his teeth.
Here, however, when it is for the purpose of smelling, it is allowed to
commence with. But does not R. Eliezer hold what is stated in the above
Mishna, that one may break open a cask, etc.? Said R. Ashi: According to
R. Eliezer, the Mishna must be explained that the cask was cemented with
resin, and it is impossible to use it afterwards as a vessel.

"*And gather in the yard*." The rabbis taught: He may gather in the yard
and burn, because all things that are in the yard are considered as
prepared, provided he does not make of them heaps. R. Simeon, however,
permits even this. On what point do they differ? One holds that if he
makes heaps, it seems as if he prepared them for the day subsequent to
the festival; but the other holds that his pot proves that it is for
to-day.

"*Fire may not be produced*," etc. Why so? Because to produce a new
thing is not lawful.

"*One may not heat tiles*," etc. What labor is that? Said Rabba bar bar
Hana in the name of Rabbi Johanan: The Mishna refers to new tiles, that
must be examined as to whether they can stand fire. According to others,
it is a labor because they must be heated long, until they become hard.

The rabbis taught: New ovens or hearths are considered as ordinary
vessels that may be handled in the yard; but they must not be anointed
with oil, nor cleaned with a wet cloth, nor cooled

<span id="page_68">p. 68</span>

in cold water to harden it. But if all this should be done only for the
purpose of baking on that day, it is allowed.

The rabbis taught: The head and the feet of an animal may be scalded,
also singed. The hair may be removed by fire, but not with lime, clay,
or earth; nor must it be cut off with scissors. Herbs must not be cut
out with the same scissors with which they are usually detached from the
ground. But one may prepare χιναρα (artichoke) and thistle and bake in a
large oven, and water may be formed in an "antikhi" (a kind of kettle:
see Sabbath, p. 74). A new large oven, however, must not be heated on
the festival, because it may burst.

The rabbis taught: One must not blow bellows, but one may blow through a
pipe. A spit must not be sharpened and fixed (for the purpose of
roasting).

The rabbis taught: A cane must not be splintered for the purpose of
roasting salted fish. A nut, however, may be cracked through a piece of
cloth, without fear lest that the latter be torn.

MISHNA: R. Eliezer said again: In a Sabbatical year a man may place
himself on the eve of Sabbath at the place where figs or raisins are
kept, and say: From there I will take to-morrow. But, according to the
sages, he must point out the exact spot, and say: I will take from this
point to that point.

GEMARA: In a Mishna (Maasroth, Chap. IV., 2) it is stated: If children
had saved dates from the eve of Sabbath and forgot to separate the
tithe, when the Sabbath is over they must not eat them until the tithe
is separated. Also in another Mishna (ibid. III., 1): If one passed
dates through his yard to dry them, his household may eat of them
moderately. Now, Rabba asked R. Na'hman: Does the Sabbath fix the time
for separating tithe even from things the labors belonging to which are
not finished yet? Shall we assume that because it is written \[in Is.
lviii.\]: "Thou shalt call the Sabbath a delight," it fixes the time of
tithing even for things the labors belonging to which are not finished
yet, or it fixes the time only for things the labors on which are
finished and not otherwise? And he answered: Sabbath fixes the time in
any event. The former said again: Why shall not Sabbath be equal to a
yard which does not fix the time for things on which the labor is not
finished yet? Let the law of Sabbath be the same? And he answered: We
have an explicit teaching that the Sabbath fixes the time for the thing
in any event. Said Mar Sutra the son of R. Na'hman: Our Mishna which
states that only on Sabbatical years it may be done so, and not

<span id="page_69">p. 69</span>

in an ordinary year, must also be explained, that because the Sabbatical
year is exempt from tithe, he may do so; but in an ordinary year it must
not be done so, because the Sabbath fixes it for tithe. When Rabbin came
from Palestine he said, however, in the name of R. Johanan, that
Sabbath, Heave-offering, a Yard, and Price all do not fix for tithe,
only in things on which all the labor belonging to them is already
done. <span id="fr_27"></span>[1](#fn_27)

Sabbath--to state that the law is not after Hillel in the following
Boraitha: If one transferred fruit from one place to another to cut it,
and Sabbath overtook him, R. Jehudah said that only Hillel prohibited to
eat it before separating tithe, but all his colleagues differ from him.

A Yard--to state that the law is not after R. Jacob in the following
Mishna, which says that whoso passes dates through the yard, his
household may eat of them moderately, and they are free from tithe. And
a Boraitha, in addition to this Mishna, states that R. Jacob says tithe
must be separated, and R. Jose b. Jehudah frees it from tithe.

Heave-offering--to state that the law is not after R. Eliezer in the
following Mishna: Fruit of which the heave-offering was separated before
all the labors belonging to it were finished, R. Eliezer prohibits to
eat from moderately, but the sages allow this.

And Price--as we learned in the following Boraitha: Whose, bought dates
from a man of the common people in a place where the majority of
gardeners press the dates, he may eat of them moderately; and when he
comes to give tithe of them, he may separate tithe from it (but it is
not necessary to separate heave-offering). And from this Boraitha we
have learned three things: Firstly, that the price which is made does
not fix for tithe until all the labor is done; secondly, that the
majority of the common people do separate tithes; and thirdly, that if
one comes to separate tithes from fruits bought from one of the common
people, from a doubt lest the seller had not yet separated the tithe, he
may separate it even from things the labors belonging to which are not
yet finished.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_25"></span>[62:1](bet09.htm#fr_25) It is difficult to
understand the argument, as it is not known to us how the chopping-knife
was made. Even Tospheth remarks because we do not know what kind of a
chopping-knife it was, therefore it is not allowed to cut wood with any
knife, only with the hand.

<span id="fn_26"></span>[63:1](bet09.htm#fr_26) The commentators, Rashi
and Tospheth, also the dictionaries, try to explain this term, but it
remains obscure.

<span id="fn_27"></span>[69:1](bet09.htm#fr_27) The law of the tithe of
all these will be explained in Tract Maasroth. The meaning of "Price"
is, that if the grain was sold before it became ripe, it does not fix it
for tithe.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter V](bet10)
