[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Talmud](../talmud)  [Index](index)  [Previous](rab08)  [Next](rab10) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../img/tn_talm.jpg)](index)  
*Bablyonian Talmud, Book 4: Tracts Pesachim, Yomah and Hagiga*, tr. by
Michael L. Rodkinson, \[1918\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# CHAPTER IX.

A. For all the relatives, one must rend his garments, also for the
teacher from whom he received his study. A wise man, however, all are
his relatives, all must rend their garments, all

<span id="page_37">p. 37</span>

must take off their shoes, and all may take part in the funeral meal
(which used to be eaten in the street on the return from the cemetery).
R. Simeon b. Elazar, however, said that rending of the garments is
obligatory to all who are present at the death of a human being; the
relatives, however, must rend their garments and take off their shoes,
even if they are not present. Different is it when a sage dies. All who
are notified of his demise must perform the mourning ceremonies.

B. For the death of the chief of a college all (the college men) are
obliged to bare their right arm; <span id="fr_96"></span>[B1](#fn_96)
for the chief of a court, the left; and for the Nasi both arms are
bared. When the death of R. Eliezer occurred, R. Aqiba bared both his
arms, beat his breast until blood spurted from it, and cried: "My
father, my father, the chariot of Israel, and their horsemen \[I Kings,
ii. 12\].

Ula said: "Lamenting is by striking on the breast, for it is written
\[Isa. xxii. 12\]: 'They shall strike on the breast, lamenting.'"
Clapping is done with the hands, and striking is done with the feet.

The rabbis taught: "One who strikes with his feet must not do so with
his sandals on, but with his shoes on, in order to avert danger." R.
Johanan said: "If the mourner motions his head (as if he is consoled
already), his consolers need no more stay with him." R. Johanan said
again: "All persons must rise from their seats on the arrival of a Nasi,
except a mourner and a sick person." R. Johanan said again: "All persons
are told to be seated (after they rose), except a mourner and a sick
person.

C. For all his relatives one is not obliged to bare his aim, except for
father and mother. If something is on the arms which prevents their
being bared, one is not obliged to do it even at the death of his
parents. It happened that when the death of R. Aqiba's father occurred,
R. Aqiba did not bare his arm, though others did.

 <span id="fr_97"></span>[C1](#fn_97)In all cases it is praiseworthy to
remove the corpse as soon as possible, excepting in the case of a dead
parent, unless it is

<span id="page_38">p. 38</span>

on a Friday or on the eve of a festival, for the removal is then only
for the honor of the deceased (in order that they shall not remain
unburied until after the Sabbath or festival). In all cases of death it
is optional with the mourner whether to lessen his attendance to his
business or not; in the case of the death of a parent, he must lessen.
As to baring the shoulder, it is also obligatory in case of parents
only. It happened that the father of a great man of the generation died,
and the great man wanted to bare his shoulder; another great man, who
equalled him and who was present at the time, wanted to do likewise (in
order to show his respect), and the first one refrained from doing it
(in order to prevent the other one from inconvenience). Said Abayi: "The
great man of the generation was Rabbi, and the other one who was present
at the time was R. Jacob bar A'ha." According to others, it was *vice
versa*. In all cases of death the mourner may cut his hair after thirty
days; but in the case of his parents, not before he is censured by his
friends (for wearing too long hair). In all cases of death one may
participate in any enjoyment after thirty days, except in the case of
his parents, when he may do so only after twelve months. Said Rabba
bar bar Hana: "In an entertainment of friends he may participate at
once." In all cases one may rend his garment only one span long; over
parents he must rend so much as to bare his breast. Said R. Abuhu: From
what passage do we know this? From \[II Sam. i. 2\]: "David thereupon
took hold of his clothes, and rent them." And it is known that wherever
"hold" is mentioned, it is not less than a span. In all cases, even if
one has ten garments on, it is sufficient to rend the upper one only;
over his parents, however, he must rend all the garments he has on,
except the chest protector. And there is no distinction made between
male and female. R. Simeon b. Elazar, however, said: "A woman rends the
undergarment, places the rent part on her back, and then rends her upper
garment." In all cases it is optional whether to tear asunder the
outside hem or not, but over parents it is obligatory. R. Jehudah,
however, said: "If the hem is not torn asunder, it is not considered
rending at all." <span id="fr_98"></span>[C2](#fn_98) Said R. Abuhu:
"What is the reason of R. Jehudah's statement? It is written \[II Kings,
ii. 12\]: "And he took hold of his clothes, and rent them in two
pieces." The superfluous

<span id="page_39">p. 39</span>

statement, "in two pieces," indicates that it must be rent so that it
should look as if torn in two pieces. In all cases the rent may be
slightly sewed together after the seven days, and regularly mended after
the thirty days; but over parents it may only be slightly sewed together
after thirty days, but never regularly mended. Women, however, may sew
it together at once, for the sake of decency. When Rabbin came from
Palestine, he stated in the name of R. Johanan: "Over relatives it is
optional whether to rend by hand or with an instrument; over parents, by
hand only." R. Hyya bar Abba said in the name of R. Johanan: "Over
relatives the rent is made in the house; over parents, even outside of
the house." A prince once died. Said R. Hisda to R. Hanan bar Rabha:
"Stand on an elevation and rend your garments, so that every one will
see it." Over the death of a scholar, the right shoulder is bared; over
that of a chief of a court, the left one is bared; over that of a Nasi,
both shoulders are bared.

The rabbis taught: When a scholar dies, his college closes. When a chief
of a court dies. all the colleges in the city in which he resided close,
and those who come to the prayer-house to pray change their usual seats,
so that those who have seats on the north benches take seats on the
south benches, and *vice versa*. But when a Nasi dies, all the colleges
close and the members of the congregation assemble in the prayer-house,
and only seven read in the Law, and leave. R. Joshua b. Kar'ha said:
"That does not mean that they shall walk around in the streets, but that
they must remain in their houses and keep silent." And no ordinance or
Agada should be declared in the mourner's house. It was said, however,
of R. Hananiah b. Gamaliel that he had declared ordinances and Agada in
the house of a mourner.

The rabbis taught: "And the following rent garments may not be mended:
garments rent over the death of parents: over the death of one's
instructor in Law; over a Nasi, chief of the court; over ill-tidings;
over blasphemy; the Holy Scrolls which were burned by fire; the cities
of Jehudah; the Temple; and over Jerusalem. And one may rend over the
destruction of the Temple and add another rent (at the same place) over
Jerusalem." <span id="fr_99"></span>[C3](#fn_99) R. Helba in the name of
Ula of Birah, quoting R.

<span id="page_40">p. 40</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Elazar, said: "One
who beholds the cities of Jehudah in their desolate state, says \[Isa.
lxiv. 9\]: 'Thy holy cities are become a wilderness,' and rends his
garment; when he beholds Jerusalem in her desolate state, he says
\[ibid., ibid.\]: 'Zion is become a wilderness, Jerusalem a desolate
place,' and rends; when he beholds the Temple in its desolate state, he
says \[ibid. 10\]: 'Our holy and our beautiful house where our fathers
praised Thee is burned up with fire; and all our costly things are
become ruins,' and rends."

 <span id="fr_100"></span>[C4](#fn_100)The Boraitha stated: "One may
rend over the Temple and add another rent," etc. There is a
contradiction from the following Boraitha: "Both the one who heard it
and the one who saw it, as soon as they reach Zophim they rend their
garments, and they do so *separately* over the Temple and over
Jerusalem?" This presents no difficulty: The first Boraitha relates to a
case where he beheld the Temple first; the second, where he beheld
Jerusalem first (Rashi explains the first case that he was under such
circumstances that he could not see Jerusalem first, as for instance if
he were in a closed carriage).

The rabbis taught: "And all (rents) may be slightly sewed together,
hemmed, gathered (a sort of stitch), and stair-stitched, but not
regularly mended." Said R. Hisda: "Mending is not allowed only when it
is done in the fashion of Alexandria"(for it then looks as if never
rent).

The rabbis taught: The original rending is a span long; the additional,
three fingers. Such is the dictum of R. Meir; R. Jehudah, however, said:
"The original rending is three fingers, and the additional a trifle."
Said Ula: "The Halakha prevails according to R. Meir as regards the
original rending, and according to R. Jehudah as regards the additional
one." We have learned the same also in a Boraitha in the name of R.
Jose.

 <span id="fr_101"></span>[C5](#fn_101)Rending which is not done in the
moment of excitement (immediately after the occurrence of the death) is
not considered rending at all. Was it then not stated that Samuel rent
all the twelve different garments he had on when he was informed of the
death of Rabh, saying: "The man whom I always feared (for his sharpness)
has passed away"? And was it not also stated of R. Johanan that he rent
thirteen woollen garments when he was

<span id="page_41">p. 41</span>

informed of the death of R. Hanina, saying: "The man whom I always was
in dread of has passed away"(and in these instances it was not
immediately after the occurrence of the death)? In case of death of
rabbis it is different, because. their teachings being always fresh in
memory, the moment of excitement is whenever the information of their
death reaches. Rabhin bar Ada said to Rabha: "Thy disciple R. Amram
taught the following Boraitha: A mourner during all the seven days must
wear the rent part in front, and if he changes clothes he must rend
again. On the Sabbath he must remove the rent part from the front to the
back; if he, however, changes his clothes for the Sabbath, he must not
rend again." (Hence we see that one must rend, although after the moment
of excitement?) Rabha answered him: "This applies only to parents, but
over other relatives it is different."

 <span id="fr_102"></span>[C6](#fn_102)May those rents be mended? The
father of R. Oshiya and Bar Qappara differ: One holds they may, and the
other holds they may not.

 <span id="fr_103"></span>[C7](#fn_103)Rabha said: A mourner may walk
around in his easy-dress in his house (in private). <span
id="fr_104"></span>[C8](#fn_104)

D. If he was informed of his father's death, and he rent his garments,
and afterward he was told that it was not the father but the mother, his
duty is fulfilled; and also *vice versa*. If after he has rent for his
parents he was told that it was not his parents but one of his
relatives, this rending is sufficient. If, however, he was informed of
the death of a relative, and after he has rent he was told that it was
not his relative but one of his parents, he must rend again.

The rabbis taught: "If one is informed of the death of his father and he
made a rent, and then he was informed of the death of his son and he
made an additional rent, the lower rent may be mended but not the upper
one. If, however, he was informed of the death of his son first, the
upper one may be mended but not the lower one. If he was informed of the
death of his father, mother, brother, and sister at the same time, he
may make one rent for all. R. Jehudah b. Bathyra, however, said: One
rent over his father and mother, and another over

<span id="page_42">p. 42</span>

all the others; for an additional rent should not be added to the one
over his parents." What is the reason? Said R. Na'hman bar Itz'hak:
"Because the law of additional rending does not apply to the case of
parents." Said Samuel: "The Halakha prevails according to R. Jehudah b.
Bathyra." Could Samuel say so? Did not Samuel decide that the Halakha
prevails, in regard to mourning, according to the one who is lenient?
Mourning is one thing and rending is another.

 <span id="fr_105"></span>[D1](#fn_105)How far down must one rend? As
far as his navel. According to others, as far as the breast. And
although there is no direct support for that from the Scripture, there
is nevertheless a hint for that in \[Joel, ii. 13\], "And rend your
heart, and not your garments."

The rabbis taught: If a sick person has a case of death in his family he
must not be informed of the fact, for it may cause him distress; and no
rending is done in his presence, and the women are silenced (to keep any
knowledge from him); and a minor's garments are rent for the purpose of
moving others to pity him; and rending is done over the parents of one's
wife out of respect to the latter. R. Papa said: "We have learned in
Tract Great Mourning: 'But one (mourner) may not place a babe in his
lap, for it may cause him to smile and thus be disliked by others.'"

"*The funeral meal is not to be taken except on a couch standing up
properly*." The rabbis taught: "One who comes to the mourner's house, if
he was intimate with the mourner, he takes the funeral meal on a lowered
couch; if he were not, on a couch standing up properly." Rabha had a
death in his family, and Abba bar Martha, who was also known as Abba bar
Maniumi, came to console him. Rabha put up the couch, Abba bar Martha
lowered it, and Rabha remarked: "How little sense this young scholar
has!"

The rabbis taught: "A mourner who travels from one place to another, if
it is convenient to him to lessen his attendance to his business he
shall do so; if not, he shall attend at least in company with other
traders."

The rabbis taught: From what time on must the couch be lowered? From the
time the deceased is removed from the house. Such is the dictum of R.
Elazar. R. Joshua, however, said: "From the time the top-stone is placed
on the grave."

<span id="page_43">p. 43</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> When R. Gamaliel
the Elder died, <span id="fr_106"></span>[D2](#fn_106) as soon as he was
removed from the house R. Elazar told the mourners to lower the couches;
when the top-stone was placed on the grave, R. Joshua told them to do
so, and they answered: "We have already done so by the direction of the
elder teacher."

The rabbis taught: "From what hour on may the couches be put in proper
condition on Friday? From the hour of the Min'ha prayer on." Said Rabba
bar Huna: "One must not, however, sit down on them until sunset, and on
Saturday evening he must again lower them, although he has but one more
day to mourn."

The rabbis taught: "One must lower not only his own couch, but all the
couches in the house, even if they numbered ten and were placed in
different places; and even if four brothers mourn over the death of a
fifth brother, they all must lower their couches. If there is, however,
one couch used exclusively for placing on it utensils, that one need not
be lowered."

The rabbis taught: "One (a mourner) who sleeps on a stool, a large
mortar, or on the floor has not fulfilled his duty." Said R. Johanan:
"For he has not performed the duty of lowering the couch."

E. If one bought a garment which was rent for a death, he must not sew
it together, unless he knows that the rent is such that it may be sewed
together. If one sells such a garment, he is obliged to acquaint the
buyer what kind of a rent it is. All garments of which their rents must
not be sewed together, must not be sold to Gentiles; neither can they be
turned downward and sewed together. Such is the decree of R. Simeon b.
Elazar. The sages permit it. If one comes to a dying person in a rent
garment, he is robbing the dead. <span id="fr_107"></span>[E1](#fn_107)
It is a greater sin to rob the dead than the living, because one can
always appease the latter

<span id="page_44">p. 44</span>

and make restitution, which he cannot do to the dead. The same may be
said of him who honors his parents after they are dead: it is more
praiseworthy than when he honors them when they are alive, as in that
case it may be said that he does so because he fears them, or because he
expects to inherit from them; but when he honors them after they are
dead, it is only for the sake of heaven.

The rabbis taught: One who wears in the presence of a deceased person a
garment which has been rent over another deceased, is imposing on both
the deceased and the living. R. Simeon b. Gamaliel said: "One who
borrows a garment of another for the purpose of visiting his sick
father, and informing the borrower of the purpose for which the garment
is to be used, does visit his father but finds him dead, he must rend,
but may mend it and return it to the owner, paying him the difference in
value caused by the rending. But if he has not informed the owner of the
purpose, he may not rend.

F. If one has rent for one dead, and he be resuscitated, if he dies
immediately after, this rent is sufficient; but if he live some time,
one must rend again.

G. One who saves the garment which was upon the dead is robbing the
dead: this is only with the garments which are with him in the coffin,
but not those which are with him in bed; nevertheless, the heirs must be
told not to save even the garments which were with him in the bed. <span
id="fr_108"></span>[G1](#fn_108) One who adds garments to a corpse more
than necessary, he transgresses the precept, "Thou shalt not destroy"
\[Deut. xx. 19\]. <span id="fr_109"></span>[G2](#fn_109) So is the
decree of R. Meir. R. Eliezer b. Zadok said: He makes the corpse
homely. <span id="fr_110"></span>[G3](#fn_110) Rabban Gamaliel said:
Also, they add vermin.

H. Said R. Nathan: The garments in which the corpse is buried will be
renewed with him in resurrection, as it is written \[Job, xxxviii. 14\]:
"She is changed as the sealing-clay, and (all things) stand as though
newly clad."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_96"></span>[37:B1](rab09.htm#fr_96)

### CHAPTER IX.

B. As this custom is obsolete, we cannot explain its meaning and how it
was done.

<span id="fn_97"></span>[37:C1](rab09.htm#fr_97) *C*. *Gemara* from Moed
Katan.

<span id="fn_98"></span>[38:C2](rab09.htm#fr_98) In order to understand
the explanation hereof of Rashi, a thorough knowledge of the ancient cut
of garments is required, which we leave to the historian.

<span id="fn_99"></span>[39:C3](rab09.htm#fr_99) All this is adduced
from biblical passages which we deem unimportant to quote here.

<span id="fn_100"></span>[40:C4](rab09.htm#fr_100) *C*. *Gemara* from
Moed Katan.

<span id="fn_101"></span>[40:C5](rab09.htm#fr_101) *Gemara* from Moed
Katan.

<span id="fn_102"></span>[41:C6](rab09.htm#fr_102) *C*. *Gemara* from
Moed Katan.

<span id="fn_103"></span>[41:C7](rab09.htm#fr_103) *Gemara* from Moed
Katan.

<span id="fn_104"></span>[41:C8](rab09.htm#fr_104) The term in the text
for "easy-dress" is ‏אונקלי‎ which has several different meanings. See
our "Phyl. Rit.," p. 65. Here, however, it seems to mean a gown worn in
the house.

<span id="fn_105"></span>[42:D1](rab09.htm#fr_105) *D*. *Gemara* from
Moed Katan.

<span id="fn_106"></span>[43:D2](rab09.htm#fr_106) It seems to us that
it should read Gamaliel of Jamniah, as R. Gamaliel the Elder was his
grandfather, and Eliezer and Joshua were colleagues of the former.
Heilprin in his "Seder Hadoroth" brought Abraham Zacutta's opinion that
R. Eliezer and R. Joshua were present at the death of both Gamaliel the
Elder and his grandson of Jamniah without any remarks, which seems to us
impossible. Moreover, if R. Eliezer and R. Joshua existed in the time of
the Elder, they could have been little children only.

<span id="fn_107"></span>[43:E1](rab09.htm#fr_107) *E*. The Talmud
elsewhere says that he robs the living and the dead, because the people
who see the rent in his garments may think that he rent it then, and to
impose upon the people is considered a robbery.

<span id="fn_108"></span>[44:G1](rab09.htm#fr_108) *G*. It seems to us
from Sanhedrin, 48*a*, that the Talmud advises that all the garments
which were with the dead in bed shall be used for the purpose of
honoring the dead, as their custom was to pour wine before the dead.

<span id="fn_109"></span>[44:G2](rab09.htm#fr_109) All things which were
fit for use for human beings, or for their benefit, the Talmud does not
allow to destroy, without a purpose, and calls the one who does so "a
transgressor" of the negative commandment cited in this passage.

<span id="fn_110"></span>[44:G3](rab09.htm#fr_110) It means, because
when they are rotten it adds to the homeliness of the corpse.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter X](rab10)
