[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Talmud](../talmud)  [Index](index)  [Previous](rab05)  [Next](rab07) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../img/tn_talm.jpg)](index)  
*Bablyonian Talmud, Book 4: Tracts Pesachim, Yomah and Hagiga*, tr. by
Michael L. Rodkinson, \[1918\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# CHAPTER VI.

A. A mourner must not read the Pentateuch, Prophets, and Hagiographa. He
is also not allowed to study Mishna, Talmud, Halakha, and Hagadah. He is
also not allowed to wash, to anoint, to wear shoes, or to have sexual
intercourse with his wife. He must cover his head and lower his couch.
Rabban Gamaliel washed himself when his wife died (see Mishna Berachoth,
166).

 <span id="fr_71"></span>[A1](#fn_71)A mourner must not study the Law,
because the Merciful

<span id="page_24">p. 24</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> One commanded
Ezekiel: "Sigh in silence" \[ibid.\]. But how is it with one who is
under the ban? Said R. Joseph: Come and hear: We have learned: "One who
is put under the ban may study for himself and also with others; he may
be hired and he may hire others. But the case is otherwise with one who
was excommunicated; the latter may, however, study for himself in order
not to discontinue his studies. He may also establish for himself a
small store in order to earn a living." Rabh said: "He may sell water in
the market of Araboth."

 <span id="fr_72"></span>[A2](#fn_72)A mourner must not wash his
clothes, as it is written \[II Sam. xiv. 2\]: "Then sent Joab to Thekoa,
and he fetched thence a wise woman, and said to her," etc., "and anoint
thyself not with oil; but be as a woman that hath these many days been
mourning for the dead." What is the case with those under the ban? Come
and hear: "Those who are under the ban are prohibited from cutting their
hair and washing their clothes." Infer herefrom. A mourner must have his
garment rent, because the Merciful One commanded the sons of Aaron
\[Lev. x. 6\]: "And your garments you shall *not* rend"; hence others
must. A mourner must lower his couch (place the mattress near or on the
floor), as Bar Qappara taught: "(God said) I had placed my image among
them, and for their sins I upset it (decreed death). Let them now lower
their beds." A mourner must not work, for it is written \[Amos, viii.
10\]: "And I will change your feasts into mourning," As on the feast it
is prohibited to do any work, so also is the case with the mourner. May
one who is under the ban work? Said R. Joseph: Come and hear (Taanith):
"When it was stated that it is prohibited to do work, it referred only
to the day-time but not to the evening; and the same is the case with
one who is under the ban." A mourner must not wash himself, as it is
written \[II Sam. xiv, 2\]: "And anoint thyself not with oil"; and
anointing includes also washing.

 <span id="fr_73"></span>[A3](#fn_73)And the Halakha prevails that a
mourner must not bathe his entire body in either warm or cold water for
seven days, but he may bathe his face, hands, and feet with cold water
but not with warm. To anoint himself ever so little is prohibited,
however, for a mourner; but he may do so for the purpose of removing the
dirt from a certain part of his body.

 <span id="fr_74"></span>[A4](#fn_74)A mourner must not wear shoes,
because Ezekiel was commanded

<span id="page_25">p. 25</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> \[Ezek. xxiv.
17\]; "And the shoes put on thy feet." Hence others must not. A mourner
must have no intercourse with his wife, as it is written \[II Sam. xii,
24\]: "And David *comforted* Bath Sheba, and he went in unto her, and
lay with her." Hence, before comforting it is prohibited.

On the first three days if a mourner is greeted he shall say: "I am a
mourner." However, from the fourth day onward he may answer
half-heartedly.

B. When the death occurs in the same city, he must not accompany the
others on the first two days; on the third he may go out and stand in
the line for the purpose of being consoled, but he must not console
others. All this is only when there are sufficient pall-bearers and
burial attendants; otherwise he must accompany the others even on the
first day.

The rabbis taught: "A mourner on the first Sabbath <span
id="fr_75"></span>[B1](#fn_75) must be confined to his house. On the
second he may leave the house, but he may not occupy his usual seat (in
the prayer-house); on the third he may occupy his usual seat, but he
must refrain from conversation; and on the fourth Sabbath he is as any
other person." R. Jehudah said: "As to the first Sabbath, it was not
necessary at all to state that he must be confined to the house, for it
is self-evident, because all come to comfort him on that day. But the
above order begins on the second Sabbath; viz., 'On the second he must
be confined to his house,' etc., and only on the fifth Sabbath he is as
any other person.

C. On the first and second days the mourner must not enter the Temple
mountain; on the third, however, he is allowed to enter, but must go
around to the left. The following must enter to the left: A mourner, one
who is under the ban, one who has a sick person in his house, and one
who has sustained a loss. "Why do you enter to the left?" (the people
standing about ask him). "Because I am a mourner!" And they rejoin: "The
One who rests in this house may console thee!" And if he says: "Because
I am in ban!" they rejoin: "The One who rests in this house may soften
their hearts and they will befriend thee." So says R. Meir. Said R. Jose
to him: "If so, you seem to insinuate that they have not judged him
rightly? But they rejoin thus: "The One who rests in this

<span id="page_26">p. 26</span>

house, will soften thy heart, that thou mayest listen to their advice,
and they will again befriend thee." To the one who had a sick person in
his home they rejoined: The One who rests in this house shall have mercy
upon him! and if the sick was his only son they should pray: "Shall have
mercy upon him immediately!"

D. It happened to a woman whose daughter fell ill, that she ascended the
Temple mount, turned to the left, and did not stir from there till she
was told that her child had recovered.

E. To one who has sustained a loss they say: "The One who rests in this
house will soften the heart of the finder, and he will return it to thee
immediately!" It happened to Elazar b. Hananiah b. Hezekiah b. Gorion
that he lost the Holy Scrolls, which cost him a hundred Manah. <span
id="fr_76"></span>[E1](#fn_76) He ascended the Temple mount, turned to
the left, and did not stir till he was told that they were found. And
the Temple was built by Solomon only for the purpose that everyone who
should have any trouble should come and pray, as it is written \[I
Kings, viii. 37\]: "If there be famine in the land, if there be
pestilence," etc. From this we know only for individuals; when do we
know that it is also for the public in general? It is written \[ibid.,
ibid. 38\]: "Of all thy people Israel." Lest one say it is also for the
one who prays for children, or for riches which may not be good for him,
therefore it is written \[ibid., ibid. 39\]: "As thou mayest know his
heart, for thou thyself alone knowest the heart of all the children of
men." Whatever is good for him, grant him. Whence do we know that they
should not persist in their rebellion? <span
id="fr_77"></span>[E2](#fn_77) It is written \[ibid., ibid. 38\]: "When
they shall be *conscious* every man of the plague of his own heart, and
he then spread forth his hands toward this house." All this concerns the
Israelites, but whence do we know that it concerns also the Gentiles?
Therefore it is written \[ibid., ibid. 41\]: "But also to the stranger,
who is not of thy people Israel, but cometh out of a far-off country,"
etc.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_69"></span>[23:E4](rab05.htm#fr_69) The Talmud explains
this passage to refer to the phylacteries.

<span id="fn_70"></span>[23:E5](rab05.htm#fr_70) See our "Phylacteries
Ritual," pp. 49 and 55.

<span id="fn_71"></span>[23:A1](rab06.htm#fr_71)

### CHAPTER VI.

A. *Gemara* from Moed Katan.

<span id="fn_72"></span>[24:A2](rab06.htm#fr_72) *Gemara* from Moed
Katan.

<span id="fn_73"></span>[24:A3](rab06.htm#fr_73) Transferred from
Taanith.

<span id="fn_74"></span>[24:A4](rab06.htm#fr_74) *Gemara* from Moed
Katan.

<span id="fn_75"></span>[25:B1](rab06.htm#fr_75) *B*. It means the first
week, etc., even when he goes to prayer-house in the week-days.

<span id="fn_76"></span>[26:E1](rab06.htm#fr_76) *E*. The coin Manah was
of the value of a hundred Zuz.

<span id="fn_77"></span>[26:E2](rab06.htm#fr_77) This is to be
understood thus: Whence do we know, if a rebel comes to pray that he
shall be successful in his rebellion, that he shall not be listened to?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VII](rab07)
