[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Talmud](../talmud)  [Index](index)  [Previous](rab00)  [Next](rab02) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../img/tn_talm.jpg)](index)  
*Bablyonian Talmud, Book 4: Tracts Pesachim, Yomah and Hagiga*, tr. by
Michael L. Rodkinson, \[1918\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_1">p. 1</span>

# EBEL RABBATHI (GREAT MOURNING), OR SEMA'HOTH (JOYS).

## CHAPTER I. <span id="fr_0"></span>[1](#fn_0)

A. One in he struggle of death is to be regarded as living in all
respects. He still binds the dependents to the law of Yibum, <span
id="fr_1"></span>[A2](#fn_1) and he exempts from the same. <span
id="fr_2"></span>[A3](#fn_2) He makes his dependents eat of
heave-offerings, <span id="fr_3"></span>[A4](#fn_3) and prevents them
from eating it. <span id="fr_4"></span>[A5](#fn_4) He inherits and makes
others inherit. <span id="fr_5"></span>[A6](#fn_5) When a limb or a
piece of flesh is removed from him, it is regarded as of a living
man. <span id="fr_6"></span>[A7](#fn_6) The blood of his sin-offering
and transgression may be sprinkled until he dies. <span
id="fr_7"></span>[A8](#fn_7)

<span id="page_2">p. 2</span>

B. His mouth must not be closed, nor his openings stopped. No metal
vessel or anything which chills <span id="fr_8"></span>[B1](#fn_8) must
be put on his navel till he dies, as it is written \[Eccl. xii. 6\]:
"While the silver cord is not yet torn loose."

C. He must not be moved, nor put on sand or salt, until he dies. <span
id="fr_9"></span>[C1](#fn_9)

D. His eyes must not be closed. Whoever touches or moves him is regarded
as a shedder of blood. <span id="fr_10"></span>[D1](#fn_10)

E. His relatives may not rend their clothes nor remove their shoes nor
lament over him, nor may the coffin be brought into his room, till he
dies.

F. His death must not be announced, nor his deeds proclaimed, until he
dies; R. Jehudah, however, said: If he was a wise man, the latter may be
done. <span id="fr_11"></span>[F1](#fn_11)

G. Greetings must not be exchanged when there is a death in a village,
but it may be done in a greater city. An infant cut or torn at birth, a
miscarriage, or born alive at the eighth month, or born dead at the
ninth--all the religious ceremonies do not apply to it.

H. The same is the case with an idolater or bondsman, nevertheless they
may exclaim over him: "Woe, lion! lion! Woe, hero!" <span
id="fr_12"></span>[H1](#fn_12) R. Jehudah said: (It may be said also:)
Woe, trusted man, who lived by his labor! They said to him: If so, what
is there left to say of the upright? He rejoined: If he was righteous
why should this not be said of him? <span id="fr_13"></span>[H2](#fn_13)
No consolation is needed (on the death of) male and female slaves.

I. It happened when the female slave of R. Eliezer died, his disciples
went to console him. When he saw them he went into

<span id="page_3">p. 3</span>

the yard, and they followed him; he returned to the house, and they
followed him. He then said to them: I thought that you might be scalded
with lukewarm water, now I see that you cannot be scalded even with
boiling. Have I not taught unto you: No consolation is needed (on the
death of) slaves?

J. When Tebbi the slave of Rabban Gamaliel died, the latter accepted
consolation. Said his disciples to him: Our master! hast thou not taught
unto us that no consolation is needed on slaves? He rejoined: My slave
Tebbi cannot be likened to other slaves; he was a righteous one.

K. He also permitted him to lay Tephilin. Said his disciples: Our
master! hast thou not taught unto us that slaves are exempt from
Tephilin? And he made the same rejoinder.

L. Slaves must not be distinguished as Father so and so, or Mother so
and so. <span id="fr_14"></span>[L1](#fn_14) The household of Rabban
Gamaliel, however, used the distinction of "Father Tebbi" and "Mother
Tebbitha" to the above-named and his wife. <span
id="fr_15"></span>[L2](#fn_15)

M. Ancestors must not be distinguished as the fathers of the nation (or
the tribes), except the three Patriarchs; nor mothers of the nation, but
the four mothers. <span id="fr_16"></span>[M1](#fn_16)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_0"></span>[1:1](rab01.htm#fr_0)

#### EDITOR'S COMMENTARY.

### CHAPTER I.

As the chapters are short, their contents will be found in the Synopsis.

<span id="fn_1"></span>[1:A2](rab01.htm#fr_1) *A*. If he is the only
brother of him who died childless, the widow cannot marry again until he
dies. And if it happened that she did marry in that time, the marriage
is considered null and void.

<span id="fn_2"></span>[1:A3](rab01.htm#fr_2) If he is the only son of
his father who died at that time, he is considered as a living child,
and to exempt the widow from Yibum or Halitzah.

<span id="fn_3"></span>[1:A4](rab01.htm#fr_3) His wife or slave if he is
a priest, also his mother if she was the daughter of a commoner.

<span id="fn_4"></span>[1:A5](rab01.htm#fr_4) If his wife was the
daughter of a priest, and he a commoner \[Lev. xxii. 12-14\].

<span id="fn_5"></span>[1:A6](rab01.htm#fr_5) For instance, if his
mother dies at that time and leaves property to him, it is considered
his; so that when he dies his relatives on his mother's side inherit
from him, but not those on his father's. See Nidah, 44*a*.

<span id="fn_6"></span>[1:A7](rab01.htm#fr_6) It is not a subject of
defilement, to make him who touches it or the tent which contains it
unclean, if it has not a certain quantity, as will be explained farther
on.

<span id="fn_7"></span>[1:A8](rab01.htm#fr_7) The blood of an offering
can be sprinkled only when the offerer is alive, and has a substitute in
the Temple.

<span id="fn_8"></span>[2:B1](rab01.htm#fr_8) *B*. See Sabbath, p. 353.

<span id="fn_9"></span>[2:C1](rab01.htm#fr_9) *C*. As was the custom at
that time.

<span id="fn_10"></span>[2:D1](rab01.htm#fr_10) *D*. For the reason, see
ibid., Mishna and Gemara thereon; here, however, this is said in the
name of R. Meir.

<span id="fn_11"></span>[2:F1](rab01.htm#fr_11) *F*. Not in his
presence, but people may say among themselves: "What a great loss we
have in the death of the man who did so and so." Some say even in his
presence, because he is used to hear his praises, and will not be
alarmed; but we do not find any basis for this assertion.

<span id="fn_12"></span>[2:H1](rab01.htm#fr_12) *H*. If they were worthy
of such a lamentation.

<span id="fn_13"></span>[2:H2](rab01.htm#fr_13) It seems to us that this
is said of a bondman only, but not of an idolater, as an idolater, even
if he was a Gentile, is called a sinner according to the Talmud, which
declares that idolatry was prohibited to Noah for all nations.

<span id="fn_14"></span>[3:L1](rab01.htm#fr_14) *L*. The word Abba,
which means "Father," was a title at that time, as "Reverend" is now, or
as the Catholics entitle their superiors of the Church and nunneries
"Father" and "Mother."

<span id="fn_15"></span>[3:L2](rab01.htm#fr_15) In Midrash Rabbah \[Lev.
chap. xix.\] is to be found Tebbitha, the female slave of Rabban
Gamaliel, presumably Tebbi's wife.

<span id="fn_16"></span>[3:M1](rab01.htm#fr_16) *M*. Sarah, Rebeccah,
Rachel, and Leah, the wives of our patriarchs. See Berachoth.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter II](rab02)
