[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Talmud](../talmud)  [Index](index)  [Previous](rab02)  [Next](rab04) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../img/tn_talm.jpg)](index)  
*Bablyonian Talmud, Book 4: Tracts Pesachim, Yomah and Hagiga*, tr. by
Michael L. Rodkinson, \[1918\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# CHAPTER III.

A. An infant a day old must be regarded by his parents as if he would be
a bridegroom; <span id="fr_28"></span>[A1](#fn_28) and not merely a day
old, but even if the head and the greater part of the body came out
alive. The expression of "a day" is used by the sages because it is more
usual.

B. An infant dying at birth is interred attended by one woman and two
men, and is carried in the hand. Abba Saul, however, said: By two women
and one man. The sages objected

<span id="page_7">p. 7</span>

to him that one woman is allowed to be with two men in a separate place,
but not *vice versa*. No line of consolers is formed, no mourners'
benediction is said, until it is thirty days old. From the age of thirty
days till a twelvemonth it may be attended by men and women, and is
carried in a case under the arm. From the age of one to three years it
is attended by the same, with the addition that it may be carried in a
case on the shoulder. R. Jehudah, however, said: If the father desires,
a coffin may be brought to the cemetery to bury it in, even if it is not
three years old.

C. At the age of three it is carried in a hearse. R. Aqiba, however,
said: If it is three years old, but looks like two, it is not carried in
a hearse; but a hearse may be used for those who look like three even if
they are less. Simeon the son of the brother of Azariah said: Anyone
borne in a hearse, his praises may be proclaimed. R. Meir in the name of
Elazar b. Azariah said: If when he was alive he used to play on the
street and was known to the people, then they are obliged to attend, but
not otherwise. R. Jehudah, however, said in the name of the same: Even
if he was known only to his neighbors.

D. Regarding lamentations, R. Meir in the name of R. Ishmael said: The
poor are lamented from the age of three, and the rich from the age of
five; R. Jehudah, however, said in the name of the same: The poor from
the age of five, and the rich from the age of six. R. Aqiba said: The
poor from the age of six, and the rich from the age of seven. <span
id="fr_29"></span>[D1](#fn_29) The poor are lamented the same as the
rich, the rich as the children of the sages, and they as the
princes. <span id="fr_30"></span>[D2](#fn_30)

E. A child that was able to act for himself may be lamented for his own
virtues; if he has none, for those of his parents; if his parents have
no virtues, for those of his other relatives. A bride may be lamented
either for the virtues of her father or father-in-law, as honors should
be exaggerated and not diminished. No honor is to be invented, but may
be added to the original.

F. In Jerusalem they used to say: "Prepare good things, they shall be
used *before* thy hearse." In Judah, however, they

<span id="page_8">p. 8</span>

used to say: "They shall be used *behind* thy hearse." Because in
Jerusalem the lamenters used to walk in front of the hearse, and
proclaimed only the virtues which he possessed; and the people who were
behind the hearse, even such as he did not. And in Judah the lamenters
were behind the hearse, and they spoke only of the virtues which he
possessed; and the people who were behind them did not repeat
anything. <span id="fr_31"></span>[F1](#fn_31) From the age of three to
thirty, one is lamented as if he were a bridegroom; <span
id="fr_32"></span>[F2](#fn_32) from thirty to forty he is lamented as a
brother; <span id="fr_33"></span>[F3](#fn_33) from forty to fifty as a
father. <span id="fr_34"></span>[F4](#fn_34)

G. R. Simeon b. Elazar said: From the age of thirty to forty, if he has
children, or if most others of his age have grandchildren, he is
lamented as a father; otherwise, as a brother. <span
id="fr_35"></span>[G1](#fn_35)

H. One dying under the age of fifty, it may yet be considered as if he
were under the punishment of Kareth (short life). When, however, he
reaches the age of fifty-two, this was the death of Samuel the Prophet;
at the age of sixty, this is the death mentioned in the Scriptures, as
it is written \[Job, v. 26\]: "Thou wilt go in a ripe age unto the
grave." At seventy it is considered old age, as it is written \[Psalms,
xc. 10\]: "The days of our years in this life are seventy years." At
eighty it is considered uncommon vigor, as it is written \[ibid.\]: "And
if by uncommon vigor they be eighty." "Above that age it is a life of
affliction, and so said Barzillai the Gileadite to David," \[II Samuel,
xix. 36\].

Death after only one day of sickness is a death of wrath; at two days,
it is a death of terror; at three days, a death of pest; at four and
five days, a hastened death; at six days, it is the death mentioned in
the Torah; at seven, it is a death of favor; <span
id="fr_36"></span>[H1](#fn_36) more than that, it is a death of
suffering.

<span id="page_9">p. 9</span>

The rabbis taught: <span id="fr_37"></span>[H2](#fn_37) One who dies
suddenly, he is said to have died an abrupt death; if the death was
preceded by one day's sickness, it is a hastened death. R. Hananiah,
however, said: The latter case is termed a plague-death, as it is
written \[Ezek. xxiv. 16\]: "Son of man, behold, I will take away from
thee the desire of thy eyes by a sudden death (plague)"; and it is
stated again \[ibid. 18\]: "And when I had spoken unto the people in the
morning, my wife died at evening." If it was preceded by a two days'
sickness, it is a hurried death; if by a three days', it is a reproach;
if by a four days', a rebuke; but if preceded by a five days' sickness,
it is an ordinary death. \[Said R. Hanin: From what biblical passage is
this adduced? From (Deut. xxxi. 14): "Hehn korvu yomechu lomuth"
(Behold, thy days approach that thou must die). "Hehn" means "one" in
Greek; "korvu" (in the plural) is two; "yomechu" (in the plural) is also
two; altogether five.\] Death at the age of fifty is Kareth (cut off);
at fifty-two, the age at which Samuel of Ramah died; at sixty, a death
by Heaven. <span id="fr_38"></span>[H3](#fn_38) \[Said Mar Zutra: Whence
is this adduced? From (Job, v. 26): "Thou wilt go in a ripe age, ‏בכלח‎
unto the grave," the numerical value of the letters of ‏בכלח‎ <span
id="fr_39"></span>[H4](#fn_39) being sixty.\] Seventy is called an old
age; eighty, an age of uncommon vigor, as it is written \[Psalms, xc.
10\]: "And if by uncommon vigor they be eighty." Rabba, however, said:
"From fifty to sixty it is Kareth; and the reason why this is not stated
in the Boraitha is because of the honor of Samuel." When R. Joseph
arrived at the age of sixty, he gave an entertainment to the rabbis, for
he said: "I have passed the age of Kareth." Said Abayi to him: "It is
true that the Master has passed the *age* of Kareth, but has then the
Master already passed the *day* of Kareth?" And he answered him: "Be
content for the present with half." R. Huna died suddenly, which caused
the rabbis great worry. A couple

<span id="page_10">p. 10</span>

of sages of Hadaeb taught them: "It was stated (regarding a sudden
death), only when the deceased has not reached the age of eighty; but if
he has, it is, on the contrary, considered a death caused by a kiss."
Rabha said: Longevity, fertility, and maintenance do not depend on
virtue but rather on fate, as is illustrated by the case of Rabba and R.
Hisda, both of whom were upright rabbis and both could bring down rain
by their prayers, and still R. Hisda died at the age of ninety-two and
Rabba at the age of forty. In the house of R. Hisda there were sixty
marriages, while in that of Rabba there were sixty deaths. In the house
of R. Hisda there was fine white bread in such an abundance that even
the dogs did not care for it, while in that of Rabba there was not
sufficient barley bread for human beings. Rabha further said: Three
things I prayed Heaven to grant me. Two were granted, the third one not:
the wisdom of R. Huna and the riches of R. Hisda were granted me, but
the modesty of Rabba bar R. Huna was denied to me. R. Seorim (Amram),
the brother of Rabha, was sitting at the bedside of Rabha when the
latter was in his last agonies. Said Rabha to him: "Let the Master tell
him (the angel of death) not to cause me any pain." And he answered him:
"Is, then, the Master himself not a friend of him?" Rabha rejoined: "As
my fate was already referred to him, he will not care for me any more."
R. Seorim then said to the sick: "I would like that the soul of the
Master should appear before me." When it was so, R. Seorim asked: "Had
the Master felt any pain?" (at the time of the separation of the soul
from the body), and he answered: "It was as if pinched with the lancet."
Rabha was sitting at the bedside of R. Na'hman when he was in his last
agonies, and the latter said: "Let the Master tell him (the angel of
death) not to pain me." And he said to him: "Is not the Master a
prominent person?" (to tell him so himself). And he answered him: "Who
is esteemed, or worthy, or who can contend (at such a moment)?" He then
said to the dying: "Let the Master's soul appear before me." When it was
so, he asked him: "Had you pain?" And he answered: "It was as easy as to
remove a hair from milk; and yet, if the Holy One, blessed be He, would
command me to return to the world I was in I would pray permission not
to do it, for the fear (of the angel of death) is too great." R. Elazar
was eating Trumah (heave-offering) when the death angel appeared before
him, and he said to him: "You see that I am now eating Trumah, is it not
sacred?" And the appropriate moment passed

<span id="page_11">p. 11</span>

over. To R. Shesheth he presented himself in the market, and he said to
him: "Do you wish to take me when I am in the market, as if I were an
animal? Come to my house." When he presented himself to R. Ashi in the
market, the latter said to him: "Extend my time thirty days, so as to
enable me to review my studies, as ye say: 'Happy is the person who
comes here possessed of his studies.'" On the thirtieth day he appeared
again, and R. Ashi said to him: "Why such punctuality?" And he answered
him: "You interfere with Bar Nathan, as no regency must interfere with
another, even as much as a hair (*i.e.*, R. Nathan cannot become the
head of the college so long as you are alive)." R. Hisda could not be
overpowered (by the angel of death), for he kept on studying all the
time, and the death angel climbed up and hid himself in a cedar in front
of Rabha's house. When the cedar broke down, R. Hisda discontinued his
study for a moment and he was overpowered at that moment. R. Hyya was
inaccessible (to the angel of death). One day he transformed himself
into a mendicant, and knocked on the door and asked for a slice of
bread. When R. Hyya handed him what he asked for, the angel said to him:
"Does not the Master have mercy with a poor man? Why does the Master
have no mercy with me? I am the angel of death." And as proof, he showed
him the fire-rod. R. Hyya then delivered up his soul to him.

I. Said R. Hanina b. Antigonos: If an old man has eaten forbidden
things, or intentionally violated the Sabbath, the punishment of which
is Kareth, <span id="fr_40"></span>[I1](#fn_40) and he is over the age
that short life should be applied to him, what will signify to us that
his death was that of Kareth? Therefore we must consider that he who
died after only three days of sickness, it is a death of Kareth; at four
days, it is a hastened death, etc. Said R. Jehudah: The pious of ancient
times have suffered of the sickness of the intestines two or three days
before their death, <span id="fr_41"></span>[I2](#fn_41) for the purpose
of cleaning their bodies of all food and drink, that they should enter
clean in the world to come, as it is written \[Proverbs, xxvii. 21\]:
"(As) the fining-pot is for silver, and the furnace for gold, so is a
man (proved) according to his praise."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_28"></span>[6:A1](rab03.htm#fr_28)

### CHAPTER III.

A. See Nidah, 44*b*, where it is explained that an infant even a day old
must be regarded as a bridegroom, if someone kills it, and the same
language is used here.

<span id="fn_29"></span>[7:D1](rab03.htm#fr_29) *D*. Rashi explains
this: Because the pain of the poor on the death of their children is
much greater than that of the rich, as their children are their only
joy, having no others.

<span id="fn_30"></span>[7:D2](rab03.htm#fr_30) It means that no
distinction must be made from the rank of the parents, but from the
corpse itself, as all Israel is alike in pedigree.

<span id="fn_31"></span>[8:F1](rab03.htm#fr_31) *F*. We have translated
according to the corrections of Elias Wilna, and as Rashi explains it in
Sabbath, 153*a*, old edition.

<span id="fn_32"></span>[8:F2](rab03.htm#fr_32) It means to say, as he
was in the best vigor of his life, the lamentations were as great as if
it had happened to a bridegroom standing under the canopy.

<span id="fn_33"></span>[8:F3](rab03.htm#fr_33) It means that he was an
active member of society, and his loss is felt by everybody.

<span id="fn_34"></span>[8:F4](rab03.htm#fr_34) Who was active so long
that he was considered as a father.

<span id="fn_35"></span>[8:G1](rab03.htm#fr_35) *G*. One of the
commentators supposes that at that time there were separate customs for
a father, brother, etc. It seems to us, however, that our interpretation
is right.

<span id="fn_36"></span>[8:H1](rab03.htm#fr_36) *H*. As six days are
enough for one to reconsider all he has done in his life and to make his
will, leaving the seventh for the purpose <span id="page_9">p. 9</span>
of taking his leave from his family. Where, however, six days of
sickness are mentioned in the Torah we cannot imagine, nor do we find it
in any of the commentators.

<span id="fn_37"></span>[9:H2](rab03.htm#fr_37) All paragraphs beginning
with, "The rabbis taught," or with italics, are transferred from Moed
Katan (see there note, p. 27). The paragraphs not so beginning will be
marked in the Commentary *Gemara*.

<span id="fn_38"></span>[9:H3](rab03.htm#fr_38) There are different
penalties for crimes: Kareth; death by Heaven; and death by the court,
which latter was in four different forms.

<span id="fn_39"></span>[9:H4](rab03.htm#fr_39) This Hebrew word
aggregates sixty; namely, the first letter (from right to left) counts
two, the second twenty, the third thirty, and the last eight.

<span id="fn_40"></span>[11:I1](rab03.htm#fr_40) *I*. Leviticus, vii.
25.

<span id="fn_41"></span>[11:I2](rab03.htm#fr_41) According to Elias
Wilna's corrections, and according to him, it is to be understood that
R. Jehudah opposes R. Hanina b. Antigonos, and maintains that even a
pious man may die in two or three days. The text, however, reads twenty
days.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IV](rab04)
