[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Talmud](../talmud)  [Index](index)  [Previous](rab09)  [Next](rab11) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../img/tn_talm.jpg)](index)  
*Bablyonian Talmud, Book 4: Tracts Pesachim, Yomah and Hagiga*, tr. by
Michael L. Rodkinson, \[1918\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_45">p. 45</span>

# CHAPTER X.

A. A mourner is exempt from reading Shema, from prayers, and all the
precepts commanded in the Torah, during the time that the corpse is in
his house. If one desires to be rigorous with himself, he shall not do
so, for the honor of the dead. When the time for reading Shema
approaches, all the people read; he, however, must be silent. When they
rise to pray, he shall acknowledge the justice, saying: "Lord of the
universe! I have sinned against Thee; a little only of my indebtedness
was called in, although I deserve much more. May it be Thy will to close
up our breaches <span id="fr_111"></span>[A1](#fn_111) and condole us!"
R. Simeon said: He also prays for the departed soul.

B. The mourner must eat with his neighbors. If he has none, he shall eat
in another room; if he has none, he shall make a partition of ten spans'
distance; if he has nothing to make a partition with, he shall turn his
face and eat. He must not lean <span id="fr_112"></span>[B1](#fn_112)
and eat, neither must he eat meat nor drink wine; he must not pronounce
the meal benediction, nor can he be included where three are required in
pronouncing it, neither may others pronounce it singly or in three for
him. All this is only on week-days; on the Sabbath, however, he may eat
and lean, and is allowed all the things mentioned above. As Rabban
Gamaliel said: On the Sabbath a mourner is not considered as a mourner
at all.

 <span id="fr_113"></span>[B2](#fn_113)R. Jehudah in the name of Rabh
said: "A mourner on the first day must not eat of his own bread, for the
Merciful One said \[Ezek. xxiv. 22\]: 'And the bread of other men shall
ye not eat.'" Rabba and R. Joseph (when they were in mourning) used to
exchange their meals between themselves. R. Jehudah in the name of Rabh
said again: "When a case of death occurs in a town, all the inhabitants
of the town are prohibited from doing any work." R. Hamnuna happened to
be in Drumtha,

<span id="page_46">p. 46</span>

and he heard the horn announcing the occurrence of a death. When he
subsequently noticed certain persons doing some work, he said to them:
"Let these persons be under the ban, for is there not a death-case in
town?" They answered him: "There are special societies for burying the
dead." And he thereupon said to them: "If such is the case, you are
absolved." R. Jehudah in the name of Rabh said again: "One who laments
excessively over a deceased may be sure to have to do so over another
deceased." There lived a woman in the neighborhood of R. Huna who bad
seven sons. Once one of them died, and she was weeping very much. R.
Huna sent her a message not to do so, but she paid no attention to it,
and R. Huna sent her the following message: "If you listen to what I
say, well and good; if not, you may as well prepare a shroud for another
of your sons." Subsequently another son died, and one by one all of them
died. He then said to her: "Now prepare a shroud for yourself." And she
also died.

C. The corpse must not be carried out when near the time of reading
Shema: it must be done an hour sooner or later. When the bearers of the
hearse go out, those in front of it, as their services are required, are
exempt from reading Shema, but are prohibited to wear their shoes; those
who are behind it, however, as their services are not required, are
obliged to read Shema and are allowed to wear their shoes. Both are
exempt from prayer and phylacteries. If on their return from the burial
there is yet time to begin and finish Shema before standing in line,
they first read, and stand in line afterward; otherwise they stand in
line first, and read and pray afterward. The inside row which sees the
mourner is exempt from it; the outside, however, is not. R. Jehudah
said: Even if there is but one row, if they stand for the sake of the
mourner, they are exempt; but if they stand for the sake of their own
honor, they are not. The people who come to console, if they see the
mourner they are exempt, otherwise they are not.

D. R. Simeon b. Elazar said: Rabban Gamaliel had a prepared sepulchre at
Jamnia, wherein they used to deposit the corpse and lock the door. After
that they came to stand in line around the mourner and consoled him;
through this they exempted the public from doing these duties, and
subsequently the corpse was brought up to Jerusalem.

The rabbis taught: At first in the houses of the rich (mourners), silver
and gold baskets and white glass were used:

<span id="page_47">p. 47</span>

and in those of the poor, willow baskets and colored glass were used,
and the poor felt ashamed; and it was enacted that only willow baskets
and colored glass should be used by all. At first they used to leave the
face of the deceased uncovered and used to carry him on an expensive
bier if he belonged to the rich class; but they used to cover his face
(for their faces grew dim from hunger) and carry him on a common bier if
he belonged to the poor class, and the poor people felt ashamed. So it
was enacted that all should be covered and be carried on a common bier.
At first they used to carry the rich in braided beds, and the poor in
common ones, and the poor felt ashamed, and it was enacted that all
should be borne in a common bed. At first spices used to be placed at
the side of those who died from bowel-troubles, and those who suffered
from that disease while still living used to feel. ashamed; and it was
enacted that spices should be placed at the side of every deceased
person out of respect to those who were suffering from that disease
while still living. At first the expenses accompanying the burial of a
deceased person were more burdensome and painful to his relatives than
the death itself, and they used to leave the corpse and run away, until
Rabban Gamaliel, the Nasi, directed that he be buried in flaxen
garments; and it became customary with the people to bury the dead in
flaxen garments. Said R. Papa: "And at present, even in a flaxen garment
of the value of one Zuz."

When the grave is closed, the mourner wraps up his head: <span
id="fr_114"></span>[D1](#fn_114) when ready for the line, he bares it
and exempts the others from doing it; if he steps outside the line, he
covers it again; when he comes home and others come to visit him, he
bares it again and exempts the others from doing it. <span
id="fr_115"></span>[D2](#fn_115)

E. When a death occurs in the family of a sage or a disciple of a sage,
they may come and discuss about the laws of mourning before him. If they
err, he may set them right half-heartedly; but himself must not propound
a question. He may speak himself, if he so desires, or he may permit
another to

<span id="page_48">p. 48</span>

speak for him. It happened that the son of R. Jehudah died, and the
latter permitted another to speak for him; so also did R. Jose the
Galilean when his son died. It happened to R. Aqiba that his son died,
and he sat and lectured all day; so also did Rabbi when his son died. If
it is necessary to discuss about something, they must begin concerning
the laws of mourning, and then branch off to other matters, and finish
again in regard to mourning. In Judah, on the Sabbath they greet the
mourner on entering and leaving the college, to show that no mourning
exists on the Sabbath.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_111"></span>[45:A1](rab10.htm#fr_111)

### CHAPTER X.

A. According to the translation of Leeser, and meaning that the doors
shall be closed for further bereavements.

<span id="fn_112"></span>[45:B1](rab10.htm#fr_112) *B*. According to the
custom in the Orient to eat leaning, and as we do at the *Seder*
ceremony on the first eve of Passover.

<span id="fn_113"></span>[45:B2](rab10.htm#fr_113) *Gemara* from Moed
Katan.

<span id="fn_114"></span>[47:D1](rab10.htm#fr_114) *D*. See above, [p.
27](rab07.htm#page_27).

<span id="fn_115"></span>[47:D2](rab10.htm#fr_115) The literal
translation of the text is to cover and to bare the head, and it may be
that the custom was already in vogue, to honor those present in baring
the head, as Paul required to bare the head in the house of prayer. We,
however, translated "wrap up," in accordance with the text, page cited,
and in accordance with other commentators.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XI](rab11)
