[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Talmud](../talmud)  [Index](index)  [Previous](rab10)  [Next](rab12) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../img/tn_talm.jpg)](index)  
*Bablyonian Talmud, Book 4: Tracts Pesachim, Yomah and Hagiga*, tr. by
Michael L. Rodkinson, \[1918\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# CHAPTER XI.

A. When two deaths occur in town, the one that died first is buried
first; and if the first has to be left over night, the second is buried.
And although it is said: Whoever leaves his dead over night transgresses
a negative commandment, <span id="fr_116"></span>[A1](#fn_116) still, if
it is done for the purpose of digging a grave, to prepare shrouds, or to
enable his outside relatives to attend to his funeral, it does not
matter. If a master and a pupil die on the same day, the master is
buried first; a pupil and a common man, the pupil is buried first. If
both are masters, or pupils, or common men, the one that died first is
buried first. A man and a woman, the woman is buried first, because the
latter is more liable to become disgusting.

B. These are the differences between a man and a woman:

<span id="page_49">p. 49</span>

A man may be left in the street to hold an oration over him, but not a
woman; the greatest man of the city may accompany a man, but he is not
to be troubled for a woman. R. Jehudah said: He may; the funeral meal is
taken over a man, but not over a woman. Said R. Jehudah: If she has
little children, the meal is taken with them.

C. They do not stand in line, nor is the mourning benediction said after
the burial of the first, but after the second; then they do all this,
and console, and exempt the public from doing so. Two mourners may not
be consoled together, unless they are in the very same position in the
community. The same is the case with two corpses to be carried in one
hearse: An accident happened in the city of Usha wherein a house tumbled
down and killed two male children and one female child, and R. Jehudah
ordered that all three should be carried together. The male children
were put on one side, and the female on the other, and they lamented
over them: "Woe, woe, bridegroom! Woe, bride!" Two funeral orations may
not be held in one town at the same time, unless there is enough
attendance for both. The same is the case with two brides, they must not
be married at the same time, unless there is enough attendance for both.
R. Simeon b. Elazar said: Even in this case it is not advisable to do
so, because there may be enmity. <span id="fr_117"></span>[C1](#fn_117)

D. The corpse must be set aside for a bride, <span
id="fr_118"></span>[D1](#fn_118) because the honor of the living
precedes that of the dead. A bride, however, must be set aside for a
king, for the honor of the king. King Agrippa, however, stepped aside
for the sake of a bride, and he was praised by the sages. His remark
was: "I have time to put on my crown every day, and she can put on her
crown only once in her lifetime."

E. The study of the Law (in the colleges) must not be interrupted for
the sake of a burial or a bride. Abba Saul, however, said: The
performance of meritorious deeds has preference over study, as was the
custom of R. Jehudah. Whenever he saw a funeral or a bridal party
coming, he glanced at the disciples, telling

<span id="page_50">p. 50</span>

them: The performance supersedes study. If one of the parents of a
married couple die, the woman must not paint nor adorn herself, and her
husband must not protest against it. Sweeping, washing glasses, and
making of the beds is not considered as labor to a mourner.

The rabbis taught: "The mourner's house may be swept and besprinkled,
and the dishes, glasses, flasks, and jugs may be rinsed, but no gum to
be put on coal, or spices, may be brought to the mourner's house." Must
it not? But has not Bar Qappara taught: "No benediction is pronounced
over gums (to be put on coal) or spices in the mourner's house"; from
which it is inferred that only the benediction is not pronounced, but
they may be brought there? These present no difficulty: the first
statement relates to the place where the mourner is sitting; the
statement of Bar Qappara, to the place where the consolers are sitting.

F. If one leaves five sons, who were at his table, but each one slept at
his own house, each one must lower his couch in his own house, otherwise
the performance is made only in the house which is used for sleeping.
If, however, there were five rooms, and all were used, it must be done
in all. One lodging in another's house, if he is intimate with his host,
he must lower his couch, otherwise he need not. One who is on a journey
and hears of the death of one of his near relatives, if he can lower his
couch without any difficulty, he may do so. One may turn over his couch
on two benches, or on four stones, no matter if there were even five
mattresses on top of it, and was four spans above the ground, provided
the legs of the couch are in the air. This, however, is after the
burial; but when the corpse is in the house, he may not sleep even on an
upturned couch.

G. The performance of lowering the couch is sometimes for six days, and
sometimes for five, four, and three days, no more, no less. How so? If
the death occurred on a week-day, it is for six days; if in the
afternoon of the eve of Sabbath, it is for five days; if a festival
succeeds this Sabbath, for four days; and if the two days of New Year
succeed this Sabbath, it is for three days. <span
id="fr_119"></span>[G1](#fn_119)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_116"></span>[48:A1](rab11.htm#fr_116)

### CHAPTER XI.

A. The negative commandment is Deut. xxi. 23, although it is spoken only
of one hanged by judicial decree. It seems to us, however, that it only
means that the corpse must be taken away from the house in which it
died, and not that it must be buried on the same day; and this we do for
two reasons: first, because it would be a contradiction to what is said
above that they deposited the corpse in a prepared grave, and also that
they examine the deed the first three days; and second, if it meant that
it must be buried the same day, the Talmud would say that he
transgresses a positive commandment also, as further on the verse says,
"But thou shalt surely bury him on that day." However, the expression
"negative commandment" is taken from the corrections of Elias Wilna, who
took it from the Talmud elsewhere.

<span id="fn_117"></span>[49:C1](rab11.htm#fr_117) *C*. Enmity may be
caused between certain persons and the bride, why they went to the other
wedding and not to hers. He, therefore, differs only in the case of a
marriage, but not in the case of a funeral.

<span id="fn_118"></span>[49:D1](rab11.htm#fr_118) *D*. It means when
they meet together at the gate or on a narrow street.

<span id="fn_119"></span>[50:G1](rab11.htm#fr_119) *G*. The Mishna was
taught before the existing calendar was made, as since then New Year
cannot fall on Sunday.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XII](rab12)
