<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Acts Index](act)  
  [Previous](act013)  [Next](act015) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*A Commentary, Critical, Practical, and Explanatory on the Old and New
Testaments*, by Robert Jamieson, A.R. Fausset and David Brown \[1882\]
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Acts Chapter 14](../../../bib/kjv/act014.htm#001)

[Acts 14:1](../../../bib/kjv/act014.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">act 14:1</span></span>

MEETING WITH SIMILAR SUCCESS AND SIMILAR OPPOSITION AT ICONIUM, PAUL AND
BARNABAS FLEE FOR THEIR LIVES TO LYSTRA AND DERBE, AND PREACH THERE.
([Act 14:1-7](../../../bib/kjv/act014.htm#001))

they went both together into the synagogue--Though Paul was now the
prominent speaker and actor, yet in everything Barnabas went along with
him.

a . . . multitude . . . of the Greeks believed--meaning probably the
religious proselytes, as opposed to "the Gentiles" mentioned [Act
14:2](../../../bib/kjv/act014.htm#002).

[Acts 14:3](../../../bib/kjv/act014.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">act 14:3</span></span>

Long time therefore abode they--because in spite of opposition they were
meeting with so much success.

speaking boldly in the Lord--rather, "in dependence on the Lord," that
is, on their glorified Head.

who gave testimony to the word of his grace--a notable definition of the
Gospel, whose whole burden is GRACE.

and granted--"granting," that is, who confirmed the Gospel by granting
miraculous attestation to it. (The "and" is wanting in the best
manuscripts).

[Acts 14:5](../../../bib/kjv/act014.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">act 14:5</span></span>

an assault made . . . to stone them--rather here, "an impetuous
movement" with a view to stoning them: for in [Co2
11:25](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#025), Paul says, "Once I was stoned,"
and that was at Lystra, as expressly related in [Act
14:19](../../../bib/kjv/act014.htm#019). (PALEY'S remarks--HorÃ&brvbr;
PaulinÃ&brvbr;--on this singular coincidence between the Epistle and the
history are very striking).

fled--(See [Mat 10:23](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#023)).

[Acts 14:6](../../../bib/kjv/act014.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">act 14:6</span></span>

unto Lystra and Derbe--the one some twenty miles to the south, the other
some sixty miles to the east of Iconium, somewhere near the bases of
what are called the Black Mountains and the roots of Mount Taurus; but
their exact position has not yet been discovered.

[Acts 14:8](../../../bib/kjv/act014.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">act 14:8</span></span>

AT LYSTRA PAUL HEALING A CRIPPLE, THE PEOPLE ARE SCARCE RESTRAINED FROM
SACRIFICING TO THEM AS GODS, BUT AFTERWARDS, THEIR MINDS BEING POISONED,
THEY STONE PAUL, LEAVING HIM FOR DEAD--WITHDRAWING TO DERBE, THEY PREACH
AND TEACH THERE. ([Act 14:8-21](../../../bib/kjv/act014.htm#008))

there sat there a certain man . . . a cripple from his mother's womb . .
. The same heard Paul speak--in the open air and ([Act
14:11](../../../bib/kjv/act014.htm#011)) to a crowd of people.

[Acts 14:9](../../../bib/kjv/act014.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">act 14:9</span></span>

who steadfastly beholding him--as he did Elymas the sorcerer when about
to work a miracle on him.

and perceiving that he had faith to be healed--Paul may have been led by
the sight of this cripple to dwell on the Saviour's miracles of healing,
and His present power; and perceiving from the eagerness with which the
patient drank in his words, that he was prepared to put his own case
into the Redeemer's hands, the Spirit of the glorified Physician came
all upon Paul, and "with a loud voice" he bade him "stand upright upon
his feet." The effect was instantaneous--he sprang to his feet "and
walked."

[Acts 14:11](../../../bib/kjv/act014.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">act 14:11</span></span>

in the speech of Lycaonia--whether a corruption of the Greek tongue,
which was well enough understood in this region, or the remains of some
older tongue, is not known.

The gods are come down to us in the likeness of men--the language of an
unsophisticated people. But "that which was a superstition in Lycaonia,
and for which the whole "creation" groaned, became a reality at
Bethlehem" \[WEBSTER and WILKINSON\].

[Acts 14:12](../../../bib/kjv/act014.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">act 14:12</span></span>

they called Barnabas, Jupiter--the father of the gods, from his
commanding mien (CHRYSOSTOM thinks).

and Paul, Mercurius--the god of eloquence and the messenger and
attendant of Jupiter, in the heathen mythology.

[Acts 14:13](../../../bib/kjv/act014.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">act 14:13</span></span>

the priest of Jupiter, which was before their city--that is, whose
temple stood

before their city, brought oxen and garlands--to crown the victims and
decorate, as on festive occasions, the porches.

[Acts 14:14](../../../bib/kjv/act014.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">act 14:14</span></span>

when . . . Barnabas and Paul heard--Barnabas is put first here,
apparently as having been styled the "Jupiter" of the company.

they rent their clothes and ran in--rather (according to the true
reading), "ran forth."

among the people, crying out . . . Sirs, why do ye these things?--This
was something more than that abhorrence of idolatry which took
possession of the Jews as a nation from the time of the Babylonish
captivity: it was that delicate sensibility to everything which affects
the honor of God which Christianity, giving us in God a reconciled
Father, alone can produce; making the Christian instinctively feel
himself to be wounded in all dishonor done to God, and filling him with
mingled horror and grief when such gross insults as this are offered to
him.

[Acts 14:15](../../../bib/kjv/act014.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">act 14:15</span></span>

We . . . are men of like passions, &c.--How unlike either imposture or
enthusiasm is this, and how high above all self-seeking do these men of
Christ show themselves to be!

unto the living God--This is the most glorious and distinctive of all
the names of God. It is the familiar phraseology of the Old Testament.
which, in such contrast with all that is to be found within the
literature of heathenism, is shown to be, with its sequel, the New
Testament, the one Book of the true religion.

who made heaven, and earth, and the sea, and all . . . therein--This
idea of creation, utterly unknown alike to rude and to cultivated
heathenism, would not only define what was meant by "the living God,"
but open up a new world to the more thoughtful part of the audience.

[Acts 14:16](../../../bib/kjv/act014.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">act 14:16</span></span>

Who in times past suffered all nations to walk in their own ways--that
is, without extending to them the revelation vouchsafed to the seed of
Abraham, and the grace attending it; compare [Act
17:30](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#030); [Co1
1:21](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#021). Yet not without guilt on their
part was this privation ([Rom 1:20](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#020),
&c.).

[Acts 14:17](../../../bib/kjv/act014.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">act 14:17</span></span>

Nevertheless he left not himself without witness--Though the heinousness
of idolatry is represented as so much less in the heathen, by how much
they were outside the pale of revealed religion, he takes care to add
that the heathen have divine "witness" enough to leave them "without
excuse."

he did good--scattering His beneficence everywhere and in a thousand
forms.

rain from heaven, and fruitful seasons--on which human subsistence and
all human enjoyment depend. In Lycaonia, where, as ancient writers
attest, rain is peculiarly scarce, this allusion would have all the
greater effect.

filling our hearts with food and gladness--a natural colloquialism, the
heart being gladdened by the food supplied to the body.

[Acts 14:18](../../../bib/kjv/act014.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">act 14:18</span></span>

with these sayings scarce restrained they the people that they had not
done sacrifice to them--In spite of this,and Peter's repudiation of all
such honor ([Act 10:26](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#026)), how soon
idolatrous tendencies began to show themselves in the Christian Church,
at length to be systematized and enjoined in the Church of Rome!

[Acts 14:19](../../../bib/kjv/act014.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">act 14:19</span></span>

came thither certain Jews from Antioch and Iconium--Furious zeal that
would travel so far to counteract the missionaries of the Cross!

persuaded the people--"the multitudes."

and having stoned Paul--(See on [Act
14:5](../../../bib/kjv/act014.htm#005)). Barnabas they seem to have let
alone; Paul, as the prominent actor and speaker, being the object of all
their rage. The words seem to imply that it was the Jews who did this;
and no doubt they took the lead ([Act
14:19](../../../bib/kjv/act014.htm#019)), but it was the act of the
instigated and fickle multitudes along with them.

drew him out of the city--By comparing this with [Act
7:58](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#058) it will be seen that the Jews
were the chief actors in this scene.

[Acts 14:20](../../../bib/kjv/act014.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">act 14:20</span></span>

as the disciples stood round about him--sorrowing. So his labors here
had not been in vain: "Disciples" had been gathered, who now rallied
around the bleeding body. And one appears to have been gained on this
occasion, of far more importance than all the rest--TIMOTHEUS. See on
[Act 16:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#001). (It could scarcely have
been at the subsequent visit, [Act
14:21](../../../bib/kjv/act014.htm#021), for the reason given in [Ti2
3:10-11](../../../bib/kjv/ti2003.htm#010); while at the third visit,
[Act 16:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#001), he was already a
Christian).

he rose up--It is possible that this recovery was natural; the
insensibility occasioned by such treatment as he had received sometimes
passing away of itself, and leaving the patient less hurt than appeared.
But certainly the impression naturally left on the mind by the words is
that the restoration was miraculous; and so the best interpreters
understand the words. This is confirmed by what follows.

came into the city--Noble intrepidity!

next day he departed with Barnabas to Derbe--a journey for which he
could hardly be fit if his recovery had been natural. (As to Derbe, see
on [Act 14:6](../../../bib/kjv/act014.htm#006)).

[Acts 14:21](../../../bib/kjv/act014.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">act 14:21</span></span>

and when they had preached . . . to that city and had taught
many--rather, "had made many disciples" (Margin); but probably without
suffering any persecution, as Derbe is not mentioned along with Antioch,
Iconium, and Lystra ([Ti2 3:11](../../../bib/kjv/ti2003.htm#011)).

PAUL AND BARNABAS RETRACE THEIR STEPS, RETURN TO ANTIOCH IN SYRIA, AND
THUS COMPLETE THEIR FIRST MISSIONARY JOURNEY. ([Act
14:21-28](../../../bib/kjv/act014.htm#021))

they returned . . . to Lystra, Iconium, and Antioch, confirming the
souls, &c.--At Derbe, Paul was not far from the well-known pass which
leads down from the central tableland to Cilicia and Tarsus. But his
thoughts did not center in an earthly home. He revisited the places
where he had been reviled and persecuted, but where he had left as sheep
in the desert the disciples whom his Master had enabled him to gather.
They needed building up and strengthening in the faith, comforting in
the midst of their inevitable suffering, and fencing round by permanent
institutions. Undaunted therefore by the dangers that awaited them, our
missionaries return to them, using words of encouragement which none but
the founders of a true religion would have ventured to address to their
earliest converts, that "we can only enter into the kingdom of God by
passing through much tribulation" \[HOWSON\].

[Acts 14:23](../../../bib/kjv/act014.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">act 14:23</span></span>

when they had ordained them elders--literally, "chosen by show of
hands." But as that would imply that this was done by the apostles' own
hands, many render the word, as in our version, "ordained." Still, as
there is no evidence in the New Testament that the word had then lost
its proper meaning, as this is beyond doubt its meaning in [Co2
8:19](../../../bib/kjv/co2008.htm#019), and as there is indisputable
evidence that the concurrence of the people was required in all
elections to sacred office in the earliest ages of the Church, it is
perhaps better to understand the words to mean, "when they had made a
choice of elders," that is, superintended such choice on the part of the
disciples.

and had prayed with fasting--literally, "fastings," thus setting them
solemnly apart. This last clause confirms our interpretation of the
former. For if "ordination" was by prayer and fasting (see [Act
13:3](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#003)), why should it be said they
first "ordained elders," and after that "prayed with fasting?" Whereas
if the first clause refer to the choice and the second to the
ordination, all is natural.

they commended--"committed"

them--that is, all these churches.

to the Lord--Jesus.

[Acts 14:25](../../../bib/kjv/act014.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">act 14:25</span></span>

when they had preached the word in Perga--now doing what, for some
reason, they had not done on their former visit, but probably with no
visible fruit.

they went down into Attaila--a seaport on the Gulf of Pamphylia, drawing
to itself the commerce of Egypt and Syria.

[Acts 14:26](../../../bib/kjv/act014.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">act 14:26</span></span>

sailed to Antioch, from whence they had been recommended--(See on [Act
13:3](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#003)).

[Acts 14:27](../../../bib/kjv/act014.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">act 14:27</span></span>

when they had gathered the church together, they rehearsed all that God
had done with them, &c.--As their call and mission had been solemn and
formal, in the presence of and by the Church as well as the Holy Ghost,
they dutifully, and no doubt with eager joy, convened the church and
gave their report of "all that God had done with them," that is, by and
for them.

and how--in particular.

he had opened the door of faith to the Gentiles--to such even as before
had not been proselytes. (See on [Act
11:21](../../../bib/kjv/act011.htm#021); and on the language, see [Co1
16:9](../../../bib/kjv/co1016.htm#009); [Co2
2:12](../../../bib/kjv/co2002.htm#012); [Col
4:3](../../../bib/kjv/col004.htm#003)). The ascribing directly to God of
such access to the Gentiles is to be noted.

[Acts 14:28](../../../bib/kjv/act014.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">act 14:28</span></span>

there they abode long time--"no little time." From the commencement of
the mission till they left Antioch to go up to attend the council at
Jerusalem, some four or five years elapsed; and as the missionary
journey would probably occupy less than two years, the rest of the time
would be the period of their stay at Antioch. (But see Chronological
Table.)

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Acts Chapter 15](act015)

</div>
