<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Acts Index](act.md)  
  [Previous](act015)  [Next](act017.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*A Commentary, Critical, Practical, and Explanatory on the Old and New
Testaments*, by Robert Jamieson, A.R. Fausset and David Brown \[1882\]
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Acts Chapter 16](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#001.md)

[Acts 16:1](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">act 16:1</span></span>

Then came he to Derbe and Lystra; and, behold, a certain disciple was
there--that is, at Lystra (not Derbe, as some conclude from [Act
20:4](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#004).md).

named Timotheus--(See on [Act 14:20](../../../bib/kjv/act014.htm#020).md).
As Paul styles him "his own son in the faith" ([Ti1
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#002).md), he must have been gained to
Christ at the apostle's first visit; and as Paul says he "had fully
known his persecutions which came on him at Lystra" ([Ti2
3:10-11](../../../bib/kjv/ti2003.htm#010).md), he may have been in that
group of disciples that surrounded the apparently lifeless body of the
apostle outside the walls of Lystra, and that at a time of life when the
mind receives its deepest impressions from the spectacle of innocent
suffering and undaunted courage \[HOWSON\]. His would be one of "the
souls of the disciples confirmed" at the apostle's second visit,
"exhorted to continue in the faith, and" warned "that we must through
much tribulation enter into the kingdom of God" ([Act
14:21-22](../../../bib/kjv/act014.htm#021).md).

the son of a certain . . . Jewess--"The unfeigned faith which dwelt
first in his grandmother Lois" descended to "his mother Eunice," and
thence it passed to this youth ([Ti2
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/ti2001.htm#005).md), who "from a child knew the Holy
Scriptures" ([Ti2 3:15](../../../bib/kjv/ti2003.htm#015).md). His gifts and
destination to the ministry of Christ had already been attested ([Ti1
1:18](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#018.md); [Ti1
4:14](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#014).md); and though some ten years after
this Paul speaks of him as still young ([Ti1
4:12](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#012).md), "he was already well reported
of by the brethren that were at Lystra and Iconium" ([Act
16:2](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#002).md), and consequently must have been
well known through all that quarter.

but his father was a Greek--Such mixed marriages, though little
practiced, and disliked by the stricter Jews in Palestine, must have
been very frequent among the Jews of the dispersion, especially in
remote districts, where but few of the scattered people were settled
\[HOWSON\].

[Acts 16:3](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">act 16:3</span></span>

Him would Paul have to go forth with him--This is in harmony with all we
read in the Acts and Epistles of Paul's affectionate and confiding
disposition. He had no relative ties which were of service to him in his
work; his companions were few and changing; and though Silas would
supply the place of Barnabas, it was no weakness to yearn for the
society of one who might become, what Mark once appeared to be, a son in
the Gospel \[HOWSON\]. And such he indeed proved to be, the most
attached and serviceable of his associates ([Phi
2:19-23](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#019.md); [Co1
4:17](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#017.md); [Co1
16:10-11](../../../bib/kjv/co1016.htm#010.md); [Th1
3:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/th1003.htm#001).md). His double connection, with
the Jews by the mother's side and the Gentiles by the father's, would
strike the apostle as a peculiar qualification for his own sphere of
labor. "So far as appears, Timothy is the first Gentile who after his
conversion comes before us as a regular missionary; for what is said of
Titus ([Gal 2:3](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#003).md) refers to a later
period" \[WIES\]. But before his departure, Paul

took and circumcised him--a rite which every Israelite might perform.

because of the Jews . . . for they knew all that his father was a
Greek--This seems to imply that the father was no proselyte. Against the
wishes of a Gentile father no Jewish mother was, as the Jews themselves
say, permitted to circumcise her son. We thus see why all the religion
of Timothy is traced to the female side of the family ([Ti2
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/ti2001.htm#005).md). "Had Timothy not been
circumcised, a storm would have gathered round the apostle in his
farther progress. His fixed line of procedure was to act on the cities
through the synagogues; and to preach the Gospel to the Jew first and
then to the Gentile. But such a course would have been impossible had
not Timothy been circumcised. He must necessarily have been repelled by
that people who endeavored once to murder Paul because they imagined he
had taken a Greek into the temple ([Act
21:29](../../../bib/kjv/act021.htm#029).md). The very intercourse of social
life would have been almost impossible, for it was still "an
abomination" for the circumcised to eat with the uncircumcised"
\[HOWSON\]. In refusing to compel Titus afterwards to be circumcised
([Gal 2:3](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#003).md) at the bidding of Judaizing
Christians, as necessary to salvation, he only vindicated "the truth of
the Gospel" ([Gal 2:5](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#005).md); in
circumcising Timothy, "to the Jews he became as a Jew that he might gain
the Jews." Probably Timothy's ordination took place now ([Ti1
4:14](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#014.md); [Ti2
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/ti2001.htm#006).md); and it was a service,
apparently, of much solemnity--"before many witnesses" ([Ti1
6:12](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#012).md).

[Acts 16:4](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">act 16:4</span></span>

And as they went through the cities, they delivered . . . the decrees .
. . And so were the churches established in the faith, and increased in
number daily--not the churches, but the number of their members, by this
visit and the written evidence laid before them of the triumph of
Christian liberty at Jerusalem, and the wise measures there taken to
preserve the unity of the Jewish and Gentile converts.

[Acts 16:6](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">act 16:6</span></span>

THEY BREAK NEW GROUND IN PHRYGIA AND GALATIA--THEIR COURSE IN THAT
DIRECTION BEING MYSTERIOUSLY HEDGED UP, THEY TRAVEL WESTWARD TO TROAS,
WHERE THEY ARE DIVINELY DIRECTED TO MACEDONIA--THE HISTORIAN HIMSELF
HERE JOINING THE MISSIONARY PARTY, THEY EMBARK FOR NEAPOLIS, AND REACH
PHILIPPI. ([Act 16:6-12](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#006).md)

Now when they had gone throughout Phrygia and the region of
Galatia--proceeding in a northwesterly direction. At this time must have
been formed "the churches of Galatia" ([Gal
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#002.md); [Co1
16:1](../../../bib/kjv/co1016.htm#001).md); founded, as we learn from the
Epistle to the Galatians (particularly [Gal
4:19](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#019).md), by the apostle Paul, and which
were already in existence when he was on his third missionary journey,
as we learn from [Act 18:23](../../../bib/kjv/act018.htm#023.md), where it
appears that he was no less successful in Phrygia. Why these
proceedings, so interesting as we should suppose, are not here detailed,
it is not easy to say; for the various reasons suggested are not very
satisfactory: for example, that the historian had not joined the party
\[ALFORD\]; that he was in haste to bring the apostle to Europe
\[OLSHAUSEN\]; that the main stream of the Church's development was from
Jerusalem to Rome, and the apostle's labors in Phrygia and Galatia lay
quite out of the line of that direction \[BAUMGARTEN\].

and were forbidden of the Holy Ghost--speaking by some prophet, see on
[Act 11:27](../../../bib/kjv/act011.htm#027.md).

to preach the word in Asia--not the great Asiatic continent, nor even
the rich peninsula now called Asia Minor, but only so much of its
western coast as constituted the Roman province of Asia.

[Acts 16:7](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">act 16:7</span></span>

After they were come to Mysia--where, as being part of Roman Asia, they
were forbidden to labor ([Act 16:8](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#008).md).

they assayed--or attempted

to go into--or, towards.

Bithynia--to the northeast.

but the Spirit--speaking as before.

suffered them not--probably because, (1) Europe was ripe for the labors
of this missionary party; and (2) other instruments were to be honored
to establish the Gospel in the eastern regions of Asia Minor, especially
the apostle Peter (see [Pe1 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#001).md). By
the end of the first century, as testified by PLINY the governor,
Bithynia was filled with Christians. "This is the first time that the
Holy Ghost is expressly spoken of as determining the course they were to
follow in their efforts to evangelize the nations, and it was evidently
designed to show that whereas hitherto the diffusion of the Gospel had
been carried on in unbroken course, connected by natural points of
junction, it was now to take a leap to which it could not be impelled
but by an immediate and independent operation of the Spirit; and though
primarily, this intimation of the Spirit was only negative, and referred
but to the immediate neighborhood, we may certainly conclude that Paul
took it for a sign that a new epoch was now to commence in his apostolic
labors" \[BAUMGARTEN\].

[Acts 16:8](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">act 16:8</span></span>

came down to Troas--a city on the northeast coast of the Ã†gean Sea, the
boundary of Asia Minor on the west; the region of which was the scene of
the great Trojan war.

[Acts 16:9](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">act 16:9</span></span>

a vision appeared to Paul in the night--while awake, for it is not
called a dream.

There stood a man of Macedonia, and prayed him, saying, Come over into
Macedonia, and help us--Stretching his eye across the Ã†gean Sea, from
Troas on the northeast, to the Macedonian hills, visible on the
northwest, the apostle could hardly fail to think this the destined
scene of his future labors; and, if he retired to rest with this
thought, he would be thoroughly prepared for the remarkable intimation
of the divine will now to be given him. This visional Macedonian
discovered himself by what he said. But it was a cry not of conscious
desire for the Gospel, but of deep need of it and unconscious
preparedness to receive it, not only in that region, but, we may well
say, throughout all that western empire which Macedonia might be said to
represent. It was a virtual confession "that the highest splendor of
heathendom, which we must recognize in the arts of Greece and in the
polity and imperial power of Rome, had arrived at the end of all its
resources. God had left the Gentile peoples to walk in their own ways
([Act 14:2](../../../bib/kjv/act014.htm#002).md). They had sought to gain
salvation for themselves; but those who had carried it farthest along
the paths of natural development were now pervaded by the feeling that
all had indeed been vanity. This feeling is the simple, pure result of
all the history of heathendom. And Israel, going along the way which God
had marked out for him, had likewise arrived at his end. At last he is
in a condition to realize his original vocation, by becoming the guide
who is to lead the Gentiles unto God, the only Author and Creator of
man's redemption; and Paul is in truth the very person in whom this
vocation of Israel is now a present divine reality, and to whom, by this
nocturnal apparition of the Macedonian, the preparedness of the heathen
world to receive the ministry of Israel towards the Gentiles is
confirmed" \[BAUMGARTEN\]. This voice cries from heathendom still to the
Christian Church, and never does the Church undertake the work of
missions, nor any missionary go forth from it, in the right spirit, save
in obedience to this cry.

[Acts 16:10](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">act 16:10</span></span>

And after he had seen the vision, immediately we endeavoured to go into
Macedonia--The "we," here first introduced, is a modest intimation that
the historian himself had now joined the missionary party. (The modern
objections to this are quite frivolous). Whether Paul's broken health
had anything to do with this arrangement for having "the beloved
physician" with him \[WIES\], can never be known with certainty; but
that he would deem himself honored in taking care of so precious a life,
there can be no doubt.

[Acts 16:11](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">act 16:11</span></span>

Therefore loosing from Troas, we came--literally, "ran."

with a straight course--that is, "ran before the wind."

to Samothracia--a lofty island on the Thracian coast, north from Troas,
with an inclination westward. The wind must have set in strong from the
south or south-southeast to bring them there so soon, as the current is
strong in the opposite direction, and they afterwards took five days to
what they now did in two ([Act 20:6](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#006).md)
\[HOWSON\].

next day to Neapolis--on the Macedonian, or rather Thracian, coast,
about sixty-five miles from Samothracia, and ten from Philippi, of which
it is the harbor.

[Acts 16:12](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">act 16:12</span></span>

Philippi . . . the chief--rather, perhaps, "the first"

city of that part of Macedonia--The meaning appears to be--the first
city one comes to, proceeding from Neapolis. The sense given in our
version hardly consists with fact.

a colony--that is, possessing all the privileges of Roman citizenship,
and, as such, both exempted from scourging and (in ordinary cases) from
arrest, and entitled to appeal from the local magistrate to the emperor.
Though the Pisidian Antioch and Troas were also "colonies," the fact is
mentioned in this history of Philippi only on account of the frequent
references to Roman privileges and duties in the sequel of the chapter.

AT PHILIPPI, LYDIA IS GAINED AND WITH HER HOUSEHOLD BAPTIZED--AN EVIL
SPIRIT IS EXPELLED, PAUL AND SILAS ARE SCOURGED, IMPRISONED, AND
MANACLED, BUT MIRACULOUSLY SET FREE, AND THE JAILER WITH ALL HIS
HOUSEHOLD CONVERTED AND BAPTIZED. ([Act
16:12-34](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#012).md)

we were in that city abiding certain days--waiting till the sabbath came
round: their whole stay must have extended to some weeks. As their rule
was to begin with the Jews and proselytes, they did nothing till the
time when they knew that they would convene for worship.

[Acts 16:13](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">act 16:13</span></span>

on the sabbath day--the first after their arrival, as the words imply.

we went out of the city--rather, as the true reading is, "outside of the
(city) gate."

by a river-side--one of the small streams which gave name to the place
ere the city was founded by Philip of Macedon.

where prayer was wont to be made--or a prayer-meeting held. It is plain
there was no synagogue at Philippi (contrast [Act
17:1](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#001).md), the number of the Jews being
small. The meeting appears to have consisted wholly of women, and these
not all Jewish. The neighborhood of streams was preferred, on account of
the ceremonial washings used on such occasions.

we sat down and spake unto the women, &c.--a humble congregation, and
simple manner of preaching. But here and thus were gathered the
first-fruits of Europe unto Christ, and they were of the female sex, of
whose accession and services honorable mention will again and again be
made.

[Acts 16:14](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">act 16:14</span></span>

Lydia--a common name among the Greeks and Romans.

a seller of purple, of the city of Thyatira--on the confines of Lydia
and Phrygia. The Lydians, particularly the inhabitants of Thyatira, were
celebrated for their dyeing, in which they inherited the reputation of
the Tyrians. Inscriptions to this effect, yet remaining, confirm the
accuracy of our historian. This woman appears to have been in good
circumstances, having an establishment at Philippi large enough to
accommodate the missionary party ([Act
16:15](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#015).md), and receiving her goods from
her native town.

which worshipped God--that is, was a proselyte to the Jewish faith, and
as such present at this meeting.

whose heart the Lord opened--that is, the Lord Jesus (see [Act
16:15](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#015.md); and compare [Luk
24:45](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#045.md); [Mat
11:27](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#027).md).

that she attended to the things . . . spoken by Paul--"showing that the
inclination of the heart towards the truth originates not in the will of
man. The first disposition to turn to the Gospel is a work of grace"
\[OLSHAUSEN\]. Observe here the place assigned to "giving attention" or
"heed" to the truth--that species of attention which consists in having
the whole mind engrossed with it, and in apprehending and drinking it
in, in its vital and saving character.

[Acts 16:15](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">act 16:15</span></span>

And when . . . baptized . . . and her household--probably without much
delay. The mention of baptism here for the first time in connection with
the labors of Paul, while it was doubtless performed on all his former
converts, indicates a special importance in this first European baptism.
Here also is the first mention of a Christian household. Whether it
included children, also in that case baptized, is not explicitly stated;
but the presumption, as in other cases of household baptism, is that it
did. Yet the question of infant baptism must be determined on other
grounds; and such incidental allusions form only part of the historical
materials for ascertaining the practice of the Church.

she besought us, saying, If ye have judged me to be faithful to the
Lord--the Lord Jesus; that is, "By the faith on Him which ye have
recognized in me by baptism." There is a beautiful modesty in the
expression.

And she constrained us--The word seems to imply that they were
reluctant, but were overborne.

[Acts 16:16](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">act 16:16</span></span>

as we went to prayer--The words imply that it was on their way to the
usual place of public prayer, by the river-side, that this took place;
therefore not on the same day with what had just occurred.

a . . . damsel--a female servant, and in this case a slave ([Act
16:19](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#019).md).

possessed of a spirit of divination--or, of Python, that is, a spirit
supposed to be inspired by the Pythian Apollo, or of the same nature.
The reality of this demoniacal possession is as undeniable as that of
any in the Gospel history.

[Acts 16:17](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">act 16:17</span></span>

These men are servants of the most high God, &c.--Glorious testimony!
But see on [Luk 4:41](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#041.md).

this did she many days--that is, on many successive occasions when on
their way to their usual place of meeting, or when engaged in religious
services.

[Acts 16:18](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">act 16:18</span></span>

Paul being grieved--for the poor victim; grieved to see such power
possessed by the enemy of man's salvation, and grieved to observe the
malignant design with which this high testimony was borne to Christ.

[Acts 16:19](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#019.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">act 16:19</span></span>

when her masters saw that the hope of their gains was gone, they caught
Paul and Silas--as the leading persons.

and drew them into the market-place--or Forum, where the courts were.

to the magistrates, saying, &c.--We have here a full and independent
confirmation of the reality of this supernatural cure, since on any
other supposition such conduct would be senseless.

[Acts 16:20](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#020.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">act 16:20</span></span>

These men, being Jews--objects of dislike, contempt, and suspicion by
the Romans, and at this time of more than usual prejudice.

do exceedingly trouble our city--See similar charges, [Act
17:6](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#006.md); [Act
24:5](../../../bib/kjv/act024.htm#005.md); [Kg1
18:17](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#017.md). There is some color of truth in
all such accusations, in so far as the Gospel, and generally the fear of
God, as a reigning principle of human action, is in a godless world a
thoroughly revolutionary principle . . . How far external commotion and
change will in any case attend the triumph of this principle depends on
the breadth and obstinacy of the resistance it meets with.

[Acts 16:21](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#021.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">act 16:21</span></span>

And teach customs, which are not lawful for us to receive, neither to
observe, being Romans--Here also there was a measure of truth; as the
introduction of new gods was forbidden by the laws, and this might be
thought to apply to any change of religion. But the whole charge was
pure hypocrisy; for as these men would have let the missionaries preach
what religion they pleased if they had not dried up the source of their
gains, so they conceal the real cause of their rage under color of a
zeal for religion, and law, and good order: so [Act
17:6-7](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#006.md); [Act
19:25](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#025.md), [Act
19:27](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#027.md).

[Acts 16:22](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#022.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">act 16:22</span></span>

the multitude rose up together against them--so [Act
19:28](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#028.md), [Act
19:34](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#034.md); [Act
21:30](../../../bib/kjv/act021.htm#030.md); [Luk
23:18](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#018.md).

the magistrates rent off their--Paul's and Silas'

clothes--that is, ordered the lictors, or rod-bearers, to tear them off,
so as to expose their naked bodies (see on [Act
16:37](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#037).md). The word expresses the
roughness with which this was done to prisoners preparatory to whipping.

and commanded to beat them--without any trial ([Act
16:37](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#037).md), to appease the popular rage.
Thrice, it seems, Paul endured this indignity ([Co2
11:25](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#025).md).

[Acts 16:23](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#023.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">act 16:23</span></span>

when they had laid many stripes upon them--the bleeding wounds from
which they were not washed till it was done by the converted jailer
([Act 16:33](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#033).md).

charged the jailer . . . who . . . thrust them into the inner
prison--"pestilential cells, damp and cold, from which the light was
excluded, and where the chains rusted on the prisoners. One such place
may be seen to this day on the slope of the Capitol at Rome" \[HOWSON\].

[Acts 16:24](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#024.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">act 16:24</span></span>

made their feet fast in the stocks--an instrument of torture as well as
confinement, made of wood bound with iron, with holes for the feet,
which were stretched more or less apart according to the severity
intended. (ORIGEN at a later period, besides having his neck thrust into
an iron collar, lay extended for many days with his feet apart in the
rack). Though jailers were proverbially unfeeling, the manner in which
the order was given in this case would seem to warrant all that was
done.

[Acts 16:25](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#025.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">act 16:25</span></span>

And at midnight Paul and Silas prayed and sang praises--literally,
"praying, were singing praises"; that is, while engaged in pouring out
their hearts in prayer, had broken forth into singing, and were hymning
loud their joy. As the word here employed is that used to denote the
Paschal hymn sung by our Lord and His disciples after their last
Passover ([Mat 26:30](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#030).md), and which we
know to have consisted of Psa. 113:1-118:29, which was chanted at that
festival, it is probable that it was portions of the Psalms, so rich in
such matter, which our joyous sufferers chanted forth; nor could any be
more seasonable and inspiring to them than those very six Psalms, which
every devout Jew would no doubt know by heart. "He giveth songs in the
night" ([Job 35:10](../../../bib/kjv/job035.htm#010).md). Though their
bodies were still bleeding and tortured in the stocks, their spirits,
under "the expulsive power of a new affection," rose above suffering,
and made the prison wails resound with their song. "In these midnight
hymns, by the imprisoned witnesses for Jesus Christ, the whole might of
Roman injustice and violence against the Church is not only set at
naught, but converted into a foil to set forth more completely the
majesty and spiritual power of the Church, which as yet the world knew
nothing of. And if the sufferings of these two witnesses of Christ are
the beginning and the type of numberless martyrdoms which were to flow
upon the Church from the same source, in like manner the unparalleled
triumph of the Spirit over suffering was the beginning and the pledge of
a spiritual power which we afterwards see shining forth so triumphantly
and irresistibly in the many martyrs of Christ who were given up as a
prey to the same imperial might of Rome" \[NEANDER in BAUMGARTEN\].

and the prisoners heard them--literally, "were listening to them," that
is, when the astounding events immediately to be related took place; not
asleep, but wide awake and rapt (no doubt) in wonder at what they heard.

[Acts 16:26](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#026.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">act 16:26</span></span>

And suddenly there was a great earthquake--in answer, doubtless, to the
prayers and expectations of the sufferers that, for the truth's sake and
the honor of their Lord, some interposition would take place.

every one's bands--that is, the bands of all the prisoners.

were loosed--not by the earthquake, of course, but by a miraculous
energy accompanying it. By this and the joyous strains which they had
heard from the sufferers, not to speak of the change wrought on the
jailer, these prisoners could hardly fail to have their hearts in some
measure opened to the truth; and this part of the narrative seems the
result of information afterwards communicated by one or more of these
men.

[Acts 16:27](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#027.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">act 16:27</span></span>

the keeper . . . awaking . . . drew . . . his sword, and would have
killed himself, &c.--knowing that his life was forfeited in that case
([Act 12:19](../../../bib/kjv/act012.htm#019.md); and compare [Act
27:42](../../../bib/kjv/act027.htm#042).md).

[Acts 16:28](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#028.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">act 16:28</span></span>

But Paul cried with a loud voice--the better to arrest the deed.

Do thyself no harm, for we are all here--What divine calmness and
self-possession! No elation at their miraculous liberation, or haste to
take advantage of it; but one thought filled the apostle's mind at that
moment--anxiety to save a fellow creature from sending himself into
eternity, ignorant of the only way of life; and his presence of mind
appears in the assurance which he so promptly gives to the desperate
man, that his prisoners had none of them fled as he feared. But how, it
has been asked by skeptical critics, could Paul in his inner prison know
what the jailer was about to do? In many conceivable ways, without
supposing any supernatural communication. Thus, if the jailer slept at
the door of "the inner prison," which suddenly flew open when the
earthquake shook the foundations of the building; if, too, as may easily
be conceived, he uttered some cry of despair on seeing the doors open;
and, if the clash of the steel, as the affrighted man drew it hastily
from the scabbard, was audible but a few yards off, in the dead midnight
stillness, increased by the awe inspired in the prisoners by the
miracle--what difficulty is there in supposing that Paul, perceiving in
a moment how matters stood, after crying out, stepped hastily to him,
uttering the noble entreaty here recorded? Not less flat is the
question, why the other liberated prisoners did not make their
escape:--as if there were the smallest difficulty in understanding how,
under the resistless conviction that there must be something
supernatural in their instantaneous liberation without human hand, such
wonder and awe should possess them as to take away for the time not only
all desire of escape, but even all thought on the subject.

[Acts 16:29](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#029.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">act 16:29</span></span>

Then he called for a light, and sprang in . . . and fell down before
Paul and Silas, and brought them out and said--How graphic this rapid
succession of minute details, evidently from the parties themselves, the
prisoners and the jailer, who would talk over every feature of the scene
once and again, in which the hand of the Lord had been so marvellously
seen.

[Acts 16:30](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#030.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">act 16:30</span></span>

Sirs, what must I do to be saved?--If this question should seem in
advance of any light which the jailer could be supposed to possess, let
it be considered (1) that the "trembling" which came over him could not
have arisen from any fear for the safety of his prisoners, for they were
all there; and if it had, he would rather have proceeded to secure them
again than leave them, to fall down before Paul and Silas. For the same
reason it is plain that his trembling had nothing to do with any account
he would have to render to the magistrates. Only one explanation of it
can be given--that he had become all at once alarmed about his spiritual
state, and that though, a moment before, he was ready to plunge into
eternity with the guilt of self-murder on his head, without a thought of
the sin he was committing and its awful consequences, his unfitness to
appear before God, and his need of salvation, now flashed full upon his
soul and drew from the depths of his spirit the cry here recorded. If
still it be asked how it could take such definite shape, let it be
considered (2) that the jailer could hardly be ignorant of the nature of
the charges on which these men had been imprisoned, seeing they had been
publicly whipped by order of the magistrates, which would fill the whole
town with the facts of the case, including that strange cry of the
demoniac from day to-day--"These men are the servants of the most high
God, which show unto us the way of salvation"--words proclaiming not
only the divine commission of the preachers, but the news of salvation
they were sent to tell, the miraculous expulsion of the demon and the
rage of her masters. All this, indeed, would go for nothing with such a
man, until roused by the mighty earthquake which made the building to
rock; then despair seizing him at the sight of the open doors, the sword
of self-destruction was suddenly arrested by words from one of those
prisoners such as he would never imagine could be spoken in their
circumstances--words evidencing something divine about them. Then would
flash across him the light of a new discovery; "That was a true cry
which the Pythoness uttered, 'These men are the servants of the most
high God, which show unto us the way of salvation! That I now must know,
and from them, as divinely sent to me, must I learn that way of
salvation!'" Substantially, this is the cry of every awakened sinner,
though the degree of light and the depths of anxiety it expresses will
be different in each case.

[Acts 16:31](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#031.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">act 16:31</span></span>

Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou shalt be saved--The brevity,
simplicity, and directness of this reply are, in the circumstances,
singularly beautiful. Enough at that moment to have his faith directed
simply to the Saviour, with the assurance that this would bring to his
soul the needed and sought salvation--the how being a matter for after
teaching.

thou shalt be saved, and thy house--(See on [Luk
19:10](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#010).md).

[Acts 16:32](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#032.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">act 16:32</span></span>

And they spake unto him the word of the Lord--unfolding now, doubtless,
more fully what "the Lord Jesus Christ" was to whom they had pointed his
faith, and what the "salvation" was which this would bring him.

and to all that were in his house--who from their own dwelling (under
the same roof no doubt with the prison) had crowded round the apostles,
aroused first by the earthquake. (From their addressing the Gospel
message "to all that were in the house" it is not necessary to infer
that it contained no children, but merely that as it contained adults
besides the jailer himself, so to all of these, as alone of course fit
to be addressed, they preached the word).

[Acts 16:33](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#033.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">act 16:33</span></span>

And he took them--the word implies change of place.

the same hour of the night, and washed their stripes--in the well or
fountain which was within or near the precincts of the prison
\[HOWSON\]. The mention of "the same hour of the night" seems to imply
that they had to go forth into the open air, which, unseasonable as the
hour was, they did. These bleeding wounds had never been thought of by
the indifferent jailer. But now, when his whole heart was opened to his
spiritual benefactors, he cannot rest until he has done all in his power
for their bodily relief.

and was baptized, he and all his, straightway--probably at the same
fountain, since it took place "straightway"; the one washing on his part
being immediately succeeded by the other on theirs.

[Acts 16:34](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#034.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">act 16:34</span></span>

And when he had brought them into his house, he set meat before them and
rejoiced, believing--that is, as the expression implies, "rejoiced
because he had believed."

in God--as a converted heathen, for the faith of a Jew would not be so
expressed \[ALFORD\].

with all his house--the wondrous change on himself and the whole house
filling his soul with joy. "This is the second house which, in the Roman
city of Philippi, has been consecrated by faith in Jesus, and of which
the inmates, by hospitable entertainment of the Gospel witnesses, have
been sanctified to a new beginning of domestic life, pleasing and
acceptable to God. The first result came to pass in consequence simply
of the preaching of the Gospel; the second was the fruit of a testimony
sealed and ennobled by suffering" \[BAUMGARTEN\].

[Acts 16:35](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#035.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_035">act 16:35</span></span>

when it was day, the magistrates sent the sergeants, saying, Let those
men go--The cause of this change can only be conjectured. When the
commotion ceased, reflection would soon convince them of the injustice
they had done, even supposing the prisoners had been entitled to no
special privileges; and if rumor reached them that the prisoners were
somehow under supernatural protection, they might be the more awed into
a desire to get rid of them.

[Acts 16:36](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#036.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_036">act 16:36</span></span>

the keeper--overjoyed to have such orders to execute.

told this . . . to Paul . . . now therefore . . . go in peace--Very
differently did Paul receive such orders.

[Acts 16:37](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#037.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_037">act 16:37</span></span>

Paul said unto them--to the sergeants who had entered the prison along
with the jailer, that they might be able to report that the men had
departed.

They have beaten us openly--The publicity of the injury done them,
exposing their naked and bleeding bodies to the rude populace, was
evidently the most stinging feature of it to the apostle's delicate
feeling, and to this accordingly he alludes to the Thessalonians,
probably a year after: "Even after we had suffered before, and were
shamefully entreated (or 'insulted') as ye know at Philippi" ([Th1
2:2](../../../bib/kjv/th1002.htm#002).md).

uncondemned--unconvicted on trial.

being Romans--(See on [Act 22:28](../../../bib/kjv/act022.htm#028).md).

and cast us into prison--both illegal. Of Silas' citizenship, if meant
to be included, we know nothing.

and now do they thrust us out--hurry us out--see [Mar
9:38](../../../bib/kjv/mar009.htm#038.md), Greek.

privily?--Mark the intended contrast between the public insult they had
inflicted and the private way in which they ordered them to be off.

nay verily--no, indeed.

but let them come themselves and fetch us out--by open and formal act,
equivalent to a public declaration of their innocence.

[Acts 16:38](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#038.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_038">act 16:38</span></span>

they feared when they heard they were Romans--their authority being thus
imperilled; for they were liable to an action for what they had done.

[Acts 16:39](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#039.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_039">act 16:39</span></span>

And they came--in person.

and besought them--not to complain of them. What a contrast this
suppliant attitude of the preachers of Philippi to the tyrannical air
with which they had the day before treated the preachers! (See [Isa
60:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa060.htm#014.md); [Rev
3:9](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#009).md).

brought them out--conducted them forth from the prison into the street,
as insisted on.

and desired--"requested."

them to depart out of the city--perhaps fearing again to excite the
populace.

[Acts 16:40](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#040.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_040">act 16:40</span></span>

And they went out of the prison--Having attained their object--to
vindicate their civil rights, by the infraction of which in this case
the Gospel in their persons had been illegally affronted--they had no
mind to carry the matter farther. Their citizenship was valuable to them
only as a shield against unnecessary injuries to their Master's cause.
What a beautiful mixture of dignity and meekness is this! Nothing
secular, which may be turned to the account of the Gospel, is morbidly
disregarded; in any other view, nothing of this nature is set store
by:--an example this for all ages.

and entered into the house of Lydia--as if to show by this leisurely
proceeding that they had not been made to leave, but were at full
liberty to consult their own convenience.

and when they had seen the brethren--not only her family and the
jailer's, but probably others now gained to the Gospel.

they comforted them--rather, perhaps, "exhorted" them, which would
include comfort. "This assembly of believers in the house of Lydia was
the first church that had been founded in Europe" \[BAUMGARTEN\].

and departed--but not all; for two of the company remained behind (see
on [Act 17:14](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#014).md): Timotheus, of whom the
Philippians "learned the proof" that he honestly cared for their state,
and was truly like-minded with Paul, "serving with him in the Gospel as
a son with his father" ([Phi 2:19-23](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#019).md);
and Luke, "whose praise is in the Gospel," though he never praises
himself or relates his own labors, and though we only trace his
movements in connection with Paul, by the change of a pronoun, or the
unconscious variation of his style. In the seventeenth chapter the
narrative is again in the third person, and the pronoun is not changed
to the second till we come to [Act
20:5](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#005.md). The modesty with which Luke
leaves out all mention of his own labors need hardly be pointed out. We
shall trace him again when he rejoins Paul in the same neighborhood. His
vocation as a physician may have brought him into connection with these
contiguous coasts of Asia and Europe, and he may (as MR. SMITH suggests,
"Shipwreck," &c.) have been in the habit of exercising his professional
skill as a surgeon at sea \[HOWSON\].

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Acts Chapter 17](act017.md)

</div>
