<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Acts Index](act.md)  
  [Previous](act011)  [Next](act013.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*A Commentary, Critical, Practical, and Explanatory on the Old and New
Testaments*, by Robert Jamieson, A.R. Fausset and David Brown \[1882\]
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Acts Chapter 12](../../../bib/kjv/act012.htm#001.md)

[Acts 12:1](../../../bib/kjv/act012.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">act 12:1</span></span>

PERSECUTION OF THE CHURCH BY HEROD AGRIPPA I--MARTYRDOM OF JAMES AND
MIRACULOUS DELIVERANCE OF PETER. (Acts 12:1-19)

Herod the king--grandson of Herod the Great, and son of Aristobulus. He
at this time ruled over all his father's dominions. PALEY has remarked
the accuracy of the historian here. For thirty years before this there
was no king at Jerusalem exercising supreme authority over Judea, nor
was there ever afterwards, save during the three last years of Herod's
life, within which the transactions occurred.

[Acts 12:2](../../../bib/kjv/act012.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">act 12:2</span></span>

killed James . . . with the sword--beheaded him; a most ignominious mode
of punishment, according to the Jews. Blessed martyr! Thou hast indeed
"drunk of thy Lord's cup, and hast been baptized with his baptism." (See
on [Mar 10:38-40](../../../bib/kjv/mar010.htm#038)..md) A grievous loss
this would be to the Church; for though nothing is known of him beyond
what we read in the Gospels, the place which he had as one of the three
whom the Lord admitted to His closest intimacy would lead the Church to
look up to him with a reverence and affection which even their enemies
would come to hear of. They could spring only upon one more prized
victim; and flushed with their first success, they prevail upon Herod to
seize him also.

[Acts 12:3](../../../bib/kjv/act012.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">act 12:3</span></span>

because he saw it pleased the Jews--Popularity was the ruling passion of
this Herod, not naturally so cruel as some of the family \[JOSEPHUS,
Antiquities, 19.7.3\].

to take Peter also--whose loss, at this stage of the Church, would have
been, so far as we can see, irreparable.

Then were the days of unleavened bread--seven in number, during which,
after killing and eating the Passover, no leaven was allowed in Jewish
houses ([Exo 12:15](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#015.md), [Exo
12:19](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#019).md).

[Acts 12:4](../../../bib/kjv/act012.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">act 12:4</span></span>

delivered him to four quaternions of soldiers--that is, to four parties
of four each, corresponding to the four Roman watches; two watching in
prison and two at the gates, and each party being on duty for the space
of one watch.

intending after Easter--rather, "after the Passover"; that is, after the
whole festival was over. (The word in our King James Version is an
ecclesiastical term of later date, and ought not to have been employed
here).

to bring him forth to the people--for execution; for during "the days of
unleavened bread," or the currency of any religious festival, the Jews
had a prejudice against trying or putting anyone to death.

[Acts 12:5](../../../bib/kjv/act012.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">act 12:5</span></span>

prayer was made without ceasing--rather, "instant," "earnest," "urgent"
(Margin); as in [Luk 22:44](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#044.md); [Act
26:7](../../../bib/kjv/act026.htm#007.md); and [Pe1
4:8](../../../bib/kjv/pe1004.htm#008) (see Greek.md).

of the church unto God for him--not in public assembly, for it was
evidently not safe to meet thus; but in little groups in private houses,
one of which was Mary's ([Act 12:12](../../../bib/kjv/act012.htm#012).md).
And this was kept up during all the days of unleavened bread.

[Acts 12:6](../../../bib/kjv/act012.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">act 12:6</span></span>

And when Herod would have brought him forth--"was going to bring him
forth."

the same night--but a few hours before the intended execution. Thus long
were the disciples kept waiting; their prayers apparently unavailing,
and their faith, as would seem from the sequel, waxing feeble. Such,
however, is the "law" of God's procedure ([Deu
32:36](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#036.md) and see on [Joh
21:3](../../../bib/kjv/joh021.htm#003).md).

Peter was sleeping between two soldiers, bound with two chains--Roman
prisoners had a chain fastened at one end to the wrist of their fight
hand, and at the other to the wrist of a soldier's left hand, leaving
the right arm of the keeper free in case of any attempt to escape. For
greater security the prisoner was sometimes, as here, chained to two
soldiers, one on each side. (See [Act
21:23](../../../bib/kjv/act021.htm#023)..md) Ye think your prey secure,
bloodthirsty priests and thou obsequious tyrant who, to "please the
Jews," hast shut in this most eminent of the servants of Christ within
double gates, guarded by double sentinels, while double keepers and
double chains seem to defy all rescue! So thought the chief priests, who
"made the sepulchre of the Lord sure, sealing the stone and setting a
watch." But "He that sitteth in heaven shall laugh at you." Meanwhile,
"Peter is sleeping!" In a few hours he expects a stingless death;
"neither counts he his life dear unto him, so that he may finish his
course with joy and the ministry which he has received of the Lord
Jesus." In this frame of spirit he has dropped asleep, and lies the
picture of peace.

[Acts 12:7](../../../bib/kjv/act012.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">act 12:7</span></span>

the angel of the Lord--rather, "an angel."

came upon him--so in [Luk 2:9](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#009.md),
expressive of the unexpected nature of the visit.

smote Peter on the side . . . Arise up quickly. And his chains fell off
. . . Gird thyself . . . And so he did . . . Cast thy garment--tunic,
which he had thrown off for the night.

[Acts 12:8](../../../bib/kjv/act012.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">act 12:8</span></span>

about thee . . . follow me--In such graphic minuteness of detail we have
a charming mark of reality: while the rapidity and curtness of the
orders, and the promptitude with which they were obeyed, betoken the
despatch which, in the circumstances, was necessary.

[Acts 12:9](../../../bib/kjv/act012.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">act 12:9</span></span>

wist not that it was true; but thought he saw a vision--So little did
the apostle look for deliverance!

[Acts 12:10](../../../bib/kjv/act012.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">act 12:10</span></span>

first and the second ward . . . the iron gate that leadeth unto the
city--We can only conjecture the precise meaning of all this, not
knowing the position of the prison.

passed on through one street; and forthwith the angel departed from
him--when he had placed him beyond pursuit. Thus "He disappointeth the
devices of the crafty, so that their heads cannot perform their
enterprise" ([Job 5:12](../../../bib/kjv/job005.htm#012).md).

[Acts 12:11](../../../bib/kjv/act012.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">act 12:11</span></span>

when Peter was come to himself--recovered from his bewilderment, and had
time to look back upon all the steps that had followed each other in
such rapid succession.

Now I know of a surety, that the Lord hath sent his angel, and hath
delivered me, &c.--another evidence that Peter expected nothing but to
seal his testimony with his blood on this occasion.

[Acts 12:12](../../../bib/kjv/act012.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">act 12:12</span></span>

he came to the house of Mary, &c.--who "must have had a house of some
pretensions to receive a large number; and, accordingly, we read that
her brother Barnabas ([Col 4:10](../../../bib/kjv/col004.htm#010).md) was a
person of substance ([Act 4:37](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#037).md). She
must also have been distinguished for faith and courage to allow such a
meeting in the face of persecution" \[WEBSTER and WILKINSON\]. To such a
house it was natural that Peter should come.

mother of John . . . Mark--so called to distinguish him from the apostle
of that name, and to distinguish her from the other Marys.

where many were gathered together praying--doubtless for Peter's
deliverance, and continuing, no doubt, on this the last of the days of
unleavened bread, which was their last hope, all night in prayer to God.

[Acts 12:13](../../../bib/kjv/act012.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">act 12:13</span></span>

came to hearken--not to open; for neither was it a time nor an hour of
night for that, but to listen who was there.

[Acts 12:14](../../../bib/kjv/act012.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">act 12:14</span></span>

opened not for gladness, but ran in and told, &c.--How exquisite is this
touch of nature!

[Acts 12:15](../../../bib/kjv/act012.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">act 12:15</span></span>

Thou art mad--one of those exclamations which one can hardly resist on
hearing what seems far "too good to be true."

she constantly affirmed--"kept steadfastly affirming."

that it was even so. Then said they, It is his angel--his disembodied
spirit, his ghost; anything, in fact, rather than himself. Though this
had been the burden of their fervent prayers during all the days of
unleavened bread, they dispute themselves out of it as a thing
incredible. Still, it is but the unbelief of the disciples who "believed
not for joy and wondered" at the tidings of their Lord's resurrection.
How often do we pray for what we can hardly credit the bestowment of,
when it comes in answer to our prayers! This, however, argues not so
much hard unbelief as that kind of it incident to the best in this land
of shadows, which perceives not so clearly as it might how very near
heaven and earth, the Lord and His praying people, are to each other.

[Acts 12:16](../../../bib/kjv/act012.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">act 12:16</span></span>

Peter continued knocking--delay being dangerous.

[Acts 12:17](../../../bib/kjv/act012.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">act 12:17</span></span>

But he, beckoning . . . with his hand to hold their peace--a lively
touch this. In the hubbub of joyful and wondering interrogatories there
might mingle reflections, thrown out by one against another, for holding
out so long against the testimony of Rhoda; while the emotion of the
apostle's own spirit would be too deep and solemn to take part in such
demonstrations or utter a word till, with his hand, he had signified his
wish for perfect silence.

Go show these things unto James and to the brethren--Whether James the
son of Alpheus, one of the Twelve, usually known as "James the Less,"
and "James the Lord's brother" ([Gal
1:19](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#019).md), were the same person; and if
not, whether the James here referred to was the former or the latter,
critics are singularly divided, and the whole question is one of the
most difficult. To us, it appears that there are strong reasons for
thinking that they were not the same person, and that the one here
meant, and throughout the Acts, is the apostle James. (But on this more
hereafter). James is singled out, because he had probably begun to take
the oversight of the Church in Jerusalem, which we afterwards find him
exercising (Acts 15:1-29).

And he departed, and went into another place--according to his Lord's
express command ([Mat 10:23](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#023).md). When
told, on a former miraculous liberation from prison, to go and speak
unto the people ([Act 5:20](../../../bib/kjv/act005.htm#020).md), he did
it; but in this case to present himself in public would have been to
tempt God by rushing upon certain destruction.

[Acts 12:18](../../../bib/kjv/act012.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">act 12:18</span></span>

as soon as it was day, &c.--His deliverance must have been during the
fourth watch (three to six A.M.); else he must have been missed by the
keepers at the change of the watch \[WIES\].

[Acts 12:19](../../../bib/kjv/act012.htm#019.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">act 12:19</span></span>

examined the keepers--who, either like the keepers of our Lord's
sepulchre, had "shaken and become as dead men" ([Mat
28:4](../../../bib/kjv/mat028.htm#004).md), or had slept on their watch and
been divinely kept from awaking.

commanded that they should be put to death--Impotent vengeance!

[Acts 12:20](../../../bib/kjv/act012.htm#020.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">act 12:20</span></span>

HEROD'S MISERABLE END--GROWING SUCCESS OF THE GOSPEL--BARNABAS AND SAUL
RETURN TO ANTIOCH. ([Act 12:20-25](../../../bib/kjv/act012.htm#020).md)

Herod was . . . displeased with them of Tyre and Sidon--for some reason
unknown; but the effect on their commercial relations made the latter
glad to sue for peace.

their country was nourished by the king's country--See [Kg1
5:11](../../../bib/kjv/kg1005.htm#011.md); [Ezr
3:7](../../../bib/kjv/ezr003.htm#007.md); [Eze
27:17](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#017.md). Perhaps the famine ([Act
11:28](../../../bib/kjv/act011.htm#028).md) made them the more urgent for
reconciliation.

[Acts 12:21](../../../bib/kjv/act012.htm#021.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">act 12:21</span></span>

And upon a set day Herod . . . made an oration unto them--to the Tyrians
and Sidonians especially.

[Acts 12:22](../../../bib/kjv/act012.htm#022.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">act 12:22</span></span>

the people gave a shout, &c.--JOSEPHUS' account of his death is
remarkably similar to this \[Antiquities, 19.8.2\]. Several cases of
such deaths occur in history. Thus was this wretched man nearer his end
than he of whom he had thought to make a public spectacle.

[Acts 12:24](../../../bib/kjv/act012.htm#024.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">act 12:24</span></span>

But the word grew, &c.--that is, Not only was the royal representative
ignominiously swept from the stage, while his intended victim was spared
to the Church, but the cause which he and his Jewish instigators sought
to crush was only furthered and glorified. How full of encouragement and
consolation is all this to the Christian Church in every age!

[Acts 12:25](../../../bib/kjv/act012.htm#025.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">act 12:25</span></span>

Barnabas and Saul returned from Jerusalem--where, it thus appears, they
had remained during all this persecution.

when they had fulfilled their ministry--or service; that mentioned on
[Act 11:29-30](../../../bib/kjv/act011.htm#029.md).

took with them John . . . Mark--(See on [Act
12:12](../../../bib/kjv/act012.htm#012).md), not to be confounded with the
second Evangelist, as is often done. As his uncle was Barnabas, so his
spiritual father was Peter ([Pe1
5:13](../../../bib/kjv/pe1005.htm#013).md).

PAUL'S FIRST MISSIONARY JOURNEY:

In Company with Barnabas.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Acts Chapter 13](act013.md)

</div>
