<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[1 Chronicles Index](ch1)  
  [Previous](ch1026)  [Next](ch1028) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*A Commentary, Critical, Practical, and Explanatory on the Old and New
Testaments*, by Robert Jamieson, A.R. Fausset and David Brown \[1882\]
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [1 Chronicles Chapter 27](../../../bib/kjv/ch1027.htm#001)

[1 Chronicles 27:1](../../../bib/kjv/ch1027.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">ch1 27:1</span></span>

TWELVE CAPTAINS FOR EVERY MONTH. ([Ch1
27:1-15](../../../bib/kjv/ch1027.htm#001))

came in and went out month by month--Here is an account of the standing
military force of Israel. A militia formed, it would seem, at the
beginning of David's reign (see [Ch1
27:7](../../../bib/kjv/ch1027.htm#007)) was raised in the following
order: Twelve legions, corresponding to the number of tribes, were
enlisted in the king's service. Each legion comprised a body of
twenty-four thousand men, whose term of service was a month in rotation,
and who were stationed either at Jerusalem or in any other place where
they might be required. There was thus always a force sufficient for the
ordinary purposes of state, as well as for resisting sudden attacks or
popular tumults; and when extraordinary emergencies demanded a larger
force, the whole standing army could easily be called to arms, amounting
to two hundred eighty-eight thousand, or to three hundred thousand,
including the twelve thousand officers that naturally attended on the
twelve princes ([Ch1 27:16-24](../../../bib/kjv/ch1027.htm#016)). Such a
military establishment would be burdensome neither to the country nor to
the royal treasury; for attendance on this duty being a mark of honor
and distinction, the expense of maintenance would be borne probably by
the militiaman himself, or furnished out of the common fund of his
tribe. Nor would the brief period of actual service produce any
derangement of the usual course of affairs; for, on the expiry of the
term, every soldier returned to the pursuits and duties of private life
during the other eleven months of the year. Whether the same individuals
were always enrolled, cannot be determined. The probability is, that
provided the requisite number was furnished, no stricter scrutiny would
be made. A change of men might, to a certain degree, be encouraged, as
it was a part of David's policy to train all his subjects to skill in
arms; and to have made the enlistment fall always on the same
individuals would have defeated that purpose. To have confined each
month's levy rigidly within the limits of one tribe might have fallen
hard upon those tribes which were weak and small. The rotation system
being established, each division knew its own month, as well as the name
of the commander under whom it was to serve. These commanders are
styled, "the chief fathers," that is, the hereditary heads of tribes
who, like chieftains of clans, possessed great power and influence.

captains of thousands and hundreds--The legions of twenty-four thousand
were divided into regiments of one thousand, and these again into
companies of a hundred men, under the direction of their respective
subalterns, there being, of course, twenty-four captains of thousands,
and two hundred forty centurions.

and their officers--the Shoterim, who in the army performed the duty of
the commissariat, keeping the muster-roll, &c.

[1 Chronicles 27:2](../../../bib/kjv/ch1027.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">ch1 27:2</span></span>

Jashobeam the son of Zabdiel--(See on [Ch1
11:11](../../../bib/kjv/ch1011.htm#011); [Sa2
23:8](../../../bib/kjv/sa2023.htm#008)). Hachmoni was his father,
Zabdiel probably one of his ancestors; or there might be different names
of the same individual. In the rotation of the military courses, the
dignity of precedence, not of authority, was given to the hero.

[1 Chronicles 27:4](../../../bib/kjv/ch1027.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">ch1 27:4</span></span>

second month was Dodai--or, "Dodo." Here the text seems to require the
supplement of "Eleazar the son of Dodo" ([Sa2
23:9](../../../bib/kjv/sa2023.htm#009)).

[1 Chronicles 27:7](../../../bib/kjv/ch1027.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">ch1 27:7</span></span>

Asahel--This officer having been slain at the very beginning of David's
reign \[[Sa2 2:23](../../../bib/kjv/sa2002.htm#023)\], his name was
probably given to this division in honor of his memory, and his son was
invested with the command.

[1 Chronicles 27:16](../../../bib/kjv/ch1027.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">ch1 27:16</span></span>

PRINCES OF THE TWELVE TRIBES. ([Ch1
27:16-24](../../../bib/kjv/ch1027.htm#016))

over the tribes of Israel: the ruler--This is a list of the hereditary
chiefs or rulers of tribes at the time of David's numbering the people.
Gad and Asher are not included; for what reason is unknown. The tribe of
Levi had a prince ([Ch1 27:17](../../../bib/kjv/ch1027.htm#017)), as
well as the other tribes; and although it was ecclesiastically subject
to the high priest, yet in all civil matters it had a chief or head,
possessed of the same authority and power as in the other tribes, only
his jurisdiction did not extend to the priests.

[1 Chronicles 27:18](../../../bib/kjv/ch1027.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">ch1 27:18</span></span>

Elihu--probably the same as Eliab ([Sa1
16:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa1016.htm#006)).

[1 Chronicles 27:23](../../../bib/kjv/ch1027.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">ch1 27:23</span></span>

But David took not the number of them from twenty years old and
under--The census which David ordered did not extend to all the
Israelites; for to contemplate such an enumeration would have been to
attempt an impossibility ([Gen 28:14](../../../bib/kjv/gen028.htm#014)),
and besides would have been a daring offense to God. The limitation to a
certain age was what had probably quieted David's conscience as to the
lawfulness of the measure, while its expediency was strongly pressed
upon his mind by the army arrangements he had in view.

[1 Chronicles 27:24](../../../bib/kjv/ch1027.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">ch1 27:24</span></span>

neither was the number put in the account of the chronicles of King
David--either because the undertaking was not completed, Levi and
Benjamin not having been numbered ([Ch1
21:6](../../../bib/kjv/ch1021.htm#006)), or the full details in the
hands of the enumerating officers were not reported to David, and,
consequently, not registered in the public archives.

the chronicles--were the daily records or annals of the king's reign. No
notice was taken of this census in the historical register, as from the
public calamity with which it was associated it would have stood as a
painful record of the divine judgment against the king and the nation.

[1 Chronicles 27:25](../../../bib/kjv/ch1027.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">ch1 27:25</span></span>

over the king's treasures--Those treasures consisted of gold, silver,
precious stones, cedar-wood, &c.; those which he had in Jerusalem as
distinguished from others without the city.

the storehouses in the fields--Grain covered over with layers of straw
is frequently preserved in the fields under little earthen mounds, like
our potato pits.

[1 Chronicles 27:27](../../../bib/kjv/ch1027.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">ch1 27:27</span></span>

the vineyards--These seem to have been in the vine growing districts of
Judah, and were committed to two men of that quarter.

wine-cellars--The wine is deposited in jars sunk in the court of the
house.

[1 Chronicles 27:28](../../../bib/kjv/ch1027.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">ch1 27:28</span></span>

olive trees and the sycamore trees . . . in the low plains--that is, the
Shephela, the rich, low-lying ground between the Mediterranean and the
mountains of Judah.

[1 Chronicles 27:29](../../../bib/kjv/ch1027.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">ch1 27:29</span></span>

herds that fed in Sharon--a fertile plain between CÃ&brvbr;sarea and
Joppa.

[1 Chronicles 27:30](../../../bib/kjv/ch1027.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">ch1 27:30</span></span>

camels--These were probably in the countries east of the Jordan, and
hence an Ishmaelite and Nazarite were appointed to take charge of them.

[1 Chronicles 27:31](../../../bib/kjv/ch1027.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">ch1 27:31</span></span>

rulers of the substance that was king David's--How and when the king
acquired these demesnes and this variety of property--whether it was
partly by conquests, or partly by confiscation, or by his own active
cultivation of waste lands--is not said. It was probably in all these
ways. The management of the king's private possessions was divided into
twelve parts, like his public affairs and the revenue derived from all
these sources mentioned must have been very large.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Chronicles Chapter 28](ch1028)

</div>
