<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[2 Chronicles Index](ch2.md)  
  [Previous](ch2006)  [Next](ch2008.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*A Commentary, Critical, Practical, and Explanatory on the Old and New
Testaments*, by Robert Jamieson, A.R. Fausset and David Brown \[1882\]
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [2 Chronicles Chapter 7](../../../bib/kjv/ch2007.htm#001.md)

[2 Chronicles 7:1](../../../bib/kjv/ch2007.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">ch2 7:1</span></span>

GOD GIVES TESTIMONY TO SOLOMON'S PRAYER; THE PEOPLE WORSHIP. ([Ch2
7:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/ch2007.htm#001).md)

the fire came down from heaven, and consumed the burnt offering--Every
act of worship was accompanied by a sacrifice. The preternatural stream
of fire kindled the mass of flesh, and was a token of the divine
acceptance of Solomon's prayer (see on [Lev
9:24](../../../bib/kjv/lev009.htm#024.md); [Kg1
18:38](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#038).md).

the glory of the Lord filled the house--The cloud, which was the symbol
of God's presence and majesty, filled the interior of the temple ([Exo
40:35](../../../bib/kjv/exo040.htm#035).md).

[2 Chronicles 7:2](../../../bib/kjv/ch2007.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">ch2 7:2</span></span>

the priests could not enter--Both from awe of the miraculous fire that
was burning on the altar and from the dense cloud that enveloped the
sanctuary, they were unable for some time to perform their usual
functions (see on [Kg1 8:10](../../../bib/kjv/kg1008.htm#010).md). But
afterwards, their courage and confidence being revived, they approached
the altar and busied themselves in the offering of an immense number of
sacrifices.

[2 Chronicles 7:3](../../../bib/kjv/ch2007.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">ch2 7:3</span></span>

all the children of Israel . . . bowed themselves with their faces to
the ground upon the pavement--This form of prostration (that of lying on
one's knees with the forehead touching the earth), is the manner in
which the Hebrews, and Orientals in general, express the most profound
sentiments of reverence and humility. The courts of the temple were
densely crowded on the occasion, and the immense multitude threw
themselves on the ground. What led the Israelites suddenly to assume
that prostrate attitude on the occasion referred to, was the spectacle
of the symbolical cloud slowly and majestically descending upon the
temple, and then entering it.

[2 Chronicles 7:4](../../../bib/kjv/ch2007.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">ch2 7:4</span></span>

SOLOMON'S SACRIFICES. ([Ch2 7:4-11](../../../bib/kjv/ch2007.htm#004).md)

Then the king and all the people offered sacrifices--Whether the
individual worshippers slaughtered their own cattle, or a certain
portion of the vast number of the Levitical order in attendance
performed that work, as they sometimes did, in either case the offerings
were made through the priests, who presented the blood and the fat upon
the altar (see on [Kg1 8:62](../../../bib/kjv/kg1008.htm#062).md).

[2 Chronicles 7:5](../../../bib/kjv/ch2007.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">ch2 7:5</span></span>

so the king and all the people dedicated the house of God--The
ceremonial of dedication consisted principally in the introduction of
the ark into the temple, and in the sacrificial offerings that were made
on a scale of magnitude suitable to the extraordinary occasion. All
present, the king, the people, and the priests, took part according to
their respective stations in the performance of the solemn service. The
duty, of course, devolved chiefly on the priests, and hence in
proceeding to describe their several departments of work, the historian
says, generally, "the priests waited on their offices." While great
numbers would be occupied with the preparation and offering of the
victims, others sounded with their trumpets, and the different bands of
the Levites praised the Lord with vocal and instrumental music, by the
hundred thirty-sixth Psalm, the oft-recurring chorus of which is, "for
His mercy endureth for ever."

[2 Chronicles 7:7](../../../bib/kjv/ch2007.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">ch2 7:7</span></span>

Solomon hallowed the middle of the court--On this extraordinary
occasion, when a larger number of animals were offered than one altar
and the usual place of rings to which the animals were bound would
admit, the whole space was taken in that was between the place of rings
and the west end of the court to be used as a temporary place for
additional altars. On that part of the spacious court holocausts were
burning all round.

[2 Chronicles 7:8](../../../bib/kjv/ch2007.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">ch2 7:8</span></span>

Solomon kept the feast seven days--The time chosen for the dedication of
the temple was immediately previous to the feast of tabernacles (see on
[Kg1 8:1-12](../../../bib/kjv/kg1008.htm#001).md). That season, which came
after the harvest, corresponding to our September and October, lasted
seven days, and during so prolonged a festival there was time afforded
for the offering of the immense sacrifices enumerated. A large
proportion of these were peace offerings, which afforded to the people
the means of festive enjoyment.

all Israel . . . from the entering in of Hamath--that is, the defile at
Lebanon.

unto the river of Egypt--that is, Rhinocorura, now El-Arish, the south
boundary of Palestine.

[2 Chronicles 7:10](../../../bib/kjv/ch2007.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">ch2 7:10</span></span>

on the three and twentieth day of the seventh month--This was the last
day of the feast of tabernacles.

[2 Chronicles 7:12](../../../bib/kjv/ch2007.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">ch2 7:12</span></span>

GOD APPEARS TO HIM. ([Ch2 7:12-22](../../../bib/kjv/ch2007.htm#012).md)

the Lord appeared to Solomon by night--(See on [Kg1
9:1-9](../../../bib/kjv/kg1009.htm#001).md). The dedication of the temple
must have been an occasion of intense national interest to Solomon and
his subjects. Nor was the interest merely temporary or local. The record
of it is read and thought of with an interest that is undiminished by
the lapse of time. The fact that this was the only temple of all nations
in which the true God was worshipped imparts a moral grandeur to the
scene and prepares the mind for the sublime prayer that was offered at
the dedication. The pure theism of that prayer--its acknowledgment of
the unity of God as well as of His moral perfections in providence and
grace, came from the same divine source as the miraculous fire. They
indicated sentiments and feelings of exalted and spiritual devotion,
which sprang not from the unaided mind of man, but from the fountain of
revelation. The reality of the divine presence was attested by the
miracle, and that miracle stamped the seal of truth upon the theology of
the temple-worship.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 Chronicles Chapter 8](ch2008.md)

</div>
