<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[2 Chronicles Index](ch2)  
  [Previous](ch2028)  [Next](ch2030) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*A Commentary, Critical, Practical, and Explanatory on the Old and New
Testaments*, by Robert Jamieson, A.R. Fausset and David Brown \[1882\]
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [2 Chronicles Chapter 29](../../../bib/kjv/ch2029.htm#001)

[2 Chronicles 29:1](../../../bib/kjv/ch2029.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">ch2 29:1</span></span>

HEZEKIAH'S GOOD REIGN. ([Ch2 29:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/ch2029.htm#001))

Hezekiah began to reign, &c.--(see on [Kg2
18:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg2018.htm#001)). His mother's name, which, in
[Kg2 18:2](../../../bib/kjv/kg2018.htm#002), appears in an abridged
form, is here given in full.

[2 Chronicles 29:3](../../../bib/kjv/ch2029.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">ch2 29:3</span></span>

HE RESTORES RELIGION. ([Ch2 29:3-11](../../../bib/kjv/ch2029.htm#003))

in the first year of his reign, in the first month--not the first month
after his accession to the throne, but in Nisan, the first month of the
sacred year, the season appointed for the celebration of the passover.

he opened the doors of the house of the Lord--which had been closed up
by his father ([Ch2 28:24](../../../bib/kjv/ch2028.htm#024)).

and repaired them--or embellished them (compare [Kg2
18:16](../../../bib/kjv/kg2018.htm#016)).

[2 Chronicles 29:4](../../../bib/kjv/ch2029.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">ch2 29:4</span></span>

the east street--the court of the priests, which fronted the eastern
gate of the temple. Assembling the priests and Levites there, he
enjoined them to set about the immediate purification of the temple. It
does not appear that the order referred to the removal of idols, for
objects of idolatrous homage could scarcely have been put there, seeing
the doors had been shut up \[[Ch2
29:3](../../../bib/kjv/ch2029.htm#003)\]; but in its forsaken and
desolate state the temple and its courts had been polluted by every kind
of impurity.

[2 Chronicles 29:6](../../../bib/kjv/ch2029.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">ch2 29:6</span></span>

our fathers have trespassed--Ahaz and the generation contemporary with
him were specially meant, for they "turned away their faces from the
habitation of the Lord," and whether or not they turned east to the
rising sun, they abandoned the worship of God. They "shut up the doors
of the porch," so that the sacred ritual was entirely discontinued.

[2 Chronicles 29:8](../../../bib/kjv/ch2029.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">ch2 29:8</span></span>

Wherefore the wrath of the Lord was upon Judah and Jerusalem--This pious
king had the discernment to ascribe all the national calamities that had
befallen the kingdom to the true cause, namely, apostasy from God. The
country had been laid waste by successive wars of invasion, and its
resources drained. Many families mourned members of their household
still suffering the miseries of foreign captivity; all their former
prosperity and glory had fled; and to what was this painful and
humiliating state of affairs to be traced, but to the manifest judgment
of God upon the kingdom for its sins?

[2 Chronicles 29:10](../../../bib/kjv/ch2029.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">ch2 29:10</span></span>

Now it is in mine heart to make a covenant with the Lord God--Convinced
of the sin and bitter fruits of idolatry, Hezekiah intended to reverse
the policy of his father, and to restore, in all its ancient purity and
glory, the worship of the true God. His commencement of this resolution
at the beginning of his reign attests his sincere piety. It also proves
the strength of his conviction that righteousness exalteth a nation;
for, instead of waiting till his throne was consolidated, he devised
measures of national reformation at the beginning of his reign and
vigorously faced all the difficulties which, in such a course, he had to
encounter, after the people's habits had so long been moulded to
idolatry. His intentions were first disclosed to this meeting of the
priests and Levites--for the agency of these officials was to be
employed in carrying them into effect.

[2 Chronicles 29:12](../../../bib/kjv/ch2029.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">ch2 29:12</span></span>

THE HOUSE OF GOD CLEANSED. (2Ch. 29:12-36)

Then the Levites arose--Fourteen chiefs undertook the duty of collecting
and preparing their brethren for the important work of cleansing the
Lord's house. Beginning with the outer courts--that of the priests and
that of the people--the cleansing of these occupied eight days, after
which they set themselves to purify the interior; but as the Levites
were not allowed to enter within the walls of the temple, the priest
brought all the sweepings out to the porch, where they were received by
the Levites and thrown into the brook Kedron. This took eight days more.
At the end of this period they repaired to the palace and announced that
not only had the whole of the sacred edifice, within and without,
undergone a thorough purification, but all the vessels which the late
king had taken away and applied to a common use in his palace, had been
restored, "and sanctified."

[2 Chronicles 29:20](../../../bib/kjv/ch2029.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">ch2 29:20</span></span>

Then Hezekiah the king rose early, and gathered the rulers of the
city--His anxiety to enter upon the expiatory service with all possible
despatch, now that the temple had been properly prepared for it,
prevented his summoning all the representatives of Israel. The requisite
number of victims having been provided, and the officers of the temple
having sanctified themselves according to the directions of the law, the
priests were appointed to offer sacrifices of atonement successively,
for "the kingdom," that is, for the sins of the king and his
predecessors; for "the sanctuary," that is, for the sins of the priests
themselves and for the desecration of the temple; "and for Judah," that
is, for the people who, by their voluntary consent, were involved in the
guilt of the national apostasy. Animals of the kinds used in sacrifice
were offered by sevens, that number indicating completeness. The Levites
were ordered to praise God with musical instruments, which, although not
originally used in the tabernacle, had been enlisted in the service of
divine worship by David on the advice of the prophets Gad and Nathan, as
well calculated to animate the devotions of the people. At the close of
the special services of the occasion, namely, the offering of atonement
sacrifices, the king and all civic rulers who were present joined in the
worship. A grand anthem was sung ([Ch2
29:30](../../../bib/kjv/ch2029.htm#030)) by the choir, consisting of
some of the psalms of David and Asaph, and a great number of thank
offerings, praise offerings, and freewill burnt offerings were presented
at the invitation of the king.

[2 Chronicles 29:31](../../../bib/kjv/ch2029.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">ch2 29:31</span></span>

Hezekiah . . . said, Now ye have consecrated yourselves unto the Lord,
come near--This address was made to the priests as being now, by the
sacrifice of the expiation offerings, anew consecrated to the service of
God and qualified to resume the functions of their sacred office ([Exo
28:41](../../../bib/kjv/exo028.htm#041); [Exo
29:32](../../../bib/kjv/exo029.htm#032)).

the congregation brought in--that is, the body of civic rulers present.

[2 Chronicles 29:34](../../../bib/kjv/ch2029.htm#034)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">ch2 29:34</span></span>

the priests were too few, . . . wherefore their brethren the Levites did
help them--The skins of beasts intended as peace offerings might be
taken off by the officers, because, in such cases, the carcass was not
wholly laid upon the altar; but animals meant for burnt offerings which
were wholly consumed by fire could be flayed by the priests alone, not
even the Levites being allowed to touch them, except in cases of
unavoidable necessity ([Ch2 35:11](../../../bib/kjv/ch2035.htm#011)).
The duty being assigned by the law to the priests ([Lev
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/lev001.htm#006)), was construed by consuetudinary
practice as an exclusion of all others not connected with the Aaronic
family.

for the Levites were more upright in heart to sanctify themselves than
the priests--that is, displayed greater alacrity than the priests. This
service was hastened by the irrepressible solicitude of the king.
Whether it was that many of the priests, being absent in the country,
had not arrived in time--whether from the long interruption of the
public duties, some of them had relaxed in their wonted attentions to
personal cleanliness, and had many preparations to make--or whether from
some having participated in the idolatrous services introduced by Ahaz,
they were backward in repairing to the temple--a reflection does seem to
be cast upon their order as dilatory and not universally ready for duty
(compare [Ch2 30:15](../../../bib/kjv/ch2030.htm#015)). Thus was the
newly consecrated temple reopened to the no small joy of the pious king
and all the people.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 Chronicles Chapter 30](ch2030)

</div>
