<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[2 Chronicles Index](ch2)  
  [Previous](ch2029)  [Next](ch2031) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*A Commentary, Critical, Practical, and Explanatory on the Old and New
Testaments*, by Robert Jamieson, A.R. Fausset and David Brown \[1882\]
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [2 Chronicles Chapter 30](../../../bib/kjv/ch2030.htm#001)

[2 Chronicles 30:1](../../../bib/kjv/ch2030.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">ch2 30:1</span></span>

HEZEKIAH PROCLAIMS A PASSOVER. ([Ch2
30:1-12](../../../bib/kjv/ch2030.htm#001))

Hezekiah sent to all . . . Judah . . . to come to . . . Jerusalem, to
keep the passover--This great religious festival had not been regularly
observed by the Hebrews in their national capacity for a long time
because of the division of the kingdom and the many disorders that had
followed that unhappy event. Hezekiah longed extremely to see its
observance revived; and the expression of his wishes having received a
hearty response from the princes and chief men of his own kingdom, the
preparatory steps were taken for a renewed celebration of the national
solemnity.

letters also to Ephraim and Manasseh--The names of these leading tribes
are used for the whole kingdom of Israel. It was judged impossible,
however, that the temple, the priests, and people could be all duly
sanctified at the usual time appointed for the anniversary, namely, the
fourteenth day of the first month (Nisan). Therefore it was resolved,
instead of postponing the feast till another year, to observe it on the
fourteenth day of the second month; a liberty which, being in certain
circumstances ([Num 9:6-13](../../../bib/kjv/num009.htm#006)) granted to
individuals, might, it was believed, be allowed to all the people.
Hezekiah's proclamation was, of course, authoritative in his own
kingdom, but it could not have been made and circulated in all the towns
and villages of the neighboring kingdom without the concurrence, or at
least the permission, of the Israelitish sovereign. Hoshea, the reigning
king, is described as, though evil in some respects, yet more favorably
disposed to religious liberty than any of his predecessors since the
separation of the kingdom. This is thought to be the meaning of the
mitigating clause in his character ([Kg2
17:2](../../../bib/kjv/kg2017.htm#002)).

[2 Chronicles 30:6](../../../bib/kjv/ch2030.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">ch2 30:6</span></span>

the posts--that is, runners, or royal messengers, who were taken from
the king's bodyguard ([Ch2 23:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/ch2023.htm#001)).
Each, well mounted, had a certain number of miles to traverse. Having
performed his course, he was relieved by another, who had to scour an
equal extent of ground; so that, as the government messengers were
despatched in all directions, public edicts were speedily diffused
throughout the country. The proclamation of Hezekiah was followed by a
verbal address from himself, piously urging the duty, and setting forth
the advantages, of a return to the pure faith and institutions which God
had delivered to their ancestors through Moses.

the remnant of you, that are escaped out of the hand of the kings of
Assyria--This implies that several expeditions against Israel had
already been made by Assyrian invaders--by Pul ([Kg2
15:19](../../../bib/kjv/kg2015.htm#019)), but none of the people were
then removed; at a later period by Tiglath-pileser, when it appears that
numbers among the tribes east of Jordan ([Ch1
5:26](../../../bib/kjv/ch1005.htm#026)), and afterwards in the northern
parts of Israel ([Kg2 15:20](../../../bib/kjv/kg2015.htm#020)), were
carried into foreign exile. The invasion of Shalmaneser cannot be
alluded to, as it did not take place till the sixth year of Hezekiah's
reign ([Kg2 17:6](../../../bib/kjv/kg2017.htm#006); [Kg2
18:9-12](../../../bib/kjv/kg2018.htm#009)).

[2 Chronicles 30:10](../../../bib/kjv/ch2030.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">ch2 30:10</span></span>

the posts passed from city to city--It is not surprising that after so
long a discontinuance of the sacred festival, this attempt to revive it
should, in some quarters, have excited ridicule and opposition.
Accordingly, among the tribes of Ephraim, Manasseh, and Zebulun,
Hezekiah's messengers met with open insults and ill usage. Many,
however, in these very districts, as well as throughout the kingdom of
the ten tribes, generally complied with the invitation; while, in the
kingdom of Judah, there was one unanimous feeling of high expectation
and pious delight. The concourse that repaired to Jerusalem on the
occasion was very great, and the occasion was ever after regarded as one
of the greatest passovers that had ever been celebrated.

[2 Chronicles 30:14](../../../bib/kjv/ch2030.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">ch2 30:14</span></span>

THE ASSEMBLY DESTROYS THE ALTARS OF IDOLATRY. ([Ch2
30:13-27](../../../bib/kjv/ch2030.htm#013))

they arose and took away the altars that were in Jerusalem--As a
necessary preparation for the right observance of the approaching
solemnity, the removal of the altars, which Ahaz had erected in the
city, was resolved upon ([Ch2 28:24](../../../bib/kjv/ch2028.htm#024));
for, as the people of God, the Hebrews were bound to extirpate all
traces of idolatry; and it was a happy sign and pledge of the influence
of the Spirit pervading the minds of the people when they voluntarily
undertook this important preliminary work.

[2 Chronicles 30:15](../../../bib/kjv/ch2030.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">ch2 30:15</span></span>

the priests and the Levites were ashamed--Though the Levites are
associated in this statement, the priests were principally referred to;
those of them who had been dilatory or negligent in sanctifying
themselves ([Ch2 29:34](../../../bib/kjv/ch2029.htm#034)) were put to
the blush and stimulated to their duty by the greater alacrity and zeal
of the people.

[2 Chronicles 30:16](../../../bib/kjv/ch2030.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">ch2 30:16</span></span>

the priests sprinkled the blood, which they received of the hand of the
Levites--This was a deviation from the established rules and practices
in presenting the offerings of the temple. The reason was, that many
present on the occasion having not sanctified themselves, the Levites
slaughtered the paschal victims (see on [Ch2
35:5](../../../bib/kjv/ch2035.htm#005)) for everyone that was unclean.
At other times the heads of families killed the lambs themselves, the
priests receiving the blood from their hands and presenting it on the
altar. Multitudes of the Israelites, especially from certain tribes
([Ch2 30:18](../../../bib/kjv/ch2030.htm#018)), were in this
unsanctified state, and yet they ate the passover--an exceptional
feature and one opposed to the law ([Num
9:6](../../../bib/kjv/num009.htm#006)); but this exception was allowed
in answer to Hezekiah's prayer ([Ch2
30:18-20](../../../bib/kjv/ch2030.htm#018)).

[2 Chronicles 30:20](../../../bib/kjv/ch2030.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">ch2 30:20</span></span>

the Lord . . . healed the people--We imagine the whole affair to have
been the following: In consequence of their transgressions they had
cause to fear disease and even death ([Lev
15:31](../../../bib/kjv/lev015.htm#031)). Hezekiah prayed for the
nation, which was on the point of being diseased, and might therefore be
regarded as sick already \[BERTHEAU\].

[2 Chronicles 30:21](../../../bib/kjv/ch2030.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">ch2 30:21</span></span>

the children of Israel . . . kept the feast--The time appointed by the
law for the continuance of the feast was seven days \[[Exo
12:15](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#015); [Exo
13:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo013.htm#006); [Lev
23:6](../../../bib/kjv/lev023.htm#006)\]; but in consequence of its
having been allowed to fall so long into desuetude, they doubled the
period of celebration and kept it fourteen days with unabated
satisfaction and joy. Materials for the additional sacrificial meals
were supplied by the munificence of the king and the princes.

[2 Chronicles 30:24](../../../bib/kjv/ch2030.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">ch2 30:24</span></span>

and a great number of priests sanctified themselves--so that there would
be a sufficient number of hands for the additional services.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 Chronicles Chapter 31](ch2031)

</div>
