<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[2 Chronicles Index](ch2.md)  
  [Previous](ch2014)  [Next](ch2016.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*A Commentary, Critical, Practical, and Explanatory on the Old and New
Testaments*, by Robert Jamieson, A.R. Fausset and David Brown \[1882\]
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [2 Chronicles Chapter 15](../../../bib/kjv/ch2015.htm#001.md)

[2 Chronicles 15:1](../../../bib/kjv/ch2015.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">ch2 15:1</span></span>

JUDAH MAKES A SOLEMN COVENANT WITH GOD. ([Ch2
15:1-15](../../../bib/kjv/ch2015.htm#001).md)

Azariah the son of Oded--This prophet, who is mentioned nowhere else,
appears at this stage of the sacred story in the discharge of an
interesting mission. He went to meet Asa, as he was returning from his
victorious pursuit of the Ethiopians, and the congratulatory address
here recorded was publicly made to the king in presence of his army.

[2 Chronicles 15:2](../../../bib/kjv/ch2015.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">ch2 15:2</span></span>

The Lord is with you, while ye be with him--You have had, in your recent
signal success, a remarkable proof that God's blessing is upon you; your
victory has been the reward of your faith and piety. If you steadfastly
adhere to the cause of God, you may expect a continuance of His favor;
but if you abandon it, you will soon reap the bitter fruits of apostasy.

[2 Chronicles 15:3](../../../bib/kjv/ch2015.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">ch2 15:3</span></span>

Now for a long season Israel hath been without the true God, &c.--Some
think that Azariah was referring to the sad and disastrous condition to
which superstition and idolatry had brought the neighboring kingdom of
Israel. His words should rather be taken in a wider sense, for it seems
manifest that the prophet had his eye upon many periods in the national
history, when the people were in the state described--a state of
spiritual destitution and ignorance--and exhibited its natural result as
widespread anarchy, mutual dissension among the tribes, and general
suffering ([Jdg 9:23](../../../bib/kjv/jdg009.htm#023.md); [Jdg
12:4](../../../bib/kjv/jdg012.htm#004.md); [Jdg
20:21](../../../bib/kjv/jdg020.htm#021.md); [Ch2
13:17](../../../bib/kjv/ch2013.htm#017).md). These calamities God permitted
to befall them as the punishment of their apostasy. Azariah's object in
these remarks was to establish the truth of his counsel ([Ch2
15:2](../../../bib/kjv/ch2015.htm#002).md), threatening, in case of
neglecting it by describing the uniform course of the divine procedure
towards Israel, as shown in all periods of their history. Then after
this appeal to national experience, he concluded with an earnest
exhortation to the king to prosecute the work of reformation so well
begun \[[Ch2 15:7](../../../bib/kjv/ch2015.htm#007.md)\].

[2 Chronicles 15:7](../../../bib/kjv/ch2015.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">ch2 15:7</span></span>

Be ye strong--Great resolution and indomitable energy would be required
to persevere in the face of the opposition your reforming measures will
encounter.

your work shall be rewarded--What you do in the cause and for the glory
of God will assuredly be followed by the happiest results both to
yourself and your subjects.

[2 Chronicles 15:8](../../../bib/kjv/ch2015.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">ch2 15:8</span></span>

when Asa heard . . . the prophecy of Oded the prophet--The insertion of
these words, "of Oded the prophet," is generally regarded as a
corruption of the text. "The sole remedy is to erase them. They are,
probably, the remains of a note, which crept in from the margin into the
text" \[BERTHEAU\].

he took courage--Animated by the seasonable and pious address of
Azariah, Asa became a more zealous reformer than ever, employing all his
royal authority and influence to extirpate every vestige of idolatry
from the land.

and out of the cities which he had taken from mount Ephraim--He may have
acquired cities of Ephraim, the conquest of which is not recorded ([Ch2
17:2](../../../bib/kjv/ch2017.htm#002).md); but it has been commonly
supposed that the reference is to cities which his father Abijah had
taken in that quarter ([Ch2 13:19](../../../bib/kjv/ch2013.htm#019).md).

renewed the altar of the Lord . . . before the porch--that is, the altar
of burnt offering. As this was done on or about the fifteenth year of
the reign of this pious king, the renewal must have consisted in some
splendid repairs or embellishments, which made it look like a new
dedication, or in a reconstruction of a temporary altar, like that of
Solomon ([Ch2 7:7](../../../bib/kjv/ch2007.htm#007).md), for extraordinary
sacrifices to be offered on an approaching occasion.

[2 Chronicles 15:9](../../../bib/kjv/ch2015.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">ch2 15:9</span></span>

he gathered all Judah and Benjamin--Not satisfied with these minor
measures of purification and improvement, Asa meditated a grand scheme
which was to pledge his whole kingdom to complete the work of
reformation, and with this in view he waited for a general assembly of
the people.

and the strangers with them out of Ephraim and Manasseh--The population
of Asa's kingdom had been vastly increased by the continued influx of
strangers, who, prompted by motives either of interest or of piety,
sought in his dominions that security and freedom which they could not
enjoy amid the complicated troubles which distracted Israel.

and out of Simeon--Although a portion of that tribe, located within the
territory of Judah, were already subjects of the southern kingdom, the
general body of the Simeonites had joined in forming the northern
kingdom of Israel. But many of them now returned of their own accord.

[2 Chronicles 15:10](../../../bib/kjv/ch2015.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">ch2 15:10</span></span>

the third month--when was held the feast of pentecost. On this occasion,
it was celebrated at Jerusalem by an extraordinary sacrifice of seven
hundred oxen and seven thousand sheep, the spoil of the Ethiopians being
offered. The assembled worshippers entered with great and holy
enthusiasm into a national covenant "to seek the Lord their God . . .
with all their heart and with all their soul;" and, at the same time, to
execute with rigor the laws which made idolatry punishable with death
([Ch2 15:13](../../../bib/kjv/ch2015.htm#013.md); [Deu
17:2-5](../../../bib/kjv/deu017.htm#002.md); [Heb
10:28](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#028).md). The people testified unbounded
satisfaction with this important religious movement, and its moral
influence was seen in the promotion of piety, order, and tranquillity
throughout the land.

[2 Chronicles 15:18](../../../bib/kjv/ch2015.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">ch2 15:18</span></span>

the things that his father had dedicated--probably part of the booty
obtained by his signal victory over Jeroboam, but which, though
dedicated, had hitherto been unrepresented.

and that he himself had dedicated--of the booty taken from the
Ethiopians. Both of these were now deposited in the temple as votive
offerings to Him whose right hand and holy arm had given them the
victory.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 Chronicles Chapter 16](ch2016.md)

</div>
