<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[2 Chronicles Index](ch2.md)  
  [Previous](ch2005)  [Next](ch2007.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*A Commentary, Critical, Practical, and Explanatory on the Old and New
Testaments*, by Robert Jamieson, A.R. Fausset and David Brown \[1882\]
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [2 Chronicles Chapter 6](../../../bib/kjv/ch2006.htm#001.md)

[2 Chronicles 6:1](../../../bib/kjv/ch2006.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">ch2 6:1</span></span>

SOLOMON BLESSES THE PEOPLE AND PRAISES GOD. (2Ch. 6:1-41)

The Lord hath said that he would dwell in the thick darkness--This
introduction to Solomon's address was evidently suggested by the
remarkable incident recorded at the close of the last chapter: the
phenomenon of a densely opaque and uniformly shaped cloud, descending in
a slow and majestic manner and filling the whole area of the temple. He
regarded it himself, and directed the people also to regard it, as an
undoubted sign and welcome pledge of the divine presence and acceptance
of the building reared to His honor and worship. He referred not to any
particular declaration of God, but to the cloud having been all along in
the national history of Israel the recognized symbol of the divine
presence ([Exo 16:10](../../../bib/kjv/exo016.htm#010.md); [Exo
24:16](../../../bib/kjv/exo024.htm#016.md); [Exo
40:34](../../../bib/kjv/exo040.htm#034.md); [Num
9:15](../../../bib/kjv/num009.htm#015.md); [Kg1
8:10-11](../../../bib/kjv/kg1008.htm#010).md).

[2 Chronicles 6:13](../../../bib/kjv/ch2006.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">ch2 6:13</span></span>

Solomon had made a brazen scaffold--a sort of platform. But the Hebrew
term rendered "scaffold," being the same as that used to designate the
basin, suggests the idea that this throne might bear some resemblance,
in form or structure, to those lavers in the temple, being a sort of
round and elevated pulpit, placed in the middle of the court, and in
front of the altar of burnt offering.

upon it he stood, and kneeled down upon his knees--After ascending the
brazen scaffold, he assumed those two attitudes in succession, and with
different objects in view. He stood while he addressed and blessed the
surrounding multitude ([Ch2 6:3-11](../../../bib/kjv/ch2006.htm#003).md).
Afterwards he knelt down and stretched out his hands towards heaven,
with his face probably turned towards the altar, while he gave utterance
to the beautiful and impressive prayer which is recorded in the
remainder of this chapter. It is deserving of notice that there was no
seat in this pulpit--for the king either stood or knelt all the time he
was in it. It is not improbable that it was surmounted by a canopy, or
covered by a veil, to screen the royal speaker from the rays of the sun.

[2 Chronicles 6:18](../../../bib/kjv/ch2006.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">ch2 6:18</span></span>

how much less this house which I have built! Have respect therefore to
the prayer of thy servant--No person who entertains just and exalted
views of the spiritual nature of the Divine Being will suppose that he
can raise a temple for the habitation of Deity, as a man builds a house
for himself. Nearly as improper and inadmissible is the idea that a
temple can contribute to enhance the glory of God, as a monument may be
raised in honor of a great man. Solomon described the true and proper
use of the temple, when he entreated that the Lord would "hearken unto
the supplications of His servant and His people Israel, which they
should make towards this place." In short, the grand purpose for which
the temple was erected was precisely the same as that contemplated by
churches--to afford the opportunity and means of public and social
worship, according to the ritual of the Mosaic dispensation--to
supplicate the divine mercy and favor--to render thanks for past
instances of goodness, and offer petitions for future blessings (see on
[Kg1 8:22](../../../bib/kjv/kg1008.htm#022).md). This religious design of
the temple--the ONE temple in the world--is in fact its standpoint of
absorbing interest.

[2 Chronicles 6:22](../../../bib/kjv/ch2006.htm#022.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">ch2 6:22</span></span>

If a man sin against his neighbour, and an oath be laid upon him to make
him swear, and the oath come before thine altar in this house, &c.--In
cases where the testimony of witnesses could not be obtained and there
was no way of settling a difference or dispute between two people but by
accepting the oath of the accused, the practice had gradually crept in
and had acquired the force of consuetudinary law, for the party to be
brought before the altar, where his oath was taken with all due
solemnity, together with the imprecation of a curse to fall upon himself
if his disavowal should be found untrue. There is an allusion to such a
practice in this passage.

[2 Chronicles 6:38](../../../bib/kjv/ch2006.htm#038.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_038">ch2 6:38</span></span>

If they return to thee . . . in the land of their captivity . . . and
pray toward their land, which thou gavest unto their fathers--These
words gave rise to the favorite usage of the ancient as well as modern
Jews, of turning in prayer toward Jerusalem, in whatever quarter of the
world they might be, and of directing their faces toward the temple when
in Jerusalem itself or in any part of the holy land ([Kg1
8:44](../../../bib/kjv/kg1008.htm#044).md).

[2 Chronicles 6:41](../../../bib/kjv/ch2006.htm#041.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_041">ch2 6:41</span></span>

arise, O Lord God into thy resting-place--These words are not found in
the record of this prayer in the First Book of Kings; but they occur in
[Psa 132:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa132.htm#008.md), which is generally
believed to have been composed by David, or rather by Solomon, in
reference to this occasion. "Arise" is a very suitable expression to be
used when the ark was to be removed from the tabernacle in Zion to the
temple on Mount Moriah.

into thy resting-place--the temple so called ([Isa
66:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#001).md), because it was a fixed and
permanent mansion ([Psa 132:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa132.htm#014).md).

the ark of thy strength--the abode by which Thy glorious presence is
symbolized, and whence Thou dost issue Thine authoritative oracles, and
manifest Thy power on behalf of Thy people when they desire and need it.
It might well be designated the ark of God's strength, because it was
through means of it the mighty miracles were wrought and the brilliant
victories were won, that distinguish the early annals of the Hebrew
nation. The sight of it inspired the greatest animation in the breasts
of His people, while it diffused terror and dismay through the ranks of
their enemies (compare [Psa 78:61](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#061).md).

let thy priests . . . be clothed with salvation--or with righteousness
([Psa 132:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa132.htm#009).md), that is, be equipped not
only with the pure white linen garments Thou hast appointed for their
robe of office, but also adorned with the moral beauties of true
holiness, that their person and services may be accepted, both for
themselves and all the people. Thus they would be "clothed with
salvation," for that is the effect and consequence of a sanctified
character.

[2 Chronicles 6:42](../../../bib/kjv/ch2006.htm#042.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_042">ch2 6:42</span></span>

turn not away the face of thine anointed--that is, of me, who by Thy
promise and appointment have been installed as king and ruler of Israel.
The words are equivalent in meaning to this: Do not reject my present
petitions; do not send me from Thy throne of grace dejected in
countenance and disappointed in heart.

remember the mercies of David thy servant--that is, the mercies promised
to David, and in consideration of that promise, hear and answer my
prayer (compare [Psa 132:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa132.htm#010).md).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 Chronicles Chapter 7](ch2007.md)

</div>
