<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Daniel Index](dan.md)  
  [Previous](dan004)  [Next](dan006.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*A Commentary, Critical, Practical, and Explanatory on the Old and New
Testaments*, by Robert Jamieson, A.R. Fausset and David Brown \[1882\]
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Daniel Chapter 5](../../../bib/kjv/dan005.htm#001.md)

[Daniel 5:1](../../../bib/kjv/dan005.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">dan 5:1</span></span>

BELSHAZZAR'S IMPIOUS FEAST; THE HANDWRITING ON THE WALL INTERPRETED BY
DANIEL OF THE DOOM OF BABYLON AND ITS KING. (Dan. 5:1-31)

Belshazzar--RAWLINSON, from the Assyrian inscriptions, has explained the
seeming discrepancy between Daniel and the heathen historians of
Babylon, BEROSUS and ABYDENUS, who say the last king (Nabonidus)
surrendered in Borsippa, after Babylon was taken, and had an honorable
abode in Caramania assigned to him. Belshazzar was joint king with his
father (called Minus in the inscriptions), but subordinate to him; hence
the Babylonian account suppresses the facts which cast discredit on
Babylon, namely, that Belshazzar shut himself up in that city and fell
at its capture; while it records the surrender of the principal king in
Borsippa (see my Introduction to Daniel). The heathen XENOPHON'S
description of Belshazzar accords with Daniel's; he calls him "impious,"
and illustrates his cruelty by mentioning that he killed one of his
nobles, merely because, in hunting, the noble struck down the game
before him; and unmanned a courtier, Gadates, at a banquet, because one
of the king's concubines praised him as handsome. Daniel shows none of
the sympathy for him which he had for Nebuchadnezzar. XENOPHON confirms
Daniel as to Belshazzar's end. WINER explains the "shazzar" in the name
as meaning "fire."

made . . . feast--heaven-sent infatuation when his city was at the time
being besieged by Cyrus. The fortifications and abundant provisions in
the city made the king despise the besiegers. It was a festival day
among the Babylonians \[XENOPHON\].

drank . . . before the thousand--The king, on this extraordinary
occasion, departed from his usual way of feasting apart from his nobles
(compare [Est 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/est001.htm#003).md).

[Daniel 5:2](../../../bib/kjv/dan005.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">dan 5:2</span></span>

whiles he tasted the wine--While under the effects of wine, men will do
what they dare not do when sober.

his father Nebuchadnezzar--that is, his forefather. So "Jesus . . . the
son of David, the son of Abraham" ([Mat
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#001).md). Daniel does not say that the
other kings mentioned in other writers did not reign between Belshazzar
and Nebuchadnezzar, namely, Evil-merodach ([Jer
52:31](../../../bib/kjv/jer052.htm#031).md), Neriglissar, his
brother-in-law, and Laborasoarchod (nine months). BEROSUS makes
Nabonidus, the last king, to have been one of the people, raised to the
throne by an insurrection. As the inscriptions show that Belshazzar was
distinct from, and joint king with, him, this is not at variance with
Daniel, whose statement that Belshazzar was son (grandson) of
Nebuchadnezzar is corroborated by Jeremiah ([Jer
27:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer027.htm#007).md). Their joint, yet independent,
testimony, as contemporaries, and having the best means of information,
is more trustworthy than any of the heathen historians, if there were a
discrepancy. Evil-merodach, son of Nebuchadnezzar (according to
BEROSUS), reigned but a short time (one or two years), having, in
consequence of his bad government, been dethroned by a plot of
Neriglissar, his sister's husband; hence Daniel does not mention him. At
the elevation of Nabonidus as supreme king, Belshazzar, the grandson of
Nebuchadnezzar, was doubtless suffered to be subordinate king and
successor, in order to conciliate the legitimate party. Thus the seeming
discrepancy becomes a confirmation of genuineness when cleared up, for
the real harmony must have been undesigned.

wives . . . concubines--not usually present at feasts in the East, where
women of the harem are kept in strict seclusion. Hence Vashti's refusal
to appear at Ahasuerus' feast ([Est
1:9-12](../../../bib/kjv/est001.htm#009).md). But the Babylonian court, in
its reckless excesses, seems not to have been so strict as the Persian.
XENOPHON \[CyropÃ&brvbr;dia, 5.2,28\] confirms Daniel, representing a
feast of Belshazzar where the concubines are present. At the beginning
"the lords" ([Dan 5:1](../../../bib/kjv/dan005.htm#001).md), for whom the
feast was made, alone seem to have been present; but as the revelry
advanced, the women were introduced. Two classes of them are mentioned,
those to whom belonged the privileges of "wives," and those strictly
concubines ([Sa2 5:13](../../../bib/kjv/sa2005.htm#013.md); [Kg1
11:3](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#003.md); [Sol
6:8](../../../bib/kjv/sol006.htm#008).md).

[Daniel 5:3](../../../bib/kjv/dan005.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">dan 5:3</span></span>

This act was not one of necessity, or for honor's sake, but in reckless
profanity.

[Daniel 5:4](../../../bib/kjv/dan005.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">dan 5:4</span></span>

praised--sang and shouted praises to "gods," which being of gold, "are
their own witnesses" ([Isa 44:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#009).md),
confuting the folly of those who fancy such to be gods.

[Daniel 5:5](../../../bib/kjv/dan005.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">dan 5:5</span></span>

In the same hour--that the cause of God's visitation might be palpable,
namely, the profanation of His vessels and His holy name.

fingers of . . . hand--God admonishes him, not by a dream (as
Nebuchadnezzar had been warned), or by a voice, but by "fingers coming
forth," the invisibility of Him who moved them heightening the awful
impressiveness of the scene, the hand of the Unseen One attesting his
doom before the eyes of himself and his guilty fellow revellers.

against the candlestick--the candelabra; where the mystic characters
would be best seen. BARNES makes it the candlestick taken from the
temple of Jerusalem, the nearness of the writing to it intimating that
the rebuke was directed against the sacrilege.

upon the plaster of the wall of the king's palace--Written in cuneiform
letters on slabs on the walls, and on the very bricks, are found the
perpetually recurring recital of titles, victories, and exploits, to
remind the spectator at every point of the regal greatness. It is
significant, that on the same wall on which the king was accustomed to
read the flattering legends of his own magnificence, he beholds the
mysterious inscription which foretells his fall (compare [Pro
16:18](../../../bib/kjv/pro016.htm#018.md); [Act
12:21-23](../../../bib/kjv/act012.htm#021).md).

part of the hand--the anterior part, namely, the fingers.

[Daniel 5:6](../../../bib/kjv/dan005.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">dan 5:6</span></span>

countenance--literally, "brightness," that is, his bright look.

joints of his loins--"the vertebrÃ&brvbr; of his back" \[GESENIUS\].

[Daniel 5:7](../../../bib/kjv/dan005.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">dan 5:7</span></span>

He calls for the magicians, who more than once had been detected in
imposture. He neglects God, and Daniel, whose fame as an interpreter was
then well-established. The world wishes to be deceived and shuts its
eyes against the light \[CALVIN\]. The Hebrews think the words were
Chaldee, but in the old Hebrew character (like that now in the Samaritan
Pentateuch).

third ruler--The first place was given to the king; the second, to the
son of the king, or of the queen; the third, to the chief of the
satraps.

[Daniel 5:8](../../../bib/kjv/dan005.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">dan 5:8</span></span>

The words were in such a character as to be illegible to the Chaldees,
God reserving this honor to Daniel.

[Daniel 5:10](../../../bib/kjv/dan005.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">dan 5:10</span></span>

queen--the queen mother, or grandmother, Nitocris, had not been present
till now. She was wife either of Nebuchadnezzar or of Evil merodach;
hence her acquaintance with the services of Daniel. She completed the
great works which the former had begun. Hence HERODOTUS attributes them
to her alone. This accounts for the deference paid to her by Belshazzar.
(See on [Dan 4:36](../../../bib/kjv/dan004.htm#036).md). Compare similar
rank given to the queen mother among the Hebrews ([Kg1
15:13](../../../bib/kjv/kg1015.htm#013).md).

[Daniel 5:11](../../../bib/kjv/dan005.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">dan 5:11</span></span>

spirit of the holy gods--She remembers and repeats Nebuchadnezzar's
language ([Dan 4:8-9](../../../bib/kjv/dan004.htm#008.md), [Dan
4:18](../../../bib/kjv/dan004.htm#018).md). As Daniel was probably,
according to Oriental custom, deprived of the office to which
Nebuchadnezzar had promoted him, as "master of the magicians" ([Dan
4:9](../../../bib/kjv/dan004.htm#009).md), at the king's death, Belshazzar
might easily be ignorant of his services.

the king . . . thy father the king . . . thy father--The repetition
marks with emphatic gravity both the excellencies of Daniel, and the
fact that Nebuchadnezzar, whom Belshazzar is bound to reverence as his
father, had sought counsel from him in similar circumstances.

[Daniel 5:13](../../../bib/kjv/dan005.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">dan 5:13</span></span>

the captivity of Judah--the captive Jews residing in Babylon.

[Daniel 5:17](../../../bib/kjv/dan005.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">dan 5:17</span></span>

Not inconsistent with [Dan 5:29](../../../bib/kjv/dan005.htm#029.md). For
here he declares his interpretation of the words is not from the desire
of reward. The honors in [Dan 5:29](../../../bib/kjv/dan005.htm#029.md)
were doubtless urged on him, without his wish, in such a way that he
could not with propriety refuse them. Had he refused them after
announcing the doom of the kingdom, he might have been suspected of
cowardice or treason.

[Daniel 5:18](../../../bib/kjv/dan005.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">dan 5:18</span></span>

God gave--It was not his own birth or talents which gave him the vast
empire, as he thought. To make him unlearn his proud thought was the
object of God's visitation on him.

majesty--in the eyes of his subjects.

glory--from his victories.

honour--from the enlargement and decoration of the city.

[Daniel 5:19](../../../bib/kjv/dan005.htm#019.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">dan 5:19</span></span>

A purely absolute monarchy ([Jer
27:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer027.htm#007).md).

[Daniel 5:21](../../../bib/kjv/dan005.htm#021.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">dan 5:21</span></span>

heart was made like . . . beasts--literally, "he made his heart like the
beasts," that is, he desired to dwell with them.

[Daniel 5:22](../../../bib/kjv/dan005.htm#022.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">dan 5:22</span></span>

Thou hast erred not through ignorance, but through deliberate contempt
of God, notwithstanding that thou hadst before thine eyes the striking
warning given in thy grandfather's case.

[Daniel 5:23](../../../bib/kjv/dan005.htm#023.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">dan 5:23</span></span>

whose are all thy ways-- ([Jer 10:23](../../../bib/kjv/jer010.htm#023).md).

[Daniel 5:24](../../../bib/kjv/dan005.htm#024.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">dan 5:24</span></span>

Then--When thou liftedst up thyself against the Lord.

the part of the hand--the fore part, the fingers.

was . . . sent from him--that is, from God.

[Daniel 5:25](../../../bib/kjv/dan005.htm#025.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">dan 5:25</span></span>

Mene, Mene, Tekel, Upharsin--literally, "numbered, weighed, and
dividers."

[Daniel 5:26](../../../bib/kjv/dan005.htm#026.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">dan 5:26</span></span>

God hath fixed the number of years of thine empire, and that number is
now complete.

[Daniel 5:27](../../../bib/kjv/dan005.htm#027.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">dan 5:27</span></span>

weighed in the balances--The Egyptians thought that Osiris weighed the
actions of the dead in a literal balance. The Babylonians may have had
the same notion, which would give a peculiar appropriateness to the
image here used.

found wanting--too light before God, the weigher of actions ([Sa1
2:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa1002.htm#003.md); [Psa
62:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa062.htm#009).md). Like spurious gold or silver
([Jer 6:30](../../../bib/kjv/jer006.htm#030).md).

[Daniel 5:28](../../../bib/kjv/dan005.htm#028.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">dan 5:28</span></span>

Peres--the explanation of "dividers" ([Dan
5:25](../../../bib/kjv/dan005.htm#025).md), the active participle plural
there being used for the passive participle singular, "dividers" for
"divided." The word "Peres" alludes to the similar word "Persia."

divided--namely, among the Medes and Persians \[MAURER\]; or, "severed"
from thee \[GROTIUS\].

[Daniel 5:29](../../../bib/kjv/dan005.htm#029.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">dan 5:29</span></span>

Belshazzar . . . clothed Daniel with scarlet--To come from the presence
of a prince in a dress presented to the wearer as a distinction is still
held a great honor in the East. Daniel was thus restored to a similar
rank to what he had held under Nebuchadnezzar ([Dan
2:48](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#048).md). Godly fidelity which might be
expected to bring down vengeance, as in this case, is often rewarded
even in this life. The king, having promised, was ashamed before his
courtiers to break his word. He perhaps also affected to despise the
prophecy of his doom, as an idle threat. As to Daniel's reasons for now
accepting what at first he had declined, compare Note, see on [Dan
5:17](../../../bib/kjv/dan005.htm#017.md). The insignia of honor would be
witnesses for God's glory to the world of his having by God's aid
interpreted the mystic characters. The cause of his elevation too would
secure the favor of the new dynasty ([Dan
6:2](../../../bib/kjv/dan006.htm#002).md) for both himself and his captive
countrymen. As the capture of the city by Cyrus was not till near
daylight, there was no want of time in that eventful night for
accomplishing all that is here recorded. The capture of the city so
immediately after the prophecy of it (following Belshazzar's sacrilege),
marked most emphatically to the whole world the connection between
Babylon's sin and its punishment.

[Daniel 5:30](../../../bib/kjv/dan005.htm#030.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">dan 5:30</span></span>

HERODOTUS and XENOPHON confirm Daniel as to the suddenness of the event.
Cyrus diverted the Euphrates into a new channel and, guided by two
deserters, marched by the dry bed into the city, while the Babylonians
were carousing at an annual feast to the gods. See also [Isa
21:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa021.htm#005.md); [Isa
44:27](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#027.md); [Jer
50:38-39](../../../bib/kjv/jer050.htm#038.md); [Jer
51:36](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#036.md). As to Belshazzar's being slain,
compare [Isa 14:18-20](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#018.md); [Isa
21:2-9](../../../bib/kjv/isa021.htm#002.md); [Jer
50:29-35](../../../bib/kjv/jer050.htm#029.md); [Jer
51:57](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#057.md).

[Daniel 5:31](../../../bib/kjv/dan005.htm#031.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">dan 5:31</span></span>

Darius the Median--that is Cyaxares II, the son and successor of
Astyages, 569-536 B.C. Though Koresh, or Cyrus, was leader of the
assault, yet all was done in the name of Darius; therefore, he alone is
mentioned here; but [Dan 6:28](../../../bib/kjv/dan006.htm#028.md) shows
Daniel was not ignorant of Cyrus' share in the capture of Babylon. [Isa
13:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa013.htm#017.md); [Isa
21:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa021.htm#002.md), confirm Daniel in making the
Medes the leading nation in destroying Babylon. So also [Jer
51:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#011.md), [Jer
51:28](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#028.md). HERODOTUS, on the other hand,
omits mentioning Darius, as that king, being weak and sensual, gave up
all the authority to his energetic nephew, Cyrus \[XENOPHON,
CyropÃ&brvbr;dia, 1.5; 8.7\].

threescore and two years old--This agrees with XENOPHON
\[CyropÃ&brvbr;dia, 8.5,19\], as to Cyaxares II.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Daniel Chapter 6](dan006.md)

</div>
