<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Daniel Index](dan)  
  [Previous](eze048)  [Next](dan001) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*A Commentary, Critical, Practical, and Explanatory on the Old and New
Testaments*, by Robert Jamieson, A.R. Fausset and David Brown \[1882\]
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Daniel Introduction](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#001)

[Daniel](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">dan 0:0</span></span>

DANIEL, that is, "God is my judge"; probably of the blood royal (compare
[Dan 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#003), with [Ch1
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/ch1003.htm#001), where a son of David is named
so). Jerusalem may have been his birthplace (though [Dan
9:24](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#024), "thy holy city," does not
necessarily imply this). He was carried to Babylon among the Hebrew
captives brought thither by Nebuchadnezzar at the first deportation in
the fourth year of Jehoiakim. As he and his three companions are called
([Dan 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#004)) "children," he cannot have
been more than about twelve years old when put in training, according to
Eastern etiquette, to be a courtier ([Dan
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#003), [Dan
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#006)). He then received a new name, by
which it was usual to mark a change in one's condition ([Kg2
23:34](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#034); [Kg2
24:17](../../../bib/kjv/kg2024.htm#017); [Ezr
5:14](../../../bib/kjv/ezr005.htm#014); [Est
2:7](../../../bib/kjv/est002.htm#007)), Belteshazzar, that is, "a prince
favored by Bel" ([Dan 1:7](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#007)). His piety
and wisdom were proverbial among his countrymen at an early period;
probably owing to that noble proof he gave of faithfulness, combined
with wisdom, in abstaining from the food sent to him from the king's
table, as being polluted by the idolatries usual at heathen banquets
([Dan 1:8-16](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#008)). Hence Ezekiel's
reference to him ([Eze 14:14](../../../bib/kjv/eze014.htm#014), [Eze
14:20](../../../bib/kjv/eze014.htm#020); [Eze
28:3](../../../bib/kjv/eze028.htm#003)) is precisely of that kind we
should expect; a coincidence which must be undesigned. Ezekiel refers to
him not as a writer, but as exhibiting a character righteous and wise in
discerning secrets, in those circumstances now found in his book, which
are earlier than the time when Ezekiel wrote. As Joseph rose in Egypt by
interpreting Pharaoh's dreams, so Daniel, by interpreting
Nebuchadnezzar's, was promoted to be governor of Babylonia, and
president of the Magian priest-caste. Under Evil-merodach,
Nebuchadnezzar's successor, as a change of officers often attends the
accession of a new king, Daniel seems to have had a lower post, which
led him occasionally to be away from Babylon ([Dan
8:2](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#002), [Dan
8:27](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#027)). Again he came into note when he
read the mystic writing of Belshazzar's doom on the wall on the night of
that monarch's impious feast. BEROSUS calls the last Babylonian king
Nabonidus and says he was not killed, but had an honorable abode in
Carmania assigned to him, after having surrendered voluntarily in
Borsippa. RAWLINSON has cleared up the discrepancy from the Nineveh
inscription. Belshazzar was joint king with his father, Evil-merodach or
Nabonidus (called Minus in the inscriptions), to whom he was
subordinate. He shut himself up in Babylon, while the other king took
refuge elsewhere, namely, in Borsippa. BEROSUS gives the Chaldean
account, which suppresses all about Belshazzar, as being to the national
dishonor. Had Daniel been a late book, he would no doubt have taken up
the later account of BEROSUS. If he gave a history differing from that
current in Babylonia, the Jews of that region would not have received it
as true. Darius the Mede, or Cyaxares II, succeeded and reigned two
years. The mention of this monarch's reign, almost unknown to profane
history (being eclipsed by the splendor of Cyrus) is an incidental proof
that Daniel wrote as a contemporary historian of events which he knew,
and did not borrow from others. In the third year of Cyrus he saw the
visions (the tenth through twelfth chapters) relating to his people down
to the latest days and the coming resurrection. He must have been about
eighty-four years old at this time. Tradition represents Daniel as
having died and been buried at Shushan. Though his advanced age did not
allow him to be among those who returned to Palestine, yet he never
ceased to have his people's interests nearest to his heart (Dan. 9:3-19;
[Dan 10:12](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#012)).

AUTHENTICITY OF THE BOOK OF DANIEL. [Dan
7:1](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#001), [Dan
7:28](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#028); [Dan
8:2](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#002); [Dan
9:2](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#002); [Dan
10:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#001); [Dan
12:4-5](../../../bib/kjv/dan012.htm#004), testify that it was composed
by Daniel himself. He does not mention himself in the first six
chapters, which are historical; for in these it is not the author, but
the events which are the prominent point. In the last six, which are
prophetical, the author makes himself known, for here it was needed,
prophecy being a revelation of words to particular men. It holds a third
rank in the Hebrew canon: not among the prophets, but in the Hagiographa
(Chetubim), between Esther and Ezra, books like it relating to the
captivity; because he did not strictly belong to those who held
exclusively the profession of "prophets" in the theocracy, but was
rather a "seer," having the gift, but not the office of prophet. Were
the book an interpolated one, it doubtless would have been placed among
the prophets. Its present position is a proof of its genuineness, as it
was deliberately put in a position different from that where most would
expect to find it. Placed between Esther, and Ezra and Nehemiah, it
separated the historical books of the time after the captivity. Thus,
Daniel was, as BENGEL calls him, the politician, chronologer, and
historian among the prophets. The Psalms also, though many are
prophetical, are ranked with the Hagiographa, not with the prophets; and
the Revelation of John is separated from his Epistles, as Daniel is from
the Old Testament prophets. Instead of writing in the midst of the
covenant people, and making them the foreground of his picture, he
writes in a heathen court, the world kingdoms occupying the foreground,
and the kingdom of God, though ultimately made the most significant, the
background. His peculiar position in the heathen court is reflected in
his peculiar position in the canon. As the "prophets" in the Old
Testament, so the epistles of the apostles in the New Testament were
written by divinely commissioned persons for their contemporaries. But
Daniel and John were not in immediate contact with the congregation, but
isolated and alone with God, the one in a heathen court, the other on a
lonely isle ([Rev 1:9](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#009)). PORPHYRY, the
assailant of Christianity in the third century, asserted that the Book
of Daniel was a forgery of the time of the Maccabees (170-164 B.C.), a
time when confessedly there were no prophets, written after the events
as to Antiochus Epiphanes, which it professes to foretell; so accurate
are the details. A conclusive proof of Daniel's inspiration, if his
prophecies can be shown to have been before the events. Now we know,
from JOSEPHUS \[Antiquities, 10.11.7\], that the Jews in Christ's days
recognized Daniel as in the canon. Zechariah, Ezra, and Nehemiah,
centuries before Antiochus, refer to it. Jesus refers to it in His
characteristic designation, "Son of man," [Mat
24:30](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#030) ([Dan
7:13](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#013)); also expressly by name, and as
a "prophet," in [Mat 24:15](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#015) (compare
[Mat 24:21](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#021), with [Dan
12:1](../../../bib/kjv/dan012.htm#001), &c.); and in the moment that
decided His life ([Mat 26:64](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#064)) or
death, when the high priest adjured him by the living God. Also, in [Luk
1:19-26](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#019), "Gabriel" is mentioned, whose
name occurs nowhere else in Scripture, save in [Dan
8:16](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#016); [Dan
9:21](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#021). Besides the references to it in
Revelation, Paul confirms the prophetical part of it, as to the
blasphemous king ([Dan 7:8](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#008), [Dan
7:25](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#025); [Dan
11:36](../../../bib/kjv/dan011.htm#036)), in [Co1
6:2](../../../bib/kjv/co1006.htm#002); [Th2
2:3-4](../../../bib/kjv/th2002.htm#003); the narrative part, as to the
miraculous deliverances from "the lions" and "the fire," in [Heb
11:33-34](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#033). Thus the book is expressly
attested by the New Testament on the three points made the
stumbling-block of neologists--the predictions, the narratives of
miracles, and the manifestations of angels. An objection has been stated
to the unity of the book, namely, that Jesus quotes no part of the first
half of Daniel. But [Mat 21:44](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#044) would
be an enigma if it were not a reference to the "stone that smote the
image" ([Dan 2:34-35](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#034), [Dan
2:44-45](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#044)). Thus the New Testament
sanctions the second, third, sixth, seventh, and eleventh chapters. The
design of the miracles in the heathen courts where Daniel was, as of
those of Moses in Egypt, was to lead the world power, which seemed to be
victorious over the theocracy, to see the essential inner superiority of
the seemingly fallen kingdom of God to itself, and to show prostrate
Israel that the power of God was the same as of old in Egypt. The first
book of Maccabees (compare 1 Maccabees 1:24; 9:27, 40, with [Dan
12:1](../../../bib/kjv/dan012.htm#001); [Dan
11:26](../../../bib/kjv/dan011.htm#026), of the Septuagint) refers to
Daniel as an accredited book, and even refers to the Septuagint
Alexandrian version of it. The fact of Daniel having a place in the
Septuagint shows it was received by the Jews at large prior to the
Maccabean times. The Septuagint version so arbitrarily deviated from the
Hebrew Daniel, that Theodotius' version was substituted for it in the
early Christian Church. JOSEPHUS \[Antiquities, 11.8.5\] mentions that
Alexander the Great had designed to punish the Jews for their fidelity
to Darius, but that Jaddua (332 B.C.), the high priest, met him at the
head of a procession and averted his wrath by showing him Daniel's
prophecy that a Grecian monarch should overthrow Persia. Certain it is,
Alexander favored the Jews, and JOSEPHUS' statement gives an explanation
of the fact; at least it shows that the Jews in JOSEPHUS' days believed
that Daniel was extant in Alexander's days, long before the Maccabees.
With Jaddua (high priest from 341-322 B.C.) the Old Testament history
ends ([Neh 12:11](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#011)). (The register of
the priests and Levites was not written by Nehemiah, who died about 400
B.C., but was inserted with divine sanction by the collectors of the
canon subsequently.) An objection to Daniel's authenticity has been
rested on a few Greek words found in it. But these are mostly names of
Greek musical instruments, which were imported by Greece from the East,
rather than vice versa. Some of the words are derived from the common
Indo-Germanic stock of both Greek and Chaldee: hence their appearance in
both tongues. And one or two may have come through the Greeks of Asia
Minor to the Chaldee. The fact that from the fourth verse of the second
chapter to the end of the seventh, the language is Chaldee, but the rest
Hebrew, is not an argument against, but for, its authenticity. So in
Ezra the two languages are found. The work, if that of one author, must
have been composed by someone in the circumstances of Daniel, that is,
by one familiar with both languages. No native-born Hebrew who had not
lived in Chaldea would know Chaldee so well as to use it with the same
idiomatic ease as his native tongue; the very impurities in Daniel's use
of both are just such as were natural to one in his circumstances, but
unnatural to one in a later age, or to one not half Hebrew, half
Chaldean in residence as Daniel was. Those parts of Daniel which concern
the whole world are mostly Chaldee, then the language of the world
empire. So Greek was made the language of the New Testament, which was
designed for the whole world. Those affecting the Jews, mostly Hebrew;
and this not so impure as that of Ezekiel. His Chaldee is a mixture of
Hebrew and Aramaic. Two predictions alone are enough to prove to us that
Daniel was a true prophet. (1) That his prophecies reach beyond
Antiochus; namely, he foretells the rise of the four great monarchies,
Babylon, Medo-Persia, Greece, and Rome (the last not being in Daniel's
time known beyond the precincts of Italy, or rather of Latium), and that
no other earthly kingdom would subvert the fourth, but that it would
divide into parts. All this has come to pass. No fifth great earthly
monarchy has arisen, though often attempted, as by Charlemagne, Charles
V, and Napoleon. (2) The time of Messiah's advent, as dated from a
certain decree, His being cut off, and the destruction of the city. "He
who denies Daniel's prophecies," says SIR ISAAC NEWTON, "undermines
Christianity, which is founded on Daniel's prophecies concerning
Christ."

CHARACTERISTICS OF DANIEL. The vision mode of revelation is the
exception in other prophets, the rule in Daniel. In Zechariah (Zec.
1:1-6:15), who lived after Daniel, the same mode appears, but the other
form from the seventh chapter to the end. The Revelation of St. John
alone is perfectly parallel to Daniel, which may be called the Old
Testament Apocalypse. In the contents too there is the difference above
noticed, that he views the kingdom of God from the standpoint of the
world kingdoms, the development of which is his great subject. This mode
of viewing it was appropriate to his own position in a heathen court,
and to the relation of subjection in which the covenant-people then
stood to the world powers. No longer are single powers of the world
incidentally introduced, but the universal monarchies are the chief
theme, in which the worldly principle, opposed to the kingdom of God,
manifests itself fully. The near and distant are not seen in the same
perspective, as by the other prophets, who viewed the whole future from
the eschatological point; but in Daniel the historical details are given
of that development of the world powers which must precede the advent of
the kingdom \[AUBERLEN\].

SIGNIFICANCE OF THE BABYLONIAN CAPTIVITY. The exile is the historical
basis of Daniel's prophecies, as Daniel implies in the first chapter,
which commences with the beginning, and ends with the termination, of
the captivity ([Dan 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#001), [Dan
1:21](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#021); compare [Dan
9:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#001)). A new stage in the theocracy
begins with the captivity. Nebuchadnezzar made three incursions into
Judah. The first under Jehoiakim (606 B.C.), in which Daniel was carried
away, subjected the theocracy to the Babylonian world power. The second
(598 B.C.) was that in which Jehoiachin and Ezekiel were carried away.
In the third (588 B.C.), Nebuchadnezzar destroyed Jerusalem and carried
away Zedekiah. Originally, Abraham was raised out of the "sea" ([Dan
7:2](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#002)) of the nations, as an island holy
to God, and his seed chosen as God's mediator of His revelations of love
to mankind. Under David and Solomon, the theocracy, as opposed to the
heathen power, attained its climax in the Old Testament, not only being
independent, but lord of the surrounding nations; so that the period of
these two kings was henceforth made the type of the Messianic. But when
God's people, instead of resting on Him, seek alliance with the world
power, that very power is made the instrument of their chastisement. So
Ephraim (722 B.C.) fell by Assyria; and Judah also, drawn into the
sphere of the world's movements from the time of Ahaz, who sought
Assyrian help (740 B.C., Isa. 7:1-25) at last fell by Babylon, and
thenceforth has been more or less dependent on the world monarchies, and
so, till Messiah, was favored with no revelations from the time of
Malachi (four hundred years). Thus, from the beginning of the exile, the
theocracy, in the strict sense, ceased on earth; the rule of the world
powers superseding it. But God's covenant with Israel remains firm ([Rom
11:29](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#029)); therefore, a period of
blessing under Messiah's kingdom is now foretold as about to follow
their long chastisement. The exile thus is the turning point in the
history of the theocracy, which ROOS thus divides: (1) From Adam to the
exodus out of Egypt. (2) From the exodus to the beginning of the
Babylonian captivity. (3) From the captivity to the millennium. (4) From
the millennium to the end of the world. The position of Daniel in the
Babylonian court was in unison with the altered relations of the
theocracy and the world power, which new relation was to be the theme of
his prophecy. Earlier prophets, from the standpoint of Israel, treated
of Israel in its relation to the world powers; Daniel, from Babylon, the
center of the then world power, treats of the world powers in their
relation to Israel. His seventy years' residence in Babylon, and his
high official position there, gave him an insight into the world's
politics, fitting him to be the recipient of political revelations;
while his spiritual experiences, gained through Nebuchadnezzar's
humiliation, Belshazzar's downfall, and the rapid decay of the
Babylonian empire itself, as well as the miraculous deliverances of
himself and his friends (the third through sixth chapters), all fitted
him for regarding things from the spiritual standpoint, from which the
world's power appears transient, but the glory of God's kingdom eternal.
As his political position was the body, the school of magicians in which
he had studied for three years ([Dan
1:4-5](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#004)) was the soul; and his mind
strong in faith and nourished by the earlier prophecies ([Dan
9:2](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#002)), the spirit of his prophecy,
which only waited for the spirit of revelation from above to kindle it.
So God fits His organs for their work. AUBERLEN compares Daniel to
Joseph: the one at the beginning, the other at the end of the Jewish
history of revelation; both representatives of God and His people at
heathen courts; both interpreters of the dim presentiments of truth,
expressed in God-sent dreams, and therefore raised to honor by the
powers of the world: so representing Israel's calling to be a royal
priesthood among the nations; and types of Christ, the true Israel, and
of Israel's destination to be a light to lighten the whole Gentile
world, as [Rom 11:12](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#012), [Rom
11:15](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#015) foretells. As Achilles at the
beginning, and Alexander at the end, of Grecian history are the mirrors
of the whole life of the Hellenic people, so Joseph and Daniel of
Israel.

CONTENTS OF THE BOOK. Historical and biographical introduction in the
first chapter. Daniel, a captive exile, is representative of his nation
in its servitude and exile: while his heavenly insight into dreams, far
exceeding that of the magi, represents the divine superiority of the
covenant-people over their heathen lords. The high dignities, even in
the world, which he thereby attained, typify the giving of the
earth-kingdom at last "to the people of the saints of the Most High"
([Dan 7:27](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#027)). Thus Daniel's personal
history is the typical foundation of his prophecy. The prophets had to
experience in themselves, and in their age, something of what they
foretold about future times; just as David felt much of Christ's
sufferings in his own person (compare [Hos
1:2-11](../../../bib/kjv/hos001.htm#002); [Hos
2:3](../../../bib/kjv/hos002.htm#003)). So Jon. 1:1-17, &c. \[ROOS\].
Hence biographical notices of Daniel and his friends are inserted among
his prophecies. The second through twelfth chapters contain the
substance of the book, and consist of two parts. The first (the second
through seventh chapters) represents the development of the world
powers, viewed from a historical point. The second (the eighth through
twelfth chapters), their development in relation to Israel, especially
in the future preceding Christ's first advent, foretold in the ninth
chapter. But prophecy looks beyond the immediate future to the complete
fulfilment in the last days, since the individual parts in the organic
history of salvation cannot be understood except in connection with the
whole. Also Israel looked forward to the Messianic time, not only for
spiritual salvation, but also for the visible restoration of the kingdom
which even now we too expect. The prophecy which they needed ought
therefore to comprise both, and so much of the history of the world as
would elapse before the final consummation. The period of Daniel's
prophecies, therefore, is that from the downfall of the theocracy at the
captivity till its final restoration, yet future--the period of the
dominion of the world powers, not set aside by Christ's first coming
([Joh 18:36](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#036); for, to have taken the
earth-kingdom then, would have been to take it from Satan's hands, [Mat
4:8-10](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#008)), but to be superseded by His
universal and everlasting kingdom at His second coming ([Rev
11:15](../../../bib/kjv/rev011.htm#015)). Thus the general survey of the
development and final destiny of the world powers (the second through
seventh chapters) fittingly precedes the disclosures as to the immediate
future (the eighth through twelfth chapters). Daniel marks the division
by writing the first part in Chaldee, and the second, and the
introduction, in Hebrew; the former, referring to the powers of the
world, in the language of the then dominant world power under which he
lived; the latter, relating to the people of God, in their own language.
An interpolator in a later age would have used Hebrew, the language of
the ancient prophets throughout, or if anywhere Aramaic, so as to be
understood by his contemporaries, he would have used it in the second
rather than in the first part as having a more immediate reference to
his own times \[AUBERLEN\].

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Daniel Chapter 1](dan001)

</div>
