<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Deuteronomy Index](deu.md)  
  [Previous](deu006)  [Next](deu008.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*A Commentary, Critical, Practical, and Explanatory on the Old and New
Testaments*, by Robert Jamieson, A.R. Fausset and David Brown \[1882\]
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Deuteronomy Chapter 7](../../../bib/kjv/deu007.htm#001.md)

[Deuteronomy 7:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu007.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">deu 7:1</span></span>

ALL COMMUNION WITH THE NATIONS FORBIDDEN. (Deu. 7:1-26)

the Hittites--This people were descended from Heth, the second son of
Canaan ([Gen 10:15](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#015).md), and occupied the
mountainous region about Hebron, in the south of Palestine.

the Girgashites--supposed by some to be the same as the Gergesenes ([Mat
8:28](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#028).md), who lay to the east of Lake
Gennesareth; but they are placed on the west of Jordan ([Jos
24:11](../../../bib/kjv/jos024.htm#011).md), and others take them for a
branch of the large family of the Hivites, as they are omitted in nine
out of ten places where the tribes of Canaan are enumerated; in the
tenth they are mentioned, while the Hivites are not.

the Amorites--descended from the fourth son of Canaan. They occupied,
besides their conquest on the Moabite territory, extensive settlements
west of the Dead Sea, in the mountains.

the Canaanites--located in PhÅ“nicia, particularly about Tyre and Sidon,
and being sprung from the oldest branch of the family of Canaan, bore
his name.

the Perizzites--that is, villagers, a tribe who were dispersed
throughout the country and lived in unwalled towns.

the Hivites--who dwelt about Ebal and Gerizim, extending towards Hermon.
They are supposed to be the same as the Avims.

the Jebusites--resided about Jerusalem and the adjacent country.

seven nations greater and mightier than thou--Ten were formerly
mentioned ([Gen 15:19-21](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#019).md). But in the
lapse of near five hundred years, it cannot be surprising that some of
them had been extinguished in the many intestine feuds that prevailed
among those warlike tribes. It is more than probable that some,
stationed on the east of Jordan, had fallen under the victorious arms of
the Israelites.

[Deuteronomy 7:2](../../../bib/kjv/deu007.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">deu 7:2</span></span>

thou shalt smite them, and utterly destroy them; thou shalt make no
covenant with them--This relentless doom of extermination which God
denounced against those tribes of Canaan cannot be reconciled with the
attributes of the divine character, except on the assumption that their
gross idolatry and enormous wickedness left no reasonable hope of their
repentance and amendment. If they were to be swept away like the
antediluvians or the people of Sodom and Gomorrah, as incorrigible
sinners who had filled up the measure of their iniquities, it mattered
not to them in what way the judgment was inflicted; and God, as the
Sovereign Disposer, had a right to employ any instruments that pleased
Him for executing His judgments. Some think that they were to be
exterminated as unprincipled usurpers of a country which God had
assigned to the posterity of Eber and which had been occupied ages
before by wandering shepherds of that race, till, on the migration of
Jacob's family into Egypt through the pressure of famine, the Canaanites
overspread the whole land, though they had no legitimate claim to it,
and endeavored to retain possession of it by force. In this view their
expulsion was just and proper. The strict prohibition against
contracting any alliances with such infamous idolaters was a prudential
rule, founded on the experience that "evil communications corrupt good
manners" \[[Co1 15:33](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#033.md)\], and its
importance or necessity was attested by the unhappy examples of Solomon
and others in the subsequent history of Israel.

[Deuteronomy 7:5](../../../bib/kjv/deu007.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">deu 7:5</span></span>

thus shall ye deal with them; ye shall destroy their altars, &c.--The
removal of the temples, altars, and everything that had been enlisted in
the service, or might tend to perpetuate the remembrance, of Canaanite
idolatry, was likewise highly expedient for preserving the Israelites
from all risk of contamination. It was imitated by the Scottish
Reformers, and although many ardent lovers of architecture and the fine
arts have anathematized their proceedings as vandalism, yet there was
profound wisdom in the favorite maxim of Knox--"pull down the nests, and
the rooks will disappear."

[Deuteronomy 7:6](../../../bib/kjv/deu007.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">deu 7:6</span></span>

For thou art an holy people unto the Lord thy God--that is, set apart to
the service of God, or chosen to execute the important purposes of His
providence. Their selection to this high destiny was neither on account
of their numerical amount (for, till after the death of Joseph, they
were but a handful of people); nor because of their extraordinary merits
(for they had often pursued a most perverse and unworthy conduct); but
it was in consequence of the covenant or promise made with their pious
forefathers; and the motives that led to that special act were such as
tended not only to vindicate God's wisdom, but to illustrate His glory
in diffusing the best and most precious blessings to all mankind.

[Deuteronomy 7:11](../../../bib/kjv/deu007.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">deu 7:11</span></span>

Thou shalt therefore keep the commandments, and the statutes, and the
judgments, which I command thee this day--In the covenant into which God
entered with Israel, He promised to bestow upon them a variety of
blessings so long as they continued obedient to Him as their heavenly
King. He pledged His veracity that His infinite perfections would be
exerted for this purpose, as well as for delivering them from every evil
to which, as a people, they would be exposed. That people accordingly
were truly happy as a nation, and found every promise which the faithful
God made to them amply fulfilled, so long as they adhered to that
obedience which was required of them. See a beautiful illustration of
this in [Psa 144:12-15](../../../bib/kjv/psa144.htm#012.md).

[Deuteronomy 7:15](../../../bib/kjv/deu007.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">deu 7:15</span></span>

the evil diseases of Egypt--(See [Exo
15:26](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#026).md). Besides those with which
Pharaoh and his subjects were visited, Egypt has always been dreadfully
scourged with diseases. The testimony of Moses is confirmed by the
reports of many modern writers, who tell us that, notwithstanding its
equal temperature and sereneness, that country has some indigenous
maladies which are very malignant, such as ophthalmia, dysentery,
smallpox, and the plague.

[Deuteronomy 7:20](../../../bib/kjv/deu007.htm#020.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">deu 7:20</span></span>

Moreover the Lord thy God will send the hornet among them--(See on [Jos
24:12](../../../bib/kjv/jos024.htm#012.md) \[and [Exo
23:28](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#028)\].md).

[Deuteronomy 7:22](../../../bib/kjv/deu007.htm#022.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">deu 7:22</span></span>

lest the beasts of the field increase upon thee--(See on [Exo
23:29](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#029).md). The omnipotence of their
Almighty Ruler could have given them possession of the promised land at
once. But, the unburied corpses of the enemy and the portions of the
country that might have been left desolate for a while, would have drawn
an influx of dangerous beasts. This evil would be prevented by a
progressive conquest and by the use of ordinary means, which God would
bless.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Deuteronomy Chapter 8](deu008.md)

</div>
