<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Deuteronomy Index](deu.md)  
  [Previous](deu001)  [Next](deu003.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*A Commentary, Critical, Practical, and Explanatory on the Old and New
Testaments*, by Robert Jamieson, A.R. Fausset and David Brown \[1882\]
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Deuteronomy Chapter 2](../../../bib/kjv/deu002.htm#001.md)

[Deuteronomy 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu002.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">deu 2:1</span></span>

THE STORY IS CONTINUED. (Deu. 2:1-37)

Then we turned, and took our journey into the wilderness by the way of
the Red Sea--After their unsuccessful attack upon the Canaanites, the
Israelites broke up their encampment at Kadesh, and journeying southward
over the west desert of Tih as well as through the great valley of the
Ghor and Arabah, they extended their removals as far as the gulf of
Akaba.

we compassed mount Seir many days--In these few words Moses comprised
the whole of that wandering nomadic life through which they passed
during thirty-eight years, shifting from place to place, and regulating
their stations by the prospect of pasturage and water. Within the
interval they went northward a second time to Kadesh, but being refused
a passage through Edom and opposed by the Canaanites and Amalekites,
they again had no alternative but to traverse once more the great Arabah
southwards to the Red Sea, where turning to the left and crossing the
long, lofty mountain chain to the eastward of Ezion-geber ([Num
21:4-5](../../../bib/kjv/num021.htm#004).md), they issued into the great
and elevated plains, which are still traversed by the Syrian pilgrims in
their way to Mecca. They appear to have followed northward nearly the
same route, which is now taken by the Syrian hadji, along the western
skirts of this great desert, near the mountains of Edom \[ROBINSON\]. It
was on entering these plains they received the command, "Ye have
compassed this mountain (this hilly tract, now Jebel Shera) long enough,
turn ye northward" \[[Deu 2:3](../../../bib/kjv/deu002.htm#003.md)\].

[Deuteronomy 2:4](../../../bib/kjv/deu002.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">deu 2:4</span></span>

the children of Esau, which dwell in Seir . . . shall be afraid of
you--The same people who had haughtily repelled the approach of the
Israelites from the western frontier were alarmed now that they had come
round upon the weak side of their country.

[Deuteronomy 2:5](../../../bib/kjv/deu002.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">deu 2:5</span></span>

Meddle not with them--that is, "which dwell in Seir" ([Deu
2:4](../../../bib/kjv/deu002.htm#004).md) --for there was another branch of
Esau's posterity, namely, the Amalekites, who were to be fought against
and destroyed ([Gen 36:12](../../../bib/kjv/gen036.htm#012.md); [Exo
17:14](../../../bib/kjv/exo017.htm#014.md); [Deu
25:17](../../../bib/kjv/deu025.htm#017).md). But the people of Edom were
not to be injured, either in their persons or property. And although the
approach of so vast a nomadic horde as the Israelites naturally created
apprehension, they were to take no advantage of the prevailing terror to
compel the Edomites to accept whatever terms they imposed. They were
merely to pass "through" or along their border, and to buy meat and
water of them for money ([Deu 2:6](../../../bib/kjv/deu002.htm#006).md).
The people, kinder than their king, did sell them bread, meat, fruits,
and water in their passage along their border ([Deu
2:29](../../../bib/kjv/deu002.htm#029).md), in the same manner as the
Syrian caravan of Mecca is now supplied by the people of the same
mountains, who meet the pilgrims as at a fair or market on the hadji
route \[ROBINSON\]. Although the Israelites still enjoyed a daily supply
of the manna, there was no prohibition against their eating other food
when opportunity afforded. Only they were not to cherish an inordinate
desire for it. Water is a scarce commodity and is often paid for by
travellers in those parts. It was the more incumbent on the Israelites
to do so, as, by the blessing of God, they possessed plenty of means to
purchase, and the long-continued experience of the extraordinary
goodness of God to them, should inspire such confidence in Him as would
suppress the smallest thought of resorting to fraud or violence in
supplying their wants.

[Deuteronomy 2:8](../../../bib/kjv/deu002.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">deu 2:8</span></span>

we passed . . . through the way of the plain--the Arabah or great
valley, from Elath ("trees") (the Ailah of the Greeks and Romans). The
site of it is marked by extensive mounds of rubbish.

Ezion-geber--now Akaba, both were within the territory of Edom; and
after making a circuit of its southeastern boundary, the Israelites
reached the border of Moab on the southeast of the Salt Sea. They had
been forbidden by divine command to molest the Moabites in any way; and
this special honor was conferred on that people not on their own
account, for they were very wicked, but in virtue of their descent from
Lot. (See on [Deu 23:3](../../../bib/kjv/deu023.htm#003).md). Their
territory comprised the fine country on the south, and partly on the
north of the Arnon. They had won it by their arms from the original
inhabitants, the Emims, a race, terrible, as their name imports, for
physical power and stature ([Gen
14:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen014.htm#005).md), in like manner as the Edomites
had obtained their settlement by the overthrow of the original occupiers
of Seir, the Horims ([Gen 14:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen014.htm#006).md), who
were troglodytes, or dwellers in caves. Moses alluded to these
circumstances to encourage his countrymen to believe that God would much
more enable them to expel the wicked and accursed Canaanites. At that
time, however, the Moabites, having lost the greater part of their
possessions through the usurpations of Sihon, were reduced to the small
but fertile region between the Zered and the Arnon.

[Deuteronomy 2:13](../../../bib/kjv/deu002.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">deu 2:13</span></span>

Now rise up, and get you over the brook Zered--The southern border of
Moab, Zered ("woody"), now Wady Ahsy, separates the modern district of
Kerak from Jebal, and, indeed, forms a natural division of the country
between the north and south. Ar, called in later times Rabbah, was the
capital of Moab and situated twenty-five miles south of the Arnon on the
banks of a small but shady stream, the Beni Hamed. It is here mentioned
as representative of the country dependent on it, a rich and
well-cultivated country, as appears from the numerous ruins of cities,
as well as from the traces of tillage still visible on the fields.

[Deuteronomy 2:16](../../../bib/kjv/deu002.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">deu 2:16</span></span>

all the men of war were consumed and dead from among the people--The
outbreak at Kadesh on the false report of the spies had been the
occasion of the fatal decree by which God doomed the whole grown-up
population to die in the wilderness \[[Num
14:29](../../../bib/kjv/num014.htm#029.md)\]; but that outbreak only filled
up the measure of their iniquities. For that generation, though not
universally abandoned to heathenish and idolatrous practices, yet had
all along displayed a fearful amount of ungodliness in the desert, which
this history only hints at obscurely, but which is expressly asserted
elsewhere ([Eze 20:25-26](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#025.md); [Amo
5:25](../../../bib/kjv/amo005.htm#025.md), [Amo
5:27](../../../bib/kjv/amo005.htm#027.md); [Act
7:42-43](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#042).md).

[Deuteronomy 2:19](../../../bib/kjv/deu002.htm#019.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">deu 2:19</span></span>

when thou comest nigh over against the children of Ammon, distress them
not, nor meddle with them--The Ammonites, being kindred to the Moabites,
were, from regard to the memory of their common ancestor, to remain
undisturbed by the Israelites. The territory of this people had been
directly north from that of Moab. It extended as far as the Jabbok,
having been taken by them from a number of small Canaanitish tribes,
namely, the Zamzummins, a bullying, presumptuous band of giants, as
their name indicates; and the Avims, the aborigines of the district
extending from Hazerim or Hazeroth (El Hudhera) even unto Azzah (Gaza),
but of which they had been dispossessed by the Caphtorim (Philistines),
who came out of Caphtor (Lower Egypt) and settled in the western coast
of Palestine. The limits of the Ammonites were now compressed; but they
still possessed the mountainous region beyond the Jabbok ([Jos
11:2](../../../bib/kjv/jos011.htm#002).md). What a strange insight does
this parenthesis of four verses give into the early history of
Palestine! How many successive wars of conquest had swept over its early
state--what changes of dynasty among the Canaanitish tribes had taken
place long prior to the transactions recorded in this history!

[Deuteronomy 2:24](../../../bib/kjv/deu002.htm#024.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">deu 2:24</span></span>

Rise ye up . . . and pass over the river Arnon--At its mouth, this
stream is eighty-two feet wide and four deep. It flows in a channel
banked by perpendicular cliffs of sandstone. At the date of the
Israelitish migration to the east of the Jordan, the whole of the fine
country lying between the Arnon and the Jabbok including the mountainous
tract of Gilead, had been seized by the Amorites, who, being one of the
nations doomed to destruction (see [Deu
7:2](../../../bib/kjv/deu007.htm#002.md); [Deu
20:16](../../../bib/kjv/deu020.htm#016).md), were utterly exterminated.
Their country fell by right of conquest into the hands of the
Israelites. Moses, however, considering this doom as referring solely to
the Amorite possessions west of Jordan, sent a pacific message to Sihon,
requesting permission to go through his territories, which lay on the
east of that river. It is always customary to send messengers before to
prepare the way; but the rejection of Moses' request by Sihon and his
opposition to the advance of the Israelites ([Num
21:23](../../../bib/kjv/num021.htm#023.md); [Jdg
11:26](../../../bib/kjv/jdg011.htm#026).md) drew down on himself and his
Amorite subjects the predicted doom on the first pitched battlefield
with the Canaanites. It secured to Israel not only the possession of a
fine and pastoral country, but, what was of more importance to them, a
free access to the Jordan on the east.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Deuteronomy Chapter 3](deu003.md)

</div>
