<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Deuteronomy Index](deu)  
  [Previous](deu011)  [Next](deu013) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*A Commentary, Critical, Practical, and Explanatory on the Old and New
Testaments*, by Robert Jamieson, A.R. Fausset and David Brown \[1882\]
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Deuteronomy Chapter 12](../../../bib/kjv/deu012.htm#001)

[Deuteronomy 12:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu012.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">deu 12:1</span></span>

MONUMENTS OF IDOLATRY TO BE DESTROYED. ([Deu
12:1-15](../../../bib/kjv/deu012.htm#001))

These are the statutes and judgments, which ye shall observe--Having in
the preceding chapter inculcated upon the Israelites the general
obligation to fear and love God, Moses here enters into a detail of some
special duties they were to practise on their obtaining possession of
the promised land.

[Deuteronomy 12:2](../../../bib/kjv/deu012.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">deu 12:2</span></span>

Ye shall utterly destroy all the places, wherein the nations which ye
shall possess served their gods--This divine command was founded on the
tendencies of human nature; for to remove out of sight everything that
had been associated with idolatry, that it might never be spoken of and
no vestige of it remain, was the only effectual way to keep the
Israelites from temptations to it. It is observable that Moses does not
make any mention of temples, for such buildings were not in existence at
that early period. The "places" chosen as the scene of heathen worship
were situated either on the summit of a lofty mountain, or on some
artificial mound, or in a grove, planted with particular trees, such as
oaks, poplars, and elms ([Isa 57:5-7](../../../bib/kjv/isa057.htm#005);
[Hos 4:13](../../../bib/kjv/hos004.htm#013)). The reason for the
selection of such sites was both to secure retirement and to direct the
attention upward to heaven; and the "place" was nothing else than a
consecrated enclosure, or at most, a canopy or screen from the weather.

[Deuteronomy 12:3](../../../bib/kjv/deu012.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">deu 12:3</span></span>

And ye shall overthrow their altars--piles of turf or small stones.

and break their pillars--Before the art of sculpture was known, the
statues of idols were only rude blocks of colored stones.

[Deuteronomy 12:5](../../../bib/kjv/deu012.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">deu 12:5</span></span>

unto the place which the Lord your God shall choose . . . to put his
name there . . . thou shalt come--They were forbidden to worship either
in the impure superstitious manner of the heathen, or in any of the
places frequented by them. A particular place for the general rendezvous
of all the tribes would be chosen by God Himself; and the choice of one
common place for the solemn rites of religion was an act of divine
wisdom, for the security of the true religion. It was admirably
calculated to prevent the corruption which would otherwise have crept in
from their frequenting groves and high hills--to preserve uniformity of
worship and keep alive their faith in Him to whom all their sacrifices
pointed. The place was successively Mizpeh, Shiloh, and especially
Jerusalem. But in all the references made to it by Moses, the name is
never mentioned. This studied silence was maintained partly lest the
Canaanites within whose territories it lay might have concentrated their
forces to frustrate all hopes of obtaining it; partly lest the desire of
possessing a place of such importance might have become a cause of
strife or rivalry amongst the Hebrew tribes, as about the appointment to
the priesthood (Num. 16:1-30).

[Deuteronomy 12:7](../../../bib/kjv/deu012.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">deu 12:7</span></span>

there ye shall eat before the Lord--of the things mentioned ([Deu
12:6](../../../bib/kjv/deu012.htm#006)); but of course, none of the
parts assigned to the priests before the Lord--in the place where the
sanctuary should be established, and in those parts of the Holy City
which the people were at liberty to frequent and inhabit.

[Deuteronomy 12:12](../../../bib/kjv/deu012.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">deu 12:12</span></span>

ye shall rejoice before the Lord your God, ye, and your sons, and your
daughters, &c.--Hence it appears that, although males only were
commanded to appear before God at the annual solemn feasts ([Exo
23:17](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#017)), the women were allowed to
accompany them (1Sa. 1:3-23).

[Deuteronomy 12:15](../../../bib/kjv/deu012.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">deu 12:15</span></span>

Notwithstanding thou mayest kill and eat flesh in all thy gates--Every
animal designed for food, whether ox, goat, or lamb, was during the
abode in the wilderness ordered to be slain as a peace offering at the
door of the tabernacle; its blood to be sprinkled, and its fat burnt
upon the altar by the priest. The encampment, being then round about the
altar, made this practice, appointed to prevent idolatry, easy and
practicable. But on the settlement in the promised land, the obligation
to slay at the tabernacle was dispensed with. The people were left at
liberty to prepare their meat in their cities or homes.

according to the blessing of the Lord thy God which he hath given
thee--The style of living should be accommodated to one's condition and
means--profuse and riotous indulgence can never secure the divine
blessing.

the unclean and the clean may eat thereof--The unclean here are those
who were under some slight defilement, which, without excluding them
from society, yet debarred them from eating any of the sacred meats
([Lev 7:20](../../../bib/kjv/lev007.htm#020)). They were at liberty
freely to partake of common articles of food.

of the roebuck--the gazelle.

and as of the hart--The Syrian deer (Cervus barbatus) is a species
between our red and fallow deer, distinguished by the want of a
bis-antler, or second branch on the horns, reckoning from below, and for
a spotted livery which is effaced only in the third or fourth year.

[Deuteronomy 12:16](../../../bib/kjv/deu012.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">deu 12:16</span></span>

BLOOD PROHIBITED. ([Deu 12:16-25](../../../bib/kjv/deu012.htm#016))

ye shall not eat the blood; ye shall pour it upon the earth as
water--The prohibition against eating or drinking blood as an unnatural
custom accompanied the announcement of the divine grant of animal flesh
for food ([Gen 9:4](../../../bib/kjv/gen009.htm#004)), and the
prohibition was repeatedly renewed by Moses with reference to the great
objects of the law ([Lev 17:12](../../../bib/kjv/lev017.htm#012)), the
prevention of idolatry, and the consecration of the sacrificial blood to
God. In regard, however, to the blood of animals slain for food, it
might be shed without ceremony and poured on the ground as a common
thing like water--only for the sake of decency, as well as for
preventing all risk of idolatry, it was to be covered over with earth
([Lev 17:13](../../../bib/kjv/lev017.htm#013)), in opposition to the
practice of heathen sportsmen, who left it exposed as an offering to the
god of the chase.

[Deuteronomy 12:22](../../../bib/kjv/deu012.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">deu 12:22</span></span>

Even as the roebuck and the hart is eaten, so shalt thou eat them,
&c.--Game when procured in the wilderness had not been required to be
brought to the door of the tabernacle. The people were now to be as free
in the killing of domestic cattle as of wild animals. The permission to
hunt and use venison for food was doubtless a great boon to the
Israelites, not only in the wilderness, but on their settlement in
Canaan, as the mountainous ranges of Lebanon, Carmel, and Gilead, on
which deer abounded in vast numbers, would thus furnish them with a
plentiful and luxuriant repast.

[Deuteronomy 12:26](../../../bib/kjv/deu012.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">deu 12:26</span></span>

HOLY THINGS TO BE EATEN IN THE HOLY PLACE. ([Deu
12:26-32](../../../bib/kjv/deu012.htm#026))

Only thy holy things which thou hast--The tithes mentioned ([Deu
12:17](../../../bib/kjv/deu012.htm#017)) are not to be considered
ordinary tithes, which belonged to the Levites, and of which private
Israelites had a right to eat; but they are other extraordinary tithes
or gifts, which the people carried to the sanctuary to be presented as
peace offerings, and on which, after being offered and the allotted
portion given to the priest, they feasted with their families and
friends ([Lev 27:30](../../../bib/kjv/lev027.htm#030)).

[Deuteronomy 12:29](../../../bib/kjv/deu012.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">deu 12:29</span></span>

Take heed to thyself that thou be not snared by following them . . .
saying, How did these nations serve their gods?--The Israelites,
influenced by superstitious fear, too often endeavored to propitiate the
deities of Canaan. Their Egyptian education had early impressed that
bugbear notion of a set of local deities, who expected their dues of all
who came to inhabit the country which they honored with their
protection, and severely resented the neglect of payment in all
newcomers \[WARBURTON\]. Taking into consideration the prevalence of
this idea among them, we see that against an Egyptian influence was
directed the full force of the wholesome caution with which this chapter
closes.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Deuteronomy Chapter 13](deu013)

</div>
