<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Deuteronomy Index](deu)  
  [Previous](deu020)  [Next](deu022) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*A Commentary, Critical, Practical, and Explanatory on the Old and New
Testaments*, by Robert Jamieson, A.R. Fausset and David Brown \[1882\]
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Deuteronomy Chapter 21](../../../bib/kjv/deu021.htm#001)

[Deuteronomy 21:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu021.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">deu 21:1</span></span>

EXPIATION OF UNCERTAIN MURDER. ([Deu
21:1-9](../../../bib/kjv/deu021.htm#001))

If one be found slain . . . lying in the field, and it be not known who
hath slain him--The ceremonies here ordained to be observed on the
discovery of a slaughtered corpse show the ideas of sanctity which the
Mosaic law sought to associate with human blood, the horror which murder
inspired, as well as the fears that were felt lest God should avenge it
on the country at large, and the pollution which the land was supposed
to contract from the effusion of innocent, unexpiated blood. According
to Jewish writers, the Sanhedrin, taking charge of such a case, sent a
deputation to examine the neighborhood. They reported to the nearest
town to the spot where the body was found. An order was then issued by
their supreme authority to the elders or magistrates of that town, to
provide the heifer at the civic expense and go through the appointed
ceremonial. The engagement of the public authorities in the work of
expiation, the purchase of the victim heifer, the conducting it to a
"rough valley" which might be at a considerable distance, and which, as
the original implies, was a wady, a perennial stream, in the waters of
which the polluting blood would be wiped away from the land, and a
desert withal, incapable of cultivation; the washing of the hands, which
was an ancient act symbolical of innocence--the whole of the ceremonial
was calculated to make a deep impression on the Jewish, as well as on
the Oriental, mind generally; to stimulate the activity of the
magistrates in the discharge of their official duties; to lead to the
discovery of the criminal, and the repression of crime.

[Deuteronomy 21:10](../../../bib/kjv/deu021.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">deu 21:10</span></span>

THE TREATMENT OF A CAPTIVE TAKEN TO WIFE. ([Deu
21:10-23](../../../bib/kjv/deu021.htm#010))

When thou goest to war . . . and seest among the captives a beautiful
woman . . . that thou wouldest have her to thy wife--According to the
war customs of all ancient nations, a female captive became the slave of
the victor, who had the sole and unchallengeable control of right to her
person. Moses improved this existing usage by special regulations on the
subject. He enacted that, in the event that her master was captivated by
her beauty and contemplated a marriage with her, a month should be
allowed to elapse, during which her perturbed feelings might be calmed,
her mind reconciled to her altered condition, and she might bewail the
loss of her parents, now to her the same as dead. A month was the usual
period of mourning with the Jews, and the circumstances mentioned here
were the signs of grief--the shaving of the head, the allowing the nails
to grow uncut, the putting off her gorgeous dress in which ladies, on
the eve of being captured, arrayed themselves to be the more attractive
to their captors. The delay was full of humanity and kindness to the
female slave, as well as a prudential measure to try the strength of her
master's affections. If his love should afterwards cool and he become
indifferent to her person, he was not to lord it over her, neither to
sell her in the slave market, nor retain her in a subordinate condition
in his house; but she was to be free to go where her inclinations led
her.

[Deuteronomy 21:15](../../../bib/kjv/deu021.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">deu 21:15</span></span>

If a man have two wives, one beloved, and another hated--In the original
and all other translations, the words are rendered "have had," referring
to events that have already taken place; and that the "had" has, by some
mistake, been omitted in our version, seems highly probable from the
other verbs being in the past tense--"hers that was hated," not "hers
that is hated"; evidently intimating that she (the first wife) was dead
at the time referred to. Moses, therefore, does not here legislate upon
the case of a man who has two wives at the same time, but on that of a
man who has married twice in succession, the second wife after the
decease of the first; and there was an obvious necessity for legislation
in these circumstances; for the first wife, who was hated, was dead, and
the second wife, the favorite, was alive; and with the feelings of a
stepmother, she would urge her husband to make her own son the heir.
This case has no bearing upon polygamy, which there is no evidence that
the Mosaic code legalized.

[Deuteronomy 21:18](../../../bib/kjv/deu021.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">deu 21:18</span></span>

If a man have a stubborn and rebellious son--A severe law was enacted in
this case. But the consent of both parents was required as a prevention
of any abuse of it; for it was reasonable to suppose that they would not
both agree to a criminal information against their son except from
absolute necessity, arising from his inveterate and hopeless wickedness;
and, in that view, the law was wise and salutary, as such a person would
be a pest and nuisance to society. The punishment was that to which
blasphemers were doomed \[[Lev
24:23](../../../bib/kjv/lev024.htm#023)\]; for parents are considered
God's representatives and invested with a portion of his authority over
their children.

[Deuteronomy 21:22](../../../bib/kjv/deu021.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">deu 21:22</span></span>

if a man have committed a sin . . . and thou hang him on a tree--Hanging
was not a Hebrew form of execution (gibbeting is meant), but the body
was not to be left to rot or be a prey to ravenous birds; it was to be
buried "that day," either because the stench in a hot climate would
corrupt the air, or the spectacle of an exposed corpse bring ceremonial
defilement on the land.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Deuteronomy Chapter 22](deu022)

</div>
