<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Deuteronomy Index](deu)  
  [Previous](deu021)  [Next](deu023) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*A Commentary, Critical, Practical, and Explanatory on the Old and New
Testaments*, by Robert Jamieson, A.R. Fausset and David Brown \[1882\]
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Deuteronomy Chapter 22](../../../bib/kjv/deu022.htm#001)

[Deuteronomy 22:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu022.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">deu 22:1</span></span>

OF HUMANITY TOWARD BRETHREN. ([Deu
22:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/deu022.htm#001))

Thou shalt not see thy brother's ox or his sheep go astray, and hide
thyself from them, &c.--"Brother" is a term of extensive application,
comprehending persons of every description; not a relative, neighbor, or
fellow countryman only, but any human being, known or unknown, a
foreigner, and even an enemy ([Exo
23:4](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#004)). The duty inculcated is an act
of common justice and charity, which, while it was taught by the law of
nature, was more clearly and forcibly enjoined in the law delivered by
God to His people. Indifference or dissimulation in the circumstances
supposed would not only be cruelty to the dumb animals, but a violation
of the common rights of humanity; and therefore the dictates of natural
feeling, and still more the authority of the divine law, enjoined that
the lost or missing property of another should be taken care of by the
finder, till a proper opportunity occurred of restoring it to the owner.

[Deuteronomy 22:5](../../../bib/kjv/deu022.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">deu 22:5</span></span>

THE SEX TO BE DISTINGUISHED BY APPAREL. ([Deu
22:5-12](../../../bib/kjv/deu022.htm#005))

The woman shall not wear that which pertaineth unto a man, neither shall
a man put on a woman's garment--Though disguises were assumed at certain
times in heathen temples, it is probable that a reference was made to
unbecoming levities practised in common life. They were properly
forbidden; for the adoption of the habiliments of the one sex by the
other is an outrage on decency, obliterates the distinctions of nature
by fostering softness and effeminacy in the man, impudence and boldness
in the woman as well as levity and hypocrisy in both; and, in short, it
opens the door to an influx of so many evils that all who wear the dress
of another sex are pronounced "an abomination unto the Lord."

[Deuteronomy 22:6](../../../bib/kjv/deu022.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">deu 22:6</span></span>

If a bird's nest chance to be before thee--This is a beautiful instance
of the humanizing spirit of the Mosaic law, in checking a tendency to
wanton destructiveness and encouraging a spirit of kind and
compassionate tenderness to the tiniest creatures. But there was wisdom
as well as humanity in the precept; for, as birds are well known to
serve important uses in the economy of nature, the extirpation of a
species, whether of edible or ravenous birds, must in any country be
productive of serious evils. But Palestine, in particular, was situated
in a climate which produced poisonous snakes and scorpions; and the
deserts and mountains would have been overrun with them as well as
immense swarms of flies, locusts, mice, and vermin of various kinds if
the birds which fed upon them were extirpated \[MICHAELIS\].
Accordingly, the counsel given in this passage was wise as well as
humane, to leave the hen undisturbed for the propagation of the species,
while the taking of the brood occasionally was permitted as a check to
too rapid an increase.

[Deuteronomy 22:8](../../../bib/kjv/deu022.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">deu 22:8</span></span>

thou shalt make a battlement for thy roof, that thou bring not blood
upon thine house, if any man fall from thence--The tops of houses in
ancient Judea, as in the East still, were flat, being composed of
branches or twigs laid across large beams, and covered with a cement of
clay or strong plaster. They were surrounded by a parapet breast high.
In summer the roof is a favorite resort for coolness, and accidents
would frequently happen from persons incautiously approaching the edge
and falling into the street or court; hence it was a wise and prudent
precaution in the Jewish legislator to provide that a stone balustrade
or timber railing round the roof should form an essential part of every
new house.

[Deuteronomy 22:9](../../../bib/kjv/deu022.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">deu 22:9</span></span>

Thou shalt not sow thy vineyard with divers seeds--(See on [Lev
19:19](../../../bib/kjv/lev019.htm#019)).

[Deuteronomy 22:10](../../../bib/kjv/deu022.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">deu 22:10</span></span>

Thou shalt not plough with an ox and an ass together--Whether this
association, like the mixture of seeds, had been dictated by
superstitious motives and the prohibition was symbolical, designed to
teach a moral lesson ([Co2 6:14](../../../bib/kjv/co2006.htm#014)), may
or may not have been the case. But the prohibition prevented a great
inhumanity still occasionally practised by the poorer sort in Oriental
countries. An ox and ass, being of different species and of very
different characters, cannot associate comfortably, nor unite cheerfully
in drawing a plough or a wagon. The ass being much smaller and his step
shorter, there would be an unequal and irregular draft. Besides, the
ass, from feeding on coarse and poisonous weeds, has a fetid breath,
which its yoke fellow seeks to avoid, not only as poisonous and
offensive, but producing leanness, or, if long continued, death; and
hence, it has been observed always to hold away its head from the ass
and to pull only with one shoulder.

[Deuteronomy 22:11](../../../bib/kjv/deu022.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">deu 22:11</span></span>

thou shalt not wear a garment of divers sorts--The essence of the crime
([Zep 1:8](../../../bib/kjv/zep001.htm#008)) consisted, not in wearing a
woollen and a linen robe, but in the two stuffs being woven together,
according to a favorite superstition of ancient idolaters (see on [Lev
19:19](../../../bib/kjv/lev019.htm#019)).

[Deuteronomy 22:12](../../../bib/kjv/deu022.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">deu 22:12</span></span>

thou shalt make thee fringes upon the four quarters--or, according to
some eminent biblical interpreters, tassels on the coverlet of the bed.
The precept is not the same as [Num
15:38](../../../bib/kjv/num015.htm#038).

[Deuteronomy 22:13](../../../bib/kjv/deu022.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">deu 22:13</span></span>

If a man take a wife, &c.--The regulations that follow might be
imperatively needful in the then situation of the Israelites; and yet,
it is not necessary that we should curiously and impertinently inquire
into them. So far was it from being unworthy of God to leave such things
upon record, that the enactments must heighten our admiration of His
wisdom and goodness in the management of a people so perverse and so
given to irregular passions. Nor is it a better argument that the
Scriptures were not written by inspiration of God to object that this
passage, and others of a like nature, tend to corrupt the imagination
and will be abused by evil-disposed readers, than it is to say that the
sun was not created by God, because its light may be abused by wicked
men as an assistant in committing crimes which they have meditated
\[HORNE\].

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Deuteronomy Chapter 23](deu023)

</div>
