<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Deuteronomy Index](deu)  
  [Previous](deu029)  [Next](deu031) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*A Commentary, Critical, Practical, and Explanatory on the Old and New
Testaments*, by Robert Jamieson, A.R. Fausset and David Brown \[1882\]
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Deuteronomy Chapter 30](../../../bib/kjv/deu030.htm#001)

[Deuteronomy 30:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu030.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">deu 30:1</span></span>

GREAT MERCIES PROMISED UNTO THE PENITENT. ([Deu
30:1-10](../../../bib/kjv/deu030.htm#001))

when all these things are come upon thee, . . . and thou shalt return .
. . then the Lord thy God will turn thy captivity--The hopes of the
Hebrew people are ardently directed to this promise, and they
confidently expect that God, commiserating their forlorn and fallen
condition, will yet rescue them from all the evils of their long
dispersion. They do not consider the promise as fulfilled by their
restoration from the captivity in Babylon, for Israel was not then
scattered in the manner here described--"among all the nations," "unto
the utmost parts of heaven" ([Deu
30:4](../../../bib/kjv/deu030.htm#004)). When God recalled them from
that bondage, all the Israelites were not brought back. They were not
multiplied above their fathers ([Deu
30:5](../../../bib/kjv/deu030.htm#005)), nor were their hearts and those
of their children circumcised to love the Lord ([Deu
30:6](../../../bib/kjv/deu030.htm#006)). It is not, therefore, of the
Babylonish captivity that Moses was speaking in this passage; it must be
of the dispersed state to which they have been doomed for eighteen
hundred years. This prediction may have been partially accomplished on
the return of the Israelites from Babylon; for, according to the
structure and design of Scripture prophecy, it may have pointed to
several similar eras in their national history; and this view is
sanctioned by the prayer of Nehemiah ([Neh
1:8-9](../../../bib/kjv/neh001.htm#008)). But undoubtedly it will
receive its full and complete accomplishment in the conversion of the
Jews to the Gospel of Christ. At the restoration from the Babylonish
captivity, that people were changed in many respects for the better.
They were completely weaned from idolatry; and this outward reformation
was a prelude to the higher attainments they are destined to reach in
the age of Messiah, "when the Lord God will circumcise their hearts and
the hearts of their seed to love the Lord." The course pointed out seems
clearly to be this: that the hearts of the Hebrew people shall be
circumcised ([Col 2:2](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#002)); in other
words, by the combined influences of the Word and spirit of God, their
hearts will be touched and purified from all their superstition and
unbelief. They will be converted to the faith of Jesus Christ as their
Messiah--a spiritual deliverer, and the effect of their conversion will
be that they will return and obey the voice (the Gospel, the evangelical
law) of the Lord. The words may be interpreted either wholly in a
spiritual sense ([Joh 11:51-52](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#051)), or,
as many think, in a literal sense also (Rom. 11:1-36). They will be
recalled from all places of the dispersion to their own land and enjoy
the highest prosperity. The mercies and favors of a bountiful Providence
will not then be abused as formerly ([Deu
31:20](../../../bib/kjv/deu031.htm#020); [Deu
32:15](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#015)). They will be received in a
better spirit and employed to nobler purposes. They will be happy, "for
the Lord will again rejoice over them for good, as He rejoiced over
their fathers."

[Deuteronomy 30:11](../../../bib/kjv/deu030.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">deu 30:11</span></span>

THE COMMANDMENT IS MANIFEST. ([Deu
30:11-14](../../../bib/kjv/deu030.htm#011))

For this commandment . . . is not hidden . . . neither is it far
off--That law of loving and obeying God, which was the subject of Moses'
discourse, was well known to the Israelites. They could not plead
ignorance of its existence and requirements. It was not concealed as an
impenetrable mystery in heaven, for it had been revealed; nor was it
carefully withheld from the people as a dangerous discovery; for the
youngest and humblest of them were instructed in those truths, which
were subjects of earnest study and research among the wisest and
greatest of other nations. They were not under a necessity of
undertaking long journeys or distant voyages, as many ancient sages did
in quest of knowledge. They enjoyed the peculiar privilege of a familiar
acquaintance with it. It was with them a subject of common conversation,
engraven on their memories, and frequently explained and inculcated on
their hearts. The apostle Paul ([Rom
10:6-8](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#006)) has applied this passage to
the Gospel, for the law of Christ is substantially the same as that of
Moses, only exhibited more clearly in its spiritual nature and extensive
application; and, accompanied with the advantages of Gospel grace, it is
practicable and easy.

[Deuteronomy 30:15](../../../bib/kjv/deu030.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">deu 30:15</span></span>

DEATH AND LIFE ARE SET BEFORE THE ISRAELITES. ([Deu
30:15-20](../../../bib/kjv/deu030.htm#015))

See, I have set before thee this day life and good, and death and
evil--the alternative of a good and happy, or a disobedient and
miserable life. Love of God and compliance with His will are the only
ways of securing the blessings and avoiding the evils described. The
choice was left to them, and in urging upon them the inducements to a
wise choice, Moses warmed as he proceeded into a tone of solemn and
impressive earnestness similar to that of Paul to the elders of Ephesus
([Act 20:26-27](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#026)).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Deuteronomy Chapter 31](deu031)

</div>
