<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Deuteronomy Index](deu.md)  
  [Previous](deu008)  [Next](deu010.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*A Commentary, Critical, Practical, and Explanatory on the Old and New
Testaments*, by Robert Jamieson, A.R. Fausset and David Brown \[1882\]
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Deuteronomy Chapter 9](../../../bib/kjv/deu009.htm#001.md)

[Deuteronomy 9:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu009.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">deu 9:1</span></span>

MOSES DISSUADES THEM FROM THE OPINION OF THEIR OWN RIGHTEOUSNESS. (Deu.
9:1-25)

this day--means this time. The Israelites had reached the confines of
the promised land, but were obliged, to their great mortification, to
return. But now they certainly were to enter it. No obstacle could
prevent their possession; neither the fortified defenses of the towns,
nor the resistance of the gigantic inhabitants of whom they had received
from the spies so formidable a description.

cities great and fenced up to heaven--Oriental cities generally cover a
much greater space than those in Europe; for the houses often stand
apart with gardens and fields intervening. They are almost all
surrounded with walls built of burnt or sun-dried bricks, about forty
feet in height. All classes in the East, but especially the nomad
tribes, in their ignorance of engineering and artillery, would have
abandoned in despair the idea of an assault on a walled town, which
to-day would be demolished in a few hours.

[Deuteronomy 9:4](../../../bib/kjv/deu009.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">deu 9:4</span></span>

Speak not thou in thine heart, . . . saying, For my righteousness the
Lord hath brought me in to possess this land--Moses takes special care
to guard his countrymen against the vanity of supposing that their own
merits had procured them the distinguished privilege. The Canaanites
were a hopelessly corrupt race, and deserved extermination; but history
relates many remarkable instances in which God punished corrupt and
guilty nations by the instrumentality of other people as bad as
themselves. It was not for the sake of the Israelites, but for His own
sake, for the promise made to their pious ancestors, and in furtherance
of high and comprehensive purposes of good to the world, that God was
about to give them a grant of Canaan.

[Deuteronomy 9:7](../../../bib/kjv/deu009.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">deu 9:7</span></span>

Remember, and forget not, how thou provokedst the Lord--To dislodge from
their minds any presumptuous idea of their own righteousness, Moses
rehearses their acts of disobedience and rebellion committed so
frequently, and in circumstances of the most awful and impressive
solemnity, that they had forfeited all claims to the favor of God. The
candor and boldness with which he gave, and the patient submission with
which the people bore, his recital of charges so discreditable to their
national character, has often been appealed to as among the many
evidences of the truth of this history.

[Deuteronomy 9:8](../../../bib/kjv/deu009.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">deu 9:8</span></span>

Also in Horeb--rather, "even in Horeb," where it might have been
expected they would have acted otherwise.

[Deuteronomy 9:12](../../../bib/kjv/deu009.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">deu 9:12</span></span>

Arise, get thee down quickly from hence; for thy people . . . have
corrupted themselves--With a view to humble them effectually, Moses
proceeds to particularize some of the most atrocious instances of their
infidelity. He begins with the impiety of the golden calf--an impiety
which, while their miraculous emancipation from Egypt, the most
stupendous displays of the Divine Majesty that were exhibited on the
adjoining mount, and the recent ratification of the covenant by which
they engaged to act as the people of God, were fresh in memory,
indicated a degree of inconstancy or debasement almost incredible.

[Deuteronomy 9:17](../../../bib/kjv/deu009.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">deu 9:17</span></span>

I took the two tables, . . . and broke them before your eyes--not in the
heat of intemperate passion, but in righteous indignation, from zeal to
vindicate the unsullied honor of God, and by the suggestion of His
Spirit to intimate that the covenant had been broken, and the people
excluded from the divine favor.

[Deuteronomy 9:18](../../../bib/kjv/deu009.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">deu 9:18</span></span>

I fell down before the Lord--The sudden and painful reaction which this
scene of pagan revelry produced on the mind of the pious and patriotic
leader can be more easily imagined than described. Great and public sins
call for seasons of extraordinary humiliation, and in his deep
affliction for the awful apostasy, he seems to have held a miraculous
fast as long as before.

[Deuteronomy 9:20](../../../bib/kjv/deu009.htm#020.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">deu 9:20</span></span>

The Lord was very angry with Aaron to have destroyed him--By allowing
himself to be overborne by the tide of popular clamor, Aaron became a
partaker in the guilt of idolatry and would have suffered the penalty of
his sinful compliance, had not the earnest intercession of Moses on his
behalf prevailed.

[Deuteronomy 9:21](../../../bib/kjv/deu009.htm#021.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">deu 9:21</span></span>

I cast the dust thereof into the brook that descended out of the
mount--that is, "the smitten rock" (El Leja) which was probably
contiguous to, or a part of, Sinai. It is too seldom borne in mind that
though the Israelites were supplied with water from this rock when they
were stationed at Rephidim (Wady Feiran), there is nothing in the
Scripture narrative which should lead us to suppose that the rock was in
the immediate neighborhood of that place (see on [Exo
17:5](../../../bib/kjv/exo017.htm#005).md). The water on this smitten rock
was probably the brook that descended from the mount. The water may have
flowed at the distance of many miles from the rock, as the winter
torrents do now through the wadies of Arabia-PetrÃ&brvbr;a ([Psa
78:15-16](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#015).md). And the rock may have been
smitten at such a height, and at a spot bearing such a relation to the
Sinaitic valleys, as to furnish in this way supplies of water to the
Israelites during the journey from Horeb by the way of mount Seir and
Kadesh-barnea ([Deu 1:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#001).md). On this
supposition new light is, perhaps, cast on the figurative language of
the apostle, when he speaks of "the rock following" the Israelites ([Co1
10:4](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#004).md) \[WILSON, Land of the Bible\].

[Deuteronomy 9:25](../../../bib/kjv/deu009.htm#025.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">deu 9:25</span></span>

Thus I fell down before the Lord forty days and forty nights, as I fell
down at the first--After the enumeration of various acts of rebellion,
he had mentioned the outbreak at Kadesh-barnea, which, on a superficial
reading of this verse, would seem to have led Moses to a third and
protracted season of humiliation. But on a comparison of this passage
with [Num 14:5](../../../bib/kjv/num014.htm#005.md), the subject and
language of this prayer show that only the second act of intercession
([Deu 9:18](../../../bib/kjv/deu009.htm#018).md) is now described in fuller
detail.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Deuteronomy Chapter 10](deu010.md)

</div>
