<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Deuteronomy Index](deu.md)  
  [Previous](deu010)  [Next](deu012.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*A Commentary, Critical, Practical, and Explanatory on the Old and New
Testaments*, by Robert Jamieson, A.R. Fausset and David Brown \[1882\]
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Deuteronomy Chapter 11](../../../bib/kjv/deu011.htm#001.md)

[Deuteronomy 11:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu011.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">deu 11:1</span></span>

AN EXHORTATION TO OBEDIENCE. (Deu. 11:1-32)

Therefore thou shalt love the Lord thy God, and keep his charge--The
reason for the frequent repetition of the same or similar counsels is to
be traced to the infantine character and state of the church, which
required line upon line and precept upon precept. Besides, the
Israelites were a headstrong and perverse people, impatient of control,
prone to rebellion, and, from their long stay in Egypt, so violently
addicted to idolatry, that they ran imminent risk of being seduced by
the religion of the country to which they were going, which, in its
characteristic features, bore a strong resemblance to that of the
country they had left.

[Deuteronomy 11:2](../../../bib/kjv/deu011.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">deu 11:2</span></span>

I speak not with your children which have not known . . . But your eyes
have seen all the great acts of the Lord which he did--Moses is here
giving a brief summary of the marvels and miracles of awful judgment
which God had wrought in effecting their release from the tyranny of
Pharaoh, as well as those which had taken place in the wilderness. He
knew that he might dwell upon these, for he was addressing many who had
been witnesses of those appalling incidents. For it will be remembered
that the divine threatening that they should die in the wilderness, and
its execution, extended only to males from twenty years and upward, who
were able to go forth to war. No males under twenty years of age, no
females, and none of the tribe of Levi, were objects of the denunciation
(see [Num 14:28-30](../../../bib/kjv/num014.htm#028.md); [Num
16:49](../../../bib/kjv/num016.htm#049).md). There might, therefore, have
been many thousands of the Israelites at that time of whom Moses could
say, "Your eyes have seen all the great acts which He did"; and with
regard to those the historic review of Moses was well calculated to stir
up their minds to the duty and advantages of obedience.

[Deuteronomy 11:10](../../../bib/kjv/deu011.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">deu 11:10</span></span>

For the land, whither thou goest in to possess it, is not as the land of
Egypt, from whence ye came out--The physical features of Palestine
present a striking contrast to those of the land of bondage. A widely
extending plain forms the cultivated portion of Egypt, and on the
greater part of this low and level country rain never falls. This
natural want is supplied by the annual overflow of the Nile, and by
artificial means from the same source when the river has receded within
its customary channel. Close by the bank the process of irrigation is
very simple. The cultivator opens a small sluice on the edge of the
square bed in which seed has been sown, making drill after drill; and
when a sufficient quantity of water has poured in, he shuts it up with
his foot. Where the bank is high, the water is drawn up by hydraulic
engines, of which there are three kinds used, of different power,
according to the subsidence of the stream. The water is distributed in
small channels or earthen conduits, simple in construction, worked by
the foot, and formed with a mattock by the gardener who directs their
course, and which are banked up or opened, as occasion may require, by
pressing in the soil with the foot. Thus was the land watered in which
the Israelites had dwelt so long. Such vigilance and laborious industry
would not be needed in the promised land. Instead of being visited with
moisture only at one brief season and left during the rest of the year
under a withering blight, every season it would enjoy the benign
influences of a genial climate. The hills would attract the frequent
clouds, and in the refreshing showers the blessing of God would
especially rest upon the land.

[Deuteronomy 11:12](../../../bib/kjv/deu011.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">deu 11:12</span></span>

A land which the Lord thy God careth for--that is, watering it, as it
were, with His own hands, without human aid or mechanical means.

[Deuteronomy 11:14](../../../bib/kjv/deu011.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">deu 11:14</span></span>

the first rain and the latter rain--The early rain commenced in autumn,
that is, chiefly during the months of September and October, while the
latter rain fell in the spring of the year, that is, during the months
of March and April. It is true that occasional showers fell all the
winter; but, at the autumnal and vernal seasons, they were more
frequent, copious, and important; for the early rain was necessary,
after a hot and protracted summer, to prepare the soil for receiving the
seed; and the latter rain, which shortly preceded the harvest, was of
the greatest use in invigorating the languishing powers of vegetation
([Jer 5:24](../../../bib/kjv/jer005.htm#024.md); [Joe
2:23](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#023.md); [Amo
4:7](../../../bib/kjv/amo004.htm#007.md); [Jam
5:7](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#007).md).

[Deuteronomy 11:15](../../../bib/kjv/deu011.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">deu 11:15</span></span>

I will send grass in thy fields for thy cattle--Undoubtedly the special
blessing of the former and the latter rain \[[Deu
11:14](../../../bib/kjv/deu011.htm#014.md)\] was one principal cause of the
extraordinary fertility of Canaan in ancient times. That blessing was
promised to the Israelites as a temporal reward for their fidelity to
the national covenant \[[Deu 11:13](../../../bib/kjv/deu011.htm#013.md)\].
It was threatened to be withdrawn on their disobedience or apostasy; and
most signally is the execution of that threatening seen in the present
sterility of Palestine. MR. LOWTHIAN, an English farmer, who was struck
during his journey from Joppa to Jerusalem by not seeing a blade of
grass, where even in the poorest localities of Britain some wild
vegetation is found, directed his attention particularly to the subject,
and pursued the inquiry during a month's residence in Jerusalem, where
he learned that a miserably small quantity of milk is daily sold to the
inhabitants at a dear rate, and that chiefly asses' milk. "Most
clearly," says he, "did I perceive that the barrenness of large portions
of the country was owing to the cessation of the early and latter rain,
and that the absence of grass and flowers made it no longer the land
([Deu 11:9](../../../bib/kjv/deu011.htm#009).md) flowing with milk and
honey."

[Deuteronomy 11:18](../../../bib/kjv/deu011.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">deu 11:18</span></span>

lay up these my words in your heart and in your soul, and bind
them--(See on [Deu 6:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu006.htm#001).md).

[Deuteronomy 11:24](../../../bib/kjv/deu011.htm#024.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">deu 11:24</span></span>

Every place whereon the soles of your feet shall tread shall be
yours--not as if the Jews should be lords of the world, but of every
place within the promised land. It should be granted to them and
possessed by them, on conditions of obedience:

from the wilderness--the Arabah on the south;

Lebanon--the northern limit;

Euphrates--their boundary on the east. Their grant of dominion extended
so far, and the right was fulfilled to Solomon.

even unto the uttermost sea--the Mediterranean.

[Deuteronomy 11:26](../../../bib/kjv/deu011.htm#026.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">deu 11:26</span></span>

Behold, I set before you this day a blessing and a curse--(See on [Deu
27:11](../../../bib/kjv/deu027.htm#011).md).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Deuteronomy Chapter 12](deu012.md)

</div>
