<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Deuteronomy Index](deu)  
  [Previous](deu005)  [Next](deu007) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*A Commentary, Critical, Practical, and Explanatory on the Old and New
Testaments*, by Robert Jamieson, A.R. Fausset and David Brown \[1882\]
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Deuteronomy Chapter 6](../../../bib/kjv/deu006.htm#001)

[Deuteronomy 6:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu006.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">deu 6:1</span></span>

MOSES EXHORTS ISRAEL TO HEAR GOD AND TO KEEP HIS COMMANDMENTS. (Deu.
6:1-25)

Now these are the commandments, the statutes, and the judgments, which
the Lord your God commanded to teach you, that ye might do them . . .
whither ye go to possess it--The grand design of all the institutions
prescribed to Israel was to form a religious people, whose national
character should be distinguished by that fear of the Lord their God
which would ensure their divine observance of His worship and their
steadfast obedience to His will. The basis of their religion was an
acknowledgment of the unity of God with the understanding and the love
of God in the heart ([Deu 6:4-5](../../../bib/kjv/deu006.htm#004)).
Compared with the religious creed of all their contemporaries, how sound
in principle, how elevated in character, how unlimited in the extent of
its moral influence on the heart and habits of the people! Indeed, it is
precisely the same basis on which rests the purer and more spiritual
form of it which Christianity exhibits ([Mat
22:37](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#037); [Mar
12:30](../../../bib/kjv/mar012.htm#030); [Luk
10:27](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#027)). Moreover, to help in keeping a
sense of religion in their minds, it was commanded that its great
principles should be carried about with them wherever they went, as well
as meet their eyes every time they entered their homes. A further
provision was made for the earnest inculcation of them on the minds of
the young by a system of parental training, which was designed to
associate religion with all the most familiar and oft-recurring scenes
of domestic life. It is probable that Moses used the phraseology in [Deu
6:7](../../../bib/kjv/deu006.htm#007) merely in a figurative way, to
signify assiduous, earnest, and frequent instruction; and perhaps he
meant the metaphorical language in [Deu
6:8](../../../bib/kjv/deu006.htm#008) to be taken in the same sense
also. But as the Israelites interpreted it literally, many writers
suppose that a reference was made to a superstitious custom borrowed
from the Egyptians, who wore jewels and ornamental trinkets on the
forehead and arm, inscribed with certain words and sentences, as amulets
to protect them from danger. These, it has been conjectured, Moses
intended to supersede by substituting sentences of the law; and so the
Hebrews understood him, for they have always considered the wearing of
the Tephilim, or frontlets, a permanent obligation. The form was as
follows: Four pieces of parchment, inscribed, the first with [Exo
13:2-10](../../../bib/kjv/exo013.htm#002); the second with [Exo
13:11-16](../../../bib/kjv/exo013.htm#011); the third with [Deu
6:1-8](../../../bib/kjv/deu006.htm#001); and the fourth with [Deu
11:18-21](../../../bib/kjv/deu011.htm#018), were enclosed in a square
case or box of tough skin, on the side of which was placed the Hebrew
letter (shin), and bound round the forehead with a thong or ribbon. When
designed for the arms, those four texts were written on one slip of
parchment, which, as well as the ink, was carefully prepared for the
purpose. With regard to the other usage supposed to be alluded to, the
ancient Egyptians had the lintels and imposts of their doors and gates
inscribed with sentences indicative of a favorable omen \[WILKINSON\];
and this is still the case, for in Egypt and other Mohammedan countries,
the front doors of houses (in Cairo, for instance) are painted red,
white, and green, bearing conspicuously inscribed upon them such
sentences from the Koran, as "God is the Creator," "God is one, and
Mohammed is his prophet." Moses designed to turn this ancient and
favorite custom to a better account and ordered that, instead of the
former superstitious inscriptions, there should be written the words of
God, persuading and enjoining the people to hold the laws in perpetual
remembrance.

[Deuteronomy 6:20](../../../bib/kjv/deu006.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">deu 6:20</span></span>

when thy son asketh thee in time to come, saying--The directions given
for the instruction of their children form only an extension of the
preceding counsels.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Deuteronomy Chapter 7](deu007)

</div>
