<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Deuteronomy Index](deu)  
  [Previous](deu026)  [Next](deu028) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*A Commentary, Critical, Practical, and Explanatory on the Old and New
Testaments*, by Robert Jamieson, A.R. Fausset and David Brown \[1882\]
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Deuteronomy Chapter 27](../../../bib/kjv/deu027.htm#001)

[Deuteronomy 27:2](../../../bib/kjv/deu027.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">deu 27:2</span></span>

THE PEOPLE ARE TO WRITE THE LAW UPON STONES. ([Deu
27:1-10](../../../bib/kjv/deu027.htm#001))

it shall be on the day when ye shall pass over Jordan--"Day" is often
put for "time"; and it was not till some days after the passage that the
following instructions were acted upon.

thou shalt set thee up great stones, and plaister them with
plaister--These stones were to be taken in their natural state, unhewn,
and unpolished--the occasion on which they were used not admitting of
long or elaborate preparation; and they were to be daubed over with
paint or whitewash, to render them more conspicuous. Stones and even
rocks are seen in Egypt and the peninsula of Sinai, containing
inscriptions made three thousand years ago, in paint or plaister. By
some similar method those stones may have been inscribed, and it is most
probable that Moses learned the art from the Egyptians.

[Deuteronomy 27:3](../../../bib/kjv/deu027.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">deu 27:3</span></span>

thou shalt write upon them all the words of this law--It might be, as
some think, the Decalogue; but a greater probability is that it was "the
blessings and curses," which comprised in fact an epitome of the law
([Jos 8:34](../../../bib/kjv/jos008.htm#034)).

[Deuteronomy 27:5](../../../bib/kjv/deu027.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">deu 27:5</span></span>

there shalt thou build an altar . . . of whole stones--The stones were
to be in their natural state, as if a chisel would communicate pollution
to them. The stony pile was to be so large as to contain all the
conditions of the covenant, so elevated as to be visible to the whole
congregation of Israel; and the religious ceremonial performed on the
occasion was to consist: first, of the elementary worship needed for
sinful men; and secondly, of the peace offerings, or lively, social
feasts, that were suited to the happy people whose God was the Lord.
There were thus, the law which condemned, and the typical expiation--the
two great principles of revealed religion.

[Deuteronomy 27:11](../../../bib/kjv/deu027.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">deu 27:11</span></span>

THE TRIBES DIVIDED ON GERIZIM AND EBAL. ([Deu
27:11-13](../../../bib/kjv/deu027.htm#011))

These shall stand upon mount Gerizim to bless the people . . . these
shall stand upon mount Ebal to curse--Those long, rocky ridges lay in
the province of Samaria, and the peaks referred to were near Shechem
(Nablous), rising in steep precipices to the height of about eight
hundred feet and separated by a green, well-watered valley of about five
hundred yards wide. The people of Israel were here divided into two
parts. On mount Gerizim (now Jebel-et-Tur) were stationed the
descendants of Rachel and Leah, the two principal wives of Jacob, and to
them was assigned the most pleasant and honorable office of pronouncing
the benedictions; while on the twin hill of Ebal (now Imad-el-Deen) were
placed the posterity of the two secondary wives, Zilpah and Bilhah, with
those of Reuben, who had lost the primogeniture, and Zebulun, Leah's
youngest son; to them was committed the necessary but painful duty of
pronouncing the maledictions (see on [Jdg
9:7](../../../bib/kjv/jdg009.htm#007)). The ceremony might have taken
place on the lower spurs of the mountains, where they approach more
closely to each other; and the course observed was as follows: Amid the
silent expectations of the solemn assembly, the priests standing round
the ark in the valley below, said aloud, looking to Gerizim, "Blessed is
the man that maketh not any graven image," when the people ranged on
that hill responded in full simultaneous shouts of "Amen"; then turning
round to Ebal, they cried, "Cursed is the man that maketh any graven
image"; to which those that covered the ridge answered, "Amen." The same
course at every pause was followed with all the blessings and curses
(see on [Jos 8:33-34](../../../bib/kjv/jos008.htm#033)). These curses
attendant on disobedience to the divine will, which had been revealed as
a law from heaven, be it observed, are given in the form of a
declaration, not a wish, as the words should be rendered, "Cursed is
he," and not, "Cursed be he."

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Deuteronomy Chapter 28](deu028)

</div>
