<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Esther Index](est.md)  
  [Previous](est000)  [Next](est002.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*A Commentary, Critical, Practical, and Explanatory on the Old and New
Testaments*, by Robert Jamieson, A.R. Fausset and David Brown \[1882\]
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Esther Chapter 1](../../../bib/kjv/est001.htm#001.md)

[Esther 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/est001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">est 1:1</span></span>

AHASUERUS MAKES ROYAL FEASTS. (Est. 1:1-22)

Ahasuerus--It is now generally agreed among learned men that the
Ahasuerus mentioned in this episode is the Xerxes who figures in Grecian
history.

[Esther 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/est001.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">est 1:3</span></span>

made a feast unto all his princes and his servants--Banquets on so grand
a scale, and extending over so great a period, have been frequently
provided by the luxurious monarchs of Eastern countries, both in ancient
and modern times. The early portion of this festive season, however,
seems to have been dedicated to amusement, particularly an exhibition of
the magnificence and treasures of the court, and it was closed by a
special feast of seven days' continuance, given within the gardens of
the royal palace. The ancient palace of Susa has been recently
disinterred from an incumbent mass of earth and ruins; and in that
palace, which is, beyond all doubt, the actual edifice referred to in
this passage, there is a great hall of marble pillars. "The position of
the great colonnade corresponds with the account here given. It stands
on an elevation in the center of the mound, the remainder of which we
may well imagine to have been occupied, after the Persian fashion, with
a garden and fountains. Thus the colonnade would represent the 'court of
the garden of the king's palace' with its 'pillars of marble.' I am even
inclined to believe the expression, 'Shushan the palace,' applies
especially to this portion of the existing ruins, in contradistinction
to the citadel and the city of Shushan" \[LOFTUS, Chaldaea and
Susiana\].

[Esther 1:6](../../../bib/kjv/est001.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">est 1:6</span></span>

Where were white, green, and blue hangings, &c.--The fashion, in the
houses of the great, on festive occasions, was to decorate the chambers
from the middle of the wall downward with damask or velvet hangings of
variegated colors suspended on hooks, or taken down at pleasure.

the beds were of gold and silver--that is, the couches on which,
according to Oriental fashion, the guests reclined, and which were
either formed entirely of gold and silver or inlaid with ornaments of
those costly metals, stood on an elevated floor of parti-colored marble.

[Esther 1:7](../../../bib/kjv/est001.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">est 1:7</span></span>

they gave them drink in vessels of gold--There is reason to believe from
this account, as well as from [Est
5:6](../../../bib/kjv/est005.htm#006.md); [Est
7:2](../../../bib/kjv/est007.htm#002.md), [Est
7:7-8](../../../bib/kjv/est007.htm#007.md), where the drinking of wine
occupies by far the most prominent place in the description, that this
was a banquet rather than a feast.

[Esther 1:9](../../../bib/kjv/est001.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">est 1:9</span></span>

Also Vashti the queen made a feast for the women--The celebration was
double; for, as according to the Oriental fashion, the sexes do not
intermingle in society, the court ladies were entertained in a separate
apartment by the queen.

[Esther 1:10](../../../bib/kjv/est001.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">est 1:10</span></span>

On the seventh day, when the heart of the king was merry with wine--As
the feast days advanced, the drinking was more freely indulged in, so
that the close was usually marked by great excesses of revelry.

he commanded . . . the seven chamberlains--These were the eunuchs who
had charge of the royal harem. The refusal of Vashti to obey an order
which required her to make an indecent exposure of herself before a
company of drunken revellers, was becoming both the modesty of her sex
and her rank as queen; for, according to Persian customs, the queen,
even more than the wives of other men, was secluded from the public
gaze. Had not the king's blood been heated with wine, or his reason
overpowered by force of offended pride, he would have perceived that his
own honor, as well as hers, was consulted by her dignified conduct.

[Esther 1:13](../../../bib/kjv/est001.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">est 1:13</span></span>

Then the king said to the wise men--These were probably the magi,
without whose advice as to the proper time of doing a thing the Persian
kings never did take any step whatever; and the persons named in [Est
1:14](../../../bib/kjv/est001.htm#014.md) were the "seven counsellors"
(compare [Ezr 7:14](../../../bib/kjv/ezr007.htm#014).md) who formed the
state ministry. The combined wisdom of all, it seems, was enlisted to
consult with the king what course should be taken after so unprecedented
an occurrence as Vashti's disobedience of the royal summons. It is
scarcely possible for us to imagine the astonishment produced by such a
refusal in a country and a court where the will of the sovereign was
absolute. The assembled grandees were petrified with horror at the
daring affront. Alarm for the consequences that might ensue to each of
them in his own household next seized on their minds; and the sounds of
bacchanalian revelry were hushed into deep and anxious consultation what
punishment to inflict on the refractory queen. But a purpose was to be
served by the flattery of the king and the enslavement of all women. The
counsellors were too intoxicated or obsequious to oppose the courtly
advice of Memucan was unanimously resolved, with a wise regard to the
public interests of the nation, that the punishment of Vashti could be
nothing short of degradation from her royal dignity. The doom was
accordingly pronounced and made known in all parts of the empire.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Esther Chapter 2](est002.md)

</div>
