<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Esther Index](est.md)  
  [Previous](est002)  [Next](est004.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*A Commentary, Critical, Practical, and Explanatory on the Old and New
Testaments*, by Robert Jamieson, A.R. Fausset and David Brown \[1882\]
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Esther Chapter 3](../../../bib/kjv/est003.htm#001.md)

[Esther 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/est003.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">est 3:1</span></span>

HAMAN, ADVANCED BY THE KING, AND DESPISED BY MORDECAI, SEEKS REVENGE ON
ALL THE JEWS. ([Est 3:1-15](../../../bib/kjv/est003.htm#001).md)

After these things did king Ahasuerus promote Haman . . . set his seat
above all the princes--that is, raised him to the rank of vizier, or
prime confidential minister, whose pre-eminence in office and power
appeared in the elevated state chair appropriated to that supreme
functionary. Such a distinction in seats was counted of vast importance
in the formal court of Persia.

[Esther 3:2](../../../bib/kjv/est003.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">est 3:2</span></span>

all the king's servants, that were in the king's gate, bowed, and
reverenced Haman--Large mansions in the East are entered by a spacious
vestibule, or gateway, along the sides of which visitors sit, and are
received by the master of the house; for none, except the nearest
relatives or special friends, are admitted farther. There the officers
of the ancient king of Persia waited till they were called, and did
obeisance to the all-powerful minister of the day.

But Mordecai bowed not, nor did him reverence--The obsequious homage of
prostration not entirely foreign to the manners of the East, had not
been claimed by former viziers; but this minion required that all
subordinate officers of the court should bow before him with their faces
to the earth. But to Mordecai, it seemed that such an attitude of
profound reverence was due only to God. Haman being an Amalekite, one of
a doomed and accursed race, was, doubtless, another element in the
refusal; and on learning that the recusant was a Jew, whose
nonconformity was grounded on religious scruples, the magnitude of the
affront appeared so much the greater, as the example of Mordecai would
be imitated by all his compatriots. Had the homage been a simple token
of civil respect, Mordecai would not have refused it; but the Persian
kings demanded a sort of adoration, which, it is well known, even the
Greeks reckoned it degradation to express. As Xerxes, in the height of
his favoritism, had commanded the same honors to be given to the
minister as to himself, this was the ground of Mordecai's refusal.

[Esther 3:7](../../../bib/kjv/est003.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">est 3:7</span></span>

In the first month . . . they cast Pur, that is, the lot--In resorting
to this method of ascertaining the most auspicious day for putting his
atrocious scheme into execution, Haman acted as the kings and nobles of
Persia have always done, never engaging in any enterprise without
consulting the astrologers, and being satisfied as to the lucky hour.
Vowing revenge but scorning to lay hands on a single victim, he
meditated the extirpation of the whole Jewish race, who, he knew, were
sworn enemies of his countrymen; and by artfully representing them as a
people who were aliens in manners and habits, and enemies to the rest of
his subjects, he procured the king's sanction of the intended massacre.
One motive which he used in urging his point was addressed to the king's
cupidity. Fearing lest his master might object that the extermination of
a numerous body of his subjects would seriously depress the public
revenue, Haman promised to make up the loss.

[Esther 3:9](../../../bib/kjv/est003.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">est 3:9</span></span>

I will pay ten thousand talents of silver . . . into the king's
treasuries--This sum, reckoning by the Babylonish talent, will be about
Â£2,119,000; but estimated according to the Jewish talent, it will
considerably exceed Â£3,000,000, an immense contribution to be made out
of a private fortune. But classic history makes mention of several
persons whose resources seem almost incredible.

[Esther 3:10](../../../bib/kjv/est003.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">est 3:10</span></span>

the king took his ring from his hand, and gave it unto Haman--There was
a seal or signet in the ring. The bestowment of the ring, with the
king's name and that of his kingdom engraven on it, was given with much
ceremony, and it was equivalent to putting the sign manual to a royal
edict.

[Esther 3:12](../../../bib/kjv/est003.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">est 3:12</span></span>

Then were the king's scribes called . . . and there was written--The
government secretaries were employed in making out the proclamation
authorizing a universal massacre of the Jews on one day. It was
translated into the dialects of all the people throughout the vast
empire, and swift messengers were sent to carry it into all the
provinces. On the day appointed, all Jews were to be put to death and
their property confiscated; doubtless, the means by which Haman hoped to
pay his stipulated tribute into the royal treasury. To us it appears
unaccountable how any sane monarch could have given his consent to the
extirpation of a numerous class of his subjects. But such acts of
frenzied barbarity have, alas! been not rarely authorized by careless
and voluptuous despots, who have allowed their ears to be engrossed and
their policy directed by haughty and selfish minions, who had their own
passions to gratify, their own ends to serve.

[Esther 3:15](../../../bib/kjv/est003.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">est 3:15</span></span>

the king and Haman sat down to drink; but the city Shushan was
perplexed--The completeness of the word-painting in this verse is
exquisite. The historian, by a simple stroke, has drawn a graphic
picture of an Oriental despot, wallowing with his favorite in sensual
enjoyments, while his tyrannical cruelties were rending the hearts and
homes of thousands of his subjects.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Esther Chapter 4](est004.md)

</div>
