<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Esther Index](est)  
  [Previous](est009)  [Next](job000) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*A Commentary, Critical, Practical, and Explanatory on the Old and New
Testaments*, by Robert Jamieson, A.R. Fausset and David Brown \[1882\]
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Esther Chapter 10](../../../bib/kjv/est010.htm#001)

[Esther 10:1](../../../bib/kjv/est010.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">est 10:1</span></span>

AHASUERUS' GREATNESS. MORDECAI'S ADVANCEMENT. ([Est
10:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/est010.htm#001))

Ahasuerus laid a tribute--This passage being an appendix to the history,
and improperly separated from the preceding chapter, it might be that
the occasion of levying this new impost arose out of the commotions
raised by Haman's conspiracy. Neither the nature nor the amount of the
tax has been recorded; only it was not a local tribute, but one exacted
from all parts of his vast empire.

[Esther 10:2](../../../bib/kjv/est010.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">est 10:2</span></span>

the declaration of the greatness of Mordecai--The experience of this
pious and excellent Jew verified the statement, "he that humbleth
himself shall be exalted" \[[Mat
23:12](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#012); [Luk
14:11](../../../bib/kjv/luk014.htm#011); [Luk
18:14](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#014)\]. From sitting contentedly at
the king's gate, he was raised to the dignity of highest subject, the
powerful ruler of the kingdom. Acting uniformly on the great principles
of truth and righteousness, his greatness rested on a firm foundation.
His faith was openly avowed, and his influence as a professor of the
true religion was of the greatest usefulness for promoting the welfare
of the Jewish people, as well as for advancing the glory of God.

[Esther 10:3](../../../bib/kjv/est010.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">est 10:3</span></span>

For Mordecai . . . was next unto King Ahasuerus . . . great among the
Jews, &c.--The elevation of this pious and patriotic Jew to the
possession of the highest official power was of very great importance to
the suffering church at that period; for it enabled him, who all along
possessed the disposition, now to direct the royal influence and
authority in promoting the interests and extending the privileges of his
exiled countrymen. Viewed in this light, the providence of God is
plainly traceable in all the steps that led to his unexpected
advancement. This providential interposition is all the more remarkable,
that, as in the analogous case of Joseph, it was displayed in making the
ordinary and natural course of things lead to the most marvellous
results. To use the pious words of an eminent prelate, "though in the
whole of this episode there was no extraordinary manifestation of God's
power, no particular cause or agent that was in its working advanced
above the ordinary pitch of nature, yet the contrivance, and suiting
these ordinary agents appointed by God, is in itself more admirable than
if the same end had been effected by means that were truly miraculous."
The sudden advancement of individuals from obscurity and neglect to the
highest stations of power and influence is, in Eastern courts, no
extraordinary nor infrequent occurrence. The caprice, the weak
partiality of the reigning sovereign, or, it may be, his penetrating
discernment in discovering latent energy and talent, has often "raised
the beggar from the dunghill, and set him among princes" \[[Sa1
2:8](../../../bib/kjv/sa1002.htm#008)\]. Some of the all-powerful
viziers in modern Persia, and not a few of the beys in Egypt, have been
elevated to their respective dignities in this manner. And, therefore,
the advancement of "Mordecai, who was next unto Ahasuerus, and great
among the Jews," was in perfect accordance with the rapid revolution of
"the wheel of fortune" in that part of the world. But, considering all
the circumstances of Mordecai's advancement, not only his gaining the
favor of the king, but his being "accepted of the multitude of his
brethren, it was beyond all controversy the doing of the Lord, and was
truly marvellous in his people's eyes."

accepted of the multitude of his brethren--Far from being envious of his
grandeur, they blessed God for the elevation to official power of so
good a man.

speaking peace to all his seed--While his administration was conducted
with a mild and impartial hand, he showed a peculiarly warm and friendly
feeling to all his countrymen when asked his counsel or his aid.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Job Introduction](job000)

</div>
