<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Exodus Index](exo.md)  
  [Previous](exo004)  [Next](exo006.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*A Commentary, Critical, Practical, and Explanatory on the Old and New
Testaments*, by Robert Jamieson, A.R. Fausset and David Brown \[1882\]
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Exodus Chapter 5](../../../bib/kjv/exo005.htm#001.md)

[Exodus 5:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo005.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">exo 5:1</span></span>

FIRST INTERVIEW WITH PHARAOH. (Exo. 5:1-23)

Moses and Aaron went in--As representatives of the Hebrews, they were
entitled to ask an audience of the king, and their thorough Egyptian
training taught them how and when to seek it.

and told Pharaoh--When introduced, they delivered a message in the name
of the God of Israel. This is the first time He is mentioned by that
national appellation in Scripture. It seems to have been used by divine
direction ([Exo 4:2](../../../bib/kjv/exo004.htm#002).md) and designed to
put honor on the Hebrews in their depressed condition ([Heb
11:16](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#016).md).

[Exodus 5:2](../../../bib/kjv/exo005.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">exo 5:2</span></span>

And Pharaoh said, Who is the Lord--rather "Jehovah." Lord was a common
name applied to objects of worship; but Jehovah was a name he had never
heard of. Pharaoh estimated the character and power of this God by the
abject and miserable condition of the worshippers and concluded that He
held as low a rank among the gods as His people did in the nation. To
demonstrate the supremacy of the true God over all the gods of Egypt,
was the design of the plagues.

I know not the Lord, neither will I let Israel go--As his honor and
interest were both involved he determined to crush this attempt, and in
a tone of insolence, or perhaps profanity, rejected the request for the
release of the Hebrew slaves.

[Exodus 5:3](../../../bib/kjv/exo005.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">exo 5:3</span></span>

The God of the Hebrews hath met with us--Instead of being provoked into
reproaches or threats, they mildly assured him that it was not a
proposal originating among themselves, but a duty enjoined on them by
their God. They had for a long series of years been debarred from the
privilege of religious worship, and as there was reason to fear that a
continued neglect of divine ordinances would draw down upon them the
judgments of offended heaven, they begged permission to go three days'
journey into the desert--a place of seclusion--where their sacrificial
observances would neither suffer interruption nor give umbrage to the
Egyptians. In saying this, they concealed their ultimate design of
abandoning the kingdom, and by making this partial request at first,
they probably wished to try the king's temper before they disclosed
their intentions any farther. But they said only what God had put in
their mouths ([Exo 3:12](../../../bib/kjv/exo003.htm#012.md), [Exo
3:18](../../../bib/kjv/exo003.htm#018).md), and this "legalizes the
specific act, while it gives no sanction to the general habit of
dissimulation" \[CHALMERS\].

[Exodus 5:4](../../../bib/kjv/exo005.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">exo 5:4</span></span>

Wherefore do ye, Moses and Aaron, let the people from their works?
&c.--Without taking any notice of what they had said, he treated them as
ambitious demagogues, who were appealing to the superstitious feelings
of the people, to stir up sedition and diffuse a spirit of discontent,
which spreading through so vast a body of slaves, might endanger the
peace of the country.

[Exodus 5:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo005.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">exo 5:6</span></span>

Pharaoh commanded--It was a natural consequence of the high displeasure
created by this interview that he should put additional burdens on the
oppressed Israelites.

taskmasters--Egyptian overseers, appointed to exact labor of the
Israelites.

officers--Hebrews placed over their brethren, under the taskmasters,
precisely analogous to the Arab officers set over the Arab Fellahs, the
poor laborers in modern Egypt.

[Exodus 5:7](../../../bib/kjv/exo005.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">exo 5:7</span></span>

Ye shall no more give the people straw to make brick--The making of
bricks appears to have been a government monopoly as the ancient bricks
are nearly all stamped with the name of a king, and they were formed, as
they are still in Lower Egypt, of clay mixed with chopped straw and
dried or hardened in the sun. The Israelites were employed in this
drudgery; and though they still dwelt in Goshen and held property in
flocks and herds, they were compelled in rotation to serve in the brick
quarries, pressed in alternating groups, just as the fellaheen, or
peasants, are marched by press gangs in the same country still.

let them go and gather straw for themselves--The enraged despot did not
issue orders to do an impracticable thing. The Egyptian reapers in the
corn harvest were accustomed merely to cut off the ears and leave the
stalk standing.

[Exodus 5:8](../../../bib/kjv/exo005.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">exo 5:8</span></span>

tale--an appointed number of bricks. The materials of their labor were
to be no longer supplied, and yet, as the same amount of produce was
exacted daily, it is impossible to imagine more aggravated cruelty--a
perfect specimen of Oriental despotism.

[Exodus 5:12](../../../bib/kjv/exo005.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">exo 5:12</span></span>

So the people were scattered--It was an immense grievance to the
laborers individually, but there would be no hindrance from the
husbandmen whose fields they entered, as almost all the lands of Egypt
were in the possession of the crown ([Gen
47:20](../../../bib/kjv/gen047.htm#020).md).

[Exodus 5:13](../../../bib/kjv/exo005.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">exo 5:13</span></span>

And the taskmasters hasted them . . . officers . . . beaten--As the
nearest fields were bared and the people had to go farther for stubble,
it was impossible for them to meet the demand by the usual tale of
bricks. "The beating of the officers is just what might have been
expected from an Eastern tyrant, especially in the valley of the Nile,
as it appears from the monuments, that ancient Egypt, like modern China,
was principally governed by the stick" \[TAYLOR\]. "The mode of beating
was by the offender being laid flat on the ground and generally held by
the hands and feet while the chastisement was administered"
\[WILKINSON\]. ([Deu 25:2](../../../bib/kjv/deu025.htm#002).md). A picture
representing the Hebrews on a brick field, exactly as described in this
chapter, was found in an Egyptian tomb at Thebes.

[Exodus 5:20](../../../bib/kjv/exo005.htm#020.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">exo 5:20</span></span>

they met Moses . . . The Lord look upon you, and judge--Thus the
deliverer of Israel found that this patriotic interference did, in the
first instance, only aggravate the evil he wished to remove, and that
instead of receiving the gratitude, he was loaded with the reproaches of
his countrymen. But as the greatest darkness is immediately before the
dawn, so the people of God are often plunged into the deepest affliction
when on the eve of their deliverance; and so it was in this case.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Exodus Chapter 6](exo006.md)

</div>
