<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Exodus Index](exo)  
  [Previous](exo029)  [Next](exo031) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*A Commentary, Critical, Practical, and Explanatory on the Old and New
Testaments*, by Robert Jamieson, A.R. Fausset and David Brown \[1882\]
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Exodus Chapter 30](../../../bib/kjv/exo030.htm#001)

[Exodus 30:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo030.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">exo 30:1</span></span>

THE ALTAR OF INCENSE. (Exo. 30:1-38)

thou shalt make an altar to burn incense upon, &c.--Its material was to
be like that of the ark of the testimony, but its dimensions very small
\[[Exo 25:10](../../../bib/kjv/exo025.htm#010)\].

[Exodus 30:2](../../../bib/kjv/exo030.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">exo 30:2</span></span>

foursquare--the meaning of which is not that it was to be entirely of a
cubical form, but that upon its upper and under surface, it showed four
equal sides. It was twice as high as it was broad, being twenty-one
inches broad and three feet six inches high. It had "horns"; its top or
flat surface was surmounted by an ornamental ledge or rim, called a
crown, and it was furnished at the sides with rings for carriage. Its
only accompanying piece of furniture was a golden censer or pan, in
which the incense was set fire to upon the altar. Hence it was called
the altar of incense, or the "golden altar" \[[Exo
39:38](../../../bib/kjv/exo039.htm#038); [Exo
40:26](../../../bib/kjv/exo040.htm#026)\], from the profuse degree in
which it was gilded or overlaid with the precious metal. This splendor
was adapted to the early age of the church, but in later times, when the
worship was to be more spiritual, the altar of incense is prophetically
described as not of gold but of wood, and double the size of that in the
tabernacle, because the church should be vastly extended ([Mal
1:11](../../../bib/kjv/mal001.htm#011)).

[Exodus 30:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo030.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">exo 30:6</span></span>

thou shalt put it before the veil that is by the ark of the
testimony--which separated the holy from the most holy place. The altar
was in the middle between the table of showbread and the candlestick
next the holy of holies, at equal distances from the north and south
walls; in other words, it occupied a spot on the outside of the great
partition veil, but directly in front of the mercy seat, which was
within that sacred enclosure; so that although the priest who ministered
at this altar could not behold the mercy seat, he was to look towards
it, and present his incense in that direction. This was a special
arrangement, and it was designed to teach the important lesson that,
though we cannot with the eye of sense, see the throne of grace, we must
"direct our prayer to it and look up" \[[Psa
5:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa005.htm#003)\] (compare [Co2
3:14](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#014); [Heb
10:20](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#020); [Rev
4:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev004.htm#001)).

[Exodus 30:7](../../../bib/kjv/exo030.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">exo 30:7</span></span>

Aaron shall burn thereon sweet incense--literally, "incense of
spices"--Strong aromatic substances were burnt upon this altar to
counteract by their odoriferous fragrance the offensive fumes of the
sacrifices; or the incense was employed in an offering of tributary
homage which the Orientals used to make as a mark of honor to kings; and
as God was Theocratic Ruler of Israel, His palace was not to be wanting
in a usage of such significancy. Both these ends were served by this
altar--that of fumigating the apartments of the sacred edifice, while
the pure lambent flame, according to Oriental notions, was an honorary
tribute to the majesty of Israel's King. But there was a far higher
meaning in it still; for as the tabernacle was not only a palace for
Israel's King, but a place of worship for Israel's God, this altar was
immediately connected with a religious purpose. In the style of the
sacred writers, incense was a symbol or emblem of prayer ([Psa
141:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa141.htm#002); [Rev
5:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev005.htm#008); [Rev
8:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev008.htm#003)). From the uniform combination of
the two services, it is evident that the incense was an emblem of the
prayers of sincere worshippers ascending to heaven in the cloud of
perfume; and, accordingly, the priest who officiated at this altar
typified the intercessory office of Christ ([Luk
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#010); [Heb
7:25](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#025)).

every morning . . . at even--In every period of the national history
this daily worship was scrupulously observed.

[Exodus 30:8](../../../bib/kjv/exo030.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">exo 30:8</span></span>

Aaron shall burn incense--seemingly limiting the privilege of
officiating at the altar of incense to the high priest alone, and there
is no doubt that he and his successors exclusively attended this altar
on the great religious festivals. But "Aaron" is frequently used for the
whole priestly order, and in later times, any of the priests might have
officiated at this altar in rotation ([Luk
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#009)).

[Exodus 30:9](../../../bib/kjv/exo030.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">exo 30:9</span></span>

Ye shall offer no strange incense--that is, of a different composition
from that of which the ingredients are described so minutely.

[Exodus 30:11](../../../bib/kjv/exo030.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">exo 30:11</span></span>

When thou takest the sum of the children of Israel, &c.--Moses did so
twice, and doubtless observed the law here prescribed. The tax was not
levied from women, minors, old men ([Num
1:42](../../../bib/kjv/num001.htm#042), [Num
1:45](../../../bib/kjv/num001.htm#045)), and the Levites ([Num
1:47](../../../bib/kjv/num001.htm#047)), they being not numbered.
Assuming the shekel of the sanctuary to be about half an ounce troy,
though nothing certain is known about it, the sum payable by each
individual was two and four pence. This was not a voluntary
contribution, but a ransom for the soul or lives of the people. It was
required from all classes alike, and a refusal to pay implied a wilful
exclusion from the privileges of the sanctuary, as well as exposure to
divine judgments. It was probably the same impost that was exacted from
our Lord ([Mat 17:24-27](../../../bib/kjv/mat017.htm#024)), and it was
usually devoted to repairs and other purposes connected with the
services of the sanctuary.

[Exodus 30:18](../../../bib/kjv/exo030.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">exo 30:18</span></span>

Thou shalt . . . make a laver of brass--Though not actually forming a
component part of the furniture of the tabernacle, this vase was closely
connected with it; and though from standing at the entrance it would be
a familiar object, it possessed great interest and importance from the
baptismal purposes to which it was applied. No data are given by which
its form and size can be ascertained; but it was probably a miniature
pattern of Solomon's--a circular basin.

his foot--supposed not to be the pedestal on which it rested, but a
trough or shallow receptacle below, into which the water, let out from a
cock or spout, flowed; for the way in which all Eastern people wash
their hands or feet is by pouring upon them the water which falls into a
basin. This laver was provided for the priests alone. But in the
Christian dispensation, all believers are priests, and hence the apostle
exhorts them how to draw near to God ([Joh
13:10](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#010); [Heb
10:22](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#022)).

[Exodus 30:23](../../../bib/kjv/exo030.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">exo 30:23</span></span>

Take thou also . . . principal spices, &c.--Oil is frequently mentioned
in Scripture as an emblem of sanctification, and anointing with it a
means of designating objects as well as persons to the service of God.
Here it is prescribed by divine authority, and the various ingredients
in their several proportions described which were to compose the oil
used in consecrating the furniture of the tabernacle.

myrrh--a fragrant and medicinal gum from a little known tree in Arabia.

sweet cinnamon--produced from a species of laurel or sweet bay, found
chiefly in Ceylon, growing to a height of twenty feet: this spice is
extracted from the inner bark, but it is not certain whether that
mentioned by Moses is the same as that with which we are familiar.

sweet calamus--or sweet cane, a product of Arabia and India, of a tawny
color in appearance; it is like the common cane and strongly
odoriferous.

[Exodus 30:24](../../../bib/kjv/exo030.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">exo 30:24</span></span>

cassia--from the same species of tree as the cinnamon--some think the
outer bark of that tree. All these together would amount to one hundred
twenty pounds, troy weight.

hin--a word of Egyptian origin, equal to ten pints. Being mixed with the
olive oil--no doubt of the purest kind--this composition probably
remained always in a liquid state, and the strictest prohibition issued
against using it for any other purpose than anointing the tabernacle and
its furniture.

[Exodus 30:34](../../../bib/kjv/exo030.htm#034)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">exo 30:34</span></span>

the Lord said unto Moses, Take unto thee sweet spices--These were:

stacte--the finest myrrh;

onycha--supposed to be an odoriferous shell;

galbanum--a gum resin from an umbelliferous plant.

frankincense--a dry, resinous, aromatic gum, of a yellow color, which
comes from a tree in Arabia, and is obtained by incision of the bark.
This incense was placed within the sanctuary, to be at hand when the
priest required to burn on the altar. The art of compounding unguents
and perfumes was well known in Egypt, where sweet-scented spices were
extensively used not only in common life, but in the ritual of the
temples. Most of the ingredients here mentioned have been found on
minute examination of mummies and other Egyptian relics; and the
Israelites, therefore, would have the best opportunities of acquiring in
that country the skill in pounding and mixing them which they were
called to exercise in the service of the tabernacle. But the recipe for
the incense as well as for the oil in the tabernacle, though it receives
illustration from the customs of Egypt, was peculiar, and being
prescribed by divine authority, was to be applied to no common or
inferior purpose.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Exodus Chapter 31](exo031)

</div>
