<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Exodus Index](exo.md)  
  [Previous](exo039)  [Next](lev000.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*A Commentary, Critical, Practical, and Explanatory on the Old and New
Testaments*, by Robert Jamieson, A.R. Fausset and David Brown \[1882\]
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Exodus Chapter 40](../../../bib/kjv/exo040.htm#001.md)

[Exodus 40:2](../../../bib/kjv/exo040.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">exo 40:2</span></span>

THE TABERNACLE REARED AND ANOINTED. (Exo. 40:1-38)

On the first day of the first month--From a careful consideration of the
incidents recorded to have happened after the exodus ([Exo
12:2](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#002.md); [Exo
13:4](../../../bib/kjv/exo013.htm#004.md); [Exo
19:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#001.md); [Exo
20:18](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#018.md); [Exo
34:28](../../../bib/kjv/exo034.htm#028), &c..md), it has been computed that
the work of the tabernacle was commenced within six months after that
emigration; and consequently, that other six months had been occupied in
building it. So long a period spent in preparing the materials of a
movable pavilion, it would be difficult to understand, were it not for
what we are told of the vast dimensions of the tabernacle, as well as
the immense variety of curious and elaborate workmanship which its
different articles of furniture required.

the tabernacle--the entire edifice.

the tent--the covering that surmounted it ([Exo
40:19](../../../bib/kjv/exo040.htm#019).md).

[Exodus 40:15](../../../bib/kjv/exo040.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">exo 40:15</span></span>

anoint them, as thou didst anoint their fathers--The sacred oil was
used, but it does not appear that the ceremony was performed exactly in
the same manner; for although the anointing oil was sprinkled over the
garments both of Aaron and his sons ([Exo
29:21](../../../bib/kjv/exo029.htm#021.md); [Lev
8:30](../../../bib/kjv/lev008.htm#030).md), it was not poured over the
heads of the latter. This distinction was reserved for the high priest
([Exo 29:7](../../../bib/kjv/exo029.htm#007.md); [Lev
8:12](../../../bib/kjv/lev008.htm#012.md); [Psa
133:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa133.htm#002).md).

[Exodus 40:16](../../../bib/kjv/exo040.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">exo 40:16</span></span>

Thus did Moses: according to all that the Lord commanded him--On his
part, the same scrupulous fidelity was shown in conforming to the
"pattern" in the disposition of the furniture, as had been displayed by
the workmen in the erection of the edifice.

[Exodus 40:33](../../../bib/kjv/exo040.htm#033.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">exo 40:33</span></span>

So Moses finished the work--Though it is not expressly recorded in this
passage, yet, from what took place on all similar occasions, there is
reason to believe that on the inauguration day the people were summoned
from their tents--were all drawn up as a vast assemblage, yet in calm
and orderly arrangement, around the newly erected tabernacle.

[Exodus 40:34](../../../bib/kjv/exo040.htm#034.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">exo 40:34</span></span>

a cloud--literally, "The cloud," the mystic cloud which was the
well-known symbol of the Divine Presence. After remaining at a great
distance from them on the summit of the mount, it appeared to be in
motion; and if many among them had a secret misgiving about the issue,
how the fainting heart would revive, the interest of the moment
intensely increase, and the tide of joy swell in every bosom, when that
symbolic cloud was seen slowly and majestically descending towards the
plain below and covering the tabernacle. The entire and universal
concealment of the tabernacle within the folds of an impervious cloud
was not without a deep and instructive meaning; it was a protection to
the sacred edifice from the burning heats of the Arabian climate; it was
a token of the Divine Presence; and it was also an emblem of the Mosaic
dispensation, which, though it was a revelation from heaven, yet left
many things hid in obscurity; for it was a dark cloud compared with the
bright cloud, which betokened the clearer and fuller discoveries of the
divine character and glory in the gospel ([Mat
17:5](../../../bib/kjv/mat017.htm#005).md).

the glory of the Lord filled the tabernacle--that is, light and fire, a
created splendor, which was the peculiar symbol of God ([Jo1
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/jo1001.htm#005).md). Whether this light was inherent
in the cloud or not, it emanated from it on this occasion, and making
its entry, not with the speed of a lightning flash as if it were merely
an electric spark, but in majestic splendor, it passed through the outer
porch into the interior of the most holy place ([Kg1
8:10](../../../bib/kjv/kg1008.htm#010.md); [Joh
1:14](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#014).md). Its miraculous character is
shown by the fact, that, though "it filled the tabernacle," not a
curtain or any article of furniture was so much as singed.

[Exodus 40:35](../../../bib/kjv/exo040.htm#035.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_035">exo 40:35</span></span>

Moses was not able to enter into the tent of the congregation--How does
this circumstance show the incapacity of man, in his present state, to
look upon the unveiled perfections of the Godhead! Moses could not
endure the unclouded effulgence, nor the sublimest of the prophets ([Isa
6:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa006.htm#005).md). But what neither Moses nor the
most eminent of God's messengers to the ancient church through the
weakness of nature could endure, we can all now do by an exercise of
faith; looking unto Jesus, who reflected with chastened radiance the
brightness of the Father's glory; and who, having as the Forerunner for
us, entered within the veil, has invited us to come boldly to the mercy
seat. While Moses was compelled, through the influence of overwhelming
awe, to stand aloof and could not enter the tabernacle, Christ entered
into the holy place not made with hands; nay, He is Himself the true
tabernacle, filled with the glory of God, ever with the grace and truth
which the Shekinah typified. What great reason we have to thank God for
Jesus Christ, who, while He Himself was the brightness of the Father's
glory, yet exhibited that glory in so mild and attractive a manner, as
to allure us to draw near with confidence and love into the Divine
Presence!

[Exodus 40:36](../../../bib/kjv/exo040.htm#036.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_036">exo 40:36</span></span>

when the cloud was taken up from over the tabernacle--In journeying
through the sandy, trackless deserts of the East, the use of torches,
exhibiting a cloud of smoke by day and of fire by night, has been
resorted to from time immemorial. The armies of Darius and Alexander
were conducted on their marches in this manner \[FABER\]. The Arab
caravans in the present day observe the same custom; and materials for
these torches are stored up among other necessary preparations for a
journey. Live fuel, hoisted in chafing dishes at the end of long poles,
and being seen at a great distance, serves, by the smoke in the daytime
and the light at night, as a better signal for march than the sound of a
trumpet, which is not heard at the extremities of a large camp
\[LABORDE\]. This usage, and the miracle related by Moses, mutually
illustrate each other. The usage leads us to think that the miracle was
necessary, and worthy of God to perform; and, on the other hand, the
miracle of the cloudy pillar, affording double benefit of shade by day
and light at night, implies not only that the usage was not unknown to
the Hebrews, but supplied all the wants which they felt in common with
other travellers through those dreary regions \[FABER, HESS,
GRANDPIERRE\]. But its peculiar appearance, unvarying character, and
regular movements, distinguished it from all the common atmospheric
phenomena. It was an invaluable boon to the Israelites, and being
recognized by all classes among that people as the symbol of the Divine
Presence, it guided their journeys and regulated their encampments
(compare [Psa 29:1-11](../../../bib/kjv/psa029.htm#001); Psa. 105:1-45.md).

[Exodus 40:38](../../../bib/kjv/exo040.htm#038.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_038">exo 40:38</span></span>

the cloud of the Lord was upon the tabernacle, &c.--While it had
hitherto appeared sometimes in one place, sometimes in another, it was
now found on the tabernacle only; so that from the moment that sanctuary
was erected, and the glory of the Lord had filled the sacred edifice,
the Israelites had to look to the place which God had chosen to put His
name there, in order that they might enjoy the benefit of a heavenly
Guide ([Num 9:15-23](../../../bib/kjv/num009.htm#015).md). In like manner,
the church had divine revelation for its guide from the first--long
before the WORD of God existed in a written form; but ever since the
setting up of that sacred canon, it rests on that as its tabernacle and
there only is it to be found. It accompanies us wherever we are or go,
just as the cloud led the way of the Israelites. It is always accessible
and can be carried in our pockets when we walk abroad; it may be
engraved on the inner tablets of our memories and our hearts; and so
true, faithful, and complete a guide is it, that there is not a scene of
duty or of trial through which we may be called to pass in the world,
but it furnishes a clear, a safe, and unerring direction ([Col
3:16](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#016).md).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Leviticus Introduction](lev000.md)

</div>
