<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Exodus Index](exo.md)  
  [Previous](exo015)  [Next](exo017.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*A Commentary, Critical, Practical, and Explanatory on the Old and New
Testaments*, by Robert Jamieson, A.R. Fausset and David Brown \[1882\]
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Exodus Chapter 16](../../../bib/kjv/exo016.htm#001.md)

[Exodus 16:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo016.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">exo 16:1</span></span>

MURMURS FOR WANT OF BREAD. (Exo. 16:1-36)

they took their journey from Elim--where they had remained several days.

came unto the wilderness of Sin--It appears from Num. 32:1-42, that
several stations are omitted in this historical notice of the journey.
This passage represents the Israelites as advanced into the great plain,
which, beginning near El-Murkah, extends with a greater or less breadth
to almost the extremity of the peninsula. In its broadest part northward
of Tur it is called El-Kaa, which is probably the desert of Sin
\[ROBINSON\].

[Exodus 16:2](../../../bib/kjv/exo016.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">exo 16:2</span></span>

the whole congregation . . . murmured against Moses and Aaron--Modern
travellers through the desert of Sinai are accustomed to take as much as
is sufficient for the sustenance of men and beasts during forty days.
The Israelites having been rather more than a month on their journey,
their store of corn or other provisions was altogether or nearly
exhausted; and there being no prospect of procuring any means of
subsistence in the desert, except some wild olives and wild honey ([Deu
32:13](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#013).md), loud complaints were made
against the leaders.

[Exodus 16:3](../../../bib/kjv/exo016.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">exo 16:3</span></span>

Would to God we had died by the hand of the Lord in the land of
Egypt--How unreasonable and absurd the charge against Moses and Aaron!
how ungrateful and impious against God! After all their experience of
the divine wisdom, goodness, and power, we pause and wonder over the
sacred narrative of their hardness and unbelief. But the expression of
feeling is contagious in so vast a multitude, and there is a feeling of
solitude and despondency in the desert which numbers cannot dispel; and
besides, we must remember that they were men engrossed with the
present--that the Comforter was not then given--and that they were
destitute of all visible means of sustenance and cut off from every
visible comfort, with only the promises of an unseen God to look to as
the ground of their hope. And though we may lament they should tempt God
in the wilderness and freely admit their sin in so doing, we can be at
no loss for a reason why those who had all their lives been accustomed
to walk by sight should, in circumstances of unparalleled difficulty and
perplexity, find it hard to walk by faith. Do not even we find it
difficult to walk by faith through the wilderness of this world, though
in the light of a clearer revelation, and under a nobler leader than
Moses? \[FISK\]. (See [Co1 10:11-12](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#011).md).

[Exodus 16:4](../../../bib/kjv/exo016.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">exo 16:4</span></span>

Then said the Lord unto Moses--Though the outbreak was immediately
against the human leaders, it was indirectly against God: yet mark His
patience, and how graciously He promised to redress the grievance.

I will rain bread from heaven--Israel, a type of the Church which is
from above, and being under the conduct, government, and laws of heaven,
received their food from heaven also ([Psa
78:24](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#024).md).

that I may prove them, whether they will walk in my law, or no--The
grand object of their being led into the wilderness was that they might
receive a religious training directly under the eye of God; and the
first lesson taught them was a constant dependence on God for their
daily nourishment.

[Exodus 16:13](../../../bib/kjv/exo016.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">exo 16:13</span></span>

at even the quails came up, and covered the camp--This bird is of the
gallinaceous kind \[that is, relating to the order of heavy-bodied,
largely terrestrial birds\], resembling the red partridge, but not
larger than the turtledove. They are found in certain seasons in the
places through which the Israelites passed, being migratory birds, and
they were probably brought to the camp by "a wind from the Lord" as on
another occasion ([Num 11:31](../../../bib/kjv/num011.htm#031).md).

and in the morning . . . a small round thing . . . manna--There is a gum
of the same name distilled in this desert region from the tamarisk,
which is much prized by the natives, and preserved carefully by those
who gather it. It is collected early in the morning, melts under the
heat of the sun, and is congealed by the cold of night. In taste it is
as sweet as honey, and has been supposed by distinguished travellers,
from its whitish color, time, and place of its appearance, to be the
manna on which the Israelites were fed: so that, according to the views
of some, it was a production indigenous to the desert; according to
others, there was a miracle, which consisted, however, only in the
preternatural arrangements regarding its supply. But more recent and
accurate examination has proved this gum of the tarfa-tree to be wanting
in all the principal characteristics of the Scripture manna. It exudes
only in small quantities, and not every year; it does not admit of being
baked ([Num 11:8](../../../bib/kjv/num011.htm#008).md) or boiled ([Exo
16:23](../../../bib/kjv/exo016.htm#023).md). Though it may be exhaled by
the heat and afterwards fall with the dew, it is a medicine, not
food--it is well known to the natives of the desert, while the
Israelites were strangers to theirs; and in taste as well as in the
appearance of double quantity on Friday, none on Sabbath, and in not
breeding worms, it is essentially different from the manna furnished to
the Israelites.

[Exodus 16:32](../../../bib/kjv/exo016.htm#032.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">exo 16:32</span></span>

Fill an omer of it to be kept for your generations--The mere fact of
such a multitude being fed for forty years in the wilderness, where no
food of any kind is to be obtained, will show the utter impossibility of
their subsisting on a natural production of the kind and quantity as
this tarfa-gum \[see on [Exo 16:13](../../../bib/kjv/exo016.htm#013.md)\];
and, as if for the purpose of removing all such groundless speculations,
Aaron was commanded to put a sample of it in a pot--a golden pot ([Heb
9:4](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#004).md) --to be laid before the
Testimony, to be kept for future generations, that they might see the
bread on which the Lord fed their fathers in the wilderness. But we have
the bread of which that was merely typical ([Co1
10:3](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#003.md); [Joh
6:32](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#032).md).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Exodus Chapter 17](exo017.md)

</div>
