<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Exodus Index](exo)  
  [Previous](exo027)  [Next](exo029) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*A Commentary, Critical, Practical, and Explanatory on the Old and New
Testaments*, by Robert Jamieson, A.R. Fausset and David Brown \[1882\]
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Exodus Chapter 28](../../../bib/kjv/exo028.htm#001)

[Exodus 28:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo028.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">exo 28:1</span></span>

APPOINTMENT TO THE PRIESTHOOD. (Exo. 28:1-43)

take thou unto thee Aaron thy brother, and his sons with him--Moses had
hitherto discharged the priestly functions ([Psa
99:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa099.htm#006)), and he evinced the piety as
well as humility of his character, in readily complying with the command
to invest his brother with the sacred office, though it involved the
perpetual exclusion of his own family. The appointment was a special act
of God's sovereignty, so that there could be no ground for popular
umbrage by the selection of Aaron's family, with whom the office was
inalienably established and continued in unbroken succession till the
introduction of the Christian era.

[Exodus 28:2](../../../bib/kjv/exo028.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">exo 28:2</span></span>

holy garments--No inherent holiness belonged either to the material or
the workmanship. But they are called "holy" simply because they were not
worn on ordinary occasions, but assumed in the discharge of the sacred
functions ([Eze 44:19](../../../bib/kjv/eze044.htm#019)).

for glory and for beauty--It was a grand and sumptuous attire. In
material, elaborate embroidery, and color, it had an imposing splendor.
The tabernacle being adapted to the infantine aid of the church, it was
right and necessary that the priests' garments should be of such superb
and dazzling appearance, that the people might be inspired with a due
respect for the ministers as well as the rites of religion. But they had
also a further meaning; for being all made of linen, they were
symbolical of the truth, purity, and other qualities in Christ that
rendered Him such a high priest as became us.

[Exodus 28:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo028.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">exo 28:6</span></span>

ephod--It was a very gorgeous robe made of byssus, curiously
embroidered, and dyed with variegated colors, and further enriched with
golden tissue, the threads of gold being either originally interwoven or
afterwards inserted by the embroiderer. It was short--reaching from the
breast to a little below the loins--and though destitute of sleeves,
retained its position by the support of straps thrown over each
shoulder. These straps or braces, connecting the one with the back, the
other with the front piece of which the tunic was composed, were united
on the shoulder by two onyx stones, serving as buttons, and on which the
names of the twelve tribes were engraved, and set in golden encasements.
The symbolical design of this was, that the high priest, who bore the
names along with him in all his ministrations before the Lord, might be
kept in remembrance of his duty to plead their cause, and supplicate the
accomplishment of the divine promises in their favor. The ephod was
fastened by a girdle of the same costly materials, that is, dyed,
embroidered, and wrought with threads of gold. It was about a
handbreadth wide and wound twice round the upper part of the waist; it
fastened in front, the ends hanging down at great length ([Rev
1:13](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#013)).

[Exodus 28:15](../../../bib/kjv/exo028.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">exo 28:15</span></span>

thou shalt make the breastplate of judgment with cunning work--a very
splendid and richly embroidered piece of brocade, a span square, and
doubled, to enable it the better to bear the weight of the precious
stones in it. There were twelve different stones, containing each the
name of a tribe, and arranged in four rows, three in each. The
Israelites had acquired a knowledge of the lapidary's art in Egypt, and
the amount of their skill in cutting, polishing, and setting precious
stones, may be judged of by the diamond forming one of the engraved
ornaments on this breastplate. A ring was attached to each corner,
through which the golden chains were passed to fasten this brilliant
piece of jewelry at the top and bottom tightly on the breast of the
ephod.

[Exodus 28:30](../../../bib/kjv/exo028.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">exo 28:30</span></span>

thou shalt put in the breastplate of judgment the Urim and Thummim--The
words signify "lights" and "perfections"; and nothing more is meant than
the precious stones of the breastplate already described (compare [Exo
39:8-21](../../../bib/kjv/exo039.htm#008); [Lev
8:8](../../../bib/kjv/lev008.htm#008)). They received the name because
the bearing of them qualified the high priest to consult the divine
oracle on all public or national emergencies, by going into the holy
place--standing close before the veil and putting his hand upon the Urim
and Thummim, he conveyed a petition from the people and asked counsel of
God, who, as the Sovereign of Israel, gave response from the midst of
His glory. Little, however, is known about them. But it may be remarked
that Egyptian judges wore on the breast of their official robes a
representation of Justice, and the high priest in Israel long officiated
also as a judge; so that some think the Urim and Thummim had a reference
to his judicial functions.

[Exodus 28:31](../../../bib/kjv/exo028.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">exo 28:31</span></span>

the robe of the ephod all of blue--It was the middle garment, under the
ephod and above the coat. It had a hole through which the head was
thrust, and was formed carefully of one piece, such as was the robe of
Christ ([Joh 19:23](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#023)). The high priest's
was of a sky-blue color. The binding at the neck was strongly woven, and
it terminated below in a fringe, made of blue, purple, and scarlet
tassels, in the form of a pomegranate, interspersed with small bells of
gold, which tinkled as the wearer was in motion.

[Exodus 28:34](../../../bib/kjv/exo028.htm#034)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">exo 28:34</span></span>

a golden bell and a pomegranate--The bells were hung between the
pomegranates, which were said to have amounted to seventy-two, and the
use of them seems to have been to announce to the people when the high
priest entered the most holy place, that they might accompany him with
their prayers, and also to remind himself to be attired in his official
dress, to minister without which was death.

[Exodus 28:36](../../../bib/kjv/exo028.htm#036)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_036">exo 28:36</span></span>

plate--literally, a petal of a flower, which seems to have been the
figure of this golden plate, which was tied with a ribbon of blue on the
front of the mitre, so that every one facing him could read the
inscription.

[Exodus 28:37](../../../bib/kjv/exo028.htm#037)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_037">exo 28:37</span></span>

mitre--crown-like cap for the head, not covering the entire head, but
adhering closely to it, composed of fine linen. The Scripture has not
described its form, but from JOSEPHUS we may gather that it was conical
in shape, as he distinguishes the mitres of the common priests by saying
that they were not conical--that it was encircled with swathes of blue
embroidered, and that it was covered by one piece of fine linen to hide
the seams.

[Exodus 28:39](../../../bib/kjv/exo028.htm#039)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_039">exo 28:39</span></span>

coat of fine linen--a garment fastened at the neck, and reaching far
down the person, with the sleeves terminating at the elbow.

girdle of needlework--a piece of fine twined linen, richly embroidered,
and variously dyed. It is said to have been very long, and being many
times wound round the body, it was fastened in front and the ends hung
down, which, being an impediment to a priest in active duty, were
usually thrown across the shoulders. This was the outer garment of the
common priests.

[Exodus 28:40](../../../bib/kjv/exo028.htm#040)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_040">exo 28:40</span></span>

bonnets--turbans.

[Exodus 28:42](../../../bib/kjv/exo028.htm#042)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_042">exo 28:42</span></span>

linen breeches--drawers, which encompassed the loins and reached half
way down the thighs. They are seen very frequently represented in
Egyptian figures.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Exodus Chapter 29](exo029)

</div>
