<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Exodus Index](exo.md)  
  [Previous](exo033)  [Next](exo035.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*A Commentary, Critical, Practical, and Explanatory on the Old and New
Testaments*, by Robert Jamieson, A.R. Fausset and David Brown \[1882\]
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Exodus Chapter 34](../../../bib/kjv/exo034.htm#001.md)

[Exodus 34:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo034.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">exo 34:1</span></span>

THE TABLES ARE RENEWED. (Exo. 34:1-35)

the like unto the first--God having been reconciled to repentant Israel,
through the earnest intercession, the successful mediation of Moses,
means were to be taken for the restoration of the broken covenant.
Intimation was given, however, in a most intelligible and expressive
manner, that the favor was to be restored with some memento of the
rupture; for at the former time God Himself had provided the materials,
as well as written upon them. Now, Moses was to prepare the stone
tables, and God was only to retrace the characters originally inscribed
for the use and guidance of the people.

[Exodus 34:2](../../../bib/kjv/exo034.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">exo 34:2</span></span>

present thyself . . . to me in the top of the mount--Not absolutely the
highest peak; for as the cloud of the Shekinah usually abode on the
summit, and yet ([Exo 34:5](../../../bib/kjv/exo034.htm#005).md) it
"descended," the plain inference is that Moses was to station himself at
a point not far distant, but still below the loftiest pinnacle.

[Exodus 34:3](../../../bib/kjv/exo034.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">exo 34:3</span></span>

no man shall come up with thee . . . neither . . . flocks nor herds--All
these enactments were made in order that the law might be a second time
renewed with the solemnity and sanctity that marked its first delivery.
The whole transaction was ordered so as to impress the people with an
awful sense of the holiness of God; and that it was a matter of no
trifling moment to have subjected Him, so to speak, to the necessity of
re-delivering the law of the ten commandments.

[Exodus 34:4](../../../bib/kjv/exo034.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">exo 34:4</span></span>

Moses . . . took in his hand the two tables of stone--As Moses had no
attendant to divide the labor of carrying them, it is evident that they
must have been light, and of no great dimensions--probably flat slabs of
shale or slate, such as abound in the mountainous region of Horeb. An
additional proof of their comparatively small size appears in the
circumstance of their being deposited in the ark of the most holy place
([Exo 25:10](../../../bib/kjv/exo025.htm#010).md).

[Exodus 34:5](../../../bib/kjv/exo034.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">exo 34:5</span></span>

the Lord descended in the cloud--After graciously hovering over the
tabernacle, it seems to have resumed its usual position on the summit of
the mount. It was the shadow of God manifest to the outward senses; and,
at the same time, of God manifest in the flesh. The emblem of a cloud
seems to have been chosen to signify that, although He was pleased to
make known much about himself, there was more veiled from mortal view.
It was to check presumption and engender awe and give a humble sense of
human attainments in divine knowledge, as now man sees, but darkly.

[Exodus 34:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo034.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">exo 34:6</span></span>

the Lord passed by before him--in this remarkable scene, God performed
what He had promised to Moses the day before.

proclaimed, The Lord . . . merciful and gracious--At an earlier period
He had announced Himself to Moses, in the glory of His self-existent and
eternal majesty, as "I am" \[[Exo
3:14](../../../bib/kjv/exo003.htm#014.md)\]; now He makes Himself known in
the glory of His grace and goodness--attributes that were to be
illustriously displayed in the future history and experience of the
church. Being about to republish His law--the sin of the Israelites
being forgiven and the deed of pardon about to be signed and sealed by
renewing the terms of the former covenant--it was the most fitting time
to proclaim the extent of the divine mercy which was to be displayed,
not in the case of Israel only, but of all who offend.

[Exodus 34:8](../../../bib/kjv/exo034.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">exo 34:8</span></span>

Moses bowed . . . and worshipped--In the East, people bow the head to
royalty, and are silent when it passes by, while in the West, they take
off their hats and shout.

[Exodus 34:9](../../../bib/kjv/exo034.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">exo 34:9</span></span>

he said, If now I have found grace in thy sight, O Lord, let my Lord, I
pray thee, go among us--On this proclamation, he, in the overflowing
benevolence of s heart, founded an earnest petition for the Divine
Presence being continued with the people; and God was pleased to give
His favorable answer to Moses' intercession by a renewal of His promise
under the form of a covenant, repeating the leading points that formed
the conditions of the former national compact.

[Exodus 34:27](../../../bib/kjv/exo034.htm#027.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">exo 34:27</span></span>

And the Lord said unto Moses, Write thou these words--that is, the
ceremonial and judicial injunctions comprehended above (Exo. 34:11-26);
while the rewriting of the ten commandments on the newly prepared slabs
was done by God Himself (compare [Deu
10:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/deu010.htm#001).md).

[Exodus 34:28](../../../bib/kjv/exo034.htm#028.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">exo 34:28</span></span>

he was there with the Lord forty days and forty nights--as long as
formerly \[[Exo 24:18](../../../bib/kjv/exo024.htm#018.md)\], being
sustained for the execution of his special duties by the miraculous
power of God. A special cause is assigned for his protracted fast on
this second occasion ([Deu 9:18](../../../bib/kjv/deu009.htm#018).md).

[Exodus 34:29](../../../bib/kjv/exo034.htm#029.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">exo 34:29</span></span>

Moses wist not that the skin of his face shone while he talked with
him--It was an intimation of the exalted presence into which he had been
admitted and of the glory he had witnessed ([Co2
3:18](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#018).md); and in that view, it was a
badge of his high office as the ambassador of God. No testimonial needed
to be produced. He bore his credentials on his very face; and whether
this extraordinary effulgence was a permanent or merely temporary
distinction, it cannot be doubted that this reflected glory was given
him as an honor before all the people.

[Exodus 34:30](../../../bib/kjv/exo034.htm#030.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">exo 34:30</span></span>

they were afraid to come nigh him--Their fear arose from a sense of
guilt--the beaming radiance of his countenance made him appear to their
awe-struck consciences a flaming minister of heaven.

[Exodus 34:33](../../../bib/kjv/exo034.htm#033.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">exo 34:33</span></span>

he put a veil on his face--That veil was with the greatest propriety
removed when speaking with the Lord, for every one appears unveiled to
the eye of Omniscience; but it was replaced on returning to the
people--and this was emblematic of the dark and shadowy character of
that dispensation ([Co2 3:13-14](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#013).md).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Exodus Chapter 35](exo035.md)

</div>
