<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Exodus Index](exo.md)  
  [Previous](exo014)  [Next](exo016.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*A Commentary, Critical, Practical, and Explanatory on the Old and New
Testaments*, by Robert Jamieson, A.R. Fausset and David Brown \[1882\]
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Exodus Chapter 15](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#001.md)

[Exodus 15:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">exo 15:1</span></span>

SONG OF MOSES. (Exo. 15:1-27)

Then sang Moses and the children of Israel--The scene of this
thanksgiving song is supposed to have been at the landing place on the
eastern shore of the Red Sea, at Ayoun Musa, "the fountains of Moses."
They are situated somewhat farther northward along the shore than the
opposite point from which the Israelites set out. But the line of the
people would be extended during the passage, and one extremity of it
would reach as far north as these fountains, which would supply them
with water on landing. The time when it was sung is supposed to have
been the morning after the passage. This song is, by some hundred years,
the oldest poem in the world. There is a sublimity and beauty in the
language that is unexampled. But its unrivalled superiority arises not
solely from the splendor of the diction. Its poetical excellencies have
often drawn forth the admiration of the best judges, while the character
of the event commemorated, and its being prompted by divine inspiration,
contribute to give it an interest and sublimity peculiar to itself.

I will sing unto the Lord, for he hath triumphed gloriously--Considering
the state of servitude in which they had been born and bred, and the
rude features of character which their subsequent history often
displays, it cannot be supposed that the children of Israel generally
were qualified to commit to memory or to appreciate the beauties of this
inimitable song. But they might perfectly understand its pervading
strain of sentiment; and, with the view of suitably improving the
occasion, it was thought necessary that all, old and young, should join
their united voices in the rehearsal of its words. As every individual
had cause, so every individual gave utterance to his feelings of
gratitude.

[Exodus 15:20](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#020.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">exo 15:20</span></span>

Miriam the prophetess--so called from her receiving divine revelations
([Num 12:1](../../../bib/kjv/num012.htm#001.md); [Mic
6:4](../../../bib/kjv/mic006.htm#004).md), but in this instance principally
from her being eminently skilled in music, and in this sense the word
"prophecy" is sometimes used in Scripture ([Ch1
25:1](../../../bib/kjv/ch1025.htm#001.md); [Co1
11:5](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#005).md).

took a timbrel--or "tabret"--a musical instrument in the form of a hoop,
edged round with rings or pieces of brass to make a jingling noise and
covered over with tightened parchment like a drum. It was beat with the
fingers, and corresponds to our tambourine.

all the women went out after her with timbrels and with dances--We shall
understand this by attending to the modern customs of the East, where
the dance--a slow, grave, and solemn gesture, generally accompanied with
singing and the sound of the timbrel, is still led by the principal
female of the company, the rest imitating her movements and repeating
the words of the song as they drop from her lips.

[Exodus 15:21](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#021.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">exo 15:21</span></span>

Miriam answered them--"them" in the Hebrew is masculine, so that Moses
probably led the men and Miriam the women--the two bands responding
alternately, and singing the first verse as a chorus.

[Exodus 15:22](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#022.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">exo 15:22</span></span>

wilderness of Shur--comprehending all the western part of
Arabia-PetrÃ&brvbr;a. The desert of Etham was a part of it, extending
round the northern portion of the Red Sea, and a considerable distance
along its eastern shore; whereas the "wilderness of Shur" (now Sudhr)
was the designation of all the desert region of Arabia-PetrÃ&brvbr;a
that lay next to Palestine.

[Exodus 15:23](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#023.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">exo 15:23</span></span>

when they came to Marah, they could not drink of the waters--Following
the general route of all travellers southward, between the sea and the
tableland of the Tih ("valley of wandering"), Marah is almost
universally believed to be what is now called Howarah, in Wady Amarah,
about thirty miles from the place where the Israelites landed on the
eastern shore of the Red Sea--a distance quite sufficient for their
march of three days. There is no other perennial spring in the
intermediate space. The water still retains its ancient character, and
has a bad name among the Arabs, who seldom allow their camels to partake
of it.

[Exodus 15:25](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#025.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">exo 15:25</span></span>

the Lord showed him a tree, which when he had cast into the waters, the
waters were made sweet--Some travellers have pronounced this to be the
Elvah of the Arabs--a shrub in form and flower resembling our hawthorn;
others, the berries of the Ghurkhud--a bush found growing around all
brackish fountains. But neither of these shrubs are known by the natives
to possess such natural virtues. It is far more likely that God
miraculously endowed some tree with the property of purifying the bitter
water--a tree employed as the medium, but the sweetening was not
dependent upon the nature or quality of the tree, but the power of God
(compare [Joh 9:6](../../../bib/kjv/joh009.htm#006).md). And hence the
"statute and ordinance" that followed, which would have been singularly
inopportune if no miracle had been wrought.

and there he proved them--God now brought the Israelites into
circumstances which would put their faith and obedience to the test
(compare [Gen 22:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen022.htm#001).md).

[Exodus 15:27](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#027.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">exo 15:27</span></span>

they came to Elim, where were twelve wells of water--supposed to be what
is now called Wady-Ghurandel, the most extensive watercourse in the
western desert--an oasis, adorned with a great variety of trees, among
which the palm is still conspicuous, and fertilized by a copious stream.
It is estimated to be a mile in breadth, but stretching out far to the
northeast. After the weary travel through the desert, this must have
appeared a most delightful encampment from its shade and verdure, as
well as from its abundant supply of sweet water for the thirsty
multitude. The palm is called "the tree of the desert," as its presence
is always a sign of water. The palms in this spot are greatly increased
in number, but the wells are diminished.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Exodus Chapter 16](exo016.md)

</div>
