<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Exodus Index](exo)  
  [Previous](exo005)  [Next](exo007) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*A Commentary, Critical, Practical, and Explanatory on the Old and New
Testaments*, by Robert Jamieson, A.R. Fausset and David Brown \[1882\]
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Exodus Chapter 6](../../../bib/kjv/exo006.htm#001)

[Exodus 6:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo006.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">exo 6:1</span></span>

RENEWAL OF THE PROMISE. ([Exo 6:1-13](../../../bib/kjv/exo006.htm#001))

the Lord said unto Moses--The Lord, who is long-suffering and indulgent
to the errors and infirmities of His people, made allowance for the
mortification of Moses as the result of this first interview and cheered
him with the assurance of a speedy and successful termination to his
embassy.

[Exodus 6:2](../../../bib/kjv/exo006.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">exo 6:2</span></span>

And God spake unto Moses--For his further encouragement, there was made
to him an emphatic repetition of the promise ([Exo
3:20](../../../bib/kjv/exo003.htm#020)).

[Exodus 6:3](../../../bib/kjv/exo006.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">exo 6:3</span></span>

I . . . God Almighty--All enemies must fall, all difficulties must
vanish before My omnipotent power, and the patriarchs had abundant
proofs of this.

but by my name, &c.--rather, interrogatively, by My name Jehovah was I
not known to them? Am not I, the Almighty God, who pledged My honor for
the fulfilment of the covenant, also the self-existent God who lives to
accomplish it? Rest assured, therefore, that I shall bring it to pass.
This passage has occasioned much discussion; and it has been thought by
many to intimate that as the name Jehovah was not known to the
patriarchs, at least in the full bearing or practical experience of it,
the honor of the disclosure was reserved to Moses, who was the first
sent with a message in the name of Jehovah, and enabled to attest it by
a series of public miracles.

[Exodus 6:9](../../../bib/kjv/exo006.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">exo 6:9</span></span>

Moses spake so unto the children of Israel--The increased severities
inflicted on the Israelites seem to have so entirely crushed their
spirits, as well as irritated them, that they refused to listen to any
more communications ([Exo 14:12](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#012)). Even
the faith of Moses himself was faltering; and he would have abandoned
the enterprise in despair had he not received a positive command from
God to revisit the people without delay, and at the same time renew
their demand on the king in a more decisive and peremptory tone.

[Exodus 6:12](../../../bib/kjv/exo006.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">exo 6:12</span></span>

how then shall . . . who am of uncircumcised lips?--A metaphorical
expression among the Hebrews, who, taught to look on the circumcision of
any part as denoting perfection, signified its deficiency or
unsuitableness by uncircumcision. The words here express how painfully
Moses felt his want of utterance or persuasive oratory. He seems to have
fallen into the same deep despondency as his brethren, and to be
shrinking with nervous timidity from a difficult, if not desperate,
cause. If he had succeeded so ill with the people, whose dearest
interests were all involved, what better hope could he entertain of his
making more impression on the heart of a king elated with pride and
strong in the possession of absolute power? How strikingly was the
indulgent forbearance of God displayed towards His people amid all their
backwardness to hail His announcement of approaching deliverance! No
perverse complaints or careless indifference on their part retarded the
development of His gracious purposes. On the contrary, here, as
generally, the course of His providence is slow in the infliction of
judgments, while it moves more quickly, as it were, when misery is to be
relieved or benefits conferred.

[Exodus 6:14](../../../bib/kjv/exo006.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">exo 6:14</span></span>

THE GENEALOGY OF MOSES. (Exo. 6:14-30)

These be the heads of their fathers' houses--chiefs or governors of
their houses. The insertion of this genealogical table in this part of
the narrative was intended to authenticate the descent of Moses and
Aaron. Both of them were commissioned to act so important a part in the
events transacted in the court of Egypt and afterwards elevated to so
high offices in the government and Church of God, that it was of the
utmost importance that their lineage should be accurately traced. Reuben
and Simeon being the oldest of Jacob's sons, a passing notice is taken
of them, and then the historian advances to the enumeration of the
principal persons in the house of Levi \[[Exo
6:16-19](../../../bib/kjv/exo006.htm#016)\].

[Exodus 6:20](../../../bib/kjv/exo006.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">exo 6:20</span></span>

Amram took him Jochebed his father's sister to wife--The Septuagint and
Syriac versions render it "his cousin."

[Exodus 6:23](../../../bib/kjv/exo006.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">exo 6:23</span></span>

Elisheba--that is, Elizabethan. These minute particulars recorded of the
family of Aaron, while he has passed over his own, indicate the real
modesty of Moses. An ambitious man or an impostor would have acted in a
different manner.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Exodus Chapter 7](exo007)

</div>
