<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Exodus Index](exo)  
  [Previous](exo002)  [Next](exo004) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*A Commentary, Critical, Practical, and Explanatory on the Old and New
Testaments*, by Robert Jamieson, A.R. Fausset and David Brown \[1882\]
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Exodus Chapter 3](../../../bib/kjv/exo003.htm#001)

[Exodus 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo003.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">exo 3:1</span></span>

DIVINE APPEARANCE AND COMMISSION TO MOSES. (Exo. 3:1-22)

Now Moses kept the flock--This employment he had entered on in
furtherance of his matrimonial views (see on [Exo
2:21](../../../bib/kjv/exo002.htm#021)), but it is probable he was
continuing his service now on other terms like Jacob during the latter
years of his stay with Laban ([Gen
30:28](../../../bib/kjv/gen030.htm#028)).

he led the flock to the backside of the desert--that is, on the west of
the desert \[GESENIUS\], assuming Jethro's headquarters to have been at
Dahab. The route by which Moses led his flock must have been west
through the wide valley called by the Arabs, Wady-es-Zugherah
\[ROBINSON\], which led into the interior of the wilderness.

Mountain of God--so named either according to Hebrew idiom from its
great height, as "great mountains," Hebrew, "mountains of God" ([Psa
36:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa036.htm#006)); "goodly cedars," Hebrew,
"cedars of God" ([Psa 80:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa080.htm#010)); or some
think from its being the old abode of "the glory"; or finally from its
being the theater of transactions most memorable in the history of the
true religion to Horeb--rather, "Horeb-ward."

Horeb--that is, "dry," "desert," was the general name for the
mountainous district in which Sinai is situated, and of which it is a
part. (See on [Exo 19:2](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#002)). It was used
to designate the region comprehending that immense range of lofty,
desolate, and barren hills, at the base of which, however, there are not
only many patches of verdure to be seen, but almost all the valleys, or
wadys, as they are called, show a thin coating of vegetation, which,
towards the south, becomes more luxuriant. The Arab shepherds seldom
take their flocks to a greater distance than one day's journey from
their camp. Moses must have gone at least two days' journey, and
although he seems to have been only following his pastoral course, that
region, from its numerous springs in the clefts of the rocks being the
chief resort of the tribes during the summer heats, the Providence of
God led him thither for an important purpose.

[Exodus 3:2](../../../bib/kjv/exo003.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">exo 3:2</span></span>

the angel of the Lord appeared unto him in a flame of fire--It is common
in Scripture to represent the elements and operations of nature, as
winds, fires, earthquakes, pestilence, everything enlisted in executing
the divine will, as the "angels" or messengers of God. But in such cases
God Himself is considered as really, though invisibly, present. Here the
preternatural fire may be primarily meant by the expression "angel of
the Lord"; but it is clear that under this symbol, the Divine Being was
present, whose name is given ([Exo
3:4](../../../bib/kjv/exo003.htm#004), [Exo
3:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo003.htm#006)), and elsewhere called the angel
of the covenant, Jehovah-Jesus.

out of the midst of a bush--the wild acacia or thorn, with which that
desert abounds, and which is generally dry and brittle, so much so, that
at certain seasons, a spark might kindle a district far and wide into a
blaze. A fire, therefore, being in the midst of such a desert bush was a
"great sight." It is generally supposed to have been emblematic of the
Israelites' condition in Egypt--oppressed by a grinding servitude and a
bloody persecution, and yet, in spite of the cruel policy that was bent
on annihilating them, they continued as numerous and thriving as ever.
The reason was "God was in the midst of them." The symbol may also
represent the present state of the Jews, as well as of the Church
generally in the world.

[Exodus 3:4](../../../bib/kjv/exo003.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">exo 3:4</span></span>

when the Lord saw that he turned aside to see--The manifestations which
God anciently made of Himself were always accompanied by clear,
unmistakable signs that the communications were really from heaven. This
certain evidence was given to Moses. He saw a fire, but no human agent
to kindle it; he heard a voice, but no human lips from which it came; he
saw no living Being, but One was in the bush, in the heat of the flames,
who knew him and addressed him by name. Who could this be but the Divine
Being?

[Exodus 3:5](../../../bib/kjv/exo003.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">exo 3:5</span></span>

put off thy shoes--The direction was in conformity with a usage which
was well known to Moses, for the Egyptian priests observed it in their
temples, and it is observed in all Eastern countries where the people
take off their shoes or sandals, as we do our hats. But the Eastern idea
is not precisely the same as the Western. With us, the removal of the
hat is an expression of reverence for the place we enter, or rather of
Him who is worshipped there. With them the removal of the shoes is a
confession of personal defilement and conscious unworthiness to stand in
the presence of unspotted holiness.

[Exodus 3:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo003.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">exo 3:6</span></span>

I am the God . . . come down to deliver--The reverential awe of Moses
must have been relieved by the divine Speaker (see [Mat
22:32](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#032)), announcing Himself in His
covenant character, and by the welcome intelligence communicated.
Moreover, the time, as well as all the circumstances of this miraculous
appearance, were such as to give him an illustrious display of God's
faithfulness to His promises. The period of Israel's journey and
affliction in Egypt had been predicted ([Gen
15:13](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#013)), and it was during the last
year of the term which had still to run that the Lord appeared in the
burning bush.

[Exodus 3:10](../../../bib/kjv/exo003.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">exo 3:10</span></span>

Come now therefore, and I will send thee--Considering the patriotic
views that had formerly animated the breast of Moses, we might have
anticipated that no mission could have been more welcome to his heart
than to be employed in the national emancipation of Israel. But he
evinced great reluctance to it and stated a variety of objections \[[Exo
3:11](../../../bib/kjv/exo003.htm#011), [Exo
3:13](../../../bib/kjv/exo003.htm#013); [Exo
4:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo004.htm#001), [Exo
4:10](../../../bib/kjv/exo004.htm#010)\] all of which were successfully
met and removed--and the happy issue of his labors was minutely
described.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Exodus Chapter 4](exo004)

</div>
