<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Exodus Index](exo)  
  [Previous](exo012)  [Next](exo014) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*A Commentary, Critical, Practical, and Explanatory on the Old and New
Testaments*, by Robert Jamieson, A.R. Fausset and David Brown \[1882\]
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Exodus Chapter 13](../../../bib/kjv/exo013.htm#001)

[Exodus 13:2](../../../bib/kjv/exo013.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">exo 13:2</span></span>

THE FIRST-BORN SANCTIFIED. ([Exo
13:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/exo013.htm#001))

Sanctify unto me all the first-born--To "sanctify" means to
"consecrate," to "set apart" from a common to a sacred use. The
foundation of this duty rested on the fact that the Israelites, having
had their first-born preserved by a distinguishing act of grace from the
general destruction that overtook the families of the Egyptians, were
bound in token of gratitude to consider them as the Lord's peculiar
property (compare [Heb 12:23](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#023)).

[Exodus 13:3](../../../bib/kjv/exo013.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">exo 13:3</span></span>

MEMORIAL OF THE PASSOVER. ([Exo
13:3-10](../../../bib/kjv/exo013.htm#003))

Moses said unto the people, Remember this day--The day that gave them a
national existence and introduced them into the privileges of
independence and freedom, deserved to live in the memories of the
Hebrews and their posterity; and, considering the signal interposition
of God displayed in it, to be held not only in perpetual, but devout
remembrance.

house of bondage--literally, "house of slaves"--that is, a servile and
degrading condition.

for by strength of hand the Lord brought you out from this place--The
emancipation of Israel would never have been obtained except it had been
wrung from the Egyptian tyrant by the appalling judgments of God, as had
been at the outset of his mission announced to Moses ([Exo
3:19](../../../bib/kjv/exo003.htm#019)).

There shall no leavened bread, &c.--The words are elliptical, and the
meaning of the clause may be paraphrased thus:--"For by strength of hand
the Lord brought you out from this place, in such haste that there could
or should be no leavened bread eaten."

[Exodus 13:4](../../../bib/kjv/exo013.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">exo 13:4</span></span>

month Abib--literally, "a green ear," and hence the month Abib is the
month of green ears, corresponding to the middle of our March. It was
the best season for undertaking a journey to the desert region of Sinai,
especially with flocks and herds; for then the winter torrents had
subsided, and the wadies were covered with an early and luxuriant
verdure.

[Exodus 13:5](../../../bib/kjv/exo013.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">exo 13:5</span></span>

when the Lord shall bring thee--The passover is here instituted as a
permanent festival of the Israelites. It was, however, only a
prospective observance; we read of only one celebration of the passover
during the protracted sojourn in the wilderness \[[Num
9:5](../../../bib/kjv/num009.htm#005)\]; but on their settlement in the
promised land, the season was hallowed as a sacred anniversary \[[Jos
5:10](../../../bib/kjv/jos005.htm#010)\], in conformity with the
directions here given.

[Exodus 13:8](../../../bib/kjv/exo013.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">exo 13:8</span></span>

thou shalt show thy son in that day, saying--The establishment of this
and the other sacred festivals presented the best opportunities of
instructing the young in a knowledge of His gracious doings to their
ancestors in Egypt.

[Exodus 13:9](../../../bib/kjv/exo013.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">exo 13:9</span></span>

it shall be for a sign unto thee upon thine hand, &c.--There is no
reason to believe that the Oriental tattooing--the custom of staining
the hands with the powder of Hennah, as Eastern females now do--is here
referred to. Nor is it probable that either this practice or the
phylacteries of the Pharisees--parchment scrolls, which were worn on
their wrists and foreheads--had so early an existence. The words are to
be considered only as a figurative mode of expression.

that the Lord's law may be in thy mouth, &c.--that is, that it may be
the subject of frequent conversation and familiar knowledge among the
people.

[Exodus 13:12](../../../bib/kjv/exo013.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">exo 13:12</span></span>

FIRSTLINGS OF BEASTS. ([Exo 13:11-16](../../../bib/kjv/exo013.htm#011))

every firstling, &c.--the injunction respecting the consecration of the
first-born, as here repeated, with some additional circumstances. The
firstlings of clean beasts, such as lambs, kids, and calves, if males,
were to be devoted to God and employed in sacrifice. Those unclean
beasts, as the ass's colt, being unfit for sacrifice, were to be
redeemed ([Num 18:15](../../../bib/kjv/num018.htm#015)).

[Exodus 13:17](../../../bib/kjv/exo013.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">exo 13:17</span></span>

JOURNEY FROM EGYPT. ([Exo 13:17-21](../../../bib/kjv/exo013.htm#017))

God led them not through the way of the land of the Philistines,
although that was near, &c.--The shortest and most direct route from
Egypt to Palestine was the usual caravan road that leads by Belbeis,
El-Arish, to Ascalon and Gaza. The Philistines, who then possessed the
latter, would have been sure to dispute their passage, for between them
and the Israelites there was a hereditary feud ([Ch1
7:21-22](../../../bib/kjv/ch1007.htm#021)); and so early a commencement
of hostilities would have discouraged or dismayed the unwarlike band
which Moses led. Their faith was to be exercised and strengthened, and
from the commencement of their travels we observe the same careful
proportion of burdens and trials to their character and state, as the
gracious Lord shows to His people still in that spiritual journey of
which the former was typical.

[Exodus 13:18](../../../bib/kjv/exo013.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">exo 13:18</span></span>

God led the people about, through the way of the wilderness of the Red
Sea, &c.--This wondrous expanse of water is a gulf of the Indian ocean.
It was called in Hebrew "the weedy sea," from the forest of marine
plants with which it abounds. But the name of the Red Sea is not so
easily traced. Some think it was given from its contiguity to the
countries of Edom ("red"); others derive it from its coral rocks; while
a third class ascribe the origin of the name to an extremely red
appearance of the water in some parts, caused by a numberless multitude
of very small mollusca. This sea, at its northern extremity, separates
into two smaller inlets--the eastern called anciently the Elanitic gulf,
now the gulf of Akaba; and the western the Heroopolite gulf, now the
gulf of Suez, which, there can be no doubt, extended much more to the
north anciently than it does now. It was toward the latter the
Israelites marched.

went up harnessed--that is, girded, equipped for a long journey. (See
[Psa 105:37](../../../bib/kjv/psa105.htm#037)). The Margin renders it
"five in a rank," meaning obviously five large divisions, under five
presiding officers, according to the usages of all caravans; and a
spectacle of such a mighty and motley multitude must have presented an
imposing appearance, and its orderly progress could have been effected
only by the superintending influence of God.

[Exodus 13:19](../../../bib/kjv/exo013.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">exo 13:19</span></span>

Moses took the bones of Joseph with him--in fulfilment of the oath he
exacted from his brethren ([Gen
50:25-26](../../../bib/kjv/gen050.htm#025)). The remains of the other
patriarchs (not noticed from their obscurity) were also carried out of
Egypt ([Act 7:15-16](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#015)); and there would
be no difficulty as to the means of conveyance--a few camels bearing
these precious relics would give a true picture of Oriental customs,
such as is still to be seen in the immense pilgrimages to Mecca.

[Exodus 13:20](../../../bib/kjv/exo013.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">exo 13:20</span></span>

encamped in Etham--This place is supposed by the most intelligent
travellers to be the modern Ajrud, where is a watering-place, and which
is the third stage of the pilgrim-caravans to Mecca. "It is remarkable
that either of the different routes eastward from Heliopolis, or
southward from Heroopolis, equally admit of Ajrud being Etham. It is
twelve miles northwest from Suez, and is literally on the edge of the
desert" \[Pictorial Bible\].

[Exodus 13:21](../../../bib/kjv/exo013.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">exo 13:21</span></span>

the Lord went before them--by a visible token of His presence, the
Shekinah, in a majestic cloud ([Psa
78:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#014); [Neh
9:12](../../../bib/kjv/neh009.htm#012); [Co1
10:1](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#001)), called "the angel of God" ([Exo
14:19](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#019); [Exo
23:20-23](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#020); [Psa
99:6-7](../../../bib/kjv/psa099.htm#006); [Isa
63:8-9](../../../bib/kjv/isa063.htm#008)).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Exodus Chapter 14](exo014)

</div>
