<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Ezra Index](ezr)  
  [Previous](ezr006)  [Next](ezr008) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*A Commentary, Critical, Practical, and Explanatory on the Old and New
Testaments*, by Robert Jamieson, A.R. Fausset and David Brown \[1882\]
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Ezra Chapter 7](../../../bib/kjv/ezr007.htm#001)

[Ezra 7:1](../../../bib/kjv/ezr007.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">ezr 7:1</span></span>

EZRA GOES UP TO JERUSALEM. ([Ezr
7:1-10](../../../bib/kjv/ezr007.htm#001))

in the reign of Artaxerxes--the Ahasuerus of Esther.

Ezra the son of Seraiah--that is, grandson or great-grandson. Seraiah
was the high priest put to death by Nebuchadnezzar at Riblah ([Kg2
25:18](../../../bib/kjv/kg2025.htm#018)). A period of one hundred thirty
years had elapsed between that catastrophe and the journey of Ezra to
Jerusalem. As a grandson of Seraiah, namely, Jeshua, who held the office
of high priest, had accompanied Zerubbabel in the first caravan of
returning exiles, Ezra must have been in all probability a grandson,
descended, too, from a younger son, the older branch being in possession
of the pontificate.

[Ezra 7:6](../../../bib/kjv/ezr007.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">ezr 7:6</span></span>

This Ezra . . . was a ready scribe in the law of Moses--The term
"scribe" does not mean merely a penman, nor even an attorney well versed
in forms of law and skilled in the method of preparing public or private
deeds. He was a rabbi, or doctor, learned in the Mosaic law, and in all
that related to the civil and ecclesiastical polity and customs of the
Hebrew people. Scribes of this description possessed great authority and
influence (compare [Mat 23:25](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#025); [Mar
12:28](../../../bib/kjv/mar012.htm#028)).

the king granted him all his request--left Babylon entrusted with an
important commission to be executed in Jerusalem. The manner in which he
obtained this office is minutely related in a subsequent passage. Here
it is noticed, but with a pious acknowledgment of the divine grace and
goodness which disposed the royal mind in favor of Ezra's patriotic
objects. The Levites, &c., did not go at that time, but are mentioned
here by anticipation.

[Ezra 7:8](../../../bib/kjv/ezr007.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">ezr 7:8</span></span>

he came to Jerusalem in the fifth month--that is, corresponding to the
end of our July or beginning of our August. As he left Babylon on the
Jewish New Year's Day ([Ezr 7:9](../../../bib/kjv/ezr007.htm#009)), the
journey must have occupied not less than four months (a long period),
but it was necessary to move at a slow pace and by short, easy stages,
as he had to conduct a large caravan of poor people, including women,
children, and all their household gear (see on [Ezr
8:24](../../../bib/kjv/ezr008.htm#024)).

[Ezra 7:10](../../../bib/kjv/ezr007.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">ezr 7:10</span></span>

Ezra had prepared his heart to seek the law of the Lord, &c.--His
reigning desire had been to study the divine law--its principles,
institutions, privileges, and requirements; and now from love and zeal,
he devoted himself, as the business of his life, to the work of
instructing, reforming, and edifying others.

[Ezra 7:11](../../../bib/kjv/ezr007.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">ezr 7:11</span></span>

GRACIOUS COMMISSION OF ARTAXERXES. (Ezra 7:11-26)

this is the copy of the letter that the king Artaxerxes gave--The
measure which this document authorized, and the remarkable interest in
the Jews displayed in it, were most probably owing to the influence of
Esther, who is thought to have been raised to the high position of queen
a few months previous to the departure of Ezra \[HALES\]. According to
others, who adopt a different chronology, it was more probably pressed
upon the attention of the Persian court by Ezra, who, like Daniel,
showed the prophecies to the king; or by some leading Jews on his
accession, who, seeing the unsettled and disordered state of the colony
after the deaths of Zerubbabel, Jeshua, Haggai, and Zechariah,
recommended the appointment of a commission to reform abuses, suppress
disorder, and enforce the observance of the law.

[Ezra 7:12](../../../bib/kjv/ezr007.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">ezr 7:12</span></span>

Artaxerxes, king of kings--That title might have been assumed as, with
literal truth, applicable to him, since many of the tributary princes of
his empire still retained the name and authority of kings. But it was a
probably a mere Orientalism, denoting a great and powerful prince, as
the heaven of heavens signified the highest heaven, and vanity of
vanities, the greatest vanity. This vainglorious title was assumed by
the kings of Assyria, from whom it passed to the sovereigns of Persia.

unto Ezra the priest, a scribe of the law of the God of heaven--The
appointment of Ezra to this influential mission was of the highest
importance to the Hebrew people, as a large proportion of them were
become, in a great measure, strangers both to the language and the
institutions of their forefathers.

[Ezra 7:14](../../../bib/kjv/ezr007.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">ezr 7:14</span></span>

sent of the king, and of his seven counsellors--This was the fixed
number of the privy council of the kings of Persia ([Est
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/est001.htm#010), [Est
1:14](../../../bib/kjv/est001.htm#014)). The document describes, with
great clearness and precision, the nature of Ezra's commission and the
extent of power and prerogatives with which he was invested. It gave him
authority, in the first place, to organize the colony in Judea and
institute a regular government, according to the laws of the Hebrew
people, and by magistrates and rulers of their own nation ([Ezr
7:25-26](../../../bib/kjv/ezr007.htm#025)), with power to punish
offenders by fines, imprisonment, exile, or death, according to the
degree of their criminality. Secondly, he was empowered to carry a large
donation in money, partly from the royal treasury and partly raised by
voluntary contributions among his countrymen, to create a fund out of
which to make suitable provision for maintaining the regular worship of
God in Jerusalem ([Ezr 7:16-17](../../../bib/kjv/ezr007.htm#016)).
Thirdly, the Persian officers in Syria were commanded to afford him
every assistance by gifts of money within a certain specified limit, in
carrying out the objects of his patriotic mission ([Ezr
7:21](../../../bib/kjv/ezr007.htm#021)).

[Ezra 7:22](../../../bib/kjv/ezr007.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">ezr 7:22</span></span>

an hundred talents of silver--Â£22,000 according to the rate of the
silver talent of Babylon. Fourthly, Artaxerxes gave his royal sanction
in the establishment of the divine law, which exempted priests and
Levites from taxation or tribute and confirmed to them the exclusive
right to officiate in the sacred services of the sanctuary. And,
finally, in the expression of the king's desire for the divine blessing
upon the king and his government ([Ezr
7:23](../../../bib/kjv/ezr007.htm#023)), we see the strong persuasion
which pervaded the Persian court, and had been produced by the captivity
of the Hebrew people, as to the being and directing providence of the
God they worshipped. It will be observed, however, that the commission
related exclusively to the rebuilding of the temple--not of the walls.
The Samaritans ([Ezr 4:20-22](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#020)) had
succeeded in alarming the Persian court by their representations of the
danger to the empire of fortifying a city notorious for the turbulent
character of its inhabitants and the prowess of its kings.

[Ezra 7:27](../../../bib/kjv/ezr007.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">ezr 7:27</span></span>

EZRA BLESSES GOD FOR THIS FAVOR. ([Ezr
7:27-28](../../../bib/kjv/ezr007.htm#027))

Blessed be the Lord God of our fathers--This devout thanksgiving is in
unison with the whole character of Ezra, who discerns the hand of God in
every event, and is always ready to express a pious acknowledgment for
the divine goodness.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ezra Chapter 8](ezr008)

</div>
