<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Ezra Index](ezr.md)  
  [Previous](ezr009)  [Next](neh000.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*A Commentary, Critical, Practical, and Explanatory on the Old and New
Testaments*, by Robert Jamieson, A.R. Fausset and David Brown \[1882\]
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Ezra Chapter 10](../../../bib/kjv/ezr010.htm#001.md)

[Ezra 10:1](../../../bib/kjv/ezr010.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">ezr 10:1</span></span>

EZRA REFORMS THE STRANGE MARRIAGES. (Ezra 10:1-17)

Now when Ezra had prayed--As this prayer was uttered in public, while
there was a general concourse of the people at the time of the evening
sacrifice and as it was accompanied with all the demonstrations of
poignant sorrow and anguish, it is not surprising that the spectacle of
a man so respected, a priest so holy, a governor so dignified as Ezra,
appearing distressed and filled with fear at the sad state of things,
should produce a deep sensation; and the report of his passionate grief
and expressions in the court of the temple having rapidly spread through
the city, a great multitude flocked to the spot.

[Ezra 10:2](../../../bib/kjv/ezr010.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">ezr 10:2</span></span>

Shechaniah . . . answered and said unto Ezra, We have trespassed--This
was one of the leading men, who was not himself a delinquent in the
matter, for his name does not occur in the following list. He spoke in
the general name of the people, and his conduct evinced a tender
conscience, as well as no small fortitude in making such a proposal; for
as his father and five paternal uncles ([Ezr
10:26](../../../bib/kjv/ezr010.htm#026).md) were involved in the guilt of
unlawful marriages, he showed, by the measure he recommended, that he
deemed it better to obey God than to please his nearest relatives.

yet now there is hope in Israel concerning this thing--This hope,
however, depended on timely measures of reformation, and therefore,
instead of surrendering themselves to despair or despondency, he
counselled them to amend their error without delay, relying on God's
mercy for the past. Though the proposal may seem harsh and cruel, yet in
the peculiar circumstances of the Jews it was just as well as necessary;
and he urged the duty of seeing it executed on Ezra, as the only person
competent to carry it into effect, being possessed of skill and address
for so delicate and difficult a work, and invested by God, and under Him
by the Persian king ([Ezr 7:23-28](../../../bib/kjv/ezr007.htm#023).md),
with the requisite authority to enforce it.

[Ezra 10:5](../../../bib/kjv/ezr010.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">ezr 10:5</span></span>

Then Ezra . . . went into the chamber of Johanan--At a private council
of the princes and elders held there, under the presidency of Ezra, it
was resolved to enter into a general covenant to put away their foreign
wives and children; that a proclamation should be made for all who had
returned from Babylon to repair within three days to Jerusalem, under
pain of excommunication and confiscation of their property.

[Ezra 10:9](../../../bib/kjv/ezr010.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">ezr 10:9</span></span>

Then all the men of Judah and Benjamin--The returned captives belonged
chiefly to these tribes; but other Israelites are also included under
these names, as they all were then occupying the territory formerly
assigned to those two tribes.

It was the ninth month--that is, between the end of December and the
beginning of January, which is the coldest and most rainy season of the
year in Palestine.

all the people sat in the street--that is, the court.

[Ezra 10:10](../../../bib/kjv/ezr010.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">ezr 10:10</span></span>

Ezra the priest stood up, and said--Having fully represented the
enormity of their sin and urged them to dissolve their unlawful
connections, he was gratified by receiving a prompt acknowledgment of
the justice of his reproof and a promise of compliance with his
recommendation. But as the weather was ungenial and the defaulters were
too numerous to be passed in review at one time, it was resolved that a
commission should be appointed to examine into the whole matter. These
commissioners, assisted by the judges and elders of the respective
cities, made a minute investigation into every case, and after three
months' labor completely removed all traces of the abuse. Doubtless, an
adequate provision was made for the repudiated wives and children,
according to the means and circumstances of the husbands.

[Ezra 10:18](../../../bib/kjv/ezr010.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">ezr 10:18</span></span>

THOSE THAT HAD TAKEN STRANGE WIVES. (Ezra 10:18-44)

among the sons of the priests--From the names of so many men of rank
appearing in the following list, some idea may be formed of the great
and complicated difficulties attending the reformatory work.

[Ezra 10:19](../../../bib/kjv/ezr010.htm#019.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">ezr 10:19</span></span>

they gave their hands--that is, came under a solemn engagement, which
was usually ratified by pledging the right hand ([Pro
6:1](../../../bib/kjv/pro006.htm#001.md); [Eze
17:18](../../../bib/kjv/eze017.htm#018).md). The delinquents of the
priestly order bound themselves to do like the common Israelites ([Ezr
10:25](../../../bib/kjv/ezr010.htm#025).md), and sought to expiate their
sin by sacrificing a ram as a trespass offering.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Nehemiah Introduction](neh000.md)

</div>
