<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Ezra Index](ezr.md)  
  [Previous](ezr008)  [Next](ezr010.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*A Commentary, Critical, Practical, and Explanatory on the Old and New
Testaments*, by Robert Jamieson, A.R. Fausset and David Brown \[1882\]
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Ezra Chapter 9](../../../bib/kjv/ezr009.htm#001.md)

[Ezra 9:1](../../../bib/kjv/ezr009.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">ezr 9:1</span></span>

EZRA MOURNS FOR THE AFFINITY OF THE PEOPLE WITH STRANGERS. ([Ezr
9:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/ezr009.htm#001).md)

Now when these things were done--The first days after Ezra's arrival in
Jerusalem were occupied in executing the different trusts committed to
him. The nature and design of the office with which the royal authority
had invested him was publicly made known to his own people by the formal
delivery of the contribution and the sacred vessels brought from Babylon
to the priests to be deposited in the temple. Then his credentials were
privately presented to the provincial governors; and by this prudent,
orderly proceeding he put himself in the best position to avail himself
of all the advantages guaranteed him by the king. On a superficial view
everything contributed to gratify his patriotic feelings in the
apparently flourishing state of the church and country. But a further
acquaintance discovered the existence of great corruptions, which
demanded immediate correction. One was particularly brought under his
notice as being the source and origin of all others; namely, a serious
abuse that was practised respecting the law of marriage.

the princes came to me, saying--The information they lodged with Ezra
was to the effect that numbers of the people, in violation of the divine
law ([Deu 7:2-3](../../../bib/kjv/deu007.htm#002).md), had contracted
marriages with Gentile women, and that the guilt of the disorderly
practice, far from being confined to the lower classes, was shared in by
several of the priests and Levites, as well as of the leading men in the
country. This great irregularity would inevitably bring many evils in
its train; it would encourage and increase idolatry, as well as break
down the barriers of distinction which, for important purposes, God had
raised between the Israelites and all other people. Ezra foresaw these
dangerous consequences, but was overwhelmed with a sense of the
difficulty of correcting the evil, when matrimonial alliances had been
formed, families had been reared, affections engaged, and important
interests established.

[Ezra 9:3](../../../bib/kjv/ezr009.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">ezr 9:3</span></span>

when I heard this thing, I rent my garment and my mantle, &c.--the outer
and inner garment, which was a token not only of great grief, but of
dread at the same time of the divine wrath;

plucked off the hair of my head and of my beard--which was a still more
significant sign of overpowering grief.

[Ezra 9:4](../../../bib/kjv/ezr009.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">ezr 9:4</span></span>

Then were assembled unto me every one that trembled at the words of the
God of Israel, &c.--All the pious people who reverenced God's word and
dreaded its threatenings and judgments joined with Ezra in bewailing the
public sin, and devising the means of redressing it.

I sat astonied until the evening sacrifice--The intelligence of so gross
a violation of God's law by those who had been carried into captivity on
account of their sins, and who, though restored, were yet unreformed,
produced such a stunning effect on the mind of Ezra that he remained for
a while incapable either of speech or of action. The hour of the evening
sacrifice was the usual time of the people assembling; and at that
season, having again rent his hair and garments, he made public prayer
and confession of sin.

[Ezra 9:5](../../../bib/kjv/ezr009.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">ezr 9:5</span></span>

PRAYS TO GOD. ([Ezr 9:5-15](../../../bib/kjv/ezr009.htm#005).md)

I fell upon my knees, and spread out my hands unto the Lord my God--The
burden of his prayer, which was dictated by a deep sense of the
emergency, was that he was overwhelmed at the flagrant enormity of this
sin, and the bold impiety of continuing in it after having, as a people,
so recently experienced the heavy marks of the divine displeasure. God
had begun to show returning favor to Israel by the restoration of some.
But this only aggravated their sin, that, so soon after their
re-establishment in their native land, they openly violated the express
and repeated precepts which commanded them to extirpate the Canaanites.
Such conduct, he exclaimed, could issue only in drawing down some great
punishment from offended Heaven and ensuring the destruction of the
small remnant of us that is left, unless, by the help of divine grace,
we repent and bring forth the fruits of repentance in an immediate and
thorough reformation.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ezra Chapter 10](ezr010.md)

</div>
