<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Ezra Index](ezr.md)  
  [Previous](ezr004)  [Next](ezr006.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*A Commentary, Critical, Practical, and Explanatory on the Old and New
Testaments*, by Robert Jamieson, A.R. Fausset and David Brown \[1882\]
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Ezra Chapter 5](../../../bib/kjv/ezr005.htm#001.md)

[Ezra 5:1](../../../bib/kjv/ezr005.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">ezr 5:1</span></span>

ZERUBBABEL AND JESHUA SET FORWARD THE BUILDING OF THE TEMPLE IN THE
REIGN OF DARIUS. (Ezra 5:1-17)

Then the prophets . . . prophesied . . . in the name of the God of
Israel--From the recorded writings of Haggai and Zechariah, it appears
that the difficulties experienced and the many obstacles thrown in the
way had first cooled the zeal of the Jews in the building of the temple,
and then led to an abandonment of the work, under a pretended belief
that the time for rebuilding it had not yet come ([Hag
1:2-11](../../../bib/kjv/hag001.htm#002).md). For fifteen years the work
was completely suspended. These two prophets upbraided them with severe
reproaches for their sloth, negligence, and worldly selfishness ([Hag
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/hag001.htm#004).md), threatened them with severe
judgments if they continued backward, and promised that they would be
blessed with great national prosperity if they resumed and prosecuted
the work with alacrity and vigor.

Zechariah the son of Iddo--that is, grandson ([Zac
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/zac001.htm#001).md).

[Ezra 5:2](../../../bib/kjv/ezr005.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">ezr 5:2</span></span>

Then rose up Zerubbabel . . . and Jeshua . . . began to build the house
of God--The strong appeals and animating exhortations of these prophets
gave a new impulse to the building of the temple. It was in the second
year of the reign of Darius Hystaspes that the work, after a long
interruption, was resumed.

[Ezra 5:3](../../../bib/kjv/ezr005.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">ezr 5:3</span></span>

At the same time came to them Tatnai, governor on this side the
river--The Persian empire west of the Euphrates included at this time
Syria, Arabia, Egypt, PhÅ“nicia, and other provinces subject to Darius.
The empire was divided into twenty provinces, called satrapies. Syria
formed one satrapy, inclusive of Palestine, PhÅ“nicia, and Cyprus, and
furnished an annual revenue of three hundred fifty talents. It was
presided over by a satrap or viceroy, who at this time resided at
Damascus. Though superior to the native governors of the Jews appointed
by the Persian king, he never interfered with their internal government
except when there was a threatened disturbance of order and
tranquillity. Tatnai, the governor (whether this was a personal name or
an official title is unknown), had probably been incited by the
complaints and turbulent outrages of the Samaritans against the Jews;
but he suspended his judgment, and he prudently resolved to repair to
Jerusalem, that he might ascertain the real state of matters by personal
inspection and enquiry, in company with another dignified officer and
his provincial council.

[Ezra 5:5](../../../bib/kjv/ezr005.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">ezr 5:5</span></span>

But the eye of their God was upon the elders of the Jews, &c.--The
unusual presence, the imposing suite, the authoritative enquiries of the
satrap appeared formidable, and might have produced a paralyzing
influence or led to disastrous consequences, if he had been a partial
and corrupt judge or actuated by unfriendly feelings towards the Jewish
cause. The historian, therefore, with characteristic piety, throws in
this parenthetical verse to intimate that God averted the threatening
cloud and procured favor for the elders or leaders of the Jews, that
they were not interrupted in their proceedings till communications with
the court should be made and received. Not a word was uttered to
dispirit the Jews or afford cause of triumph to their opponents. Matters
were to go on till contrary orders arrived from Babylon. After surveying
the work in progress, he inquired: first, by what authority this
national temple was undertaken; and, secondly, the names of the
principal promoters and directors of the undertaking. To these two heads
of enquiry the Jews returned ready and distinct replies. Then having
learned that it originated in a decree of Cyrus, who had not only
released the Jewish exiles from captivity and permitted them to return
to their own land for the express purpose of rebuilding the house of
God, but, by an act of royal grace, had restored to them the sacred
vessels which Nebuchadnezzar had carried off as trophies from the former
temple, Tatnai transmitted all this information in an official report to
his imperial master, accompanying it with a recommendatory suggestion
that search should be made among the national archives at Babylon for
the original decree of Cyrus, that the truth of the Jews' statement
might be verified. The whole conduct of Tatnai, as well as the general
tone of his despatch, is marked by a sound discretion and prudent
moderation, free from any party bias, and evincing a desire only to do
his duty. In all respects he appears in favorable contrast with his
predecessor, Rehum ([Ezr 4:9](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#009).md).

[Ezra 5:8](../../../bib/kjv/ezr005.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">ezr 5:8</span></span>

the house of the great God, which is builded with great
stones--literally, "stones of rolling"; that is, stones of such
extraordinary size that they could not be carried--they had to be rolled
or dragged along the ground.

[Ezra 5:13](../../../bib/kjv/ezr005.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">ezr 5:13</span></span>

Cyrus the king . . . made a decree--The Jews were perfectly warranted
according to the principles of the Persian government to proceed with
the building in virtue of Cyrus' edict. For everywhere a public decree
is considered as remaining in force until it is revoked but the "laws of
the Medes and Persians changed not" \[[Dan
6:8](../../../bib/kjv/dan006.htm#008.md), [Dan
6:12](../../../bib/kjv/dan006.htm#012.md), [Dan
6:15](../../../bib/kjv/dan006.htm#015.md)\].

[Ezra 5:16](../../../bib/kjv/ezr005.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">ezr 5:16</span></span>

Then came . . . Shesh-bazzar . . . since that time even until now hath
it been in building--This was not a part of the Jews' answer--they could
not have said this, knowing the building had long ceased. But Tatnai
used these expressions in his report, either looking on the stoppage as
a temporary interruption, or supposing that the Jews were always working
a little, as they had means and opportunities.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ezra Chapter 6](ezr006.md)

</div>
