<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Ezra Index](ezr.md)  
  [Previous](ezr007)  [Next](ezr009.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*A Commentary, Critical, Practical, and Explanatory on the Old and New
Testaments*, by Robert Jamieson, A.R. Fausset and David Brown \[1882\]
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Ezra Chapter 8](../../../bib/kjv/ezr008.htm#001.md)

[Ezra 8:1](../../../bib/kjv/ezr008.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">ezr 8:1</span></span>

EZRA'S COMPANIONS FROM BABYLON. ([Ezr
8:1-14](../../../bib/kjv/ezr008.htm#001).md)

this is the genealogy of them that went up with me from Babylon--The
number given here amounts to 1754. But this is the register of adult
males only, and as there were women and children also ([Ezr
8:21](../../../bib/kjv/ezr008.htm#021).md), the whole caravan may be
considered as comprising between six thousand and seven thousand.

[Ezra 8:15](../../../bib/kjv/ezr008.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">ezr 8:15</span></span>

HE SENDS TO IDDO FOR MINISTERS FOR THE TEMPLE SERVICE. ([Ezr
8:15-20](../../../bib/kjv/ezr008.htm#015).md)

I gathered them together to the river that runneth to Ahava--This river
has not been ascertained. It is probable that the Ahava was one of the
streams or numerous canals of Mesopotamia communicating with the
Euphrates \[CyclopÃ&brvbr;dia of Biblical Literature\]. But it was
certainly in Babylonia on the banks of that stream; and perhaps the
place appointed for general rendezvous was in the neighborhood of a town
of the same name. The emigrants encamped there for three days, according
to Oriental custom, while the preparations for the departure were being
completed and Ezra was arranging the order of the caravan.

I . . . found there none of the sons of Levi--that is, the ordinary
Levites. Notwithstanding the privilege of exemption from all taxes
granted to persons engaged in the temple service, none of the Levitical
tribes were induced to join the settlement in Jerusalem; and it was even
not without difficulty Ezra persuaded some of the priestly families to
accompany him.

[Ezra 8:16](../../../bib/kjv/ezr008.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">ezr 8:16</span></span>

then sent I for Eliezer . . . with commandment unto Iddo the chief--Ezra
sent this deputation, either by virtue of authority which by his
priestly character he had over the Levites, or of the royal commission
with which he was invested. The deputation was despatched to Iddo, who
was a prince or chief of the Nethinims--for the Persian government
allowed the Hebrews during their exile to retain their ecclesiastical
government by their own chiefs, as well as to enjoy the privilege of
free worship. Iddo's influence procured and brought to the camp at Ahava
thirty-eight Levites, and two hundred twenty Nethinims, the descendants
of the Gibeonites, who performed the servile duties of the temple.

[Ezra 8:21](../../../bib/kjv/ezr008.htm#021.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">ezr 8:21</span></span>

A FAST PROCLAIMED. (Ezra 8:21-36)

Then I proclaimed a fast there--The dangers to travelling caravans from
the Bedouin Arabs that prowl through the desert were in ancient times as
great as they still are; and it seems that travellers usually sought the
protection of a military escort. But Ezra had spoken so much to the king
of the sufficiency of the divine care of His people that he would have
blushed to apply for a guard of soldiers. Therefore he resolved that his
followers should, by a solemn act of fasting and prayer, commit
themselves to the Keeper of Israel. Their faith, considering the many
and constant perils of a journey across the Bedouin regions, must have
been great, and it was rewarded by the enjoyment of perfect safety
during the whole way.

[Ezra 8:24](../../../bib/kjv/ezr008.htm#024.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">ezr 8:24</span></span>

Then I separated twelve of the chief of the priests . . . and weighed
unto them the silver, &c.--The custody of the contributions and of the
sacred vessels was, during the journey, committed to twelve of the chief
priests, who, with the assistance of ten of their brethren, were to
watch closely over them by the way, and deliver them into the house of
the Lord in Jerusalem. The treasures in silver and gold, according to
the value of the Babylonian talent, amounted to about Â£515,000
sterling.

[Ezra 8:27](../../../bib/kjv/ezr008.htm#027.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">ezr 8:27</span></span>

two vessels of fine copper, precious as gold--Almost all commentators
agree in maintaining that the vessels referred to were not made of
copper, but of an alloy capable of taking on a bright polish, which we
think highly probable, as copper was then in common use among the
Babylonians, and would not be as precious as gold. This alloy, much
esteemed among the Jews, was composed of gold and other metals, which
took on a high polish and was not subject to tarnish \[NOYES\].

[Ezra 8:31](../../../bib/kjv/ezr008.htm#031.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">ezr 8:31</span></span>

we departed from the river of Ahava on the twelfth day of the first
month--Computing from the time of their setting out to the period of
their arrival, they occupied about four months on the way. Their health
and security were marvellous during so long a journey. The
pilgrim-caravans of the present day perform long journeys through the
wildest deserts of the East under the protection of a firman from the
Porte, and an escort of soldiers. But for a large body, composed as that
of Ezra--of some thousands of men, women, and children, unaccustomed to
travel, undisciplined to order, and without military strength, and with
so large an amount of treasure tempting the cupidity of the marauding,
plundering tribes of the desert--to accomplish a journey so long and so
arduous in perfect safety, is one of the most astonishing events
recorded in history. Nothing but the vigilant care of a superintending
Providence could have brought them securely to their destination.

[Ezra 8:33](../../../bib/kjv/ezr008.htm#033.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">ezr 8:33</span></span>

Now on the fourth day was the silver . . . weighed in the house of our
God--The first three days after their arrival in Jerusalem were
undoubtedly given to repose; on the next, the treasures were weighed and
handed over to the custody of the officiating priests of the temple. The
returned exiles offered burnt offerings, and Ezra delivered the royal
commission to the satraps and inferior magistrates; while the Levitical
portion of them lent all the assistance they could in performing the
additional work which the arrival of so many new worshippers occasioned.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ezra Chapter 9](ezr009.md)

</div>
