<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Ezra Index](ezr)  
  [Previous](ezr003)  [Next](ezr005) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*A Commentary, Critical, Practical, and Explanatory on the Old and New
Testaments*, by Robert Jamieson, A.R. Fausset and David Brown \[1882\]
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Ezra Chapter 4](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#001)

[Ezra 4:1](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">ezr 4:1</span></span>

THE BUILDING HINDERED. ([Ezr 4:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#001))

the adversaries of Judah and Benjamin--that is, strangers settled in the
land of Israel.

[Ezra 4:2](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">ezr 4:2</span></span>

we seek your God, as ye do; and we do sacrifice unto him since the days
of Esar-haddon . . . which brought us up hither--A very interesting
explanation of this passage has been recently obtained from the Assyrian
sculptures. On a large cylinder, deposited in the British Museum, there
is inscribed a long and perfect copy of the annals of Esar-haddon, in
which the details are given of a large deportation of Israelites from
Palestine, and a consequent settlement of Babylonian colonists in their
place. It is a striking confirmation of the statement made in this
passage. Those Assyrian settlers intermarried with the remnant of
Israelite women, and their descendants, a mongrel race, went under the
name of Samaritans. Though originally idolaters, they were instructed in
the knowledge of God, so that they could say, "We seek your God"; but
they served Him in a superstitious way of their own (see on [Kg2
17:26-34](../../../bib/kjv/kg2017.htm#026), [Kg2
17:41](../../../bib/kjv/kg2017.htm#041)).

[Ezra 4:3](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">ezr 4:3</span></span>

But Zerubbabel and Jeshua . . . said . . . Ye have nothing to do with us
to build an house unto our God--This refusal to co-operate with the
Samaritans, from whatever motives it sprang, was overruled by Providence
for ultimate good; for, had the two peoples worked together, familiar
acquaintanceship and intermarriage would have ensued, and the result
might have been a relapse of the Jews into idolatry. Most certainly,
confusion and obscurity in the genealogical evidence that proved the
descent of the Messiah would have followed; whereas, in their hostile
and separate condition, they were jealous observers of each other's
proceedings, watching with mutual care over the preservation and
integrity of the sacred books, guarding the purity and honor of the
Mosaic worship, and thus contributing to the maintenance of religious
knowledge and truth.

[Ezra 4:4](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">ezr 4:4</span></span>

Then the people of the land weakened the hands of the people of Judah,
&c.--Exasperated by this repulse, the Samaritans endeavored by every
means to molest the workmen as well as obstruct the progress of the
building; and, though they could not alter the decree which Cyrus had
issued regarding it, yet by bribes and clandestine arts indefatigably
plied at court, they labored to frustrate the effects of the edict.
Their success in those underhand dealings was great; for Cyrus, being
frequently absent and much absorbed in his warlike expeditions, left the
government in the hands of his son Cambyses, a wicked prince, and
extremely hostile to the Jews and their religion. The same arts were
assiduously practised during the reign of his successor, Smerdis, down
to the time of Darius Hystaspes. In consequence of the difficulties and
obstacles thus interposed, for a period of twenty years, the progress of
the work was very slow.

[Ezra 4:6](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">ezr 4:6</span></span>

in the reign of Ahasuerus, in the beginning of his reign, wrote they . .
. an accusation--Ahasuerus was a regal title, and the king referred to
was successor of Darius, the famous Xerxes.

[Ezra 4:7](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">ezr 4:7</span></span>

LETTER TO ARTAXERXES. (Ezra 4:7-24)

in the days of Artaxerxes wrote Bishlam, &c.--The three officers named
are supposed to have been deputy governors appointed by the king of
Persia over all the provinces subject to his empire west of the
Euphrates.

the Syrian tongue--or AramÃ&brvbr;an language, called sometimes in our
version, Chaldee. This was made use of by the Persians in their decrees
and communications relative to the Jews (compare [Kg2
18:26](../../../bib/kjv/kg2018.htm#026); [Isa
36:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa036.htm#011)). The object of their letter was
to press upon the royal notice the inexpediency and danger of rebuilding
the walls of Jerusalem. They labored hard to prejudice the king's mind
against that measure.

[Ezra 4:9](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">ezr 4:9</span></span>

the Dinaites--The people named were the colonists sent by the Babylonian
monarch to occupy the territory of the ten tribes. "The great and noble
Asnappar" was Esar-haddon. Immediately after the murder of Sennacherib,
the Babylonians, Medes, Armenians, and other tributary people seized the
opportunity of throwing off the Assyrian yoke. But Esar-haddon having,
in the thirtieth year of his reign, recovered Babylon and subdued the
other rebellious dependents, transported numbers of them into the waste
cities of Samaria, most probably as a punishment of their revolt
\[HALES\].

[Ezra 4:12](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">ezr 4:12</span></span>

the Jews which came up from thee to us--The name "Jews" was generally
used after the return from the captivity, because the returning exiles
belonged chiefly to the tribes of Judah and Benjamin. Although the edict
of Cyrus permitted all who chose to return, a permission of which some
of the Israelites availed themselves, the great body who went to settle
in Judea were the men of Judah.

[Ezra 4:13](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">ezr 4:13</span></span>

toll, tribute, and custom--The first was a poll tax; the second was a
property tax; the third the excise dues on articles of trade and
merchandise. Their letter, and the edict that followed, commanding an
immediate cessation of the work at the city walls, form the exclusive
subject of narrative at Ezra 4:7-23. And now from this digression \[the
historian\] returns at [Ezr 4:24](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#024) to
resume the thread of his narrative concerning the building of the
temple.

[Ezra 4:14](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">ezr 4:14</span></span>

we have maintenance from the king's palace--literally, "we are salted
with the salt of the palace." "Eating a prince's salt" is an Oriental
phrase, equivalent to "receiving maintenance from him."

[Ezra 4:24](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">ezr 4:24</span></span>

Then ceased the work of the house of God--It was this occurrence that
first gave rise to the strong religious antipathy between the Jews and
the Samaritans, which was afterwards greatly aggravated by the erection
of a rival temple on Mount Gerizim.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ezra Chapter 5](ezr005)

</div>
