<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Galatians Index](gal)  
  [Previous](co2013)  [Next](gal001) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*A Commentary, Critical, Practical, and Explanatory on the Old and New
Testaments*, by Robert Jamieson, A.R. Fausset and David Brown \[1882\]
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Galatians Introduction](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#001)

[Galatians](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">gal 0:0</span></span>

THE internal and external evidence for Paul's authorship is conclusive.
The style is characteristically Pauline. The superscription, and
allusions to the apostle of the Gentiles in the first person, throughout
the Epistle, establish the same truth ([Gal
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#001), [Gal
1:13-24](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#013); [Gal
2:1-14](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#001)). His authorship is also upheld
by the unanimous testimony of the ancient Church: compare IRENÃ†US
\[Against Heresies, 3,7,2\] ([Gal
3:19](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#019)); POLYCARP \[Epistle to the
Philippians, 3\] quotes [Gal 4:26](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#026);
[Gal 6:7](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#007); JUSTIN MARTYR, or whoever
wrote the Discourse to the Greeks, alludes to [Gal
4:12](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#012); [Gal
5:20](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#020).

The Epistle was written "TO THE CHURCHES OF GALATIA" ([Gal
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#002)), a district of Asia Minor,
bordering on Phrygia, Pontus, Bithynia, Cappadocia, and Paphlagonia. The
inhabitants (Gallo-grÃ&brvbr;ci, contracted into Galati, another form of
the name Celts) were Gauls in origin, the latter having overrun Asia
Minor after they had pillaged Delphi, about 280 B.C. and at last
permanently settled in the central parts, thence called
Gallo-grÃ&brvbr;cia or Galatia. Their character, as shown in this
Epistle, is in entire consonance with that ascribed to the Gallic race
by all writers. CÃ&brvbr;sar \[Commentaries on the Gallic War, 4,5\],
"The infirmity of the Gauls is that they are fickle in their resolves
and fond of change, and not to be trusted." So Thierry (quoted by
ALFORD), "Frank, impetuous, impressible, eminently intelligent, but at
the same time extremely changeable, inconstant, fond of show,
perpetually quarrelling, the fruit of excessive vanity." They received
Paul at first with all joy and kindness; but soon wavered in their
allegiance to the Gospel and to him, and hearkened as eagerly now to
Judaizing teachers as they had before to him ([Gal
4:14-16](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#014)). The apostle himself had been
the first preacher among them ([Act
16:6](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#006); [Gal
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#008); [Gal
4:13](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#013); see on [Gal
4:13](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#013); "on account of infirmity of
flesh I preached unto you at the first": implying that sickness detained
him among them); and had then probably founded churches, which at his
subsequent visit he "strengthened" in the faith ([Act
18:23](../../../bib/kjv/act018.htm#023)). His first visit was about A.D.
51, during his second missionary journey. JOSEPHUS \[Antiquities,
16.62\] testifies that many Jews resided in Ancyra in Galatia. Among
these and their brethren, doubtless, as elsewhere, he began his
preaching. And though subsequently the majority in the Galatian churches
were Gentiles ([Gal 4:8-9](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#008)), yet these
were soon infected by Judaizing teachers, and almost suffered themselves
to be persuaded to undergo circumcision ([Gal
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#006); [Gal
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#001), [Gal
3:3](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#003); [Gal
5:2-3](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#002); [Gal
6:12-13](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#012)). Accustomed as the Galatians
had been, when heathen, to the mystic worship of Cybele (prevalent in
the neighboring region of Phrygia), and the theosophistic doctrines
connected with that worship, they were the more readily led to believe
that the full privileges of Christianity could only be attained through
an elaborate system of ceremonial symbolism ([Gal
4:9-11](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#009); [Gal
5:7-12](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#007)). They even gave ear to the
insinuation that Paul himself observed the law among the Jews, though he
persuaded the Gentiles to renounce it, and that his motive was to keep
his converts in a subordinate state, excluded from the full privileges
of Christianity, which were enjoyed by the circumcised alone ([Gal
5:11](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#011), [Gal
4:16](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#016), compare with [Gal
2:17](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#017)); and that in "becoming all
things to all men," he was an interested flatterer ([Gal
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#010)), aiming at forming a party for
himself: moreover, that he falsely represented himself as an apostle
divinely commissioned by Christ, whereas he was but a messenger sent by
the Twelve and the Church at Jerusalem, and that his teaching was now at
variance with that of Peter and James, "pillars" of the Church, and
therefore ought not to be accepted.

His PURPOSE, then, in writing this Epistle was: (1) to defend his
apostolic authority ([Gal 1:11-19](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#011);
[Gal 2:1-14](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#001)); (2) to counteract the
evil influence of the Judaizers in Galatia (Gal. 3:1-4:31), and to show
that their doctrine destroyed the very essence of Christianity, by
lowering its spirituality to an outward ceremonial system; (3) to give
exhortation for the strengthening of Galatian believers in faith towards
Christ, and in the fruits of the Spirit (Gal. 5:1-6:18). He had already,
face to face, testified against the Judaizing teachers ([Gal
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#009); [Gal
4:16](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#016); [Act
18:23](../../../bib/kjv/act018.htm#023)); and now that he has heard of
the continued and increasing prevalence of the evil, he writes with his
own hand ([Gal 6:11](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#011) : a labor which he
usually delegated to an amanuensis) this Epistle to oppose it. The
sketch he gives in it of his apostolic career confirms and expands the
account in Acts and shows his independence of human authority, however
exalted. His protest against Peter in [Gal
2:14-21](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#014), disproves the figment, not
merely of papal, but even of that apostle's supremacy; and shows that
Peter, save when specially inspired, was fallible like other men.

There is much in common between this Epistle and that to the Romans on
the subject of justification by faith only, and not by the law. But the
Epistle to the Romans handles the subject in a didactic and logical
mode, without any special reference; this Epistle, in a controversial
manner, and with special reference to the Judaizers in Galatia.

The STYLE combines the two extremes, sternness. (Gal. 1:1-24; [Gal
3:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#001)) and tenderness ([Gal
4:19-20](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#019)), the characteristics of a man
of strong emotions, and both alike well suited for acting on an
impressible people such as the Galatians were. The beginning is abrupt,
as was suited to the urgency of the question and the greatness of the
danger. A tone of sadness, too, is apparent, such as might be expected
in the letter of a warm-hearted teacher who had just learned that those
whom he loved were forsaking his teachings for those of perverters of
the truth, as well as giving ear to calumnies against himself.

The TIME OF WRITING was after the visit to Jerusalem recorded in [Act
15:1](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#001), &c.; that is, A.D. 50, if that
visit be, as seems probable, identical with that in [Gal
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#001). Further, as [Gal
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#009) ("as we said before"), and [Gal
4:16](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#016) ("Have \[ALFORD\] I become your
enemy?" namely, at my second visit, whereas I was welcomed by you at my
first visit), refer to his second visit ([Act
18:23](../../../bib/kjv/act018.htm#023)), this Epistle must have been
written after the date of that visit (the autumn of A.D. 54). [Gal
4:13](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#013), "Ye know how . . . I preached .
. . at the first" (Greek, "at the former time"), implies that Paul, at
the time of writing, had been twice in Galatia; and [Gal
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#006), "I marvel that ye are so soon
removed," implies that he wrote not long after having left Galatia for
the second time; probably in the early part of his residence at Ephesus
([Act 18:23](../../../bib/kjv/act018.htm#023); [Act
19:1](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#001), &c., from A.D. 54, the autumn,
to A.D. 57, Pentecost) \[ALFORD\]. CONYBEARE and HOWSON, from the
similarity between this Epistle and that to the Romans, the same line of
argument in both occupying the writer's mind, think it was not written
till his stay at Corinth ([Act
20:2-3](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#002)), during the winter of 57-58,
whence he wrote his Epistle to the Romans; and certainly, in the theory
of the earlier writing of it from Ephesus, it does seem unlikely that
the two Epistles to the Corinthians, so dissimilar, should intervene
between those so similar as the Epistles to the Galatians and Romans; or
that the Epistle to the Galatians should intervene between the second to
the Thessalonians and the first to the Corinthians. The decision between
the two theories rests on the words, "so soon." If these be not
considered inconsistent with little more than three years having elapsed
since his second visit to Galatia, the argument, from the similarity to
the Epistle to the Romans, seems to me conclusive. This to the Galatians
seems written on the urgency of the occasion, tidings having reached him
at Corinth from Ephesus of the Judaizing of many of his Galatian
converts, in an admonitory and controversial tone, to maintain the great
principles of Christian liberty and justification by faith only; that to
the Romans is a more deliberate and systematic exposition of the same
central truths of theology, subsequently drawn up in writing to a Church
with which he was personally unacquainted. See on [Gal
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#006), for BIRKS'S view. PALEY
\[HorÃ&brvbr; PaulinÃ&brvbr;\] well remarks how perfectly adapted the
conduct of the argument is to the historical circumstances under which
the Epistle was written! Thus, that to the Galatians, a Church which
Paul had founded, he puts mainly upon authority; that to the Romans, to
whom he was not personally known, entirely upon argument.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Galatians Chapter 1](gal001)

</div>
