<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Genesis Index](gen)  
  [Previous](gen026)  [Next](gen028) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*A Commentary, Critical, Practical, and Explanatory on the Old and New
Testaments*, by Robert Jamieson, A.R. Fausset and David Brown \[1882\]
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Genesis Chapter 27](../../../bib/kjv/gen027.htm#001)

[Genesis 27:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen027.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">gen 27:1</span></span>

INFIRMITY OF ISAAC. (Gen. 27:1-27)

when Isaac was old, and his eyes were dim--He was in his hundred
thirty-seventh year; and apprehending death to be near, Isaac prepared
to make his last will--an act of the gravest importance, especially as
it included the conveyance through a prophetic spirit of the patriarchal
blessing.

[Genesis 27:4](../../../bib/kjv/gen027.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">gen 27:4</span></span>

make . . . savory meat--perhaps to revive and strengthen him for the
duty; or rather, "as eating and drinking" were used on all religious
occasions, he could not convey the right, till he had eaten of the meat
provided for the purpose by him who was to receive the blessing \[ADAM
CLARKE\] (compare [Gen 18:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen018.htm#007)).

that my soul may bless thee--It is difficult to imagine him ignorant of
the divine purpose (compare [Gen
25:23](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#023)). But natural affection,
prevailing through age and infirmity, prompted him to entail the honors
and powers of the birthright on his elder son; and perhaps he was not
aware of what Esau had done ([Gen
25:34](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#034)).

[Genesis 27:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen027.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">gen 27:6</span></span>

Rebekah spake unto Jacob--She prized the blessing as invaluable; she
knew that God intended it for the younger son \[[Gen
25:23](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#023)\]; and in her anxiety to secure
its being conferred on the right object--on one who cared for
religion--she acted in the sincerity of faith; but in crooked
policy--with unenlightened zeal; on the false principle that the end
would sanctify the means.

[Genesis 27:11](../../../bib/kjv/gen027.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">gen 27:11</span></span>

Jacob said, Esau my brother is a hairy man--It is remarkable that his
scruples were founded, not on the evil of the act, but on the risk and
consequences of deception.

[Genesis 27:13](../../../bib/kjv/gen027.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">gen 27:13</span></span>

and his mother said unto him, Upon me be thy curse--His conscience being
soothed by his mother, preparations were hastily made for carrying out
the device; consisting, first, of a kid's flesh, which, made into a
ragout, spiced with salt, onions, garlic, and lemon juice, might easily
be passed off on a blind old man, with blunted senses, as game; second,
of pieces of goat's skin bound on his hands and neck, its soft silken
hair resembling that on the cheek of a young man; third, of the long
white robe--the vestment of the first-born, which, transmitted from
father to son and kept in a chest among fragrant herbs and perfumed
flowers used much in the East to keep away moths--his mother provided
for him.

[Genesis 27:18](../../../bib/kjv/gen027.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">gen 27:18</span></span>

he came unto his father--The scheme planned by the mother was to be
executed by the son in the father's bedchamber; and it is painful to
think of the deliberate falsehoods, as well as daring profanity, he
resorted to. The disguise, though wanting in one thing, which had nearly
upset the whole plot, succeeded in misleading Isaac; and while giving
his paternal embrace, the old man was roused into a state of high
satisfaction and delight.

[Genesis 27:27](../../../bib/kjv/gen027.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">gen 27:27</span></span>

the smell of my son is as of a field--The aromatic odors of the Syrian
fields and meadows, often impart a strong fragrance to the person and
clothes, as has been noticed by many travellers.

[Genesis 27:28](../../../bib/kjv/gen027.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">gen 27:28</span></span>

THE BLESSING. (Gen. 27:28-46)

God give thee of the dew of heaven--To an Oriental mind, this
phraseology implied the highest flow of prosperity. The copious fall of
dew is indispensable to the fruitfulness of lands, which would be
otherwise arid and sterile through the violent heat; and it abounds most
in hilly regions, such as Canaan, hence called the "fat land" ([Neh
9:25](../../../bib/kjv/neh009.htm#025), [Neh
9:35](../../../bib/kjv/neh009.htm#035)).

plenty of corn and wine--Palestine was famous for vineyards, and it
produced varieties of corn, namely, wheat, barley, oats, and rye.

[Genesis 27:29](../../../bib/kjv/gen027.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">gen 27:29</span></span>

Let people serve thee--fulfilled in the discomfiture of the hostile
tribes that opposed the Israelites in the wilderness; and in the
pre-eminence and power they attained after their national establishment
in the promised land. This blessing was not realized to Jacob, but to
his descendants; and the temporal blessings promised were but a shadow
of those spiritual ones, which formed the grand distinction of Jacob's
posterity.

[Genesis 27:30](../../../bib/kjv/gen027.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">gen 27:30</span></span>

Esau came in from his hunting--Scarcely had the former scene been
concluded, when the fraud was discovered. The emotions of Isaac, as well
as Esau, may easily be imagined--the astonishment, alarm, and sorrow of
the one; the disappointment and indignation of the other. But a moment's
reflection convinced the aged patriarch that the transfer of the
blessing was "of the Lord," and now irrevocable. The importunities of
Esau, however, overpowered him; and as the prophetic afflatus was upon
the patriarch, he added what was probably as pleasing to a man of Esau's
character as the other would have been.

[Genesis 27:39](../../../bib/kjv/gen027.htm#039)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_039">gen 27:39</span></span>

Behold, thy dwelling shall be the fatness of the earth--The first part
is a promise of temporal prosperity, made in the same terms as Jacob's
\[[Gen 27:28](../../../bib/kjv/gen027.htm#028)\] --the second part
refers to the roving life of hunting freebooters, which he and his
descendants should lead. Though Esau was not personally subject to his
brother, his posterity were tributary to the Israelites, till the reign
of Joram when they revolted and established a kingdom of their own ([Kg2
8:20](../../../bib/kjv/kg2008.htm#020); [Ch2
21:8-10](../../../bib/kjv/ch2021.htm#008)).

[Genesis 27:41](../../../bib/kjv/gen027.htm#041)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_041">gen 27:41</span></span>

Esau hated Jacob--It is scarcely to be wondered at that Esau resented
the conduct of Jacob and vowed revenge.

The days of mourning for my father are at hand--a common Oriental phrase
for the death of a parent.

[Genesis 27:42](../../../bib/kjv/gen027.htm#042)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_042">gen 27:42</span></span>

these words of Esau were told Rebekah--Poor woman! she now early begins
to reap the bitter fruits of her fraudulent device; she is obliged to
part with her son, for whom she planned it, never, probably, seeing him
again; and he felt the retributive justice of heaven fall upon him
heavily in his own future family.

[Genesis 27:45](../../../bib/kjv/gen027.htm#045)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_045">gen 27:45</span></span>

Why should I be deprived of you both?--This refers to the law of
Goelism, by which the nearest of kin would be obliged to avenge the
death of Jacob upon his brother.

[Genesis 27:46](../../../bib/kjv/gen027.htm#046)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_046">gen 27:46</span></span>

Rebekah said to Isaac--Another pretext Rebekah's cunning had to devise
to obtain her husband's consent to Jacob's journey to Mesopotamia; and
she succeeded by touching the aged patriarch in a tender point,
afflicting to his pious heart--the proper marriage of their younger son.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Genesis Chapter 28](gen028)

</div>
