<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Genesis Index](gen)  
  [Previous](gen023)  [Next](gen025) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*A Commentary, Critical, Practical, and Explanatory on the Old and New
Testaments*, by Robert Jamieson, A.R. Fausset and David Brown \[1882\]
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Genesis Chapter 24](../../../bib/kjv/gen024.htm#001)

[Genesis 24:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen024.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">gen 24:1</span></span>

A MARRIAGE COMMISSION. ([Gen 24:1-9](../../../bib/kjv/gen024.htm#001))

And Abraham was old . . . take a wife--His anxiety to see his son
married was natural to his position as a pastoral chief interested in
preserving the honor of his tribe, and still more as a patriarch who had
regard to the divine promise of a numerous posterity.

[Genesis 24:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen024.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">gen 24:2</span></span>

said unto his eldest servant--Abraham being too old, and as the heir of
the promise not being at liberty to make even a temporary visit to his
native land, was obliged to intrust this delicate mission to Eliezer,
whom, although putting entire confidence in him, he on this occasion
bound by a solemn oath. A pastoral chief in the present day would follow
the same course if he could not go himself.

[Genesis 24:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen024.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">gen 24:3</span></span>

thou shalt not take a wife, &c.--Among pastoral tribes the matrimonial
arrangements are made by the parents, and a youth must marry, not among
strangers, but in his own tribe--custom giving him a claim, which is
seldom or never resisted, to the hand of his first cousin. But Abraham
had a far higher motive--a fear lest, if his son married into a
Canaanitish family, he might be gradually led away from the true God.

[Genesis 24:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen024.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">gen 24:10</span></span>

THE JOURNEY. (Gen. 24:10-67)

the servant took ten camels, &c.--So great an equipage was to give the
embassy an appearance worthy of the rank and wealth of Abraham; to carry
provisions; to bear the marriage presents, which as usual would be
distributed over several beasts; besides one or two spare camels in case
of emergency.

went to Mesopotamia, &c.--A stranger in those regions, who wishes to
obtain information, stations himself at one of the wells in the
neighborhood of a town, and he is sure to learn all the news of the
place from the women who frequent them every morning and evening.
Eliezer followed this course, and letting his camels rest, he waited
till the evening time of water drawing.

[Genesis 24:12](../../../bib/kjv/gen024.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">gen 24:12</span></span>

And he said, O Lord God of my master--The servant appears worthy of the
master he served. He resolves to follow the leading of Providence; and
while he shows good sense in the tokens he fixes upon of ascertaining
the temper and character of the future bride, he never doubts but that
in such a case God will direct him.

[Genesis 24:15](../../../bib/kjv/gen024.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">gen 24:15</span></span>

before he had done speaking . . . behold, Rebekah came out--As he
anticipated, a young woman unveiled, as in pastoral regions, appeared
with her pitcher on her shoulder. Her comely appearance, her affable
manners, her obliging courtesy in going down the steps to fetch water
not only to him but to pour it into the trough for his camels, afforded
him the most agreeable surprise. She was the very person his imagination
had pictured, and he proceeded to reward her civility.

[Genesis 24:22](../../../bib/kjv/gen024.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">gen 24:22</span></span>

the man took a golden earring, &c.--The ring was not for the ear, but
the nose; the armlets, such as young women in Syria and Arabia still
appear daily at wells decked in. They are worn from the elbow to the
wrist, commonly made of silver, copper, brass, or horn.

[Genesis 24:23](../../../bib/kjv/gen024.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">gen 24:23</span></span>

And said, Whose daughter art thou?--After telling her name and family,
the kind-hearted damsel hastened home to give notice of a stranger's
arrival.

[Genesis 24:28](../../../bib/kjv/gen024.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">gen 24:28</span></span>

and told them of her mother's house these things--the female apartments.
This family was in an advanced stage of pastoral life, dwelling in a
settled place and a fixed habitation.

[Genesis 24:29](../../../bib/kjv/gen024.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">gen 24:29</span></span>

Rebekah had a brother . . . Laban ran out--From what we know of his
character, there is reason to believe that the sight of the dazzling
presents increased both his haste and his invitation.

[Genesis 24:32](../../../bib/kjv/gen024.htm#032)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">gen 24:32</span></span>

the man came into the house, &c.--What a beautiful picture of piety,
fidelity, and disinterestedness in a servant! He declined all attention
to his own comforts till he had told his name and his errand.

[Genesis 24:50](../../../bib/kjv/gen024.htm#050)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_050">gen 24:50</span></span>

Then Laban and Bethuel answered--The brothers conduct all the marriage
negotiations, their father being probably dead, and without consulting
their sister. Their language seems to indicate they were worshippers of
the true God.

[Genesis 24:53](../../../bib/kjv/gen024.htm#053)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_053">gen 24:53</span></span>

And the servant brought forth jewels of silver, and . . . gold--These
are the usual articles, with money, that form a woman's dowry among the
pastoral tribes. Rebekah was betrothed and accompanied the servant to
Canaan.

[Genesis 24:64](../../../bib/kjv/gen024.htm#064)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_064">gen 24:64</span></span>

she lighted off the camel--If Isaac were walking, it would have been
most unmannerly for her to have continued seated; an inferior, if
riding, always alights in presence of a person of rank, no exception
being made for women.

[Genesis 24:65](../../../bib/kjv/gen024.htm#065)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_065">gen 24:65</span></span>

she took a veil, and covered herself--The veil is an essential part of
female dress. In country places it is often thrown aside, but on the
appearance of a stranger, it is drawn over the face, as to conceal all
but the eyes. In a bride it was a token of her reverence and subjection
to her husband.

[Genesis 24:67](../../../bib/kjv/gen024.htm#067)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_067">gen 24:67</span></span>

And Isaac brought her into his mother's . . . tent--thus establishing
her at once in the rights and honors of a wife before he had seen her
features. Disappointments often take place, but when Isaac saw his wife,
"he loved her."

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Genesis Chapter 25](gen025)

</div>
