<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Genesis Index](gen.md)  
  [Previous](gen013)  [Next](gen015.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*A Commentary, Critical, Practical, and Explanatory on the Old and New
Testaments*, by Robert Jamieson, A.R. Fausset and David Brown \[1882\]
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Genesis Chapter 14](../../../bib/kjv/gen014.htm#001.md)

[Genesis 14:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen014.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">gen 14:1</span></span>

WAR. (Gen. 14:1-24)

And it came to pass--This chapter presents Abram in the unexpected
character of a warrior. The occasion was this: The king of Sodom and the
kings of the adjoining cities, after having been tributaries for twelve
years to the king of Elam, combined to throw off his yoke. To chastise
their rebellion, as he deemed it, Chedorlaomer, with the aid of three
allies, invaded the territories of the refractory princes, defeated them
in a pitched battle where the nature of the ground favored his army
([Gen 14:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen014.htm#010).md), and hastened in triumph
on his homeward march, with a large amount of captives and booty, though
merely a stranger.

[Genesis 14:12](../../../bib/kjv/gen014.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">gen 14:12</span></span>

they took Lot . . . and his goods, and departed--How would the
conscience of that young man now upbraid him for his selfish folly and
ingratitude in withdrawing from his kind and pious relative! Whenever we
go out of the path of duty, we put ourselves away from God's protection,
and cannot expect that the choice we make will be for our lasting good.

[Genesis 14:13](../../../bib/kjv/gen014.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">gen 14:13</span></span>

there came one that had escaped--Abram might have excused himself from
taking any active concern in his "brother," that is, nephew, who little
deserved that he should incur trouble or danger on his account. But
Abram, far from rendering evil for evil, resolved to take immediate
measures for the rescue of Lot.

[Genesis 14:14](../../../bib/kjv/gen014.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">gen 14:14</span></span>

And when Abram heard that his brother was taken captive, he armed his
trained servants--domestic slaves, such as are common in Eastern
countries still and are considered and treated as members of the family.
If Abram could spare three hundred and eighteen slaves and leave a
sufficient number to take care of the flocks, what a large establishment
he must have had.

[Genesis 14:15](../../../bib/kjv/gen014.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">gen 14:15</span></span>

he divided himself . . . by night--This war between the petty princes of
ancient Canaan is exactly the same as the frays and skirmishes between
Arab chiefs in the present day. When a defeated party resolves to pursue
the enemy, they wait till they are fast asleep; then, as they have no
idea of posting sentinels, they rush upon them from different
directions, strike down the tent poles--if there is any fight at all, it
is the fray of a tumultuous mob--a panic commonly ensues, and the whole
contest is ended with little or no loss on either side.

[Genesis 14:18](../../../bib/kjv/gen014.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">gen 14:18</span></span>

Melchizedek--This victory conferred a public benefit on that part of the
country; and Abram, on his return, was treated with high respect and
consideration, particularly by the king of Sodom and Melchizedek, who
seems to have been one of the few native princes, if not the only one,
who knew and worshipped, "the most high God," whom Abram served. This
king who was a type of the Saviour ([Heb
7:1](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#001).md), came to bless God for the
victory which had been won, and in the name of God to bless Abram, by
whose arms it had been achieved--a pious acknowledgment which we should
imitate on succeeding in any lawful enterprise.

[Genesis 14:20](../../../bib/kjv/gen014.htm#020.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">gen 14:20</span></span>

he gave him tithes of all--Here is an evidence of Abram's piety, as well
as of his valor; for it was to a priest or official mediator between God
and him that Abram gave a tenth of the spoil--a token of his gratitude
and in honor of a divine ordinance ([Pro
3:9](../../../bib/kjv/pro003.htm#009).md).

[Genesis 14:21](../../../bib/kjv/gen014.htm#021.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">gen 14:21</span></span>

the king of Sodom said . . . Give me the persons--According to the war
customs still existing among the Arab tribes, Abram might have retained
the recovered goods, and his right was acknowledged by the king of
Sodom. But with honest pride, and a generosity unknown in that part of
the world, he replied with strong phraseology common to the East, "I
have lifted up mine hand" \[that is, I have sworn\] unto the Lord that I
will not take from a thread even to a sandal-thong, and that that I will
not take any thing that \[is\] thine, lest thou shouldst say, I have
made Abram rich" \[[Gen 14:22-23](../../../bib/kjv/gen014.htm#022.md)\].

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Genesis Chapter 15](gen015.md)

</div>
