<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Genesis Index](gen.md)  
  [Previous](gen038)  [Next](gen040.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*A Commentary, Critical, Practical, and Explanatory on the Old and New
Testaments*, by Robert Jamieson, A.R. Fausset and David Brown \[1882\]
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Genesis Chapter 39](../../../bib/kjv/gen039.htm#001.md)

[Genesis 39:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen039.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">gen 39:1</span></span>

JOSEPH IN POTIPHAR'S HOUSE. (Gen. 39:1-23)

Potiphar--This name, Potiphar, signifies one "devoted to the sun," the
local deity of On or Heliopolis, a circumstance which fixes the place of
his residence in the Delta, the district of Egypt bordering on Canaan.

officer--literally, "prince of the Pharoah"--that is, in the service of
government.

captain of the guard--The import of the original term has been variously
interpreted, some considering it means "chief cook," others, "chief
inspector of plantations"; but that which seems best founded is "chief
of the executioners," the same as the captain of the watch, the zabut of
modern Egypt \[WILKINSON\].

bought him . . . of the Ishmaelites--The age, appearance, and
intelligence of the Hebrew slave would soon cause him to be picked up in
the market. But the unseen, unfelt influence of the great Disposer drew
the attention of Potiphar towards him, in order that in the house of one
so closely connected with the court, he might receive that previous
training which was necessary for the high office he was destined to
fill, and in the school of adversity learn the lessons of practical
wisdom that were to be of greatest utility and importance in his future
career. Thus it is that when God has any important work to be done, He
always prepares fitting agents to accomplish it.

[Genesis 39:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen039.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">gen 39:2</span></span>

he was in the house of his master--Those slaves who had been war
captives were generally sent to labor in the field and subjected to hard
treatment under the "stick" of taskmasters. But those who were bought
with money were employed in domestic purposes, were kindly treated, and
enjoyed as much liberty as the same class does in modern Egypt.

[Genesis 39:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen039.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">gen 39:3</span></span>

his master saw that the Lord was with him--Though changed in condition,
Joseph was not changed in spirit; though stripped of the gaudy coat that
had adorned his person, he had not lost the moral graces that
distinguished his character; though separated from his father on earth,
he still lived in communion with his Father in heaven; though in the
house of an idolater, he continued a worshipper of the true God.

[Genesis 39:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen039.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">gen 39:5</span></span>

the Lord blessed the Egyptian's house for Joseph's sake, &c.--It might
be--it probably was--that a special, a miraculous blessing was poured
out on a youth who so faithfully and zealously served God amid all the
disadvantages of his place. But it may be useful to remark that such a
blessing usually follows in the ordinary course of things; and the most
worldly, unprincipled masters always admire and respect religion in a
servant when they see that profession supported by conscientious
principle and a consistent life.

made him overseer in his house--We do not know in what capacity Joseph
entered into the service of Potiphar; but the observant eye of his
master soon discovered his superior qualities and made him his chief,
his confidential servant (compare [Eph
6:7](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#007.md); [Col
3:23](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#023).md). The advancement of domestic
slaves is not uncommon, and it is considered a great disgrace not to
raise one who has been a year or two in the family. But this
extraordinary advancement of Joseph was the doing of the Lord, though on
the part of Potiphar it was the consequence of observing the astonishing
prosperity that attended him in all that he did.

[Genesis 39:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen039.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">gen 39:7</span></span>

his master's wife cast her eyes upon Joseph--Egyptian women were not
kept in the same secluded manner as females are in most Oriental
countries now. They were treated in a manner more worthy of a civilized
people--in fact, enjoyed much freedom both at home and abroad. Hence
Potiphar's wife had constant opportunity of meeting Joseph. But the
ancient women of Egypt were very loose in their morals. Intrigues and
intemperance were vices very prevalent among them, as the monuments too
plainly attest \[WILKINSON\]. Potiphar's wife was probably not worse
than many of the same rank, and her infamous advances made to Joseph
arose from her superiority of station.

[Genesis 39:9](../../../bib/kjv/gen039.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">gen 39:9</span></span>

How then can I do this great wickedness, and sin against God?--This
remonstrance, when all inferior arguments had failed, embodied the true
principle of moral purity--a principle always sufficient where it
exists, and alone sufficient.

[Genesis 39:14](../../../bib/kjv/gen039.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">gen 39:14</span></span>

Then she called unto the men of her house--Disappointed and affronted,
she vowed revenge and accused Joseph, first to the servants of the
house, and on his return to her lord.

See, he hath brought in an Hebrew . . . to mock us--an affected and
blind aspersion of her husband for keeping in his house an Hebrew, the
very abomination of Egyptians.

[Genesis 39:20](../../../bib/kjv/gen039.htm#020.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">gen 39:20</span></span>

Joseph's master took him, and put him into the prison--the roundhouse,
from the form of its construction, usually attached to the dwelling of
such an officer as Potiphar. It was partly a subterranean dungeon ([Gen
41:14](../../../bib/kjv/gen041.htm#014).md), though the brick-built walls
rose considerably above the surface of the ground, and were surmounted
by a vaulted roof somewhat in the form of an inverted bowl. Into such a
dungeon Potiphar, in the first ebullition of rage, threw Joseph and
ordered him to be subjected further to as great harshness of treatment
([Psa 105:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa105.htm#018).md) as he dared; for the
power of masters over their slaves was very properly restrained by law,
and the murder of a slave was a capital crime.

a place where the king's prisoners were bound--Though prisons seem to
have been an inseparable appendage of the palaces, this was not a common
jail--it was the receptacle of state criminals; and, therefore, it may
be presumed that more than ordinary strictness and vigilance were
exercised over the prisoners. In general, however, the Egyptian, like
other Oriental prisons, were used solely for the purposes of detention.
Accused persons were cast into them until the charges against them could
be investigated; and though the jailer was responsible for the
appearance of those placed under his custody, yet, provided they were
produced when called, he was never interrogated as to the way in which
he had kept them.

[Genesis 39:21](../../../bib/kjv/gen039.htm#021.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">gen 39:21</span></span>

The Lord . . . gave him favour in the sight of the keeper of the prison,
&c.--It is highly probable, from the situation of this prison ([Gen
40:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen040.htm#003).md), that the keeper might have been
previously acquainted with Joseph and have had access to know his
innocence of the crime laid to his charge, as well as with all the high
integrity of his character. That may partly account for his showing so
much kindness and confidence to his prisoner. But there was a higher
influence at work; for "the Lord was with Joseph, and that which he did,
the Lord made it to prosper."

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Genesis Chapter 40](gen040.md)

</div>
