<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Genesis Index](gen)  
  [Previous](gen029)  [Next](gen031) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*A Commentary, Critical, Practical, and Explanatory on the Old and New
Testaments*, by Robert Jamieson, A.R. Fausset and David Brown \[1882\]
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Genesis Chapter 30](../../../bib/kjv/gen030.htm#001)

[Genesis 30:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen030.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">gen 30:1</span></span>

DOMESTIC JEALOUSIES. (Gen. 30:1-24)

Rachel envied her sister--The maternal relation confers a high degree of
honor in the East, and the want of that status is felt as a stigma and
deplored as a grievous calamity.

Give me children, or else I die--either be reckoned as good as dead, or
pine away from vexation. The intense anxiety of Hebrew women for
children arose from the hope of giving birth to the promised seed.
Rachel's conduct was sinful and contrasts unfavorably with that of
Rebekah (compare [Gen 25:22](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#022)) and of
Hannah ([Sa1 1:11](../../../bib/kjv/sa1001.htm#011)).

[Genesis 30:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen030.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">gen 30:3</span></span>

Bilhah . . . Zilpah--Following the example of Sarah with regard to
Hagar, an example which is not seldom imitated still, she adopted the
children of her maid. Leah took the same course. A bitter and intense
rivalry existed between them, all the more from their close relationship
as sisters; and although they occupied separate apartments, with their
families, as is the uniform custom where a plurality of wives obtains,
and the husband and father spends a day with each in regular succession,
that did not allay their mutual jealousies. The evil lies in the system,
which being a violation of God's original ordinance, cannot yield
happiness.

[Genesis 30:20](../../../bib/kjv/gen030.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">gen 30:20</span></span>

And Leah said, God hath endued me with a good dowry--The birth of a son
is hailed with demonstrations of joy, and the possession of several sons
confers upon the mother an honor and respectability proportioned to
their number. The husband attaches a similar importance to the
possession, and it forms a bond of union which renders it impossible for
him ever to forsake or to be cold to a wife who has borne him sons. This
explains the happy anticipations Leah founded on the possession of her
six sons.

[Genesis 30:21](../../../bib/kjv/gen030.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">gen 30:21</span></span>

afterwards, she bare a daughter--The inferior value set on a daughter is
displayed in the bare announcement of the birth.

[Genesis 30:25](../../../bib/kjv/gen030.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">gen 30:25</span></span>

JACOB'S COVENANT WITH LABAN. (Gen. 30:25-43)

when Rachel had born Joseph--Shortly after the birth of this son,
Jacob's term of servitude expired, and feeling anxious to establish an
independence for his family, he probably, from knowing that Esau was out
of the way, announced his intention of returning to Canaan ([Heb
13:14](../../../bib/kjv/heb013.htm#014)). In this resolution the faith
of Jacob was remarkable, for as yet he had nothing to rely on but the
promise of God (compare [Gen 28:15](../../../bib/kjv/gen028.htm#015)).

[Genesis 30:27](../../../bib/kjv/gen030.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">gen 30:27</span></span>

Laban said . . . I have learned--His selfish uncle was averse to a
separation, not from warmth of affection either for Jacob or his
daughters, but from the damage his own interests would sustain. He had
found, from long observation, that the blessing of heaven rested on
Jacob, and that his stock had wonderfully increased under Jacob's
management. This was a remarkable testimony that good men are blessings
to the places where they reside. Men of the world are often blessed with
temporal benefits on account of their pious relatives, though they have
not always, like Laban, the wisdom to discern, or the grace to
acknowledge it.

[Genesis 30:28](../../../bib/kjv/gen030.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">gen 30:28</span></span>

appoint me thy wages, and I will give it--The Eastern shepherds receive
for their hire not money, but a certain amount of the increase or
produce of the flock; but Laban would at the time have done anything to
secure the continued services of his nephew, and make a show of
liberality, which Jacob well knew was constrained.

[Genesis 30:31](../../../bib/kjv/gen030.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">gen 30:31</span></span>

Jacob said, Thou shalt not give me any thing--A new agreement was made,
the substance of which was, that he was to receive remuneration in the
usual way, but on certain conditions which Jacob specified.

[Genesis 30:32](../../../bib/kjv/gen030.htm#032)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">gen 30:32</span></span>

I will pass through all thy flock to-day--Eastern sheep being generally
white, the goats black, and spotted or speckled ones comparatively few
and rare, Jacob proposed to remove all existing ones of that description
from the flock, and to be content with what might appear at the next
lambing time. The proposal seemed so much in favor of Laban, that he at
once agreed to it. But Jacob has been accused of taking advantage of his
uncle, and though it is difficult to exculpate him from practising some
degree of dissimulation, he was only availing himself of the results of
his great skill and experience in the breeding of cattle. But it is
evident from the next chapter ([Gen
31:5-13](../../../bib/kjv/gen031.htm#005)) that there was something
miraculous and that the means he had employed had been suggested by a
divine intimation.

[Genesis 30:37](../../../bib/kjv/gen030.htm#037)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_037">gen 30:37</span></span>

Jacob took rods, &c.--There are many varieties of the hazel, some of
which are more erect than the common hazel, and it was probably one of
these varieties Jacob employed. The styles are of a bright red color,
when peeled; and along with them he took wands of other shrubs, which,
when stripped of the bark, had white streaks. These, kept constantly
before the eyes of the female at the time of gestation, his observation
had taught him would have an influence, through the imagination, on the
future offspring.

[Genesis 30:38](../../../bib/kjv/gen030.htm#038)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_038">gen 30:38</span></span>

watering troughs--usually a long stone block hollowed out, from which
several sheep could drink at once, but sometimes so small as to admit of
only one drinking at a time.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Genesis Chapter 31](gen031)

</div>
