<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Genesis Index](gen.md)  
  [Previous](gen042)  [Next](gen044.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*A Commentary, Critical, Practical, and Explanatory on the Old and New
Testaments*, by Robert Jamieson, A.R. Fausset and David Brown \[1882\]
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Genesis Chapter 43](../../../bib/kjv/gen043.htm#001.md)

[Genesis 43:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen043.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">gen 43:2</span></span>

PREPARATIONS FOR A SECOND JOURNEY TO EGYPT. ([Gen
43:1-14](../../../bib/kjv/gen043.htm#001).md)

their father said, . . . Go again, buy us a little food--It was no easy
matter to bring Jacob to agree to the only conditions on which his sons
could return to Egypt ([Gen 42:15](../../../bib/kjv/gen042.htm#015).md).
The necessity of immediately procuring fresh supplies for the
maintenance of themselves and their families overcame every other
consideration and extorted his consent to Benjamin joining in a journey,
which his sons entered on with mingled feelings of hope and anxiety--of
hope, because having now complied with the governor's demand to bring
down their youngest brother, they flattered themselves that the alleged
ground of suspecting them would be removed; and of apprehension that
some ill designs were meditated against them.

[Genesis 43:11](../../../bib/kjv/gen043.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">gen 43:11</span></span>

take of the best fruits . . . a present--It is an Oriental practice
never to approach a man of power without a present, and Jacob might
remember how he pacified his brother ([Pro
21:14](../../../bib/kjv/pro021.htm#014).md) --balm, spices, and myrrh (see
on [Gen 37:25](../../../bib/kjv/gen037.htm#025).md),

honey--which some think was dibs, a syrup made from ripe dates
\[BOCHART\]; but others, the honey of Hebron, which is still valued as
far superior to that of Egypt;

nuts--pistachio nuts, of which Syria grows the best in the world;

almonds--which were most abundant in Palestine.

[Genesis 43:12](../../../bib/kjv/gen043.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">gen 43:12</span></span>

take double money--the first sum to be returned, and another sum for a
new supply. The restored money in the sacks' mouth was a perplexing
circumstance. But it might have been done inadvertently by one of the
servants--so Jacob persuaded himself--and happy it was for his own peace
and the encouragement of the travellers that he took this view. Besides
the duty of restoring it, honesty in their case was clearly the best,
the safest policy.

[Genesis 43:14](../../../bib/kjv/gen043.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">gen 43:14</span></span>

God Almighty give you mercy before the man--Jacob is here committing
them all to the care of God and, resigned to what appears a heavy trial,
prays that it may be overruled for good.

[Genesis 43:15](../../../bib/kjv/gen043.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">gen 43:15</span></span>

ARRIVAL IN EGYPT. (Gen. 43:15-30)

stood before Joseph--We may easily imagine the delight with which, amid
the crowd of other applicants, the eye of Joseph would fix on his
brethren and Benjamin. But occupied with his public duties, he consigned
them to the care of a confidential servant till he should have finished
the business of the day.

[Genesis 43:16](../../../bib/kjv/gen043.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">gen 43:16</span></span>

ruler of his house--In the houses of wealthy Egyptians one upper man
servant was intrusted with the management of the house (compare [Gen
39:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen039.htm#005).md).

slay, and make ready--Hebrew, "kill a killing"--implying preparations
for a grand entertainment (compare [Gen
31:54](../../../bib/kjv/gen031.htm#054.md); [Sa1
25:11](../../../bib/kjv/sa1025.htm#011.md); [Pro
9:2](../../../bib/kjv/pro009.htm#002.md); [Mat
22:4](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#004).md). The animals have to be killed
as well as prepared at home. The heat of the climate requires that the
cook should take the joints directly from the hands of the flesher, and
the Oriental taste is, from habit, fond of newly killed meat. A great
profusion of viands, with an inexhaustible supply of vegetables, was
provided for the repasts, to which strangers were invited, the pride of
Egyptian people consisting rather in the quantity and variety than in
the choice or delicacy of the dishes at their table.

dine . . . at noon--The hour of dinner was at midday.

[Genesis 43:18](../../../bib/kjv/gen043.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">gen 43:18</span></span>

the men were afraid--Their feelings of awe on entering the stately
mansion, unaccustomed as they were to houses at all, their anxiety at
the reasons of their being taken there, their solicitude about the
restored money, their honest simplicity in communicating their distress
to the steward and his assurances of having received their money in
"full weight," the offering of their fruit present, which would, as
usual, be done with some parade, and the Oriental salutations that
passed between their host and them--are all described in a graphic and
animated manner.

[Genesis 43:31](../../../bib/kjv/gen043.htm#031.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">gen 43:31</span></span>

THE DINNER. ([Gen 43:31-34](../../../bib/kjv/gen043.htm#031).md)

Joseph said, Set on bread--equivalent to having dinner served, "bread"
being a term inclusive of all victuals. The table was a small stool,
most probably the usual round form, "since persons might even then be
seated according to their rank or seniority, and the modern Egyptian
table is not without its post of honor and a fixed gradation of place"
\[WILKINSON\]. Two or at most three persons were seated at one table.
But the host being the highest in rank of the company had a table to
himself; while it was so arranged that an Egyptian was not placed nor
obliged to eat from the same dish as a Hebrew.

[Genesis 43:32](../../../bib/kjv/gen043.htm#032.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">gen 43:32</span></span>

Egyptians might not eat bread with the Hebrews; for that is an
abomination--The prejudice probably arose from the detestation in which,
from the oppressions of the shepherd-kings, the nation held all of that
occupation.

[Genesis 43:34](../../../bib/kjv/gen043.htm#034.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">gen 43:34</span></span>

took and sent messes . . . Benjamin's mess was five times--In Egypt, as
in other Oriental countries, there were, and are, two modes of paying
attention to a guest whom the host wishes to honor--either by giving a
choice piece from his own hand, or ordering it to be taken to the
stranger. The degree of respect shown consists in the quantity, and
while the ordinary rule of distinction is a double mess, it must have
appeared a very distinguished mark of favor bestowed on Benjamin to have
no less than five times any of his brethren.

they drank, and were merry with him--Hebrew, "drank freely" (same as
[Sol 5:1](../../../bib/kjv/sol005.htm#001.md); [Joh
2:10](../../../bib/kjv/joh002.htm#010).md). In all these cases the idea of
intemperance is excluded. The painful anxieties and cares of Joseph's
brethren were dispelled, and they were at ease.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Genesis Chapter 44](gen044.md)

</div>
