<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Genesis Index](gen)  
  [Previous](gen030)  [Next](gen032) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*A Commentary, Critical, Practical, and Explanatory on the Old and New
Testaments*, by Robert Jamieson, A.R. Fausset and David Brown \[1882\]
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Genesis Chapter 31](../../../bib/kjv/gen031.htm#001)

[Genesis 31:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen031.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">gen 31:1</span></span>

ENVY OF LABAN AND SONS. (Gen. 31:1-21)

he heard the words of Laban's sons--It must have been from rumor that
Jacob got knowledge of the invidious reflections cast upon him by his
cousins; for they were separated at the distance of three days' journey.

[Genesis 31:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen031.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">gen 31:2</span></span>

And Jacob beheld the countenance of Laban--literally, "was not the same
as yesterday, and the day before," a common Oriental form of speech. The
insinuations against Jacob's fidelity by Laban's sons, and the sullen
reserve, the churlish conduct, of Laban himself, had made Jacob's
situation, in his uncle's establishment, most trying and painful. It is
always one of the vexations attendant on worldly prosperity, that it
excites the envy of others ([Ecc 4:4](../../../bib/kjv/ecc004.htm#004));
and that, however careful a man is to maintain a good conscience, he
cannot always reckon on maintaining a good name, in a censorious world.
This, Jacob experienced; and it is probable that, like a good man, he
had asked direction and relief in prayer.

[Genesis 31:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen031.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">gen 31:3</span></span>

the Lord said . . . Return unto the land of thy fathers--Notwithstanding
the ill usage he had received, Jacob might not have deemed himself at
liberty to quit his present sphere, under the impulse of passionate
fretfulness and discontent. Having been conducted to Haran by God ([Gen
28:15](../../../bib/kjv/gen028.htm#015)) and having got a promise that
the same heavenly Guardian would bring him again into the land of
Canaan, he might have thought he ought not to leave it, without being
clearly persuaded as to the path of duty. So ought we to set the Lord
before us, and to acknowledge Him in all our ways, our journeys, our
settlements, and plans in life.

[Genesis 31:4](../../../bib/kjv/gen031.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">gen 31:4</span></span>

Jacob sent and called Rachel and Leah--His wives and family were in
their usual residence. Whether he wished them to be present at the
festivities of sheep shearing, as some think; or, because he could not
leave his flock, he called them both to come to him, in order that,
having resolved on immediate departure, he might communicate his
intentions. Rachel and Leah only were called, for the other two wives,
being secondary and still in a state of servitude, were not entitled to
be taken into account. Jacob acted the part of a dutiful husband in
telling them his plans; for husbands that love their wives should
consult with them and trust in them ([Pro
31:11](../../../bib/kjv/pro031.htm#011)).

[Genesis 31:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen031.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">gen 31:6</span></span>

ye know that . . . I have served your father--Having stated his strong
grounds of dissatisfaction with their father's conduct and the ill
requital he had got for all his faithful services, he informed them of
the blessing of God that had made him rich notwithstanding Laban's
design to ruin him; and finally, of the command from God he had received
to return to his own country, that they might not accuse him of caprice,
or disaffection to their family; but be convinced, that in resolving to
depart, he acted from a principle of religious obedience.

[Genesis 31:14](../../../bib/kjv/gen031.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">gen 31:14</span></span>

Rachel and Leah answered--Having heard his views, they expressed their
entire approval; and from grievances of their own, they were fully as
desirous of a separation as himself. They display not only conjugal
affection, but piety in following the course described--"whatsoever God
hath said unto thee, do" \[[Gen
31:16](../../../bib/kjv/gen031.htm#016)\]. "Those that are really their
husbands' helpmeets will never be their hindrances in doing that to
which God calls them" \[HENRY\].

[Genesis 31:17](../../../bib/kjv/gen031.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">gen 31:17</span></span>

Then Jacob rose up--Little time is spent by pastoral people in removing.
The striking down the tents and poles and stowing them among their other
baggage; the putting their wives and children in houdas like cradles, on
the backs of camels, or in panniers on asses; and the ranging of the
various parts of the flock under the respective shepherds; all this is a
short process. A plain that is covered in the morning with a long array
of tents and with browsing flocks, may, in a few hours, appear so
desolate that not a vestige of the encampment remains, except the holes
in which the tent poles had been fixed.

[Genesis 31:18](../../../bib/kjv/gen031.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">gen 31:18</span></span>

he carried the cattle of his getting--that is, his own and nothing more.
He did not indemnify himself for his many losses by carrying off any
thing of Laban's, but was content with what Providence had given him.
Some may think that due notice should have been given; but when a man
feels himself in danger--the law of self-preservation prescribes the
duty of immediate flight, if it can be done consistently with
conscience.

[Genesis 31:20](../../../bib/kjv/gen031.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">gen 31:20</span></span>

Jacob stole away--The result showed the prudence and necessity of
departing secretly; otherwise, Laban might have detained him by violence
or artifice.

[Genesis 31:22](../../../bib/kjv/gen031.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">gen 31:22</span></span>

LABAN PURSUES JACOB--THEIR COVENANT AT GILEAD. (Gen. 31:22-55)

it was told Laban on the third day--No sooner did the news reach Laban
than he set out in pursuit, and he being not encumbered, advanced
rapidly; whereas Jacob, with a young family and numerous flocks, had to
march slowly, so that he overtook the fugitives after seven days'
journey as they lay encamped on the brow of mount Gilead, an extensive
range of hills forming the eastern boundary of Canaan. Being accompanied
by a number of his people, he might have used violence had he not been
divinely warned in a dream to give no interruption to his nephew's
journey. How striking and sudden a change! For several days he had been
full of rage, and was now in eager anticipation that his vengeance would
be fully wreaked, when lo! his hands are tied by invisible power ([Psa
76:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa076.htm#010)). He did not dare to touch
Jacob, but there was a war of words.

[Genesis 31:26](../../../bib/kjv/gen031.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">gen 31:26</span></span>

Laban said . . . What hast thou done?--Not a word is said of the charge
([Gen 31:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen031.htm#001)). His reproaches were of a
different kind. His first charge was for depriving him of the
satisfaction of giving Jacob and his family the usual salutations at
parting. In the East it is customary, when any are setting out to a
great distance, for their relatives and friends to accompany them a
considerable way with music and valedictory songs. Considering the past
conduct of Laban, his complaint on this ground was hypocritical cant.
But his second charge was a grave one--the carrying off his
gods--Hebrew, "teraphim," small images of human figures, used not as
idols or objects of worship, but as talismans, for superstitious
purposes.

[Genesis 31:31](../../../bib/kjv/gen031.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">gen 31:31</span></span>

Jacob said, . . . With whomsoever thou findest thy gods let him not
live--Conscious of his own innocence and little suspecting the misdeed
of his favorite wife, Jacob boldly challenged a search and denounced the
heaviest penalty on the culprit. A personal scrutiny was made by Laban,
who examined every tent \[[Gen
31:33](../../../bib/kjv/gen031.htm#033)\]; and having entered Rachel's
last, he would have infallibly discovered the stolen images had not
Rachel made an appeal to him which prevented further search \[[Gen
31:34-35](../../../bib/kjv/gen031.htm#034)\].

[Genesis 31:34](../../../bib/kjv/gen031.htm#034)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">gen 31:34</span></span>

Rachel had taken the images, and put them in the camel's furniture, and
sat upon them--The common pack saddle is often used as a seat or a
cushion, against which a person squatted on the floor may lean.

[Genesis 31:36](../../../bib/kjv/gen031.htm#036)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_036">gen 31:36</span></span>

Jacob was wroth--Recrimination on his part was natural in the
circumstances, and, as usual, when passion is high, the charges took a
wide range. He rapidly enumerated his grievances for twenty years and in
a tone of unrestrained severity described the niggard character and
vexatious exactions of his uncle, together with the hardships of various
kinds he had patiently endured.

[Genesis 31:38](../../../bib/kjv/gen031.htm#038)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_038">gen 31:38</span></span>

The rams of thy flock have I not eaten--Eastern people seldom kill the
females for food except they are barren.

[Genesis 31:39](../../../bib/kjv/gen031.htm#039)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_039">gen 31:39</span></span>

That which was torn of beasts I brought not unto thee--The shepherds are
strictly responsible for losses in the flock, unless they can prove
these were occasioned by wild beasts.

[Genesis 31:40](../../../bib/kjv/gen031.htm#040)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_040">gen 31:40</span></span>

in the day the drought . . . and the frost by night--The temperature
changes often in twenty-four hours from the greatest extremes of heat
and cold, most trying to the shepherd who has to keep watch by his
flocks. Much allowance must be made for Jacob. Great and long-continued
provocations ruffle the mildest and most disciplined tempers. It is
difficult to "be angry and sin not" \[[Eph
4:26](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#026)\]. But these two relatives, after
having given utterance to their pent-up feelings, came at length to a
mutual understanding, or rather, God influenced Laban to make
reconciliation with his injured nephew ([Pro
16:7](../../../bib/kjv/pro016.htm#007)).

[Genesis 31:44](../../../bib/kjv/gen031.htm#044)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_044">gen 31:44</span></span>

Come thou, let us make a covenant--The way in which this covenant was
ratified was by a heap of stones being laid in a circular pile, to serve
as seats, and in the center of this circle a large one was set up
perpendicularly for an altar. It is probable that a sacrifice was first
offered, and then that the feast of reconciliation was partaken of by
both parties seated on the stones around it. To this day heaps of
stones, which have been used as memorials, are found abundantly in the
region where this transaction took place.

[Genesis 31:52](../../../bib/kjv/gen031.htm#052)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_052">gen 31:52</span></span>

This heap be witness--Objects of nature were frequently thus spoken of.
But over and above, there was a solemn appeal to God; and it is
observable that there was a marked difference in the religious
sentiments of the two. Laban spake of the God of Abraham and Nahor,
their common ancestors; but Jacob, knowing that idolatry had crept in
among that branch of the family, swore by the "fear of his father
Isaac." They who have one God should have one heart: they who are agreed
in religion should endeavor to agree in everything else.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Genesis Chapter 32](gen032)

</div>
