<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Genesis Index](gen.md)  
  [Previous](gen041)  [Next](gen043.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*A Commentary, Critical, Practical, and Explanatory on the Old and New
Testaments*, by Robert Jamieson, A.R. Fausset and David Brown \[1882\]
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Genesis Chapter 42](../../../bib/kjv/gen042.htm#001.md)

[Genesis 42:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen042.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">gen 42:1</span></span>

JOURNEY INTO EGYPT. (Gen. 42:1-38)

Now when Jacob saw that there was corn in Egypt--learned from common
rumor. It is evident from Jacob's language that his own and his sons'
families had suffered greatly from the scarcity; and through the
increasing severity of the scourge, those men, who had formerly shown
both activity and spirit, were sinking into despondency. God would not
interpose miraculously when natural means of preservation were within
reach.

[Genesis 42:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen042.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">gen 42:5</span></span>

the famine was in the land of Canaan--The tropical rains, which annually
falling swell the Nile, are those of Palestine also; and their failure
would produce the same disastrous effects in Canaan as in Egypt.
Numerous caravans of its people, therefore, poured over the sandy desert
of Suez, with their beasts of burden, for the purchase of corn; and
among others, "the sons of Israel" were compelled to undertake a journey
from which painful associations made them strongly averse.

[Genesis 42:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen042.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">gen 42:6</span></span>

Joseph was the governor--in the zenith of his power and influence.

he it was that sold--that is, directed the sales; for it is impossible
that he could give attendance in every place. It is probable, however,
that he may have personally superintended the storehouses near the
border of Canaan, both because that was the most exposed part of the
country and because he must have anticipated the arrival of some
messengers from his father's house.

Joseph's brethren came, and bowed down themselves before him--His
prophetic dreams \[[Gen 37:5-11](../../../bib/kjv/gen037.htm#005.md)\] were
in the course of being fulfilled, and the atrocious barbarity of his
brethren had been the means of bringing about the very issue they had
planned to prevent ([Isa 60:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa060.htm#014.md); [Rev
3:9](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#009), last clause.md).

[Genesis 42:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen042.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">gen 42:7</span></span>

Joseph saw his brethren, and he knew them, . . . but they knew not
him--This is not strange. They were full-grown men--he was but a lad at
parting. They were in their usual garb--he was in his official robes.
They never dreamt of him as governor of Egypt, while he had been
expecting them. They had but one face; he had ten persons to judge by.

made himself strange unto them, and spake roughly--It would be an
injustice to Joseph's character to suppose that this stern manner was
prompted by any vindictive feelings--he never indulged any resentment
against others who had injured him. But he spoke in the authoritative
tone of the governor in order to elicit some much-longed-for information
respecting the state of his father's family, as well as to bring his
brethren, by their own humiliation and distress, to a sense of the evils
they had done to him.

[Genesis 42:9](../../../bib/kjv/gen042.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">gen 42:9</span></span>

Ye are spies--This is a suspicion entertained regarding strangers in all
Eastern countries down to the present day. Joseph, however, who was well
aware that his brethren were not spies, has been charged with cruel
dissimulation, with a deliberate violation of what he knew to be the
truth, in imputing to them such a character. But it must be remembered
that he was sustaining the part of a ruler; and, in fact, acting on the
very principle sanctioned by many of the sacred writers, and our Lord
Himself, who spoke parables (fictitious stories) to promote a good end.

[Genesis 42:15](../../../bib/kjv/gen042.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">gen 42:15</span></span>

By the life of Pharaoh--It is a very common practice in Western Asia to
swear by the life of the king. Joseph spoke in the style of an Egyptian
and perhaps did not think there was any evil in it. But we are taught to
regard all such expressions in the light of an oath ([Mat
5:34](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#034.md); [Jam
5:12](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#012).md).

[Genesis 42:17](../../../bib/kjv/gen042.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">gen 42:17</span></span>

put them . . . into ward three days--Their confinement had been designed
to bring them to salutary reflection. And this object was attained, for
they looked upon the retributive justice of God as now pursuing them in
that foreign land. The drift of their conversation is one of the most
striking instances on record of the power of conscience \[[Gen
42:21-22](../../../bib/kjv/gen042.htm#021.md)\].

[Genesis 42:24](../../../bib/kjv/gen042.htm#024.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">gen 42:24</span></span>

took . . . Simeon, and bound him--He had probably been the chief
instigator--the most violent actor in the outrage upon Joseph; and if
so, his selection to be the imprisoned and fettered hostage for their
return would, in the present course of their reflections, have a painful
significance.

[Genesis 42:25](../../../bib/kjv/gen042.htm#025.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">gen 42:25</span></span>

Joseph commanded to fill their sacks with corn, and to restore every
man's money--This private generosity was not an infringement of his
duty--a defrauding of the revenue. He would have a discretionary
power--he was daily enriching the king's exchequer--and he might have
paid the sum from his own purse.

[Genesis 42:27](../../../bib/kjv/gen042.htm#027.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">gen 42:27</span></span>

inn--a mere station for baiting beasts of burden.

he espied his money--The discovery threw them into greater perplexity
than ever. If they had been congratulating themselves on escaping from
the ruthless governor, they perceived that now he would have a handle
against them; and it is observable that they looked upon this as a
judgment of heaven. Thus one leading design of Joseph was gained in
their consciences being roused to a sense of guilt.

[Genesis 42:35](../../../bib/kjv/gen042.htm#035.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_035">gen 42:35</span></span>

as they emptied their sacks, that, behold, every man's . . . money was
in his sack--It appears that they had been silent about the money
discovery at the resting-place, as their father might have blamed them
for not instantly returning. However innocent they knew themselves to
be, it was universally felt to be an unhappy circumstance, which might
bring them into new and greater perils.

[Genesis 42:36](../../../bib/kjv/gen042.htm#036.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_036">gen 42:36</span></span>

Me have ye bereaved--This exclamation indicates a painfully excited
state of feeling, and it shows how difficult it is for even a good man
to yield implicit submission to the course of Providence. The language
does not imply that his missing sons had got foul play from the hands of
the rest, but he looks upon Simeon as lost, as well as Joseph, and he
insinuates it was by some imprudent statements of theirs that he was
exposed to the risk of losing Benjamin also.

[Genesis 42:37](../../../bib/kjv/gen042.htm#037.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_037">gen 42:37</span></span>

Reuben spake, . . . Slay my two sons, if I bring him not to thee--This
was a thoughtless and unwarrantable condition--one that he never
seriously expected his father would accept. It was designed only to give
assurance of the greatest care being taken of Benjamin. But unforeseen
circumstances might arise to render it impossible for all of them to
preserve that young lad ([Jam 4:13](../../../bib/kjv/jam004.htm#013).md),
and Jacob was much pained by the prospect. Little did he know that God
was dealing with him severely, but in kindness ([Heb
12:7-8](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#007).md), and that all those things he
thought against Him were working together for his good.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Genesis Chapter 43](gen043.md)

</div>
