<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Genesis Index](gen)  
  [Previous](gen045)  [Next](gen047) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*A Commentary, Critical, Practical, and Explanatory on the Old and New
Testaments*, by Robert Jamieson, A.R. Fausset and David Brown \[1882\]
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Genesis Chapter 46](../../../bib/kjv/gen046.htm#001)

[Genesis 46:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen046.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">gen 46:1</span></span>

SACRIFICE AT BEER-SHEBA. ([Gen 46:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/gen046.htm#001))

Israel took his journey with all that he had--that is, his household;
for in compliance with Pharaoh's recommendation, he left his heavy
furniture behind. In contemplating a step so important as that of
leaving Canaan, which at his time of life he might never revisit, so
pious a patriarch would ask the guidance and counsel of God. With all
his anxiety to see Joseph, he would rather have died in Canaan without
that highest of earthly gratifications than leave it without the
consciousness of carrying the divine blessing along with him.

came to Beer-sheba--That place, which was in his direct route to Egypt,
had been a favorite encampment of Abraham ([Gen
21:33](../../../bib/kjv/gen021.htm#033)) and Isaac ([Gen
26:25](../../../bib/kjv/gen026.htm#025)), and was memorable for their
experience of the divine goodness; and Jacob seems to have deferred his
public devotions till he had reached a spot so consecrated by covenant
to his own God and the God of his fathers.

[Genesis 46:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen046.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">gen 46:2</span></span>

God spake unto Israel--Here is a virtual renewal of the covenant and an
assurance of its blessings. Moreover, here is an answer on the chief
subject of Jacob's prayer and a removal of any doubt as to the course he
was meditating. At first the prospect of paying a personal visit to
Joseph had been viewed with unmingled joy. But, on calmer consideration,
many difficulties appeared to lie in the way. He may have remembered the
prophecy to Abraham that his posterity was to be afflicted in Egypt and
also that his father had been expressly told not to go \[[Gen
15:13](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#013); [Gen
26:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen026.htm#002)\]; he may have feared the
contamination of idolatry to his family and their forgetfulness of the
land of promise. These doubts were removed by the answer of the oracle,
and an assurance given him of great and increasing prosperity.

[Genesis 46:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen046.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">gen 46:3</span></span>

I will there make of thee a great nation--How truly this promise was
fulfilled, appears in the fact that the seventy souls who went down into
Egypt increased \[[Exo 1:5-7](../../../bib/kjv/exo001.htm#005)\], in the
space of two hundred fifteen years, to one hundred eighty thousand.

[Genesis 46:4](../../../bib/kjv/gen046.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">gen 46:4</span></span>

I will also surely bring thee up again--As Jacob could not expect to
live till the former promise was realized, he must have seen that the
latter was to be accomplished only to his posterity. To himself it was
literally verified in the removal of his remains to Canaan; but, in the
large and liberal sense of the words, it was made good only on the
establishment of Israel in the land of promise.

Joseph shall put his hand upon thine eyes--shall perform the last office
of filial piety; and this implied that he should henceforth enjoy,
without interruption, the society of that favorite son.

[Genesis 46:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen046.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">gen 46:5</span></span>

IMMIGRATION TO EGYPT. (Gen. 46:5-27)

And Jacob rose up from Beer-sheba--to cross the border and settle in
Egypt. However refreshed and invigorated in spirit by the religious
services at Beer-sheba, he was now borne down by the infirmities of
advanced age; and, therefore, his sons undertook all the trouble and
toil of the arrangements, while the enfeebled old patriarch, with the
wives and children, was conveyed by slow and leisurely stages in the
Egyptian vehicles sent for their accommodation.

[Genesis 46:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen046.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">gen 46:6</span></span>

goods, which they had gotten in the land--not furniture, but
substance--precious things.

[Genesis 46:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen046.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">gen 46:7</span></span>

daughters--As Dinah was his only daughter, this must mean
daughters-in-law.

all his seed brought he with him--Though disabled by age from active
superintendence, yet, as the venerable sheik of the tribe, he was looked
upon as their common head and consulted in every step.

[Genesis 46:8](../../../bib/kjv/gen046.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">gen 46:8</span></span>

all the souls of the house of Jacob, which came into Egypt, were
threescore and ten--Strictly speaking, there were only sixty-six went to
Egypt; but to these add Joseph and his two sons, and Jacob the head of
the clan, and the whole number amounts to seventy. In the speech of
Stephen ([Act 7:14](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#014)) the number is
stated to be seventy-five; but as that estimate includes five sons of
Ephraim and Manasseh ([Ch1 7:14-20](../../../bib/kjv/ch1007.htm#014)),
born in Egypt, the two accounts coincide.

[Genesis 46:28](../../../bib/kjv/gen046.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">gen 46:28</span></span>

ARRIVAL IN EGYPT. ([Gen 46:28-34](../../../bib/kjv/gen046.htm#028))

he sent Judah before him unto Joseph--This precautionary measure was
obviously proper for apprising the king of the entrance of so large a
company within his territories; moreover, it was necessary in order to
receive instruction from Joseph as to the locale of their future
settlement.

[Genesis 46:29](../../../bib/kjv/gen046.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">gen 46:29</span></span>

Joseph made ready his chariot--The difference between chariot and wagon
was not only in the lighter and more elegant construction of the former,
but in the one being drawn by horses and the other by oxen. Being a
public man in Egypt, Joseph was required to appear everywhere in an
equipage suitable to his dignity; and, therefore, it was not owing
either to pride or ostentatious parade that he drove his carriage, while
his father's family were accommodated only in rude and humble wagons.

presented himself unto him--in an attitude of filial reverence (compare
[Exo 22:17](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#017)). The interview was a most
affecting one--the happiness of the delighted father was now at its
height; and life having no higher charms, he could, in the very spirit
of the aged Simeon, have departed in peace \[[Luk
2:25](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#025), [Luk
2:29](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#029)\].

[Genesis 46:31](../../../bib/kjv/gen046.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">gen 46:31</span></span>

Joseph said, . . . I will go up, and show Pharaoh--It was a tribute of
respect due to the king to inform him of their arrival. And the
instructions which he gave them were worthy of his character alike as an
affectionate brother and a religious man.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Genesis Chapter 47](gen047)

</div>
