<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Genesis Index](gen.md)  
  [Previous](gen033)  [Next](gen035.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*A Commentary, Critical, Practical, and Explanatory on the Old and New
Testaments*, by Robert Jamieson, A.R. Fausset and David Brown \[1882\]
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Genesis Chapter 34](../../../bib/kjv/gen034.htm#001.md)

[Genesis 34:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen034.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">gen 34:1</span></span>

THE DISHONOR OF DINAH. (Gen. 34:1-31)

Though freed from foreign troubles, Jacob met with a great domestic
calamity in the fall of his only daughter. According to JOSEPHUS, she
had been attending a festival; but it is highly probable that she had
been often and freely mixing in the society of the place and that she,
being a simple, inexperienced, and vain young woman, had been flattered
by the attentions of the ruler's son. There must have been time and
opportunities of acquaintance to produce the strong attachment that
Shechem had for her.

[Genesis 34:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen034.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">gen 34:5</span></span>

Jacob held his peace--Jacob, as a father and a good man, must have been
deeply distressed. But he could do little. In the case of a family by
different wives, it is not the father, but the full brothers, on whom
the protection of the daughters devolves--they are the guardians of a
sister's welfare and the avengers of her wrongs. It was for this reason
that Simeon and Levi, the two brothers of Dinah by Leah \[[Gen
34:25](../../../bib/kjv/gen034.htm#025.md)\], appear the chief actors in
this episode; and though the two fathers would have probably brought
about an amicable arrangement of the affair, the hasty arrival of these
enraged brothers introduced a new element into the negotiations.

[Genesis 34:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen034.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">gen 34:6</span></span>

Hamor--that is, "ass"; and it is a striking proof of the very different
ideas which, in the East, are associated with that animal, which there
appears sprightly, well proportioned, and of great activity. This chief
is called Emmor ([Act 7:16](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#016).md).

[Genesis 34:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen034.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">gen 34:7</span></span>

the men were grieved, and . . . very wroth--Good men in such a case
could not but grieve; but it would have been well if their anger had
been less, or that they had known the precept "let not the sun go down
upon your wrath" \[[Eph 4:26](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#026.md)\]. No
injury can justify revenge ([Deu
32:35](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#035.md); [Rom
12:9](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#009).md); but Jacob's sons planned a
scheme of revenge in the most deceitful manner.

[Genesis 34:8](../../../bib/kjv/gen034.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">gen 34:8</span></span>

Hamor communed with them--The prince and his son seem at first sight to
have acted honestly, and our feelings are enlisted on their side. They
betray no jealousy of the powerful shepherds; on the contrary, they show
every desire to establish friendly intercourse. But their conduct was
unjustifiable in neither expressing regret nor restoring Dinah to her
family; and this great error was the true cause of the negotiations
ending in so unhappy a manner.

[Genesis 34:11](../../../bib/kjv/gen034.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">gen 34:11</span></span>

Shechem said unto her father . . . and brethren--The consideration of
the proposal for marriage belonged to Jacob, and he certainly showed
great weakness in yielding so much to the fiery impetuosity of his sons.
The sequel shows the unhappy consequences of that concession.

[Genesis 34:12](../../../bib/kjv/gen034.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">gen 34:12</span></span>

Ask me never so much dowry and gift--The gift refers to the presents
made at betrothal, both to the bride elect and her relations (compare
[Gen 24:53](../../../bib/kjv/gen024.htm#053).md), the dowry to a suitable
settlement upon her.

[Genesis 34:13](../../../bib/kjv/gen034.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">gen 34:13</span></span>

The sons of Jacob answered--The honor of their family consisted in
having the sign of the covenant. Circumcision was the external rite by
which persons were admitted members of the ancient Church. But that
outward rite could not make the Shechemites true Israelites; and yet it
does not appear that Jacob's sons required anything more. Nothing is
said of their teaching the people to worship the true God, but only of
their insisting on their being circumcised; and it is evident that they
did not seek to convert Shechem, but only made a show of religion--a
cloak to cover their diabolical design. Hypocrisy and deceit, in all
cases vicious, are infinitely more so when accompanied with a show of
religion; and here the sons of Jacob, under the pretense of
conscientious scruples, conceal a scheme of treachery as cruel and
diabolical as was, perhaps, ever perpetrated.

[Genesis 34:20](../../../bib/kjv/gen034.htm#020.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">gen 34:20</span></span>

Hamor and Shechem . . . came unto the gate of their city--That was the
place where every public communication was made; and in the ready
obsequious submission of the people to this measure we see an evidence
either of the extraordinary affection for the governing family, or of
the abject despotism of the East, where the will of a chief is an
absolute command.

[Genesis 34:30](../../../bib/kjv/gen034.htm#030.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">gen 34:30</span></span>

Jacob said . . . Ye have troubled me--This atrocious outrage perpetrated
on the defenseless citizens and their families made the cup of Jacob's
affliction overflow. We may wonder that, in speaking of it to his sons,
he did not represent it as a heinous sin, an atrocious violation of the
laws of God and man, but dwelt solely on the present consequences. It
was probably because that was the only view likely to rouse the
cold-blooded apathy, the hardened consciences of those ruffian sons.
Nothing but the restraining power of God saved him and his family from
the united vengeance of the people (compare [Gen
35:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen035.htm#005).md). All his sons had not been
engaged in the massacre. Joseph was a boy, Benjamin not yet born, and
the other eight not concerned in it. Simeon and Levi alone, with their
retainers, had been the guilty actors in the bloody tragedy. But the
Canaanites would not be discriminating in their vengeance; and if all
the Shechemites were put to death for the offense of their chief's son,
what wonder if the natives should extend their hatred to all the family
of Jacob; and who probably equalled, in number, the inhabitants of that
village.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Genesis Chapter 35](gen035.md)

</div>
