<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Genesis Index](gen)  
  [Previous](gen043)  [Next](gen045) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*A Commentary, Critical, Practical, and Explanatory on the Old and New
Testaments*, by Robert Jamieson, A.R. Fausset and David Brown \[1882\]
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Genesis Chapter 44](../../../bib/kjv/gen044.htm#001)

[Genesis 44:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen044.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">gen 44:1</span></span>

POLICY TO STAY HIS BRETHREN. (Gen. 44:1-34)

And Joseph commanded the steward--The design of putting the cup into the
sack of Benjamin was obviously to bring that young man into a situation
of difficulty or danger, in order thereby to discover how far the
brotherly feelings of the rest would be roused to sympathize with his
distress and stimulate their exertions in procuring his deliverance. But
for what purpose was the money restored? It was done, in the first
instance, from kindly feelings to his father; but another and further
design seems to have been the prevention of any injurious impressions as
to the character of Benjamin. The discovery of the cup in his
possession, if there had been nothing else to judge by, might have
fastened a painful suspicion of guilt on the youngest brother; but the
sight of the money in each man's sack would lead all to the same
conclusion, that Benjamin was just as innocent as themselves, although
the additional circumstance of the cup being found in his sack would
bring him into greater trouble and danger.

[Genesis 44:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen044.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">gen 44:2</span></span>

put my cup, the silver cup, in the sack's mouth--It was a large goblet,
as the original denotes, highly valued by its owner, on account of its
costly material or its elegant finish and which had probably graced his
table at the sumptuous entertainment of the previous day.

[Genesis 44:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen044.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">gen 44:3</span></span>

As soon as the morning was light, the men were sent away--They commenced
their homeward journey at early dawn (see on [Gen
18:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen018.htm#002)); and it may be readily supposed
in high spirits, after so happy an issue from all their troubles and
anxieties.

[Genesis 44:4](../../../bib/kjv/gen044.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">gen 44:4</span></span>

When they were gone out of the city . . . Joseph said unto his
steward--They were brought to a sudden halt by the stunning intelligence
that an article of rare value was missing from the governor's house. It
was a silver cup; so strong suspicions were entertained against them
that a special messenger was despatched to search them.

[Genesis 44:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen044.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">gen 44:5</span></span>

Is not this it in which my lord drinketh--not only kept for the
governor's personal use, but whereby he divines. Divination by cups, to
ascertain the course of futurity, was one of the prevalent superstitions
of ancient Egypt, as it is of Eastern countries still. It is not likely
that Joseph, a pious believer in the true God, would have addicted
himself to this superstitious practice. But he might have availed
himself of that popular notion to carry out the successful execution of
his stratagem for the last decisive trial of his brethren.

[Genesis 44:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen044.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">gen 44:6</span></span>

he overtook them, and he spake . . . these words--The steward's words
must have come upon them like a thunderbolt, and one of their most
predominant feelings must have been the humiliating and galling sense of
being made so often objects of suspicion. Protesting their innocence,
they invited a search. The challenge was accepted \[[Gen
44:10-11](../../../bib/kjv/gen044.htm#010)\]. Beginning with the eldest,
every sack was examined, and the cup being found in Benjamin's \[[Gen
44:12](../../../bib/kjv/gen044.htm#012)\], they all returned in an
indescribable agony of mind to the house of the governor \[[Gen
44:13](../../../bib/kjv/gen044.htm#013)\], throwing themselves at his
feet \[[Gen 44:14](../../../bib/kjv/gen044.htm#014)\], with the
remarkable confession, "God hath found out the iniquity of thy servants"
\[[Gen 44:16](../../../bib/kjv/gen044.htm#016)\].

[Genesis 44:16](../../../bib/kjv/gen044.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">gen 44:16</span></span>

Judah said, What shall we say?--This address needs no
comment--consisting at first of short, broken sentences, as if, under
the overwhelming force of the speaker's emotions, his utterance were
choked, it becomes more free and copious by the effort of speaking, as
he proceeds. Every word finds its way to the heart; and it may well be
imagined that Benjamin, who stood there speechless like a victim about
to be laid on the altar, when he heard the magnanimous offer of Judah to
submit to slavery for his ransom, would be bound by a lifelong gratitude
to his generous brother, a tie that seems to have become hereditary in
his tribe. Joseph's behavior must not be viewed from any single point,
or in separate parts, but as a whole--a well-thought, deep-laid, closely
connected plan; and though some features of it do certainly exhibit an
appearance of harshness, yet the pervading principle of his conduct was
real, genuine, brotherly kindness. Read in this light, the narrative of
the proceedings describes the continuous, though secret, pursuit of one
end; and Joseph exhibits, in his management of the scheme, a very high
order of intellect, a warm and susceptible heart, united to a judgment
that exerted a complete control over his feelings--a happy invention in
devising means towards the attainment of his ends and an inflexible
adherence to the course, however painful, which prudence required.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Genesis Chapter 45](gen045)

</div>
