<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Genesis Index](gen.md)  
  [Previous](gen036)  [Next](gen038.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*A Commentary, Critical, Practical, and Explanatory on the Old and New
Testaments*, by Robert Jamieson, A.R. Fausset and David Brown \[1882\]
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Genesis Chapter 37](../../../bib/kjv/gen037.htm#001.md)

[Genesis 37:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen037.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">gen 37:1</span></span>

PARENTAL PARTIALITY. ([Gen 37:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/gen037.htm#001).md)

Jacob dwelt in the land wherein his father was a stranger--that is, "a
sojourner"; "father" used collectively. The patriarch was at this time
at Mamre, in the valley of Hebron (compare [Gen
35:27](../../../bib/kjv/gen035.htm#027).md); and his dwelling there was
continued in the same manner and prompted by the same motives as that of
Abraham and Isaac ([Heb 11:13](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#013).md).

[Genesis 37:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen037.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">gen 37:2</span></span>

generations--leading occurrences, in the domestic history of Jacob, as
shown in the narrative about to be commenced.

Joseph . . . was feeding the flock--literally, "Joseph being seventeen
years old was a shepherd over the flock"--he a lad, with the sons of
Bilhah and Zilpah. Oversight or superintendence is evidently implied.
This post of chief shepherd in the party might be assigned him either
from his being the son of a principal wife or from his own superior
qualities of character; and if invested with this office, he acted not
as a gossiping telltale, but as a "faithful steward" in reporting the
scandalous conduct of his brethren.

[Genesis 37:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen037.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">gen 37:3</span></span>

son of his old age--Benjamin being younger, was more the son of his old
age and consequently on that ground might have been expected to be the
favorite. Literally rendered, it is "son of old age to him"--Hebrew
phrase, for "a wise son"--one who possessed observation and wisdom above
his years--an old head on young shoulders.

made him a coat of many colors--formed in those early days by sewing
together patches of colored cloth, and considered a dress of distinction
([Jdg 5:30](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#030.md); [Sa2
13:18](../../../bib/kjv/sa2013.htm#018).md). The passion for various colors
still reigns among the Arabs and other people of the East, who are fond
of dressing their children in this gaudy attire. But since the art of
interweaving various patterns was introduced, "the coats of colors" are
different now from what they seem to have been in patriarchal times, and
bear a close resemblance to the varieties of tartan.

[Genesis 37:4](../../../bib/kjv/gen037.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">gen 37:4</span></span>

could not speak peaceably unto him--did not say "peace be to thee"
\[[Gen 43:23](../../../bib/kjv/gen043.htm#023.md), &c.\], the usual
expression of good wishes among friends and acquaintances. It is deemed
a sacred duty to give all this form of salutation; and the withholding
of it is an unmistakable sign of dislike or secret hostility. The
habitual refusal of Joseph's brethren, therefore, to meet him with "the
salaam," showed how ill-disposed they were towards him. It is very
natural in parents to love the youngest, and feel partial to those who
excel in talents or amiableness. But in a family constituted as
Jacob's--many children by different mothers--he showed great and
criminal indiscretion.

[Genesis 37:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen037.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">gen 37:5</span></span>

THE DREAMS OF JOSEPH. (Gen. 37:5-36)

Joseph dreamed a dream--Dreams in ancient times were much attended to,
and hence the dream of Joseph, though but a mere boy, engaged the
serious consideration of his family. But this dream was evidently
symbolical. The meaning was easily discerned, and, from its being
repeated under different emblems, the fulfilment was considered certain
(compare [Gen 41:32](../../../bib/kjv/gen041.htm#032).md), whence it was
that "his brethren envied him, but his father observed the saying"
\[[Gen 37:11](../../../bib/kjv/gen037.htm#011.md)\].

[Genesis 37:12](../../../bib/kjv/gen037.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">gen 37:12</span></span>

his brethren went to feed their father's flock in Shechem--The vale of
Shechem was, from the earliest mention of Canaan, blest with
extraordinary abundance of water. Therefore did the sons of Jacob go
from Hebron to this place, though it must have cost them near twenty
hours' travelling--that is, at the shepherd rate, a little more than
fifty miles. But the herbage there was so rich and nutritious that they
thought it well worth the pains of so long a journey, to the neglect of
the grazing district of Hebron \[VAN DE VELDE\].

[Genesis 37:13](../../../bib/kjv/gen037.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">gen 37:13</span></span>

Israel said, . . . Do not thy brethren feed the flock in
Shechem?--Anxious to learn how his sons were doing in their distant
encampment, Jacob despatched Joseph; and the youth, accepting the
mission with alacrity, left the vale of Hebron, sought them at Shechem,
heard of them from a man in "the field" (the wide and richly cultivated
plain of Esdraelon), and found that they had left that neighborhood for
Dothan, probably being compelled by the detestation in which, from the
horrid massacre, their name was held.

[Genesis 37:17](../../../bib/kjv/gen037.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">gen 37:17</span></span>

Joseph went after his brethren, and found them in Dothan--Hebrew,
Dothaim, or "two wells," recently discovered in the modern "Dothan,"
situated a few hours' distance from Shechem.

[Genesis 37:18](../../../bib/kjv/gen037.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">gen 37:18</span></span>

when they saw him afar off--on the level grass field, where they were
watching their cattle. They could perceive him approaching in the
distance from the side of Shechem, or rather, Samaria.

[Genesis 37:19](../../../bib/kjv/gen037.htm#019.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">gen 37:19</span></span>

Behold, this dreamer cometh--literally, "master of dreams"--a bitterly
ironical sneer. Dreams being considered suggestions from above, to make
false pretensions to having received one was detested as a species of
blasphemy, and in this light Joseph was regarded by his brethren as an
artful pretender. They already began to form a plot for Joseph's
assassination, from which he was rescued only by the address of Reuben,
who suggested that he should rather be cast into one of the wells, which
are, and probably were, completely dried up in summer.

[Genesis 37:23](../../../bib/kjv/gen037.htm#023.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">gen 37:23</span></span>

they stripped Joseph out of his coat . . . of many colors--Imagine him
advancing in all the unsuspecting openness of brotherly affection. How
astonished and terrified must he have been at the cold reception, the
ferocious aspect, the rough usage of his unnatural assailants! A vivid
picture of his state of agony and despair was afterwards drawn by
themselves (compare [Gen 42:21](../../../bib/kjv/gen042.htm#021).md).

[Genesis 37:25](../../../bib/kjv/gen037.htm#025.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">gen 37:25</span></span>

they sat down to eat bread--What a view does this exhibit of those
hardened profligates! Their common share in this conspiracy is not the
only dismal feature in the story. The rapidity, the almost instantaneous
manner in which the proposal was followed by their joint resolution, and
the cool indifference, or rather the fiendish satisfaction, with which
they sat down to regale themselves, is astonishing. It is impossible
that mere envy at his dreams, his gaudy dress, or the doting partiality
of their common father, could have goaded them on to such a pitch of
frenzied resentment or confirmed them in such consummate wickedness.
Their hatred to Joseph must have had a far deeper seat. It must have
been produced by dislike to his piety and other excellencies, which made
his character and conduct a constant censure upon theirs, and on account
of which they found that they could never be at ease till they had rid
themselves of his hated presence. This was the true solution of the
mystery, just as it was in the case of Cain ([Jo1
3:12](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#012).md).

they lifted up their eyes, . . . and, behold, a company of
Ishmaelites--They are called Midianites ([Gen
37:28](../../../bib/kjv/gen037.htm#028).md), and Medanites, in Hebrew ([Gen
37:36](../../../bib/kjv/gen037.htm#036).md), being a travelling caravan
composed of a mixed association of Arabians. Those tribes of Northern
Arabia had already addicted themselves to commerce, and long did they
enjoy a monopoly, the carrying trade being entirely in their hands.
Their approach could easily be seen; for, as their road, after crossing
the ford from the trans-jordanic district, led along the south side of
the mountains of Gilboa, a party seated on the plain of Dothan could
trace them and their string of camels in the distance as they proceeded
through the broad and gently sloping valley that intervenes. Trading in
the produce of Arabia and India, they were in the regular course of
traffic on their way to Egypt: and the chief articles of commerce in
which this clan dealt were

spicery from India, that is, a species of resinous gum, called storax,
balm--"balm of Gilead," the juice of the balsam tree, a native of
Arabia-Felix, and myrrh--an Arabic gum of a strong, fragrant smell. For
these articles there must have been an enormous demand in Egypt as they
were constantly used in the process of embalming.

[Genesis 37:26](../../../bib/kjv/gen037.htm#026.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">gen 37:26</span></span>

Judah said, . . . What profit is it if we slay our brother?--The sight
of these travelling merchants gave a sudden turn to the views of the
conspirators; for having no wish to commit a greater degree of crime
than was necessary for the accomplishment of their end, they readily
approved of Judah's suggestion to dispose of their obnoxious brother as
a slave. The proposal, of course, was founded on their knowledge that
the Arabian merchants trafficked in slaves; and there is the clearest
evidence furnished by the monuments of Egypt that the traders who were
in the habit of bringing slaves from the countries through which they
passed, found a ready market in the cities of the Nile.

they . . . lifted up Joseph out of the pit, and sold him--Acting
impulsively on Judah's advice, they had their poor victim ready by the
time the merchants reached them; and money being no part of their
object, they sold him for

twenty pieces of silver--The money was probably in rings or pieces
(shekels), and silver is always mentioned in the records of that early
age before gold, on account of its rarity. The whole sum, if in shekel
weight, did not exceed Â£3.

they brought Joseph into Egypt--There were two routes to Egypt: the one
was overland by Hebron, where Jacob dwelt, and by taking which, the fate
of his hapless son would likely have reached the paternal ears; the
other was directly westward across the country from Dothan to the
maritime coast, and in this, the safest and most expeditious way, the
merchants carried Joseph to Egypt. Thus did an overruling Providence
lead this murderous conclave of brothers, as well as the slave merchants
both following their own free courses--to be parties in an act by which
He was to work out, in a marvellous manner, the great purposes of His
wisdom and goodness towards His ancient Church and people.

[Genesis 37:29](../../../bib/kjv/gen037.htm#029.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">gen 37:29</span></span>

Reuben returned unto the pit--He seems to have designedly taken a
circuitous route, with a view of secretly rescuing the poor lad from a
lingering death by starvation. His intentions were excellent, and his
feelings no doubt painfully lacerated when he discovered what had been
done in his absence. But the thing was of God, who had designed that
Joseph's deliverance should be accomplished by other means than his.

[Genesis 37:31](../../../bib/kjv/gen037.htm#031.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">gen 37:31</span></span>

they took Joseph's coat--The commission of one sin necessarily leads to
another to conceal it; and the scheme of deception which the sons of
Jacob planned and practised on their aged father was a necessary
consequence of the atrocious crime they had perpetrated. What a wonder
that their cruel sneer, "thy son's coat," and their forced efforts to
comfort him, did not awaken suspicion! But extreme grief, like every
other passion, is blind, and Jacob, great as his affliction was, did
allow himself to indulge his sorrow more than became one who believed in
the government of a supreme and all-wise Disposer.

[Genesis 37:34](../../../bib/kjv/gen037.htm#034.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">gen 37:34</span></span>

Jacob rent his clothes, and put sackcloth upon his loins--the common
signs of Oriental mourning. A rent is made in the skirt more or less
long according to the afflicted feelings of the mourner, and a coarse
rough piece of black sackcloth or camel's hair cloth is wound round the
waist.

[Genesis 37:35](../../../bib/kjv/gen037.htm#035.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_035">gen 37:35</span></span>

and he said, For I will go down into the grave unto my son--not the
earth, for Joseph was supposed to be torn in pieces, but the unknown
place--the place of departed souls, where Jacob expected at death to
meet his beloved son.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Genesis Chapter 38](gen038.md)

</div>
