<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Genesis Index](gen.md)  
  [Previous](gen039)  [Next](gen041.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*A Commentary, Critical, Practical, and Explanatory on the Old and New
Testaments*, by Robert Jamieson, A.R. Fausset and David Brown \[1882\]
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Genesis Chapter 40](../../../bib/kjv/gen040.htm#001.md)

[Genesis 40:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen040.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">gen 40:1</span></span>

TWO STATE PRISONERS. ([Gen 40:1-8](../../../bib/kjv/gen040.htm#001).md)

the butler--not only the cup-bearer, but overseer of the royal
vineyards, as well as the cellars; having, probably, some hundreds of
people under him.

baker--or cook, had the superintendence of every thing relating to the
providing and preparing of meats for the royal table. Both officers,
especially the former, were, in ancient Egypt, always persons of great
rank and importance; and from the confidential nature of their
employment, as well as their access to the royal presence, they were
generally the highest nobles or princes of the blood.

[Genesis 40:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen040.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">gen 40:3</span></span>

Pharaoh put them in ward, &c.--Whatever was their crime, they were
committed, until their case could be investigated, to the custody of the
captain of the guard, that is, Potiphar, in an outer part of whose house
the royal prison was situated.

[Genesis 40:4](../../../bib/kjv/gen040.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">gen 40:4</span></span>

The captain of the guard charged Joseph with them--not the keeper,
though he was most favorably disposed; but Potiphar himself, who, it
would seem, was by this time satisfied of the perfect innocence of the
young Hebrew; though, probably, to prevent the exposure of his family,
he deemed it prudent to detain him in confinement (see [Psa
37:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#005).md).

They continued a season in ward--literally, "days," how long, is
uncertain; but as they were called to account on the king's birthday, it
has been supposed that their offense had been committed on the preceding
anniversary \[CALVIN\].

[Genesis 40:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen040.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">gen 40:5</span></span>

they dreamed a dream--Joseph, influenced by the spirit of true religion,
could feel for others ([Ecc 4:1](../../../bib/kjv/ecc004.htm#001.md); [Rom
12:15](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#015.md); [Phi
2:4](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#004).md). Observing them one day extremely
depressed, he inquired the cause of their melancholy; and being informed
it was owing to a dream they had respectively dreamed during the
previous night, after piously directing them to God ([Dan
2:30](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#030.md); [Isa
26:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa026.htm#010).md), he volunteered to aid them,
through the divine help, in discovering the import of their vision. The
influence of Providence must be seen in the remarkable fact of both
officers dreaming such dreams in one night. He moves the spirits of men.

[Genesis 40:9](../../../bib/kjv/gen040.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">gen 40:9</span></span>

THE BUTLER'S DREAM. ([Gen 40:9-15](../../../bib/kjv/gen040.htm#009).md)

In my dream, behold, a vine was before me--The visionary scene described
seems to represent the king as taking exercise and attended by his
butler, who gave him a cooling draught. On all occasions, the kings of
ancient Egypt were required to practice temperance in the use of wine
\[WILKINSON\]; but in this scene, it is a prepared beverage he is
drinking, probably the sherbet of the present day. Everything was done
in the king's presence--the cup was washed, the juice of the grapes
pressed into it; and it was then handed to him--not grasped; but lightly
resting on the tips of the fingers.

[Genesis 40:12](../../../bib/kjv/gen040.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">gen 40:12</span></span>

Joseph said, . . . This is the interpretation--Speaking as an inspired
interpreter, he told the butler that within three days he would be
restored to all the honors and privileges of his office; and while
making that joyful announcement, he earnestly bespoke the officer's
influence for his own liberation. Nothing has hitherto met us in the
record indicative of Joseph's feelings; but this earnest appeal reveals
a sadness and impatient longing for release, which not all his piety and
faith in God could dispel.

[Genesis 40:16](../../../bib/kjv/gen040.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">gen 40:16</span></span>

THE BAKER'S DREAM. ([Gen 40:16-23](../../../bib/kjv/gen040.htm#016).md)

I had three white baskets--The circumstances mentioned exactly describe
his duties, which, notwithstanding numerous assistants, he performed
with his own hands.

white--literally, "full of holes"; that is, wicker baskets. The meats
were carried to table upon the head in three baskets, one piled upon the
other; and in the uppermost, the bakemeats. And in crossing the open
courts, from the kitchen to the dining rooms, the removal of the viands
by a vulture, eagle, ibis, or other rapacious bird, was a frequent
occurrence in the palaces of Egypt, as it is an everyday incident in the
hot countries of the East still. The risk from these carnivorous birds
was the greater in the cities of Egypt, where being held sacred, it was
unlawful to destroy them; and they swarmed in such numbers as to be a
great annoyance to the people.

[Genesis 40:18](../../../bib/kjv/gen040.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">gen 40:18</span></span>

Joseph answered and said, This is the interpretation--The purport was
that in three days his execution should be ordered. The language of
Joseph describes minutely one form of capital punishment that prevailed
in Egypt; namely, that the criminal was decapitated and then his
headless body gibbeted on a tree by the highway till it was gradually
devoured by the ravenous birds.

[Genesis 40:20](../../../bib/kjv/gen040.htm#020.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">gen 40:20</span></span>

it came to pass the third day, which was Pharaoh's birthday--This was a
holiday season, celebrated at court with great magnificence and honored
by a free pardon to prisoners. Accordingly, the issue happened to the
butler and baker, as Joseph had foretold. Doubtless, he felt it painful
to communicate such dismal tidings to the baker; but he could not help
announcing what God had revealed to him; and it was for the honor of the
true God that he should speak plainly.

[Genesis 40:23](../../../bib/kjv/gen040.htm#023.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">gen 40:23</span></span>

yet did not the chief butler remember Joseph--This was human nature. How
prone are men to forget and neglect in prosperity, those who have been
their companions in adversity ([Amo
6:6](../../../bib/kjv/amo006.htm#006).md)! But although reflecting no
credit on the butler, it was wisely ordered in the providence of God
that he should forget him. The divine purposes required that Joseph
should obtain his deliverance in another way, and by other means.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Genesis Chapter 41](gen041.md)

</div>
