<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Hebrews Index](heb)  
  [Previous](heb008)  [Next](heb010) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*A Commentary, Critical, Practical, and Explanatory on the Old and New
Testaments*, by Robert Jamieson, A.R. Fausset and David Brown \[1882\]
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Hebrews Chapter 9](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#001)

[Hebrews 9:1](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">heb 9:1</span></span>

INFERIORITY OF THE OLD TO THE NEW COVENANT IN THE MEANS OF ACCESS TO
GOD: THE BLOOD OF BULLS AND GOATS OF NO REAL AVAIL: THE BLOOD OF CHRIST
ALL-SUFFICIENT TO PURGE AWAY SIN, WHENCE FLOWS OUR HOPE OF HIS APPEARING
AGAIN FOR OUR PERFECT SALVATION. (Heb. 9:1-28)

Then verily--Greek, "Accordingly then." Resuming the subject from [Heb
8:5](../../../bib/kjv/heb008.htm#005). In accordance with the command
given to Moses, "the first covenant had," &c.

had--not "has," for as a covenant it no longer existed, though its rites
were observed till the destruction of Jerusalem.

ordinances--of divine right and institution.

service--worship.

a worldly sanctuary--Greek, "its (literally, 'the') sanctuary worldly,"
mundane; consisting of the elements of the visible world. Contrasted
with the heavenly sanctuary. Compare [Heb
9:11-12](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#011), "not of this building," [Heb
9:24](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#024). Material, outward, perishing
(however precious its materials were), and also defective religiously.
In [Heb 9:2-5](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#002), "the worldly sanctuary"
is discussed; in [Heb 9:6](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#006), &c., the
"ordinances of worship." The outer tabernacle the Jews believed,
signified this world; the Holy of Holies, heaven. JOSEPHUS calls the
outer, divided into two parts, "a secular and common place," answering
to "the earth and sea"; and the inner holiest place, the third part,
appropriated to God and not accessible to men.

[Hebrews 9:2](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">heb 9:2</span></span>

Defining "the worldly tabernacle."

a tabernacle--"the tabernacle."

made--built and furnished.

the first--the anterior tabernacle.

candlestick . . . table--typifying light and life ([Exo
25:31-39](../../../bib/kjv/exo025.htm#031)). The candlestick consisted
of a shaft and six branches of gold, seven in all, the bowls made like
almonds, with a knop and a flower in one branch. It was carried in
Vespasian's triumph, and the figure is to be seen on Titus' arch at
Rome. The table of shittim wood, covered with gold, was for the
showbread ([Exo 25:23-30](../../../bib/kjv/exo025.htm#023)).

showbread--literally, "the setting forth of the loaves," that is, the
loaves set forth: "the show of the bread" \[ALFORD\]. In the outer holy
place: so the Eucharist continues until our entrance into the heavenly
Holy of Holies ([Co1 11:26](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#026)).

which, &c.--"which (tabernacle) is called the holy place," as
distinguished from "the Holy of Holies."

[Hebrews 9:3](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">heb 9:3</span></span>

And--Greek, "But."

after--behind; within.

second veil--There were two veils or curtains, one before the Holy of
Holies (catapetasma), here alluded to, the other before the tabernacle
door (calumma).

called--as opposed to "the true."

[Hebrews 9:4](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">heb 9:4</span></span>

golden censer--The Greek, must not be translated "altar of incense," for
it was not in "the holiest" place "after the second veil," but in "the
holy place"; but as in [Ch2 26:19](../../../bib/kjv/ch2026.htm#019), and
[Eze 8:11](../../../bib/kjv/eze008.htm#011), "censer": so Vulgate and
Syriac. This GOLDEN censer was only used on the day of atonement (other
kinds of censers on other days), and is therefore associated with the
holiest place, as being taken into it on that anniversary by the high
priest. The expression "which had," does not mean that the golden censer
was deposited there, for in that case the high priest would have had to
go in and bring it out before burning incense in it; but that the golden
censer was one of the articles belonging to, and used for, the yearly
service in the holiest place. He virtually supposes (without specifying)
the existence of the "altar of incense" in the anterior holy place, by
mentioning the golden censer filled with incense from it: the incense
answers to the prayers of the saints; and the altar though outside the
holiest place, is connected with it (standing close by the second veil,
directly before the ark of the covenant), even as we find an antitypical
altar in heaven. The rending of the veil by Christ has brought the
antitypes to the altar, candlestick, and showbread of the anterior holy
place into the holiest place, heaven. In [Kg1
6:22](../../../bib/kjv/kg1006.htm#022), Hebrew, "the altar" is said to
belong to the oracle, or holiest place (compare [Exo
30:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo030.htm#006)).

ark--of shittim wood, that is, acacia. Not in the second temple, but in
its stead was a stone basement (called "the stone of foundation"), three
fingers high.

pot--"golden," added in the Septuagint, and sanctioned by Paul.

manna--an omer, each man's daily portion. In [Kg1
8:9](../../../bib/kjv/kg1008.htm#009); [Ch2
5:10](../../../bib/kjv/ch2005.htm#010), it is said there was nothing in
the ark of Solomon's temple save the two stone tables of the law put in
by Moses. But the expression that there was nothing THEN therein save
the two tables, leaves the inference to be drawn that formerly there
were the other things mentioned by the Rabbis and by Paul here, the pot
of manna (the memorial of God's providential care of Israel) and the rod
of Aaron, the memorial of the lawful priesthood ([Num
17:3](../../../bib/kjv/num017.htm#003), [Num
17:5](../../../bib/kjv/num017.htm#005), [Num
17:7](../../../bib/kjv/num017.htm#007), [Num
17:10](../../../bib/kjv/num017.htm#010)). The expressions "before the
Lord" ([Exo 16:32](../../../bib/kjv/exo016.htm#032)), and "before the
testimony" ([Num 17:10](../../../bib/kjv/num017.htm#010)) thus mean, "IN
the ark." "In," however, may be used here (as the corresponding Hebrew
word) as to things attached to the ark as appendages, as the book of the
law was put "in the side of the ark," and so the golden jewels offered
by the Philistines ([Sa1 6:8](../../../bib/kjv/sa1006.htm#008)).

tables of the covenant-- ([Deu 9:9](../../../bib/kjv/deu009.htm#009);
[Deu 10:2](../../../bib/kjv/deu010.htm#002)).

[Hebrews 9:5](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">heb 9:5</span></span>

over it--over "the ark of the covenant."

cherubim--representing the ruling powers by which God acts in the moral
and natural world. (See on [Eze 1:6](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#006);
[Eze 10:1](../../../bib/kjv/eze010.htm#001)). Hence sometimes they
answer to the ministering angels; but mostly to the elect redeemed, by
whom God shall hereafter rule the world and set forth His manifold
wisdom: redeemed humanity, combining in, and with itself, the highest
forms of subordinate creaturely life; not angels. They stand on the
mercy seat, and on that ground become the habitation of God, from which
His glory is to shine upon the world. They expressly say, [Rev
5:8-10](../../../bib/kjv/rev005.htm#008), "Thou hast redeemed us." They
are there distinguished from the angels, and associated with the elders.
They were of one piece with the mercy seat, even as the Church is one
with Christ: their sole standing is on the blood-sprinkled mercy seat;
they gaze down at it as the redeemed shall for ever; they are "the
habitation of God through the Spirit."

of glory--The cherubim were bearers of the divine glory, whence,
perhaps, they derive their name. The Shekinah, or cloud of glory, in
which Jehovah appeared between the cherubim over the mercy seat, the lid
of the ark, is doubtless the reference. THOLUCK thinks the twelve loaves
of the showbread represent the twelve tribes of the nation, presented as
a community before God consecrated to Him (just as in the Lord's Supper
believers, the spiritual Israel, all partaking of the one bread, and
becoming one bread and one body, present themselves before the Lord as
consecrated to Him, [Co1 10:16-17](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#016));
the oil and light, the pure knowledge of the Lord, in which the covenant
people are to shine (the seven (lights), implying perfection); the ark
of the covenant, the symbol of God's kingdom in the old covenant, and
representing God dwelling among His own; the ten commandments in the
ark, the law as the basis of union between God and man; the mercy seat
covering the law and sprinkled with the blood of atonement for the
collective sin of the people, God's mercy \[in Christ\] stronger than
the law; the cherubim, the personified \[redeemed\] creation, looking
down on the mercy seat, where God's mercy, and God's law, are set forth
as the basis of creation.

mercy seat--Greek, "the propitiatory": the golden cover of the ark, on
which was sprinkled the blood of the propitiatory sacrifice on the day
of atonement; the footstool of Jehovah, the meeting place of Him and His
people.

we cannot--conveniently: besides what met the eye in the sanctuary,
there were spiritual realities symbolized which it would take too long
to discuss in detail, our chief subject at present being the priesthood
and the sacrifices. "Which" refers not merely to the cherubim, but to
all the contents of the sanctuary enumerated in [Heb
9:2-5](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#002).

[Hebrews 9:6](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">heb 9:6</span></span>

The use made of the sanctuary so furnished by the high priest on the
anniversary of atonement.

ordained--arranged.

always--twice at the least every day, for the morning and evening care
of the lamps, and offering of incense ([Exo
30:7-8](../../../bib/kjv/exo030.htm#007)).

went--Greek, "enter": present tense.

[Hebrews 9:7](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">heb 9:7</span></span>

once every year--the tenth day of the seventh month. He entered within
the veil on that day twice at least. Thus "once" means here on the one
occasion only. The two, or possibly more, entrances on that one day were
regarded as parts of the one whole.

not without blood-- ([Heb 8:3](../../../bib/kjv/heb008.htm#003)).

offered--Greek, "offers."

errors--Greek, "ignorances": "inadvertent errors." They might have
known, as the law was clearly promulged, and they were bound to study
it; so that their ignorance was culpable (compare [Act
3:17](../../../bib/kjv/act003.htm#017); [Eph
4:18](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#018); [Pe1
1:14](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#014)). Though one's ignorance may
mitigate one's punishment ([Luk
12:48](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#048)), it does not wholly exempt from
punishment.

[Hebrews 9:8](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">heb 9:8</span></span>

The Holy Ghost--Moses himself did not comprehend the typical meaning
([Pe1 1:11-12](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#011)).

signifying--by the typical exclusion of all from the holiest, save the
high priest once a year.

the holiest of all--heaven, the antitype.

the first tabernacle--the anterior tabernacle, representative of the
whole Levitical system. While it (the first tabernacle, and that which
represents the Levitical system) as yet "has a standing" (so the Greek,
that is, "has continuance": "lasts"), the way to heaven (the antitypical
"holiest place") is not yet made manifest (compare [Heb
10:19-20](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#019)). The Old Testament economy
is represented by the holy place, the New Testament economy by the Holy
of Holies. Redemption, by Christ, has opened the Holy of Holies (access
to heaven by faith now, [Heb 4:16](../../../bib/kjv/heb004.htm#016);
[Heb 7:19](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#019), [Heb
7:25](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#025); [Heb
10:19](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#019), [Heb
10:22](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#022); by sight hereafter, [Isa
33:24](../../../bib/kjv/isa033.htm#024); [Rev
11:19](../../../bib/kjv/rev011.htm#019); [Rev
21:2-3](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#002)) to all mankind. The Greek for
"not yet" (me po) refers to the mind of the Spirit: the Spirit
intimating that men should not think the way was yet opened
\[TITTMANN\]. The Greek negative, "ou po," would deny the fact
objectively; "me po" denies the thing subjectively.

[Hebrews 9:9](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">heb 9:9</span></span>

Which--"The which," namely, anterior tabernacle: "as being that which
was" \[ALFORD\].

figure--Greek, "parable": a parabolic setting forth of the character of
the Old Testament.

for--"in reference to the existing time." The time of the temple-worship
really belonged to the Old Testament, but continued still in Paul's time
and that of his Hebrew readers. "The time of reformation" ([Heb
9:10](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#010)) stands in contrast to this, "the
existing time"; though, in reality, "the time of reformation," the New
Testament time, was now present and existing. So "the age to come," is
the phrase applied to the Gospel, because it was present only to
believers, and its fulness even to them is still to come. Compare [Heb
9:11](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#011), "good things to come."

in which--tabernacle, not time, according to the reading of the oldest
manuscripts. Or translate, "according to which" parabolic
representation, or figure.

were--Greek, "are."

gifts--unbloody oblations.

could not--Greek, "cannot": are not able.

him that did the service--any worshipper. The Greek is "latreuein,"
serve God, which is all men's duty; not "leitourgein," to serve in a
ministerial office.

make . . . perfect--perfectly remove the sense of guilt, and sanctify
inwardly through love.

as pertaining to the conscience--"in respect to the (moral-religious)
consciousness." They can only reach as far as the outward flesh (compare
"carnal ordinances," [Heb 9:10](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#010), [Heb
9:13-14](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#013)).

[Hebrews 9:10](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">heb 9:10</span></span>

Which--sacrifices.

stood--consisted in \[ALFORD\]; or, "have attached to them" only things
which appertain to the use of foods, &c. The rites of meats, &c., go
side by side with the sacrifices \[THOLUCK and WAHL\]; compare [Col
2:16](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#016).

drinks-- ([Lev 10:9](../../../bib/kjv/lev010.htm#009); [Lev
11:4](../../../bib/kjv/lev011.htm#004)). Usage subsequently to the law
added many observances as to meats and drinks.

washings-- ([Exo 29:4](../../../bib/kjv/exo029.htm#004)).

and carnal ordinances--One oldest manuscript, Syriac and Coptic, omit
"and." "Carnal ordinances" stand in apposition to "sacrifices" ([Heb
9:9](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#009)). Carnal (outward, affecting only
the flesh) is opposed to spiritual. Contrast "flesh" with "conscience"
([Heb 9:13-14](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#013)).

imposed--as a burden ([Act 15:10](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#010), [Act
15:28](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#028)) continually pressing heavy.

until the time of reformation--Greek, "the season of rectification,"
when the reality should supersede the type ([Heb
8:8-12](../../../bib/kjv/heb008.htm#008)). Compare "better," [Heb
9:23](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#023).

[Hebrews 9:11](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">heb 9:11</span></span>

But--in contrast to "could not make . . . perfect" ([Heb
9:9](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#009)).

Christ--The Messiah, of whom all the prophets foretold; not "Jesus"
here. From whom the "reformation" ([Heb
9:10](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#010)), or rectification, emanates,
which frees from the yoke of carnal ordinances, and which is being
realized gradually now, and shall be perfectly in the consummation of
"the age (world) to come." "Christ . . . High Priest," exactly answers
to [Lev 4:5](../../../bib/kjv/lev004.htm#005), "the priest that is
anointed."

being come an, &c.--rather, "having come forward (compare [Heb
10:7](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#007), a different Greek word,
picturesquely presenting Him before us) as High Priest." The Levitical
priests must therefore retire. Just as on the day of atonement, no work
was done, no sacrifice was offered, or priest was allowed to be in the
tabernacle while the high priest went into the holiest place to make
atonement ([Lev 16:17](../../../bib/kjv/lev016.htm#017), [Lev
16:29](../../../bib/kjv/lev016.htm#029)). So not our righteousness, nor
any other priest's sacrifice, but Christ alone atones; and as the high
priest before offering incense had on common garments of a priest, but
after it wore his holy garments of "glory and beauty" ([Exo
28:2](../../../bib/kjv/exo028.htm#002), [Exo
28:40](../../../bib/kjv/exo028.htm#040)) in entering the holiest, so
Christ entered the heavenly holiest in His glorified body.

good things to come--Greek, "the good things to come," [Heb
10:1](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#001); "better promises," ([Heb
8:6](../../../bib/kjv/heb008.htm#006); the "eternal inheritance," [Heb
9:15](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#015); [Pe1
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#004); the "things hoped for," [Heb
11:1](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#001)).

by a . . . tabernacle--joined with "He entered." Translate, "Through the
. . . tabernacle" (of which we know) \[ALFORD\]. As the Jewish high
priest passed through the anterior tabernacle into the holiest place, so
Christ passed through heaven into the inner abode of the unseen and
unapproachable God. Thus, "the tabernacle" here is the heavens through
which He passed (see on [Heb 4:14](../../../bib/kjv/heb004.htm#014)).
But "the tabernacle" is also the glorified body of Christ (see on [Heb
8:2](../../../bib/kjv/heb008.htm#002)), "not of this building" (not of
the mere natural "creation, but of the spiritual and heavenly, the new
creation"), the Head of the mystical body, the Church. Through this
glorified body He passes into the heavenly holiest place ([Heb
9:24](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#024)), the immaterial, unapproachable
presence of God, where He intercedes for us. His glorified body, as the
meeting place of God and all Christ's redeemed, and the angels, answers
to the heavens through which He passed, and passes. His body is opposed
to the tabernacle, as His blood to the blood of goats, &c.

greater--as contrasted with the small dimensions of the earthly anterior
tabernacle.

more perfect--effective in giving pardon, peace, sanctification, and
access to closest communion with God (compare [Heb
9:9](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#009); [Heb
10:1](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#001)).

not made with hands--but by the Lord Himself ([Heb
8:2](../../../bib/kjv/heb008.htm#002)).

[Hebrews 9:12](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">heb 9:12</span></span>

Neither--"Nor yet."

by--"through"; as the means of His approach.

goats . . . calves--not a bullock, such as the Levitical high priest
offered for himself, and a goat for the people, on the day of atonement
([Lev 16:6](../../../bib/kjv/lev016.htm#006), [Lev
16:15](../../../bib/kjv/lev016.htm#015)), year by year, whence the
plural is used, goats . . . calves. Besides the goat offered for the
people the blood of which was sprinkled before the mercy seat, the high
priest led forth a second goat, namely, the scapegoat; over it he
confessed the people's sins, putting them on the head of the goat, which
was sent as the sin-bearer into the wilderness out of sight, implying
that the atonement effected by the goat sin offering (of which the
ceremony of the scapegoat is a part, and not distinct from the sin
offering) consisted in the transfer of the people's sins on the goat,
and their consequent removal out of sight. The translation of sins on
the victim usual in other expiatory sacrifices being omitted in the case
of the slain goat, but employed in the case of the goat sent away,
proved the two goats were regarded as one offering \[ARCHBISHOP MAGEE\].
Christ's death is symbolized by the slain goat; His resurrection to life
by the living goat sent away. Modern Jews substitute in some places a
cock for the goat as an expiation, the sins of the offerers being
transferred to the entrails, and exposed on the housetop for the birds
to carry out of sight, as the scapegoat did; the Hebrew for "man" and
"cock" being similar, gebher \[BUXTORF\].

by--"through," as the means of His entrance; the key unlocking the
heavenly Holy of Holies to Him. The Greek is forcible, "through THE
blood of His own" (compare [Heb 9:23](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#023)).

once--"once for all."

having obtained--having thereby obtained; literally, "found for
Himself," as a thing of insuperable difficulty to all save Divine
Omnipotence, self-devoting zeal, and love, to find. The access of Christ
to the Father was arduous ([Heb 5:7](../../../bib/kjv/heb005.htm#007)).
None before had trodden the path.

eternal--The entrance of our Redeemer, once for all, into the heavenly
holiest place, secures eternal redemption to us; whereas the Jewish high
priest's entrance was repeated year by year, and the effect temporary
and partial, "On redemption," compare [Mat
20:28](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#028); [Eph
1:7](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#007); [Col
1:14](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#014); [Ti1
2:5](../../../bib/kjv/ti1002.htm#005); [Tit
2:14](../../../bib/kjv/tit002.htm#014); [Pe1
1:19](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#019).

[Hebrews 9:13](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">heb 9:13</span></span>

PROOF OF AND ENLARGEMENT ON, THE "ETERNAL REDEMPTION" MENTIONED IN [Heb
9:12](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#012). (Heb. 9:13-28)

if--as we know is the case; so the Greek indicative means. Argument from
the less to the greater. If the blood of mere brutes could purify in
any, however small a degree, how much more shall inward purification,
and complete and eternal salvation, be wrought by the blood of Christ,
in whom dwelt all the fulness of the Godhead?

ashes of an heifer-- ([Num 19:16-18](../../../bib/kjv/num019.htm#016)).
The type is full of comfort for us. The water of separation, made of the
ashes of the red heifer, was the provision for removing ceremonial
defilement whenever incurred by contact with the dead. As she was slain
without the camp, so Christ (compare [Heb
13:11](../../../bib/kjv/heb013.htm#011); [Num
19:3-4](../../../bib/kjv/num019.htm#003)). The ashes were laid by for
constant use; so the continually cleansing effects of Christ's blood,
once for all shed. In our wilderness journey we are continually
contracting defilement by contact with the spiritually dead, and with
dead works, and need therefore continual application to the antitypical
life-giving cleansing blood of Christ, whereby we are afresh restored to
peace and living communion with God in the heavenly holy place.

the unclean--Greek, "those defiled" on any particular occasion.

purifying--Greek, "purity."

the flesh--Their effect in themselves extended no further. The law had a
carnal and a spiritual aspect; carnal, as an instrument of the Hebrew
polity, God, their King, accepting, in minor offenses, expiatory victims
instead of the sinner, otherwise doomed to death; spiritual, as the
shadow of good things to come ([Heb
10:1](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#001)). The spiritual Israelite
derived, in partaking of these legal rights, spiritual blessings not
flowing from them, but from the great antitype. Ceremonial sacrifices
released from temporal penalties and ceremonial disqualifications;
Christ's sacrifice releases from everlasting penalties ([Heb
9:12](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#012)), and moral impurities on the
conscience disqualifying from access to God ([Heb
9:14](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#014)). The purification of the flesh
(the mere outward man) was by "sprinkling"; the washing followed by
inseparable connection ([Num 19:19](../../../bib/kjv/num019.htm#019)).
So justification is followed by renewing.

[Hebrews 9:14](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">heb 9:14</span></span>

offered himself--The voluntary nature of the offering gives it especial
efficacy. He "through the eternal Spirit," that is, His divine Spirit
([Rom 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#004), in contrast to His "flesh,"
[Heb 9:3](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#003); His Godhead, [Ti1
3:16](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#016); [Pe1
3:18](../../../bib/kjv/pe1003.htm#018)), "His inner personality"
\[ALFORD\], which gave a free consent to the act, offered Himself. The
animals offered had no spirit or will to consent in the act of
sacrifice; they were offered according to the law; they had a life
neither enduring, nor of any intrinsic efficacy. But He from eternity,
with His divine and everlasting Spirit, concurred with the Father's will
of redemption by Him. His offering began on the altar of the cross, and
was completed in His entering the holiest place with His blood. The
eternity and infinitude of His divine Spirit (compare [Heb
7:16](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#016)) gives eternal ("eternal
redemption," [Heb 9:12](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#012), also compare
[Heb 9:15](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#015)) and infinite merit to His
offering, so that not even the infinite justice of God has any exception
to take against it. It was "through His most burning love, flowing from
His eternal Spirit," that He offered Himself \[OECOLAMPADIUS\].

without spot--The animal victims had to be without outward blemish;
Christ on the cross was a victim inwardly and essentially stainless
([Pe1 1:19](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#019)).

purge--purify from fear, guilt, alienation from Him, and selfishness,
the source of dead works ([Heb
9:22-23](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#022)).

your--The oldest manuscripts read "our." The Vulgate, however, supports
English Version reading.

conscience--moral religious consciousness.

dead works--All works done in the natural state, which is a state of
sin, are dead; for they come not from living faith in, and love to, "the
living God" ([Heb 11:6](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#006)). As contact
with a dead body defiled ceremonially (compare the allusion, "ashes of
an heifer," [Heb 9:13](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#013)), so dead works
defile the inner consciousness spiritually.

to serve--so as to serve. The ceremonially unclean could not serve God
in the outward communion of His people; so the unrenewed cannot serve
God in spiritual communion. Man's works before justification, however
lifelike they look, are dead, and cannot therefore be accepted before
the living God. To have offered a dead animal to God would have been an
insult (compare [Mal 1:8](../../../bib/kjv/mal001.htm#008)); much more
for a man not justified by Christ's blood to offer dead works. But those
purified by Christ's blood in living faith do serve ([Rom
12:1](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#001)), and shall more fully serve God
([Rev 22:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev022.htm#003)).

living God--therefore requiring living spiritual service ([Joh
4:24](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#024)).

[Hebrews 9:15](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">heb 9:15</span></span>

for this cause--Because of the all-cleansing power of His blood, this
fits Him to be Mediator ([Heb 8:6](../../../bib/kjv/heb008.htm#006),
ensuring to both parties, God and us, the ratification) of the new
covenant, which secures both forgiveness for the sins not covered by the
former imperfect covenant or testament, and also an eternal inheritance
to the called.

by means of death--rather, as Greek, "death having taken place." At the
moment that His death took place, the necessary effect is, "the called
receive the (fulfilment of the) promise" (so [Luk
24:49](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#049) uses "promise"; [Heb
6:15](../../../bib/kjv/heb006.htm#015); [Act
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#004)); that moment divides the Old from
the New Testament. The "called" are the elect "heirs," "partakers of the
heavenly calling" ([Heb 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/heb003.htm#001)).

redemption of . . . transgressions . . . under . . . first
testament--the transgressions of all men from Adam to Christ, first
against the primitive revelation, then against the revelations to the
patriarchs, then against the law given to Israel, the representative
people of the world. The "first testament" thus includes the whole
period from Adam to Christ, and not merely that of the covenant with
Israel, which was a concentrated representation of the covenant made
with (or the first testament given to) mankind by sacrifice, down from
the fall to redemption. Before the inheritance by the New Testament (for
here the idea of the "INHERITANCE," following as the result of Christ's
"death," being introduced, requires the Greek to be translated
"testament," as it was before covenant) could come in, there must be
redemption of (that is, deliverance from the penalties incurred by) the
transgressions committed under the first testament, for the propitiatory
sacrifices under the first testament reached only as far as removing
outward ceremonial defilement. But in order to obtain the inheritance
which is a reality, there must be a real propitiation, since God could
not enter into covenant relation with us so long as past sins were
unexpiated; [Rom 3:24-25](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#024), "a
propitiation . . . His righteousness for the remission of sins that are
past."

might--Greek, "may receive," which previously they could not ([Heb
11:39-40](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#039)).

the promise--to Abraham.

[Hebrews 9:16](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">heb 9:16</span></span>

A general axiomatic truth; it is "a testament"; not the testament. The
testator must die before his testament takes effect ([Heb
9:17](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#017)). This is a common meaning of the
Greek noun diathece. So in [Luk 22:29](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#029),
"I appoint (by testamentary disposition; the cognate Greek verb
diatithemai) unto you a kingdom, as my Father hath appointed unto me."
The need of death before the testamentary appointment takes effect,
holds good in Christ's relation as MAN to us; Of course not in God's
relation to Christ.

be--literally, be borne": "be involved in the case"; be inferred; or
else, "be brought forward in court," so as to give effect to the will.
This sense (testament) of the Greek "diathece" here does not exclude its
other secondary senses in the other passages of the New Testament: (1) a
covenant between two parties; (2) an arrangement, or disposition, made
by God alone in relation to us. Thus, [Mat
26:28](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#028) may be translated, "Blood of the
covenant"; for a testament does not require blood shedding. Compare [Exo
24:8](../../../bib/kjv/exo024.htm#008) (covenant), which Christ quotes,
though it is probable He included in a sense "testament" also under the
Greek word diathece (comprehending both meanings, "covenant" and
"testament"), as this designation strictly and properly applies to the
new dispensation, and is rightly applicable to the old also, not in
itself, but when viewed as typifying the new, which is properly a
testament. Moses ([Exo 24:8](../../../bib/kjv/exo024.htm#008)) speaks of
the same thing as \[Christ and\] Paul. Moses, by the term "covenant,"
does not mean aught save one concerning giving the heavenly inheritance
typified by Canaan after the death of the Testator, which he represented
by the sprinkling of blood. And Paul, by the term "testament," does not
mean aught save one having conditions attached to it, one which is at
the same time a covenant \[POLI, Synopsis\]; the conditions are
fulfilled by Christ, not by us, except that we must believe, but even
this God works in His people. THOLUCK explains, as elsewhere, "covenant
. . . covenant . . . mediating victim"; the masculine is used of the
victim personified, and regarded as mediator of the covenant; especially
as in the new covenant a MAN (Christ) took the place of the victim. The
covenanting parties used to pass between the divided parts of the
sacrificed animals; but, without reference to this rite, the need of a
sacrifice for establishing a covenant sufficiently explains this verse.
Others, also, explaining the Greek as "covenant," consider that the
death of the sacrificial victim represented in all covenants the death
of both parties as unalterably bound to the covenant. So in the
redemption-covenant, the death of Jesus symbolized the death of God (?)
in the person of the mediating victim, and the death of man in the same.
But the expression is not "there must be the death of both parties
making the covenant," but singular, "of Him who made (aorist, past time;
not 'of Him making') the testament." Also, it is "death," not
"sacrifice" or "slaying." Plainly, the death is supposed to be past
(aorist, "made"); and the fact of the death is brought (Greek) before
court to give effect to the will. These requisites of a will, or
testament, concur here: (1) a testator; (2) heirs; (3) goods; (4) the
death of the testator; (5) the fact of the death brought forward in
court. In [Mat 26:28](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#028) two other
requisites appear: witnesses, the disciples; and a seal, the sacrament
of the Lord's Supper, the sign of His blood wherewith the testament is
primarily sealed. It is true the heir is ordinarily the successor of him
who dies and so ceases to have the possession. But in this case Christ
comes to life again, and is Himself (including all that He hath), in the
power of His now endless life, His people's inheritance; in His being
Heir ([Heb 1:2](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#002)), they are heirs.

[Hebrews 9:17](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">heb 9:17</span></span>

after--literally, "over," as we say "upon the death of the testators";
not as THOLUCK, "on the condition that slain sacrifices be there," which
the Greek hardly sanctions.

otherwise--"seeing that it is never availing" \[ALFORD\]. BENGEL and
LACHMANN read with an interrogation, "Since, is it ever in force (surely
not) while the testator liveth?"

[Hebrews 9:18](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">heb 9:18</span></span>

Whereupon--rather, "Whence."

dedicated--"inaugurated." The Old Testament strictly and formally began
on that day of inauguration. "Where the disposition, or arrangement, is
ratified by the blood of another, namely, of animals, which cannot make
a covenant, much less make a testament, it is not strictly a testament,
where it is ratified by the death of him that makes the arrangement, it
is strictly, Greek 'diathece,' Hebrew 'berith,' taken in a wider sense,
a testament" \[BENGEL\]; thus, in [Heb
9:18](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#018), referring to the old
dispensation, we may translate, "the first (covenant)": or better,
retain "the first (testament)," not that the old dispensation, regarded
by itself, is a testament, but it is so when regarded as the typical
representative of the new, which is strictly a Testament.

[Hebrews 9:19](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">heb 9:19</span></span>

For--confirming the general truth, [Heb
9:16](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#016).

spoken . . . according to the law--strictly adhering to every direction
of "the law of commandments contained in ordinances" ([Eph
2:15](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#015)). Compare [Exo
24:3](../../../bib/kjv/exo024.htm#003), "Moses told the people all the
words of the Lord, and all the judgments; and all the people answered
with one voice," &c.

the blood of calves--Greek, "the calves," namely, those sacrificed by
the "young men" whom he sent to do so ([Exo
24:5](../../../bib/kjv/exo024.htm#005)). The "peace offerings" there
mentioned were "of oxen" (Septuagint, "little calves"), and the "burnt
offerings" were probably (though this is not specified), as on the day
of atonement, goats. The law in Exodus sanctioned formally many
sacrificial practices in use by tradition, from the primitive revelation
long before.

with water--prescribed, though not in the twenty-fourth chapter of
Exodus, yet in other purifications; for example, of the leper, and the
water of separation which contained the ashes of the red heifer.

scarlet wool, and hyssop--ordinarily used for purification. Scarlet or
crimson, resembling blood: it was thought to be a peculiarly deep, fast
dye, whence it typified sin (see on [Isa
1:18](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#018)). So Jesus wore a scarlet robe,
the emblem of the deep-dyed sins He bore on Him, though He had none in
Him. Wool was used as imbibing and retaining water; the hyssop, as a
bushy, tufty plant (wrapt round with the scarlet wool), was used for
sprinkling it. The wool was also a symbol of purity ([Isa
1:18](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#018)). The Hyssopus officinalis grows
on walls, with small lancet-formed woolly leaves, an inch long, with
blue and white flowers, and a knotty stalk about a foot high.

sprinkled . . . the book--namely, out of which he had read "every
precept": the book of the testament or covenant. This sprinkling of the
book is not mentioned in the twenty-fourth chapter of Exodus. Hence
BENGEL translates, "And (having taken) the book itself (so [Exo
24:7](../../../bib/kjv/exo024.htm#007)), he both sprinkled all the
people, and ([Heb 9:21](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#021)) moreover
sprinkled the tabernacle." But the Greek supports English Version. Paul,
by inspiration, supplies the particular specified here, not in [Exo
24:7](../../../bib/kjv/exo024.htm#007). The sprinkling of the roll (so
the Greek for "book") of the covenant, or testament, as well as of the
people, implies that neither can the law be fulfilled, nor the people be
purged from their sins, save by the sprinkling of the blood of Christ
([Pe1 1:2](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#002)). Compare [Heb
9:23](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#023), which shows that there is
something antitypical to the Bible in heaven itself (compare [Rev
20:12](../../../bib/kjv/rev020.htm#012)). The Greek, "itself,"
distinguishes the book itself from the "precepts" in it which he
"spake."

[Hebrews 9:20](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">heb 9:20</span></span>

[Exo 24:8](../../../bib/kjv/exo024.htm#008), "Behold the blood of the
covenant, which the Lord has made with you concerning all these words."
The change is here made to accord with Christ's inauguration of the new
testament, or covenant, as recorded in [Luk
22:20](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#020), "This cup (is) the new
Testament in My blood, which is shed for you": the only Gospel in which
the "is" has to be supplied. Luke was Paul's companion, which accounts
for the correspondence, as here too "is" has to be supplied.

testament--(See on [Heb 9:16-17](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#016)). The
Greek "diathece" means both "testament" and "covenant": the term
"covenant" better suits the old dispensation, though the idea testament
is included, for the old was one in its typical relation to the new
dispensation, to which the term "testament" is better suited. Christ has
sealed the testament with His blood, of which the Lord's Supper is the
sacramental sign. The testator was represented by the animals slain in
the old dispensation. In both dispensations the inheritance was
bequeathed: in the new by One who has come in person and died; in the
old by the same one, only typically and ceremonially present. See
ALFORD'S excellent Note.

enjoined unto you--commissioned me to ratify in relation to you. In the
old dispensation the condition to be fulfilled on the people's part is
implied in the words, [Exo 24:8](../../../bib/kjv/exo024.htm#008),
"(Lord made with you) concerning all these words." But here Paul omits
this clause, as he includes the fulfilment of this condition of
obedience to "all these words" in the new covenant, as part of God's
promise, in [Heb 8:8](../../../bib/kjv/heb008.htm#008), [Heb
8:10](../../../bib/kjv/heb008.htm#010), [Heb
8:12](../../../bib/kjv/heb008.htm#012), whereby Christ fulfils all for
our justification, and will enable us by putting His Spirit in us to
fulfil all in our now progressive, and finally complete, sanctification.

[Hebrews 9:21](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">heb 9:21</span></span>

Greek, "And, moreover, in like manner." The sprinkling of the tabernacle
with blood is added by inspiration here to the account in [Exo
30:25-30](../../../bib/kjv/exo030.htm#025); [Exo
40:9-10](../../../bib/kjv/exo040.htm#009), which mentions only Moses'
anointing the tabernacle and its vessels. In [Lev
8:10](../../../bib/kjv/lev008.htm#010), [Lev
8:15](../../../bib/kjv/lev008.htm#015), [Lev
8:30](../../../bib/kjv/lev008.htm#030), the sprinkling of blood upon
Aaron and his garments, and upon his sons, and upon the altar, is
mentioned as well as the anointing, so that we might naturally infer, as
JOSEPHUS has distinctly stated, that the tabernacle and its vessels were
sprinkled with blood as well as being anointed: [Lev
16:16](../../../bib/kjv/lev016.htm#016), [Lev
16:20](../../../bib/kjv/lev016.htm#020), [Lev
16:33](../../../bib/kjv/lev016.htm#033), virtually sanctions this
inference. The tabernacle and its contents needed purification ([Ch2
29:21](../../../bib/kjv/ch2029.htm#021)).

[Hebrews 9:22](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">heb 9:22</span></span>

almost--to be joined with "all things," namely almost all things under
the old dispensation. The exceptions to all things being purified by
blood are, [Exo 19:10](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#010); [Lev
15:5](../../../bib/kjv/lev015.htm#005), &c.; [Lev
16:26](../../../bib/kjv/lev016.htm#026), [Lev
16:28](../../../bib/kjv/lev016.htm#028); [Lev
22:6](../../../bib/kjv/lev022.htm#006); [Num
31:22-24](../../../bib/kjv/num031.htm#022).

without--Greek, "apart from."

shedding of blood--shed in the slaughter of the victim, and poured out
at the altar subsequently. The pouring out of the blood on the altar is
the main part of the sacrifice ([Lev
17:11](../../../bib/kjv/lev017.htm#011)), and it could not have place
apart from the previous shedding of the blood in the slaying. Paul has,
perhaps, in mind here, [Luk 22:20](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#020),
"This cup is the new testament in my blood, which is shed for you."

is--Greek, "takes place": comes to pass.

remission--of sins: a favorite expression of Luke, Paul's companion.
Properly used of remitting a debt ([Mat
6:12](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#012); [Mat
18:27](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#027), [Mat
18:32](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#032)); our sins are debts. On the
truth here, compare [Lev 5:11-13](../../../bib/kjv/lev005.htm#011), an
exception because of poverty, confirming the general rule.

[Hebrews 9:23](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">heb 9:23</span></span>

patterns--"the suggestive representations"; the typical copies (see on
[Heb 8:5](../../../bib/kjv/heb008.htm#005)).

things in the heavens--the heavenly tabernacle and the things therein.

purified with these--with the blood of bulls and goats.

heavenly things themselves--the archetypes. Man's sin had introduced an
element of disorder into the relations of God and His holy angels in
respect to man. The purification removes this element of disorder and
changes God's wrath against man in heaven (designed to be the place of
God's revealing His grace to men and angels) into a smile of
reconciliation. Compare "peace in heaven" ([Luk
19:38](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#038)). "The uncreated heaven of God,
though in itself untroubled light, yet needed a purification in so far
as the light of love was obscured by the fire of wrath against sinful
man" \[DELITZSCH in ALFORD\]. Contrast [Rev
12:7-10](../../../bib/kjv/rev012.htm#007). Christ's atonement had the
effect also of casting Satan out of heaven ([Luk
10:18](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#018); [Joh
12:31](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#031), compare [Heb
2:14](../../../bib/kjv/heb002.htm#014)). Christ's body, the true
tabernacle (see on [Heb 8:2](../../../bib/kjv/heb008.htm#002); [Heb
9:11](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#011)), as bearing our imputed sin
([Co2 5:21](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#021)), was consecrated ([Joh
17:17](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#017), [Joh
17:19](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#019)) and purified by the shedding of
His blood to be the meeting place of God and man.

sacrifices--The plural is used in expressing the general proposition,
though strictly referring to the one sacrifice of Christ once for all.
Paul implies that His one sacrifice, by its matchless excellency, is
equivalent to the Levitical many sacrifices. It, though but one, is
manifold in its effects and applicability to many.

[Hebrews 9:24](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">heb 9:24</span></span>

Resumption more fully of the thought, "He entered in once into the holy
place," [Heb 9:12](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#012). He has in [Heb
9:13-14](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#013), expanded the words "by his
own blood," [Heb 9:12](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#012); and in [Heb
9:15-23](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#015), he has enlarged on "an High
Priest of good things to come."

not . . . into . . . holy places made with hands--as was the Holy of
Holies in the earthly tabernacle (see on [Heb
9:11](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#011)).

figures--copies "of the true" holiest place, heaven, the original
archetype ([Heb 8:5](../../../bib/kjv/heb008.htm#005)).

into heaven itself--the immediate presence of the invisible God beyond
all the created heavens, through which latter Jesus passed (see on [Heb
4:14](../../../bib/kjv/heb004.htm#014); [Ti1
6:16](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#016)).

now--ever since His ascension in the present economy (compare [Heb
9:26](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#026)).

to appear--To PRESENT HIMSELF; Greek, "to be made to appear." Mere man
may have a vision through a medium, or veil, as Moses had ([Exo
33:18](../../../bib/kjv/exo033.htm#018), [Exo
33:20-23](../../../bib/kjv/exo033.htm#020)). Christ alone beholds the
Father without a veil, and is His perfect image. Through seeing HIM only
can we see the Father.

in the presence of God--Greek, "to the face of God." The saints shall
hereafter see God's face in Christ ([Rev
22:4](../../../bib/kjv/rev022.htm#004)): the earnest of which is now
given ([Co2 3:18](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#018)). Aaron, the
Levitical high priest for the people, stood before the ark and only saw
the cloud, the symbol of God's glory ([Exo
28:30](../../../bib/kjv/exo028.htm#030)).

for us--in our behalf as our Advocate and Intercessor ([Heb
7:25](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#025); [Rom
8:34](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#034); [Jo1
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#001)). "It is enough that Jesus should
show Himself for us to the Father: the sight of Jesus satisfied God in
our behalf. He brings before the face of God no offering which has
exhausted itself, and, as only sufficing for a time, needs renewal; but
He himself is in person, by virtue of the eternal Spirit, that is, the
imperishable life of His person, now and for ever freed from death, our
eternally present offering before God" \[DELITZSCH in ALFORD\].

[Hebrews 9:25](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">heb 9:25</span></span>

As in [Heb 9:24](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#024), Paul said, it was not
into the typical, but the true sanctuary, that Christ is entered; so now
he says, that His sacrifice needs not, as the Levitical sacrifices did,
to be repeated. Construe, "Nor yet did He enter for this purpose that He
may offer Himself often," that is, "present Himself in the presence of
God, as the high priest does (Paul uses the present tense, as the legal
service was then existing), year by year, on the day of atonement,
entering the Holy of Holies.

with--literally, "in."

blood of others--not his own, as Christ did.

[Hebrews 9:26](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">heb 9:26</span></span>

then--in that case.

must . . . have suffered--rather as Greek, "It would have been necessary
for Him often to suffer." In order to "offer" ([Heb
9:25](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#025)), or present Himself often before
God in the heavenly holiest place, like the legal high priests making
fresh renewals of this high priestly function. He would have had, and
would have often to suffer. His oblation of Himself before God was once
for all (that is, the bringing in of His blood into the heavenly Holy of
Holies), and therefore the preliminary suffering was once for all.

since the foundation of the world--The continued sins of men, from their
first creation, would entail a continual suffering on earth, and
consequent oblation of His blood in the heavenly holiest place, since
the foundation of the world, if the one oblation "in the fulness of
time" were not sufficient. PHILO \[The Creation of the World, p. 637\],
shows that the high priest of the Hebrews offered sacrifices for the
whole human race. "If there had been greater efficacy in the repetition
of the oblation, Christ necessarily would not have been so long
promised, but would have been sent immediately after the foundation of
the world to suffer, and offer Himself at successive periods"
\[GROTIUS\].

now--as the case is,

once--for all; without need of renewal. Rome's fiction of an UNBLOODY
sacrifice in the mass, contradicts her assertion that the blood of
Christ is present in the wine; and also confutes her assertion that the
mass is propitiatory; for, if unbloody, it cannot be propitiatory; for
without shedding of blood there is no remission ([Heb
9:22](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#022)). Moreover, the expression "once"
for all here, and in [Heb 9:28](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#028), and
[Heb 10:10](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#010), [Heb
10:12](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#012), proves the falsity of her view
that there is a continually repeated offering of Christ in the Eucharist
or mass. The offering of Christ was a thing once done that it might be
thought of for ever (compare Note, see on [Heb
10:12](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#012)).

in the end of the world--Greek, "at the consummation of the ages"; the
winding up of all the previous ages from the foundation of the world; to
be followed by a new age ([Heb 1:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#001)).
The last age, beyond which no further age is to be expected before
Christ's speedy second coming, which is the complement of the first
coming; literally, "the ends of the ages"; [Mat
28:20](../../../bib/kjv/mat028.htm#020) is literally, "the consummation
of the age," or world (singular; not as here, plural, ages). Compare
"the fulness of times," [Eph 1:10](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#010).

appeared--Greek, "been manifested" on earth ([Ti1
3:16](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#016); [Pe1
1:20](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#020)). English Version has confounded
three distinct Greek verbs, by translating all alike, [Heb
9:24](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#024), [Heb
9:26](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#026), [Heb
9:28](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#028), "appear." But, in [Heb
9:24](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#024), it is "to present Himself,"
namely, before God in the heavenly sanctuary; in [Heb
9:26](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#026), "been manifested" on earth: in
[Heb 9:28](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#028), "shall be seen" by all, and
especially believers.

put away--abolish; doing away sin's power as well by delivering men from
its guilt and penalty, so that it should be powerless to condemn men, as
also from its yoke, so that they shall at last sin no more.

sin--singular number; all the sins of men of every age are regarded as
one mass laid on Christ. He hath not only droned for all actual sins,
but destroyed sin itself. [Joh 1:29](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#029),
"Behold the Lamb of God that taketh away the sin (not merely the sins:
singular, not plural) of the world."

by the sacrifice of himself--Greek, "by (through) His own sacrifice";
not by "blood of others" ([Heb 9:25](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#025)).
ALFORD loses this contrast in translating, "by His sacrifice."

[Hebrews 9:27](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">heb 9:27</span></span>

as--inasmuch as.

it is appointed--Greek, "it is laid up (as our appointed lot)," [Col
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#005). The word "appointed" (so Hebrew
"seth" means) in the case of man, answers to "anointed" in the case of
Jesus; therefore "the Christ," that is, the anointed, is the title here
given designedly. He is the representative man; and there is a strict
correspondence between the history of man and that of the Son of man.
The two most solemn facts of our being are here connected with the two
most gracious truths of our dispensation, our death and judgment
answering in parallelism to Christ's first coming to die for us, and His
second coming to consummate our salvation.

once--and no more.

after this the judgment--namely, at Christ's appearing, to which, in
[Heb 9:28](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#028), "judgment" in this verse is
parallel. Not, "after this comes the heavenly glory." The intermediate
state is a state of joyous, or else agonizing and fearful, expectation
of "judgment"; after the judgment comes the full and final state of joy,
or else woe.

[Hebrews 9:28](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">heb 9:28</span></span>

Christ--Greek, "THE Christ"; the representative MAN; representing all
men, as the first Adam did.

once offered--not "often," [Heb 9:25](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#025);
just as "men," of whom He is the representative Head, are appointed by
God once to die. He did not need to die again and again for each
individual, or each successive generation of men, for He represents all
men of every age, and therefore needed to die but once for all, so as to
exhaust the penalty of death incurred by all. He was offered by the
Father, His own "eternal Spirit" ([Heb
9:14](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#014)) concurring; as Abraham spared
not Isaac, but offered him, the son himself unresistingly submitting to
the father's will (Gen. 22:1-24).

to bear the sins--referring to [Isa
53:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#012), "He bare the sins of many,"
namely, on Himself; so "bear" means, [Lev
24:15](../../../bib/kjv/lev024.htm#015); [Num
5:31](../../../bib/kjv/num005.htm#031); [Num
14:34](../../../bib/kjv/num014.htm#034). The Greek is literally "to bear
up" ([Pe1 2:24](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#024)). "Our sins were laid
on Him. When, therefore, He was lifted up on the cross, He bare up our
sins along with Him" \[BENGEL\].

many--not opposed to all, but to few. He, the One, was offered for many;
and that once for all (compare [Mat
20:28](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#028)).

look for him--with waiting expectation even unto the end (so the Greek).
It is translated "wait for" in [Rom
8:19](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#019), [Rom
8:23](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#023); [Co1
1:7](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#007), which see.

appear--rather, as Greek, "be seen." No longer in the alien "form of a
servant," but in His own proper glory.

without sin--apart from, separate from, sin. Not bearing the sin of many
on Him as at His first coming (even then there was no sin in Him). That
sin has been at His first coming once for all taken away, so as to need
no repetition of His sin offering of Himself ([Heb
9:26](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#026)). At His second coming He shall
have no more to do with sin.

unto salvation--to bring in completed salvation; redeeming then the body
which is as yet subject to the bondage of corruption. Hence, in [Phi
3:20](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#020) he says, "we look for THE
SAVIOUR." Note, Christ's prophetical office, as the divine Teacher, was
especially exercised during His earthly ministry; His priestly is now
from His first to His second coming; His kingly office shall be fully
manifested at, and after, His second coming.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Hebrews Chapter 10](heb010)

</div>
