<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[James Index](jam)  
  [Previous](jam004)  [Next](pe1000) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*A Commentary, Critical, Practical, and Explanatory on the Old and New
Testaments*, by Robert Jamieson, A.R. Fausset and David Brown \[1882\]
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [James Chapter 5](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#001)

[James 5:1](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">jam 5:1</span></span>

WOES COMING ON THE WICKED RICH: BELIEVERS SHOULD BE PATIENT UNTO THE
LORD'S COMING: VARIOUS EXHORTATIONS. (Jam. 5:1-20)

Go to now--Come now. A phrase to call solemn attention.

ye rich--who have neglected the true enjoyment of riches, which consists
in doing good. James intends this address to rich Jewish unbelievers,
not so much for themselves, as for the saints, that they may bear with
patience the violence of the rich ([Jam
5:7](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#007)), knowing that God will speedily
avenge them on their oppressors \[BENGEL\].

miseries that shall come--literally, "that are coming upon you"
unexpectedly and swiftly, namely, at the coming of the Lord ([Jam
5:7](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#007)); primarily, at the destruction of
Jerusalem; finally, at His visible coming to judge the world.

[James 5:2](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">jam 5:2</span></span>

corrupted--about to be destroyed through God's curse on your oppression,
whereby your riches are accumulated ([Jam
5:4](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#004)). CALVIN thinks the sense is, Your
riches perish without being of any use either to others or even to
yourselves, for instance, your garments which are moth-eaten in your
chests.

garments . . . moth-eaten--referring to [Mat
6:19-20](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#019).

[James 5:3](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">jam 5:3</span></span>

is cankered--"rusted through" \[ALFORD\].

rust . . . witness against you--in the day of judgment; namely, that
your riches were of no profit to any, lying unemployed and so
contracting rust.

shall eat your flesh--The rust which once ate your riches, shall then
gnaw your conscience, accompanied with punishment which shall prey upon
your bodies for ever.

as . . . fire--not with the slow process of rusting, but with the
swiftness of consuming fire.

for the last days--Ye have heaped together, not treasures as ye suppose
(compare [Luk 12:19](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#019)), but wrath
against the last days, namely, the coming judgment of the Lord. ALFORD
translates more literally, "In these last days (before the coming
judgment) ye laid up (worldly) treasure" to no profit, instead of
repenting and seeking salvation (see on [Jam
5:5](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#005)).

[James 5:4](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">jam 5:4</span></span>

Behold--calling attention to their coming doom as no vain threat.

labourers--literally "workmen."

of you kept back--So English Version rightly. Not as ALFORD, "crieth out
from you." The "keeping back of the hire" was, on the part OF the rich,
virtually an act of "fraud," because the poor laborers were not
immediately paid. The phrase is therefore not, "kept back by you," but
"of you"; the latter implying virtual, rather than overt, fraud. James
refers to [Deu 24:14-15](../../../bib/kjv/deu024.htm#014), "At this day
. . . give his hire, neither shall the sun go down upon it, lest he CRY
against thee unto the Lord, and it be sin unto thee." Many sins "cry" to
heaven for vengeance which men tacitly take no account of, as unchastity
and injustice \[BENGEL\]. Sins peculiarly offensive to God are said to
"cry" to Him. The rich ought to have given freely to the poor; their not
doing so was sin. A still greater sin was their not paying their debts.
Their greatest sin was not paying them to the poor, whose wages is their
all.

cries of them--a double cry; both that of the hire abstractly, and that
of the laborers hired.

the Lord of sabaoth--here only in the New Testament. In [Rom
9:29](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#029) it is a quotation. It is suited
to the Jewish tone of the Epistle. It reminds the rich who think the
poor have no protector, that the Lord of the whole hosts in heaven and
earth is the guardian and avenger of the latter. He is identical with
the "coming Lord" Jesus ([Jam 5:7](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#007)).

[James 5:5](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">jam 5:5</span></span>

Translate, "Ye have luxuriated . . . and wantoned." The former expresses
luxurious effeminacy; the latter, wantonness and prodigality. Their
luxury was at the expense of the defrauded poor ([Jam
5:4](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#004)).

on the earth--The same earth which has been the scene of your
wantonness, shall be the scene of the judgment coming on you: instead of
earthly delights ye shall have punishments.

nourished . . . hearts--that is glutted your bodies like beasts to the
full extent of your hearts' desire; ye live to eat, not eat to live.

as in a day of slaughter--The oldest authorities omit "as." Ye are like
beasts which eat to their hearts' content on the very day of their
approaching slaughter, unconscious it is near. The phrase answers to
"the last days," [Jam 5:3](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#003), which
favors ALFORD'S translation there, "in," not "for."

[James 5:6](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">jam 5:6</span></span>

Ye have condemned . . . the just--The Greek aorist expresses, "Ye are
accustomed to condemn . . . the just." Their condemnation of Christ,
"the Just," is foremost in James' mind. But all the innocent blood shed,
and to be shed, is included, the Holy Spirit comprehending James
himself, called "the Just," who was slain in a tumult. See my
Introduction. This gives a peculiar appropriateness to the expression in
this verse, the same "as the righteous (just) man" ([Jam
5:16](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#016)). The justice or righteousness of
Jesus and His people is what peculiarly provoked the ungodly great men
of the world.

he doth not resist you--The very patience of the Just one is abused by
the wicked as an incentive to boldness in violent persecution, as if
they may do as they please with impunity. God doth "resist the proud"
([Jam 4:6](../../../bib/kjv/jam004.htm#006)); but Jesus as man, "as a
sheep is dumb before the shearers, so He opened not His mouth": so His
people are meek under persecution. The day will come when God will
resist (literally, "set Himself in array against") His foes and theirs.

[James 5:7](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">jam 5:7</span></span>

Be patient therefore--as judgment is so near ([Jam
5:1](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#001), [Jam
5:3](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#003)), ye may well afford to be
"patient" after the example of the unresisting Just one ([Jam
5:6](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#006)).

brethren--contrasted with the "rich" oppressors, [Jam
5:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#001).

unto the coming of the Lord--Christ, when the trial of your patience
shall cease.

husbandman waiteth for--that is, patiently bears toils and delays
through hope of the harvest at last. Its "preciousness" (compare [Psa
126:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa126.htm#006), "precious seed") will more than
compensate for all the past. Compare the same image, [Gal
6:3](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#003), [Gal
6:9](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#009).

hath long patience for it--"over it," in respect to it.

until he receive--"until it receive" \[ALFORD\]. Even if English Version
be retained, the receiving of the early and latter rains is not to be
understood as the object of his hope, but the harvest for which those
rains are the necessary preliminary. The early rain fell at sowing time,
about November or December; the latter rain, about March or April, to
mature the grain for harvest. The latter rain that shall precede the
coming spiritual harvest, will probably be another Pentecost-like
effusion of the Holy Ghost.

[James 5:8](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">jam 5:8</span></span>

coming . . . draweth nigh--The Greek expresses present time and a
settled state. [Pe1 4:7](../../../bib/kjv/pe1004.htm#007), "is at hand."
We are to live in a continued state of expectancy of the Lord's coming,
as an event always nigh. Nothing can more "stablish the heart" amidst
present troubles than the realized expectation of His speedy coming.

[James 5:9](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">jam 5:9</span></span>

Grudge not--rather "Murmur not"; "grumble not." The Greek is literally,
"groan": a half-suppressed murmur of impatience and harsh judgment, not
uttered aloud or freely. Having exhorted them to patience in bearing
wrongs from the wicked, he now exhorts them to a forbearing spirit as to
the offenses given by brethren. Christians, who bear the former
patiently, sometimes are impatient at the latter, though much less
grievous.

lest . . . condemned--The best manuscript authorities read, "judged."
James refers to [Mat 7:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#001), "Judge not
lest ye be judged." To "murmur against one another" is virtually to
judge, and so to become liable to be judged.

judge . . . before the door--referring to [Mat
24:33](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#033). The Greek is the same in both
passages, and so ought to be translated here as there, "doors," plural.
The phrase means "near at hand" ([Gen
4:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen004.htm#007)), which in the oldest
interpretations \[Targums of Jonathan and Jerusalem\] is explained, "thy
sin is reserved unto the judgment of the world to come." Compare "the
everlasting doors" ([Psa 24:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa024.htm#007), whence
He shall come forth). The Lord's coming to destroy Jerusalem is
primarily referred to; and ultimately, His coming again visibly to
judgment.

[James 5:10](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">jam 5:10</span></span>

the prophets--who were especially persecuted, and therefore were
especially "blessed."

example of suffering affliction--rather, simply, "of affliction,"
literally, "evil treatment."

[James 5:11](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">jam 5:11</span></span>

count them happy-- ([Mat 5:10](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#010)).

which endure--The oldest authorities read, "which have endured," which
suits the sense better than English Version: "Those who in past days,
like the prophets and Job, have endured trials." Such, not those who
"have lived in pleasure and been wanton on the earth" ([Jam
5:5](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#005)), are "happy."

patience--rather, "endurance," answering to "endure": the Greek words
similarly corresponding. Distinct from the Greek word for "patience"
[Jam 5:10](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#010). The same word ought to be
translated, "endurance," [Jam 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#003). He
here reverts to the subject which he began with.

Job--This passage shows the history of him is concerning a real, not an
imaginary person; otherwise his case could not be quoted as an example
at all. Though he showed much of impatience, yet he always returned to
this, that he committed himself wholly to God, and at last showed a
perfect spirit of enduring submission.

and have seen--(with the eyes of your mind). ALFORD translates from the
old and genuine reading, "see also," &c. The old reading is, however,
capable of being translated as English Version.

the end of the Lord--the end which the Lord gave. If Job had much to
"endure," remember also Job's happy "end." Hence, learn, though much
tried, to "endure to the end."

that--ALFORD and others translate, "inasmuch as," "for."

pitiful . . . of tender mercy--The former refers to the "feeling"; the
latter, to the act. His pity is shown in not laying on the patient
endurer more trials than he is able to bear; His mercy, in His giving a
happy "end" to the trials \[BENGEL\].

[James 5:12](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">jam 5:12</span></span>

But above all--as swearing is utterly alien to the Christian meek
"endurance" just recommended.

swear not--through impatience, to which trials may tempt you ([Jam
5:10-11](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#010)). In contrast to this stands
the proper use of the tongue, [Jam
5:13](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#013). James here refers to [Mat
5:34](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#034), &c.

let your yea be yea--Do not use oaths in your everyday conversation, but
let a simple affirmative or denial be deemed enough to establish your
word.

condemnation--literally, "judgment," namely, of "the Judge" who
"standeth before the doors" ([Jam
5:9](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#009)).

[James 5:13](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">jam 5:13</span></span>

afflicted--referring to the "suffering affliction" ([Jam
5:10](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#010)).

let him pray--not "swear" in rash impatience.

merry--joyous in mind.

sing psalms--of praise. Paul and Silas sang psalms even in affliction.

[James 5:14](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">jam 5:14</span></span>

let him call for the elders--not some one of the elders, as Roman
Catholics interpret it, to justify their usage in extreme unction. The
prayers of the elders over the sick would be much the same as though the
whole Church which they represent should pray \[BENGEL\].

anointing him with oil--The usage which Christ committed to His apostles
was afterwards continued with laying on of hands, as a token of the
highest faculty of medicine in the Church, just as we find in [Co1
6:2](../../../bib/kjv/co1006.htm#002) the Church's highest judicial
function. Now that the miraculous gift of healing has been withdrawn for
the most part, to use the sign where the reality is wanting would be
unmeaning superstition. Compare other apostolic usages now discontinued
rightly, [Co1 11:4-15](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#004); [Co1
16:20](../../../bib/kjv/co1016.htm#020). "Let them use oil who can by
their prayers obtain recovery for the sick: let those who cannot do
this, abstain from using the empty sign" \[WHITAKER\]. Romish extreme
unction is administered to those whose life is despaired of, to heal the
soul, whereas James' unction was to heal the body. CARDINAL CAJETAN
\[Commentary\] admits that James cannot refer to extreme unction. Oil in
the East, and especially among the Jews (see the Talmud, Jerusalem and
Babylon), was much used as a curative agent. It was also a sign of the
divine grace. Hence it was an appropriate sign in performing miraculous
cures.

in the name of the Lord--by whom alone the miracle was performed: men
were but the instruments.

[James 5:15](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">jam 5:15</span></span>

prayer--He does not say the oil shall save: it is but the symbol.

save--plainly not as Rome says, "save" the soul. but heal "the sick": as
the words, "the Lord shall raise him up," prove. So the same Greek is
translated, "made (thee) whole," [Mat
9:21-22](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#021).

and if . . . sins--for not all who are sick are so because of some
special sins. Here a case is supposed of one visited with sickness for
special sins.

have committed--literally, "be in a state of having committed sins,"
that is, be under the consequences of sins committed.

they--rather, "it": his having committed sins shall be forgiven him. The
connection of sin and sickness is implied in [Isa
33:24](../../../bib/kjv/isa033.htm#024); [Mat
9:2-5](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#002); [Joh
5:14](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#014). The absolution of the sick,
retained in the Church of England, refers to the sins which the sick man
confesses ([Jam 5:16](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#016)) and repents of,
whereby outward scandal has been given to the Church and the cause of
religion; not to sins in their relation to God, the only Judge.

[James 5:16](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">jam 5:16</span></span>

The oldest authorities read, "Confess, THEREFORE," &c. Not only in the
particular case of sickness, but universally confess.

faults--your falls and offenses, in relation to one another. The word is
not the same as sins. [Mat 5:23-24](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#023);
[Luk 17:4](../../../bib/kjv/luk017.htm#004), illustrate the precept
here.

one to another--not to the priest, as Rome insists. The Church of
England recommends in certain cases. Rome compels confession in all
cases. Confession is desirable in the case of (1) wrong done to a
neighbor; (2) when under a troubled conscience we ask counsel of a godly
minister or friend as to how we may obtain God's forgiveness and
strength to sin no more, or when we desire their intercessory prayers
for us ("Pray for one another"): "Confession may be made to anyone who
can pray" \[BENGEL\]; (3) open confession of sin before the Church and
the world, in token of penitence. Not auricular confession.

that ye may be healed--of your bodily sicknesses. Also that, if your
sickness be the punishment of sin, the latter being forgiven on
intercessory prayer, "ye may be healed" of the former. Also, that ye may
be healed spiritually.

effectual--intense and fervent, not "wavering" ([Jam
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#006)), \[BEZA\]. "When energized" by
the Spirit, as those were who performed miracles \[HAMMOND\]. This suits
the collocation of the Greek words and the sense well. A righteous man's
prayer is always heard generally, but his particular request for the
healing of another was then likely to be granted when he was one
possessing a special charism of the Spirit. ALFORD translates, "Availeth
much in its working." The "righteous" is one himself careful to avoid
"faults," and showing his faith by works ([Jam
2:24](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#024)).

[James 5:17](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">jam 5:17</span></span>

Elias . . . like passions as we--therefore it cannot be said that he was
so raised above us as to afford no example applicable to common mortals
like ourselves.

prayed earnestly--literally, "prayed with prayer": Hebraism for prayed
intensely. Compare [Luk 22:15](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#015), "With
desire I have desired," that is, earnestly desired. ALFORD is wrong in
saying, Elias' prayer that it might not rain "is not even hinted at in
the Old Testament history." In [Kg1
17:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg1017.htm#001) it is plainly implied, "As the
Lord God of Israel liveth, before whom I stand, there shall not be dew
nor rain these years, but according to my word." His prophecy of the
fact was according to a divine intimation given to him in answer to
prayer. In jealousy for God's honor ([Kg1
19:10](../../../bib/kjv/kg1019.htm#010)), and being of one mind with God
in his abhorrence of apostasy, he prayed that the national idolatry
should be punished with a national judgment, drought; and on Israel's
profession of repentance he prayed for the removal of the visitation, as
is implied in [Kg1 18:39-42](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#039); compare
[Luk 4:25](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#025).

three years, &c.--Compare [Kg1 18:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#001),
"The third year," namely, from Elijah's going to Zarephath; the prophecy
([Jam 5:1](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#001)) was probably about five or
six months previously.

[James 5:18](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">jam 5:18</span></span>

prayed . . . and--that is, "and so." Mark the connection between the
prayer and its accomplishment.

her fruit--her usual and due fruit, heretofore withheld on account of
sin. Three and a half years is the time also that the two witnesses
prophesy who "have power to shut and open heaven that it rain not."

[James 5:19](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">jam 5:19</span></span>

The blessing of reclaiming an erring sinner by the mutual consent and
intercessory prayer just recommended.

do err--more literally, "be led astray."

the truth--the Gospel doctrine and precepts.

one--literally, "any"; as "any" before. Everyone ought to seek the
salvation of everyone \[BENGEL\].

[James 5:20](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">jam 5:20</span></span>

Let him--the converted.

know--for his comfort, and the encouragement of others to do likewise.

shall save--future. The salvation of the one so converted shall be
manifested hereafter.

shall hide a multitude of sins--not his own, but the sins of the
converted. The Greek verb in the middle voice requires this. [Pro
10:12](../../../bib/kjv/pro010.htm#012) refers to charity "covering" the
sins of others before men; James to one's effecting by the conversion of
another that that other's sins be covered before God, namely, with
Christ's atonement. He effects this by making the convert partaker in
the Christian covenant for the remission of all sins. Though this hiding
of sins was included in the previous "shall save," James expresses it to
mark in detail the greatness of the blessing conferred on the penitent
through the converter's instrumentality, and to incite others to the
same good deed.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Peter Introduction](pe1000)

</div>
