<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Judges Index](jdg)  
  [Previous](jdg007)  [Next](jdg009) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*A Commentary, Critical, Practical, and Explanatory on the Old and New
Testaments*, by Robert Jamieson, A.R. Fausset and David Brown \[1882\]
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Judges Chapter 8](../../../bib/kjv/jdg008.htm#001)

[Judges 8:1](../../../bib/kjv/jdg008.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">jdg 8:1</span></span>

THE EPHRAIMITES OFFENDED, BUT PACIFIED. ([Jdg
8:1-9](../../../bib/kjv/jdg008.htm#001))

the men of Ephraim said unto him, Why hast thou served us thus?--Where
this complaint was made, whether before or after the crossing of the
Jordan, cannot be determined. By the overthrow of the national enemy,
the Ephraimites were benefited as largely as any of the other
neighboring tribes. But, piqued at not having been sharers in the glory
of the victory, their leading men could not repress their wounded pride;
and the occasion only served to bring out an old and deep-seated feeling
of jealous rivalry that subsisted between the tribes ([Isa
9:21](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#021)). The discontent was groundless,
for Gideon acted according to divine directions. Besides, as their tribe
was conterminous with that of Gideon, they might, had they been really
fired with the flame of patriotic zeal, have volunteered their services
in a movement against the common enemy.

[Judges 8:2](../../../bib/kjv/jdg008.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">jdg 8:2</span></span>

he said unto them, What have I done now in comparison of you?--His mild
and truly modest answer breathes the spirit of a great as well as good
man, who was calm, collected, and self-possessed in the midst of most
exciting scenes. It succeeded in throwing oil on the troubled waters
([Pro 16:1](../../../bib/kjv/pro016.htm#001)), and no wonder, for in the
height of generous self-denial, it ascribes to his querulous brethren a
greater share of merit and glory than belonged to himself ([Co1
13:4](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#004); [Phi
2:3](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#003)).

[Judges 8:4](../../../bib/kjv/jdg008.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">jdg 8:4</span></span>

Gideon came to Jordan, and passed over--much exhausted, but eager to
continue the pursuit till the victory was consummated.

[Judges 8:5](../../../bib/kjv/jdg008.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">jdg 8:5</span></span>

he said unto the men of Succoth--that is, a place of tents or booths.
The name seems to have been applied to the whole part of the Jordan
valley on the west, as well as on the east side of the river, all
belonging to the tribe of Gad (compare [Gen
33:17](../../../bib/kjv/gen033.htm#017); [Kg1
7:46](../../../bib/kjv/kg1007.htm#046); with [Jos
13:27](../../../bib/kjv/jos013.htm#027)). Being engaged in the common
cause of all Israel, he had a right to expect support and encouragement
from his countrymen everywhere.

[Judges 8:6](../../../bib/kjv/jdg008.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">jdg 8:6</span></span>

the princes of Succoth said, Are the hands of Zebah and Zalmunna now in
thine hand--an insolent as well as a time-serving reply. It was insolent
because it implied a bitter taunt that Gideon was counting with
confidence on a victory which they believed he would not gain; and it
was time-serving, because living in the near neighborhood of the
Midianite sheiks, they dreaded the future vengeance of those roving
chiefs. This contumelious manner of acting was heartless and disgraceful
in people who were of Israelitish blood.

[Judges 8:7](../../../bib/kjv/jdg008.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">jdg 8:7</span></span>

I will tear your flesh with the thorns of the wilderness and with
briers--a cruel torture, to which captives were often subjected in
ancient times, by having thorns and briers placed on their naked bodies
and pressed down by sledges, or heavy implements of husbandry being
dragged over them.

[Judges 8:8](../../../bib/kjv/jdg008.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">jdg 8:8</span></span>

he went up thence to Penuel, and spake unto them likewise--a neighboring
city, situated also in the territory of Gad, near the Jabbok, and
honored with this name by Jacob ([Gen
32:30-31](../../../bib/kjv/gen032.htm#030)).

[Judges 8:9](../../../bib/kjv/jdg008.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">jdg 8:9</span></span>

he spake . . ., When I come again in peace, I will break down this
tower--Intent on the pursuit, and afraid of losing time, he postponed
the merited vengeance till his return. His confident anticipation of a
triumphant return evinces the strength of his faith; and his specific
threat was probably provoked by some proud and presumptuous boast, that
in their lofty watchtower the Penuelites would set him at defiance.

[Judges 8:10](../../../bib/kjv/jdg008.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">jdg 8:10</span></span>

ZEBAH AND ZALMUNNA TAKEN. (Jdg. 8:10-27)

Now Zebah and Zalmunna were in Karkor--a town on the eastern confines of
Gad. The wreck of the Midianite army halted there.

[Judges 8:11](../../../bib/kjv/jdg008.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">jdg 8:11</span></span>

Gideon went up by the way of them that dwelt in tents on the east--He
tracked the fugitives across the mountain range of Gilead to the
northeast of the Jabbok, and there came upon them unexpectedly while
they were resting secure among their own nomadic tribes. Jogbehah is
supposed to be Ramoth-gilead; and, therefore, the Midianites must have
found refuge at or near Abela, "Abel-cheramim," "the plain of the
vineyards."

[Judges 8:12](../../../bib/kjv/jdg008.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">jdg 8:12</span></span>

when Zebah and Zalmunna fled, he pursued after them--A third conflict
took place. His arrival at their last quarters, which was by an unwonted
path, took the fugitives by surprise, and the conquest of the Midianite
horde was there completed.

[Judges 8:13](../../../bib/kjv/jdg008.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">jdg 8:13</span></span>

Gideon returned from battle before the sun was up--He seems to have
returned by a nearer route to Succoth, for what is rendered in our
version "before the sun was up," means "the heights of Heres, the
sun-hills."

[Judges 8:14](../../../bib/kjv/jdg008.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">jdg 8:14</span></span>

he described--wrote the names of the seventy princes or elders. It was
from them he had received so inhospitable a treatment.

[Judges 8:16](../../../bib/kjv/jdg008.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">jdg 8:16</span></span>

he took . . . the thorns of the wilderness and briers, and with them he
taught the men of Succoth--By refusing his soldiers refreshment, they
had committed a public crime, as well as an act of inhumanity, and were
subjected to a horrible punishment, which the great abundance and
remarkable size of the thorn bushes, together with the thinness of
clothing in the East, has probably suggested.

[Judges 8:18](../../../bib/kjv/jdg008.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">jdg 8:18</span></span>

Then said he unto Zebah and Zalmunna, What manner of men were they whom
ye slew at Tabor?--This was one of the countless atrocities which the
Midianite chiefs had perpetrated during their seven years' lawless
occupancy. It is noticed now for the first time when their fate was
about to be determined.

each one resembled the children of a king--An Orientalism for great
beauty, majesty of appearance, uncommon strength, and grandeur of form.

[Judges 8:19](../../../bib/kjv/jdg008.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">jdg 8:19</span></span>

They were my brethren, even the sons of my mother--That is, uterine
brothers; but, in all countries where polygamy prevails, "the son of my
mother" implies a closeness of relationship and a warmth of affection
never awakened by the looser term, "brother."

[Judges 8:20](../../../bib/kjv/jdg008.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">jdg 8:20</span></span>

he said unto Jether his first-born, Up, and slay them--The nearest of
kin was the blood-avenger; but a magistrate might order any one to do
the work of the executioner; and the person selected was always of a
rank equal or proportioned to that of the party doomed to suffer ([Kg1
2:29](../../../bib/kjv/kg1002.htm#029)). Gideon intended, then, by the
order to Jether, to put an honor on his son, by employing him to slay
two enemies of his country; and on the youth declining, he performed the
bloody deed himself.

[Judges 8:22](../../../bib/kjv/jdg008.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">jdg 8:22</span></span>

the men of Israel said unto Gideon, Rule thou over us . . . Gideon said
unto them, the Lord shall rule over you--Their unbounded admiration and
gratitude prompted them, in the enthusiasm of the moment, to raise their
deliverer to a throne, and to establish a royal dynasty in his house.
But Gideon knew too well, and revered too piously the principles of the
theocracy, to entertain the proposal for a moment. Personal and family
ambition was cheerfully sacrificed to a sense of duty, and every worldly
motive was kept in check by a supreme regard to the divine honor. He
would willingly act as judge, but the Lord alone was King of Israel.

[Judges 8:24](../../../bib/kjv/jdg008.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">jdg 8:24</span></span>

Gideon said unto them, I would desire a request of you--This was the
contribution of an earring (singular). As the ancient Arabians
(Ishmaelites and Midianites being synonymous terms, [Gen
37:25](../../../bib/kjv/gen037.htm#025), [Gen
37:28](../../../bib/kjv/gen037.htm#028)) were gorgeously adorned with
barbaric pearl and gold, an immense amount of such valuable booty had
fallen into the hands of the Israelitish soldiers. The contribution was
liberally made, and the quantity of gold given to him is estimated at
Â£3113 sterling.

[Judges 8:26](../../../bib/kjv/jdg008.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">jdg 8:26</span></span>

ornaments--crescent-like plates of gold suspended from the necks, or
placed on the breasts of the camels.

collars--rather, "earrings," or drops of gold or pearl.

purple--a royal color. The ancient, as well as modern Arabs, adorned the
necks, breasts, and legs, of their riding animals with sumptuous
housing.

[Judges 8:27](../../../bib/kjv/jdg008.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">jdg 8:27</span></span>

Gideon made an ephod thereof, and put it in his city, . . . Ophrah--That
no idolatrous use was in view, nor any divisive course from Shiloh
contemplated, is manifest from [Jdg
8:33](../../../bib/kjv/jdg008.htm#033). Gideon proposed, with the gold
he received, to make an ephod for his use only as a civil magistrate or
ruler, as David did ([Ch1 15:27](../../../bib/kjv/ch1015.htm#027)), and
a magnificent pectoral or breastplate also. It would seem, from the
history, that he was not blamable in making this ephod, as a civil robe
or ornament merely, but that it afterward became an object to which
religious ideas were attached; whereby it proved a snare, and
consequently an evil, by perversion, to Gideon and his house \[TAYLOR,
Fragments\].

[Judges 8:28](../../../bib/kjv/jdg008.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">jdg 8:28</span></span>

MIDIAN SUBDUED. ([Jdg 8:28](../../../bib/kjv/jdg008.htm#028))

Thus was Midian subdued before the children of Israel--This invasion of
the Arab hordes into Canaan was as alarming and desolating as the
irruption of the Huns into Europe. It was the severest scourge ever
inflicted upon Israel; and both it and the deliverance under Gideon
lived for centuries in the minds of the people ([Psa
83:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa083.htm#011)).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Judges Chapter 9](jdg009)

</div>
