<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Judges Index](jdg)  
  [Previous](jdg015)  [Next](jdg017) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*A Commentary, Critical, Practical, and Explanatory on the Old and New
Testaments*, by Robert Jamieson, A.R. Fausset and David Brown \[1882\]
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Judges Chapter 16](../../../bib/kjv/jdg016.htm#001)

[Judges 16:1](../../../bib/kjv/jdg016.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">jdg 16:1</span></span>

SAMSON CARRIES AWAY THE GATES OF GAZA. ([Jdg
16:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/jdg016.htm#001))

Gaza--now Guzzah, the capital of the largest of the five Philistine
principal cities, about fifteen miles southwest of Ashkelon. The object
of this visit to this city is not recorded, and unless he had gone in
disguise, it was a perilous exposure of his life in one of the enemy's
strongholds. It soon became known that he was there; and it was
immediately resolved to secure him. But deeming themselves certain of
their prey, the Gazites deferred the execution of their measure till the
morning.

[Judges 16:3](../../../bib/kjv/jdg016.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">jdg 16:3</span></span>

Samson . . . arose at midnight, and took the doors of the gate of the
city--A ruinous pile of masonry is still pointed out as the site of the
gate. It was probably a part of the town wall, and as this ruin is
"toward Hebron," there is no improbability in the tradition.

carried them up to the top of an hill that is before Hebron--That hill
is El-Montar; but by Hebron in this passage is meant "the mountains of
Hebron"; for otherwise Samson, had he run night and day from the time of
his flight from Gaza, could only have come on the evening of the
following day within sight of the city of Hebron. The city of Gaza was,
in those days, probably not less than three-quarters of an hour distant
from El-Montar. To have climbed to the top of this hill with the
ponderous doors and their bolts on his shoulders, through a road of
thick sand, was a feat which none but a Samson could have accomplished
\[VAN DE VELDE\].

[Judges 16:4](../../../bib/kjv/jdg016.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">jdg 16:4</span></span>

DELILAH CORRUPTED BY THE PHILISTINES. ([Jdg
16:4-14](../../../bib/kjv/jdg016.htm#004))

he loved a woman in the valley of Sorek--The location of this place is
not known, nor can the character of Delilah be clearly ascertained. Her
abode, her mercenary character, and her heartless blandishments afford
too much reason to believe she was a profligate woman.

[Judges 16:5](../../../bib/kjv/jdg016.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">jdg 16:5</span></span>

the lords of the Philistines--The five rulers deemed no means beneath
their dignity to overcome this national enemy.

Entice him, and see wherein his great strength lieth--They probably
imagined that he carried some amulet about his person, or was in the
possession of some important secret by which he had acquired such
herculean strength; and they bribed Delilah, doubtless by a large
reward, to discover it for them. She undertook the service and made
several attempts, plying all her arts of persuasion or blandishment in
his soft and communicative moods, to extract his secret.

[Judges 16:7](../../../bib/kjv/jdg016.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">jdg 16:7</span></span>

Samson said . . ., If they bind me with seven green withs--Vine
tendrils, pliant twigs, or twists made of crude vegetable stalks are
used in many Eastern countries for ropes at the present day.

[Judges 16:8](../../../bib/kjv/jdg016.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">jdg 16:8</span></span>

she bound him with them--probably in a sportive manner, to try whether
he was jesting or in earnest.

[Judges 16:9](../../../bib/kjv/jdg016.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">jdg 16:9</span></span>

there were men lying in wait, abiding . . . in the chamber--The Hebrew,
literally rendered, is, "in the inner," or "most secret part of the
house."

[Judges 16:10](../../../bib/kjv/jdg016.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">jdg 16:10</span></span>

And Delilah said--To avoid exciting suspicion, she must have allowed
some time to elapse before making this renewed attempt.

[Judges 16:12](../../../bib/kjv/jdg016.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">jdg 16:12</span></span>

new ropes--It is not said of what material they were formed; but from
their being dried, it is probable they were of twigs, like the former.
The Hebrew intimates that they were twisted, and of a thick, strong
description.

[Judges 16:13](../../../bib/kjv/jdg016.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">jdg 16:13</span></span>

If thou weavest the seven locks of my head--braids or tresses, into
which, like many in the East, he chose to plait his hair. Working at the
loom was a female employment; and Delilah's appears to have been close
at hand. It was of a very simple construction; the woof was driven into
the warp, not by a reed, but by a wooden spatula. The extremity of the
web was fastened to a pin or stake fixed in the wall or ground; and
while Delilah sat squatting at her loom, Samson lay stretched on the
floor, with his head reclining on her lap--a position very common in the
East.

[Judges 16:14](../../../bib/kjv/jdg016.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">jdg 16:14</span></span>

went away with the pin of the beam, and with the web--that is, the whole
weaving apparatus.

[Judges 16:16](../../../bib/kjv/jdg016.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">jdg 16:16</span></span>

HE IS OVERCOME. ([Jdg 16:15-20](../../../bib/kjv/jdg016.htm#015))

she pressed him daily with her words--Though disappointed and mortified,
this vile woman resolved to persevere; and conscious how completely he
was enslaved by his passion for her, she assailed him with a succession
of blandishing arts, till she at length discovered the coveted secret.

[Judges 16:17](../../../bib/kjv/jdg016.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">jdg 16:17</span></span>

if I be shaven, then my strength will go from me--His herculean powers
did not arise from his hair, but from his peculiar relation to God as a
Nazarite. His unshorn locks were a sign of his Nazaritism, and a pledge
on the part of God that his supernatural strength would be continued.

[Judges 16:19](../../../bib/kjv/jdg016.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">jdg 16:19</span></span>

she called for a man, and she caused him to shave off the seven locks of
his head--It is uncertain, however, whether the ancient Hebrews cut off
the hair to the same extent as Orientals now. The word employed is
sometimes the same as that for shearing sheep, and therefore the
instrument might be only scissors.

[Judges 16:20](../../../bib/kjv/jdg016.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">jdg 16:20</span></span>

he wist not that the Lord was departed from him--What a humiliating and
painful spectacle! Deprived of the divine influences, degraded in his
character, and yet, through the infatuation of a guilty passion,
scarcely awake to the wretchedness of his fallen condition!

[Judges 16:21](../../../bib/kjv/jdg016.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">jdg 16:21</span></span>

THE PHILISTINES TOOK HIM AND PUT OUT HIS EYES. ([Jdg
16:21-22](../../../bib/kjv/jdg016.htm#021))

the Philistines took him, and put out his eyes--To this cruel privation
prisoners of rank and consequence have commonly been subjected in the
East. The punishment is inflicted in various ways, by scooping out the
eyeballs, by piercing the eye, or destroying the sight by holding a
red-hot iron before the eyes. His security was made doubly sure by his
being bound with fetters of brass (copper), not of leather, like other
captives.

he did grind in the prison-house--This grinding with hand-millstones
being the employment of menials, he was set to it as the deepest
degradation.

[Judges 16:22](../../../bib/kjv/jdg016.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">jdg 16:22</span></span>

Howbeit the hair of his head began to grow again--It is probable that he
had now reflected on his folly; and becoming a sincere penitent, renewed
his Nazarite vow. "His hair grew together with his repentance, and his
strength with his hairs" \[BISHOP HALL\].

[Judges 16:23](../../../bib/kjv/jdg016.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">jdg 16:23</span></span>

THEIR FEAST TO DAGON. ([Jdg 16:23-25](../../../bib/kjv/jdg016.htm#023))

the lords of the Philistines gathered them together for to offer a great
sacrifice unto Dagon--It was a common practice in heathen nations, on
the return of their solemn religious festivals, to bring forth their war
prisoners from their places of confinement or slavery; and, in heaping
on them every species of indignity, they would offer their grateful
tribute to the gods by whose aid they had triumphed over their enemies.
Dagon was a sea idol, usually represented as having the head and upper
parts human, while the rest of the body resembled a fish.

[Judges 16:27](../../../bib/kjv/jdg016.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">jdg 16:27</span></span>

HIS DEATH. ([Jdg 16:26-31](../../../bib/kjv/jdg016.htm#026))

there were upon the roof about three thousand men and women, that beheld
while Samson made sport--This building seems to have been similar to the
spacious and open amphitheaters well known among the Romans and still
found in many countries of the East. They are built wholly of wood. The
standing place for the spectators is a wooden floor resting upon two
pillars and rising on an inclined plane, so as to enable all to have a
view of the area in the center. In the middle there are two large beams,
on which the whole weight of the structure lies, and these beams are
supported by two pillars placed almost close to each other, so that when
these are unsettled or displaced, the whole pile must tumble to the
ground.

[Judges 16:28](../../../bib/kjv/jdg016.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">jdg 16:28</span></span>

Samson called unto the Lord--His penitent and prayerful spirit seems
clearly to indicate that this meditated act was not that of a vindictive
suicide, and that he regarded himself as putting forth his strength in
his capacity of a public magistrate. He must be considered, in fact, as
dying for his country's cause. His death was not designed or sought,
except as it might be the inevitable consequence of his great effort.
His prayer must have been a silent ejaculation, and, from its being
revealed to the historian, approved and accepted of God.

[Judges 16:31](../../../bib/kjv/jdg016.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">jdg 16:31</span></span>

Then his brethren and all the house of his father came down, and took
him, and brought him up, and buried him--This awful catastrophe seems to
have so completely paralyzed the Philistines, that they neither
attempted to prevent the removal of Samson's corpse, nor to molest the
Israelites for a long time after. Thus the Israelitish hero rendered by
his strength and courage signal services to his country, and was always
regarded as the greatest of its champions. But his slavish subjection to
the domination of his passions was unworthy of so great a man and
lessens our respect for his character. Yet he is ranked among the
ancient worthies who maintained a firm faith in God ([Heb
11:32](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#032)).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Judges Chapter 17](jdg017)

</div>
