<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Judges Index](jdg.md)  
  [Previous](jdg010)  [Next](jdg012.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*A Commentary, Critical, Practical, and Explanatory on the Old and New
Testaments*, by Robert Jamieson, A.R. Fausset and David Brown \[1882\]
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Judges Chapter 11](../../../bib/kjv/jdg011.htm#001.md)

[Judges 11:1](../../../bib/kjv/jdg011.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">jdg 11:1</span></span>

JEPHTHAH. ([Jdg 11:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/jdg011.htm#001).md)

Jephthah--"opener."

son of an harlot--a concubine, or foreigner; implying an inferior sort
of marriage prevalent in Eastern countries. Whatever dishonor might
attach to his birth, his own high and energetic character rendered him
early a person of note.

Gilead begat Jephthah--His father seems to have belonged to the tribe of
Manasseh ([Ch1 7:14](../../../bib/kjv/ch1007.htm#014.md), [Ch1
7:17](../../../bib/kjv/ch1007.htm#017).md).

[Judges 11:2](../../../bib/kjv/jdg011.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">jdg 11:2</span></span>

Thou shalt not inherit in our father's house--As there were children by
the legitimate wife, the son of the secondary one was not entitled to
any share of the patrimony, and the prior claim of the others was
indisputable. Hence, as the brothers of Jephthah seem to have resorted
to rude and violent treatment, they must have been influenced by some
secret ill-will.

[Judges 11:3](../../../bib/kjv/jdg011.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">jdg 11:3</span></span>

Jephthah . . . dwelt in the land of Tob--on the north of Gilead, beyond
the frontier of the Hebrew territories ([Sa2
10:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa2010.htm#006.md), [Sa2
10:8](../../../bib/kjv/sa2010.htm#008).md).

there were gathered vain men to Jephthah--idle, daring, or desperate.

and went out with him--followed him as a military chief. They led a
freebooting life, sustaining themselves by frequent incursions on the
Ammonites and other neighboring people, in the style of Robin Hood. The
same kind of life is led by many an Arab or Tartar still, who as the
leader of a band, acquires fame by his stirring or gallant adventures.
It is not deemed dishonorable when the expeditions are directed against
those out of his own tribe or nation. Jephthah's mode of life was
similar to that of David when driven from the court of Saul.

[Judges 11:4](../../../bib/kjv/jdg011.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">jdg 11:4</span></span>

THE GILEADITES COVENANT WITH JEPHTHAH. ([Jdg
11:4-11](../../../bib/kjv/jdg011.htm#004).md)

in process of time--on the return of the season.

the children of Ammon made war against Israel--Having prepared the way
by the introduction of Jephthah, the sacred historian here resumes the
thread of his narrative from [Jdg
10:17](../../../bib/kjv/jdg010.htm#017.md). The Ammonites seem to have
invaded the country, and active hostilities were inevitable.

[Judges 11:5](../../../bib/kjv/jdg011.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">jdg 11:5</span></span>

the elders of Gilead went to fetch Jephthah--All eyes were directed
towards him as the only person possessed of the qualities requisite for
the preservation of the country in this time of imminent danger; and a
deputation of the chief men was despatched from the Hebrew camp at
Mizpeh to solicit his services.

[Judges 11:7](../../../bib/kjv/jdg011.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">jdg 11:7</span></span>

Jephthah said, Did not ye hate me?--He gave them at first a haughty and
cold reception. It is probable that he saw some of his brothers among
the deputies. Jephthah was now in circumstances to make his own terms.
With his former experience, he would have shown little wisdom or
prudence without binding them to a clear and specific engagement to
invest him with unlimited authority, the more especially as he was about
to imperil his life in their cause. Although ambition might, to a
certain degree, have stimulated his ready compliance, it is impossible
to overlook the piety of his language, which creates a favorable
impression that his roving life, in a state of social manners so
different from ours, was not incompatible with habits of personal
religion.

[Judges 11:10](../../../bib/kjv/jdg011.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">jdg 11:10</span></span>

the elders of Israel said unto Jephthah, The Lord be witness between
us--Their offer being accompanied by the most solemn oath, Jephthah
intimated his acceptance of the mission, and his willingness to
accompany them. But to make "assurance doubly sure," he took care that
the pledge given by the deputies in Tob should be ratified in a general
assembly of the people at Mizpeh; and the language of the historian,
"Jephthah uttered all his words before the Lord," seems to imply that
his inauguration with the character and extraordinary office of judge
was solemnized by prayer for the divine blessing, or some religious
ceremonial.

[Judges 11:12](../../../bib/kjv/jdg011.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">jdg 11:12</span></span>

HIS EMBASSY TO THE KING OF AMMON. (Jdg. 11:12-28)

Jephthah sent messengers unto the king of the children of Ammon--This
first act in his judicial capacity reflects the highest credit on his
character for prudence and moderation, justice and humanity. The bravest
officers have always been averse to war; so Jephthah, whose courage was
indisputable, resolved not only to make it clearly appear that
hostilities were forced upon him, but to try measures for avoiding, if
possible, an appeal to arms: and in pursuing such a course he was acting
as became a leader in Israel ([Deu
20:10-18](../../../bib/kjv/deu020.htm#010).md).

[Judges 11:13](../../../bib/kjv/jdg011.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">jdg 11:13</span></span>

the king of Ammon . . ., Because Israel took away my land--(See on [Deu
2:19](../../../bib/kjv/deu002.htm#019).md). The subject of quarrel was a
claim of right advanced by the Ammonite monarch to the lands which the
Israelites were occupying. Jephthah's reply was clear, decisive, and
unanswerable;--first, those lands were not in the possession of the
Ammonites when his countrymen got them, and that they had been acquired
by right of conquest from the Amorites \[[Jdg
11:21](../../../bib/kjv/jdg011.htm#021.md)\]; secondly, the Israelites had
now, by a lapse of three hundred years of undisputed possession,
established a prescriptive right to the occupation \[[Jdg
11:22-23](../../../bib/kjv/jdg011.htm#022.md)\]; and thirdly, having
received a grant of them from the Lord, his people were entitled to
maintain their right on the same principle that guided the Ammonites in
receiving, from their god Chemosh, the territory they now occupied
\[[Jdg 11:24](../../../bib/kjv/jdg011.htm#024.md)\]. This diplomatic
statement, so admirable for the clearness and force of its arguments,
concluded with a solemn appeal to God to maintain, by the issue of
events, the cause of right and justice \[[Jdg
11:27](../../../bib/kjv/jdg011.htm#027.md)\].

[Judges 11:28](../../../bib/kjv/jdg011.htm#028.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">jdg 11:28</span></span>

Howbeit the king of the children of Ammon hearkened not unto the words
of Jephthah--His remonstrances to the aggressor were disregarded, and
war being inevitable, preparations were made for a determined
resistance.

[Judges 11:29](../../../bib/kjv/jdg011.htm#029.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">jdg 11:29</span></span>

HIS VOW. ([Jdg 11:29-31](../../../bib/kjv/jdg011.htm#029).md)

Then the Spirit of the Lord came upon Jephthah--The calm wisdom,
sagacious forethought, and indomitable energy which he was enabled to
display, were a pledge to himself and a convincing evidence to his
countrymen, that he was qualified by higher resources than his own for
the momentous duties of his office.

he passed over Gilead, and Manasseh--the provinces most exposed and in
danger, for the purpose of levying troops, and exciting by his presence
a widespread interest in the national cause. Returning to the camp at
Mizpeh, he then began his march against the enemy. There he made his
celebrated vow, in accordance with an ancient custom for generals at the
outbreak of a war, or on the eve of a battle, to promise the god of
their worship a costly oblation, or dedication of some valuable booty,
in the event of victory. Vows were in common practice also among the
Israelites. They were encouraged by the divine approval as emanating
from a spirit of piety and gratitude; and rules were laid down in the
law for regulating the performance. But it is difficult to bring
Jephthah's vow within the legitimate range (see on [Lev
27:28](../../../bib/kjv/lev027.htm#028).md).

[Judges 11:31](../../../bib/kjv/jdg011.htm#031.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">jdg 11:31</span></span>

whatsoever cometh forth of the doors of my house to meet me--This
evidently points not to an animal, for that might have been a dog;
which, being unclean, was unfit to be offered; but to a person, and it
looks extremely as if he, from the first, contemplated a human
sacrifice. Bred up as he had been, beyond the Jordan, where the
Israelitish tribes, far from the tabernacle, were looser in their
religious sentiments, and living latterly on the borders of a heathen
country where such sacrifices were common, it is not improbable that he
may have been so ignorant as to imagine that a similar immolation would
be acceptable to God. His mind, engrossed with the prospect of a
contest, on the issue of which the fate of his country depended, might,
through the influence of superstition, consider the dedication of the
object dearest to him the most likely to ensure success.

shall surely be the Lord's; and \[or\] I will offer it up for a burnt
offering--The adoption of the latter particle, which many interpreters
suggest, introduces the important alternative, that if it were a person,
the dedication would be made to the service of the sanctuary; if a
proper animal or thing, it would be offered on the altar.

[Judges 11:32](../../../bib/kjv/jdg011.htm#032.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">jdg 11:32</span></span>

HE OVERCOMES THE AMMONITES. ([Jdg
11:32-33](../../../bib/kjv/jdg011.htm#032).md)

Jephthah passed over unto the children of Ammon . . . and the Lord
delivered them into his hands--He met and engaged them at Aroer, a town
in the tribe of Gad, upon the Arnon. A decisive victory crowned the arms
of Israel, and the pursuit was continued to Abel (plain of the
vineyards), from south to north, over an extent of about sixty miles.

[Judges 11:34](../../../bib/kjv/jdg011.htm#034.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">jdg 11:34</span></span>

Jephthah came to Mizpeh unto his house, and, behold, his daughter came
out to meet him with timbrels and with dances--The return of the victors
was hailed, as usual, by the joyous acclaim of a female band ([Sa1
18:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa1018.htm#006).md), the leader of whom was
Jephthah's daughter. The vow was full in his mind, and it is evident
that it had not been communicated to anyone, otherwise precautions would
doubtless have been taken to place another object at his door. The
shriek, and other accompaniments of irrepressible grief, seem to
indicate that her life was to be forfeited as a sacrifice; the nature of
the sacrifice (which was abhorrent to the character of God) and distance
from the tabernacle does not suffice to overturn this view, which the
language and whole strain of the narrative plainly support; and although
the lapse of two months might be supposed to have afforded time for
reflection, and a better sense of his duty, there is but too much reason
to conclude that he was impelled to the fulfilment by the dictates of a
pious but unenlightened conscience.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Judges Chapter 12](jdg012.md)

</div>
