<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Judges Index](jdg.md)  
  [Previous](jdg005)  [Next](jdg007.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*A Commentary, Critical, Practical, and Explanatory on the Old and New
Testaments*, by Robert Jamieson, A.R. Fausset and David Brown \[1882\]
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Judges Chapter 6](../../../bib/kjv/jdg006.htm#001.md)

[Judges 6:1](../../../bib/kjv/jdg006.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">jdg 6:1</span></span>

THE ISRAELITES, FOR THEIR SINS, OPPRESSED BY MIDIAN. ([Jdg
6:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/jdg006.htm#001).md)

and the Lord delivered them into the hand of Midian--Untaught by their
former experiences, the Israelites again apostatized, and new sins were
followed by fresh judgments. Midian had sustained a severe blow in the
time of Moses (Num. 31:1-18); and the memory of that disaster, no doubt,
inflamed their resentment against the Israelites. They were wandering
herdsmen, called "children of the East," from their occupying the
territory east of the Red Sea, contiguous to Moab. The destructive
ravages they are described as at this time committing in the land of
Israel are similar to those of the Bedouin Arabs, who harass the
peaceful cultivators of the soil. Unless composition is made with them,
they return annually at a certain season, when they carry off the grain,
seize the cattle and other property; and even life itself is in jeopardy
from the attacks of those prowling marauders. The vast horde of
Midianites that overran Canaan made them the greatest scourge which had
ever afflicted the Israelites.

[Judges 6:2](../../../bib/kjv/jdg006.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">jdg 6:2</span></span>

made . . . dens . . . in the mountains and caves--not, of course,
excavating them, for they were already, but making them fit for
habitation.

[Judges 6:8](../../../bib/kjv/jdg006.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">jdg 6:8</span></span>

A PROPHET REBUKES THEM. ([Jdg 6:7-10](../../../bib/kjv/jdg006.htm#007).md)

the Lord sent a prophet unto the children of Israel--The curse of the
national calamity is authoritatively traced to their infidelity as the
cause.

[Judges 6:11](../../../bib/kjv/jdg006.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">jdg 6:11</span></span>

AN ANGEL SENDS GIDEON TO DELIVER THEM. ([Jdg
6:11-16](../../../bib/kjv/jdg006.htm#011).md)

there came an angel of the Lord--He appeared in the character and
equipments of a traveller ([Jdg 6:21](../../../bib/kjv/jdg006.htm#021).md),
who sat down in the shade to enjoy a little refreshment and repose.
Entering into conversation on the engrossing topic of the times, the
grievous oppression of the Midianites, he began urging Gideon to exert
his well-known prowess on behalf of his country. Gideon, in replying,
addresses him at first in a style equivalent (in Hebrew) to "sir," but
afterwards gives to him the name usually applied to God.

an oak--Hebrew, "the oak"--as famous in after-times.

Ophrah--a city in the tribe of Manasseh, about sixteen miles north of
Jericho, in the district belonging to the family of Abiezer ([Jos
17:2](../../../bib/kjv/jos017.htm#002).md).

his son Gideon threshed wheat by the wine-press--This incident tells
emphatically the tale of public distress. The small quantity of grain he
was threshing, indicated by his using a flail instead of the customary
treading of cattle--the unusual place, near a wine-press, under a tree,
and on the bare ground, not a wooden floor, for the prevention of
noise--all these circumstances reveal the extreme dread in which the
people were living.

[Judges 6:13](../../../bib/kjv/jdg006.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">jdg 6:13</span></span>

if the Lord be with us, why then is all this befallen us?--Gideon's
language betrays want of reflection, for the very chastisements God had
brought on His people showed His presence with, and His interest in,
them.

[Judges 6:14](../../../bib/kjv/jdg006.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">jdg 6:14</span></span>

the Lord looked upon him, and said, Go in this thy might . . . have not
I sent thee?--The command and the promise made Gideon aware of the real
character of his visitor; and yet like Moses, from a sense of humility,
or a shrinking at the magnitude of the undertaking, he excused himself
from entering on the enterprise. And even though assured that, with the
divine aid, he would overcome the Midianites as easily as if they were
but one man, he still hesitates and wishes to be better assured that the
mission was really from God. He resembles Moses also in the desire for a
sign; and in both cases it was the rarity of revelations in such periods
of general corruption that made them so desirous of having the fullest
conviction of being addressed by a heavenly messenger. The request was
reasonable, and it was graciously granted \[[Jdg
6:18](../../../bib/kjv/jdg006.htm#018.md)\].

[Judges 6:18](../../../bib/kjv/jdg006.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">jdg 6:18</span></span>

GIDEON'S PRESENT CONSUMED BY FIRE. (Jdg. 6:17-32)

Depart not hence, I pray thee, until I . . . bring forth my
present--Hebrew, my mincha, or "meat offering"; and his idea probably
was to prove, by his visitor's partaking of the entertainment, whether
or not he was more than man.

[Judges 6:19](../../../bib/kjv/jdg006.htm#019.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">jdg 6:19</span></span>

Gideon went in, and made ready a kid; . . . the flesh he put in a
basket, and he put the broth in a pot--(See on [Gen
18:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen018.htm#007).md). The flesh seems to have been
roasted, which is done by cutting it into kobab, that is, into small
pieces, fixed on a skewer, and put before the fire. The broth was for
immediate use; the other, brought in a hand-basket was intended to be a
future supply to the traveller. The miraculous fire that consumed it and
the vanishing of the stranger, not by walking, but as a spirit in the
fire, filled Gideon with awe. A consciousness of demerit fills the heart
of every fallen man at the thought of God, with fear of His wrath; and
this feeling was increased by a belief prevalent in ancient times, that
whoever saw an angel would forthwith die. The acceptance of Gideon's
sacrifice betokened the acceptance of his person; but it required an
express assurance of the divine blessing, given in some unknown manner,
to restore his comfort and peace of mind.

[Judges 6:24](../../../bib/kjv/jdg006.htm#024.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">jdg 6:24</span></span>

it came to pass the same night, that the Lord said unto him--The
transaction in which Gideon is here described as engaged was not entered
on till the night after the vision.

[Judges 6:25](../../../bib/kjv/jdg006.htm#025.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">jdg 6:25</span></span>

Take thy father's . . . second bullock--The Midianites had probably
reduced the family herd; or, as Gideon's father was addicted to
idolatry, the best may have been fattened for the service of Baal; so
that the second was the only remaining one fit for sacrifice to God.

throw down the altar of Baal that thy father hath--standing upon his
ground, though kept for the common use of the townsmen.

cut down the grove that is by it--dedicated to Ashtaroth. With the aid
of ten confidential servants he demolished the one altar and raised on
the appointed spot the altar of the Lord; but, for fear of opposition,
the work had to be done under cover of night. A violent commotion was
excited next day, and vengeance vowed against Gideon as the perpetrator.
"Joash, his father, quieted the mob in a manner similar to that of the
town clerk of Ephesus. It was not for them to take the matter into their
own hands. The one, however, made an appeal to the magistrate; the other
to the idolatrous god himself" \[CHALMERS\].

[Judges 6:33](../../../bib/kjv/jdg006.htm#033.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">jdg 6:33</span></span>

THE SIGNS. ([Jdg 6:33-39](../../../bib/kjv/jdg006.htm#033).md)

all the Midianites . . . pitched in Jezreel--The confederated troops of
Midian, Amalek, and their neighbors, crossing the Jordan to make a fresh
inroad on Canaan, encamped in the plains of Esdraelon (anciently
Jezreel). The southern part of the Ghor lies in a very low level, so
that there is a steep and difficult descent into Canaan by the southern
wadies. Keeping this in view, we see the reason why the Midianite army,
from the east of Jordan, entered Canaan by the northern wadies of the
Ghor, opposite Jezreel.

[Judges 6:34](../../../bib/kjv/jdg006.htm#034.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">jdg 6:34</span></span>

the Spirit of the Lord came upon Gideon--Called in this sudden emergency
into the public service of his country, he was supernaturally endowed
with wisdom and energy commensurate with the magnitude of the danger and
the difficulties of his position. His summons to war was
enthusiastically obeyed by all the neighboring tribes. On the eve of a
perilous enterprise, he sought to fortify his mind with a fresh
assurance of a divine call to the responsible office. The miracle of the
fleece was a very remarkable one--especially, considering the copious
dews that fall in his country. The divine patience and condescension
were wonderfully manifested in reversing the form of the miracle. Gideon
himself seems to have been conscious of incurring the displeasure of God
by his hesitancy and doubts; but He bears with the infirmities of His
people.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Judges Chapter 7](jdg007.md)

</div>
