<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Judges Index](jdg.md)  
  [Previous](jdg004)  [Next](jdg006.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*A Commentary, Critical, Practical, and Explanatory on the Old and New
Testaments*, by Robert Jamieson, A.R. Fausset and David Brown \[1882\]
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Judges Chapter 5](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#001.md)

[Judges 5:1](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">jdg 5:1</span></span>

DEBORAH AND BARAK'S SONG OF THANKSGIVING. (Jdg. 5:1-31)

Then sang Deborah and Barak . . . on that day--This noble triumphal ode
was evidently the composition of Deborah herself.

[Judges 5:2](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">jdg 5:2</span></span>

The meaning is obscurely seen in our version; it has been better
rendered thus, "Praise ye Jehovah; for the free are freed in Israel--the
people have willingly offered themselves" \[ROBINSON\].

[Judges 5:4](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">jdg 5:4</span></span>

Allusion is here made, in general terms, to God's interposition on
behalf of His people.

Seir . . . the field of Edom--represent the mountain range and plain
extending along the south from the Dead Sea to the Elanitic Gulf.

thou wentest out--indicates the storm to have proceeded from the south
or southeast.

[Judges 5:6](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">jdg 5:6</span></span>

The song proceeds in these verses to describe the sad condition of the
country, the oppression of the people, and the origin of all the
national distress in the people's apostasy from God. Idolatry was the
cause of foreign invasion and internal inability to resist it.

[Judges 5:9](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">jdg 5:9</span></span>

expresses gratitude to the respective leaders of the tribes which
participated in the contest; but, above all, to God, who inspired both
the patriotic disposition and the strength.

[Judges 5:10](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">jdg 5:10</span></span>

Speak--that is, join in this song of praise.

white asses--Those which are purely white are highly prized, and being
costly, are possessed only by the wealthy and great.

Ye that sit in judgment--has been rendered, "ye that repose on
tapestries."

[Judges 5:11](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">jdg 5:11</span></span>

The wells which are at a little distance from towns in the East, are, in
unsettled times, places of danger. But in peace they are scenes of
pleasant and joyous resort. The poetess anticipates that this song may
be sung, and the righteous acts of the Lord rehearsed at these now
tranquil "places of drawing water." Deborah now rouses herself to
describe, in terms suitable to the occasion, the preparation and the
contest, and calls in a flight of poetic enthusiasm on Barak to parade
his prisoners in triumphal procession. Then follows a eulogistic
enumeration of the tribes which raised the commanded levy, or
volunteered their services--the soldiers of Ephraim who dwelt near the
mount of the Amalekites, the small quota of Benjamin; "the governors,"
valiant leaders "out of Machir," the western Manasseh; out of Zebulun.

[Judges 5:15](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">jdg 5:15</span></span>

Then comes a reproachful notice of the tribes which did not obey the
summons to take the field against the common enemy of Israel. By the

divisions--that is, the watercourses which descend from the eastern
hills unto the Jordan and Dead Sea.

For the divisions of Reuben there were great thoughts of heart--They
felt the patriotic impulse and determined, at first, to join the ranks
of their western brethren, but resiled from the purpose, preferring
their peaceful shepherd songs to the trumpet sound of war.

[Judges 5:17](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">jdg 5:17</span></span>

Gilead abode beyond Jordan--that is, Both Gad and the eastern half to
Manasseh chose to dwell at ease in their Havoth-jair, or "villages of
tents," while Dan and Asher, both maritime tribes, continued with their
ships and in their "breaches" ("havens"). The mention of these craven
tribes ([Jdg 5:18](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#018).md) is concluded with a
fresh burst of commendation on Zebulun and Naphtali.

[Judges 5:19](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#019.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">jdg 5:19</span></span>

describes the scene of battle and the issue. It would seem ([Jdg
5:19](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#019).md) that Jabin was reinforced by the
troops of other Canaanite princes. The battlefield was near Taanach (now
Ta'annuk), on a tell or mound in the level plain of Megiddo (now
Leijun), on its southwestern extremity, by the left bank of the Kishon.

they took no gain of money--They obtained no plunder.

[Judges 5:20](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#020.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">jdg 5:20</span></span>

the stars in their courses fought--A fearful tempest burst upon them and
threw them into disorder.

[Judges 5:21](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#021.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">jdg 5:21</span></span>

the river of Kishon swept them away--The enemy was defeated near "the
waters of Megiddo"--the sources and side streams of the Kishon: they
that fled had to cross the deep and marshy bed of the torrent, but the
Lord had sent a heavy rain--the waters suddenly rose--the warriors fell
into the quicksands, and sinking deep into them, were drowned or washed
into the sea \[VAN DE VELDE\].

[Judges 5:22](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#022.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">jdg 5:22</span></span>

Then were the horse hoofs broken by the means of the
prancings--Anciently, as in many parts of the East still, horses were
not shod. The breaking of the hoofs denotes the hot haste and heavy
irregular tramp of the routed foe.

[Judges 5:23](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#023.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">jdg 5:23</span></span>

Curse ye Meroz--a village on the confines of Issachar and Naphtali,
which lay in the course of the fugitives, but the inhabitants declined
to aid in their destruction.

[Judges 5:24](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#024.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">jdg 5:24</span></span>

is a most graphic picture of the treatment of Sisera in the tent of
Jael.

[Judges 5:25](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#025.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">jdg 5:25</span></span>

butter--curdled milk; a favorite beverage in the East.

[Judges 5:28](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#028.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">jdg 5:28</span></span>

In these verses a sudden transition is made to the mother of the
Canaanite general, and a striking picture is drawn of a mind agitated
between hope and fear--impatient of delay, yet anticipating the news of
victory and the rewards of rich booty.

the lattice--a lattice window, common to the houses in warm countries
for the circulation of air.

[Judges 5:29](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#029.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">jdg 5:29</span></span>

her wise ladies--maids of honor.

[Judges 5:30](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#030.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">jdg 5:30</span></span>

to every man a damsel or two--Young maidens formed always a valued part
of Oriental conquerors' war-spoils. But Sisera's mother wished other
booty for him; namely, the gold-threaded, richly embroidered, and
scarlet-colored cloaks which were held in such high esteem. The ode
concludes with a wish in keeping with the pious and patriotic character
of the prophetess.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Judges Chapter 6](jdg006.md)

</div>
