<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Judges Index](jdg.md)  
  [Previous](jdg001)  [Next](jdg003.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*A Commentary, Critical, Practical, and Explanatory on the Old and New
Testaments*, by Robert Jamieson, A.R. Fausset and David Brown \[1882\]
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Judges Chapter 2](../../../bib/kjv/jdg002.htm#001.md)

[Judges 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/jdg002.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">jdg 2:1</span></span>

AN ANGEL SENT TO REBUKE THE PEOPLE AT BOCHIM. ([Jdg
2:1-10](../../../bib/kjv/jdg002.htm#001).md)

an angel . . . came from Gilgal to Bochim--We are inclined to think,
from the authoritative tone of his language, that he was the Angel of
the Covenant ([Exo 23:20](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#020.md); [Jos
5:14](../../../bib/kjv/jos005.htm#014).md); the same who appeared in human
form and announced himself captain of the Lord's host. His coming from
Gilgal had a peculiar significance, for there the Israelites made a
solemn dedication of themselves to God on their entrance into the
promised land \[[Jos 4:1-9](../../../bib/kjv/jos004.htm#001.md)\]; and the
memory of that religious engagement, which the angel's arrival from
Gilgal awakened, gave emphatic force to his rebuke of their apostasy.

Bochim--"the weepers," was a name bestowed evidently in allusion to this
incident or the place, which was at or near Shiloh.

I said, I will never break my covenant with you . . . but ye have not
obeyed my voice--The burden of the angel's remonstrance was that God
would inviolably keep His promise; but they, by their flagrant and
repeated breaches of their covenant with Him, had forfeited all claim to
the stipulated benefits. Having disobeyed the will of God by voluntarily
courting the society of idolaters and placing themselves in the way of
temptation, He left them to suffer the punishment of their misdeeds.

[Judges 2:4](../../../bib/kjv/jdg002.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">jdg 2:4</span></span>

when the angel of the Lord spake these words . . . the people lifted up
their voice, and wept--The angel's expostulation made a deep and painful
impression. But the reformation was but temporary, and the gratifying
promise of a revival which this scene of emotion held out, was, ere
long, blasted by speedy and deeper relapses into the guilt of defection
and idolatry.

[Judges 2:6](../../../bib/kjv/jdg002.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">jdg 2:6</span></span>

And when Joshua had let the people go--This passage is a repetition of
[Jos 24:29-31](../../../bib/kjv/jos024.htm#029.md). It was inserted here to
give the reader the reasons which called forth so strong and severe a
rebuke from the angel of the Lord. During the lifetime of the first
occupiers, who retained a vivid recollection of all the miracles and
judgments which they had witnessed in Egypt and the desert, the national
character stood high for faith and piety. But, in course of time, a new
race arose who were strangers to all the hallowed and solemnizing
experience of their fathers, and too readily yielded to the corrupting
influences of the idolatry that surrounded them.

[Judges 2:11](../../../bib/kjv/jdg002.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">jdg 2:11</span></span>

WICKEDNESS OF THE NEW GENERATION AFTER JOSHUA. ([Jdg
2:11-19](../../../bib/kjv/jdg002.htm#011).md)

the children of Israel did evil in the sight of the Lord--This chapter,
together with the first eight verses of the next \[Jdg. 2:11-3:8\],
contains a brief but comprehensive summary of the principles developed
in the following history. An attentive consideration of them, therefore,
is of the greatest importance to a right understanding of the strange
and varying phases of Israelitish history, from the death of Joshua till
the establishment of the monarchy.

served Baalim--The plural is used to include all the gods of the
country.

[Judges 2:13](../../../bib/kjv/jdg002.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">jdg 2:13</span></span>

Ashtaroth--Also a plural word, denoting all the female divinities, whose
rites were celebrated by the most gross and revolting impurities.

[Judges 2:14](../../../bib/kjv/jdg002.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">jdg 2:14</span></span>

the anger of the Lord was hot against Israel, and he delivered them into
the hands of spoilers that spoiled them--Adversities in close and rapid
succession befell them. But all these calamities were designed only as
chastisements--a course of correctional discipline by which God brought
His people to see and repent of their errors; for as they returned to
faith and allegiance, He "raised up judges" ([Jdg
2:16](../../../bib/kjv/jdg002.htm#016).md).

[Judges 2:16](../../../bib/kjv/jdg002.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">jdg 2:16</span></span>

which delivered them out of the hand of those that spoiled them--The
judges who governed Israel were strictly God's vicegerents in the
government of the people, He being the supreme ruler. Those who were
thus elevated retained the dignity as long as they lived; but there was
no regular, unbroken succession of judges. Individuals, prompted by the
inward, irresistible impulse of God's Spirit when they witnessed the
depressed state of their country, were roused to achieve its
deliverance. It was usually accompanied by a special call, and the
people seeing them endowed with extraordinary courage or strength,
accepted them as delegates of Heaven, and submitted to their sway.
Frequently they were appointed only for a particular district, and their
authority extended no farther than over the people whose interests they
were commissioned to protect. They were without pomp, equipage, or
emoluments attached to the office. They had no power to make laws; for
these were given by God; nor to explain them, for that was the province
of the priests--but they were officially upholders of the law, defenders
of religion, avengers of all crimes, particularly of idolatry and its
attendant vices.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Judges Chapter 3](jdg003.md)

</div>
