<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Judges Index](jdg)  
  [Previous](jdg008)  [Next](jdg010) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*A Commentary, Critical, Practical, and Explanatory on the Old and New
Testaments*, by Robert Jamieson, A.R. Fausset and David Brown \[1882\]
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Judges Chapter 9](../../../bib/kjv/jdg009.htm#001)

[Judges 9:1](../../../bib/kjv/jdg009.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">jdg 9:1</span></span>

ABIMELECH IS MADE KING BY THE SHECHEMITES. ([Jdg
9:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/jdg009.htm#001))

Abimelech the son of Jerubbaal went to Shechem--The idolatry which had
been stealthily creeping into Israel during the latter years of Gideon
was now openly professed; Shechem was wholly inhabited by its adherents;
at least, idolaters had the ascendency. Abimelech, one of Gideon's
numerous sons, was connected with that place. Ambitious of sovereign
power, and having plied successfully the arts of a demagogue with his
maternal relatives and friends, he acquired both the influence and money
by which he raised himself to a throne.

communed . . . with all the family of the house of his mother's
father--Here is a striking instance of the evils of polygamy--one son
has connections and interests totally alien to those of his brothers.

[Judges 9:2](../../../bib/kjv/jdg009.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">jdg 9:2</span></span>

Whether is better for you, either that all the sons of Jerubbaal, . . .
or that one reign over you--a false insinuation, artfully contrived to
stir up jealousy and alarm. Gideon had rejected, with abhorrence, the
proposal to make himself or any of his family king, and there is no
evidence that any of his other sons coveted the title.

[Judges 9:4](../../../bib/kjv/jdg009.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">jdg 9:4</span></span>

the house of Baal-berith--either the temple, or the place where this
idol was worshipped; Baal-berith, "god of the covenant," by invocation
of whom the league of cities was formed.

Abimelech hired vain and light persons, which followed him--idle,
worthless vagabonds, the scum of society, who had nothing to lose, but
much to gain from the success of a revolutionary movement.

[Judges 9:5](../../../bib/kjv/jdg009.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">jdg 9:5</span></span>

went unto . . . Ophrah, and slew his brethren i. e., upon one
stone--This is the first mention of a barbarous atrocity which has, with
appalling frequency, been perpetrated in the despotic countries of the
East--that of one son of the deceased monarch usurping the throne and
hastening to confirm himself in the possession by the massacre of all
the natural or legitimate competitors. Abimelech slew his brethren on
one stone, either by dashing them from one rock, or sacrificing them on
one stone altar, in revenge for the demolition of Baal's altar by their
father. This latter view is the more probable, from the Shechemites
([Jdg 9:24](../../../bib/kjv/jdg009.htm#024)) aiding in it.

threescore and ten persons--A round number is used, but it is evident
that two are wanting to complete that number.

[Judges 9:6](../../../bib/kjv/jdg009.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">jdg 9:6</span></span>

all the men of Shechem . . ., and all the house of Millo--that is, a
mound or rampart, so that the meaning is, all the men in the house or
temple; namely, the priests of Baal.

made Abimelech king, by the plain of the pillar--rather, "by the oak
near a raised mound"--so that the ceremony of coronation might be
conspicuous to a crowd.

[Judges 9:7](../../../bib/kjv/jdg009.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">jdg 9:7</span></span>

JOTHAM BY A PARABLE REPROACHES THEM. ([Jdg
9:7-21](../../../bib/kjv/jdg009.htm#007))

he . . . stood in the top of mount Gerizim and lifted up his voice--The
spot he chose was, like the housetops, the public place of Shechem; and
the parable \[[Jdg 9:8-15](../../../bib/kjv/jdg009.htm#008)\] drawn from
the rivalry of the various trees was appropriate to the diversified
foliage of the valley below. Eastern people are exceedingly fond of
parables and use them for conveying reproofs, which they could not give
in any other way. The top of Gerizim is not so high in the rear of the
town, as it is nearer to the plain. With a little exertion of voice, he
could easily have been heard by the people of the city; for the hill so
overhangs the valley, that a person from the side or summit would have
no difficulty in speaking to listeners at the base. Modern history
records a case, in which soldiers on the hill shouted to the people in
the city and endeavored to instigate them to an insurrection. There is
something about the elastic atmosphere of an Eastern clime which causes
it to transmit sound with wonderful celerity and distinctness
\[HACKETT\].

[Judges 9:13](../../../bib/kjv/jdg009.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">jdg 9:13</span></span>

wine, which cheereth God and man--not certainly in the same manner. God
might be said to be "cheered" by it, when the sacrifices were accepted,
as He is said also to be honored by oil ([Jdg
9:9](../../../bib/kjv/jdg009.htm#009)).

[Judges 9:21](../../../bib/kjv/jdg009.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">jdg 9:21</span></span>

Joatham . . . went to Beer--the modern village El-Bireh, on the ridge
which bounds the northern prospect of Jerusalem.

[Judges 9:22](../../../bib/kjv/jdg009.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">jdg 9:22</span></span>

GAAL'S CONSPIRACY. (Jdg. 9:22-49)

When Abimelech had reigned three years--His reign did not, probably at
first, extend beyond Shechem; but by stealthy and progressive
encroachments he subjected some of the neighboring towns to his sway.
None could "reign" in Israel, except by rebellious usurpation; and hence
the reign of Abimelech is expressed in the original by a word signifying
"despotism," not that which describes the mild and divinely authorized
rule of the judge.

[Judges 9:23](../../../bib/kjv/jdg009.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">jdg 9:23</span></span>

Then God sent an evil spirit between Abimelech and the men of
Shechem--In the course of providence, jealousy, distrust, secret
disaffection, and smothered rebellion appeared among his subjects
disappointed and disgusted with his tyranny; and God permitted those
disorders to punish the complicated crimes of the royal fratricide and
idolatrous usurper.

[Judges 9:26](../../../bib/kjv/jdg009.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">jdg 9:26</span></span>

Gaal . . . came with his brethren . . ., and the men of Shechem put
their confidence in him--An insurrection of the original Canaanites,
headed by this man, at last broke out in Shechem.

[Judges 9:28](../../../bib/kjv/jdg009.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">jdg 9:28</span></span>

would to God this people were under my hand--He seems to have been a
boastful, impudent, and cowardly person, totally unfit to be a leader in
a revolutionary crisis. The consequence was that he allowed himself to
be drawn into an ambush, was defeated, the city of Shechem destroyed and
strewn with salt. The people took refuge in the stronghold, which was
set on fire, and all in it perished.

[Judges 9:50](../../../bib/kjv/jdg009.htm#050)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_050">jdg 9:50</span></span>

ABIMELECH SLAIN. ([Jdg 9:50-57](../../../bib/kjv/jdg009.htm#050))

Then went Abimelech to Thebez, and encamped against Thebez--now
Tubas--not far from Shechem.

[Judges 9:51](../../../bib/kjv/jdg009.htm#051)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_051">jdg 9:51</span></span>

all the men and women, . . . gat them up to the top of the tower--The
Canaanite forts were generally mountain fastnesses or keeps, and they
often had a strong tower which served as a last refuge. The Assyrian
bas-reliefs afford counterparts of the scene here described so vivid and
exact, that we might almost suppose them to be representations of the
same historic events. The besieged city--the strong tower within--the
men and women crowding its battlements--the fire applied to the doors,
and even the huge fragments of stone dropping from the hands of one of
the garrison on the heads of the assailants, are all well represented to
the life--just as they are here described in the narrative of inspired
truth \[GOSS\].

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Judges Chapter 10](jdg010)

</div>
