<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[2 John Index](jo2.md)  
  [Previous](jo1005)  [Next](jo2001.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*A Commentary, Critical, Practical, and Explanatory on the Old and New
Testaments*, by Robert Jamieson, A.R. Fausset and David Brown \[1882\]
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [2 John Introduction](../../../bib/kjv/jo2001.htm#001.md)

[2 John](../../../bib/kjv/jo2001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">jo2 0:0</span></span>

AUTHENTICITY.--That these two Epistles were written by the same author
appears from their similarity of tone, style, and sentiments. That John,
the beloved disciple, was the author of the Second and Third Epistles,
as of the First Epistle, appears from IRENÃ†US \[Against Heresies,
1.16.3\], who quotes [Jo2 1:10-11](../../../bib/kjv/jo2001.htm#010.md); and
in \[3.16.8\], he quotes [Jo2 1:7](../../../bib/kjv/jo2001.htm#007.md),
mistaking it, however, as if occurring in First John. CLEMENT OF
ALEXANDRIA (A.D. 192) \[Miscellanies, 2.66\], implies his knowledge of
other Epistles of John besides the First Epistle; and in fragments of
his Adumbrations \[p. 1011\], he says, "John's Second Epistle which was
written to the virgins (Greek, "parthenous"; perhaps Parthos is what was
meant) is the simplest; but it was written to a certain Babylonian named
the Elect lady." DIONYSIUS OF ALEXANDRIA (in EUSEBIUS \[Ecclesiastical
History, 7.25\]) observes that John never names himself in his Epistles,
"not even in the Second and Third Epistles, although they are short
Epistles, but simply calls himself the presbyter, a confutation of those
who think John the apostle distinct from John the presbyter. ALEXANDER
OF ALEXANDRIA cites [Jo2 1:10-11](../../../bib/kjv/jo2001.htm#010.md), as
John's \[SOCRATES, Ecclesiastical History, 1.6\]. CYPRIAN \[Concerning
the Baptism of Heretics\], in referring to the bishops at the Council of
Carthage, says, "John the apostle, in His Epistle, has said, if any come
to you" ([Jo2 1:10](../../../bib/kjv/jo2001.htm#010).md); so that this
Epistle, and therefore its twin sister, Third John, was recognized as
apostolic in the North African Church. The MURATORI fragment is
ambiguous. The Second and Third Epistles were not in the Peschito or old
Syriac version; and COSMAS INDICOPLEUSTES in the sixth century says that
in his time the Syriac Church only acknowledged three of the Catholic
Epistles, First Peter, First John, and James. But EPHREM THE SYRIAN
quotes the Second Epistle of John. EUSEBIUS \[Ecclesiastical History,\]
reckons both Epistles among the Antilegomena or controverted Scriptures,
as distinguished from the Homologoumena or universally acknowledged from
the first. Still his own opinion was that the two minor Epistles were
genuine, remarking, as he does in Demonstration of the Gospel \[3.5\],
that in John's "Epistles" he does not mention his own name, nor call
himself an apostle or evangelist, but an "elder" ([Jo2
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/jo2001.htm#001.md); [Jo3
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/jo3001.htm#001).md). ORIGEN (in EUSEBIUS
\[Ecclesiastical History, 6.25\]) mentions the Second and Third
Epistles, but adds, "not all admit (implying that most authorities do)
their genuineness." JEROME \[On Illustrious Men, 9\] mentions the two
latter Epistles as attributed to John the presbyter, whose sepulcher was
shown among the Ephesians in his day. But the designation "elder" was
used of the apostles by others (for example, PAPIAS, in EUSEBIUS
\[Ecclesiastical History, 3.39\]), and is used by Peter, an apostle, of
himself ([Pe1 5:1](../../../bib/kjv/pe1005.htm#001).md). Why, then, should
not John also use this designation of himself, in consonance with the
humility which leads him not to name himself or his apostleship even in
the First Epistle? The Antilegomena were generally recognized as
canonical soon after the Council of Nicea (A.D. 325). Thus CYRIL OF
JERUSALEM, A.D. 349, enumerates fourteen Epistles of Paul, and seven
Catholic Epistles. So GREGORY NAZIANZEN, in A.D. 389. The Councils of
Hippo, 393, and Carthage, 397, adopted a catalogue of New Testament
books exactly agreeing with our canon. So our oldest extant Greek
manuscripts. The Second and Third Epistles of John, from their brevity
(which ORIGEN notices), and the private nature of their contents, were
less generally read in the earliest Christian assemblies and were also
less quoted by the Fathers; hence arose their non-universal recognition
at the first. Their private nature makes them the less likely to be
spurious, for there seems no purpose in their forgery. The style and
coloring too accord with the style of the First Epistle.

TO WHOM ADDRESSED.--The Third Epistle is directed to Gaius or Caius;
whether Gaius of Macedonia ([Act
19:20](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#020).md), or Gaius of Corinth ([Rom
16:23](../../../bib/kjv/rom016.htm#023.md); [Co1
1:14](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#014).md), or Gaius of Derbe ([Act
20:4](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#004).md), it is hard to decide. MILL
believes Gaius, bishop of Pergamos \[Apostolic Constitutions, 7.40\], to
be the person addressed in [Jo3 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/jo3001.htm#001.md).

The address of the Second Epistle is more disputed. It opens, "The elder
unto the Elect lady" ([Jo2 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/jo2001.htm#001).md). And
it closes, "The children of thy elect sister greet thee" ([Jo2
1:13](../../../bib/kjv/jo2001.htm#013).md). Now, [Pe1
1:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#001.md), addresses the elect in Asia,
&c., and closes ([Pe1 5:13](../../../bib/kjv/pe1005.htm#013).md), "The
Church that is at Babylon, elected together with you, saluteth you."
Putting together these facts, with the quotations (above) from CLEMENT
OF ALEXANDRIA, and the fact that the word "Church" comes from a Greek
word (kyriake) cognate to the Greek for "lady" (kyria; "belonging to the
Lord," kyrios); WORDSWORTH'S view is probable. As Peter in Babylon had
sent the salutations of the elect Church in the then Parthian (see above
on CLEMENT OF ALEXANDRIA) Babylon to her elect sister in Asia, so John,
the metropolitan president of the elect Church in Asia, writes to the
elect lady, that is, Church, in Babylon. NEANDER, ALFORD, and others,
think the Greek "kyria" not to mean "lady," but to be her proper name;
and that she had a "sister, a Christian matron," then with John.

DATE AND PLACE OF WRITING.--EUSEBIUS \[Ecclesiastical History, 3.25\]
relates that John, after the death of Domitian, returned from his exile
in Patmos to Ephesus, and went on missionary tours into the heathen
regions around, and also made visitations of the churches around, and
ordained bishops and clergy. Such journeys are mentioned, [Jo2
1:12](../../../bib/kjv/jo2001.htm#012.md); [Jo3
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/jo3001.htm#010.md), [Jo3
1:14](../../../bib/kjv/jo3001.htm#014.md). If EUSEBIUS be right, both
Epistles must have been written after the Apocalypse, in his old age,
which harmonizes with the tone of the Epistles, and in or near Ephesus.
It was on one of his visitation tours that he designed to rebuke
Diotrephes ([Jo3 1:9-10](../../../bib/kjv/jo3001.htm#009).md).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 John Chapter 1](jo2001.md)

</div>
