<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[John Index](joh)  
  [Previous](joh015)  [Next](joh017) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*A Commentary, Critical, Practical, and Explanatory on the Old and New
Testaments*, by Robert Jamieson, A.R. Fausset and David Brown \[1882\]
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [John Chapter 16](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#001)

[John 16:1](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">joh 16:1</span></span>

DISCOURSE AT THE SUPPER TABLE CONCLUDED. (John 16:1-33)

These things have I spoken unto you, that ye should not be
offended--both the warnings and the encouragements just given.

[John 16:2](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">joh 16:2</span></span>

They shall put you out of the synagogue-- ([Joh
9:22](../../../bib/kjv/joh009.htm#022); [Joh
12:42](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#042)).

the time cometh, that whosoever killeth you will think that he doeth God
service--The words mean religious service--"that he is offering a
service to God." (So Saul of Tarsus, [Gal
1:13-14](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#013); [Phi
3:6](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#006)).

[John 16:4](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">joh 16:4</span></span>

these things I said not . . . at--from.

the beginning--He had said it pretty early ([Luk
6:22](../../../bib/kjv/luk006.htm#022)), but not quite as in [Joh
16:2](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#002).

because I was with you.

[John 16:5](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">joh 16:5</span></span>

But now I go my way to him that sent me--While He was with them, the
world's hatred was directed chiefly against Himself; but His departure
would bring it down upon them as His representatives.

and none of you asketh me, Whither goest thou?--They had done so in a
sort ([Joh 13:36](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#036); [Joh
14:5](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#005)); but He wished more intelligent
and eager inquiry on the subject.

[John 16:6](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">joh 16:6</span></span>

But because I have said these things . . . sorrow hath filled your
heart--Sorrow had too much paralyzed them, and He would rouse their
energies.

[John 16:7](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">joh 16:7</span></span>

It is expedient for you that I go away--

My Saviour, can it ever be

That I should gain by losing thee?

KEBLE.

Yes.

for if I go not away, the Comforter will not come unto you, but if I
depart, I will send him unto you--(See on [Joh
7:39](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#039); [Joh
14:15](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#015)).

[John 16:8](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">joh 16:8</span></span>

And when he is come, he will, &c.--This is one of the passages most
pregnant with thought in the profound discourses of Christ; with a few
great strokes depicting all and every part of the ministry of the Holy
Ghost in the world--His operation with reference to individuals as well
as the mass, on believers and unbelievers alike \[OLSHAUSEN\].

he will reprove--This is too weak a word to express what is meant.
Reproof is indeed implied in the term employed, and doubtless the word
begins with it. But convict or convince is the thing intended; and as
the one expresses the work of the Spirit on the unbelieving portion of
mankind, and the other on the believing, it is better not to restrict it
to either.

[John 16:9](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">joh 16:9</span></span>

Of sin, because they believe not on me--As all sin has its root in
unbelief, so the most aggravated form of unbelief is the rejection of
Christ. The Spirit, however, in fastening this truth upon the
conscience, does not extinguish, but, on the contrary, does consummate
and intensify, the sense of all other sins.

[John 16:10](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">joh 16:10</span></span>

Of righteousness, because I go to my Father, and ye see me no
more--Beyond doubt, it is Christ's personal righteousness which the
Spirit was to bring home to the sinner's heart. The evidence of this was
to lie in the great historical fact, that He had "gone to His Father and
was no more visible to men":--for if His claim to be the Son of God, the
Saviour of the world, had been a lie, how should the Father, who is "a
jealous God," have raised such a blasphemer from the dead and exalted
him to His right hand? But if He was the "Faithful and True Witness,"
the Father's "Righteous Servant," "His Elect, in whom His soul
delighted," then was His departure to the Father, and consequent
disappearance from the view of men, but the fitting consummation, the
august reward, of all that He did here below, the seal of His mission,
the glorification of the testimony which He bore on earth, by the
reception of its Bearer to the Father's bosom. This triumphant
vindication of Christ's rectitude is to us divine evidence, bright as
heaven, that He is indeed the Saviour of the world, God's Righteous
Servant to justify many, because He bare their iniquities ([Isa
53:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#011)). Thus the Spirit, in this
clause, is seen convincing men that there is in Christ perfect relief
under the sense of sin of which He had before convinced them; and so far
from mourning over His absence from us, as an irreparable loss, we learn
to glory in it, as the evidence of His perfect acceptance on our behalf,
exclaiming with one who understood this point, "Who shall lay anything
to the charge of God's elect? It is God that justifieth: Who is he that
condemneth? It is Christ that died; yea, rather, that is risen again,
who is even at the right hand of God," &c. ([Rom
8:33-34](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#033)).

[John 16:11](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">joh 16:11</span></span>

Of judgment, because the prince of this world is judged--By supposing
that the final judgment is here meant, the point of this clause is, even
by good interpreters, quite missed. The statement, "The prince of this
world is judged," means, beyond all reasonable doubt, the same as that
in [Joh 12:31](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#031), "Now shall the prince
of this world be cast out"; and both mean that his dominion over men, or
his power to enslave and so to ruin them, is destroyed. The death of
Christ "judged" or judicially overthrew him, and he was thereupon "cast
out" or expelled from his usurped dominion ([Heb
2:14](../../../bib/kjv/heb002.htm#014); [Jo1
3:8](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#008); [Col
2:15](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#015)). Thus, then, the Spirit shall
bring home to men's conscience: (1) the sense of sin, consummated in the
rejection of Him who came to "take away the sin of the world"; (2) the
sense of perfect relief in the righteousness of the Father's Servant,
now fetched from the earth that spurned Him to that bosom where from
everlasting He had dwelt; and (3) the sense of emancipation from the
fetters of Satan, whose judgment brings to men liberty to be holy, and
transformation out of servants of the devil into sons and daughters of
the Lord Almighty. To one class of men, however, all this will carry
conviction only; they "will not come to Christ"--revealed though He be
to them as the life-giving One--that they may have life. Such, abiding
voluntarily under the dominion of the prince of this world, are judged
in his judgment, the visible consummation of which will be at the great
day. To another class, however, this blessed teaching will have another
issue--translating them out of the kingdom of darkness into the kingdom
of God's dear Son.

[John 16:12](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">joh 16:12</span></span>

when he, the Spirit of truth, is come . . . he shall not speak of
himself--that is, from Himself, but, like Christ Himself, "what He
hears," what is given Him to communicate.

he will show you things to come--referring specially to those
revelations which, in the Epistles partially, but most fully in the
Apocalypse, open up a vista into the Future of the Kingdom of God, whose
horizon is the everlasting hills.

[John 16:14](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">joh 16:14</span></span>

He shall glorify me; for he shall receive of mine and show it unto
you--Thus the whole design of the Spirit's office is to glorify
Christ--not in His own Person, for this was done by the Father when He
exalted Him to His own right hand--but in the view and estimation of
men. For this purpose He was to "receive of Christ"--all the truth
relating to Christ--"and show it unto them," or make them to discern it
in its own light. The subjective nature of the Spirit's teaching--the
discovery to the souls of men of what is Christ outwardly--is here very
clearly expressed; and, at the same time, the vanity of looking for
revelations of the Spirit which shall do anything beyond throwing light
in the soul upon what Christ Himself is, and taught, and did upon earth.

[John 16:15](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">joh 16:15</span></span>

All things that the Father hath are mine--a plainer expression than this
of absolute community with the Father in all things cannot be conceived,
though the "all things" here have reference to the things of the Kingdom
of Grace, which the Spirit was to receive that He might show it to us.
We have here a wonderful glimpse into the inner relations of the
Godhead.

[John 16:16](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">joh 16:16</span></span>

A little while, and ye shall not see me; and again a little while, and
ye shall see me, because I go to the Father--The joy of the world at
their not seeing Him seems to show that His removal from them by death
was what He meant; and in that case, their joy at again seeing Him
points to their transport at His reappearance amongst them on His
Resurrection, when they could no longer doubt His identity. At the same
time the sorrow of the widowed Church in the absence of her Lord in the
heavens, and her transport at His personal return, are certainly here
expressed.

[John 16:23](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">joh 16:23</span></span>

In that day--of the dispensation of the Spirit (as in [Joh
14:20](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#020)).

ye shall ask--inquire of

me nothing--by reason of the fulness of the Spirit's teaching ([Joh
14:26](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#026); [Joh
16:13](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#013); and compare [Jo1
2:27](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#027)).

[John 16:24](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">joh 16:24</span></span>

Hitherto have ye asked nothing in my name--for "prayer in the name of
Christ, and prayer to Christ, presuppose His glorification"
\[OLSHAUSEN\].

ask--when I am gone, "in My name."

[John 16:25](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">joh 16:25</span></span>

in proverbs--in obscure language, opposed to "showing plainly"--that is,
by the Spirit's teaching.

[John 16:26](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">joh 16:26</span></span>

I say not . . . I will pray the Father for you--as if He were not of
Himself disposed to aid you: Christ does pray the Father for His people,
but not for the purpose of inclining an unwilling ear.

[John 16:27](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">joh 16:27</span></span>

For the Father himself loveth you, because ye have loved me--This love
of theirs is that which is called forth by God's eternal love in the
gift of His Son mirrored in the hearts of those who believe, and resting
on His dear Son.

[John 16:28](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">joh 16:28</span></span>

I came forth from the Father, &c.--that is, "And ye are right, for I
have indeed so come forth,and shall soon return whence I came." This
echo of the truth, alluded to in [Joh
16:27](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#027), seems like thinking aloud, as
if it were grateful to His own spirit on such a subject and at such an
hour.

[John 16:29](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">joh 16:29</span></span>

His disciples said, . . . now speakest thou plainly, and speakest no
proverb--hardly more so than before; the time for perfect plainness was
yet to come; but having caught a glimpse of His meaning (it was nothing
more), they eagerly express their satisfaction, as if glad to make
anything of His words. How touchingly does this show both the simplicity
of their hearts and the infantile character of their faith!

[John 16:31](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">joh 16:31</span></span>

Jesus answered . . . Do ye now believe?--that is, "It is well ye do, for
it is soon to be tested, and in a way ye little expect."

the hour cometh, yea, is now come, that ye shall be scattered, every man
to his own, and shall leave me alone; and yet I am not alone--A deep and
awful sense of wrong experienced is certainly expressed here, but how
lovingly! That He was not to be utterly deserted, that there was One who
would not forsake Him, was to Him matter of ineffable support and
consolation; but that He should be without all human countenance and
cheer, who as Man was exquisitely sensitive to the law of sympathy,
would fill themselves with as much shame, when they afterwards recurred
to it, as the Redeemer's heart in His hour of need with pungent sorrow.
"I looked for some to take pity, but there was none; and for comforters,
but I found none" ([Psa 69:20](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#020)).

because the Father is with me--how near, and with what sustaining power,
who can express?

[John 16:33](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#033)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">joh 16:33</span></span>

These things I have spoken unto you--not the immediately preceding
words, but this whole discourse, of which these were the very last
words, and which He thus winds up.

that in me ye might have peace--in the sublime sense before explained.
(See on [Joh 14:27](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#027)).

In the world ye shall have tribulation--specially arising from its
deadly opposition to those who "are not of the world, but chosen out of
the world." So that the "peace" promised was far from an unruffled one.

I have overcome the world--not only before you, but for you, that ye may
be able to do the same ([Jo1 5:4-5](../../../bib/kjv/jo1005.htm#004)).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: John Chapter 17](joh017)

</div>
