<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[John Index](joh.md)  
  [Previous](joh002)  [Next](joh004.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*A Commentary, Critical, Practical, and Explanatory on the Old and New
Testaments*, by Robert Jamieson, A.R. Fausset and David Brown \[1882\]
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [John Chapter 3](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#001.md)

[John 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">joh 3:1</span></span>

NIGHT INTERVIEW OF NICODEMUS WITH JESUS. (John 3:1-21)

Nicodemus--In this member of the Sanhedrim sincerity and timidity are
seen struggling together.

[John 3:2](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">joh 3:2</span></span>

came to Jesus by night--One of those superficial "believers" mentioned
in [Joh 2:23-24](../../../bib/kjv/joh002.htm#023.md), yet inwardly craving
further satisfaction, Nicodemus comes to Jesus in quest of it, but comes
"by night" (see [Joh 19:38-39](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#038.md); [Joh
12:42](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#042).md); he avows his conviction that
He was

come from God--an expression never applied to a merely human messenger,
and probably meaning more here--but only as "a teacher," and in His
miracles he sees a proof merely that "God is with Him." Thus, while
unable to repress his convictions, he is afraid of committing himself
too far.

[John 3:3](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">joh 3:3</span></span>

Except, &c.--This blunt and curt reply was plainly meant to shake the
whole edifice of the man's religion, in order to lay a deeper and more
enduring foundation. Nicodemus probably thought he had gone a long way,
and expected, perhaps, to be complimented on his candor. Instead of
this, he is virtually told that he has raised a question which he is not
in a capacity to solve, and that before approaching it, his spiritual
vision required to be rectified by an entire revolution on his inner
man. Had the man been less sincere, this would certainly have repelled
him; but with persons in his mixed state of mind--to which Jesus was no
stranger ([Joh 2:25](../../../bib/kjv/joh002.htm#025).md) --such methods
speed better than more honeyed words and gradual approaches.

a man--not a Jew merely; the necessity is a universal one.

be born again--or, as it were, begin life anew in relation to God; his
manner of thinking, feeling, and acting, with reference to spiritual
things, undergoing a fundamental and permanent revolution.

cannot see--can have no part in (just as one is said to "see life," "see
death," &c.).

the kingdom of God--whether in its beginnings here ([Luk
16:16](../../../bib/kjv/luk016.htm#016).md), or its consummation hereafter
([Mat 25:34](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#034.md); [Eph
5:5](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#005).md).

[John 3:4](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">joh 3:4</span></span>

How, &c.--The figure of the new birth, if it had been meant only of
Gentile proselytes to the Jewish religion, would have been intelligible
enough to Nicodemus, being quite in keeping with the language of that
day; but that Jews themselves should need a new birth was to him
incomprehensible.

[John 3:5](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">joh 3:5</span></span>

of water and of the Spirit--A twofold explanation of the "new birth," so
startling to Nicodemus. To a Jewish ecclesiastic, so familiar with the
symbolical application of water, in every variety of way and form of
expression, this language was fitted to show that the thing intended was
no other than a thorough spiritual purification by the operation of the
Holy Ghost. Indeed, element of water and operation of the Spirit are
brought together in a glorious evangelical prediction of Ezekiel ([Eze
36:25-27](../../../bib/kjv/eze036.htm#025).md), which Nicodemus might have
been reminded of had such spiritualities not been almost lost in the
reigning formalism. Already had the symbol of water been embodied in an
initiatory ordinance, in the baptism of the Jewish expectants of Messiah
by the Baptist, not to speak of the baptism of Gentile proselytes before
that; and in the Christian Church it was soon to become the great
visible door of entrance into "the kingdom of God," the reality being
the sole work of the Holy Ghost ([Tit
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/tit003.htm#005).md).

[John 3:6](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">joh 3:6</span></span>

That which is born, &c.--A great universal proposition; "That which is
begotten carries within itself the nature of that which begat it"
\[OLSHAUSEN\].

flesh--Not the mere material body, but all that comes into the world by
birth, the entire man; yet not humanity simply, but in its corrupted,
depraved condition, in complete subjection to the law of the fall ([Rom
8:1-9](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#001).md). So that though a man "could
enter a second time into his mother's womb and be born," he would be no
nearer this "new birth" than before ([Job
14:4](../../../bib/kjv/job014.htm#004.md); [Psa
51:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#005).md).

is spirit--"partakes of and possesses His spiritual nature."

[John 3:7](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">joh 3:7</span></span>

Marvel not, &c.--If a spiritual nature only can see and enter the
kingdom of God; if all we bring into the world with us be the reverse of
spiritual; and if this spirituality be solely of the Holy Ghost, no
wonder a new birth is indispensable.

Ye must--"Ye, says Jesus, not we" \[BENGEL\]. After those universal
propositions, about what "a man" must be, to "enter the kingdom of God"
([Joh 3:5](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#005).md) --this is remarkable,
showing that our Lord meant to hold Himself forth as "separate from
sinners."

[John 3:8](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">joh 3:8</span></span>

The wind, &c.--Breath and spirit (one word both in Hebrew and Greek) are
constantly brought together in Scripture as analogous ([Job
27:3](../../../bib/kjv/job027.htm#003.md); [Job
33:4](../../../bib/kjv/job033.htm#004.md); [Eze
37:9-14](../../../bib/kjv/eze037.htm#009).md).

canst not tell, &c.--The laws which govern the motion of the winds are
even yet but partially discovered; but the risings, failings, and change
in direction many times in a day, of those gentle breezes here referred
to, will probably ever be a mystery to us: So of the operation of the
Holy Ghost in the new birth.

[John 3:9](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">joh 3:9</span></span>

How, &c.--Though the subject still confounds Nicodemus, the necessity
and possibility of the new birth is no longer the point with him, but
the nature of it and how it is brought about \[LUTHARDT\]. "From this
moment Nicodemus says nothing more, but has sunk unto a disciple who has
found his true teacher. Therefore the Saviour now graciously advances in
His communications of truth, and once more solemnly brings to the mind
of this teacher in Israel, now become a learner, his own not guiltless
ignorance, that He may then proceed to utter, out of the fulness of His
divine knowledge, such farther testimonies both of earthly and heavenly
things as his docile scholar may to his own profit receive" \[STIER\].

[John 3:10](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">joh 3:10</span></span>

master--"teacher." The question clearly implies that the doctrine of
regeneration is so far disclosed in the Old Testament that Nicodemus was
culpable in being ignorant of it. Nor is it merely as something that
should be experienced under the Gospel that the Old Testament holds it
forth--as many distinguished critics allege, denying that there was any
such thing as regeneration before Christ. For our Lord's proposition is
universal, that no fallen man is or can be spiritual without a
regenerating operation of the Holy Ghost, and the necessity of a
spiritual obedience under whatever name, in opposition to mere
mechanical services, is proclaimed throughout all the Old Testament.

[John 3:11](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">joh 3:11</span></span>

We speak that we know, and . . . have seen--that is, by absolute
knowledge and immediate vision of God, which "the only-begotten Son in
the bosom of the Father" claims as exclusively His own ([Joh
1:18](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#018).md). The "we" and "our" are here
used, though Himself only is intended, in emphatic contrast, probably,
with the opening words of Nicodemus, "Rabbi, we know.", &c.

ye receive not, &c.--referring to the class to which Nicodemus belonged,
but from which he was beginning to be separated in spirit.

[John 3:12](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">joh 3:12</span></span>

earthly things--such as regeneration, the gate of entrance to the
kingdom of God on earth, and which Nicodemus should have understood
better, as a truth even of that more earthly economy to which he
belonged.

heavenly things--the things of the new and more heavenly evangelical
economy, only to be fully understood after the effusion of the Spirit
from heaven through the exalted Saviour.

[John 3:13](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">joh 3:13</span></span>

no man hath ascended, &c.--There is something paradoxical in this
language--"No one has gone up but He that came down, even He who is at
once both up and down." Doubtless it was intended to startle and
constrain His auditor to think that there must be mysterious elements in
His Person. The old Socinians, to subvert the doctrine of the
pre-existence of Christ, seized upon this passage as teaching that the
man Jesus was secretly caught up to heaven to receive His instructions,
and then "came down from heaven" to deliver them. But the sense
manifestly is this: "The perfect knowledge of God is not obtained by any
man's going up from earth to heaven to receive it--no man hath so
ascended--but He whose proper habitation, in His essential and eternal
nature, is heaven, hath, by taking human flesh, descended as the Son of
man to disclose the Father, whom He knows by immediate gaze alike in the
flesh as before He assumed it, being essentially and unchangeably 'in
the bosom of the Father'" ([Joh 1:18](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#018).md).

[John 3:14](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">joh 3:14</span></span>

And as Moses, &c.--Here now we have the "heavenly things," as before the
"earthly," but under a veil, for the reason mentioned in [Joh
3:12](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#012.md). The crucifixion of Messiah is
twice after this veiled under the same lively term--"uplifting," [Joh
8:28](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#028.md); [Joh
12:32-33](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#032.md). Here it is still further
veiled--though to us who know what it means, rendered vastly more
instructive--by reference to the brazen serpent. The venom of the fiery
serpents, shooting through the veins of the rebellious Israelites, was
spreading death through the camp--lively emblem of the perishing
condition of men by reason of sin. In both cases the remedy was divinely
provided. In both the way of cure strikingly resembled that of the
disease. Stung by serpents, by a serpent they are healed. By "fiery
serpents" bitten--serpents, probably, with skin spotted fiery red
\[KURTZ\]--the instrument of cure is a serpent of brass or copper,
having at a distance the same appearance. So in redemption, as by man
came death, by Man also comes life--Man, too, "in the likeness of sinful
flesh" ([Rom 8:3](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#003).md), differing in
nothing outward and apparent from those who, pervaded by the poison of
the serpent, were ready to perish. But as the uplifted serpent had none
of the venom of which the serpent-bitten people were dying, so while the
whole human family were perishing of the deadly wound inflicted on it by
the old serpent, "the Second Man," who arose over humanity with healing
in His wings, was without spot or wrinkle, or any such thing. In both
cases the remedy is conspicuously displayed; in the one case on a pole,
in the other on the cross, to "draw all men unto Him" ([Joh
12:32](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#032).md). In both cases it is by
directing the eye to the uplifted Remedy that the cure is effected; in
the one case the bodily eye, in the other the gaze of the soul by
"believing in Him," as in that glorious ancient proclamation--"Look unto
me and be ye saved, all the ends of the earth," &c. ([Isa
45:22](../../../bib/kjv/isa045.htm#022).md). Both methods are stumbling to
human reason. What, to any thinking Israelite, could seem more unlikely
than that a deadly poison should be dried up in his body by simply
looking on a reptile of brass? Such a stumbling-block to the Jews and to
the Greeks foolishness was faith in the crucified Nazarene as a way of
deliverance from eternal perdition. Yet was the warrant in both cases to
expect a cure equally rational and well grounded. As the serpent was
God's ordinance for the cure of every bitten Israelite, so is Christ for
the salvation of every perishing sinner--the one however a purely
arbitrary ordinance, the other divinely adapted to man's complicated
maladies. In both cases the efficacy is the same. As one simple look at
the serpent, however distant and however weak, brought an instantaneous
cure, even so, real faith in the Lord Jesus, however tremulous, however
distant--be it but real faith--brings certain and instant healing to the
perishing soul. In a word, the consequences of disobedience are the same
in both. Doubtless many bitten Israelites, galling as their case was,
would reason rather than obey, would speculate on the absurdity of
expecting the bite of a living serpent to be cured by looking at a piece
of dead metal in the shape of one--speculate thus till they died. Alas!
is not salvation by a crucified Redeemer subjected to like treatment?
Has the offense of the cross" yet ceased? (Compare [Kg2
5:12](../../../bib/kjv/kg2005.htm#012).md).

[John 3:16](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">joh 3:16</span></span>

For God so loved, &c.--What proclamation of the Gospel has been so oft
on the lips of missionaries and preachers in every age since it was
first uttered? What has sent such thrilling sensations through millions
of mankind? What has been honored to bring such multitudes to the feet
of Christ? What to kindle in the cold and selfish breasts of mortals the
fires of self-sacrificing love to mankind, as these words of transparent
simplicity, yet overpowering majesty? The picture embraces several
distinct compartments: "THE WORLD"--in its widest sense--ready "to
perish"; the immense "LOVE OF GOD" to that perishing world, measurable
only, and conceivable only, by the gift which it drew forth from Him;
THE GIFT itself--"He so loved the world that He gave His only begotten
Son," or, in the language of Paul, "spared not His own Son" ([Rom
8:32](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#032).md), or in that addressed to Abraham
when ready to offer Isaac on the altar, "withheld not His Son, His only
Son, whom He loved" ([Gen 22:16](../../../bib/kjv/gen022.htm#016).md); the
FRUIT of this stupendous gift--not only deliverance from impending
"perdition," but the bestowal of everlasting life; the MODE in which all
takes effect--by "believing" on the Son. How would Nicodemus' narrow
Judaism become invisible in the blaze of this Sun of righteousness seen
rising on "the world" with healing in His wings! ([Mal
4:2](../../../bib/kjv/mal004.htm#002).md).

[John 3:17](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">joh 3:17</span></span>

not to condemn, &c.--A statement of vast importance. Though
"condemnation" is to many the issue of Christ's mission ([Joh
3:19](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#019).md), it is not the object of His
mission, which is purely a saving one.

[John 3:18](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">joh 3:18</span></span>

is not condemned--Having, immediately on his believing, "passed from
death unto life" ([Joh 5:24](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#024).md).

condemned already--Rejecting the one way of deliverance from that
"condemnation" which God gave His Son to remove, and so wilfully
remaining condemned.

[John 3:19](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#019.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">joh 3:19</span></span>

this is the condemnation, &c.--emphatically so, revealing the
condemnation already existing, and sealing up under it those who will
not be delivered from it.

light is come into the world--in the Person of Him to whom Nicodemus was
listening.

loved darkness, &c.--This can only be known by the deliberate rejection
of Christ, but that does fearfully reveal it.

[John 3:20](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#020.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">joh 3:20</span></span>

reproved--by detection.

[John 3:21](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#021.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">joh 3:21</span></span>

doeth truth--whose only object in life is to be and do what will bear
the light. Therefore he loves and "comes to the light," that all he is
and does, being thus thoroughly tested, may be seen to have nothing in
it but what is divinely wrought and divinely approved. This is the
"Israelite, indeed, in whom is no guile."

[John 3:22](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#022.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">joh 3:22</span></span>

JESUS IN THE NEIGHBORHOOD OF THE BAPTIST--HIS NOBLE TESTIMONY TO HIS
MASTER. (John 3:22-36)

land of Judea--the rural parts of that province, the foregoing
conversation being held in the capital.

baptized--in the sense explained in [Joh
4:2](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#002.md).

[John 3:23](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#023.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">joh 3:23</span></span>

Ã†non . . . Salim--on the west of Jordan. (Compare [Joh
3:26](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#026.md) with [Joh
1:28](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#028).md).

[John 3:24](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#024.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">joh 3:24</span></span>

John not yet cast into prison--Hence it is plain that our Lord's
ministry did not commence with the imprisonment of John, though, but for
this, we should have drawn that inference from [Mat
4:12](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#012.md) and Mark's ([Mar
1:14](../../../bib/kjv/mar001.htm#014).md) express statement.

[John 3:25](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#025.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">joh 3:25</span></span>

between some of--rather, "on the part of."

and the Jews--rather (according to the best manuscripts), "and a Jew,"

about purifying--that is, baptizing, the symbolical meaning of washing
with water being put (as in [Joh 2:6](../../../bib/kjv/joh002.htm#006).md)
for the act itself. As John and Jesus were the only teachers who
baptized Jews, discussions might easily arise between the Baptist's
disciples and such Jews as declined to submit to that rite.

[John 3:26](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#026.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">joh 3:26</span></span>

Rabbi, &c.--"Master, this man tells us that He to whom thou barest such
generous witness beyond Jordan is requiting thy generosity by drawing
all the people away to Himself. At this rate, thou shalt soon have no
disciples at all." The reply to this is one of the noblest and most
affecting utterances that ever came from the lips of man.

[John 3:27](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#027.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">joh 3:27</span></span>

A man, &c.--"I do my heaven-prescribed work, and that is enough for me.
Would you have me mount into my Master's place? Said I not unto you, I
am not the Christ? The Bride is not mine, why should the people stay
with me?? Mine it is to point the burdened to the Lamb of God that
taketh away the sin of the world, to tell them there is Balm in Gilead,
and a Physician there. And shall I grudge to see them, in obedience to
the call, flying as a cloud, and as doves to their windows? Whose is the
Bride but the Bridegroom's? Enough for me to be the Bridegroom's friend,
sent by Him to negotiate the match, privileged to bring together the
Saviour and those He is come to seek and to save, and rejoicing with joy
unspeakable if I may but 'stand and hear the Bridegroom's voice,'
witnessing the blessed espousals. Say ye, then, they go from me to Him?
Ye bring me glad tidings of great joy. He must increase, but I must
decrease; this, my joy, therefore is fulfilled."

A man can receive, &c.--assume nothing, that is, lawfully and with any
success; that is, Every man has his work and sphere appointed him from
above, Even Christ Himself came under this law ([Heb
5:4](../../../bib/kjv/heb005.htm#004).md).

[John 3:31](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#031.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">joh 3:31</span></span>

He that, &c.--Here is the reason why He must increase while all human
teachers must decrease. The Master "cometh from above"--descending from
His proper element, the region of those "heavenly things" which He came
to reveal, and so, although mingling with men and things on the earth,
is not "of the earth," either in Person or Word. The servants, on the
contrary, springing of earth, are of the earth, and their testimony,
even though divine in authority, partakes necessarily of their own
earthiness. (So strongly did the Baptist feel this contrast that the
last clause just repeats the first). It is impossible for a sharper line
of distinction to be drawn between Christ and all human teachers, even
when divinely commissioned and speaking by the power of the Holy Ghost.
And who does not perceive it? The words of prophets and apostles are
undeniable and most precious truth; but in the words of Christ we hear a
voice as from the excellent Glory, the Eternal Word making Himself heard
in our own flesh.

[John 3:32](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#032.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">joh 3:32</span></span>

what he hath seen and heard--(See on [Joh
3:11](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#011.md) and [Joh
1:18](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#018).md).

and no man receiveth, &c.--John's disciples had said, "All come to Him"
([Joh 3:26](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#026).md). The Baptist here
virtually says, Would it were so, but alas! they are next to "none"
\[BENGEL\]. They were far readier to receive himself, and obliged him to
say, I am not the Christ, and he seems pained at this.

[John 3:33](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#033.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">joh 3:33</span></span>

hath set to His seal, &c.--gives glory to God whose words Christ speaks,
not as prophets and apostles by a partial communication of the Spirit to
them.

[John 3:34](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#034.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">joh 3:34</span></span>

for God giveth not the Spirit by measure--Here, again, the sharpest
conceivable line of distinction is drawn between Christ and all
human-inspired teachers: "They have the Spirit in a limited degree; but
God giveth not \[to Him\] the Spirit by measure." It means the entire
fulness of divine life and divine power. The present tense "giveth,"
very aptly points out the permanent communication of the Spirit by the
Father to the Son, so that a constant flow and reflow of living power is
to be understood (Compare [Joh 1:15](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#015).md)
\[OLSHAUSEN\].

[John 3:35](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#035.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_035">joh 3:35</span></span>

The Father loveth, &c.--See on [Mat
11:27](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#027.md), where we have the "delivering
over of all things into the hands of the Son," while here we have the
deep spring of that august act in the Father's ineffable "love of the
Son."

[John 3:36](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#036.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_036">joh 3:36</span></span>

hath everlasting life--already has it. (See on [Joh
3:18](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#018.md) and [Joh
5:24](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#024).md).

shall not see life--The contrast here is striking: The one has already a
life that will endure for ever--the other not only has it not now, but
shall never have it--never see it.

abideth on him--It was on Him before, and not being removed in the only
possible way, by "believing on the Son," it necessarily remaineth on
him! Note.--How flatly does this contradict the teaching of many in our
day, that there neither was, nor is, anything in God against sinners
which needed to be removed by Christ, but only in men against God!

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: John Chapter 4](joh004.md)

</div>
