<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[John Index](joh)  
  [Previous](joh018)  [Next](joh020) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*A Commentary, Critical, Practical, and Explanatory on the Old and New
Testaments*, by Robert Jamieson, A.R. Fausset and David Brown \[1882\]
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [John Chapter 19](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#001)

[John 19:1](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">joh 19:1</span></span>

JESUS BEFORE PILATE--SCOURGED--TREATED WITH OTHER SEVERITIES AND
INSULTS--DELIVERED UP, AND LED AWAY TO BE CRUCIFIED. (John 19:1-16)

Pilate took Jesus and scourged him--in hope of appeasing them. (See [Mar
15:15](../../../bib/kjv/mar015.htm#015)). "And the soldiers led Him away
into the palace, and they call the whole band" ([Mar
15:16](../../../bib/kjv/mar015.htm#016)) --the body of the military
cohort stationed there--to take part in the mock coronation now to be
enacted.

[John 19:2](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">joh 19:2</span></span>

the soldiers platted a crown of thorns, and put it on his head--in
mockery of a regal crown.

and they put on him a purple robe--in mockery of the imperial purple;
first "stripping him" ([Mat 27:28](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#028)) of
His own outer garment. The robe may have been the "gorgeous" one in
which Herod arrayed and sent Him back to Pilate ([Luk
23:11](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#011)). "And they put a reed into His
right hand" ([Mat 27:29](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#029)) --in mockery
of the regal scepter. "And they bowed the knee before Him" ([Mat
27:29](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#029)).

[John 19:3](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">joh 19:3</span></span>

And said, Hail, King of the Jews!--doing Him derisive homage, in the
form used on approaching the emperors. "And they spit upon Him, and took
the reed and smote Him on the head" ([Mat
27:30](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#030)). The best comment on these
affecting details is to cover the face.

[John 19:4](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">joh 19:4</span></span>

Pilate . . . went forth again, and saith . . . Behold, I bring him forth
to you--am bringing, that is, going to bring him forth to you.

that ye may know I find no fault in him--and, by scourging Him and
allowing the soldiers to make sport of Him, have gone as far to meet
your exasperation as can be expected from a judge.

[John 19:5](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">joh 19:5</span></span>

Then Jesus came forth, wearing the crown of thorns, and the purple robe.
And Pilate saith unto them, Behold the man!--There is no reason to think
that contempt dictated this speech. There was clearly a struggle in the
breast of this wretched man. Not only was he reluctant to surrender to
mere clamor an innocent man, but a feeling of anxiety about His
mysterious claims, as is plain from what follows, was beginning to rack
his breast, and the object of his exclamation seems to have been to move
their pity. But, be his meaning what it may, those three words have been
eagerly appropriated by all Christendom, and enshrined for ever in its
heart as a sublime expression of its calm, rapt admiration of its
suffering Lord.

[John 19:6](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">joh 19:6</span></span>

When the chief priests . . . saw him, they cried out--their fiendish
rage kindling afresh at the sight of Him.

Crucify him, crucify him--(See [Mar
15:14](../../../bib/kjv/mar015.htm#014)).

Pilate saith unto them, Take ye him, and crucify him; for I find no
fault in him--as if this would relieve him of the responsibility of the
deed, who, by surrendering Him, incurred it all!

[John 19:7](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">joh 19:7</span></span>

The Jews answered him, We have a law, and by oar law he ought to die,
because he made himself the Son of God--Their criminal charges having
come to nothing, they give up that point, and as Pilate was throwing the
whole responsibility upon them, they retreat into their own Jewish law,
by which, as claiming equality with God (see [Joh
5:18](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#018) and [Joh
8:59](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#059)), He ought to die; insinuating
that it was Pilate's duty, even as civil governor, to protect their law
from such insult.

[John 19:8](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">joh 19:8</span></span>

When Pilate . . . heard this saying, he was the more afraid--the name
"SON OF GOD," the lofty sense evidently attached to it by His Jewish
accusers, the dialogue he had already held with Him, and the dream of
his wife ([Mat 27:19](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#019)), all working
together in the breast of the wretched man.

[John 19:9](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">joh 19:9</span></span>

and went again into the judgment hall, and saith to Jesus, Whence art
thou?--beyond all doubt a question relating not to His mission but to
His personal origin.

Jesus gave him no answer--He had said enough; the time for answering
such a question was past; the weak and wavering governor is already on
the point of giving way.

[John 19:10](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">joh 19:10</span></span>

Then saith Pilate unto him, Speakest thou not to me?--The "me" is the
emphatic word in the question. He falls back upon the pride of office,
which doubtless tended to blunt the workings of his conscience.

knowest thou not that I have power to crucify thee, and have power to
release thee?--said to work upon Him at once by fear and by hope.

[John 19:11](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">joh 19:11</span></span>

Thou couldest--rather, "shouldst."

have no power at all against me--neither to crucify nor to release, nor
to do anything whatever against Me \[BENGEL\].

except it were--"unless it had been."

given thee from above--that is, "Thou thinkest too much of thy power,
Pilate: against Me that power is none, save what is meted out to thee by
special divine appointment, for a special end."

therefore he that delivered me unto thee--Caiaphas, too wit--but he only
as representing the Jewish authorities as a body.

hath the greater sin--as having better opportunities and more knowledge
of such matters.

[John 19:12](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">joh 19:12</span></span>

And from thenceforth--particularly this speech, which seems to have
filled him with awe, and redoubled his anxiety.

Pilate sought to release him--that is, to gain their consent to it, for
he could have done it at once on his authority.

but the Jews cried--seeing their advantage, and not slow to profit by
it. If thou let this man go, thou art not CÃ&brvbr;sar's friend,
&c.--"This was equivalent to a threat of impeachment, which we know was
much dreaded by such officers as the procurators, especially of the
character of Pilate or Felix. It also consummates the treachery and
disgrace of the Jewish rulers, who were willing, for the purpose of
destroying Jesus, to affect a zeal for the supremacy of a foreign
prince" \[WEBSTER and WILKINSON\]. (See [Joh
19:15](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#015)).

When Pilate . . . heard that, . . . he brought Jesus forth, and sat down
in--"upon"

the judgment seat--that he might pronounce sentence against the
Prisoner, on this charge, the more solemnly.

in a place called the Pavement--a tesselated pavement, much used by the
Romans.

in the Hebrew, Gabbatha--from its being raised.

[John 19:14](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">joh 19:14</span></span>

It was the preparation--that is, the day before the Jewish sabbath.

and about the sixth hour--The true reading here is probably, "the third
hour"--or nine A.M.--which agrees best with the whole series of events,
as well as with the other Evangelists.

he saith to the Jews, Behold your King!--Having now made up his mind to
yield to them, he takes a sort of quiet revenge on them by this irony,
which he knew would sting them. This only reawakens their cry to
despatch Him.

[John 19:15](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">joh 19:15</span></span>

crucify your King? . . . We have no king but CÃ&brvbr;sar--"Some of
those who thus cried died miserably in rebellion against CÃ&brvbr;sar
forty years afterwards. But it suited their present purpose" \[ALFORD\].

[John 19:16](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">joh 19:16</span></span>

Then delivered he him therefore unto them to be crucified, &c.--(See
[Mar 15:15](../../../bib/kjv/mar015.htm#015)).

[John 19:17](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">joh 19:17</span></span>

CRUCIFIXION AND DEATH OF THE LORD JESUS. ([Joh
19:17-30](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#017))

And he bearing his cross--(See on [Luk
23:26](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#026)).

went forth--Compare [Heb 13:11-13](../../../bib/kjv/heb013.htm#011),
"without the camp"; "without the gate." On arriving at the place, "they
gave Him vinegar to drink mingled with gall \[wine mingled with myrrh,
[Mar 15:23](../../../bib/kjv/mar015.htm#023)\], and when He had tasted
thereof, He would not drink" ([Mat
27:34](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#034)). This potion was stupefying,
and given to criminals just before execution, to deaden the sense of
pain.

Fill high the bowl, and spice it well, and pour

The dews oblivious: for the Cross is sharp,

The Cross is sharp, and He

Is tenderer than a lamb.

KEBLE.

But our Lord would die with every faculty clear, and in full sensibility
to all His sufferings.

Thou wilt feel all, that Thou may'st pity all;

And rather would'st Thou wrestle with strong pain

Than overcloud Thy soul,

So clear in agony,

Or lose one glimpse of Heaven before the time,

O most entire and perfect Sacrifice,

Renewed in every pulse.

KEBLE.

[John 19:18](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">joh 19:18</span></span>

they crucified him, and two others with him--"malefactors" ([Luk
23:33](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#033)), "thieves" (rather "robbers,"
[Mat 27:38](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#038); [Mar
15:27](../../../bib/kjv/mar015.htm#027)).

on either side one and Jesus in the midst--a hellish expedient, to hold
Him up as the worst of the three. But in this, as in many other of their
doings, "the scripture was fulfilled, which saith ([Isa
53:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#012)), And he was numbered with the
transgressors"-- ([Mar 15:28](../../../bib/kjv/mar015.htm#028)) --though
the prediction reaches deeper. "Then said Jesus"--\["probably while
being nailed to the CROSS,"\] \[OLSHAUSEN\], "FATHER, FORGIVE THEM, FOR
THEY KNOW NOT WHAT THEY DO" ([Luk
23:34](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#034)) --and again the Scripture was
fulfilled which said, "And He made intercession for the transgressors"
([Isa 53:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#012)), though this also reaches
deeper. (See [Act 3:17](../../../bib/kjv/act003.htm#017); [Act
13:27](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#027); and compare [Ti1
1:13](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#013)). Often have we occasion to
observe how our Lord is the first to fulfil His own precepts--thus
furnishing the right interpretation and the perfect Model of them. (See
on [Mat 5:44](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#044)). How quickly was it seen
in "His martyr Stephen," that though He had left the earth in Person,
His Spirit remained behind, and Himself could, in some of His brightest
lineaments, be reproduced in His disciples! ([Act
7:60](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#060)). And what does the world in
every age owe to these few words, spoken where and as they were spoken!

[John 19:19](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">joh 19:19</span></span>

Pilate wrote a title, and put it on the cross . . . Jesus of Nazareth,
the King of the Jews . . . and it was written in Hebrew--or
Syro-Chaldaic, the language of the country.

and Greek--the current language.

and Latin--the official language. These were the chief languages of the
earth, and this secured that all spectators should be able to read it.
Stung by this, the Jewish ecclesiastics entreat that it may be so
altered as to express, not His real dignity, but His false claim to it.
But Pilate thought he had yielded quite enough to them; and having
intended expressly to spite and insult them by this title, for having
got him to act against his own sense of justice, he peremptorily refused
them. And thus, amidst the conflicting passions of men, was proclaimed,
in the chief tongues of mankind, from the Cross itself and in
circumstances which threw upon it a lurid yet grand light, the truth
which drew the Magi to His manger, and will yet be owned by all the
world!

[John 19:23](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">joh 19:23</span></span>

Then the soldiers, when they had crucified Jesus, took his garments, and
made four parts; to every soldier--the four who nailed Him to the cross,
and whose perquisite they were.

a part, and also his coat--the Roman tunic, or close-fitting vest.

without seam, woven from the top throughout--"perhaps denoting
considerable skill and labor as necessary to produce such a garment, the
work probably of one or more of the women who ministered in such things
unto Him, [Luk 8:3](../../../bib/kjv/luk008.htm#003)" \[WEBSTER and
WILKINSON\].

[John 19:24](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">joh 19:24</span></span>

Let us not rend it, but cast lots . . . whose it shall be, that the
scripture might be fulfilled which saith, They parted my raiment among
them; and for my vesture they did cast lots-- ([Psa
22:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#018)). That a prediction so
exceedingly specific--distinguishing one piece of dress from others, and
announcing that while those should be parted amongst several, that
should be given by lot to one person--that such a prediction should not
only be fulfilled to the letter, but by a party of heathen military,
without interference from either the friends of the enemies of the
Crucified One, is surely worthy to be ranked among the wonders of this
all-wonderful scene. Now come the mockeries, and from four different
quarters:--(1) "And they that passed by reviled Him, wagging their
heads" in ridicule ([Psa 22:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#007); [Psa
109:25](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#025); compare [Jer
18:16](../../../bib/kjv/jer018.htm#016); [Lam
2:15](../../../bib/kjv/lam002.htm#015)). "Ah!"--"Ha," an exclamation
here of derision. "Thou that destroyest the temple, and buildest it in
three days, save Thyself and come down from the cross" ([Mat
27:39-40](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#039); [Mar
15:29-30](../../../bib/kjv/mar015.htm#029)). "It is evident that our
Lord's saying, or rather this perversion of it (for He claimed not to
destroy, but to rebuild the temple destroyed by them) had greatly
exasperated the feeling which the priests and Pharisees had contrived to
excite against Him. It is referred to as the principal fact brought out
in evidence against Him on the trial (compare [Act
6:13-14](../../../bib/kjv/act006.htm#013)), as an offense for which He
deserved to suffer. And it is very remarkable that now while it was
receiving its real fulfilment, it should be made more public and more
impressive by the insulting proclamation of His enemies. Hence the
importance attached to it after the resurrection, [Joh
2:22](../../../bib/kjv/joh002.htm#022)" \[WEBSTER and WILKINSON\]. (2)
"Likewise also the chief priests, mocking Him, with the scribes and
elders, said, He saved others, Himself He cannot save" ([Mat
27:41-42](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#041)). There was a deep truth in
this, as in other taunts; for both He could not do, having "come to give
His life a ransom for many" ([Mat
20:28](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#028); [Mar
10:45](../../../bib/kjv/mar010.htm#045)). No doubt this added an unknown
sting to the reproach. "If He be the king of Israel, let Him now come
down from the cross, and we will believe Him" ([Mat
27:42](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#042)). No, they would not; for those
who resisted the evidence from the resurrection of Lazarus, and from His
own resurrection, were beyond the reach of any amount of merely external
evidence. "He trusted in God that He would deliver him; let Him deliver
Him now if He will have Him \[or 'delight in Him,' compare [Psa
18:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#019); [Deu
21:14](../../../bib/kjv/deu021.htm#014)\]; for He said, I am the Son of
God" ([Mat 27:41-43](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#041)). We thank you, O
ye chief priests, scribes, and elders, for this triple testimony,
unconsciously borne by you, to our Christ: first to His habitual trust
in God, as a feature in His character so marked and palpable that even
ye found upon it your impotent taunt; next, to His identity with the
Sufferer of the twenty-second Psalm, whose very words ([Psa
22:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#008)) ye unwittingly appropriate, thus
serving yourselves heirs to the dark office and impotent malignity of
Messiah's enemies; and again, to the true sense of that august title
which He took to Himself, "THE SON OF GOD," which He rightly interpreted
at the very first (see [Joh 5:18](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#018)) as a
claim to that oneness of nature with Him, and dearness to Him, which a
son has to his father. (3) "And the soldiers also mocked Him, coming to
Him and offering Him vinegar, and saying, If thou be the king of the
Jews, save Thyself" ([Luk 23:36-37](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#036)).
They insultingly offer to share with Him their own vinegar, or sour
wine, the usual drink of Roman soldiers, it being about the time of
their midday meal. In the taunt of the soldiers we have one of those
undesigned coincidences which so strikingly verify these historical
records. While the ecclesiastics deride Him for calling Himself, "the
Christ, the King of Israel, the Chosen, the Son of God," the soldiers,
to whom all such phraseology was mere Jewish jargon, make sport of Him
as a pretender to royalty ("KING of the Jews"), an office and dignity
which it belonged to them to comprehend. "The thieves also, which were
crucified with Him, cast the same in His teeth" ([Mat
27:44](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#044); [Mar
15:32](../../../bib/kjv/mar015.htm#032)). Not both of them, however, as
some commentators unnaturally think we must understand these words; as
if some sudden change came over the penitent one, which turned him from
an unfeeling railer into a trembling petitioner. The plural "thieves"
need not denote more than the quarter or class whence came this last and
cruelest taunt--that is, "Not only did scoffs proceed from the
passers-by, the ecclesiastics, the soldiery, but even from His
fellow-sufferers," a mode of speaking which no one would think
necessarily meant both of them. Compare [Mat
2:20](../../../bib/kjv/mat002.htm#020), "They are dead which sought the
child's life," meaning Herod; and [Mar
9:1](../../../bib/kjv/mar009.htm#001), "There be some standing here,"
where it is next to certain that only John, the youngest and last
survivor of the apostles, is meant. And is it conceivable that this
penitent thief should have first himself reviled the Saviour, and then,
on his views of Christ suddenly changing, he should have turned upon his
fellow sufferer and fellow reviler, and rebuked him not only with
dignified sharpness, but in the language of astonishment that he should
be capable of such conduct? Besides, there is a deep calmness in all
that he utters, extremely unlike what we should expect from one who was
the subject of a mental revolution so sudden and total. On the scene
itself, see on [Luk 23:29-43](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#029).

[John 19:25](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">joh 19:25</span></span>

Now there stood by the cross of Jesus his mother, and his mother's
sister, Mary, wife of Cleophas--This should be read, as in the Margin,
"Clopas," the same as "Alpheus" ([Mat
10:3](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#003)). The "Cleopas" of [Luk
24:18](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#018) was a different person.

[John 19:26](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">joh 19:26</span></span>

When Jesus . . . saw his mother, and the disciple whom he loved,
standing by, he saith to his mother, WOMAN, BEHOLD THY SON! Then saith
he to the disciple, BEHOLD THY MOTHER!--What forgetfulness of self, what
filial love, and to the "mother" and "son" what parting words!

from that hour . . . took her to his own home--or, home with him; for
his father Zebedee and his mother Salome were both alive, and the latter
here present ([Mar 15:40](../../../bib/kjv/mar015.htm#040)). See on [Mat
13:55](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#055). Now occurred the supernatural
darkness, recorded by all the other Evangelists, but not here. "Now from
the sixth hour (twelve o'clock, noon) there was darkness over all the
land unto the ninth hour" ([Mat
27:45](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#045)). No ordinary eclipse of the sun
could have occurred at this time, it being then full moon, and this
obscuration lasted about twelve times the length of any ordinary
eclipse. (Compare [Exo 10:21](../../../bib/kjv/exo010.htm#021), [Exo
10:23](../../../bib/kjv/exo010.htm#023)). Beyond doubt, the divine
intention of the portent was to invest this darkest of all tragedies
with a gloom expressive of its real character. "And about the ninth hour
Jesus cried, ELI, ELI, LAMA SABACHTHANI . . . My God, My God, why hast
Thou forsaken Me?" ([Mat 27:46](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#046)). As
the darkness commenced at the sixth hour, the second of the Jewish hours
of prayer, so it continued till the ninth hour, the hour of the evening
sacrifice, increasing probably in depth, and reaching its deepest gloom
at the moment of this mysterious cry, when the flame of the one great
"Evening Sacrifice" was burning fiercest. The words were made to His
hand. They are the opening words of a Psalm ([Psa
22:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#001)) full of the last "sufferings of
Christ and the following glories" ([Pe1
1:11](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#011)). "FATHER," was the cry in the
first prayer which He uttered on the cross, for matters had not then
come to the worst. "Father" was the cry of His last prayer, for matters
had then passed their worst. But at this crisis of His sufferings,
"Father" does not issue from His lips, for the light of a Father's
countenance was then mysteriously eclipsed. He falls back, however, on a
title expressive of His official relation, which, though lower and more
distant in itself, yet when grasped in pure and naked faith was mighty
in its claims, and rich in psalmodic associations. And what deep
earnestness is conveyed by the redoubling of this title! But as for the
cry itself, it will never be fully comprehended. An absolute desertion
is not indeed to be thought of; but a total eclipse of the felt sense of
God's presence it certainly expresses. It expre'sses surprise, as under
the experience of something not only never before known, but
inexplicable on the footing which had till then subsisted between Him
and God. It is a question which the lost cannot utter. They are
forsaken, but they know why. Jesus is forsaken, but does not know and
demands to know why. It is thus the cry of conscious innocence, but of
innocence unavailing to draw down, at that moment, the least token of
approval from the unseen Judge--innocence whose only recognition at that
moment lay in the thick surrounding gloom which but reflected the horror
of great darkness that invested His own spirit. There was indeed a cause
for it, and He knew it too--the "why" must not be pressed so far as to
exclude this. He must taste this bitterest of the wages of sin "who did
no sin" ([Pe1 2:22](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#022)). But that is not
the point now. In Him there was no cause at all ([Joh
14:30](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#030)) and He takes refuge in the
glorious fact. When no ray from above shines in upon Him, He strikes a
light out of His own breast. If God will not own Him, He shall own
Himself. On the rock of His unsullied allegiance to Heaven He will
stand, till the light of Heaven returns to His spirit. And it is near to
come. While He is yet speaking, the fierceness of the flame is beginning
to abate. One incident and insult more, and the experience of one other
predicted element of suffering, and the victory is His. The incident,
and the insult springing out of it, is the misunderstanding of the cry,
for we can hardly suppose that it was anything else. "Some of them that
stood there, when they heard that, said, This man calleth for Elias"
([Mat 27:47](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#047)).

[John 19:28](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">joh 19:28</span></span>

After this, Jesus knowing that all things were now accomplished--that
is, the moment for the fulfilment of the last of them; for there was one
other small particular, and the time was come for that too, in
consequence of the burning thirst which the fevered state of His frame
occasioned ([Psa 22:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#015)).

that the scripture-- ([Psa 69:21](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#021)).

might be fulfilled saith, I thirst. Now there was set a vessel full of
vinegar--on the offer of the soldiers' vinegar, see on [Joh
19:24](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#024).

and they--"one of them," ([Mat 27:48](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#048)).

[John 19:29](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">joh 19:29</span></span>

filled a sponge with vinegar, and put it upon--a stalk of

hyssop, and put it to his mouth--Though a stalk of this plant does not
exceed eighteen inches in length, it would suffice, as the feet of
crucified persons were not raised high. "The rest said, Let be"--\[that
is, as would seem, 'Stop that officious service'\] "let us see whether
Elias will come to save Him" ([Mat
27:49](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#049)). This was the last cruelty He
was to suffer, but it was one of the most unfeeling. "And when Jesus had
cried with a loud voice" ([Luk 23:46](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#046)).
This "loud voice," noticed by three of the Evangelists, does not imply,
as some able interpreters contend, that our Lord's strength was so far
from being exhausted that He needed not to die then, and surrendered up
His life sooner than Nature required, merely because it was the
appointed time. It was indeed the appointed time, but time that He
should be "crucified through weakness" ([Co1
13:4](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#004)), and Nature was now reaching its
utmost exhaustion. But just as even His own dying saints, particularly
the martyrs of Jesus, have sometimes had such gleams of coming glory
immediately before breathing their last, as to impart to them a strength
to utter their feelings which has amazed the by-standers, so this mighty
voice of the expiring Redeemer was nothing else but the exultant spirit
of the Dying Victor, receiving the fruit of His travail just about to be
embraced, and nerving the organs of utterance to an ecstatic expression
of its sublime feelings (not so much in the immediately following words
of tranquil surrender, in Luke, as in the final shout, recorded only by
John): "FATHER, INTO THY HANDS I COMMEND MY SPIRIT!" ([Luk
23:46](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#046)). Yes, the darkness is past, and
the true light now shineth. His soul has emerged from its mysterious
horrors; "My God" is heard no more, but in unclouded light He yields
sublime into His Father's hands the infinitely precious spirit--using
here also the words of those matchless Psalms ([Psa
31:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa031.htm#005)) which were ever on His lips. "As
the Father receives the spirit of Jesus, so Jesus receives those of the
faithful" ([Act 7:59](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#059)) \[BENGEL\]. And
now comes the expiring mighty shout.

[John 19:30](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">joh 19:30</span></span>

It is finished! and he bowed his head and gave up the ghost--What is
finished? The Law is fulfilled as never before, nor since, in His
"obedience unto death, even the death of the cross"; Messianic prophecy
is accomplished; Redemption is completed; "He hath finished the
transgression, and made reconciliation for iniquity, and brought in
everlasting righteousness, and sealed up the vision and prophecy, and
anointed a holy of holies"; He has inaugurated the kingdom of God and
given birth to a new world.

[John 19:31](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">joh 19:31</span></span>

BURIAL OF CHRIST. ([Joh 19:31-42](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#031))

the preparation--sabbath eve.

that the bodies should not remain--over night, against the Mosaic law
([Deu 21:22-23](../../../bib/kjv/deu021.htm#022)).

on the sabbath day, for that sabbath day was an high day--or "great"
day--the first day of unleavened bread, and, as concurring with an
ordinary sabbath, the most solemn season of the ecclesiastical year.
Hence their peculiar jealousy lest the law should be infringed.

besought Pilate that their legs might be broken--to hasten their death,
which was done in such cases with clubs.

[John 19:33](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#033)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">joh 19:33</span></span>

But when they came to Jesus, and saw that he was dead already--there
being in His case elements of suffering, unknown to the malefactors,
which might naturally hasten His death, lingering though it always was
in such cases, not to speak of His previous sufferings.

they brake not his legs--a fact of vast importance, as showing that the
reality of His death was visible to those whose business it was to see
to it. The other divine purpose served by it will appear presently.

[John 19:34](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#034)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">joh 19:34</span></span>

But one of the soldiers--to make assurance of the fact doubly sure.

with a spear pierced his side--making a wound deep and wide, as indeed
is plain from [Joh 20:27](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#027), [Joh
20:29](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#029). Had life still remained, it
must have fled now.

and forthwith came thereout blood and water--"It is now well known that
the effect of long-continued and intense agony is frequently to produce
a secretion of a colorless lymph within the pericardium (the membrane
enveloping the heart), amounting in many cases to a very considerable
quantity" \[WEBSTER and WILKINSON\].

[John 19:35](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#035)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_035">joh 19:35</span></span>

And he that saw it bare record--hath borne witness.

and his witness is true, and he knoweth that he saith true, that ye
might believe--This solemn way of referring to his own testimony in this
matter has no reference to what he says in his Epistle about Christ's
"coming by water and blood" (see on [Jo1
5:6](../../../bib/kjv/jo1005.htm#006)), but is intended to call
attention both to the fulfilment of Scripture in these particulars, and
to the undeniable evidence he was thus furnishing of the reality of
Christ's death, and consequently of His resurrection; perhaps also to
meet the growing tendency, in the Asiatic churches, to deny the reality
of our Lord's body, or that "Jesus Christ is come in the flesh" ([Jo1
4:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/jo1004.htm#001)).

[John 19:36](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#036)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_036">joh 19:36</span></span>

that the scripture should be fulfilled, A bone of him shall not be
broken--The reference is to the paschal lamb, as to which this ordinance
was stringent ([Exo 12:46](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#046); [Num
9:12](../../../bib/kjv/num009.htm#012). Compare [Co1
5:7](../../../bib/kjv/co1005.htm#007)). But though we are to see here
the fulfilment of a very definite typical ordinance, we shall, on
searching deeper, see in it a remarkable divine interposition to protect
the sacred body of Christ from the last indignity after He had finished
the work given Him to do. Every imaginable indignity had been permitted
before that, up to the moment of His death. But no sooner is that over
than an Unseen hand is found to have provided against the clubs of the
rude soldiers coming in contact with that temple of the Godhead. Very
different from such violence was that spear-thrust, for which not only
doubting Thomas would thank the soldier, but intelligent believers in
every age, to whom the certainty of their Lord's death and resurrection
is the life of their whole Christianity.

[John 19:37](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#037)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_037">joh 19:37</span></span>

And again another scripture saith, They shall look on him whom they
pierced--The quotation is from [Zac
12:10](../../../bib/kjv/zac012.htm#010); not taken as usual from the
Septuagint (the current Greek version), which here is all wrong, but
direct from the Hebrew. And there is a remarkable nicety in the choice
of the words employed both by the prophet and the Evangelist for
"piercing." The word in Zechariah means to thrust through with spear,
javelin, sword, or any such weapon. In that sense it is used in all the
ten places, besides this, where it is found. How suitable this was to
express the action of the Roman soldier, is manifest; and our Evangelist
uses the exactly corresponding word, which the Septuagint certainly does
not. Very different is the other word for "pierce" in [Psa
22:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#016), "They pierced my hands and my
feet." The word there used is one signifying to bore as with an awl or
hammer. How striking are these small niceties!

[John 19:38](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#038)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_038">joh 19:38</span></span>

Joseph of Arimathea--"a rich man" ([Mat
27:57](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#057)), thus fulfilling [Isa
53:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#009); "an honorable counsellor," a
member of the Sanhedrim, and of good condition, "which also waited for
the kingdom of God" ([Mar 15:43](../../../bib/kjv/mar015.htm#043)), a
devout expectant of Messiah's kingdom; "a good man and a just, the same
had not consented to the counsel and deed of them" ([Luk
23:50-51](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#050) --he had gone the length,
perhaps, of dissenting and protesting in open council against the
condemnation of our Lord); "who also himself was Jesus' disciple," ([Mat
27:57](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#057)).

being a disciple of Jesus, but secretly, for fear of the Jews--"He went
in boldly unto Pilate" ([Mar 15:43](../../../bib/kjv/mar015.htm#043))
--literally, "having taken courage went in," or "had the boldness to go
in." Mark alone, as his manner is, notices the boldness which this
required. The act would without doubt identify him for the first time
with the disciples of Christ. Marvellous it certainly is, that one who
while Jesus was yet alive merely refrained from condemning Him, not
having the courage to espouse His cause by one positive act, should, now
that He was dead, and His cause apparently dead with Him, summon up
courage to go in personally to the Roman governor and ask permission to
take down and inter the body. But if this be the first instance, it is
not the last, that a seemingly dead Christ has wakened a sympathy which
a living one had failed to evoke. The heroism of faith is usually
kindled by desperate circumstances, and is not seldom displayed by those
who before were the most timid, and scarce known as disciples at all.
"And Pilate marvelled if he were already dead" ([Mar
15:44](../../../bib/kjv/mar015.htm#044)) --rather "wondered that he was
already dead." "And calling the centurion, he asked him whether He had
been any while dead" ([Mar 15:44](../../../bib/kjv/mar015.htm#044))
--Pilate could hardly credit what Joseph had told him, that He had been
dead "some time," and, before giving up the body to His friends, would
learn how the fact stood from the centurion, whose business it was to
oversee the execution. "And when he knew it of the centurion" ([Mar
15:45](../../../bib/kjv/mar015.htm#045)), that it was as Joseph had
said, "he gave"--rather "made a gift of"--"the body to Joseph"; struck,
possibly, with the rank of the petitioner and the dignified boldness of
the petition, in contrast with the spirit of the other party and the low
rank to which he had been led to believe all the followers of Christ
belonged. Nor would he be unwilling to Show that he was not going to
carry this black affair any farther. But, whatever were Pilate's
motives, two most blessed objects were thus secured: (1) The reality of
our Lords death was attested by the party of all others most competent
to decide on it, and certainly free from all bias--the officer in
attendance--in full reliance on whose testimony Pilate surrendered the
body: (2) The dead Redeemer, thus delivered out of the hands of His
enemies, and committed by the supreme political authority to the care of
His friends, was thereby protected from all further indignities; a thing
most befitting indeed, now that His work was done, but impossible, so
far as we can see, if His enemies had been at liberty to do with Him as
they pleased. How wonderful are even the minutest features of this
matchless History!

[John 19:39](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#039)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_039">joh 19:39</span></span>

also Nicodemus, which at the first came to Jesus by night--"This remark
corresponds to the secrecy of Joseph's discipleship, just noticed, and
calls attention to the similarity of their previous character and
conduct, and the remarkable change which had now taken place" \[WEBSTER
and WILKINSON\].

brought . . . myrrh and aloes, about an hundred pounds weight--an
immense quantity, betokening the greatness of their love, but part of it
probably intended as a layer for the spot on which the body was to lie.
(See [Ch2 16:14](../../../bib/kjv/ch2016.htm#014)) \[MEYER\].

[John 19:40](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#040)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_040">joh 19:40</span></span>

Then took they the body of Jesus, and wound it in linen clothes with the
spices, as the manner of the Jews is to bury--the mixed and pulverized
myrrh and aloes shaken into the folds, and the entire body, thus
swathed, wrapt in an outer covering of "clean linen cloth" ([Mat
27:59](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#059)). Had the Lord's own friends had
the least reason to think that the spark of life was still in Him, would
they have done this? But even if one could conceive them mistaken, could
anyone have lain thus enveloped for the period during which He was in
the grave, and life still remained? Impossible. When, therefore, He
walked forth from the tomb, we can say with the most absolute certainty,
"Now is Christ risen from the dead, and become the first-fruits of them
that slept" ([Co1 15:20](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#020)). No wonder
that the learned and the barbarians alike were prepared to die for the
name of the Lord Jesus; for such evidence was to the unsophisticated
resistless. (No mention is made of anointing in this operation. No doubt
it was a hurried proceeding, for fear of interruption, and because it
was close on the sabbath, the women seem to have set this as their
proper task "as soon as the sabbath should be past" \[[Mar
16:1](../../../bib/kjv/mar016.htm#001)\]. But as the Lord graciously
held it as undesignedly anticipated by Mary at Bethany \[[Mar
14:8](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#008)\], so this was probably all the
anointing, in the strict sense of it, which He received.)

[John 19:41](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#041)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_041">joh 19:41</span></span>

Now in the place where he was crucified there was a garden, and in the
garden a new sepulchre--The choice of this tomb was, on their part,
dictated by the double circumstance that it was so near at hand, and by
its belonging to a friend of the Lord; and as there was need of haste,
even they would be struck with the providence which thus supplied it.
"There laid they Jesus therefore, because of the Jew's preparation day,
for the sepulchre was nigh at hand." But there was one recommendation of
it which probably would not strike them; but God had it in view. Not its
being "hewn out of a rock" ([Mar
15:46](../../../bib/kjv/mar015.htm#046)), accessible only at the
entrance, which doubtless would impress them with its security and
suitableness. But it was "a new sepulchre" ([Joh
19:41](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#041)), "wherein never man before was
laid" ([Luk 23:53](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#053)): and Matthew ([Mat
27:60](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#060)) says that Joseph laid Him "in
his own new tomb, which he had hewn out in the rock"--doubtless for his
own use, though the Lord had higher use for it. Thus as He rode into
Jerusalem on an ass "whereon never man before had sat" ([Mar
11:2](../../../bib/kjv/mar011.htm#002)), so now He shall lie in a tomb
wherein never man before had lain, that from these specimens it may be
seen that in all things He was "SEPARATE FROM SINNERS" ([Heb
7:26](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#026)).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: John Chapter 20](joh020)

</div>
