<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[John Index](joh)  
  [Previous](joh012)  [Next](joh014) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*A Commentary, Critical, Practical, and Explanatory on the Old and New
Testaments*, by Robert Jamieson, A.R. Fausset and David Brown \[1882\]
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [John Chapter 13](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#001)

[John 13:1](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">joh 13:1</span></span>

AT THE LAST SUPPER JESUS WASHES THE DISCIPLES' FEET--THE DISCOURSE
ARISING THEREUPON. (John 13:1-20)

when Jesus knew that his hour was come that he should depart out of this
world unto the Father--On these beautiful euphemisms, see on [Luk
9:31](../../../bib/kjv/luk009.htm#031); [Luk
9:51](../../../bib/kjv/luk009.htm#051).

having loved his own which were in the world, he loved them unto the
end--The meaning is, that on the very edge of His last sufferings, when
it might have been supposed that He would be absorbed in His own awful
prospects, He was so far from forgetting "His own," who were to be left
struggling "in the world" after He had "departed out of it to the
Father" ([Joh 17:11](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#011)), that in His care
for them He seemed scarce to think of Himself save in connection with
them: "Herein is love," not only "enduring to the end," but most
affectingly manifested when, judging by a human standard, least to be
expected.

[John 13:2](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">joh 13:2</span></span>

supper being ended--rather, "being prepared," "being served," or, "going
on"; for that it was not "ended" is plain from [Joh
13:26](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#026).

the devil having now--or, "already."

put into the heart of Judas . . . to betray him--referring to the
agreement he had already made with the chief priests ([Luk
22:3-6](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#003)).

[John 13:3](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">joh 13:3</span></span>

Jesus knowing that the Father had given all things into his hands,
&c.--This verse is very sublime, and as a preface to what follows, were
we not familiar with it, would fill us with inexpressible surprise. An
unclouded perception of His relation to the Father, the commission He
held from Him, and His approaching return to Him, possessed His soul.

[John 13:4](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">joh 13:4</span></span>

He riseth from supper, and laid aside his garments--outer garments which
would have impeded the operation of washing.

and took a towel and girded himself--assuming a servant's dress.

[John 13:5](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">joh 13:5</span></span>

began to wash--proceeded to wash. Beyond all doubt the feet of Judas
were washed, as of all the rest.

[John 13:6](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">joh 13:6</span></span>

Peter saith . . . Lord, dost thou wash my feet?--Our language cannot
bring out the intensely vivid contrast between the "Thou" and the "my,"
which, by bringing them together, the original expresses, for it is not
good English to say, "Lord, Thou my feet dost wash?" But every word of
this question is emphatic. Thus far, and in the question itself, there
was nothing but the most profound and beautiful astonishment at a
condescension to him quite incomprehensible. Accordingly, though there
can be no doubt that already Peter's heart rebelled against it as a
thing not to be tolerated, Jesus ministers no rebuke as yet, but only
bids him wait a little, and he should understand it all.

[John 13:7](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">joh 13:7</span></span>

Jesus answered and said . . . What I do thou knowest not now--that is,
Such condescension does need explanation; it is fitted to astonish.

but thou shall know hereafter--afterwards, meaning presently; though
viewed as a general maxim, applicable to all dark sayings in God's Word,
and dark doings in God's providence, these words are full of
consolation.

[John 13:8](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">joh 13:8</span></span>

Peter saith unto him, Thou shalt never wash, &c.--more emphatically,
"Never shalt Thou wash my feet": that is, "That is an incongruity to
which I can never submit." How like the man!

If I wash thee not, thou hast no part with me--What Peter could not
submit to was, that the Master should serve His servant. But the whole
saving work of Christ was one continued series of such services, ending
with and consummated by the most self-sacrificing and transcendent of
all services: THE SON OF MAN CAME not to be ministered unto, but TO
MINISTER, AND TO GIVE HIS LIFE A RANSOM FOR MANY. (See on [Mar
10:45](../../../bib/kjv/mar010.htm#045)). If Peter then could not submit
to let his Master go down so low as to wash his feet, how should he
suffer himself to be served by Him at all? This is couched under the one
pregnant word "wash," which though applicable to the lower operation
which Peter resisted, is the familiar scriptural symbol of that higher
cleansing, which Peter little thought he was at the same time virtually
putting from him. It is not humility to refuse what the Lord deigns to
do for us, or to deny what He has done, but it is self-willed
presumption--not rare, however, in those inner circles of lofty
religious profession and traditional spirituality, which are found
wherever Christian truth has enjoyed long and undisturbed possession.
The truest humility is to receive reverentially, and thankfully to own,
the gifts of grace.

[John 13:9](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">joh 13:9</span></span>

Lord, not my feet only, but also my hands and my head--that is, "To be
severed from Thee, Lord, is death to me: If that be the meaning of my
speech, I tread upon it; and if to be washed of Thee have such
significance, then not my feet only, but hands, head, and all, be
washed!" This artless expression of clinging, life-and-death attachment
to Jesus, and felt dependence upon Him for his whole spiritual
well-being, compared with the similar saying in [Joh
6:68-69](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#068) (see on [Joh
6:68-69](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#068)), furnishes such evidence of
historic verity such as no thoroughly honest mind can resist.

[John 13:10](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">joh 13:10</span></span>

He that is washed--in this thorough sense, to express which the word is
carefully changed to one meaning to wash as in a bath.

needeth not--to be so washed any more.

save to wash his feet--needeth to do no more than wash his feet (and
here the former word is resumed, meaning to wash the hands or feet).

but is clean every whit--as a whole. This sentence is singularly
instructive. Of the two cleansings, the one points to that which takes
place at the commencement of the Christian life, embracing complete
absolution from sin as a guilty state, and entire deliverance from it as
a polluted life ([Rev 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#005); [Co1
6:11](../../../bib/kjv/co1006.htm#011)) --or, in the language of
theology, Justification and Regeneration. This cleansing is effected
once for all, and is never repeated. The other cleansing, described as
that of "the feet," is such as one walking from a bath quite cleansed
still needs, in consequence of his contact with the earth. (Compare [Exo
30:18-19](../../../bib/kjv/exo030.htm#018)). It is the daily cleansing
which we are taught to seek, when in the spirit of adoption we say, "Our
Father which art in heaven . . . forgive us our debts" ([Mat
6:9](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#009), [Mat
6:12](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#012)); and, when burdened with the
sense of manifold shortcomings--as what tender spirit of a Christian is
not?--is it not a relief to be permitted thus to wash our feet after a
day's contact with the earth? This is not to call in question the
completeness of our past justification. Our Lord, while graciously
insisting on washing Peter's feet, refuses to extend the cleansing
farther, that the symbolical instruction intended to be conveyed might
not be marred.

and ye are clean--in the first and whole sense.

but not all--important, as showing that Judas, instead of being as
true-hearted a disciple as the rest at first, and merely falling away
afterwards--as many represent it--never experienced that cleansing at
all which made the others what they were.

[John 13:12](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">joh 13:12</span></span>

Know ye what I have done?--that is, its intent. The question, however,
was put merely to summon their attention to His own answer.

[John 13:13](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">joh 13:13</span></span>

Ye call me Master--Teacher.

and Lord--learning of Him in the one capacity, obeying Him in the other.

and ye say well, for so I am--The conscious dignity with which this
claim is made is remarkable, following immediately on His laying aside
the towel of service. Yet what is this whole history but a succession of
such astonishing contrast from first to last?

[John 13:14](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">joh 13:14</span></span>

If I then--the Lord.

have washed your feet--the servants'.

ye--but fellow servants.

ought to wash one another's feet--not in the narrow sense of a literal
washing, profanely caricatured by popes and emperors, but by the very
humblest real services one to another.

[John 13:16](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">joh 13:16</span></span>

The servant is not greater than his lord, &c.--an oft-repeated saying
([Mat 10:24](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#024), &c.).

If ye know these things, happy are ye if ye do them--a hint that even
among real Christians the doing of such things would come lamentably
short of the knowing.

[John 13:18](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">joh 13:18</span></span>

I speak not of you all--the "happy are ye," of [Joh
13:17](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#017), being on no supposition
applicable to Judas.

I know whom I have chosen--in the higher sense.

But that the scripture may be fulfilled--that is, one has been added to
your number, by no accident or mistake, who is none of Mine, but just
that he might fulfil his predicted destiny.

He that eateth bread with me--"did eat of my bread" ([Psa
41:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa041.htm#009)), as one of My family; admitted
to the nearest familiarity of discipleship and of social life.

hath lifted up his heel against me--turned upon Me, adding insult to
injury. (Compare [Heb 10:29](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#029)). In the
Psalm the immediate reference is to Ahithophel's treachery against David
(2Sa. 17:1-23), one of those scenes in which the parallel of his story
with that of His great Antitype is exceedingly striking. "The eating
bread derives a fearful meaning from the participation in the
sacramental supper, a meaning which must be applied for ever to all
unworthy communicants, as well as to all betrayers of Christ who eat the
bread of His Church" (STIER, with whom, and others, we agree in thinking
that Judas partook of the Lord's Supper).

[John 13:19](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">joh 13:19</span></span>

I tell you before . . . that when it comes to pass, ye may believe--and
it came to pass when they deeply needed such confirmation.

[John 13:20](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">joh 13:20</span></span>

He that receiveth whomsoever I send, receiveth me, &c.--(See on [Mat
10:40](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#040)). The connection here seems to
be that despite the dishonor done to Him by Judas, and similar treatment
awaiting themselves, they were to be cheered by the assurance that their
office, even as His own, was divine.

[John 13:21](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">joh 13:21</span></span>

THE TRAITOR INDICATED--HE LEAVES THE SUPPER ROOM. ([Joh
13:21-30](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#021))

When Jesus had thus said, he was troubled in spirit, and testified, and
said, Verily, verily, I say unto you, One of you shall betray me--The
announcement of [Joh 13:18](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#018) seems not
to have been plain enough to be quite apprehended, save by the traitor
himself. He will therefore speak it out in terms not to be
misunderstood. But how much it cost Him to do this, appears from the
"trouble" that came over His "spirit"--visible emotion, no doubt--before
He got it uttered. What wounded susceptibility does this disclose, and
what exquisite delicacy in His social intercourse with the Twelve, to
whom He cannot, without an effort, break the subject!

[John 13:22](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">joh 13:22</span></span>

the disciples looked one on another, doubting of whom he spake--Further
intensely interesting particulars are given in the other Gospels: (1)
"They were exceeding sorrowful" ([Mat
26:22](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#022)). (2) "They began to inquire
among themselves which of them it was that should do this thing" ([Luk
22:23](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#023)). (3) "They began to say unto
Him one by one, Is it I, and another, Is it I?" ([Mar
14:19](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#019)). Generous, simple hearts! They
abhorred the thought, but, instead of putting it on others, each was
only anxious to purge himself and know if he could be the wretch. Their
putting it at once to Jesus Himself, as knowing doubtless who was to do
it, was the best, as it certainly was the most spontaneous and artless
evidence of their innocence. (4) Jesus, apparently while this
questioning was going on, added, "The Son of man goeth as it is written
of Him, but woe unto that man by whom the Son of man is betrayed! It had
been good for that man if he had not been born" ([Mat
26:24](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#024)). (5) "Judas," last of all,
"answered and said, Lord, is it I?" evidently feeling that when all were
saying this, if he held his peace, that of itself would draw suspicion
upon him. To prevent this the question is wrung out of him, but perhaps,
amidst the stir and excitement at the table, in a half-suppressed tone
as we are inclined to think the answer also was--"Thou hast said" ([Mat
26:25](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#025)), or possibly by little more
than a sign; for from [Joh 13:28](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#028) it is
evident that till the moment when he went out, he was not openly
discovered.

[John 13:23](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">joh 13:23</span></span>

there was leaning on Jesus' bosom one of his disciples, whom Jesus
loved--Thus modestly does our Evangelist denote himself, as reclining
next to Jesus at the table.

Peter . . . beckoned to him to ask who it should be of whom he
spake--reclining probably at the corresponding place on the other side
of Jesus.

[John 13:25](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">joh 13:25</span></span>

He then lying--rather leaning over on Jesus' bosom.

saith--in a whisper, "Lord, who is it?"

[John 13:26](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">joh 13:26</span></span>

Jesus answered--also inaudibly, the answer being communicated to Peter
perhaps from behind.

He . . . to whom I shall give a sop when I have dipped it--a piece of
the bread soaked in the wine or the sauce of the dish; one of the
ancient ways of testifying peculiar regard; compare [Joh
13:18](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#018), "he that eateth bread with Me."

And when he had dipped . . . he gave it to Judas, &c.--Thus the sign of
Judas' treachery was an affecting expression, and the last, of the
Saviour's wounded love!

[John 13:27](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">joh 13:27</span></span>

after the sop Satan entered into him--Very solemn are these brief hints
of the successive steps by which Judas reached the climax of his guilt.
"The devil had already put it into his heart to betray his Lord." Yet
who can tell what struggles he went through ere he brought himself to
carry that suggestion into effect? Even after this, however, his
compunctions were not at an end. With the thirty pieces of silver
already in his possession, he seems still to have quailed--and can we
wonder? When Jesus stooped to wash his feet, it may be the last struggle
was reaching its crisis. But that word of the Psalm, about "one that ate
of his bread who would lift up his heel against Him" ([Psa
41:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa041.htm#009)) probably all but turned the
dread scale, and the still more explicit announcement, that one of those
sitting with Him at the table should betray Him, would beget the
thought, "I am detected; it is now too late to draw back." At that
moment the sop is given; offer of friendship is once more made--and how
affectingly! But already "Satan has entered into him," and though the
Saviour's act might seem enough to recall him even yet, hell is now in
his bosom, and he says within himself, "The die is cast; now let me go
through with it"; fear, begone!" (See on [Mat
12:43](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#043)).

Then said Jesus unto him, That thou doest, do quickly--that is, Why
linger here? Thy presence is a restraint, and thy work stands still;
thou hast the wages of iniquity, go work for it!

[John 13:28](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">joh 13:28</span></span>

no man . . . knew for what intent he spake this unto him . . . some
thought . . . Jesus . . . said . . . But what we need . . . or, . . .
give . . . to the poor--a very important statement, as showing how
carefully. Jesus had kept the secret, and Judas his hypocrisy, to the
last.

[John 13:30](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">joh 13:30</span></span>

He then, having received the sop, went immediately out--severing himself
for ever from that holy society with which he never had any spiritual
sympathy.

and it was night--but far blacker night in the soul of Judas than in the
sky over his head.

[John 13:31](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">joh 13:31</span></span>

DISCOURSE AFTER THE TRAITOR'S DEPARTURE--PETER'S SELF-CONFIDENCE--HIS
FALL PREDICTED. ([Joh 13:31-38](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#031))

when he was gone out, Jesus said, Now is the Son of man glorified--These
remarkable words plainly imply that up to this moment our Lord had
spoken under a painful restraint, the presence of a traitor within the
little circle of His holiest fellowship on earth preventing the free and
full outpouring of His heart; as is evident, indeed, from those
oft-recurring clauses, "Ye are not all clean," "I speak not of you all,"
&c. "Now" the restraint is removed, and the embankment which kept in the
mighty volume of living waters having broken down, they burst forth in a
torrent which only ceases on His leaving the supper room and entering on
the next stage of His great work--the scene in the Garden. But with what
words is the silence first broken on the departure of Judas? By no
reflections on the traitor, and, what is still more wonderful, by no
reference to the dread character of His own approaching sufferings. He
does not even name them, save by announcing, as with a burst of triumph,
that the hour of His glory has arrived! And what is very remarkable, in
five brief clauses He repeats this word "glorify" five times, as if to
His view a coruscation of glories played at that moment about the Cross.
(See on [Joh 12:23](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#023)).

God is glorified in him--the glory of Each reaching its zenith in the
Death of the Cross!

[John 13:32](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#032)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">joh 13:32</span></span>

If God be glorified in him, God shall also--in return and reward of this
highest of all services ever rendered to Him, or capable of being
rendered.

glorify him in himself, and . . . straightway glorify him--referring now
to the Resurrection and Exaltation of Christ after this service was
over, including all the honor and glory then put upon Him, and that will
for ever encircle Him as Head of the new creation.

[John 13:33](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#033)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">joh 13:33</span></span>

Little children--From the height of His own glory He now descends, with
sweet pity, to His "little children," all now His own. This term of
endearment, nowhere else used in the Gospels, and once only employed by
Paul ([Gal 4:19](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#019)), is appropriated by
the beloved disciple himself, who no fewer than seven times employs it
in his first Epistle.

Ye shall seek me--feel the want of Me.

as I said to the Jews-- ([Joh 7:34](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#034);
[Joh 8:21](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#021)). But oh in what a different
sense!

[John 13:34](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#034)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">joh 13:34</span></span>

a new commandment I give unto you, That ye love one another; as I have
loved you, that ye also love one another--This was the new feature of
it. Christ's love to His people in giving His life a ransom for them was
altogether new, and consequently as a Model and Standard for theirs to
one another. It is not, however, something transcending the great moral
law, which is "the old commandment" ([Jo1
2:7](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#007), and see on [Mar
12:28-33](../../../bib/kjv/mar012.htm#028)), but that law in a new and
peculiar form. Hence it is said to be both new and old ([Jo1
2:7-8](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#007)).

[John 13:35](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#035)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_035">joh 13:35</span></span>

By this shall all men know that ye are my disciples--the disciples of
Him who laid down His life for those He loved.

if ye have love one to another--for My sake, and as one in Me; for to
such love men outside the circle of believers know right well they are
entire strangers. Alas, how little of it there is even within this
circle!

[John 13:36](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#036)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_036">joh 13:36</span></span>

Peter said--seeing plainly in these directions how to behave themselves,
that He was indeed going from them.

Lord, whither guest thou?--having hardly a glimmer of the real truth.

Jesus answered, . . . thou canst not follow me now, but thou shalt
follow me afterwards--How different from what He said to the Jews:
"Whither I go ye cannot come" ([Joh
8:21](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#021)).

[John 13:37](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#037)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_037">joh 13:37</span></span>

why not . . . now? I will lay down my life for thy sake--He seems now to
see that it was death Christ referred to as what would sever Him from
them, but is not staggered at following Him thither. Jesus answered,

[John 13:38](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#038)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_038">joh 13:38</span></span>

Wilt thou lay down thy life for my sake?--In this repetition of Peter's
words there is deep though affectionate irony, and this Peter himself
would feel for many a day after his recovery, as he retraced the painful
particulars.

Verily . . . The cock, &c.--See on [Luk
22:31-34](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#031).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: John Chapter 14](joh014)

</div>
