<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Jonah Index](jon.md)  
  [Previous](jon001)  [Next](jon003.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*A Commentary, Critical, Practical, and Explanatory on the Old and New
Testaments*, by Robert Jamieson, A.R. Fausset and David Brown \[1882\]
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Jonah Chapter 2](../../../bib/kjv/jon002.htm#001.md)

[Jonah 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/jon002.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">jon 2:1</span></span>

JONAH'S PRAYER OF FAITH AND DELIVERANCE. ()

his God--"his" still, though Jonah had fled from Him. Faith enables
Jonah now to feel this; just as the returning prodigal says of the
Father, from whom he had wandered, "I will arise and go to my Father"
().

out of the fish's belly--Every place may serve as an oratory. No place
is amiss for prayer. Others translate, "when (delivered) out of the
fish's belly." English Version is better.

[Jonah 2:2](../../../bib/kjv/jon002.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">jon 2:2</span></span>

His prayer is partly descriptive and precatory, partly eucharistical.
Jonah incorporates with his own language inspired utterances familiar to
the Church long before in , ; in , ; in , ; in , ; in , ; ; in , ; in ,
, and . Jonah, an inspired man, thus attests both the antiquity and
inspiration of the Psalms. It marks the spirit of faith, that Jonah
identifies himself with the saints of old, appropriating their
experiences as recorded in the Word of God (). Affliction opens up the
mine of Scripture, before seen only on the surface.

out of the belly of hell--Sheol, the unseen world, which the belly of
the fish resembled.

[Jonah 2:3](../../../bib/kjv/jon002.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">jon 2:3</span></span>

thou hadst cast . . . thy billows . . . thy waves--Jonah recognizes the
source whence his sufferings came. It was no mere chance, but the hand
of God which sent them. Compare Job's similar recognition of God's hand
in calamities, ; ; and David's, .

[Jonah 2:4](../../../bib/kjv/jon002.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">jon 2:4</span></span>

cast out from thy sight--that is, from Thy favorable regard. A just
retribution on one who had fled "from the presence of the Lord" (). Now
that he has got his desire, he feels it to be his bitterest sorrow to be
deprived of God's presence, which once he regarded as a burden, and from
which he desired to escape. He had turned his back on God; so God turned
His back on him, making his sin his punishment.

toward thy holy temple--In the confidence of faith he anticipates yet to
see the temple at Jerusalem, the appointed place of worship (), and
there to render thanksgiving \[HENDERSON\]. Rather, I think, "Though
cast out of Thy sight, I will still with the eye of faith once more look
in prayer towards Thy temple at Jerusalem, whither, as Thy earthly
throne, Thou hast desired Thy worshippers to direct their prayers."

[Jonah 2:5](../../../bib/kjv/jon002.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">jon 2:5</span></span>

even to the soul--that is, threatening to extinguish the animal life.

weeds--He felt as if the seaweeds through which he was dragged were
wrapped about his head.

[Jonah 2:6](../../../bib/kjv/jon002.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">jon 2:6</span></span>

bottoms of . . . mountains--their extremities where they terminate in
the hidden depths of the sea. Compare , "the foundations of the hills"
().

earth with her bars was about me--Earth, the land of the living, is (not
"was") shut against me.

for ever--so far as any effort of mine can deliver me.

yet hast thou brought up my life from corruption--rather, "Thou bringest
. . . from the pit" \[MAURER\]. As in the previous clauses he expresses
the hopelessness of his state, so in this, his sure hope of deliverance
through Jehovah's infinite resources. "Against hope he believes in
hope," and speaks as if the deliverance were actually being
accomplished. Hezekiah seems to have incorporated Jonah's very words in
his prayer (), just as Jonah appropriated the language of the Psalms.

[Jonah 2:7](../../../bib/kjv/jon002.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">jon 2:7</span></span>

soul fainted . . . I remembered the Lord--beautifully exemplifying the
triumph of spirit over flesh, of faith over sense (; ). For a time
troubles shut out hope; but faith revived when Jonah "remembered the
Lord," what a gracious God He is, and how now He still preserves his
life and consciousness in his dark prison-house.

into thine holy temple--the temple at Jerusalem (). As there he looks in
believing prayer towards it, so here he regards his prayer as already
heard.

[Jonah 2:8](../../../bib/kjv/jon002.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">jon 2:8</span></span>

observe lying vanities--regard or reverence idols, powerless to save ().

mercy--Jehovah, the very idea of whom is identified now in Jonah's mind
with mercy and loving-kindness. As the Psalmist () styles Him, "my
goodness"; God who is to me all beneficence. Compare , "the God of my
mercy," literally, "my kindness-God." Jonah had "forsaken His own
mercy," God, to flee to heathen lands where "lying vanities" (idols)
were worshipped. But now, taught by his own preservation in conscious
life in the fish's belly, and by the inability of the mariners idols to
lull the storm (), estrangement from God seems estrangement from his own
happiness (; ). Prayer has been restrained in Jonah's case, so that he
was "fast asleep" in the midst of danger, heretofore; but now prayer is
the sure sign of his return to God.

[Jonah 2:9](../../../bib/kjv/jon002.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">jon 2:9</span></span>

I will sacrifice . . . thanksgiving--In the believing anticipation of
sure deliverance, he offers thanksgivings already. So Jehoshaphat ()
appointed singers to praise the Lord in front of the army before the
battle with Moab and Ammon, as if the victory was already gained. God
honors such confidence in Him. There is also herein a mark of sanctified
affliction, that he vows amendment and thankful obedience ().

[Jonah 2:10](../../../bib/kjv/jon002.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">jon 2:10</span></span>

upon the dry land--probably on the coast of Palestine.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Jonah Chapter 3](jon003.md)

</div>
