<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Jonah Index](jon)  
  [Previous](jon002)  [Next](jon004) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*A Commentary, Critical, Practical, and Explanatory on the Old and New
Testaments*, by Robert Jamieson, A.R. Fausset and David Brown \[1882\]
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Jonah Chapter 3](../../../bib/kjv/jon003.htm#001)

[Jonah 3:2](../../../bib/kjv/jon003.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">jon 3:2</span></span>

JONAH'S SECOND COMMISSION TO NINEVEH: THE NINEVITES REPENT OF THEIR EVIL
WAY: SO GOD REPENTS OF THE EVIL THREATENED. ()

preach . . . the preaching--literally, "proclaim the proclamation." On
the former occasion the specific object of his commission to Nineveh was
declared; here it is indeterminate. This is to show how freely he yields
himself, in the spirit of unconditional obedience, to speak whatever God
may please.

[Jonah 3:3](../../../bib/kjv/jon003.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">jon 3:3</span></span>

arose and went--like the son who was at first disobedient to the
father's command, "Go work in my vineyard," but who afterwards "repented
and went" (). Jonah was thus the fittest instrument for proclaiming
judgment, and yet hope of mercy on repentance to Nineveh, being himself
a living exemplification of both--judgment in his entombment in the
fish, mercy on repentance in his deliverance. Israel professing to obey,
but not obeying, and so doomed to exile in the same Nineveh, answers to
the son who said, "I go, sir, and went not." In it is said that Jonas
was not only a sign to the men in Christ's time, but also "unto the
Ninevites." On the latter occasion () when the Pharisees and Sadducees
tempted Him, asking a sign from heaven, He answered, "No sign shall be
given, but the sign of the prophet Jonas," . Thus the sign had a twofold
aspect, a direct bearing on the Ninevites, an indirect bearing on the
Jews in Christ's time. To the Ninevites he was not merely a prophet, but
himself a wonder in the earth, as one who had tasted of death, and yet
had not seen corruption, but had now returned to witness among them for
God. If the Ninevites had indulged in a captious spirit, they never
would have inquired and so known Jonah's wonderful history; but being
humbled by God's awful message, they learned from Jonah himself that it
was the previous concealing in his bosom of the same message of their
own doom that caused him to be entombed as an outcast from the living.
Thus he was a "sign" to them of wrath on the one hand, and, on the
other, of mercy. Guilty Jonah saved from the jaws of death gives a ray
of hope to guilty Nineveh. Thus God, who brings good from evil, made
Jonah in his fall, punishment, and restoration, a sign (an embodied
lesson or living symbol) through which the Ninevites were roused to hear
and repent, as they would not have been likely to do, had he gone on the
first commission before his living entombment and resurrection. To do
evil that good may come, is a policy which can only come from Satan; but
from evil already done to extract an instrument against the kingdom of
darkness, is a triumphant display of the grace and wisdom of God. To the
Pharisees in Christ's time, who, not content with the many signs
exhibited by Him, still demanded a sign from heaven, He gave a sign in
the opposite quarter, namely, Jonah, who came "out of the belly of hell"
(the unseen region). They looked for a Messiah gloriously coming in the
clouds of heaven; the Messiah, on the contrary, is to pass through a
like, though a deeper, humiliation than Jonah; He is to lie "in the
heart of the earth." Jonah and his Antitype alike appeared low and
friendless among their hearers; both victims to death for God's wrath
against sin, both preaching repentance. Repentance derives all its
efficacy from the death of Christ, just as Jonah's message derived its
weight with the Ninevites from his entombment. The Jews stumbled at
Christ's death, the very fact which ought to have led them to Him, as
Jonah's entombment attracted the Ninevites to his message. As Jonah's
restoration gave hope of God's placability to Nineveh, so Christ's
resurrection assures us God is fully reconciled to man by Christ's
death. But Jonah's entombment only had the effect of a moral suasive;
Christ's resurrection assures us God is fully reconciliation between God
and man \[FAIRBAIRN\].

Nineveh was an exceeding great city--literally, "great to God," that is,
before God. All greatness was in the Hebrew mind associated with GOD;
hence arose the idiom (compare "great mountains," Margin, "mountains of
God," ; "goodly cedars," Margin, "cedars of God," ; "a mighty hunter
before the Lord," ).

three days' journey--that is, about sixty miles, allowing about twenty
miles for a day's journey. Jonah's statement is confirmed by heathen
writers, who describe Nineveh as four hundred eighty stadia in
circumference \[DIODORUS SICULUS, 2.3\]. HERODOTUS defines a day's
journey to be one hundred fifty stadia; so three days' journey will not
be much below DIODORUS' estimate. The parallelogram in Central Assyria
covered with remains of buildings has Khorsabad northeast; Koyunjik and
Nebbi Yunus near the Tigris, northwest; Nimroud, between the Tigris and
the Zab, southwest; and Karamless, at a distance inward from the Zab,
southeast. From Koyunjik to Nimroud is about eighteen miles; from
Khorsabad to Karamless, the same; from Koyunjik to Khorsabad, thirteen
or fourteen miles; from Nimroud to Karamless, fourteen miles. The length
thus was greater than the breadth; compare , "a day's journey," which is
confirmed by heathen writers and by modern measurements. The walls were
a hundred feet high, and broad enough to allow three chariots abreast,
and had moreover fifteen hundred lofty towers. The space between,
including large parks and arable ground, as well as houses, was Nineveh
in its full extent. The oldest palaces are at Nimroud, which was
probably the original site. LAYARD latterly has thought that the name
Nineveh belonged originally to Koyunjik, rather than to Nimroud. Jonah
() mentions the children as numbering one hundred twenty thousand, which
would give about a million to the whole population. Existing ruins show
that Nineveh acquired its greatest extent under the kings of the second
dynasty, that is, the kings mentioned in Scripture; it was then that
Jonah visited it, and the reports of its magnificence were carried to
the west \[LAYARD\].

[Jonah 3:4](../../../bib/kjv/jon003.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">jon 3:4</span></span>

a day's journey--not going straight forward without stopping: for the
city was but eighteen miles in length; but stopping in his progress from
time to time to announce his message to the crowds gathering about him.

Yet forty days, and Nineveh shall be overthrown--The commission, given
indefinitely at his setting out, assumes now on his arrival a definite
form, and that severer than before. It is no longer a cry against the
sins of Nineveh, but an announcement of its ruin in forty days. This
number is in Scripture associated often with humiliation. It was forty
days that Moses, Elijah, and Christ fasted. Forty years elapsed from the
beginning of Christ's ministry (the antitype of Jonah's) to the
destruction of Jerusalem. The more definite form of the denunciation
implies that Nineveh has now almost filled up the measure of her guilt.
The change in the form which the Ninevites would hear from Jonah on
anxious inquiry into his history, would alarm them the more, as implying
the increasing nearness and certainty of their doom, and would at the
same time reprove Jonah for his previous guilt in delaying to warn them.
The very solitariness of the one message announced by the stranger thus
suddenly appearing among them, would impress them with the more awe.
Learning from him, that so far from lightly prophesying evil against
them, he had shrunk from announcing a less severe denunciation, and
therefore had been east into the deep and only saved by miracle, they
felt how imminent was their peril, threatened as they now were by a
prophet whose fortunes were so closely bound up with theirs. In Noah's
days one hundred twenty years of warning were given to men, yet they
repented not till the flood came, and it was too late. But in the case
of Nineveh, God granted a double mercy: first, that its people should
repent immediately after threatening; second, that pardon should
immediately follow their repentance.

[Jonah 3:5](../../../bib/kjv/jon003.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">jon 3:5</span></span>

believed God--gave credit to Jonah's message from God; thus recognizing
Jehovah as the true God.

fast . . . sackcloth--In the East outward actions are often used as
symbolical expressions of inward feelings. So fasting and clothing in
sackcloth were customary in humiliation. Compare in Ahab's case,
parallel to that of Nineveh, both receiving a respite on penitence (; ;
).

from the greatest . . . to the least--The penitence was not partial, but
pervading all classes.

[Jonah 3:6](../../../bib/kjv/jon003.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">jon 3:6</span></span>

in ashes--emblem of the deepest humiliation (; ).

[Jonah 3:7](../../../bib/kjv/jon003.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">jon 3:7</span></span>

neither . . . beast . . . taste any thing--The brute creatures share in
the evil effects of man's sin (; , ); so they here according to Eastern
custom, are made to share in man's outward indications of humiliation.
"When the Persian general Masistias was slain, the horses and mules of
the Persians were shorn, as well as themselves" \[NEWCOME from PLUTARCH;
also HERODOTUS, 9.24\].

[Jonah 3:8](../../../bib/kjv/jon003.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">jon 3:8</span></span>

cry . . . turn--Prayer without reformation is a mockery of God (; ).
Prayer, on the other hand, must precede true reformation, as we cannot
turn to God from our evil way unless God first turns us ().

[Jonah 3:9](../../../bib/kjv/jon003.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">jon 3:9</span></span>

Who can tell--(Compare ). Their acting on a vague possibility of God's
mercy, without any special ground of encouragement, is the more
remarkable instance of faith, as they had to break through long-rooted
prejudices in giving up idols to seek Jehovah at all. The only ground
which their ready faith rested on, was the fact of God sending one to
warn them, instead of destroying them at once; this suggested the
thought of a possibility of pardon. Hence they are cited by Christ as
about to condemn in the judgment those who, with much greater light and
privileges, yet repent not ().

[Jonah 3:10](../../../bib/kjv/jon003.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">jon 3:10</span></span>

God repented of the evil--When the message was sent to them, they were
so ripe for judgment that a purpose of destruction to take effect in
forty days was the only word God's righteous abhorrence of sin admitted
of as to them. But when they repented, the position in which they stood
towards God's righteousness was altered. So God's mode of dealing with
them must alter accordingly, if God is not to be inconsistent with His
own immutable character of dealing with men according to their works and
state of heart, taking vengeance at last on the hardened impenitent, and
delighting to show mercy on the penitent. Compare Abraham's reasoning, ;
; . What was really a change in them and in God's corresponding dealings
is, in condescension to human conceptions, represented as a change in
God (compare ), who, in His essential righteousness and mercy, changeth
not (; ; ; ). The reason why the announcement of destruction was made
absolute, and not dependent on Nineveh's continued impenitence, was that
this form was the only one calculated to rouse them; and at the same
time it was a truthful representation of God's purpose towards Nineveh
under its existing state, and of Nineveh's due. When that state ceased,
a new relation of Nineveh to God, not contemplated in the message, came
in, and room was made for the word to take effect, "the curse causeless
shall not come" \[FAIRBAIRN\]. Prophecy is not merely for the sake of
proving God's omniscience by the verification of predictions of the
future, but is mainly designed to vindicate God's justice and mercy in
dealing with the impenitent and penitent respectively (). The Bible ever
assigns the first place to the eternal principles of righteousness,
rooted in the character of God, subordinating to them all divine
arrangements. God's sparing Nineveh, when in the jaws of destruction, on
the first dawn of repentance encourages the timid penitent, and shows
beforehand that Israel's doom, soon after accomplished, is to be
ascribed, not to unwillingness to forgive on God's part, but to their
own obstinate impenitence.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Jonah Chapter 4](jon004)

</div>
