<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Joshua Index](jos)  
  [Previous](jos004)  [Next](jos006) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*A Commentary, Critical, Practical, and Explanatory on the Old and New
Testaments*, by Robert Jamieson, A.R. Fausset and David Brown \[1882\]
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Joshua Chapter 5](../../../bib/kjv/jos005.htm#001)

[Joshua 5:1](../../../bib/kjv/jos005.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">jos 5:1</span></span>

THE CANAANITES AFRAID. ([Jos 5:1](../../../bib/kjv/jos005.htm#001))

the kings of the Amorites, which were on the side of Jordan westward,
and all the kings of the Canaanites, which were by the sea--Under the
former designation were included the people who inhabited the
mountainous region, and under the latter those who were on the seacoast
of Palestine.

heard that the Lord had dried up the waters of Jordan . . . that their
heart melted--They had probably reckoned on the swollen river
interposing for a time a sure barrier of defense. But seeing it had been
completely dried up, they were completely paralyzed by so incontestable
a proof that God was on the side of the invaders. In fact, the conquest
had already begun in the total prostration of spirit among the native
chiefs. "Their heart melted," but unhappily not into faith and penitent
submission.

[Joshua 5:2](../../../bib/kjv/jos005.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">jos 5:2</span></span>

CIRCUMCISION IS RENEWED. ([Jos 5:2-12](../../../bib/kjv/jos005.htm#002))

At that time--on the encampment being made after the passage.

the Lord said unto Joshua, Make thee sharp knives--Stone knives, collect
and make them ready. Flints have been used in the early times of all
people; and although the use of iron was known to the Hebrews in the
days of Joshua, probably the want of a sufficient number of metallic
implements dictated the employment of flints on this occasion (compare
[Exo 4:25](../../../bib/kjv/exo004.htm#025)).

circumcise again the children of Israel the second time--literally,
"return and circumcise." The command did not require him to repeat the
operation on those who had undergone it, but to resume the observance of
the rite, which had been long discontinued. The language, however,
evidently points to a general circumcising on some previous occasion,
which, though unrecorded, must have been made before the celebration of
the passover at Sinai (compare [Exo
12:48](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#048); [Num
9:5](../../../bib/kjv/num009.htm#005)), as a mixed multitude accompanied
the camp. "The second time" of general circumcising was at the entrance
into Canaan.

[Joshua 5:3](../../../bib/kjv/jos005.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">jos 5:3</span></span>

at the hill--probably one of the argillaceous hills that form the
highest terrace of the Jordan, on a rising ground at the palm forest.

[Joshua 5:4](../../../bib/kjv/jos005.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">jos 5:4</span></span>

this is the cause why Joshua did circumcise--The omission to circumcise
the children born in the wilderness might have been owing to the
incessant movements of the people; but it is most generally thought that
the true cause was a temporary suspension of the covenant with the
unbelieving race who, being rejected of the Lord, were doomed to perish
in the wilderness, and whose children had to bear the iniquity of their
fathers ([Num 14:33](../../../bib/kjv/num014.htm#033)), though, as the
latter were to be brought into the promised land, the covenant would be
renewed with them.

[Joshua 5:8](../../../bib/kjv/jos005.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">jos 5:8</span></span>

when they had done circumcising all the people--As the number of those
born in the wilderness and uncircumcised must have been immense, a
difficulty is apt to be felt how the rite could have been performed on
such a multitude in so short a time. But it has been calculated that the
proportion between those already circumcised (under twenty when the doom
was pronounced) and those to be circumcised, was one to four, and
consequently the whole ceremony could easily have been performed in a
day. Circumcision being the sign and seal of the covenant, its
performance was virtually an investment in the promised land, and its
being delayed till their actual entrance into the country was a wise and
gracious act on the part of God, who postponed this trying duty till the
hearts of the people, animated by the recent astonishing miracle, were
prepared to obey the divine will.

they abode in their places . . . till they were whole--It is calculated
that, of those who did not need to be circumcised, more than fifty
thousand were left to defend the camp if an attack had been then made
upon it.

[Joshua 5:9](../../../bib/kjv/jos005.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">jos 5:9</span></span>

the Lord said unto Joshua, This day have I rolled away the reproach of
Egypt--The taunts industriously cast by that people upon Israel as
nationally rejected by God by the cessation of circumcision and the
renewal of that rite was a practical announcement of the restoration of
the covenant \[KEIL\].

Gilgal--No trace either of the name or site is now to be found; but it
was about two miles from Jericho \[JOSEPHUS\], and well suited for an
encampment by the advantages of shade and water. It was the first place
pronounced "holy" in the Holy Land ([Jos
5:15](../../../bib/kjv/jos005.htm#015)).

[Joshua 5:10](../../../bib/kjv/jos005.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">jos 5:10</span></span>

kept the passover on the fourteenth day of the month at even--The time
fixed by the law (see on [Exo 12:17](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#017);
[Lev 23:5](../../../bib/kjv/lev023.htm#005); [Num
28:16](../../../bib/kjv/num028.htm#016)). Thus the national existence
was commenced by a solemn act of religious dedication.

[Joshua 5:11](../../../bib/kjv/jos005.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">jos 5:11</span></span>

And they did eat of the old corn of the land--found in storehouses of
the inhabitants who had fled into Jericho.

parched corn--new grain (see on [Lev
23:10](../../../bib/kjv/lev023.htm#010)), probably lying in the fields.
Roasted--a simple and primitive preparation, much liked in the East.
This abundance of food led to the discontinuance of the manna; and the
fact of its then ceasing, viewed in connection with its seasonable
appearance in the barren wilderness, is a striking proof of its
miraculous origin.

[Joshua 5:13](../../../bib/kjv/jos005.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">jos 5:13</span></span>

AN ANGEL APPEARS TO JOSHUA. ([Jos
5:13-15](../../../bib/kjv/jos005.htm#013))

when Joshua was by Jericho--in the immediate vicinity of that city,
probably engaged in surveying the fortifications, and in meditating the
best plan of a siege.

there stood a man over against him with his sword drawn--It is evident
from the strain of the context that this was not a mere vision, but an
actual appearance; the suddenness of which surprised, but did not daunt,
the intrepid leader.

[Joshua 5:14](../../../bib/kjv/jos005.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">jos 5:14</span></span>

the host of the Lord--either the Israelitish people ([Exo
7:4](../../../bib/kjv/exo007.htm#004); [Exo
12:41](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#041); [Isa
55:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa055.htm#004)), or the angels ([Psa
148:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa148.htm#002)), or both included, and the
Captain of it was the angel of the covenant, whose visible
manifestations were varied according to the occasion. His attitude of
equipment betokened his approval of, and interest in, the war of
invasion.

Joshua fell on his face . . ., and did worship--The adoption by Joshua
of this absolute form of prostration demonstrates the sentiments of
profound reverence with which the language and majestic bearing of the
stranger inspired him. The real character of this personage was
disclosed by His accepting the homage of worship (compare [Act
10:25-26](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#025); [Rev
19:10](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#010)), and still further in the
command, "Loose thy shoe from off thy foot" ([Exo
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/exo003.htm#005)).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Joshua Chapter 6](jos006)

</div>
