<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Joshua Index](jos)  
  [Previous](jos001)  [Next](jos003) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*A Commentary, Critical, Practical, and Explanatory on the Old and New
Testaments*, by Robert Jamieson, A.R. Fausset and David Brown \[1882\]
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Joshua Chapter 2](../../../bib/kjv/jos002.htm#001)

[Joshua 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/jos002.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">jos 2:1</span></span>

RAHAB RECEIVES AND CONCEALS THE TWO SPIES. ([Jos
2:1-7](../../../bib/kjv/jos002.htm#001))

Joshua . . . sent . . . two men to spy secretly--Faith is manifested by
an active, persevering use of means ([Jam
2:22](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#022)); and accordingly Joshua, while
confident in the accomplishment of the divine promise ([Jos
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/jos001.htm#003)), adopted every precaution which a
skilful general could think of to render his first attempt in the
invasion of Canaan successful. Two spies were despatched to reconnoitre
the country, particularly in the neighborhood of Jericho; for in the
prospect of investing that place, it was desirable to obtain full
information as to its site, its approaches, the character, and resources
of its inhabitants. This mission required the strictest privacy, and it
seems to have been studiously concealed from the knowledge of the
Israelites themselves, test any unfavorable or exaggerated report,
publicly circulated, might have dispirited the people, as that of the
spies did in the days of Moses.

Jericho--Some derive this name from a word signifying "new moon," in
reference to the crescent-like plain in which it stood, formed by an
amphitheater of hills; others from a word signifying "its scent," on
account of the fragrance of the balsam and palm trees in which it was
embosomed. Its site was long supposed to be represented by the small
mud-walled hamlet Er-Riha; but recent researches have fixed on a spot
about half an hour's journey westward, where large ruins exist about six
or eight miles distant from the Jordan. It was for that age a strongly
fortified town, the key of the eastern pass through the deep ravine, now
called Wady-Kelt, into the interior of Palestine.

they . . . came into an harlot's house--Many expositors, desirous of
removing the stigma of this name from an ancestress of the Saviour ([Mat
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#005)), have called her a hostess or
tavern keeper. But Scriptural usage ([Lev
21:7-14](../../../bib/kjv/lev021.htm#007); [Deu
23:18](../../../bib/kjv/deu023.htm#018); [Jdg
11:1](../../../bib/kjv/jdg011.htm#001); [Kg1
3:16](../../../bib/kjv/kg1003.htm#016)), the authority of the
Septuagint, followed by the apostles ([Heb
11:31](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#031); [Jam
2:25](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#025)), and the immemorial style of
Eastern khans, which are never kept by women, establish the propriety of
the term employed in our version. Her house was probably recommended to
the spies by the convenience of its situation, without any knowledge of
the character of the inmates. But a divine influence directed them in
the choice of that lodging-place.

[Joshua 2:2](../../../bib/kjv/jos002.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">jos 2:2</span></span>

it was told the king--by the sentinels who at such a time of threatened
invasion would be posted on the eastern frontier and whose duty required
them to make a strict report to headquarters of the arrival of all
strangers.

[Joshua 2:4](../../../bib/kjv/jos002.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">jos 2:4</span></span>

the woman took the two men, and hid them--literally, "him," that is,
each of them in separate places, of course previous to the appearance of
the royal messengers and in anticipation of a speedy search after her
guests. According to Eastern manners, which pay an almost superstitious
respect to a woman's apartment, the royal messengers did not demand
admittance to search but asked her to bring the foreigners out.

[Joshua 2:5](../../../bib/kjv/jos002.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">jos 2:5</span></span>

the time of shutting of the gates--The gates of all Oriental cities are
closed at sunset, after which there is no possibility either of
admission or egress.

the men went out--This was a palpable deception. But, as lying is a
common vice among heathen people, Rahab was probably unconscious of its
moral guilt, especially as she resorted to it as a means for screening
her guests; and she might deem herself bound to do it by the laws of
Eastern hospitality, which make it a point of honor to preserve the
greatest enemy, if he has once eaten one's salt. Judged by the divine
law, her answer was a sinful expedient; but her infirmity being united
with faith, she was graciously pardoned and her service accepted ([Jam
2:25](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#025)).

[Joshua 2:6](../../../bib/kjv/jos002.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">jos 2:6</span></span>

she had brought them up to the roof of the house, and hid them with the
stalks of flax--Flax, with other vegetable productions, is at a certain
season spread out on the flat roofs of Eastern houses to be dried in the
sun; and, after lying awhile, it is piled up in numerous little stacks,
which, from the luxuriant growth of the flax, rise to a height of three
or four feet. Behind some of these stacks Rahab concealed the spies.

[Joshua 2:7](../../../bib/kjv/jos002.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">jos 2:7</span></span>

the men pursued after them the way to Jordan unto the fords--That river
is crossed at several well-known fords. The first and second immediately
below the sea of Galilee; the third and fourth immediately above and
below the pilgrims' bathing-place, opposite Jericho.

as soon as they which pursued after them were gone out, they shut the
gate--This precaution was to ensure the capture of the spies, should
they have been lurking in the city.

[Joshua 2:8](../../../bib/kjv/jos002.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">jos 2:8</span></span>

THE COVENANT BETWEEN HER AND THEM. ([Jos
2:8-21](../../../bib/kjv/jos002.htm#008))

she came up unto them upon the roof and said--Rahab's dialogue is full
of interest, as showing the universal panic and consternation of the
Canaanites on the one hand ([Jos
24:11](../../../bib/kjv/jos024.htm#011); [Deu
2:25](../../../bib/kjv/deu002.htm#025)), and her strong convictions on
the other, founded on a knowledge of the divine promise, and the
stupendous miracles that had opened the way of the Israelites to the
confines of the promised land. She was convinced of the supremacy of
Jehovah, and her earnest stipulations for the preservation of her
relatives amid the perils of the approaching invasion, attest the
sincerity and strength of her faith.

[Joshua 2:14](../../../bib/kjv/jos002.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">jos 2:14</span></span>

the men answered her, Our life for yours, if ye utter not this our
business--This was a solemn pledge--a virtual oath, though the name of
God is not mentioned; and the words were added, not as a condition of
their fidelity, but as necessary for her safety, which might be
endangered if the private agreement was divulged.

[Joshua 2:15](../../../bib/kjv/jos002.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">jos 2:15</span></span>

her house was upon the town wall--In many Oriental cities houses are
built on the walls with overhanging windows; in others the town wall
forms the back wall of the house, so that the window opens into the
country. Rahab's was probably of this latter description, and the cord
or rope sufficiently strong to bear the weight of a man.

[Joshua 2:16](../../../bib/kjv/jos002.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">jos 2:16</span></span>

she said--rather "she had said," for what follows must have been part of
the previous conversation.

Get you to the mountain--A range of white limestone hills extends on the
north, called Quarantania (now Jebel Karantu), rising to a height of
from twelve hundred to fifteen hundred feet, and the sides of which are
perforated with caves. Some one peak adjoining was familiarly known to
the inhabitants as "the mountain." The prudence and propriety of the
advice to flee in that direction rather than to the ford, were made
apparent by the sequel.

[Joshua 2:21](../../../bib/kjv/jos002.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">jos 2:21</span></span>

she bound the scarlet line in the window--probably soon after the
departure of the spies. It was not formed, as some suppose, into
network, as a lattice, but simply to hang down the wall. Its red color
made it conspicuous, and it was thus a sign and pledge of safety to
Rahab's house, as the bloody mark on the lintels of the houses of the
Israelites in Egypt to that people.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Joshua Chapter 3](jos003)

</div>
