<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Joshua Index](jos)  
  [Previous](jos005)  [Next](jos007) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*A Commentary, Critical, Practical, and Explanatory on the Old and New
Testaments*, by Robert Jamieson, A.R. Fausset and David Brown \[1882\]
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Joshua Chapter 6](../../../bib/kjv/jos006.htm#001)

[Joshua 6:1](../../../bib/kjv/jos006.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">jos 6:1</span></span>

JERICHO SHUT UP. ([Jos 6:1-7](../../../bib/kjv/jos006.htm#001))

Now Jericho was straitly shut up--This verse is a parenthesis introduced
to prepare the way for the directions given by the Captain of the Lord's
host.

[Joshua 6:2](../../../bib/kjv/jos006.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">jos 6:2</span></span>

See, I have given into thine hand Jericho--The language intimates that a
purpose already formed was about to be carried into immediate execution;
and that, although the king and inhabitants of Jericho were fierce and
experienced warriors, who would make a stout and determined resistance,
the Lord promised a certain and easy victory over them.

[Joshua 6:3](../../../bib/kjv/jos006.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">jos 6:3</span></span>

ye shall compass the city, all ye men of war. . . . Thus shalt thou do
six days, &c.--Directions are here given as to the mode of procedure.
Hebrew, "horns of jubilee"; that is, the bent or crooked trumpets with
which the jubilee was proclaimed. It is probable that the horns of this
animal were used at first; and that afterwards, when metallic trumpets
were introduced, the primitive name, as well as form of them, was
traditionally continued. The design of this whole proceeding was
obviously to impress the Canaanites with a sense of the divine
omnipotence, to teach the Israelites a memorable lesson of faith and
confidence in God's promises, and to inspire sentiments of respect and
reverence for the ark as the symbol of His presence. The length of time
during which those circuits were made tended the more intensely to
arrest the attention, and to deepen the impressions, both of the
Israelites and the enemy. The number seven was among the Israelites the
symbolic seal of the covenant between God and their nation \[KEIL,
HENGSTENBERG\].

[Joshua 6:6](../../../bib/kjv/jos006.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">jos 6:6</span></span>

Joshua . . . called the priests--The pious leader, whatever military
preparations he had made, surrendered all his own views, at once and
unreservedly, to the declared will of God.

[Joshua 6:8](../../../bib/kjv/jos006.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">jos 6:8</span></span>

THE CITY COMPASSED SIX DAYS. ([Jos
6:8-19](../../../bib/kjv/jos006.htm#008))

the seven priests bearing the seven trumpets . . . passed on before the
Lord--before the ark, called "the ark of the covenant," for it contained
the tables on which the covenant was inscribed. The procession was made
in deep and solemn silence, conforming to the instructions given to the
people by their leader at the outset, that they were to refrain from all
acclamation and noise of any kind until he should give them a signal. It
must have been a strange sight; no mound was raised, no sword drawn, no
engine planted, no pioneers undermining--here were armed men, but no
stroke given; they must walk and not fight. Doubtless the people of
Jericho made themselves merry with the spectacle \[BISHOP HALL\].

[Joshua 6:12](../../../bib/kjv/jos006.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">jos 6:12</span></span>

Joshua rose early in the morning, and the priests took up the ark of the
Lord--The second day's procession seems to have taken place in the
morning. In all other respects, down even to the smallest details, the
arrangements of the first day continued to be the rule followed on the
other six.

[Joshua 6:15](../../../bib/kjv/jos006.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">jos 6:15</span></span>

on the seventh day, that they rose early about the dawning of the day,
and compassed the city . . . seven times--on account of the seven
circuits they had to make that day. It is evident, however, that the
militia only of the Israelites had been called to the march--for it is
inconceivable that two millions of people could have gone so frequently
round the city in a day.

[Joshua 6:16](../../../bib/kjv/jos006.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">jos 6:16</span></span>

it came to pass at the seventh time, . . . Joshua said unto the people,
Shout; for the Lord hath given you the city--This delay brought out
their faith and obedience in so remarkable a manner, that it is
celebrated by the apostle ([Heb
11:30](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#030)).

[Joshua 6:17](../../../bib/kjv/jos006.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">jos 6:17</span></span>

And the city shall be accursed--(See on [Lev
27:28](../../../bib/kjv/lev027.htm#028)). The cherem, or "anathema," was
a devotion to utter destruction ([Deu
7:2](../../../bib/kjv/deu007.htm#002); [Deu
20:17](../../../bib/kjv/deu020.htm#017); [Sa1
15:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa1015.htm#003)). When such a ban was pronounced
against a hostile city, the men and animals were killed--no booty was
allowed to be taken. The idols and all the precious ornaments on them
were to be burned ([Deu 7:25](../../../bib/kjv/deu007.htm#025); compare
[Ch1 14:12](../../../bib/kjv/ch1014.htm#012)). Everything was either to
be destroyed or consecrated to the sanctuary. Joshua pronounced this ban
on Jericho, a great and wealthy city, evidently by divine direction. The
severity of the doom, accordant with the requirements of a law which was
holy, just, and good, was justified, not only by the fact of its
inhabitants being part of a race who had filled up their iniquities, but
by their resisting the light of the recent astonishing miracle at the
Jordan. Besides, as Jericho seems to have been defended by
reinforcements from all the country ([Jos
24:11](../../../bib/kjv/jos024.htm#011)), its destruction would paralyze
all the rest of the devoted people, and thus tend to facilitate the
conquest of the land; showing, as so astounding a military miracle did,
that it was done, not by man, but by the power and through the anger, of
God.

[Joshua 6:18](../../../bib/kjv/jos006.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">jos 6:18</span></span>

and ye, in any wise keep yourselves from the accursed thing--Generally
they were at liberty to take the spoil of other cities that were
captured ([Deu 2:35](../../../bib/kjv/deu002.htm#035); [Deu
3:7](../../../bib/kjv/deu003.htm#007); [Jos
8:27](../../../bib/kjv/jos008.htm#027)). But this, as the first fruits
of Canaan, was made an exception; nothing was to be spared but Rahab and
those in her house \[[Jos 6:17](../../../bib/kjv/jos006.htm#017)\]. A
violation of these stringent orders would not only render the guilty
persons obnoxious to the curse, but entail distress and adversity upon
all Israel, by provoking the divine displeasure. These were the
instructions given, or repeated ([Deu
13:17](../../../bib/kjv/deu013.htm#017); [Deu
7:26](../../../bib/kjv/deu007.htm#026)), previous to the last act of the
siege.

[Joshua 6:20](../../../bib/kjv/jos006.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">jos 6:20</span></span>

THE WALLS FALL DOWN. ([Jos 6:20-21](../../../bib/kjv/jos006.htm#020))

So the people shouted when the priests blew with the trumpets--Towards
the close of the seventh circuit, the signal was given by Joshua, and on
the Israelites' raising their loud war cry, the walls fell down,
doubtless burying multitudes of the inhabitants in the ruins, while the
besiegers, rushing in, consigned everything animate and inanimate to
indiscriminate destruction ([Deu
20:16-17](../../../bib/kjv/deu020.htm#016)). Jewish writers mention it
as an immemorial tradition that the city fell on the Sabbath. It should
be remembered that the Canaanites were incorrigible idolaters, addicted
to the most horrible vices, and that the righteous judgment of God might
sweep them away by the sword, as well as by famine or pestilence. There
was mercy mingled with judgment in employing the sword as the instrument
of punishing the guilty Canaanites, for while it was directed against
one place, time was afforded for others to repent.

[Joshua 6:22](../../../bib/kjv/jos006.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">jos 6:22</span></span>

RAHAB IS SAVED. ([Jos 6:22-25](../../../bib/kjv/jos006.htm#022))

Joshua had said . . . Go into the harlot's house, and bring out thence
the woman, and all that she hath--It is evident that the town walls were
not demolished universally, at least all at once, for Rahab's house was
allowed to stand until her relatives were rescued according to promise.

[Joshua 6:23](../../../bib/kjv/jos006.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">jos 6:23</span></span>

they brought out all her kindred, and left them without the camp of
Israel--a temporary exclusion, in order that they might be cleansed from
the defilement of their native idolatries and gradually trained for
admission into the society of God's people.

[Joshua 6:24](../../../bib/kjv/jos006.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">jos 6:24</span></span>

burned the city . . . and all . . . therein--except the silver, gold,
and other metals, which, as they would not burn, were added to the
treasury of the sanctuary.

[Joshua 6:25](../../../bib/kjv/jos006.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">jos 6:25</span></span>

she--Rahab

dwelleth in Israel unto this day--a proof that this book was written not
long after the events related.

[Joshua 6:26](../../../bib/kjv/jos006.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">jos 6:26</span></span>

THE REBUILDER OF JERICHO CURSED. ([Jos
6:26-27](../../../bib/kjv/jos006.htm#026))

Joshua adjured them at that time--that is, imposed upon his countrymen a
solemn oath, binding on themselves as well as their posterity, that they
would never rebuild that city. Its destruction was designed by God to be
a permanent memorial of His abhorrence of idolatry and its attendant
vices.

Cursed be the man . . . that riseth up and buildeth this city
Jericho--that is, makes the daring attempt to build.

he shall lay the foundation thereof in his first-born, and in his
youngest son shall he set up the gates of it--shall become
childless--the first beginning being marked by the death of his oldest
son, and his only surviving child dying at the time of its completion.
This curse was accomplished five hundred fifty years after its
denunciation (see on [Kg1 16:34](../../../bib/kjv/kg1016.htm#034)).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Joshua Chapter 7](jos007)

</div>
