<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Joshua Index](jos)  
  [Previous](jos021)  [Next](jos023) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*A Commentary, Critical, Practical, and Explanatory on the Old and New
Testaments*, by Robert Jamieson, A.R. Fausset and David Brown \[1882\]
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Joshua Chapter 22](../../../bib/kjv/jos022.htm#001)

[Joshua 22:1](../../../bib/kjv/jos022.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">jos 22:1</span></span>

JOSHUA DISMISSES THE TWO TRIBES AND A HALF, WITH A BLESSING. ([Jos
22:1-9](../../../bib/kjv/jos022.htm#001))

Then Joshua called the Reubenites, and the Gadites, and the half tribe
of Manasseh--The general war of invasion being ended and the enemy being
in so dispirited and isolated a condition that each tribe, by its own
resources or with the aid of its neighboring tribe, was able to repress
any renewed hostilities, the auxiliary Israelites from the eastern side
of the Jordan were now discharged from service. Joshua dismissed them
with high commendations for their fidelity and earnest admonitions to
cultivate perpetual piety in life. The redundancy of the language is
remarkable \[[Jos 22:2-5](../../../bib/kjv/jos022.htm#002)\]. It shows
how important, in the judgment of the venerable leader, a steadfast
observance of the divine law was to personal happiness, as well as
national prosperity.

[Joshua 22:3](../../../bib/kjv/jos022.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">jos 22:3</span></span>

Ye have not left your brethren these many days unto this day--for the
space of seven years.

[Joshua 22:4](../../../bib/kjv/jos022.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">jos 22:4</span></span>

get you unto your tents--that is, home; for their families had been left
in fortified towns ([Num 32:17](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#017)).

[Joshua 22:8](../../../bib/kjv/jos022.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">jos 22:8</span></span>

he spake unto them, saying, Return with much riches--in cattle, clothes,
and precious metals.

divide the spoil of your enemies with your brethren--(See on [Num
31:25-39](../../../bib/kjv/num031.htm#025)).

[Joshua 22:10](../../../bib/kjv/jos022.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">jos 22:10</span></span>

THEY BUILD THE ALTAR OF TESTIMONY ON THEIR JOURNEY. ([Jos
22:10](../../../bib/kjv/jos022.htm#010))

when they came unto the borders of Jordan, that are in the land of
Canaan, the children of Reuben . . . built there an altar by
Jordan--This altar was probably an immense pile of stones and earth. The
generality of our translators supposes that it was reared on the banks
of the Jordan, within the limits of Canaan proper. But a little closer
examination seems to make the conclusion irresistible that its position
was on the eastern side of the river, for these two reasons; first,
because it is said ([Jos 22:11](../../../bib/kjv/jos022.htm#011)) to
have been built "over against," or in the sight of the land of
Canaan--not within it; and secondly, because the declared motive of the
trans-jordanic Israelites in erecting it was to prevent their brethren
in Canaan ever saying, "in time to come, What have ye to do with the
Lord God of Israel? For the Lord hath made Jordan a border between us
and you," &c. \[[Jos 22:24-25](../../../bib/kjv/jos022.htm#024)\]. Such
a taunt would be obviously prevented or confuted by the two tribes and a
half having on the eastern side of Jordan, within their own land, a
facsimile of the altar at Shiloh, as a witness that they acknowledged
the same God and practised the same rites of worship as the brethren in
Canaan.

[Joshua 22:11](../../../bib/kjv/jos022.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">jos 22:11</span></span>

CONTENTION THEREUPON. (Jos. 22:11-29)

and the children of Israel heard say--Fame speedily spread intelligence
of what the trans-jordanic tribes had done. The act being suspected of
some idolatrous design, the tribes rose in a mass, and repairing to the
tabernacle at Shiloh, resolved to declare war against the two tribes and
a half as apostates from God. On calmer and more mature consideration,
however, they determined, in the first instance, to send a deputation
consisting of the son of the high priest, and ten eminent persons from
each tribe, to make inquiry into this rumored rebellion against God
([Deu 13:13-15](../../../bib/kjv/deu013.htm#013)). The quality of the
deputies evinced the deep solicitude that was felt on the occasion to
maintain the purity of the divine worship throughout Israel. In the
presumptive belief that the two tribes and a half had really built an
altar, the deputies expressed astonishment at their so soon falling into
such a heinous crime as that of violating the unity of divine worship
([Exo 20:24](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#024); [Lev
17:8-9](../../../bib/kjv/lev017.htm#008); [Deu
12:5-13](../../../bib/kjv/deu012.htm#005)). They reminded their eastern
brethren of the disastrous consequences that were entailed on the nation
at large by the apostasy at Peor and by the sin of Achan, and finally
exhorted them, if they felt the want of the tabernacle and altar and
repented of their rash choice in preferring worldly advantages to
religious privileges, to remove to the western side of the Jordan, where
all the tribes would form a united and obedient community of
worshippers.

[Joshua 22:21](../../../bib/kjv/jos022.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">jos 22:21</span></span>

Then the children of Reuben . . . answered--repudiating, in the
strongest terms, the alleged crime, and deponing that so far from
entertaining the intention imputed to them, their only object was to
perpetuate the memory of their alliance with Israel \[[Jos
22:24-25](../../../bib/kjv/jos022.htm#024)\], and their adherence to the
worship of Israel's God \[[Jos
22:26-27](../../../bib/kjv/jos022.htm#026)\].

[Joshua 22:33](../../../bib/kjv/jos022.htm#033)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">jos 22:33</span></span>

THE DEPUTIES SATISFIED. ([Jos
22:30-34](../../../bib/kjv/jos022.htm#030))

the thing pleased the children of Israel--The explanation not only gave
perfect satisfaction to the deputies, but elicited from them expressions
of unbounded joy and thankfulness. "This day we perceive that the Lord
is among us" \[[Jos 22:31](../../../bib/kjv/jos022.htm#031)\], that is,
by His gracious presence and preventing goodness, which has kept you
from falling into the suspected sin and rescued the nation from the
calamity of a fratricidal war or providential judgments. This episode
reflects honor upon all parties and shows that piety and zeal for the
honor and worship of God animated the people that entered Canaan to an
extent far beyond what was exemplified in many other periods of the
history of Israel.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Joshua Chapter 23](jos023)

</div>
