<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Joshua Index](jos)  
  [Previous](jos012)  [Next](jos014) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*A Commentary, Critical, Practical, and Explanatory on the Old and New
Testaments*, by Robert Jamieson, A.R. Fausset and David Brown \[1882\]
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Joshua Chapter 13](../../../bib/kjv/jos013.htm#001)

[Joshua 13:1](../../../bib/kjv/jos013.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">jos 13:1</span></span>

BOUNDS OF THE LAND NOT YET CONQUERED. (Jos. 13:1-33)

Now Joshua was old and stricken in years--He was probably above a
hundred years old; for the conquest and survey of the land occupied
about seven years, the partition one; and he died at the age of one
hundred ten years ([Jos 24:29](../../../bib/kjv/jos024.htm#029)). The
distribution, as well as the conquest of the land, was included in the
mission of Joshua; and his advanced age supplied a special reason for
entering on the immediate discharge of that duty; namely, of allocating
Canaan among the tribes of Israel--not only the parts already won, but
those also which were still to be conquered.

[Joshua 13:2](../../../bib/kjv/jos013.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">jos 13:2</span></span>

This is the land that yet remaineth--that is, to be acquired. This
section forms a parenthesis, in which the historian briefly notices the
districts yet unsubdued; namely, first, the whole country of the
Philistines--a narrow tract stretching about sixty miles along the
Mediterranean coast, and that of the Geshurites to the south of it ([Sa1
27:8](../../../bib/kjv/sa1027.htm#008)). Both included that portion of
the country "from Sihor, which is before Egypt," a small brook near
El-Arish, which on the east was the southern boundary of Canaan, to
Ekron, the most northerly of the five chief lordships or principalities
of the Philistines.

[Joshua 13:3](../../../bib/kjv/jos013.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">jos 13:3</span></span>

also the Avites: From \[on\] the south--The two clauses are thus
connected in the Septuagint and many other versions. On being driven out
([Deu 2:23](../../../bib/kjv/deu002.htm#023)), they established
themselves in the south of Philistia. The second division of the
unconquered country comprised

[Joshua 13:4](../../../bib/kjv/jos013.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">jos 13:4</span></span>

all the land of the Canaanites, and Mearah--("the cave")

that is beside the Sidonians--a mountainous region of Upper Galilee,
remarkable for its caves and fastnesses.

unto Aphek--now Afka; eastward, in Lebanon.

to the borders of the Amorites--a portion of the northeastern territory
that had belonged to Og. The third district that remained unsubdued:

[Joshua 13:5](../../../bib/kjv/jos013.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">jos 13:5</span></span>

all the land of the Giblites--Their capital was Gebal or Bylbos (Greek),
on the Mediterranean, forty miles north of Sidon.

all Lebanon, toward the sunrising--that is, Anti-libanus; the eastern
ridge, which has its proper termination in Hermon.

entering into Hamath--the valley of Baalbec.

[Joshua 13:6](../../../bib/kjv/jos013.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">jos 13:6</span></span>

All the inhabitants of the hill country from Lebanon unto
Misrephoth-maim--(See on [Jos 11:8](../../../bib/kjv/jos011.htm#008))
--that is, "all the Sidonians and PhÅ“nicians."

them will I drive out--The fulfilment of this promise was conditional.
In the event of the Israelites proving unfaithful or disobedient, they
would not subdue the districts now specified; and, in point of fact, the
Israelites never possessed them though the inhabitants were subjected to
the power of David and Solomon.

only divide thou it by lot unto the Israelites for an inheritance--The
parenthetic section being closed, the historian here resumes the main
subject of this chapter--the order of God to Joshua to make an immediate
allotment of the land. The method of distribution by lot was, in all
respects, the best that could have been adopted, as it prevented all
ground of discontent, as well as charges of arbitrary or partial conduct
on the part of the leaders; and its announcement in the life of Moses
([Num 33:54](../../../bib/kjv/num033.htm#054)), as the system according
to which the allocations to each tribe should be made, was intended to
lead the people to the acknowledgment of God as the proprietor of the
land and as having the entire right to its disposal. Moreover, a solemn
appeal to the lot showed it to be the dictate not of human, but divine,
wisdom. It was used, however, only in determining the part of the
country where a tribe was to be settled--the extent of the settlement
was to be decided on a different principle ([Num
26:54](../../../bib/kjv/num026.htm#054)). The overruling control of God
is conclusively proved because each tribe received the possession
predicted by Jacob (Gen. 49:3-28) and by Moses (Deu. 33:6-25).

[Joshua 13:8](../../../bib/kjv/jos013.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">jos 13:8</span></span>

With whom--Hebrew, "him." The antecedent is evidently to Manasseh, not,
however, the half-tribe just mentioned, but the other half; for the
historian, led, as it were, by the sound of the word, breaks off to
describe the possessions beyond Jordan already assigned to Reuben, Gad,
and the half of Manasseh (see on [Num
32:1](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#001); [Num
32:33](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#033); also see [Deu
3:8-17](../../../bib/kjv/deu003.htm#008)). It may be proper to remark
that it was wise to put these boundaries on record. In case of any
misunderstanding or dispute arising about the exact limits of each
district or property, an appeal could always be made to this
authoritative document, and a full knowledge as well as grateful sense
obtained of what they had received from God ([Psa
16:5-6](../../../bib/kjv/psa016.htm#005)).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Joshua Chapter 14](jos014)

</div>
