<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Joshua Index](jos.md)  
  [Previous](jos008)  [Next](jos010.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*A Commentary, Critical, Practical, and Explanatory on the Old and New
Testaments*, by Robert Jamieson, A.R. Fausset and David Brown \[1882\]
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Joshua Chapter 9](../../../bib/kjv/jos009.htm#001.md)

[Joshua 9:1](../../../bib/kjv/jos009.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">jos 9:1</span></span>

THE KINGS COMBINE AGAINST ISRAEL. (Jos. 9:1-27)

all the kings which were on this side--that is, the western side of
Jordan.

in the hills, and in ther valleys, and in all the coasts of the great
sea--This threefold distinction marks out very clearly a large portion
of Canaan. The first designates the hill country, which belonged
afterwards to the tribes of Judah and Ephraim: the second, all the low
country from Carmel to Gaza; and the third, the shores of the
Mediterranean, from the Isthmus of Tyre to the plain of Joppa. (As for
the tribes mentioned, see on [Num
13:29](../../../bib/kjv/num013.htm#029).md).

heard thereof--that is, of the sacking of Jericho and Ai, as well as the
rapid advance of the Israelites into the interior of the country.

[Joshua 9:2](../../../bib/kjv/jos009.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">jos 9:2</span></span>

they gathered themselves together, to fight with Joshua and with Israel,
with one accord--Although divided by separate interests and often at war
with each other, a sense of common danger prompted them to suspend their
mutual animosities, that by their united forces they might prevent the
land from falling into the hands of foreign masters.

[Joshua 9:3](../../../bib/kjv/jos009.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">jos 9:3</span></span>

THE GIBEONITES OBTAIN A LEAGUE BY CRAFT. ([Jos
9:3-15](../../../bib/kjv/jos009.htm#003).md)

when the inhabitants of Gibeon heard--This town, as its name imports,
was situated on a rocky eminence, about six miles northwest from
Jerusalem, where the modern village of El Jib now stands. It was the
capital of the Hivites, and a large important city ([Jos
10:2](../../../bib/kjv/jos010.htm#002).md). It seems to have formed, in
union with a few other towns in the neighborhood, a free independent
state ([Jos 9:17](../../../bib/kjv/jos009.htm#017).md) and to have enjoyed
a republican government ([Jos 9:11](../../../bib/kjv/jos009.htm#011).md).

[Joshua 9:4](../../../bib/kjv/jos009.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">jos 9:4</span></span>

They did work wilily--They acted with dexterous policy, seeking the
means of self-preservation, not by force, which they were convinced
would be unavailing, but by artful diplomacy.

took old sacks upon their asses--Travellers in the East transport their
luggage on beasts of burden; the poorer sort stow all their necessaries,
food, clothes, utensils together, in a woollen or hair-cloth sack, laid
across the shoulders of the beast they ride upon.

wine bottles, old, and rent, and bound up--Goat-skins, which are better
adapted for carrying liquor of any kind fresh and good, than either
earthenware, which is porous, or metallic vessels, which are soon heated
by the sun. These skin bottles are liable to be rent when old and much
used; and there are various ways of mending them--by inserting a new
piece of leather, or by gathering together the edges of the rent and
sewing them in the form of a purse, or by putting a round flat splinter
of wood into the hole.

[Joshua 9:5](../../../bib/kjv/jos009.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">jos 9:5</span></span>

old shoes and clouted--Those who have but one ass or mule for themselves
and baggage frequently dismount and walk--a circumstance which may
account for the worn shoes of the pretended travellers.

bread . . . dry and mouldy--This must have been that commonly used by
travellers--a sort of biscuit made in the form of large rings, about an
inch thick, and four or five inches in diameter. Not being so well baked
as our biscuits, it becomes hard and mouldy from the moisture left in
the dough. It is usually soaked in water previous to being used.

[Joshua 9:6](../../../bib/kjv/jos009.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">jos 9:6</span></span>

they went to Joshua unto the camp at Gilgal--Arrived at the Israelitish
headquarters, the strangers obtained an interview with Joshua and the
elders, to whom they opened their business.

[Joshua 9:7](../../../bib/kjv/jos009.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">jos 9:7</span></span>

the men of Israel said unto the Hivites, Peradventure ye dwell among
us--The answer of the Israelites implied that they had no discretion,
that their orders were imperative, and that if the strangers belonged to
any of the native tribes, the idea of an alliance with them was unlawful
since God had forbidden it ([Exo
23:32](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#032.md); [Exo
34:12](../../../bib/kjv/exo034.htm#012.md); [Deu
7:2](../../../bib/kjv/deu007.htm#002).md).

[Joshua 9:9](../../../bib/kjv/jos009.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">jos 9:9</span></span>

From a very far country thy servants are come because of the name of the
Lord thy God--They pretended to be actuated by religious motives in
seeking to be allied with His people. But their studied address is
worthy of notice in appealing to instances of God's miraculous doings at
a distance, while they pass by those done in Canaan, as if the report of
these had not yet reached their ears.

[Joshua 9:14](../../../bib/kjv/jos009.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">jos 9:14</span></span>

the men took of their victuals and asked not counsel at the mouth of the
Lord--The mouldy appearance of their bread was, after examination,
accepted as guaranteeing the truth of the story. In this precipitate
conclusion the Israelites were guilty of excessive credulity and
culpable negligence, in not asking by the high priest's Urim and Thummim
the mind of God, before entering into the alliance. It is not clear,
however, that had they applied for divine direction they would have been
forbidden to spare and connect themselves with any of the Canaanite
tribes who renounced idolatry and embraced and worshipped the true God.
At least, no fault was found with them for making a covenant with the
Gibeonites; while, on the other hand, the violation of it was severely
punished ([Sa2 21:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa2021.htm#001.md); and [Jos
11:19-20](../../../bib/kjv/jos011.htm#019).md).

[Joshua 9:16](../../../bib/kjv/jos009.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">jos 9:16</span></span>

at the end of three days . . . they heard that they were their
neighbours, and that they dwelt among them--This information was
obtained in their further progress through the country; for as [Jos
9:17](../../../bib/kjv/jos009.htm#017.md) should be rendered, "when the
children of Israel journeyed, they came to their cities." Gibeon was
about eighteen or twenty miles from Gilgal.

[Joshua 9:17](../../../bib/kjv/jos009.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">jos 9:17</span></span>

Chephirah-- ([Jos 18:26](../../../bib/kjv/jos018.htm#026.md); [Ezr
2:25](../../../bib/kjv/ezr002.htm#025.md); [Neh
7:29](../../../bib/kjv/neh007.htm#029).md).

Beeroth-- ([Sa2 4:2](../../../bib/kjv/sa2004.htm#002).md), now El Berich,
about twenty minutes' distance from El Jib (Gibeon).

Kirjath-jearim--"the city of forests," now Kuryet-el-Enab \[ROBINSON\].

[Joshua 9:18](../../../bib/kjv/jos009.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">jos 9:18</span></span>

the children of Israel smote them not--The moral character of the
Gibeonites' stratagem was bad. The princes of the congregation did not
vindicate either the expediency or the lawfulness of the connection they
had formed; but they felt the solemn obligations of their oath; and,
although the popular clamor was loud against them, caused either by
disappointment at losing the spoils of Gibeon, or by displeasure at the
apparent breach of the divine commandment, they determined to adhere to
their pledge, "because they had sworn by the Lord God of Israel." The
Israelitish princes acted conscientiously; they felt themselves bound by
their solemn promise; but to prevent the disastrous consequences of
their imprudent haste, they resolved to degrade the Gibeonites to a
servile condition as a means of preventing their people from being
ensnared into idolatry, and thus acted up, as they thought, to the true
spirit and end of the law.

[Joshua 9:27](../../../bib/kjv/jos009.htm#027.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">jos 9:27</span></span>

hewers of wood and drawers of water--The menials who performed the
lowest offices and drudgery in the sanctuary; whence they were called
Nethinims ([Ch1 9:2](../../../bib/kjv/ch1009.htm#002.md); [Ezr
2:43](../../../bib/kjv/ezr002.htm#043.md); [Ezr
8:20](../../../bib/kjv/ezr008.htm#020).md); that is, given, appropriated.
Their chastisement thus brought them into the possession of great
religious privileges ([Psa 84:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa084.htm#010).md).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Joshua Chapter 10](jos010.md)

</div>
