<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Joshua Index](jos)  
  [Previous](jos017)  [Next](jos019) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*A Commentary, Critical, Practical, and Explanatory on the Old and New
Testaments*, by Robert Jamieson, A.R. Fausset and David Brown \[1882\]
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Joshua Chapter 18](../../../bib/kjv/jos018.htm#001)

[Joshua 18:1](../../../bib/kjv/jos018.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">jos 18:1</span></span>

THE TABERNACLE SET UP AT SHILOH. ([Jos
18:1](../../../bib/kjv/jos018.htm#001))

the whole congregation . . . assembled together at Shiloh--The main body
of the Israelites had been diminished by the separation of the three
tribes, Judah, Ephraim, and Manasseh into their respective allotments;
and the country having been in a great measure subdued, the camp was
removed to Shiloh (now Seilun). It was twenty or twenty-five miles north
of Jerusalem, twelve north of Beth-el, and ten south of Shechem, and
embosomed in a rugged and romantic glen. This sequestered spot in the
heart of the country might have been recommended by the dictates of
convenience. There the allotment of the territory could be most
conveniently made, north, south, east, and west, to the different
tribes. But "the tabernacle of the congregation was also set up there,"
and its removal therefore must have been made or sanctioned by divine
intimation ([Deu 12:11](../../../bib/kjv/deu012.htm#011)). It remained
in Shiloh for more than three hundred years ([Sa1
4:1-11](../../../bib/kjv/sa1004.htm#001)).

[Joshua 18:2](../../../bib/kjv/jos018.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">jos 18:2</span></span>

THE REMAINDER OF THE LAND DESCRIBED. ([Jos
18:2-9](../../../bib/kjv/jos018.htm#002))

there remained . . . seven tribes, which had not yet received their
inheritance--The selection of Shiloh for the seat of worship, together
with the consequent removal of the camp thither, had necessarily
interrupted the casting of lots, which was commenced by fixing
localities for the tribes of Judah and Joseph. Various causes led to a
long delay in resuming it. The satisfaction of the people with their
change to so pleasant and fertile a district, their preference of a
nomad life, a love of ease, and reluctance to renew the war, seem to
have made them indifferent to the possession of a settled inheritance.
But Joshua was too much alive to the duty laid on him by the Lord to let
matters continue in that state; and accordingly, since a general
conquest of the land had been made, he resolved to proceed immediately
with the lot, believing that when each tribe should receive its
inheritance, a new motive would arise to lead them to exert themselves
in securing the full possession.

[Joshua 18:3](../../../bib/kjv/jos018.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">jos 18:3</span></span>

How long are ye slack to go to possess the land, which the Lord God of
your fathers hath given you--This reproof conveys an impression that the
seven tribes were dilatory to a criminal extent.

[Joshua 18:4](../../../bib/kjv/jos018.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">jos 18:4</span></span>

Give out from among you three men for each tribe--Though the lot
determined the part of the country where each tribe was to be located,
it could not determine the extent of territory which might be required;
and the dissatisfaction of the children of Joseph with the alleged
smallness of their possession gave reason to fear that complaints might
arise from other quarters, unless precautions were taken to make a
proper distribution of the land. For this purpose a commission was given
to twenty-one persons--three chosen from each of the seven tribes which
had not yet received their inheritance, to make an accurate survey of
the country.

[Joshua 18:9](../../../bib/kjv/jos018.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">jos 18:9</span></span>

The men went and passed through the land, and described it by cities
into seven parts in a book--dividing the land according to its value,
and the worth of the cities which it contained, into seven equal
portions. This was no light task to undertake. It required learning and
intelligence which they or their instructors had, in all probability,
brought with them out of Egypt. Accordingly, JOSEPHUS says that the
survey was performed by men expert in geometry. And, in fact, the
circumstantial account which is given of the boundaries of each tribe
and its situation, well proves it to have been the work of no mean or
incompetent hands.

[Joshua 18:10](../../../bib/kjv/jos018.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">jos 18:10</span></span>

DIVIDED BY LOT. ([Jos 18:10](../../../bib/kjv/jos018.htm#010))

Joshua cast lots for them in Shiloh before the Lord--before the
tabernacle, where the divine presence was manifested, and which
associated with the lot the idea of divine sanction.

[Joshua 18:11](../../../bib/kjv/jos018.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">jos 18:11</span></span>

the lot of . . . Benjamin came up--It has been supposed that there were
two urns or vessels, from which the lots were drawn: one containing the
names of the tribes, the other containing those of the seven portions;
and that the two were drawn out simultaneously.

the coast of their lot came forth between the children of Judah and the
children of Joseph--Thus the prophecy of Moses respecting the
inheritance of Benjamin was remarkably accomplished. (See on [Deu
33:12](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#012)).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Joshua Chapter 19](jos019)

</div>
