<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[3 Kings (1 Kings) Index](kg1.md)  
  [Previous](kg1016)  [Next](kg1018.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*A Commentary, Critical, Practical, and Explanatory on the Old and New
Testaments*, by Robert Jamieson, A.R. Fausset and David Brown \[1882\]
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [3 Kings (1 Kings) Chapter 17](../../../bib/kjv/kg1017.htm#001.md)

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 17:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg1017.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">kg1 17:1</span></span>

ELIJAH, PROPHESYING AGAINST AHAB, IS SENT TO CHERITH. ([Kg1
17:1-7](../../../bib/kjv/kg1017.htm#001).md)

Elijah the Tishbite--This prophet is introduced as abruptly as
Melchisedek--his birth, parents, and call to the prophetic office being
alike unrecorded. He is supposed to be called the Tishbite from Tisbeh,
a place east of Jordan.

who was of the inhabitants of Gilead--or residents of Gilead, implying
that he was not an Israelite, but an Ishmaelite, as MICHAELIS
conjectures, for there were many of that race on the confines of Gilead.
The employment of a Gentile as an extraordinary minister might be to
rebuke and shame the apostate people of Israel.

said unto Ahab--The prophet appears to have been warning this apostate
king how fatal both to himself and people would be the reckless course
he was pursuing. The failure of Elijah's efforts to make an impression
on the obstinate heart of Ahab is shown by the penal prediction uttered
at parting.

before whom I stand--that is, whom I serve ([Deu
18:5](../../../bib/kjv/deu018.htm#005).md).

there shall not be dew nor rain these years--not absolutely; but the dew
and the rain would not fall in the usual and necessary quantities. Such
a suspension of moisture was sufficient to answer the corrective
purposes of God, while an absolute drought would have converted the
whole country into an uninhabitable waste.

but according to my word--not uttered in spite, vengeance, or caprice,
but as the minister of God. The impending calamity was in answer to his
earnest prayer, and a chastisement intended for the spiritual revival of
Israel. Drought was the threatened punishment of national idolatry ([Deu
11:16-17](../../../bib/kjv/deu011.htm#016.md); [Deu
28:23](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#023).md).

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 17:2](../../../bib/kjv/kg1017.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">kg1 17:2</span></span>

the word of the Lord came unto him, saying, Get thee hence, and turn
thee eastward, &c.--At first the king may have spurned the prediction as
the utterance of a vain enthusiast; but when he found the drought did
last and increase in severity, he sought Elijah, who, as it was
necessary that he should be far removed from either the violence or the
importunities of the king, was divinely directed to repair to a place of
retreat, perhaps a cave on "the brook Cherith, that is, before \[east
of\] Jordan." Tradition points it out in a small winter torrent, a
little below the ford at Beth-shan.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 17:6](../../../bib/kjv/kg1017.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">kg1 17:6</span></span>

the ravens brought him bread--The idea of such unclean and voracious
birds being employed to feed the prophet has appeared to many so strange
that they have labored to make out the Orebim, which in our version has
been rendered "ravens," to be as the word is used (in [Eze
27:27](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#027).md) "merchants"; or Arabians ([Ch2
21:16](../../../bib/kjv/ch2021.htm#016.md); [Neh
4:7](../../../bib/kjv/neh004.htm#007).md); or, the citizens of Arabah, near
Beth-shan ([Jos 15:6](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#006.md); [Jos
18:18](../../../bib/kjv/jos018.htm#018).md). But the common rendering is,
in our opinion, preferable to these conjectures. And, if Elijah was
miraculously fed by ravens, it is idle to inquire where they found the
bread and the flesh, for God would direct them. After the lapse of a
year, the brook dried up, and this was a new trial to Elijah's faith.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 17:8](../../../bib/kjv/kg1017.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">kg1 17:8</span></span>

HE IS SENT TO A WIDOW OF ZAREPHATH. ([Kg1
17:8-16](../../../bib/kjv/kg1017.htm#008).md)

the word of the Lord came to him--Zarephath, Sarepta, now Surafend,
whither he was directed to go, was far away on the western coast of
Palestine, about nine miles south of Sidon, and within the dominions of
Jezebel's impious father, where the famine also prevailed. Meeting, at
his entrance into the town, the very woman who was appointed by divine
providence to support him, his faith was severely tested by learning
from her that her supplies were exhausted and that she was preparing her
last meal for herself and son. The Spirit of God having prompted him to
ask, and her to grant, some necessary succor, she received a prophet's
reward ([Mat 10:41-42](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#041).md), and for the
one meal afforded to him, God, by a miraculous increase of the little
stock, afforded many to her.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 17:17](../../../bib/kjv/kg1017.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">kg1 17:17</span></span>

HE RAISES HER SON TO LIFE. ([Kg1
17:17-24](../../../bib/kjv/kg1017.htm#017).md)

the son of the woman, the mistress of the house, fell sick--A severe
domestic calamity seems to have led her to think that, as God had shut
up heaven upon a sinful land in consequence of the prophet, she was
suffering on a similar account. Without answering her bitter upbraiding,
the prophet takes the child, lays it on his bed, and after a very
earnest prayer, had the happiness of seeing its restoration, and along
with it, gladness to the widow's heart and home. The prophet was sent to
this widow, not merely for his own security, but on account of her
faith, to strengthen and promote which he was directed to go to her
rather than to many widows in Israel, who would have eagerly received
him on the same privileged terms of exception from the grinding famine.
The relief of her bodily necessities became the preparatory means of
supplying her spiritual wants, and bringing her and her son, through the
teachings of the prophet, to a clear knowledge of God, and a firm faith
in His word ([Luk 4:25](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#025).md).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 3 Kings (1 Kings) Chapter 18](kg1018.md)

</div>
