<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[4 Kings (2 Kings) Index](kg2)  
  [Previous](kg2016)  [Next](kg2018) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*A Commentary, Critical, Practical, and Explanatory on the Old and New
Testaments*, by Robert Jamieson, A.R. Fausset and David Brown \[1882\]
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [4 Kings (2 Kings) Chapter 17](../../../bib/kjv/kg2017.htm#001)

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 17:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg2017.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">kg2 17:1</span></span>

HOSHEA'S WICKED REIGN. ([Kg2 17:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/kg2017.htm#001))

In the twelfth year of Ahaz king of Judah, began Hoshea . . . to
reign--The statement in [Kg2 15:30](../../../bib/kjv/kg2015.htm#030) may
be reconciled with the present passage in the following manner: Hoshea
conspired against Pekah in the twentieth year of the latter, which was
the eighteenth of Jotham's reign. It was two years before Hoshea was
acknowledged king of Israel, that is, in the fourth of Ahaz, and
twentieth of Jotham. In the twelfth year of Ahaz his reign began to be
tranquil and prosperous \[CALMET\].

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 17:2](../../../bib/kjv/kg2017.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">kg2 17:2</span></span>

he did evil . . . but not as the kings of Israel--Unlike his
predecessors from the time of Jeroboam, he neither established the rites
of Baal, nor compelled the people to adhere to the symbolic worship of
the calves. \[See on [Ch2 30:1](../../../bib/kjv/ch2030.htm#001).\] In
these respects, Hoshea acted as became a constitutional king of Israel.
Yet, through the influence of the nineteen princes who had swayed the
scepter before him (all of whom had been zealous patrons of idolatry,
and many of whom had been also infamous for personal crimes), the whole
nation had become so completely demoralized that the righteous judgment
of an angry Providence impended over it.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 17:3](../../../bib/kjv/kg2017.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">kg2 17:3</span></span>

Against him came up Shalmaneser--or Shalman ([Hos
10:14](../../../bib/kjv/hos010.htm#014)), the same as the Sargon of
Isaiah \[[Isa 20:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa020.htm#001)\]. Very recently
the name of this Assyrian king has been traced on the Ninevite
monuments, as concerned in an expedition against a king of Samaria,
whose name, though mutilated, COLONEL RAWLINSON reads as Hoshea.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 17:4](../../../bib/kjv/kg2017.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">kg2 17:4</span></span>

found conspiracy in Hoshea--After having paid tribute for several years,
Hoshea, determined on throwing off the Assyrian yoke, withheld the
stipulated tribute. Shalmaneser, incensed at this rebellion, proclaimed
war against Israel. This was in the sixth year of Hoshea's reign.

he had sent messengers to So, king of Egypt--the Sabaco of the classic
historians, a famous Ethiopian who, for fifty years, occupied the
Egyptian throne, and through whose aid Hoshea hoped to resist the
threatened attack of the Assyrian conqueror. But Shalmaneser, marching
against \[Hoshea\], scoured the whole country of Israel, besieged the
capital Samaria, and carried the principal inhabitants into captivity in
his own land, having taken the king himself, and imprisoned him for
life. This ancient policy of transplanting a conquered people into a
foreign land, was founded on the idea that, among a mixed multitude,
differing in language and religion, they would be kept in better
subjection, and have less opportunity of combining together to recover
their independence.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 17:6](../../../bib/kjv/kg2017.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">kg2 17:6</span></span>

carried Israel away--that is, the remaining tribes (see on [Kg2
15:29](../../../bib/kjv/kg2015.htm#029)).

and placed them, &c.--This passage GESENIUS renders thus, omitting the
particle by, which is printed in italics to show it is not in the
original: "and placed them in Halah, and on the Chabor, a river of
Gozan, and in the cities of the Medes."

Halah--the same as Calah ([Gen
10:11-12](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#011)), in the region of the Laycus
or Zab river, about a day's journey from the ruins of Nineveh.

Chabor--is a river, and it is remarkable that there is a river rising in
the central highlands of Assyria which retains this name Khabour
unchanged to the present day.

Gozan--("pasture") or Zozan, are the highlands of Assyria, which afford
pasturage. The region in which the Chabor and the Zab rise, and through
which they flow, is peculiarly of this character. The Nestorians repair
to it with their numerous flocks, spending the summer on the banks or in
the highlands of the Chabor or the Zab. Considering the high authority
we possess for regarding Gozan and Zozan as one name, there can be no
doubt that this is the Gozan referred to in this passage.

cities of the Medes--"villages," according to the Syriac and Vulgate
versions, or "mountains," according to the Septuagint. The Medish
inhabitants of Gozan, having revolted, had been destroyed by the kings
of Assyria, and nothing was more natural than that they should wish to
place in it an industrious people, like the captive Israelites, while it
was well suited to their pastoral life \[GRANT, Nestorians\].

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 17:7](../../../bib/kjv/kg2017.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">kg2 17:7</span></span>

SAMARIA TAKEN, AND ISRAEL FOR THEIR SINS CARRIED CAPTIVE. (2Ki. 17:7-41)

For so it was, that the children of Israel had sinned--There is here
given a very full and impressive vindication of the divine procedure in
punishing His highly privileged, but rebellious and apostate, people. No
wonder that amid so gross a perversion of the worship of the true God,
and the national propensity to do reverence to idols, the divine
patience was exhausted; and that the God whom they had forsaken
permitted them to go into captivity, that they might learn the
difference between His service and that of their despotic conquerors.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 17:24](../../../bib/kjv/kg2017.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">kg2 17:24</span></span>

the king of Assyria brought men from Babylon, etc.--This was not
Shalmaneser, but Esar-haddon ([Eze
4:2](../../../bib/kjv/eze004.htm#002)). The places vacated by the
captive Israelites he ordered to be occupied by several colonies of his
own subjects from Babylon and other provinces.

from Cuthah--the Chaldee form of Cush or Susiana, now Khusistan.

Ava--supposed to be Ahivaz, situated on the river Karuns, which empties
into the head of the Persian Gulf.

Hamath--on the Orontes.

Sepharvaim--Siphara, a city on the Euphrates above Babylon.

placed them in the cities of Samaria, &c.--It must not be supposed that
the Israelites were universally removed to a man. A remnant was left,
chiefly however of the poor and lower classes, with whom these foreign
colonists mingled; so that the prevailing character of society about
Samaria was heathen, not Israelite. For the Assyrian colonists became
masters of the land; and, forming partial intermarriages with the
remnant Jews, the inhabitants became a mongrel race, no longer a people
of Ephraim ([Isa 7:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#006)). These people,
imperfectly instructed in the creed of the Jews, acquired also a mongrel
doctrine. Being too few to replenish the land, lions, by which the land
had been infested ([Jdg 14:5](../../../bib/kjv/jdg014.htm#005); [Sa1
17:34](../../../bib/kjv/sa1017.htm#034); [Kg1
13:24](../../../bib/kjv/kg1013.htm#024); [Kg1
20:36](../../../bib/kjv/kg1020.htm#036); [Sol
4:8](../../../bib/kjv/sol004.htm#008)), multiplied and committed
frequent ravages upon them. Recognizing in these attacks a judgment from
the God of the land, whom they had not worshipped, they petitioned the
Assyrian court to send them some Jewish priests who might instruct them
in the right way of serving Him. The king, in compliance with their
request, sent them one of the exiled priests of Israel \[[Kg2
17:27](../../../bib/kjv/kg2017.htm#027)\], who established his
headquarters at Beth-el, and taught them how they should fear the Lord.
It is not said that he took a copy of the Pentateuch with him, out of
which he might teach them. Oral teaching was much better fitted for the
superstitious people than instruction out of a written book. He could
teach them more effectually by word of mouth. Believing that he would
adopt the best and simplest method for them, it is unlikely that he took
the written law with him, and so gave origin to the Samaritan copy of
the Pentateuch \[DAVIDSON, Criticism\]. Besides, it is evident from his
being one of the exiled priests, and from his settlement at Beth-el,
that he was not a Levite, but one of the calf-worshipping priests.
Consequently his instructions would be neither sound nor efficient.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 17:29](../../../bib/kjv/kg2017.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">kg2 17:29</span></span>

Howbeit every nation made gods of their own--These Assyrian colonists,
however, though instructed in the worship, and acknowledging the being
of the God of Israel, did not suppose Him to be the only God. Like other
heathens, they combined His worship with that of their own gods; and as
they formed a promiscuous society from different nations or provinces, a
variety of idols was acknowledged among them.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 17:30](../../../bib/kjv/kg2017.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">kg2 17:30</span></span>

Succoth-benoth--that is, the "tents" or "booths of the daughters,"
similar to those in which the Babylonian damsels celebrated impure rites
([Amo 2:8](../../../bib/kjv/amo002.htm#008)).

Nergal--The Jewish writers say this idol was in the form of a cock, and
it is certain that a cock is often associated with a priest on the
Assyrian monuments \[LAYARD\]. But modern critics, looking to the
astrological character of Assyrian idolatry, generally consider Nergal
as the planet Mars, the god of war. The name of this idol formed part of
the appellation of two of the king of Babylon's princes ([Jer
39:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer039.htm#003)).

Ashima--an idol under the form of an entirely bald he-goat.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 17:31](../../../bib/kjv/kg2017.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">kg2 17:31</span></span>

Nibhaz--under that of a dog--that Egyptian form of animal-worship having
prevailed in ancient Syria, as is evident from the image of a large dog
at the mouth of the Nahr-el-Kelb, or Dog river.

Tartak--According to the rabbis, it was in the form of an ass, but
others understand it as a planet of ill-omen, probably Saturn.

Adrammelech--supposed by some to be the same as Molech, and in Assyrian
mythology to stand for the sun. It was worshipped in the form of a
mule--others maintain in that of a peacock.

Anammelech--worshipped in the form of a hare; others say in that of a
goat.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 17:34](../../../bib/kjv/kg2017.htm#034)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">kg2 17:34</span></span>

Unto this day--the time of the Babylonian exile, when this book was
composed. Their religion was a strange medley or compound of the service
of God and the service of idols. Such was the first settlement of the
people, afterwards called Samaritans, who were sent from Assyria to
colonize the land, when the kingdom of Israel, after having continued
three hundred fifty-six years, was overthrown.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 4 Kings (2 Kings) Chapter 18](kg2018)

</div>
