<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[4 Kings (2 Kings) Index](kg2.md)  
  [Previous](kg2005)  [Next](kg2007.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*A Commentary, Critical, Practical, and Explanatory on the Old and New
Testaments*, by Robert Jamieson, A.R. Fausset and David Brown \[1882\]
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [4 Kings (2 Kings) Chapter 6](../../../bib/kjv/kg2006.htm#001.md)

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 6:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg2006.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">kg2 6:1</span></span>

ELISHA CAUSES IRON TO SWIM. ([Kg2
6:1-7](../../../bib/kjv/kg2006.htm#001).md)

the place where we dwell with thee--Margin, "sit before thee." The one
points to a common residence--the other to a common place of meeting.
The tenor of the narrative shows the humble condition of Elisha's
pupils. The place was either Beth-el or Jericho, probably the latter.
The ministry and miracles of Elisha brought great accessions to his
schools.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 6:2](../../../bib/kjv/kg2006.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">kg2 6:2</span></span>

Let us go, we pray thee, unto Jordan--whose wooded banks would furnish
plenty of timber.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 6:5](../../../bib/kjv/kg2006.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">kg2 6:5</span></span>

it was borrowed--literally, "begged." The scholar's distress arose from
the consideration that it had been presented to him; and that, owing to
his poverty, he could not procure another.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 6:6](../../../bib/kjv/kg2006.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">kg2 6:6</span></span>

cut down a stick, and cast it in thither--Although this means was used,
it had no natural adaptation to make the iron swim. Besides, the Jordan
is at Jericho so deep and rapid that there were one thousand chances to
one against the stick falling into the hole of the axe-head. All
attempts to account for the recovery of the lost implement on such a
theory must be rejected.

the iron did swim--only by the miraculous exertion of Elisha's power.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 6:8](../../../bib/kjv/kg2006.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">kg2 6:8</span></span>

DISCLOSES THE KING OF SYRIA'S COUNSEL. ([Kg2
6:8-17](../../../bib/kjv/kg2006.htm#008).md)

the king of Syria warred against Israel--This seems to have been a sort
of guerrilla warfare, carried on by predatory inroads on different parts
of the country. Elisha apprised King Jehoram of the secret purpose of
the enemy; so, by adopting precautionary measures, he was always enabled
to anticipate and defeat their attacks. The frequency of his
disappointments having led the Syrian king to suspect some of his
servants of carrying on a treacherous correspondence with the enemy, he
was informed about Elisha, whose apprehension he forthwith determined to
effect. This resolution was, of course, grounded on the belief that
however great the knowledge of Elisha might be, if seized and kept a
prisoner, he could no longer give information to the king of Israel.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 6:13](../../../bib/kjv/kg2006.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">kg2 6:13</span></span>

Dothan--or, "Dothaim," a little north of Samaria (see on [Gen
37:17](../../../bib/kjv/gen037.htm#017).md).

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 6:15](../../../bib/kjv/kg2006.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">kg2 6:15</span></span>

his servant said unto him, Alas, my master! how shall we do?--When the
Syrian detachment surrounded the place by night, for the apprehension of
the prophet, his servant was paralyzed with fear. This was a new
servant, who had only been with him since Gehazi's dismissal and
consequently had little or no experience of his master's powers. His
faith was easily shaken by so unexpected an alarm.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 6:17](../../../bib/kjv/kg2006.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">kg2 6:17</span></span>

Elisha prayed, and said, Lord, I pray thee, open his eyes, that he may
see--The invisible guard of angels that encompass and defend us ([Psa
34:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa034.htm#007).md). The opening of the eyes, which
Elisha prayed for, were those of the Spirit, not of the body--the eye of
faith sees the reality of the divine presence and protection where all
is vacancy or darkness to the ordinary eye. The horses and chariots were
symbols of the divine power (see on [Kg2
2:12](../../../bib/kjv/kg2002.htm#012).md); and their fiery nature denoted
their supernatural origin; for fire, the most ethereal of earthly
elements, is the most appropriate symbol of the Godhead \[KEIL\].

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 6:18](../../../bib/kjv/kg2006.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">kg2 6:18</span></span>

HIS ARMY SMITTEN WITH BLINDNESS. ([Kg2
6:18-23](../../../bib/kjv/kg2006.htm#018).md)

Smite this people, I pray thee, with blindness--not a total and material
blindness, for then they could not have followed him, but a mental
hallucination (see [Gen 19:11](../../../bib/kjv/gen019.htm#011).md) so that
they did not perceive or recognize him to be the object of their search.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 6:19](../../../bib/kjv/kg2006.htm#019.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">kg2 6:19</span></span>

This is not the way, neither is this the city--This statement is so far
true that, as he had now left the place of his residence, they would not
have got him by that road. But the ambiguity of his language was
purposely framed to deceive them; and yet the deception must be viewed
in the light of a stratagem, which has always been deemed lawful in war.

he led them to Samaria--When they were arrived in the midst of the
capital, their eyes, at Elisha's request, were opened, and they then
became aware of their defenseless condition, for Jehoram had received
private premonition of their arrival. The king, so far from being
allowed to slay the enemies who were thus unconsciously put in his
power, was recommended to entertain them with liberal hospitality and
then dismiss them to their own country. This was humane advice; it was
contrary to the usage of war to put war captives to death in cold blood,
even when taken by the point of the sword, much more those whom the
miraculous power and providence of God had unexpectedly placed at his
disposal. In such circumstances, kind and hospitable treatment was every
way more becoming in itself, and would be productive of the best
effects. It would redound to the credit of the true religion, which
inspired such an excellent spirit into its professors; and it would not
only prevent the future opposition of the Syrians but make them stand in
awe of a people who, they had seen, were so remarkably protected by a
prophet of the Lord. The latter clause of [Kg2
6:23](../../../bib/kjv/kg2006.htm#023.md) shows that these salutary effects
were fully realized. A moral conquest had been gained over the Syrians.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 6:24](../../../bib/kjv/kg2006.htm#024.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">kg2 6:24</span></span>

BEN-HADAD BESIEGES SAMARIA. ([Kg2
6:24-33](../../../bib/kjv/kg2006.htm#024).md)

Ben-hadad . . . besieged Samaria--This was the predicted accomplishment
of the result of Ahab's foolish and misplaced kindness ([Kg1
20:42](../../../bib/kjv/kg1020.htm#042).md).

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 6:25](../../../bib/kjv/kg2006.htm#025.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">kg2 6:25</span></span>

an ass's head was sold for fourscore pieces of silver--Though the ass
was deemed unclean food, necessity might warrant their violation of a
positive law when mothers, in their extremity, were found violating the
law of nature. The head was the worst part of the animal. Eighty pieces
of silver, equal to Â£5 5s.

the fourth part of a cab--A cab was the smallest dry measure. The
proportion here stated was nearly half a pint for 12s. 6d.

dove's dung--is thought by BOCHART to be a kind of pulse or pea, common
in Judea, and still kept in the storehouses of Cairo and Damascus, and
other places, for the use of it by pilgrim-caravans; by LINNÃ†US, and
other botanists, it is said to be the root or white bulb of the plant
Ornithogalum umbellatum, Star of Beth-lehem. The sacred historian does
not say that the articles here named were regularly sold at the rates
described, but only that instances were known of such high prices being
given.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 6:26](../../../bib/kjv/kg2006.htm#026.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">kg2 6:26</span></span>

as the king was passing--to look at the defenses, or to give some
necessary orders for manning the walls.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 6:29](../../../bib/kjv/kg2006.htm#029.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">kg2 6:29</span></span>

we boiled my son, and did eat him--(See on [Deu
28:53](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#053).md).

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 6:30](../../../bib/kjv/kg2006.htm#030.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">kg2 6:30</span></span>

had sackcloth within upon his flesh--The horrid recital of this domestic
tragedy led the king soon after to rend his garment, in consequence of
which it was discovered that he wore a penitential shirt of haircloth.
It is more than doubtful, however, if he was truly humbled on account of
his own and the nation's sins; otherwise he would not have vowed
vengeance on the prophet's life. The true explanation seems to be, that
Elisha having counselled him not to surrender, with the promise, on
condition of deep humiliation, of being delivered, and he having assumed
the signs of contrition without receiving the expected relief, regarded
Elisha who had proved false and faithless as the cause of all the
protracted distress.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 6:32](../../../bib/kjv/kg2006.htm#032.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">kg2 6:32</span></span>

But Elisha sat in his house, and the elders sat with him--The latter
clause of [Kg2 6:33](../../../bib/kjv/kg2006.htm#033.md), which contains
the king's impatient exclamation, enables us to account for the
impetuous order he issued for the beheading of Elisha. Though Jehoram
was a wicked king and most of his courtiers would resemble their master,
many had been won over, through the prophet's influence, to the true
religion. A meeting, probably a prayer-meeting, of those was held in the
house where he lodged, for he had none of his own ([Kg1
19:20-21](../../../bib/kjv/kg1019.htm#020).md); and them he not only
apprised of the king's design against himself, but disclosed to them the
proof of a premeditated deliverance.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 4 Kings (2 Kings) Chapter 7](kg2007.md)

</div>
