<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[4 Kings (2 Kings) Index](kg2)  
  [Previous](kg2002)  [Next](kg2004) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*A Commentary, Critical, Practical, and Explanatory on the Old and New
Testaments*, by Robert Jamieson, A.R. Fausset and David Brown \[1882\]
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [4 Kings (2 Kings) Chapter 3](../../../bib/kjv/kg2003.htm#001)

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg2003.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">kg2 3:1</span></span>

JEHORAM'S EVIL REIGN OVER ISRAEL. ([Kg2
3:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/kg2003.htm#001))

Jehoram the son of Ahab began to reign over Israel in Samaria the
eighteenth year of Jehoshaphat--(compare [Kg1
22:51](../../../bib/kjv/kg1022.htm#051)). To reconcile the statements in
the two passages, we must suppose that Ahaziah, having reigned during
the seventeenth and the greater part of the eighteenth year of
Jehoshaphat, was succeeded by his brother Joram or Jehoram, in the end
of that eighteenth year, or else that Ahaziah, having reigned two years
in conjunction with his father, died at the end of that period when
Jehoram ascended the throne. His policy was as hostile as that of his
predecessors to the true religion; but he made some changes. Whatever
was his motive for this alteration--whether dread of the many alarming
judgments the patronage of idolatry had brought upon his father; or
whether it was made as a small concession to the feelings of
Jehoshaphat, his ally, he abolished idolatry in its gross form and
restored the symbolic worship of God, which the kings of Israel, from
the time of Jeroboam, had set up as a partition wall between their
subjects and those of Judah.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 3:4](../../../bib/kjv/kg2003.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">kg2 3:4</span></span>

MESHA, KING OF MOAB, REBELS. ([Kg2
3:4-5](../../../bib/kjv/kg2003.htm#004))

Mesha king of Moab, &c.--As his dominions embraced an extensive pasture
country, he paid, as annual tribute, the wool of a hundred thousand
lambs and a hundred thousand rams. It is still common in the East to pay
custom and taxes in the fruits or natural produce of the land.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 3:5](../../../bib/kjv/kg2003.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">kg2 3:5</span></span>

king of Moab rebelled--This is a repetition of [Kg2
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg2001.htm#001), in order to introduce an account
of the confederate expedition for crushing this revolt, which had been
allowed to continue unchecked during the short reign of Ahaziah.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 3:6](../../../bib/kjv/kg2003.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">kg2 3:6</span></span>

ELISHA PROMISES WATER AND VICTORY OVER MOAB. (2Ki. 3:6-24)

King Jehoram . . . numbered Israel--made a levy from his own subjects,
and at the same time sought an alliance with Jehoshaphat, which, as on
the former occasion with Ahab, was readily promised ([Kg1
22:4](../../../bib/kjv/kg1022.htm#004)).

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 3:8](../../../bib/kjv/kg2003.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">kg2 3:8</span></span>

Which way shall we go up? And he answered, The way through the
wilderness of Edom--This was a long and circuitous route, by the
southern bend of the Dead Sea. Jehoshaphat however preferred it, partly
because the part of the Moabite territory at which they would arrive,
was the most defenseless; and partly because he would thereby enlist, in
the expedition, the forces of the king of Edom. But, in penetrating the
deep, rocky valley of Ahsy, which forms the boundary between Edom and
Moab, the confederate army was reduced, both man and beast, to the
greatest extremities for want of water. They were disappointed by
finding the wady of this valley, the brook Zered ([Deu
2:13-18](../../../bib/kjv/deu002.htm#013)) \[ROBINSON\], dry. Jehoram
was in despair. But the pious mind of Jehoshaphat inquired for a prophet
of the Lord; and, on being informed that Elisha was at hand, the three
kings "went down to him"; that is, to his tent, which was either in the
camp, or close by it. He had been directed thither by the Spirit of God
for this special purpose. They went to him, not only as a mark of
respect, but to supplicate for his assistance.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 3:11](../../../bib/kjv/kg2003.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">kg2 3:11</span></span>

which poured water on the hands of Elijah--that is, was his
servant--this being one of the common offices of a servant. The phrase
is used here as synonymous with "a true and eminent prophet," who will
reveal God's will to us.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 3:13](../../../bib/kjv/kg2003.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">kg2 3:13</span></span>

What have I to do with thee? &c.--Wishing to produce a deep spirit of
humility and contrition, Elisha gave a stern repulse to the king of
Israel, accompanied by a sarcastic sneer, in bidding him go and consult
Baal and his soothsayers. But the distressed condition, especially the
imploring language, of the royal suppliants, who acknowledged the hand
of the Lord in this distress, drew from the prophet the solemn
assurance, that solely out of respect to Jehoshaphat, the Lord's true
servant, did he take any interest in Jehoram.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 3:15](../../../bib/kjv/kg2003.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">kg2 3:15</span></span>

bring me a minstrel--The effect of music in soothing the mind is much
regarded in the East; and it appears that the ancient prophets, before
entering their work, commonly resorted to it, as a preparative, by
praise and prayer, to their receiving the prophetic afflatus.

the hand of the Lord--a phrase significantly implying that the gift of
prophecy was not a natural or inherent gift, but conferred by the power
and grace of God.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 3:16](../../../bib/kjv/kg2003.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">kg2 3:16</span></span>

Make this valley full of ditches--capable of holding water.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 3:17](../../../bib/kjv/kg2003.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">kg2 3:17</span></span>

Ye shall not see wind--It is common in the East to speak of seeing wind,
from the clouds of straw, dust, or sand, that are often whirled into the
air, after a long drought.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 3:20](../../../bib/kjv/kg2003.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">kg2 3:20</span></span>

when the meat offering was offered--that is, at the time of the morning
sacrifice, accompanied, doubtless, with solemn prayers; and these led,
it may be, by Elisha on this occasion, as on a similar one by Elijah
([Kg1 18:36](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#036)).

behold, there came water by the way of Edom--Far from the Israelitish
camp, in the eastern mountains of Edom, a great fall of rain, a kind of
cloudburst, took place, by which the wady was at once filled, but they
saw neither the wind nor the rains. The divine interposition was shown
by introducing the laws of nature to the determined end in the
predetermined way \[KEIL\]. It brought not only aid to the Israelitish
army in their distress, by a plentiful supply of water, but destruction
on the Moabites, who, perceiving the water, under the refulgent rays of
the morning sun, red like blood, concluded the confederate kings had
quarrelled and deluged the field with their mutual slaughter; so that,
rushing to their camp in full expectation of great spoil, they were met
by the Israelites, who, prepared for battle, fought and pursued them.
Their country was laid waste in the way, which has always been
considered the greatest desolation in the East ([Kg2
3:24](../../../bib/kjv/kg2003.htm#024)).

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 3:25](../../../bib/kjv/kg2003.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">kg2 3:25</span></span>

Kir-haraseth--(now Kerak)--Castle of Moab--then, probably, the only
fortress in the land.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 3:27](../../../bib/kjv/kg2003.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">kg2 3:27</span></span>

took his eldest son that should have reigned in his stead, and offered
him for a burnt offering, &c.--By this deed of horror, to which the
allied army drove the king of Moab, a divine judgment came upon Israel;
that is, the besiegers feared the anger of God, which they had incurred
by giving occasion to the human sacrifice forbidden in the law ([Lev
18:21](../../../bib/kjv/lev018.htm#021); [Lev
20:3](../../../bib/kjv/lev020.htm#003)), and hastily raised the siege.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 4 Kings (2 Kings) Chapter 4](kg2004)

</div>
