<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Lamentations Index](lam)  
  [Previous](jer052)  [Next](lam001) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*A Commentary, Critical, Practical, and Explanatory on the Old and New
Testaments*, by Robert Jamieson, A.R. Fausset and David Brown \[1882\]
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Lamentations Introduction](../../../bib/kjv/lam001.htm#001)

[Lamentations](../../../bib/kjv/lam001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">lam 0:0</span></span>

In the Hebrew Bible these Elegies of Jeremiah, five in number, are
placed among the Chetuvim, or "Holy Writings" ("the Psalms," &c., [Luk
24:44](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#044)), between Ruth and Ecclesiastes.
But though in classification of compositions it belongs to the Chetuvim,
it probably followed the prophecies of Jeremiah originally. For thus
alone can we account for the prophetical books being enumerated by
JOSEPHUS \[Against Apion, 1.1.8\] as thirteen: he must have reckoned
Jeremiah and Lamentations as one book, as also Judges and Ruth, the two
books of Samuel, &c., Ezra and Nehemiah. The Lamentations naturally
follow the book which sets forth the circumstances forming the subject
of the Elegies. Similar lamentations occur in [Sa2
1:19](../../../bib/kjv/sa2001.htm#019), &c.; [Sa2
3:33](../../../bib/kjv/sa2003.htm#033). The Jews read it in their
synagogues on the ninth of the month Ab, which is a fast for the
destruction of their holy city. As in [Ch2
35:25](../../../bib/kjv/ch2035.htm#025), "lamentations" are said to have
been "written" by Jeremiah on the death of Josiah, besides it having
been made "an ordinance in Israel" that "singing women" should "speak"
of that king in lamentations; JOSEPHUS \[Antiquities, 10.5.1\], JEROME,
&c., thought that they are contained in the present collection. But
plainly the subject here is the overthrow of the Jewish city and people,
as the Septuagint expressly states in an introductory verse to their
version. The probability is that there is embodied in these Lamentations
much of the language of Jeremiah's original Elegy on Josiah, as [Ch2
35:25](../../../bib/kjv/ch2035.htm#025) states; but it is now applied to
the more universal calamity of the whole state, of which Josiah's sad
death was the forerunner. Thus [Lam
4:20](../../../bib/kjv/lam004.htm#020), originally applied to Josiah,
was "written," in its subsequent reference, not so much of him, as of
the throne of Judah in general, the last representative of which,
Zedekiah, had just been carried away. The language, which is true of
good Josiah, is too strong in favor of Zedekiah, except when viewed as
representative of the crown in general. It was natural to embody the
language of the Elegy on Josiah in the more general lamentations, as his
death was the presage of the last disaster that overthrew the throne and
state.

The title more frequently given by the Jews to these Elegies is, "How"
(Hebrew, Eechah), from the first word, as the Pentateuch is similarly
called by the first Hebrew word of [Gen
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#001). The Septuagint calls it
"Lamentations," from which we derive the name. It refers not merely to
the events which occurred at the capture of the city, but to the
sufferings of the citizens (the penalty of national sin) from the very
beginning of the siege; and perhaps from before it, under Manasseh and
Josiah ([Ch2 33:11](../../../bib/kjv/ch2033.htm#011); [Ch2
35:20-25](../../../bib/kjv/ch2035.htm#020)); under Jehoahaz, Jehoiakim,
and Zedekiah ([Ch2 36:3-4](../../../bib/kjv/ch2036.htm#003), [Ch2
36:6-7](../../../bib/kjv/ch2036.htm#006), [Ch2
36:10-11](../../../bib/kjv/ch2036.htm#010), &c.). LOWTH says, "Every
letter is written with a tear, every word the sound of a broken heart."
The style is midway between the simple elevation of prophetic writing
and the loftier rhythm of Moses, David, and Habakkuk. Terse conciseness
marks the Hebrew original, notwithstanding Jeremiah's diffuseness in his
other writings. The Elegies are grouped in stanzas as they arose in his
mind, without any artificial system of arrangement as to the thoughts.
The five Elegies are acrostic: each is divided into twenty-two stanzas
or verses. In the first three Elegies the stanzas consist of triplets of
lines (excepting [Lam 1:7](../../../bib/kjv/lam001.htm#007); [Lam
2:19](../../../bib/kjv/lam002.htm#019), which contain each four lines)
each beginning with the letters of the Hebrew alphabet in regular order
(twenty-two in number). In three instances ([Lam
2:16-17](../../../bib/kjv/lam002.htm#016); [Lam
3:46-51](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#046); [Lam
4:16-17](../../../bib/kjv/lam004.htm#016)) two letters are transposed.
In the third Elegy, each line of the three forming every stanza begins
with the same letter. The stanzas in the fourth and fifth Elegies
consist of two lines each. The fifth Elegy, though having twenty-two
stanzas (the number of letters in the Hebrew alphabet), just as the
first four, yet is not alphabetical; and its lines are shorter than
those of the others, which are longer than are found in other Hebrew
poems, and contain twelve syllables, marked by a cÃ&brvbr;sura about the
middle, dividing them into two somewhat unequal parts. The alphabetical
arrangement was adopted originally to assist the memory. GROTIUS thinks
the reason for the inversion of two of the Hebrew letters in [Lam
2:16-17](../../../bib/kjv/lam002.htm#016); [Lam
3:46-51](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#046); [Lam
4:16-17](../../../bib/kjv/lam004.htm#016), is that the Chaldeans, like
the Arabians, used a different order from the Hebrews; in the first
Elegy, Jeremiah speaks as a Hebrew, in the following ones, as one
subject to the Chaldeans. This is doubtful.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Lamentations Chapter 1](lam001)

</div>
