<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Leviticus Index](lev.md)  
  [Previous](lev004)  [Next](lev006.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*A Commentary, Critical, Practical, and Explanatory on the Old and New
Testaments*, by Robert Jamieson, A.R. Fausset and David Brown \[1882\]
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Leviticus Chapter 5](../../../bib/kjv/lev005.htm#001.md)

[Leviticus 5:1](../../../bib/kjv/lev005.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">lev 5:1</span></span>

TRESPASS OFFERINGS FOR CONCEALING KNOWLEDGE. ([Lev
5:1](../../../bib/kjv/lev005.htm#001).md)

if a soul . . . hear the voice of swearing--or, according to some, "the
words of adjuration." A proclamation was issued calling any one who
could give information, to come before the court and bear testimony to
the guilt of a criminal; and the manner in which witnesses were
interrogated in the Jewish courts of justice was not by swearing them
directly, but adjuring them by reading the words of an oath: "the voice
of swearing." The offense, then, for the expiation of which this law
provides, was that of a person who neglected or avoided the opportunity
of lodging the information which it was in his power to communicate.

[Leviticus 5:2](../../../bib/kjv/lev005.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">lev 5:2</span></span>

TOUCHING ANY THING UNCLEAN. ([Lev
5:2-3](../../../bib/kjv/lev005.htm#002).md)

if a soul touch any unclean thing--A person who, unknown to himself at
the time, came in contact with any thing unclean, and either neglected
the requisite ceremonies of purification or engaged in the services of
religion while under the taint of ceremonial defilement, might be
afterwards convinced that he had committed an offense.

[Leviticus 5:4](../../../bib/kjv/lev005.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">lev 5:4</span></span>

FOR SWEARING. ([Lev 5:4-19](../../../bib/kjv/lev005.htm#004).md)

if a soul swear--a rash oath, without duly considering the nature and
consequences of the oath, perhaps inconsiderately binding himself to do
anything wrong, or neglecting to perform a vow to do something good. In
all such cases a person might have transgressed one of the divine
commandments unwittingly, and have been afterwards brought to a sense of
his delinquency.

[Leviticus 5:5](../../../bib/kjv/lev005.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">lev 5:5</span></span>

it shall be, when he shall be guilty . . . that he shall confess that he
hath sinned in that thing--make a voluntary acknowledgment of his sin
from the impulse of his own conscience, and before it come to the
knowledge of the world. A previous discovery might have subjected him to
some degree of punishment from which his spontaneous confession released
him, but still he was considered guilty of trespass, to expiate which he
was obliged by the ceremonial law to go through certain observances.

[Leviticus 5:6](../../../bib/kjv/lev005.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">lev 5:6</span></span>

he shall bring his trespass offering unto the Lord for his sins which he
hath sinned--A trespass offering differed from a sin offering in the
following respects: that it was appointed for persons who had either
done evil unwittingly, or were in doubt as to their own criminality; or
felt themselves in such a special situation as required sacrifices of
that kind \[BROWN\]. The trespass offering appointed in such cases was a
female lamb or kid; if unable to make such an offering, he might bring a
pair of turtledoves or two young pigeons--the one to be offered for a
sin offering, the other for a burnt offering; or if even that was beyond
his ability, the law would be satisfied with the tenth part of an ephah
of fine flour without oil or frankincense.

[Leviticus 5:15](../../../bib/kjv/lev005.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">lev 5:15</span></span>

sin through ignorance, in the holy things of the Lord, &c.--This is a
case of sacrilege committed ignorantly, either in not paying the full
due of tithes, first-fruits, and similar tribute in eating of meats,
which belonged to the priests alone--or he was required, along with the
restitution in money, the amount of which was to be determined by the
priest, to offer a ram for a trespass offering, as soon as he came to
the knowledge of his involuntary fraud.

[Leviticus 5:17](../../../bib/kjv/lev005.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">lev 5:17</span></span>

if a soul sin . . . though he wist it not, yet is he guilty--This also
refers to holy things, and it differs from the preceding in being one of
the doubtful cases,--that is, where conscience suspects, though the
understanding be in doubt whether criminality or sin has been committed.
The Jewish rabbis give, as an example, the case of a person who, knowing
that "the fat of the inwards" is not to be eaten, religiously abstained
from the use of it; but should a dish happen to have been at table in
which he had reason to suspect some portion of that meat was
intermingled, and he had, inadvertently, partaken of that unlawful
viand, he was bound to bring a ram as a trespass offering \[[Lev
5:16](../../../bib/kjv/lev005.htm#016.md)\]. These provisions were all
designed to impress the conscience with the sense of responsibility to
God and keep alive on the hearts of the people a salutary fear of doing
any secret wrong.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Leviticus Chapter 6](lev006.md)

</div>
