<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Leviticus Index](lev)  
  [Previous](lev010)  [Next](lev012) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*A Commentary, Critical, Practical, and Explanatory on the Old and New
Testaments*, by Robert Jamieson, A.R. Fausset and David Brown \[1882\]
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Leviticus Chapter 11](../../../bib/kjv/lev011.htm#001)

[Leviticus 11:1](../../../bib/kjv/lev011.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">lev 11:1</span></span>

BEASTS THAT MAY AND MAY NOT BE EATEN. (Lev. 11:1-47)

the Lord spake unto Moses and to Aaron--These laws, being addressed to
both the civil and ecclesiastical rulers in Israel, may serve to
indicate the twofold view that is to be taken of them. Undoubtedly the
first and strongest reason for instituting a distinction among meats was
to discourage the Israelites from spreading into other countries, and
from general intercourse with the world--to prevent them acquiring
familiarity with the inhabitants of the countries bordering on Canaan,
so as to fall into their idolatries or be contaminated with their vices:
in short, to keep them a distinct and peculiar people. To this purpose,
no difference of creed, no system of polity, no diversity of language or
manner, was so subservient as a distinction of meats founded on
religion; and hence the Jews, who were taught by education to abhor many
articles of food freely partaken of by other people, never, even during
periods of great degeneracy, could amalgamate with the nations among
which they were dispersed. But although this was the principal
foundation of these laws, dietetic reasons also had weight; for there is
no doubt that the flesh of many of the animals here ranked as unclean,
is everywhere, but especially in warm climates, less wholesome and
adapted for food than those which were allowed to be eaten. These laws,
therefore, being subservient to sanitary as well as religious ends, were
addressed both to Moses and Aaron.

[Leviticus 11:3](../../../bib/kjv/lev011.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">lev 11:3</span></span>

Whatsoever parteth the hoof, and is cloven-footed, and cheweth the
cud--Ruminating animals by the peculiar structure of their stomachs
digest their food more fully than others. It is found that in the act of
chewing the cud, a large portion of the poisonous properties of noxious
plants eaten by them, passes off by the salivary glands. This power of
secreting the poisonous effects of vegetables, is said to be
particularly remarkable in cows and goats, whose mouths are often sore,
and sometimes bleed, in consequence. Their flesh is therefore in a
better state for food, as it contains more of the nutritious juices, is
more easily digested in the human stomach, and is consequently more
easily assimilated. Animals which do not chew the cud, convert their
food less perfectly; their flesh is therefore unwholesome, from the
gross animal juices with which they abound, and is apt to produce
scorbutic and scrofulous disorders. But the animals that may be eaten
are those which "part the hoof as well as chew the cud," and this is
another means of freeing the flesh of the animal from noxious
substances. "In the case of animals with parted hoofs, when feeding in
unfavorable situations a prodigious amount of fÅ“tid matter is
discharged, and passes off between the toes; while animals with
undivided hoofs, feeding on the same ground, become severely affected in
the legs, from the poisonous plants among the pasture" \[WHITLAW, Code
of Health\]. All experience attests this, and accordingly the use of
ruminating animals (that is, those which both chew the cud and part the
hoof) has always obtained in most countries though it was observed most
carefully by the people who were favored with the promulgation of God's
law.

[Leviticus 11:4](../../../bib/kjv/lev011.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">lev 11:4</span></span>

the camel--It does to a certain extent divide the hoof, for the foot
consists of two large parts, but the division is not complete; the toes
rest upon an elastic pad on which the animal goes; as a beast of burden
its flesh is tough. An additional reason for its prohibition might be to
keep the Israelites apart from the descendants of Ishmael.

[Leviticus 11:5](../../../bib/kjv/lev011.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">lev 11:5</span></span>

the coney--not the rabbit, for it is not found in Palestine or Arabia,
but the hyrax, a little animal of the size and general shape of the
rabbit, but differing from it in several essential features. It has no
tail, singular, long hairs bristling like thorns among the fur on its
back; its feet are bare, its nails flat and round, except those on each
inner toe of the hind feet, which are sharp and project like an awl. It
does not burrow in the ground but frequents the clefts of rocks.

[Leviticus 11:6](../../../bib/kjv/lev011.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">lev 11:6</span></span>

the hare--Two species of hare must have been pointed at: the Sinai hare,
the hare of the desert, small and generally brown; the other, the hare
of Palestine and Syria, about the size and appearance of that known in
our own country. Neither the hare nor the coney are really ruminating.
They only appear to be so from working the jaws on the grasses they live
on. They are not cloven-footed; and besides, it is said that from the
great quantity of down upon them, they are very much subject to
vermin--that in order to expel these, they eat poisonous plants, and if
used as food while in that state, they are most deleterious \[WHITLAW\].

[Leviticus 11:7](../../../bib/kjv/lev011.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">lev 11:7</span></span>

the swine--It is a filthy, foul-feeding animal, and it lacks one of the
natural provisions for purifying the system, "it cheweth not the cud";
in hot climates indulgence in swine's flesh is particularly liable to
produce leprosy, scurvy, and various cutaneous eruptions. It was
therefore strictly avoided by the Israelites. Its prohibition was
further necessary to prevent their adopting many of the grossest
idolatries practised by neighboring nations.

[Leviticus 11:9](../../../bib/kjv/lev011.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">lev 11:9</span></span>

These shall ye eat . . . whatsoever hath fins and scales--"The fins and
scales are the means by which the excrescences of fish are carried off,
the same as in animals by perspiration. I have never known an instance
of disease produced by eating such fish; but those that have no fins and
scales cause, in hot climates, the most malignant disorders when eaten;
in many cases they prove a mortal poison" \[WHITLAW\].

[Leviticus 11:12](../../../bib/kjv/lev011.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">lev 11:12</span></span>

Whatsoever hath no fins nor scales, &c.--Under this classification
frogs, eels, shellfish of all descriptions, were included as unclean;
"many of the latter (shellfish) enjoy a reputation they do not deserve,
and have, when plentifully partaken of, produced effects which have led
to a suspicion of their containing something of a poisonous nature."

[Leviticus 11:13](../../../bib/kjv/lev011.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">lev 11:13</span></span>

these are they which ye shall have in abomination among the fowls--All
birds of prey are particularly ranked in the class unclean; all those
which feed on flesh and carrion. No less than twenty species of birds,
all probably then known, are mentioned under this category, and the
inference follows that all which are not mentioned were allowed; that
is, fowls which subsist on vegetable substances. From our imperfect
knowledge of the natural history of Palestine, Arabia, and the
contiguous countries at that time, it is not easy to determine exactly
what some of the prohibited birds were; although they must have been all
well known among the people to whom these laws were given.

the ossifrage--Hebrew, "bone-breaker," rendered in the Septuagint
"griffon," supposed to be the GypÅ“tos barbatus, the Lammer Geyer of the
Swiss--a bird of the eagle or vulture species, inhabiting the highest
mountain ranges in Western Asia as well as Europe. It pursues as its
prey the chamois, ibex, or marmot, among rugged cliffs, till it drives
them over a precipice--thus obtaining the name of "bone-breaker."

the ospray--the black eagle, among the smallest, but swiftest and
strongest of its kind.

[Leviticus 11:14](../../../bib/kjv/lev011.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">lev 11:14</span></span>

the vulture--The word so rendered in our version means more probably
"the kite" or "glede" and describes a varying but majestic flight,
exactly that of the kite, which now darts forward with the rapidity of
an arrow, now rests motionless on its expanded wings in the air. It
feeds on small birds, insects, and fish.

the kite--the vulture. In Egypt and perhaps in the adjoining countries
also, the kite and vulture are often seen together flying in company, or
busily pursuing their foul but important office of devouring the carrion
and relics of putrefying flesh, which might otherwise pollute the
atmosphere.

after his kind--that is, the prohibition against eating it extended to
the whole species.

[Leviticus 11:15](../../../bib/kjv/lev011.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">lev 11:15</span></span>

the raven--including the crow, the pie.

[Leviticus 11:16](../../../bib/kjv/lev011.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">lev 11:16</span></span>

the owl--It is generally supposed the ostrich is denoted by the original
word.

the nighthawk--a very small bird, with which, from its nocturnal habits,
many superstitious ideas were associated.

the cuckoo--Evidently some other bird is meant by the original term,
from its being ranged among rapacious birds. DR. SHAW thinks it is the
safsaf; but that, being a graminivorous and gregarious bird, is equally
objectionable. Others think that the sea mew, or some of the small sea
fowl, is intended.

the hawk--The Hebrew word includes every variety of the falcon
family--as the goshawk, the jerhawk, the sparrow hawk, &c. Several
species of hawks are found in Western Asia and Egypt, where they find
inexhaustible prey in the immense numbers of pigeons and turtledoves
that abound in those quarters. The hawk was held pre-eminently sacred
among the Egyptians; and this, besides its rapacious disposition and
gross habits, might have been a strong reason for its prohibition as an
article of food to the Israelites.

[Leviticus 11:17](../../../bib/kjv/lev011.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">lev 11:17</span></span>

the little owl--or horned owl, as some render it. The common barn owl,
which is well known in the East. It is the only bird of its kind here
referred to, although the word is thrice mentioned in our version.

cormorant--supposed to be the gull. \[See on [Deu
14:17](../../../bib/kjv/deu014.htm#017).\]

the great owl--according to some, the Ibis of the Egyptians. It was well
known to the Israelites, and so rendered by the Septuagint ([Deu
14:16](../../../bib/kjv/deu014.htm#016); [Isa
34:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa034.htm#011)): according to PARKHURST, the
bittern, but not determined.

[Leviticus 11:18](../../../bib/kjv/lev011.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">lev 11:18</span></span>

the swan--found in great numbers in all the countries of the Levant. It
frequents marshy places--the vicinity of rivers and lakes. It was held
sacred by the Egyptians, and kept tame within the precincts of heathen
temples. It was probably on this account chiefly that its use as food
was prohibited. MICHAELIS considers it the goose.

the pelican--remarkable for the bag or pouch under its lower jaw which
serves not only as a net to catch, but also as a receptacle of food. It
is solitary in its habits and, like other large aquatic birds, often
flies to a great distance from its favorite haunts.

the gier eagle--Being here associated with waterfowl, it has been
questioned whether any species of eagle is referred to. Some think, as
the original name racham denotes "tenderness," "affection," the halcyon
or kingfisher is intended \[CALMET\]. Others think that it is the bird
now called the rachami, a kind of Egyptian vulture, abundant in the
streets of Cairo and popularly called "Pharaoh's fowl." It is white in
color, in size like a raven, and feeds on carrion; it is one of the
foulest and filthiest birds in the world. \[See on [Deu
14:17](../../../bib/kjv/deu014.htm#017).\]

[Leviticus 11:19](../../../bib/kjv/lev011.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">lev 11:19</span></span>

the stork--a bird of benevolent temper and held in the highest
estimation in all Eastern countries; it was declared unclean, probably,
from its feeding on serpents and other venomous reptiles, as well as
rearing its young on the same food.

the heron--The word so translated only occurs in the prohibited list of
food and has been variously rendered--the crane, the plover, the
woodcock, the parrot. In this great diversity of opinion nothing certain
can be affirmed regarding it. Judging from the group with which it is
classified, it must be an aquatic bird that is meant. It may as well be
the heron as any other bird, the more especially as herons abound in
Egypt and in the Hauran of Palestine.

the lapwing--or hoopoe; found in warm regions, a very pretty but filthy
species of bird. It was considered unclean, probably from its feeding on
insects, worms, and snails.

the bat--the great or Ternat bat, known in the East, noted for its
voracity and filthiness.

[Leviticus 11:20](../../../bib/kjv/lev011.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">lev 11:20</span></span>

All fowls that creep, &c.--By "fowls" here are to be understood all
creatures with wings and "going upon all fours," not a restriction to
animals which have exactly four feet, because many "creeping things"
have more than that number. The prohibition is regarded generally as
extending to insects, reptiles, and worms.

[Leviticus 11:21](../../../bib/kjv/lev011.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">lev 11:21</span></span>

Yet these may ye eat of every flying creeping thing that goeth upon all
four, which have legs above their feet--Nothing short of a scientific
description could convey more accurately the nature "of the locust after
its kind." They were allowed as lawful food to the Israelites, and they
are eaten by the Arabs, who fry them in olive oil. When sprinkled with
salt, dried, smoked, and fried, they are said to taste not unlike red
herrings.

[Leviticus 11:26](../../../bib/kjv/lev011.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">lev 11:26</span></span>

every beast . . . not cloven-footed--The prohibited animals under this
description include not only the beasts which have a single hoof, as
horses and asses, but those also which divided the foot into paws, as
lions, tigers, &c.

[Leviticus 11:29](../../../bib/kjv/lev011.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">lev 11:29</span></span>

the weasel--rather, the mole.

the mouse--From its diminutive size it is placed among the reptiles
instead of the quadrupeds.

the tortoise--a lizard, resembling very nearly in shape, and in the hard
pointed scales of the tail, the shaketail.

[Leviticus 11:30](../../../bib/kjv/lev011.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">lev 11:30</span></span>

the ferret--the Hebrew word is thought by some to signify the newt or
chameleon, by others the frog.

the chameleon--called by the Arabs the warral, a green lizard.

the snail--a lizard which lives in the sand, and is called by the Arabs
chulca, of an azure color.

the mole--Another species of lizard is meant, probably the chameleon.

[Leviticus 11:31](../../../bib/kjv/lev011.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">lev 11:31</span></span>

whosoever doth touch them, when . . . dead, shall be unclean until the
even--These regulations must have often caused annoyance by suddenly
requiring the exclusion of people from society, as well as the
ordinances of religion. Nevertheless they were extremely useful and
salutary, especially as enforcing attention to cleanliness. This is a
matter of essential importance in the East, where venomous reptiles
often creep into houses and are found lurking in boxes, vessels, or
holes in the wall; and the carcass of one of them, or a dead mouse,
mole, lizard, or other unclean animal, might be inadvertently touched by
the hand, or fall on clothes, skin bottles, or any article of common
domestic use. By connecting, therefore, the touch of such creatures with
ceremonial defilement, which required immediately to be removed, an
effectual means was taken to prevent the bad effects of venom and all
unclean or noxious matter.

[Leviticus 11:47](../../../bib/kjv/lev011.htm#047)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_047">lev 11:47</span></span>

make a difference between the unclean and the clean--that is, between
animals used and not used for food. It is probable that the laws
contained in this chapter were not entirely new, but only gave the
sanction of divine enactment to ancient usages. Some of the prohibited
animals have, on physiological grounds, been everywhere rejected by the
general sense or experience of mankind; while others may have been
declared unclean from their unwholesomeness in warm countries or from
some reasons, which are now imperfectly known, connected with
contemporary idolatry.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Leviticus Chapter 12](lev012)

</div>
