<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Leviticus Index](lev.md)  
  [Previous](lev003)  [Next](lev005.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*A Commentary, Critical, Practical, and Explanatory on the Old and New
Testaments*, by Robert Jamieson, A.R. Fausset and David Brown \[1882\]
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Leviticus Chapter 4](../../../bib/kjv/lev004.htm#001.md)

[Leviticus 4:2](../../../bib/kjv/lev004.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">lev 4:2</span></span>

SIN OFFERING OF IGNORANCE. ([Lev
4:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/lev004.htm#001).md)

If a soul shall sin through ignorance against any of the commandments of
the Lord--a soul--an individual. All sins may be considered, in a
certain sense, as committed "through ignorance," error, or
misapprehension of one's true interests. The sins, however, referred to
in this law were unintentional violations of the ceremonial
laws,--breaches made through haste, or inadvertency of some negative
precepts, which, if done knowingly and wilfully, would have involved a
capital punishment.

do against any of them--To bring out the meaning, it is necessary to
supply, "he shall bring a sin offering."

[Leviticus 4:3](../../../bib/kjv/lev004.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">lev 4:3</span></span>

SIN OFFERING FOR THE PRIEST. (Lev. 4:3-35)

If the priest that is anointed do sin--that is, the high priest, in
whom, considering his character as typical mediator, and his exalted
office, the people had the deepest interest; and whose transgression of
any part of the divine law, therefore, whether done unconsciously or
heedlessly, was a very serious offense, both as regarded himself
individually, and the influence of his example. He is the person
principally meant, though the common order of the priesthood was
included.

according to the sin of the people--that is, bring guilt on the people.
He was to take a young bullock (the age and sex being expressly
mentioned), and having killed it according to the form prescribed for
the burnt offerings, he was to take it into the holy place and sprinkle
the atoning blood seven times before the veil, and tip with the crimson
fluid the horns of the golden altar of incense, on his way to the court
of the priests,--a solemn ceremonial appointed only for very grave and
heinous offenses, and which betokened that his sin, though done in
ignorance, had vitiated all his services; nor could any official duty he
engaged in be beneficial either to himself or the people, unless it were
atoned for by blood.

[Leviticus 4:11](../../../bib/kjv/lev004.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">lev 4:11</span></span>

the skin of the bullock, and all his flesh--In ordinary circumstances,
these were perquisites of the priests. But in the expiation necessary
for a sin of the high priest, after the fat of the sacrifice was offered
on the altar, the carcass was carried without the camp \[[Lev
4:12](../../../bib/kjv/lev004.htm#012.md)\], in order that the total
combustion of it in the place of ashes might the more strikingly
indicate the enormity of the transgression, and the horror with which he
regarded it (compare [Heb 13:12-13](../../../bib/kjv/heb013.htm#012).md).

[Leviticus 4:13](../../../bib/kjv/lev004.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">lev 4:13</span></span>

if the whole congregation of Israel sin through ignorance--In
consequence of some culpable neglect or misapprehension of the law, the
people might contract national guilt, and then national expiation was
necessary. The same sacrifice was to be offered as in the former case,
but with this difference in the ceremonial, that the elders or heads of
the tribes, as representing the people and being the principal
aggressors in misleading the congregation, laid their hands on the head
of the victim. The priest then took the blood into the holy place,
where, after dipping his finger in it seven times, he sprinkled the
drops seven times before the veil. This done, he returned to the court
of the priests, and ascending the altar, put some portion upon its
horns; then he poured it out at the foot of the altar. The fat was the
only part of the animal which was offered on the altar; for the carcass,
with its appurtenances and offals, was carried without the camp, into
the place where the ashes were deposited, and there consumed with fire.

[Leviticus 4:22](../../../bib/kjv/lev004.htm#022.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">lev 4:22</span></span>

When a ruler hath sinned, and done somewhat through ignorance against
any of the commandments--Whatever was the form of government, the king,
judge, or subordinate, was the party concerned in this law. The trespass
of such a civil functionary being less serious in its character and
consequences than that either of the high priest or the congregation, a
sin offering of inferior value was required--"a kid of the goats"; and
neither was the blood carried into the sanctuary, but applied only to
the altar of burnt offering; nor was the carcass taken without the camp;
it was eaten by the priests-in-waiting.

[Leviticus 4:27](../../../bib/kjv/lev004.htm#027.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">lev 4:27</span></span>

if any one of the common people sin through ignorance--In this case the
expiatory offering appointed was a female kid, or a ewe-lamb without
blemish; and the ceremonies were exactly the same as those observed in
the case of the offending ruler \[[Lev
4:22-26](../../../bib/kjv/lev004.htm#022.md)\]. In these two latter
instances, the blood of the sin offering was applied to the altar of
burnt offering--the place where bloody sacrifices were appointed to be
immolated. But the transgression of a high priest, or of the whole
congregation, entailing a general taint on the ritual of the tabernacle,
and vitiating its services, required a further expiation; and therefore,
in these cases, the blood of the sin offering was applied to the altar
of incense \[[Lev 4:6](../../../bib/kjv/lev004.htm#006.md), [Lev
4:17](../../../bib/kjv/lev004.htm#017.md)\].

[Leviticus 4:35](../../../bib/kjv/lev004.htm#035.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_035">lev 4:35</span></span>

it shall be forgiven him--None of these sacrifices possessed any
intrinsic value sufficient to free the conscience of the sinner from the
pollution of guilt, or to obtain his pardon from God; but they gave a
formal deliverance from a secular penalty ([Heb
9:13-14](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#013).md); and they were figurative
representations of the full and perfect sin offering which was to be
made by Christ.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Leviticus Chapter 5](lev005.md)

</div>
