<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Leviticus Index](lev)  
  [Previous](lev013)  [Next](lev015) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*A Commentary, Critical, Practical, and Explanatory on the Old and New
Testaments*, by Robert Jamieson, A.R. Fausset and David Brown \[1882\]
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Leviticus Chapter 14](../../../bib/kjv/lev014.htm#001)

[Leviticus 14:2](../../../bib/kjv/lev014.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">lev 14:2</span></span>

THE RITES AND SACRIFICES IN CLEANSING OF THE LEPER. (Lev. 14:1-57)

law of the leper in the day of his cleansing--Though quite convalescent,
a leper was not allowed to return to society immediately and at his own
will. The malignant character of his disease rendered the greatest
precautions necessary to his re-admission among the people. One of the
priests most skilled in the diagnostics of disease \[GROTIUS\], being
deputed to attend such outcasts, the restored leper appeared before this
official, and when after examination a certificate of health was given,
the ceremonies here described were forthwith observed outside the camp.

[Leviticus 14:4](../../../bib/kjv/lev014.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">lev 14:4</span></span>

two birds--literally, "sparrows." The Septuagint, however, renders the
expression "little birds"; and it is evident that it is to be taken in
this generic sense from their being specified as "clean"--a condition
which would have been altogether superfluous to mention in reference to
sparrows. In all the offerings prescribed in the law, Moses ordered only
common and accessible birds; and hence we may presume that he points
here to such birds as sparrows or pigeons, as in the desert it might
have been very difficult to procure wild birds alive.

cedar-wood, and scarlet, and hyssop--The cedar here meant was certainly
not the famous tree of Lebanon, and it is generally supposed to have
been the juniper, as several varieties of that shrub are found growing
abundantly in the clefts and crevices of the Sinaitic mountains. A stick
of this shrub was bound to a bunch of hyssop by a scarlet ribbon, and
the living bird was to be so attached to it, that when they dipped the
branches in the water, the tail of the bird might also be moistened, but
not the head nor the wings, that it might not be impeded in its flight
when let loose.

[Leviticus 14:5](../../../bib/kjv/lev014.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">lev 14:5</span></span>

the priest shall command that one of the birds be killed . . . over
running water--As the blood of a single bird would not have been
sufficient to immerse the body of another bird, it was mingled with
spring water to increase the quantity necessary for the appointed
sprinklings, which were to be repeated seven times, denoting a complete
purification. (See [Kg2 5:10](../../../bib/kjv/kg2005.htm#010); [Psa
51:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#002); [Mat
8:4](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#004); [Luk
5:14](../../../bib/kjv/luk005.htm#014)). The living bird being then set
free, in token of the leper's release from quarantine, the priest
pronounced him clean; and this official declaration was made with all
solemnity, in order that the mind of the leper might be duly impressed
with a sense of the divine goodness, and that others might be satisfied
they might safely hold intercourse with him. Several other purifications
had to be gone through during a series of seven days, and the whole
process had to be repeated on the seventh, ere he was allowed to
re-enter the camp. The circumstance of a priest being employed seems to
imply that instruction suitable to the newly recovered leper would be
given, and that the symbolical ceremonies used in the process of
cleansing leprosy would be explained. How far they were then understood
we cannot tell. But we can trace some instructive analogies between the
leprosy and the disease of sin, and between the rites observed in the
process of cleansing leprosy and the provisions of the Gospel. The chief
of these analogies is that as it was only when a leper exhibited a
certain change of state that orders were given by the priest for a
sacrifice, so a sinner must be in the exercise of faith and penitence
ere the benefits of the gospel remedy can be enjoyed by him. The slain
bird and the bird let loose are supposed to typify, the one the death,
and the other the resurrection of Christ; while the sprinklings on him
that had been leprous typified the requirements which led a believer to
cleanse himself from all filthiness of the flesh and spirit, and to
perfect his holiness in the fear of the Lord.

[Leviticus 14:10](../../../bib/kjv/lev014.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">lev 14:10</span></span>

on the eighth day he shall take two he lambs without blemish, and one
ewe-lamb of the first year without blemish--The purification of the
leper was not completed till at the end of seven days, after the
ceremonial of the birds \[[Lev
14:4-7](../../../bib/kjv/lev014.htm#004)\] and during which, though
permitted to come into the camp, he had to tarry abroad out of his tent
\[[Lev 14:8](../../../bib/kjv/lev014.htm#008)\], from which he came
daily to appear at the door of the tabernacle with the offerings
required. He was presented before the Lord by the priest that made him
clean. And hence it has always been reckoned among pious people the
first duty of a patient newly restored from a long and dangerous
sickness to repair to the church to offer his thanksgiving, where his
body and soul, in order to be an acceptable offering, must be presented
by our great Priest, whose blood alone makes any clean. The offering was
to consist of two lambs, the one was to be a sin offering, and an ephah
of fine flour (two pints equals one-tenth), and one log (half pint) of
oil ([Lev 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/lev002.htm#001)). One of the lambs was
for a trespass offering, which was necessary from the inherent sin of
his nature or from his defilement of the camp by his leprosy previous to
his expulsion; and it is remarkable that the blood of the trespass
offering was applied exactly in the same particular manner to the
extremities of the restored leper, as that of the ram in the
consecration of the priests \[[Lev
8:23](../../../bib/kjv/lev008.htm#023)\]. The parts sprinkled with this
blood were then anointed with oil--a ceremony which is supposed to have
borne this spiritual import: that while the blood was a token of
forgiveness, the oil was an emblem of healing--as the blood of Christ
justifies, the influence of the Spirit sanctifies. Of the other two
lambs the one was to be a sin offering and the other a burnt offering,
which had also the character of a thank offering for God's mercy in his
restoration. And this was considered to make atonement "for him"; that
is, it removed that ceremonial pollution which had excluded him from the
enjoyment of religious ordinances, just as the atonement of Christ
restores all who are cleansed through faith in His sacrifice to the
privileges of the children of God.

[Leviticus 14:21](../../../bib/kjv/lev014.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">lev 14:21</span></span>

if he be poor, and cannot get so much; then he shall take one lamb--a
kind and considerate provision for an extension of the privilege to
lepers of the poorer class. The blood of their smaller offering was to
be applied in the same process of purification and they were as publicly
and completely cleansed as those who brought a costlier offering ([Act
10:34](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#034)).

[Leviticus 14:34](../../../bib/kjv/lev014.htm#034)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">lev 14:34</span></span>

leprosy in a house--This law was prospective, not to come into operation
till the settlement of the Israelites in Canaan. The words, "I put the
leprosy," has led many to think that this plague was a judicial
infliction from heaven for the sins of the owner; while others do not
regard it in this light, it being common in Scripture to represent God
as doing that which He only permits in His providence to be done.
Assuming it to have been a natural disease, a new difficulty arises as
to whether we are to consider that the house had become infected by the
contagion of leprous occupiers; or that the leprosy was in the house
itself. It is evident that the latter was the true state of the case,
from the furniture being removed out of it on the first suspicion of
disease on the walls. Some have supposed that the name of leprosy was
analogically applied to it by the Hebrews, as we speak of cancer in
trees when they exhibit corrosive effects similar to what the disease so
named produces on the human body; while others have pronounced it a
mural efflorescence or species of mildew on the wall apt to be produced
in very damp situations, and which was followed by effects so injurious
to health as well as to the stability of a house, particularly in warm
countries, as to demand the attention of a legislator. Moses enjoined
the priests to follow the same course and during the same period of time
for ascertaining the true character of this disease as in human leprosy.
If found leprous, the infected parts were to be removed. If afterwards
there appeared a risk of the contagion spreading, the house was to be
destroyed altogether and the materials removed to a distance. The stones
were probably rough, unhewn stones, built up without cement in the
manner now frequently used in fences and plastered over, or else laid in
mortar. The oldest examples of architecture are of this character. The
very same thing has to be done still with houses infected with mural
salt. The stones covered with the nitrous incrustation must be removed,
and if the infected wall is suffered to remain, it must be plastered all
over anew.

[Leviticus 14:48](../../../bib/kjv/lev014.htm#048)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_048">lev 14:48</span></span>

the priest shall pronounce the house clean, because the plague is
healed--The precautions here described show that there is great danger
in warm countries from the house leprosy, which was likely to be
increased by the smallness and rude architecture of the houses in the
early ages of the Israelitish history. As a house could not contract any
impurity in the sight of God, the "atonement" which the priest was to
make for it must either have a reference to the sins of its occupants or
to the ceremonial process appointed for its purification, the very same
as that observed for a leprous person. This solemn declaration that it
was "clean," as well as the offering made on the occasion, was admirably
calculated to make known the fact, to remove apprehension from the
public mind, as well as relieve the owner from the aching suspicion of
dwelling in an infected house.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Leviticus Chapter 15](lev015)

</div>
