<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Leviticus Index](lev)  
  [Previous](lev016)  [Next](lev018) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*A Commentary, Critical, Practical, and Explanatory on the Old and New
Testaments*, by Robert Jamieson, A.R. Fausset and David Brown \[1882\]
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Leviticus Chapter 17](../../../bib/kjv/lev017.htm#001)

[Leviticus 17:3](../../../bib/kjv/lev017.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">lev 17:3</span></span>

BLOOD OF BEASTS MUST BE OFFERED AT THE TABERNACLE DOOR. (Lev. 17:1-16)

What man . . . killeth an ox--The Israelites, like other people living
in the desert, would not make much use of animal food; and when they did
kill a lamb or a kid for food, it would almost always be, as in
Abraham's entertainment of the angels \[[Gen
18:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen018.htm#007)\], an occasion of a feast, to be
eaten in company. This was what was done with the peace offerings, and
accordingly it is here enacted, that the same course shall be followed
in slaughtering the animals as in the case of those offerings, namely,
that they should be killed publicly, and after being devoted to God,
partaken of by the offerers. This law, it is obvious, could only be
observable in the wilderness while the people were encamped within an
accessible distance from the tabernacle. The reason for it is to be
found in the strong addictedness of the Israelites to idolatry at the
time of their departure from Egypt; and as it would have been easy for
any by killing an animal to sacrifice privately to a favorite object of
worship, a strict prohibition was made against their slaughtering at
home. (See on [Deu 12:15](../../../bib/kjv/deu012.htm#015)).

[Leviticus 17:5](../../../bib/kjv/lev017.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">lev 17:5</span></span>

To the end that the children of Israel may bring their sacrifices, which
they offer in the open field--"They" is supposed by some commentators to
refer to the Egyptians, so that the verse will stand thus: "the children
of Israel may bring their sacrifices which they (the Egyptians) offer in
the open field." The law is thought to have been directed against those
whose Egyptian habits led them to imitate this idolatrous practice.

[Leviticus 17:7](../../../bib/kjv/lev017.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">lev 17:7</span></span>

they shall no more offer their sacrifices unto devils--literally,
"goats." The prohibition evidently alludes to the worship of the
hirei-footed kind, such as Pan, Faunus, and Saturn, whose recognized
symbol was a goat. This was a form of idolatry enthusiastically
practised by the Egyptians, particularly in the nome or province of
Mendes. Pan was supposed especially to preside over mountainous and
desert regions, and it was while they were in the wilderness that the
Israelites seem to have been powerfully influenced by a feeling to
propitiate this idol. Moreover, the ceremonies observed in this
idolatrous worship were extremely licentious and obscene, and the gross
impurity of the rites gives great point and significance to the
expression of Moses, "they have gone a-whoring."

[Leviticus 17:8](../../../bib/kjv/lev017.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">lev 17:8</span></span>

Whatsoever man . . . offereth . . . And bringeth it not unto the door of
the tabernacle--Before the promulgation of the law, men worshipped
wherever they pleased or pitched their tents. But after that event the
rites of religion could be acceptably performed only at the appointed
place of worship. This restriction with respect to place was necessary
as a preventive of idolatry; for it prohibited the Israelites, when at a
distance, from repairing to the altars of the heathen, which were
commonly in groves or fields.

[Leviticus 17:10](../../../bib/kjv/lev017.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">lev 17:10</span></span>

I will even set my face against that soul that eateth blood, and will
cut him off from among his people--The face of God is often used in
Scripture to denote His anger ([Psa
34:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa034.htm#016); [Rev
6:16](../../../bib/kjv/rev006.htm#016); [Eze
38:18](../../../bib/kjv/eze038.htm#018)). The manner in which God's face
would be set against such an offender was, that if the crime were public
and known, he was condemned to death; if it were secret, vengeance would
overtake him. (See on [Gen 9:4](../../../bib/kjv/gen009.htm#004)). But
the practice against which the law is here pointed was an idolatrous
rite. The Zabians, or worshippers of the heavenly host, were accustomed,
in sacrificing animals, to pour out the blood and eat a part of the
flesh at the place where the blood was poured out (and sometimes the
blood itself) believing that by means of it, friendship, brotherhood,
and familiarity were contracted between the worshippers and the deities.
They, moreover, supposed that the blood was very beneficial in obtaining
for them a vision of the demon during their sleep, and a revelation of
future events. The prohibition against eating blood, viewed in the light
of this historic commentary and unconnected with the peculiar terms in
which it is expressed, seems to have been levelled against idolatrous
practices, as is still further evident from [Eze
33:25-26](../../../bib/kjv/eze033.htm#025); [Co1
10:20-21](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#020).

[Leviticus 17:11](../../../bib/kjv/lev017.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">lev 17:11</span></span>

the life of the flesh is in the blood: and I have given it to you upon
the altar to make an atonement for your souls--God, as the sovereign
author and proprietor of nature, reserved the blood to Himself and
allowed men only one use of it--in the way of sacrifices.

[Leviticus 17:13](../../../bib/kjv/lev017.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">lev 17:13</span></span>

whatsoever man . . . hunteth--It was customary with heathen sportsmen,
when they killed any game or venison, to pour out the blood as a
libation to the god of the chase. The Israelites, on the contrary, were
enjoined, instead of leaving it exposed, to cover it with dust and, by
this means, were effectually debarred from all the superstitious uses to
which the heathen applied it.

[Leviticus 17:15](../../../bib/kjv/lev017.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">lev 17:15</span></span>

every soul that eateth that which died of itself ([Exo
22:31](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#031); [Lev
7:24](../../../bib/kjv/lev007.htm#024); [Act
15:20](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#020)),

be unclean until the even--that is, from the moment of his discovering
his fault until the evening. This law, however, was binding only on an
Israelite. (See [Deu 14:21](../../../bib/kjv/deu014.htm#021)).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Leviticus Chapter 18](lev018)

</div>
