<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Leviticus Index](lev)  
  [Previous](lev007)  [Next](lev009) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*A Commentary, Critical, Practical, and Explanatory on the Old and New
Testaments*, by Robert Jamieson, A.R. Fausset and David Brown \[1882\]
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Leviticus Chapter 8](../../../bib/kjv/lev008.htm#001)

[Leviticus 8:2](../../../bib/kjv/lev008.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">lev 8:2</span></span>

MOSES CONSECRATES AARON AND HIS SONS. (Lev. 8:1-36)

Take Aaron and his sons--The consecration of Aaron and his sons had been
ordered long before (Exo. 29:1-46), but it is now described with all the
details of the ceremonial, as it was gone through after the tabernacle
was completed and the regulations for the various sacrifices enacted.

[Leviticus 8:3](../../../bib/kjv/lev008.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">lev 8:3</span></span>

gather thou all the congregation together, &c.--It was manifestly
expedient for the Israelitish people to be satisfied that Aaron's
appointment to the high dignity of the priesthood was not a personal
intrusion, nor a family arrangement between him and Moses; and nothing,
therefore, could be a more prudent or necessary measure, for impressing
a profound conviction of the divine origin and authority of the priestly
institution, than to summon a general assembly of the people, and in
their presence perform the solemn ceremonies of inauguration, which had
been prescribed by divine authority.

[Leviticus 8:6](../../../bib/kjv/lev008.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">lev 8:6</span></span>

Moses . . . washed them with water--At consecration they were subjected
to entire ablution, though on ordinary occasions they were required,
before entering on their duties, only to wash their hands and feet. This
symbolical ablution was designed to teach them the necessity of inward
purity, and the imperative obligation on those who bore the vessels and
conducted the services of the sanctuary to be holy.

[Leviticus 8:7](../../../bib/kjv/lev008.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">lev 8:7</span></span>

he put upon him the coat, and girded him with the girdle--The splendor
of the official vestments, together with the gorgeous tiara of the high
priest, was intended, doubtless, in the first instance, to produce in
the minds of the people a high respect for the ministers of religion;
and in the next, from the predominant use of linen, to inculcate upon
Aaron and his sons the duty of maintaining unspotted righteousness in
their characters and lives.

[Leviticus 8:10](../../../bib/kjv/lev008.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">lev 8:10</span></span>

took the anointing oil, &c.--which was designed to intimate that persons
who acted as leaders in the solemn services of worship should have the
unction of the Holy One both in His gifts and graces.

[Leviticus 8:14](../../../bib/kjv/lev008.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">lev 8:14</span></span>

brought the bullock for the sin offering, &c.--a timely expression of
their sense of unworthiness--a public and solemn confession of their
personal sins and a transference of their guilt to the typical victim.

[Leviticus 8:18](../../../bib/kjv/lev008.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">lev 8:18</span></span>

brought the ram, &c.--as a token of their entire dedication to the
service of God.

[Leviticus 8:22](../../../bib/kjv/lev008.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">lev 8:22</span></span>

brought the other ram,--&c. After the sin offering and burnt offering
had been presented on their behalf, this was their peace offering, by
which they declared the pleasure which they felt in entering upon the
service of God and being brought into close communion with Him as the
ministers of His sanctuary, together with their confident reliance on
His grace to help them in all their sacred duties.

[Leviticus 8:33](../../../bib/kjv/lev008.htm#033)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">lev 8:33</span></span>

ye shall not go out of the door of the tabernacle of the congregation,
&c.--After all these preliminaries, they had still to undergo a week's
probation in the court of the tabernacle before they obtained permission
to enter into the interior of the sacred building. During the whole of
that period the same sacrificial rites were observed as on the first
day, and they were expressly admonished that the smallest breach of any
of the appointed observances would lead to the certain forfeiture of
their lives \[[Lev 8:35](../../../bib/kjv/lev008.htm#035)\].

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Leviticus Chapter 9](lev009)

</div>
