<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Leviticus Index](lev.md)  
  [Previous](lev005)  [Next](lev007.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*A Commentary, Critical, Practical, and Explanatory on the Old and New
Testaments*, by Robert Jamieson, A.R. Fausset and David Brown \[1882\]
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Leviticus Chapter 6](../../../bib/kjv/lev006.htm#001.md)

[Leviticus 6:2](../../../bib/kjv/lev006.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">lev 6:2</span></span>

TRESPASS OFFERING FOR SINS DONE WITTINGLY. ([Lev
6:1-7](../../../bib/kjv/lev006.htm#001).md)

If a soul sin, and commit a trespass against the Lord--This law, the
record of which should have been joined with the previous chapter, was
given concerning things stolen, fraudulently gotten, or wrongfully kept.
The offender was enjoined to make restitution of the articles to the
rightful owner, along with a fifth part out of his own possessions. But
it was not enough thus to repair the injury done to a neighbor and to
society; he was required to bring a trespass offering, as a token of
sorrow and penitence for having hurt the cause of religion and of God.
That trespass offering was a ram without blemish, which was to be made
on the altar of burnt offerings, and the flesh belonged to the priests.
This penalty was equivalent to a mitigated fine; but being associated
with a sacred duty, the form in which the fine was inflicted served the
important purpose of rousing attention to the claims and reviving a
sense of responsibility to God.

[Leviticus 6:9](../../../bib/kjv/lev006.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">lev 6:9</span></span>

THE LAW OF THE BURNT OFFERING. ([Lev
6:8-13](../../../bib/kjv/lev006.htm#008).md)

Command Aaron and his sons, saying, This . . . law of the burnt
offering--In this passage Moses received instructions to be delivered to
the priests respecting their official duties, and first the burnt
offering--Hebrew, "a sacrifice, which went up in smoke." The daily
service consisted of two lambs, one offered in the morning at sunrise,
the other in the evening, when the day began to decline. Both of them
were consumed on the altar by means of a slow fire, before which the
pieces of the sacrifice were so placed that they fed it all night. At
all events, the observance of this daily sacrifice on the altar of burnt
offering was a daily expression of national repentance and faith. The
fire that consumed these sacrifices had been kindled from heaven at the
consecration of the tabernacle \[[Lev
9:24](../../../bib/kjv/lev009.htm#024.md)\], and to keep it from being
extinguished and the sacrifices from being burned with common fire,
strict injunctions are here given respecting not only the removal of the
ashes \[[Lev 6:10-11](../../../bib/kjv/lev006.htm#010.md)\], but the
approaching near to the fireplace in garments that were not officially
"holy."

[Leviticus 6:14](../../../bib/kjv/lev006.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">lev 6:14</span></span>

THE LAW OF THE MEAT OFFERING. ([Lev
6:14-18](../../../bib/kjv/lev006.htm#014).md)

this is the law of the meat offering--Though this was a provision for
the priests and their families, it was to be regarded as "most holy";
and the way in which it was prepared was: on any meat offerings being
presented, the priest carried them to the altar, and taking a handful
from each of them as an oblation, he salted and burnt it on the altar;
the residue became the property of the priests, and was the food of
those whose duty it was to attend on the service. They themselves as
well as the vessels from which they ate were typically holy, and they
were not at liberty to partake of the meat offering while they labored
under any ceremonial defilement.

[Leviticus 6:20](../../../bib/kjv/lev006.htm#020.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">lev 6:20</span></span>

THE HIGH PRIEST'S MEAT OFFERING. ([Lev
6:19-23](../../../bib/kjv/lev006.htm#019).md)

This is the offering of Aaron, and of his sons--the daily meat offering
of the high priest; for though his sons are mentioned along with him, it
was probably only those of his descendants who succeeded him in that
high office that are meant. It was to be offered, one half of it in the
morning and the other half in the evening--being daily laid by the
ministering priest on the altar of burnt offering, where, being
dedicated to God, it was wholly consumed. This was designed to keep him
and the other attendant priests in constant remembrance, that though
they were typically expiating the sins of the people, their own persons
and services could meet with acceptance only through faith, which
required to be daily nourished and strengthened from above.

[Leviticus 6:25](../../../bib/kjv/lev006.htm#025.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">lev 6:25</span></span>

THE LAW OF THE SIN OFFERING. ([Lev
6:21-30](../../../bib/kjv/lev006.htm#021).md)

This is the law of the sin offering--It was slain, and the fat and
inwards, after being washed and salted, were burnt upon the altar. But
the rest of the carcass belonged to the officiating priest. He and his
family might feast upon it--only, however, within the precincts of the
tabernacle; and none else were allowed to partake of it but the members
of a priestly family--and not even they, if under any ceremonial
defilement. The flesh on all occasions was boiled or sodden, with the
exception of the paschal lamb, which was roasted \[[Exo
12:8-9](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#008.md)\]; and if an earthen vessel had
been used, it being porous and likely to imbibe some of the liquid
particles, it was to be broken; if a metallic pan had been used it was
to be scoured and washed with the greatest care, not because the vessels
had been defiled, but the reverse--because the flesh of the sin offering
having been boiled in them, those vessels were now too sacred for
ordinary use. The design of all these minute ceremonies was to impress
the minds, both of priests and people, with a sense of the evil nature
of sin and the care they should take to prevent the least taint of its
impurities clinging to them.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Leviticus Chapter 7](lev007.md)

</div>
