<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Luke Index](luk)  
  [Previous](mar016)  [Next](luk001) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*A Commentary, Critical, Practical, and Explanatory on the Old and New
Testaments*, by Robert Jamieson, A.R. Fausset and David Brown \[1882\]
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Luke Introduction](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#001)

[Luke](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">luk 0:0</span></span>

THE writer of this Gospel is universally allowed to have been Lucas (an
abbreviated form of Lucanus, as Silas of Silvanus), though he is not
expressly named either in the Gospel or in the Acts. From [Col
4:14](../../../bib/kjv/col004.htm#014) we learn that he was a
"physician"; and by comparing that verse with [Col
4:10-11](../../../bib/kjv/col004.htm#010) --in which the apostle
enumerates all those of the circumcision who were then with him, but
does not mention Luke, though he immediately afterwards sends a
salutation from him--we gather that Luke was not a born Jew. Some have
thought he was a freed-man (libertinus), as the Romans devolved the
healing art on persons of this class and on their slaves, as an
occupation beneath themselves. His intimate acquaintance with Jewish
customs, and his facility in Hebraic Greek, seem to show that he was an
early convert to the Jewish faith; and this is curiously confirmed by
[Act 21:27-29](../../../bib/kjv/act021.htm#027), where we find the Jews
enraged at Paul's supposed introduction of Greeks into the temple,
because they had seen "Trophimus the Ephesian" with him; and as we know
that Luke was with Paul on that occasion, it would seem that they had
taken him for a Jew, as they made no mention of him. On the other hand,
his fluency in classical Greek confirms his Gentile origin. The time
when he joined Paul's company is clearly indicated in the Acts by his
changing (at [Act 16:10](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#010)) from the
third person singular ("he") to the first person plural ("we"). From
that time he hardly ever left the apostle till near the period of his
martyrdom ([Ti2 4:11](../../../bib/kjv/ti2004.htm#011)). EUSEBIUS makes
him a native of Antioch. If so, he would have every advantage for
cultivating the literature of Greece and such medical knowledge as was
then possessed. That he died a natural death is generally agreed among
the ancients; GREGORY NAZIANZEN alone affirming that he died a martyr.

The time and place of the publication of his Gospel are alike uncertain.
But we can approximate to it. It must at any rate have been issued
before the Acts, for there the 'Gospel' is expressly referred to as the
same author's "former treatise" ([Act
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#001)). Now the Book of the Acts was not
published for two whole years after Paul's arrival as a prisoner at
Rome, for it concludes with a reference to this period; but probably it
was published soon after that, which would appear to have been early in
the year 63. Before that time, then, we have reason to believe that the
Gospel of Luke was in circulation, though the majority of critics make
it later. If we date it somewhere between A.D. 50 and 60, we shall
probably be near the truth; but nearer it we cannot with any certainty
come. Conjectures as to the place of publication are too uncertain to be
mentioned here.

That it was addressed, in the first instance, to Gentile readers, is
beyond doubt. This is no more, as DAVIDSON remarks \[Introduction to the
New Testament, p. 186\], than was to have been expected from the
companion of an "apostle of the Gentiles," who had witnessed marvellous
changes in the condition of many heathens by the reception of the
Gospel. But the explanations in his Gospel of things known to every Jew,
and which could only be intended for Gentile readers, make this quite
plain--see [Luk 1:26](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#026); [Luk
4:31](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#031); [Luk
8:26](../../../bib/kjv/luk008.htm#026); [Luk
21:37](../../../bib/kjv/luk021.htm#037); [Luk
22:1](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#001); [Luk
24:13](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#013). A number of other minute
particulars, both of things inserted and of things omitted, confirm the
conclusion that it was Gentiles whom this Evangelist had in the first
instance in view.

We have already adverted to the classical style of Greek which this
Evangelist writes--just what might have been expected from an educated
Greek and travelled physician. But we have also observed that along with
this he shows a wonderful flexibility of style, so much so, that when he
comes to relate transactions wholly Jewish, where the speakers and
actors and incidents are all Jewish, he writes in such Jewish Greek as
one would do who had never been out of Palestine or mixed with any but
Jews. In DA COSTA'S'S Four Witnesses will be found some traces of "the
beloved physician" in this Gospel. But far more striking and important
are the traces in it of his intimate connection with the apostle of the
Gentiles. That one who was so long and so constantly in the society of
that master mind has in such a work as this shown no traces of that
connection, no stamp of that mind, is hardly to be believed. Writers of
Introductions seem not to see it, and take no notice of it. But those
who look into the interior of it will soon discover evidences enough in
it of a Pauline cast of mind. Referring for a number of details to DA
COSTA, we notice here only two examples: In [Co1
11:23](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#023), Paul ascribes to an express
revelation from Christ Himself the account of the Institution of the
Lord's Supper which he there gives. Now, if we find this account
differing in small yet striking particulars from the accounts given by
Matthew and Mark, but agreeing to the letter with Luke's account, it can
hardly admit of a doubt that the one had it from the other; and in that
case, of course, it was Luke that had it from Paul. Now Matthew and Mark
both say of the Cup, "This is my blood of the New Testament"; while Paul
and Luke say, in identical terms, "This cup is the New Testament in My
blood" ([Co1 11:25](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#025); [Luk
22:20](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#020)). Further, Luke says, "Likewise
also the cup after supper, saying," &c.; while Paul says, "After the
same manner He took the cup when He had supped, saying," &c.; whereas
neither Matthew nor Mark mention that this was after supper. But still
more striking is another point of coincidence in this case. Matthew and
Mark both say of the Bread merely this: "Take, eat; this is My body"
([Mat 26:26](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#026); [Mar
14:22](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#022)); whereas Paul says, "Take, eat,
this is My body, which is broken for you" ([Co1
11:24](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#024)), and Luke, "This is My body,
which is given for you" ([Luk 22:19](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#019)).
And while Paul adds the precious clause, "This do in remembrance of Me,"
Luke does the same, in identical terms. How can one who reflects on this
resist the conviction of a Pauline stamp in this Gospel? The other proof
of this to which we ask the reader's attention is in the fact that Paul,
in enumerating the parties by whom Christ was seen after His
resurrection, begins, singularly enough, with Peter--"And that He rose
again the third day according to the Scriptures and that He was seen of
Cephas, then of the Twelve" ([Co1
15:4-5](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#004)) --coupled with the remarkable
fact, that Luke is the only one of the Evangelists who mentions that
Christ appeared to Peter at all. When the disciples had returned from
Emmaus to tell their brethren how the Lord had appeared to them in the
way, and how He had made Himself known to them in the breaking of bread,
they were met, as Luke relates, ere they had time to utter a word, with
this wonderful piece of news, "The Lord is risen indeed, and hath
appeared to Simon" ([Luk 24:34](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#034)).

Other points connected with this Gospel will be adverted to in the
Commentary.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Luke Chapter 1](luk001)

</div>
