<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Mark Index](mar.md)  
  [Previous](mar013)  [Next](mar016.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*A Commentary, Critical, Practical, and Explanatory on the Old and New
Testaments*, by Robert Jamieson, A.R. Fausset and David Brown \[1882\]
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Mark Chapter 14](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#001.md)

[Mark 14:1](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">mar 14:1</span></span>

THE CONSPIRACY OF THE JEWISH AUTHORITIES TO PUT JESUS TO DEATH--THE
SUPPER AND THE--ANOINTING AT BETHANY--JUDAS AGREES WITH THE CHIEF
PRIESTS TO BETRAY HIS LORD. ( = Mat. 26:1-16; [Luk
22:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#001.md); [Joh
12:1-11](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#001).md). ([Mar
14:1-11](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#001).md)

After two days was the feast of the passover, and of unleavened
bread--The meaning is, that two days after what is about to be mentioned
the passover would arrive; in other words, what follows occurred two
days before the feast.

and the chief priests and the scribes sought how they might take him by
craft, and put him to death--From Matthew's fuller account (Mat.
26:1-75) we learn that our Lord announced this to the Twelve as follows,
being the first announcement to them of the precise time: "And it came
to pass, when Jesus had finished all these sayings" ([Mat
26:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#001).md) --referring to the contents of
Mat. 24:1-25:46, which He delivered to His disciples; His public
ministry being now closed: from His prophetical He is now passing into
His priestly office, although all along He Himself took our infirmities
and bare our sicknesses--"He said unto His disciples, Ye know that after
two days is \[the feast of\] the passover, and the Son of man is
betrayed to be crucified." The first and the last steps of His final
sufferings are brought together in this brief announcement of all that
was to take place. The passover was the first and the chief of the three
great annual festivals, commemorative of the redemption of God's people
from Egypt, through the sprinkling of the blood of a lamb divinely
appointed to be slain for that end; the destroying angel, "when he saw
the blood, passing over" the Israelitish houses, on which that blood was
seen, when he came to destroy all the first-born in the land of Egypt
([Exo 12:12-13](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#012).md) --bright typical
foreshadowing of the great Sacrifice, and the Redemption effected
thereby. Accordingly, "by the determinate counsel and foreknowledge of
God, who is wonderful in counsel and excellent in working," it was so
ordered that precisely at the passover season, "Christ our Passover
should be sacrificed for us." On the day following the passover
commenced "the feast of unleavened bread," so called because for seven
days only unleavened bread was to be eaten ([Exo
12:18-20](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#018).md). See on [Co1
5:6-8](../../../bib/kjv/co1005.htm#006.md). We are further told by Matthew
([Mat 26:3](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#003).md) that the consultation was
held in the palace of Caiaphas the high priest, between the chief
priests, \[the scribes\], and the elders of the people, how "they might
take Jesus by subtlety and kill Him."

[Mark 14:2](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">mar 14:2</span></span>

But they said, Not on the feast day--rather, not during the feast; not
until the seven days of unleavened bread should be over.

lest there be an uproar of the people--In consequence of the vast influx
of strangers, embracing all the male population of the land who had
reached a certain age, there were within the walls of Jerusalem at this
festival some two million people; and in their excited state, the danger
of tumult and bloodshed among "the people," who for the most part took
Jesus for a prophet, was extreme. See JOSEPHUS \[Antiquities, 20.5.3\].
What plan, if any, these ecclesiastics fixed upon for seizing our Lord,
does not appear. But the proposal of Judas being at once and eagerly
gone into, it is probable they were till then at some loss for a plan
sufficiently quiet and yet effectual. So, just at the feast time shall
it be done; the unexpected offer of Judas relieving them of their fears.
Thus, as BENGEL remarks, did the divine counsel take effect.

The Supper and the Anointing at Bethany Six Days before the Passover
([Mar 14:3-9](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#003).md).

The time of this part of the narrative is four days before what has just
been related. Had it been part of the regular train of events which our
Evangelist designed to record, he would probably have inserted it in its
proper place, before the conspiracy of the Jewish authorities. But
having come to the treason of Judas, he seems to have gone back upon
this scene as what probably gave immediate occasion to the awful deed.

[Mark 14:3](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">mar 14:3</span></span>

And being in Bethany, in the house of Simon the leper, as he sat at
meat, there came a woman--It was "Mary," as we learn from [Joh
12:3](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#003.md).

having an alabaster box of ointment of spikenard--pure nard, a
celebrated aromatic--(See [Sol 1:12](../../../bib/kjv/sol001.htm#012).md).

very precious--"very costly" ([Joh
12:3](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#003).md).

and she brake the box, and poured it on his head--"and anointed," adds
John ([Joh 12:3](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#003).md), "the feet of Jesus,
and wiped His feet with her hair: and the house was filled with the odor
of the ointment." The only use of this was to refresh and exhilarate--a
grateful compliment in the East, amid the closeness of a heated
atmosphere, with many guests at a feast. Such was the form in which
Mary's love to Christ, at so much cost to herself, poured itself out.

[Mark 14:4](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">mar 14:4</span></span>

And there were some that had indignation within themselves and
said--Matthew says ([Mat 26:8](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#008).md), "But
when His disciples saw it, they had indignation, saying," &c. The
spokesman, however, was none of the true-hearted Eleven--as we learn
from John ([Joh 12:4](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#004).md): "Then saith one
of His disciples, Judas Iscariot, Simon's son, which should betray Him."
Doubtless the thought stirred first in his breast, and issued from his
base lips; and some of the rest, ignorant of his true character and
feelings, and carried away by his plausible speech, might for the moment
feel some chagrin at the apparent waste.

Why was this waste of the ointment made?

[Mark 14:5](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">mar 14:5</span></span>

For it might have been sold for more than three hundred pence--between
nine and ten pounds sterling.

and have been given to the poor. And they murmured against her--"This he
said," remarks John ([Joh 12:6](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#006).md), and
the remark is of exceeding importance, "not that he cared for the poor
but because he was a thief, and had the bag"--the scrip or treasure
chest--"and bare what was put therein"--not "bare it off" by theft, as
some understand it. It is true that he did this; but the expression
means simply that he had charge of it and its contents, or was treasurer
to Jesus and the Twelve. What a remarkable arrangement was this, by
which an avaricious and dishonest person was not only taken into the
number of the Twelve, but entrusted with the custody of their little
property! The purposes which this served are obvious enough; but it is
further noticeable, that the remotest hint was never given to the Eleven
of his true character, nor did the disciples most favored with the
intimacy of Jesus ever suspect him, till a few minutes before he
voluntarily separated himself from their company--for ever!

[Mark 14:6](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">mar 14:6</span></span>

And Jesus said, Let her alone; why trouble ye her? she hath wrought a
good work on me--It was good in itself, and so was acceptable to Christ;
it was eminently seasonable, and so more acceptable still; and it was
"what she could," and so most acceptable of all.

[Mark 14:7](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">mar 14:7</span></span>

For ye have the poor with you always--referring to [Deu
15:11](../../../bib/kjv/deu015.htm#011.md).

and whensoever ye will ye may do them good: but me ye have not always--a
gentle hint of His approaching departure, by One who knew the worth of
His own presence.

[Mark 14:8](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">mar 14:8</span></span>

She hath done what she could--a noble testimony, embodying a principle
of immense importance.

she is come aforehand to anoint my body to the burying--or, as in John
([Joh 12:7](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#007).md), "Against the day of my
burying hath she kept this." Not that she, dear heart, thought of His
burial, much less reserved any of her nard to anoint her dead Lord. But
as the time was so near at hand when that office would have to be
performed, and she was not to have that privilege even after the spices
were brought for the purpose ([Mar
16:1](../../../bib/kjv/mar016.htm#001).md), He lovingly regards it as done
now. "In the act of love done to Him," says OLSHAUSEN beautifully, "she
has erected to herself an eternal monument, as lasting as the Gospel,
the eternal Word of God. From generation to generation this remarkable
prophecy of the Lord has been fulfilled; and even we, in explaining this
saying of the Redeemer, of necessity contribute to its accomplishment."
"Who but Himself," asks STIER, "had the power to ensure to any work of
man, even if resounding in His own time through the whole earth, an
imperishable remembrance in the stream of history? Behold once more here
the majesty of His royal judicial supremacy in the government of the
world, in this, 'Verily I say unto you.'"

[Mark 14:10](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">mar 14:10</span></span>

And Judas Iscariot, one of the twelve, went unto the chief priests, to
betray him unto them--that is, to make his proposals, and to bargain
with them, as appears from. Matthew's fuller statement ([Mat
26:14-15](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#014).md) which says, he "went unto
the chief priests, and said, What will ye give me, and I will deliver
Him unto you? And they covenanted with him for thirty pieces of silver."
The thirty pieces of silver were thirty shekels, the fine paid for man-
or maid-servant accidentally killed ([Exo
21:32](../../../bib/kjv/exo021.htm#032).md), and equal to between four and
five pounds sterling--"a goodly price that I was prized at of them!"
([Zac 11:13](../../../bib/kjv/zac011.htm#013).md).

[Mark 14:11](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">mar 14:11</span></span>

And when they heard it, they were glad, and promised to give him
money--Matthew alone records the precise sum, because a remarkable and
complicated prophecy, which he was afterwards to refer to, was fulfilled
by it.

And he sought how he might conveniently betray him--or, as more fully
given in Luke ([Luk 22:6](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#006).md), "And he
promised, and sought opportunity to betray Him unto them in the absence
of the multitude." That he should avoid an "uproar" or "riot" among the
people, which probably was made an essential condition by the Jewish
authorities, was thus assented to by the traitor; into whom, says Luke
([Luk 22:3](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#003).md), "Satan entered," to put
him upon this hellish deed.

[Mark 14:53](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#053.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_053">mar 14:53</span></span>

JESUS ARRAIGNED BEFORE THE SANHEDRIM CONDEMNED TO DIE, AND SHAMEFULLY
ENTREATED--THE FALL OF PETER. ( = Mat. 26:57-75; Luke 22:54-71; [Joh
18:13-18](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#013.md), [Joh
18:24-27](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#024)). (Mark 14:53-72.md)

And they led Jesus away to the high priest: and with him were
assembled--or rather, "there gathered together unto him."

all the chief priests and the elders and the scribes--it was then a full
and formal meeting of the Sanhedrim. Now, as the first three Evangelists
place all Peter's denials of his Lord after this, we should naturally
conclude that they took place while our Lord stood before the Sanhedrim.
But besides that the natural impression is that the scene around the
fire took place overnight, the second crowing of the cock, if we are to
credit ancient writers, would occur about the beginning of the fourth
watch, or between three and four in the morning. By that time, however,
the Council had probably convened, being warned, perhaps, that they were
to prepare for being called at any hour of the morning, should the
Prisoner be successfully secured. If this be correct, it is fairly
certain that only the last of Peter's three denials would take place
while our Lord was under trial before the Sanhedrim. One thing more may
require explanation. If our Lord had to be transferred from the
residence of Annas to that of Caiaphas, one is apt to wonder that there
is no mention of His being marched from the one to the other. But the
building, in all likelihood, was one and the same; in which case He
would merely have to be taken perhaps across the court, from one chamber
to another.

[Mark 14:54](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#054.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_054">mar 14:54</span></span>

And Peter followed him afar off, even into--or "from afar, even to the
interior of."

the palace of the high priest--"An oriental house," says ROBINSON, "is
usually built around a quadrangular interior court; into which there is
a passage (sometimes arched) through the front part of the house, closed
next the street by a heavy folding gate, with a smaller wicket for
single persons, kept by a porter. The interior court, often paved or
flagged, and open to the sky, is the hall, which our translators have
rendered 'palace,' where the attendants made a fire; and the passage
beneath the front of the house, from the street to this court, is the
porch." The place where Jesus stood before the high priest may have been
an open room, or place of audience on the ground floor, in the rear or
on one side of the court; such rooms, open in front, being customary. It
was close upon the court, for Jesus heard all that was going on around
the fire, and turned and looked upon Peter ([Luk
22:61](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#061).md).

and he sat with the servants, and warmed himself at the fire--The
graphic details, here omitted, are supplied in the other Gospels. [Joh
18:18](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#018.md) :

And the servants and officers stood there--that is, in the hall, within
the quadrangle, open to the sky.

who had made a fire of coals--or charcoal (in a brazier probably).

for it was cold--John alone of all the Evangelists mentions the
material, and the coldness of the night, as WEBSTER and WILKINSON
remark. The elevated situation of Jerusalem, observes THOLUCK, renders
it so cold about Easter as to make a watch fire at night indispensable.

And Peter stood with them and warmed himself--"He went in," says Matthew
([Mat 26:58](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#058).md), "and sat with the
servants to see the end." These two minute statements throw an
interesting light on each other. His wishing to "see the end," or issue
of these proceedings, was what led him into the palace, for he evidently
feared the worst. But once in, the serpent coil is drawn closer; it is a
cold night, and why should not he take advantage of the fire as well as
others? Besides, in the talk of the crowd about the all-engrossing topic
he may pick up something which he would like to hear. Poor Peter! But
now, let us leave him warming himself at the fire, and listening to the
hum of talk about this strange case by which the subordinate officials,
passing to and fro and crowding around the fire in this open court,
would while away the time; and, following what appears the order of the
Evangelical Narrative, let us turn to Peter's Lord.

Jesus Is Interrogated by Annas--His Dignified Reply--Is Treated with
Indignity by One of the Officials--His Meek Rebuke ([Joh
18:19-23](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#019).md).

We have seen that it is only the Fourth Evangelist who tells us that our
Lord was sent to Annas first, overnight, until the Sanhedrim could be
got together at earliest dawn. We have now, in the same Gospel, the
deeply instructive scene that passed during this non-official interview.

[Joh 18:19](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#019.md) :

The high priest--Annas.

then asked Jesus of His disciples and of His doctrine--probably to
entrap Him into some statements which might be used against Him at the
trial. From our Lord's answer it would seem that "His disciples" were
understood to be some secret party.

[Joh 18:20](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#020.md).

Jesus answered him, I spake openly to the world--compare [Mar
7:4](../../../bib/kjv/mar007.htm#004.md). He speaks of His public teaching
as now a past thing--as now all over.

I ever taught in the synagogue and in the temple, whither the Jews
always resort--courting publicity, though with sublime noiselessness.

and in secret have I said nothing--rather, "spake I nothing"; that is,
nothing different from what He taught in public: all His private
communications with the Twelve being but explanations and developments
of His public teaching. (Compare [Isa
45:19](../../../bib/kjv/isa045.htm#019.md); [Isa
48:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa048.htm#016).md).

[Joh 18:21](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#021.md) :

Why askest thou Me? ask them which heard Me what I have said to
them--rather, "what I said unto them."

behold, they know what I said--From this mode of replying, it is evident
that our Lord saw the attempt to draw Him into self-crimination, and
resented it by falling back upon the right of every accused party to
have some charge laid against Him by competent witnesses.

[Joh 18:22](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#022.md) :

And when He had thus spoken, one of the officers which stood by struck
Jesus with the palm of his hand, saying, Answerest Thou the high priest
so?--(see [Isa 50:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa050.htm#006).md). It would seem
from [Act 23:2](../../../bib/kjv/act023.htm#002.md) that this summary and
undignified way of punishment what was deemed insolence in the accused
had the sanction even of the high priests themselves.

[Joh 18:23](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#023.md) :

Jesus answered him, If I have spoken evil--rather, "If I spoke evil," in
reply to the high priest.

bear witness of the evil; but if well, why smitest thou Me?--He does not
say "if not evil," as if His reply had been merely unobjectionable; but
"if well," which seems to challenge something altogether fitting in the
remonstrance. He had addressed to the high priest. From our Lord's
procedure here, by the way, it is evident enough that His own precept in
the Sermon on the Mount--that when smitten on the one cheek we are to
turn to the smiter the other also ([Mat
5:39](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#039).md) --is not to be taken to the
letter.

Annas Sends Jesus to Caiaphas ([Joh
18:24](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#024).md).

[Joh 18:24](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#024.md).

Now Annas had sent Him bound unto Caiaphas the high priest--On the
meaning of this verse there is much diversity of opinion; and according
as we understand it will be the conclusion we come to, whether there was
but one hearing of our Lord before Annas and Caiaphas together, or
whether, according to the view we have given above, there were two
hearings--a preliminary and informal one before Annas, and a formal and
official one before Caiaphas and the Sanhedrim. If our translators have
given the right sense of the verse, there was but one hearing before
Caiaphas; and then [Joh 18:24](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#024.md) is to be
read as a parenthesis, merely supplementing what was said in [Mar
14:13](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#013.md). This is the view of CALVIN,
BEZA, GROTIUS, BENGEL, DE WETTE, MEYER, LUCKE, THOLUCK. But there are
decided objections to this view. First: We cannot but think that the
natural sense of the whole passage, embracing [Mar
14:13-14](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#013.md), [Mar
14:19-24](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#019.md), is that of a preliminary
non-official hearing before "Annas first," the particulars of which are
accordingly recorded; and then of a transference of our Lord from Annas
to Caiaphas. Second: On the other view, it is not easy to see why the
Evangelist should not have inserted [Mar
14:24](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#024.md) immediately after [Mar
14:13](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#013.md); or rather, how he could well
have done otherwise, As it stands, it is not only quite out of its
proper place, but comes in most perplexingly. Whereas, if we take it as
a simple statement of fact, that after Annas had finished his interview
with Jesus, as recorded in [Mar
14:19-23](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#019.md), he transferred Him to
Caiaphas to be formally tried, all is clear and natural. Third: The
pluperfect sense "had sent" is in the translation only; the sense of the
original word being simply "sent." And though there are cases where the
aorist here used has the sense of an English pluperfect, this sense is
not to be put upon it unless it be obvious and indisputable. Here that
is so far from being the case, that the pluperfect "had sent" is rather
an unwarrantable interpretation than a simple translation of the word:
informing the reader that, according to the view of our translators, our
Lord "had been" sent to Caiaphas before the interview just recorded by
the Evangelist; whereas, if we translate the verse literally--"Annas
sent Him bound unto Caiaphas the high priest"--we get just the
information we expect, that Annas, having merely "precognosced" the
prisoner, hoping to draw something out of Him, "sent Him to Caiaphas" to
be formally tried before the proper tribunal. This is the view of
CHRYSOSTOM and AUGUSTINE among the Fathers; and of the moderns, of
OLSHAUSEN, SCHLEIERMACHER, NEANDER, EBRARD, WIESELER, LANGE, LUTHARDT.
This brings us back to the text of our second Gospel, and in it to

The Judicial Trial and Condemnation of the Lord Jesus by the Sanhedrim--
([Mar 14:55-64](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#055).md).

But let the reader observe, that though this is introduced by the
Evangelist before any of the denials of Peter are recorded, we have
given reasons for concluding that probably the first two denials took
place while our Lord was with Annas, and the last only during the trial
before the Sanhedrim.

[Mark 14:55](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#055.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_055">mar 14:55</span></span>

And the chief priests and all the council sought for witness against
Jesus to put him to death--Matthew ([Mat
26:59](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#059).md) says they "sought false
witness." They knew they could find nothing valid; but having their
Prisoner to bring before Pilate, they behooved to make a case.

and found none--none that would suit their purpose, or make a decent
ground of charge before Pilate.

[Mark 14:56](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#056.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_056">mar 14:56</span></span>

For many bare false witness against him--From their debasing themselves
to "seek" them, we are led to infer that they were bribed to bear false
witness; though there are never wanting sycophants enough, ready to sell
themselves for naught, if they may but get a smile from those above
them: see a similar scene in [Act
6:11-14](../../../bib/kjv/act006.htm#011.md). How is one reminded here of
that complaint, "False witnesses did rise up: they laid to my charge
things that I knew not" ([Psa 31:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa031.htm#011).md)!

but their witness agreed not together--If even two of them had been
agreed, it would have been greedily enough laid hold of, as all that the
law insisted upon even in capital cases ([Deu
17:6](../../../bib/kjv/deu017.htm#006).md). But even in this they failed.
One cannot but admire the providence which secured this result; since,
on the one hand, it seems astonishing that those unscrupulous
prosecutors and their ready tools should so bungle a business in which
they felt their whole interests bound up; and, on the other hand, if
they had succeeded in making even a plausible case, the effect on the
progress of the Gospel might for a time have been injurious. But at the
very time when His enemies were saying, "God hath forsaken Him;
persecute and take Him; for there is none to deliver Him" ([Psa
71:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa071.htm#011).md). He whose Witness He was and
whose work He was doing was keeping Him as the apple of His eye, and
while He was making the wrath of man to praise Him, was restraining the
remainder of that wrath ([Psa 76:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa076.htm#010).md).

[Mark 14:57](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#057.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_057">mar 14:57</span></span>

And there arose certain, and bare false witness against him--Matthew
([Mat 26:60](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#060).md) is more precise here: "At
the last came two false witnesses." As no two had before agreed in
anything, they felt it necessary to secure a duplicate testimony to
something, but they were long of succeeding. And what was it, when at
length it was brought forward?

saying--as follows:

[Mark 14:58](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#058.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_058">mar 14:58</span></span>

We heard him say, I will destroy this temple that is made with hands,
and within three days I will build another made without hands--On this
charge, observe, first, that eager as His enemies were to find criminal
matter against our Lord, they had to go back to the outset of His
ministry, His first visit to Jerusalem, more than three years before
this. In all that He said and did after that, though ever increasing in
boldness, they could find nothing. Next, that even then, they fix only
on one speech, of two or three words, which they dared to adduce against
Him. Further, they most manifestly pervert the speech of our Lord. We
say not this because in Mark's form of it, it differs from the report of
the words given by the Fourth Evangelist ([Joh
2:18-22](../../../bib/kjv/joh002.htm#018).md) --the only one of the
Evangelists who reports it all, or mentions even any visit paid by our
Lord to Jerusalem before His last--but because the one report bears
truth, and the other falsehood, on its face. When our Lord said on that
occasion, "Destroy this temple, and in three days I will raise it up,"
they might, for a moment, have understood Him to refer to the temple out
of whose courts He had swept the buyers and sellers. But after they had
expressed their astonishment at His words, in that sense of them, and
reasoned upon the time it had taken to rear the temple as it then stood,
since no answer to this appears to have been given by our Lord, it is
hardly conceivable that they should continue in the persuasion that this
was really His meaning. But finally, even if the more ignorant among
them had done so, it is next to certain that the ecclesiastics, who were
the prosecutors in this case, did not believe that this was His meaning.
For in less than three days after this they went to Pilate, saying,
"Sir, we remember that that deceiver said, while he was yet alive, after
three days I will rise again" ([Mat
27:63](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#063).md). Now what utterance of Christ
known to His enemies, could this refer to, if not to this very saying
about destroying and rearing up the temple? And if so, it puts it beyond
a doubt that by this time, at least, they were perfectly aware that our
Lord's words referred to His death by their hands and His resurrection
by His own. But this is confirmed by [Mar
14:59](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#059.md).

[Mark 14:59](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#059.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_059">mar 14:59</span></span>

But neither so did their witness agree together--that is, not even as to
so brief a speech, consisting of but a few words, was there such a
concurrence in their mode of reporting it as to make out a decent case.
In such a charge everything depended on the very terms alleged to have
been used. For every one must see that a very slight turn, either way,
given to such words, would make them either something like indictable
matter, or else a ridiculous ground for a criminal charge--would either
give them a colorable pretext for the charge of impiety which they were
bent on making out, or else make the whole saying appear, on the worst
view that could be taken of it, as merely some mystical or empty boast.

[Mark 14:60](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#060.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_060">mar 14:60</span></span>

Answerest thou nothing? what is it which these witness against
thee?--Clearly, they felt that their case had failed, and by this artful
question the high priest hoped to get from His own mouth what they had
in vain tried to obtain from their false and contradictory witnesses.
But in this, too, they failed.

[Mark 14:61](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#061.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_061">mar 14:61</span></span>

But he held his peace, and answered nothing--This must have nonplussed
them. But they were not to be easily baulked of their object.

Again the high priest--arose ([Mat
26:62](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#062).md), matters having now come to a
crisis.

asked him, and said unto him, Art thou the Christ, the Son of the
Blessed?--Why our Lord should have answered this question, when He was
silent as to the former, we might not have quite seen, but for Matthew,
who says ([Mat 26:63](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#063).md) that the high
priest put Him upon solemn oath, saying, "I adjure Thee by the living
God, that Thou tell us whether Thou be the Christ, the Son of God." Such
an adjuration was understood to render an answer legally necessary ([Lev
5:1](../../../bib/kjv/lev005.htm#001).md). (Also see on [Joh
18:28](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#028)..md)

[Mark 14:62](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#062.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_062">mar 14:62</span></span>

And Jesus said, I am--or, as in Matthew ([Mat
26:64](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#064).md), "Thou hast said \[it\]." In
Luke, however ([Luk 22:70](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#070).md), the
answer, "Ye say that I am," should be rendered--as DE WETTE, MEYER,
ELLICOTT, and the best critics agree that the preposition requires--"Ye
say \[it\], for I am \[so\]." Some words, however, were spoken by our
Lord before giving His answer to this solemn question. These are
recorded by Luke alone ([Luk
22:67-68](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#067).md): "Art Thou the Christ \[they
asked\]? tell us. And He said unto them, If I tell you, ye will not
believe: and if I also ask \[interrogate\] "you, ye will not answer Me,
nor let Me go." This seems to have been uttered before giving His direct
answer, as a calm remonstrance and dignified protest against the
prejudgment of His case and the unfairness of their mode of procedure.
But now let us hear the rest of the answer, in which the conscious
majesty of Jesus breaks forth from behind the dark cloud which overhung
Him as He stood before the Council. (Also see on [Joh
18:28](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#028)..md)

and--in that character.

ye shall see the Son of man sitting on the right hand of power, and
coming in the clouds of heaven--In Matthew ([Mat
26:64](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#064).md) a slightly different but
interesting turn is given to it by one word: "Thou hast said \[it\]:
nevertheless"--We prefer this sense of the word to "besides," which some
recent critics decide for--"I say unto you, Hereafter shall ye see the
Son of man sit on the right hand of power, and coming in the clouds of
heaven." The word rendered "hereafter" means, not "at some future time"
(as to-day "hereafter commonly does), but what the English word
originally signified, "after here," "after now," or "from this time."
Accordingly, in [Luk 22:69](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#069.md), the words
used mean "from now." So that though the reference we have given it to
the day of His glorious Second Appearing is too obvious to admit of
doubt, He would, by using the expression, "From this time," convey the
important thought which He had before expressed, immediately after the
traitor left the supper table to do his dark work, "Now is the Son of
man glorified" ([Joh 13:31](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#031).md). At this
moment, and by this speech, did He "witness the good confession"
emphatically and properly, as the apostle says in [Ti1
6:13](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#013.md). Our translators render the words
there, "Who before Pontius Pilate witnessed"; referring it to the
admission of His being a King, in the presence of CÃ&brvbr;sar's own
chief representative. But it should be rendered, as LUTHER renders it,
and as the best interpreters now understand it, "Who under Pontius
Pilate witnessed," &c. In this view of it, the apostle is referring not
to what our Lord confessed before Pilate--which, though noble, was not
of such primary importance--but to that sublime confession which, under
Pilate's administration, He witnessed before the only competent tribunal
on such occasions, the Supreme Ecclesiastical Council of God's chosen
nation, that He was THE MESSIAH, and THE SON OF THE BLESSED ONE; in the
former word owning His Supreme Official, in the latter His Supreme
Personal, Dignity.

[Mark 14:63](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#063.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_063">mar 14:63</span></span>

Then the high priest rent his clothes--On this expression of horror of
blasphemy, see [Kg2 18:37](../../../bib/kjv/kg2018.htm#037.md).

and saith, What need we any further witnesses? (Also see on [Joh
18:28](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#028)..md)

[Mark 14:64](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#064.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_064">mar 14:64</span></span>

Ye have heard the blasphemy--(See [Joh
10:33](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#033).md). In Luke ([Luk
22:71](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#071).md), "For we ourselves have heard
of His own mouth"--an affectation of religious horror. (Also see on [Joh
18:28](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#028)..md)

what think ye?--"Say what the verdict is to be."

they all condemned him to be guilty of death--or of a capital crime,
which blasphemy against God was according to the Jewish law ([Lev
24:16](../../../bib/kjv/lev024.htm#016).md). Yet not absolutely all; for
Joseph of Arimathea, "a good man and a just," was one of that Council,
and "he was not a consenting party to the counsel and deed of them," for
that is the strict sense of the words of [Luk
23:50-51](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#050.md). Probably he absented
himself, and Nicodemus also, from this meeting of the Council, the
temper of which they would know too well to expect their voice to be
listened to; and in that case, the words of our Evangelist are to be
taken strictly, that, without one dissentient voice, "all \[present\]
condemned him to be guilty of death."

The Blessed One Is Now Shamefully Entreated ([Mar
14:65](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#065).md).

Every word here must be carefully observed, and the several accounts put
together, that we may lose none of the awful indignities about to be
described.

[Mark 14:65](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#065.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_065">mar 14:65</span></span>

some began to spit on him--or, as in [Mat
26:67](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#067.md), "to spit in \[into\] His face."
Luke ([Luk 22:63](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#063).md) says in addition,
"And the men that held Jesus mocked him"--or cast their jeers at Him.
(Also see on [Joh 18:28](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#028)..md)

to cover his face--or "to blindfold him" (as in [Luk
22:64](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#064).md).

to buffet him--Luke's word, which is rendered "smote Him" ([Luk
22:63](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#063).md), is a stronger one, conveying
an idea for which we have an exact equivalent in English, but one too
colloquial to be inserted here.

began to say unto him, Prophesy--In Matthew ([Mat
26:68](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#068).md) this is given more fully:
"Prophesy unto us, thou Christ, Who is he that smote Thee?" The
sarcastic fling at Him as "the Christ," and the demand of Him in this
character to name the unseen perpetrator of the blows inflicted on Him,
was in them as infamous as to Him it must have been, and was intended to
be, stinging.

and the servants did strike him with the palms of their hands--or
"struck Him on the face" ([Luk 22:64](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#064).md).
Ah! Well did He say prophetically, in that Messianic prediction which we
have often referred to, "I gave My back to the smiters, and My cheeks to
them that plucked off the hair: I hid not My face from shame and
spitting!" ([Isa 50:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa050.htm#006).md). "And many
other things blasphemously spake they against Him" ([Luk
22:65](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#065).md). This general statement is
important, as showing that virulent and varied as were the recorded
affronts put upon Him, they are but a small specimen of what He endured
on that dark occasion.

Peter's FIRST DENIAL of His Lord ([Mar
14:66-68](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#066).md).

[Mark 14:66](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#066.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_066">mar 14:66</span></span>

And as Peter was beneath in the palace--This little word "beneath"--one
of our Evangelist's graphic touches--is most important for the right
understanding of what we may call the topography of the scene. We must
take it in connection with Matthew's word ([Mat
26:69](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#069).md): "Now Peter sat without in the
palace"--or quadrangular court, in the center of which the fire would be
burning; and crowding around and buzzing about it would be the menials
and others who had been admitted within the court. At the upper end of
this court, probably, would be the memorable chamber in which the trial
was held--open to the court, likely, and not far from the fire (as we
gather from [Luk 22:61](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#061).md), but on a
higher level; for (as our verse says) the court, with Peter in it, was
"beneath" it. The ascent to the Council chamber was perhaps by a short
flight of steps. If the reader will bear this explanation in mind, he
will find the intensely interesting details which follow more
intelligible.

there cometh one of the maids of the high priest--"the damsel that kept
the door" ([Joh 18:17](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#017).md). The Jews seem
to have employed women as porters of their doors ([Act
12:13](../../../bib/kjv/act012.htm#013).md).

[Mark 14:67](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#067.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_067">mar 14:67</span></span>

And when she saw Peter warming himself, she looked upon him--Luke ([Luk
22:56](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#056).md) is here more graphic; "But a
certain maid beheld him as he sat by the fire"--literally, "by the
light," which, shining full upon him, revealed him to the girl--"and
earnestly looked upon him"--or, "fixed her gaze upon him." His demeanor
and timidity, which must have attracted notice, as so generally happens,
leading," says OLSHAUSEN, "to the recognition of him."

and said, And thou also wast with Jesus of Nazareth--"with Jesus the
Nazarene," or, "with Jesus of Galilee" ([Mat
26:69](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#069).md). The sense of this is given in
John's report of it ([Joh 18:17](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#017).md), "Art
not thou also one of this man's disciples?" that is, thou as well as
"that other disciple," whom she knew to be one, but did not challenge,
perceiving that he was a privileged person. In Luke ([Luk
22:56](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#056).md) it is given as a remark made by
the maid to one of the by-standers--this man was also with Him." If so
expressed in Peter's hearing--drawing upon him the eyes of every one
that heard it (as we know it did, [Mat
26:70](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#070).md), and compelling him to answer
to it--that would explain the different forms of the report naturally
enough. But in such a case this is of no real importance.

[Mark 14:68](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#068.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_068">mar 14:68</span></span>

But he denied--"before all" ([Mat
26:70](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#070).md).

saying, I know not, neither understand I what thou sayest--in Luke ([Luk
22:57](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#057).md), "I know Him not."

And he went out into the porch--the vestibule leading to the street--no
doubt finding the fire-place too hot for him; possibly also with the
hope of escaping--but that was not to be, and perhaps he dreaded that,
too. Doubtless by this time his mind would be getting into a sea of
commotion, and would fluctuate every moment in its resolves.

AND THE COCK CREW--(See on [Luk
22:34](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#034).md). This, then, was the First
Denial.

Peter's SECOND DENIAL of His Lord ([Mar
14:69-70](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#069).md).

There is here a verbal difference among the Evangelists, which without
some information which has been withheld, cannot be quite extricated.

[Mark 14:69](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#069.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_069">mar 14:69</span></span>

And a maid saw him again--or, "a girl." It might be rendered "the girl";
but this would not necessarily mean the same one as before, but might,
and probably does, mean just the female who had charge of the door or
gate near which Peter now was. Accordingly, in [Mat
26:71](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#071.md), she is expressly called
"another \[maid\]." But in Luke ([Luk
22:58](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#058).md) it is a male servant: "And
after a little while \[from the time of the first denial\]
another"--that is, as the word signifies, "another male" servant. But
there is no real difficulty, as the challenge, probably, after being
made by one was reiterated by another. Accordingly, in John ([Joh
18:25](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#025).md), it is, "They said therefore
unto him, &c.--"as if more than one challenged him at once.

and began to say to them that stood by, This is one of them--or, as in
[Mat 26:71](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#071.md) --"This \[fellow\] was also
with Jesus the Nazarene."

[Mark 14:70](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#070.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_070">mar 14:70</span></span>

And he denied it again--In Luke ([Luk
22:58](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#058).md), "Man, I am not." But worst of
all in Matthew--"And again he denied with an oath, I do not know the
man" ([Mat 26:72](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#072).md). This was the Second
Denial, more vehement, alas! than the first.

Peter's THIRD DENIAL of His Lord ([Mar
14:70-72](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#070).md).

And a little after--"about the space of one hour after" ([Luk
22:59](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#059).md).

they that stood by said again to Peter, Surely thou art one of them: for
thou art a Galilean, and thy speech agreeth thereto--"bewrayeth \[or
'discovereth'\] thee" ([Mat 26:73](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#073).md). In
Luke ([Luk 22:59](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#059).md) it is, "Another
confidently affirmed, saying, Of a truth this \[fellow\] also was with
him: for he is a Galilean." The Galilean dialect had a more Syrian cast
than that of Judea. If Peter had held his peace, this peculiarity had
not been observed; but hoping, probably, to put them off the scent by
joining in the fireside talk, he was thus discovered. The Fourth Gospel
is particularly interesting here: "One of the servants of the high
priest, being his kinsman \[or kinsman to him\] whose ear Peter cut off,
saith, Did not I see thee in the garden with Him?" ([Joh
18:26](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#026).md). No doubt his relationship to
Malchus drew his attention to the man who had smitten him, and this
enabled him to identify Peter. "Sad reprisals!" exclaims BENGEL. Poor
Peter! Thou art caught in thine own toils; but like a wild bull in a
net, thou wilt toss and rage, filling up the measure of thy terrible
declension by one more denial of thy Lord, and that the foulest of all.

[Mark 14:71](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#071.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_071">mar 14:71</span></span>

But he began to curse--"anathematize," or wish himself accursed if what
he was now to say was not true.

and to swear--or to take a solemn oath.

saying, I know not this man of whom ye speak.

[Mark 14:72](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#072.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_072">mar 14:72</span></span>

And the second time the cock crew--The other three Evangelists, who
mention but one crowing of the cock--and that not the first, but the
second and last one of Mark--all say the cock crew "immediately," but
Luke ([Luk 22:60](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#060).md) says, "Immediately,
while he yet spake, the cock crew." Alas!--But now comes the wonderful
sequel.

The Redeemer's Look upon Peter, and Peter's Bitter Tears ([Mar
14:72](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#072.md); [Luk
22:61-62](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#061).md).

It has been observed that while the beloved disciple is the only one of
the four Evangelists who does not record the repentance of Peter, he is
the only one of the four who records the affecting and most beautiful
scene of his complete restoration ([Joh
21:15-17](../../../bib/kjv/joh021.htm#015).md).

[Luk 22:61](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#061.md) :

And the Lord turned and looked upon Peter--How? it will be asked. We
answer, From the chamber in which the trial was going on, in the
direction of the court where Peter then stood--in the way already
explained. See on [Mar 14:66](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#066.md). Our
Second Evangelist makes no mention of this look, but dwells on the
warning of his Lord about the double crowing of the cock, which would
announce his triple fall, as what rushed stingingly to his recollection
and made him dissolve in tears.

And Peter called to mind the word that Jesus said unto him, Before the
cock crow twice, thou shalt deny me thrice. And when he thought thereon,
he wept--To the same effect is the statement of the First Evangelist
([Mat 26:75](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#075).md), save that like "the
beloved physician," he notices the "bitterness" of the weeping ([Luk
22:62](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#062).md). The most precious link,
however, in the whole chain of circumstances in this scene is beyond
doubt that "look" of deepest, tenderest import reported by Luke alone
([Luk 22:61](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#061).md). Who can tell what
lightning flashes of wounded love and piercing reproach shot from that
"look" through the eye of Peter into his heart!

And Peter remembered the word of the Lord, how He had said unto him,
Before the cock crow, thou shalt deny Me thrice.

[Luk 22:62](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#062.md) :

And Peter went out and wept bitterly}}--How different from the sequel of
Judas' act! Doubtless the hearts of the two men towards the Saviour were
perfectly different from the first; and the treason of Judas was but the
consummation of the wretched man's resistance of the blaze of light in
the midst of which he had lived for three years, while Peter's denial
was but a momentary obscuration of the heavenly light and love to his
Master which ruled his life. But the immediate cause of the blessed
revulsion which made Peter "weep bitterly" ([Mat
26:75](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#075).md) was, beyond all doubt, this
heart-piercing "look" which his Lord gave him. And remembering the
Saviour's own words at the table, "Simon, Simon, Satan hath desired to
have you, that he may sift you as wheat; but I prayed for thee, that thy
faith fail not" ([Luk 22:31-32](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#031).md), may
we not say that this prayer fetched down all that there was in that look
to pierce and break the heart of Peter, to keep it from despair, to work
in it "repentance unto salvation not to be repented of," and at length,
under other healing touches, to "restore his soul?" (See on [Mar
16:7](../../../bib/kjv/mar016.htm#007).md).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Mark Chapter 16](mar016.md)

</div>
