<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Matthew Index](mat)  
  [Previous](mat005)  [Next](mat007) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*A Commentary, Critical, Practical, and Explanatory on the Old and New
Testaments*, by Robert Jamieson, A.R. Fausset and David Brown \[1882\]
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Matthew Chapter 6](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#001)

[Matthew 6:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">mat 6:1</span></span>

FURTHER ILLUSTRATION OF THE RIGHTEOUSNESS OF THE KINGDOM--ITS
UNOSTENTATIOUSNESS. (Mat. 6:1-18)

Take heed that ye do not your alms--But the true reading seems clearly
to be "your righteousness." The external authority for both readings is
pretty nearly equal; but internal evidence is decidedly in favor of
"righteousness." The subject of the second verse being "almsgiving" that
word--so like the other in Greek--might easily be substituted for it by
the copyist: whereas the opposite would not be so likely. But it is
still more in favor of "righteousness," that if we so read the first
verse, it then becomes a general heading for this whole section of the
discourse, inculcating unostentatiousness in all deeds of
righteousness--Almsgiving, Prayer, and Fasting being, in that case, but
selected examples of this righteousness; whereas, if we read, "Do not
your alms," &c., this first verse will have no reference but to that one
point. By "righteousness," in this case, we are to understand that same
righteousness of the kingdom of heaven, whose leading features--in
opposition to traditional perversions of it--it is the great object of
this discourse to open up: that righteousness of which the Lord says,
"Except your righteousness shall exceed the righteousness of the scribes
and Pharisees, ye shall in no case enter into the kingdom of heaven"
([Mat 5:20](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#020)). To "do" this
righteousness, was an old and well-understood expression. Thus, "Blessed
is he that doeth righteousness at all times" ([Psa
106:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa106.htm#003)). It refers to the actings of
righteousness in the life--the outgoings of the gracious nature--of
which our Lord afterwards said to His disciples, "Herein is My Father
glorified, that ye bear much fruit; so shall ye be My disciples" ([Joh
15:8](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#008)).

before men, to be seen of them--with the view or intention of being
beheld of them. See the same expression in [Mat
5:28](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#028). True, He had required them to
let their light so shine before men that they might see their good
works, and glorify their Father which is in heaven ([Mat
5:16](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#016)). But this is quite consistent
with not making a display of our righteousness for self-glorification.
In fact, the doing of the former necessarily implies our not doing the
latter.

otherwise ye have no reward of your Father which is in heaven--When all
duty is done to God--as primarily enjoining and finally judging of
it--He will take care that it be duly recognized; but when done purely
for ostentation, God cannot own it, nor is His judgment of it even
thought of--God accepts only what is done to Himself. So much for the
general principle. Now follow three illustrations of it.

Almsgiving ([Mat 6:2-4](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#002)).

[Matthew 6:2](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">mat 6:2</span></span>

Therefore, when thou doest thine alms, do not sound a trumpet before
thee--The expression is to be taken figuratively for blazoning it. Hence
our expression to "trumpet."

as the hypocrites do--This word--of such frequent occurrence in
Scripture, signifying primarily "one who acts a part"--denotes one who
either pretends to be what he is not (as here), or dissembles what he
really is (as in [Luk 12:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#001)).

in the synagogues and in the streets--the places of religious and
secular resort.

that they may have glory of men. Verily I say unto you--In such august
expressions, it is the Lawgiver and Judge Himself that we hear speaking
to us.

They have their reward--All they wanted was human applause, and they
have it--and with it, all they will ever get.

[Matthew 6:3](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">mat 6:3</span></span>

But when thou doest alms, let not thy left hand know what thy right hand
doeth--So far from making a display of it, dwell not on it even in thine
own thoughts, lest it minister to spiritual pride.

[Matthew 6:4](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">mat 6:4</span></span>

That thine alms may be in secret, and thy Father which seeth in secret
himself shall reward thee openly--The word "Himself" appears to be an
unauthorized addition to the text, which the sense no doubt suggested.
(See [Ti1 5:25](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#025); [Rom
2:16](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#016); [Co1
4:5](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#005)).

Prayer ([Mat 6:5-6](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#005)).

[Matthew 6:5](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">mat 6:5</span></span>

And when thou prayest, thou shalt--or, preferably, "when ye pray ye
shall."

not be as the hypocrites are: for they love to pray standing in the
synagogues and in the corners of the streets--(See on [Mat
6:2](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#002)).

that they may be seen of men. Verily I say unto you, They have, &c.--The
standing posture in prayer was the ancient practice, alike in the Jewish
and in the early Christian Church. But of course this conspicuous
posture opened the way for the ostentatious.

[Matthew 6:6](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">mat 6:6</span></span>

But thou, when thou prayest, enter into thy closet--a place of
retirement.

and when thou hast shut thy door, pray to thy Father which is in secret;
and thy Father which seeth in secret shall reward thee openly--Of
course, it is not the simple publicity of prayer which is here
condemned. It may be offered in any circumstances, however open, if not
prompted by the spirit of ostentation, but dictated by the great ends of
prayer itself. It is the retiring character of true prayer which is here
taught.

Supplementary Directions and Model Prayer ([Mat
6:7-15](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#007)).

[Matthew 6:7](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">mat 6:7</span></span>

But when ye pray, use not vain repetitions--"Babble not" would be a
better rendering, both for the form of the word--which in both languages
is intended to imitate the sound--and for the sense, which expresses not
so much the repetition of the same words as a senseless multiplication
of them; as appears from what follows.

as the heathen do: for they think that they shall be heard for their
much speaking--This method of heathen devotion is still observed by
Hindu and Mohammedan devotees. With the Jews, says LIGHTFOOT, it was a
maxim, that "Every one who multiplies prayer is heard." In the Church of
Rome, not only is it carried to a shameless extent, but, as THOLUCK
justly observes, the very prayer which our Lord gave as an antidote to
vain repetitions is the most abused to this superstitious end; the
number of times it is repeated counting for so much more merit. Is not
this just that characteristic feature of heathen devotion which our Lord
here condemns? But praying much, and using at times the same words, is
not here condemned, and has the example of our Lord Himself in its
favor.

[Matthew 6:8](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">mat 6:8</span></span>

Be not ye therefore like unto them: for your Father knoweth what things
ye have need of before ye ask him--and so needs not to be informed of
our wants, any more than to be roused to attend to them by our incessant
speaking. What a view of God is here given, in sharp contrast with the
gods of the heathen! But let it be carefully noted that it is not as the
general Father of mankind that our Lord says, "Your Father" knoweth what
ye need before ye ask it; for it is not men, as such, that He is
addressing in this discourse, but His own disciples--the poor in spirit,
the mourners, the meek, hungry and thirsty souls, the merciful, the pure
in heart, the peacemakers, who allow themselves to have all manner of
evil said against them for the Son of man's sake--in short, the new-born
children of God, who, making their Father's interests their own, are
here assured that their Father, in return, makes their interests His,
and needs neither to be told nor to be reminded of their wants. Yet He
will have His children pray to Him, and links all His promised supplies
to their petitions for them; thus encouraging us to draw near and keep
near to Him, to talk and walk with Him, to open our every case to Him,
and assure ourselves that thus asking we shall receive--thus seeking we
shall find--thus knocking it shall be opened to us.

[Matthew 6:9](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">mat 6:9</span></span>

After this manner--more simply "Thus."

therefore pray ye--The "ye" is emphatic here, in contrast with the
heathen prayers. That this matchless prayer was given not only as a
model, but as a form, might be concluded from its very nature. Did it
consist only of hints or directions for prayer, it could only be used as
a directory; but seeing it is an actual prayer--designed, indeed, to
show how much real prayer could be compressed into the fewest words, but
still, as a prayer, only the more incomparable for that--it is strange
that there should be a doubt whether we ought to pray that very prayer.
Surely the words with which it is introduced, in the second utterance
and varied form of it which we have in [Luk
11:2](../../../bib/kjv/luk011.htm#002), ought to set this at rest: "When
ye pray, say, Our Father." Nevertheless, since the second form of it
varies considerably from the first, and since no example of its actual
use, or express quotation of its phraseology, occurs in the sequel of
the New Testament, we are to guard against a superstitious use of it.
How early this began to appear in the church services, and to what
extent it was afterwards carried, is known to every one versed in Church
History. Nor has the spirit which bred this abuse quite departed from
some branches of the Protestant Church, though the opposite and equally
condemnable extreme is to be found in other branches of it.

Model Prayer ([Mat 6:9-13](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#009)). According
to the Latin fathers and the Lutheran Church, the petitions of the
Lord's Prayer are seven in number; according to the Greek fathers, the
Reformed Church and the Westminster divines, they are only six; the two
last being regarded--we think, less correctly--as one. The first three
petitions have to do exclusively with God: "Thy name be hallowed"--"Thy
kingdom come"--"Thy will be done." And they occur in a descending
scale--from Himself down to the manifestation of Himself in His kingdom;
and from His kingdom to the entire subjection of its subjects, or the
complete doing of His will. The remaining four petitions have to do with
OURSELVES: "Give us our daily bread"--"Forgive us our debts"--"Lead us
not into temptation"--"Deliver us from evil." But these latter petitions
occur in an ascending scale--from the bodily wants of every day up to
our final deliverance from all evil.

Invocation:

Our Father which art in heaven--In the former clause we express His
nearness to us; in the latter, His distance from us. (See [Ecc
5:2](../../../bib/kjv/ecc005.htm#002); [Isa
66:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#001)). Holy, loving familiarity
suggests the one; awful reverence the other. In calling Him "Father" we
express a relationship we have all known and felt surrounding us even
from our infancy; but in calling Him our Father "who art in heaven," we
contrast Him with the fathers we all have here below, and so raise our
souls to that "heaven" where He dwells, and that Majesty and Glory which
are there as in their proper home. These first words of the Lord's
Prayer--this invocation with which it opens--what a brightness and
warmth does it throw over the whole prayer, and into what a serene
region does it introduce the praying believer, the child of God, as he
thus approaches Him! It is true that the paternal relationship of God to
His people is by no means strange to the Old Testament. (See [Deu
32:6](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#006); [Psa
103:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa103.htm#013); [Isa
63:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa063.htm#016); [Jer
3:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer003.htm#004), [Jer
3:19](../../../bib/kjv/jer003.htm#019); [Mal
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/mal001.htm#006); [Mal
2:10](../../../bib/kjv/mal002.htm#010)). But these are only
glimpses--the "back parts" ([Exo
33:23](../../../bib/kjv/exo033.htm#023)), if we may so say, in
comparison with the "open face" of our Father revealed in Jesus. (See on
[Co2 3:18](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#018)). Nor is it too much to say,
that the view which our Lord gives, throughout this His very first
lengthened discourse, of "our Father in heaven," beggars all that was
ever taught, even in God's own Word, or conceived before by His saints,
on this subject.

First Petition:

Hallowed be--that is, "Be held in reverence"; regarded and treated as
holy.

thy name--God's name means "Himself as revealed and manifested."
Everywhere in Scripture God defines and marks off the faith and love and
reverence and obedience He will have from men by the disclosures which
He makes to them of what He is; both to shut out false conceptions of
Him, and to make all their devotion take the shape and hue of His own
teaching. Too much attention cannot be paid to this.

Second Petition:

[Matthew 6:10](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">mat 6:10</span></span>

Thy kingdom come--The kingdom of God is that moral and spiritual kingdom
which the God of grace is setting up in this fallen world, whose
subjects consist of as many as have been brought into hearty subjection
to His gracious scepter, and of which His Son Jesus is the glorious
Head. In the inward reality of it, this kingdom existed ever since there
were men who "walked with God" ([Gen
5:24](../../../bib/kjv/gen005.htm#024)), and "waited for His salvation"
([Gen 49:18](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#018)); who were "continually
with Him, holden by His right hand" ([Psa
73:23](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#023)), and who, even in the valley of
the shadow of death, feared no evil when He was with them ([Psa
23:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa023.htm#004)). When Messiah Himself appeared,
it was, as a visible kingdom, "at hand." His death laid the deep
foundations of it. His ascension on high, "leading captivity captive and
receiving gifts for men, yea, for the rebellious, that the Lord God
might dwell among them," and the Pentecostal effusion of the Spirit, by
which those gifts for men descended upon the rebellious, and the Lord
God was beheld, in the persons of thousands upon thousands, "dwelling"
among men--was a glorious "coming" of this kingdom. But it is still to
come, and this petition, "Thy kingdom come," must not cease to ascend so
long as one subject of it remains to be brought in. But does not this
prayer stretch further forward--to "the glory to be revealed," or that
stage of the kingdom called "the everlasting kingdom of our Lord and
Saviour Jesus Christ" ([Pe2 1:11](../../../bib/kjv/pe2001.htm#011))? Not
directly, perhaps, since the petition that follows this--"Thy will be
done in earth, as it is in heaven"--would then bring us back to this
present state of imperfection. Still, the mind refuses to be so bounded
by stages and degrees, and in the act of praying, "Thy kingdom come," it
irresistibly stretches the wings of its faith, and longing, and joyous
expectation out to the final and glorious consummation of the kingdom of
God.

Third Petition:

Thy will be done in earth, as it is in heaven--or, as the same words are
rendered in Luke, "as in heaven, so upon earth" ([Luk
11:2](../../../bib/kjv/luk011.htm#002)) --as cheerfully, as constantly,
as perfectly. But some will ask, Will this ever be? We answer, If the
"new heavens and new earth" are to be just our present material system
purified by fire and transfigured, of course it will. But we incline to
think that the aspiration which we are taught in this beautiful petition
to breathe forth has no direct reference to any such organic fulfilment,
and is only the spontaneous and resistless longing of the renewed
soul--put into words--to see the whole inhabited earth in entire
conformity to the will of God. It asks not if ever it shall be--or if
ever it can be--in order to pray this prayer. It must have its holy
yearnings breathed forth, and this is just the bold yet simple
expression of them. Nor is the Old Testament without prayers which come
very near to this ([Psa 7:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa007.htm#009); [Psa
67:1-7](../../../bib/kjv/psa067.htm#001); [Psa
72:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa072.htm#019), &c.).

Fourth Petition:

[Matthew 6:11](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">mat 6:11</span></span>

Give us this day our daily bread--The compound word here rendered
"daily" occurs nowhere else, either in classical or sacred Greek, and so
must be interpreted by the analogy of its component parts. But on this
critics are divided. To those who would understand it to mean, "Give us
this day the bread of to-morrow"--as if the sense thus slid into that of
Luke "Give us day by day" ([Luk 11:2](../../../bib/kjv/luk011.htm#002),
as BENGEL, MEYER, &c.) it may be answered that the sense thus brought
out is scarcely intelligible, if not something less; that the expression
"bread of to-morrow" is not at all the same as bread "from day to day,"
and that, so understood, it would seem to contradict [Mat
6:34](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#034). The great majority of the best
critics (taking the word to be compounded of ousia, "substance," or
"being") understand by it the "staff of life," the bread of subsistence,
and so the sense will be, "Give us this day the bread which this day's
necessities require." In this case, the rendering of our authorized
version (after the Vulgate, LUTHER and some of the best modern
critics)--"our daily bread"--is, in sense, accurate enough. (See [Pro
30:8](../../../bib/kjv/pro030.htm#008)). Among commentators, there was
early shown an inclination to understand this as a prayer for the
heavenly bread, or spiritual nourishment; and in this they have been
followed by many superior expositors, even down to our own times. But as
this is quite unnatural, so it deprives the Christian of one of the
sweetest of his privileges--to cast his bodily wants in this short
prayer, by one simple petition, upon his heavenly Father. No doubt the
spiritual mind will, from "the meat that perisheth," naturally rise in
thought to "that meat which endureth to everlasting life." But let it be
enough that the petition about bodily wants irresistibly suggests a
higher petition; and let us not rob ourselves--out of a morbid
spirituality--of our one petition in this prayer for that bodily
provision which the immediate sequel of this discourse shows that our
heavenly Father has so much at heart. In limiting our petitions,
however, to provision for the day, what a spirit of childlike dependence
does the Lord both demand and beget!

Fifth Petition:

[Matthew 6:12](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">mat 6:12</span></span>

And forgive us our debts--A vitally important view of sin, this--as an
offense against God demanding reparation to His dishonored claims upon
our absolute subjection. As the debtor in the creditor's hand, so is the
sinner in the hands of God. This idea of sin had indeed come up before
in this discourse--in the warning to agree with our adversary quickly,
in case of sentence being passed upon us, adjudging us to payment of the
last farthing, and to imprisonment till then ([Mat
5:25-26](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#025)). And it comes up once and
again in our Lord's subsequent teaching--as in the parable of the
creditor and his two debtors ([Luk
7:41](../../../bib/kjv/luk007.htm#041), &c.), and in the parable of the
unmerciful debtor ([Mat 18:23](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#023), &c.).
But by embodying it in this brief model of acceptable prayer, and as the
first of three petitions more or less bearing upon sin, our Lord teaches
us, in the most emphatic manner conceivable, to regard this view of sin
as the primary and fundamental one. Answering to this is the
"forgiveness" which it directs us to seek--not the removal from our own
hearts of the stain of sin, nor yet the removal of our just dread of
God's anger, or of unworthy suspicions of His love, which is all that
some tell us we have to care about--but the removal from God's own mind
of His displeasure against us on account of sin, or, to retain the
figure, the wiping or crossing out from His "book of remembrance" of all
entries against us on this account.

as we forgive our debtors--the same view of sin as before; only now
transferred to the region of offenses given and received between man and
man. After what has been said on [Mat
5:7](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#007), it will not be thought that our
Lord here teaches that our exercise of forgiveness towards our offending
fellow men absolutely precedes and is the proper ground of God's
forgiveness of us. His whole teaching, indeed--as of all Scripture--is
the reverse of this. But as no one can reasonably imagine himself to be
the object of divine forgiveness who is deliberately and habitually
unforgiving towards his fellow men, so it is a beautiful provision to
make our right to ask and expect daily forgiveness of our daily
shortcomings and our final absolution and acquittal at the great day of
admission into the kingdom, dependent upon our consciousness of a
forgiving disposition towards our fellows, and our preparedness to
protest before the Searcher of hearts that we do actually forgive them.
(See [Mar 11:25-26](../../../bib/kjv/mar011.htm#025)). God sees His own
image reflected in His forgiving children; but to ask God for what we
ourselves refuse to men, is to insult Him. So much stress does our Lord
put upon this, that immediately after the close of this prayer, it is
the one point in it which He comes back upon ([Mat
6:14-15](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#014)), for the purpose of solemnly
assuring us that the divine procedure in this matter of forgiveness will
be exactly what our own is.

Sixth Petition:

[Matthew 6:13](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">mat 6:13</span></span>

And lead us not into temptation--He who honestly seeks and has the
assurance of, forgiveness for past sin, will strive to avoid committing
it for the future. But conscious that "when we would do good evil is
present with us," we are taught to offer this sixth petition, which
comes naturally close upon the preceding, and flows, indeed,
instinctively from it in the hearts of all earnest Christians. There is
some difficulty in the form of the petition, as it is certain that God
does bring His people--as He did Abraham, and Christ Himself--into
circumstances both fitted and designed to try them, or test the strength
of their faith. Some meet this by regarding the petition as simply an
humble expression of self-distrust and instinctive shrinking from
danger; but this seems too weak. Others take it as a prayer against
yielding to temptation, and so equivalent to a prayer for support and
deliverance when we are tempted; but this seems to go beyond the precise
thing intended. We incline to take it as a prayer against being drawn or
sucked, of our own will, into temptation, to which the word here used
seems to lend some countenance--"Introduce us not." This view, while it
does not put into our mouths a prayer against being tempted--which is
more than the divine procedure would seem to warrant--does not, on the
other hand, change the sense of the petition into one for support under
temptation, which the words will hardly bear; but it gives us a subject
for prayer, in regard to temptation, most definite, and of all others
most needful. It was precisely this which Peter needed to ask, but did
not ask, when--of his own accord, and in spite of difficulties--he
pressed for entrance into the palace hall of the high priest, and where,
once sucked into the scene and atmosphere of temptation, he fell so
foully. And if so, does it not seem pretty clear that this was exactly
what our Lord meant His disciples to pray against when He said in the
garden--"Watch and pray, that ye enter not into temptation"? ([Mat
26:41](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#041)).

Seventh Petition:

But deliver us from evil--We can see no good reason for regarding this
as but the second half of the sixth petition. With far better ground
might the second and third petitions be regarded as one. The "but"
connecting the two petitions is an insufficient reason for regarding
them as one, though enough to show that the one thought naturally
follows close upon the other. As the expression "from evil" may be
equally well rendered "from the evil one," a number or superior critics
think the devil is intended, especially from its following close upon
the subject of "temptation." But the comprehensive character of these
brief petitions, and the place which this one occupies, as that on which
all our desires die away, seems to us against so contracted a view of
it. Nor can there be a reasonable doubt that the apostle, in some of the
last sentences which he penned before he was brought forth to suffer for
his Lord, alludes to this very petition in the language of calm
assurance--"And the Lord shall deliver me from every evil work (compare
the Greek of the two passages), and will preserve me unto his heavenly
kingdom" ([Ti2 4:18](../../../bib/kjv/ti2004.htm#018)). The final
petition, then, is only rightly grasped when regarded as a prayer for
deliverance from all evil of whatever kind--not only from sin, but from
all its consequences--fully and finally. Fitly, then, are our prayers
ended with this. For what can we desire which this does not carry with
it?

For thine is the kingdom, and the power, and the glory, for ever.
Amen--If any reliance is to be placed on external evidence, this
doxology, we think, can hardly be considered part of the original text.
It is wanting in all the most ancient manuscripts; it is wanting in the
Old Latin version and in the Vulgate: the former mounting up to about
the middle of the second century, and the latter being a revision of it
in the fourth century by JEROME, a most reverential and conservative as
well as able and impartial critic. As might be expected from this, it is
passed by in silence by the earliest Latin fathers; but even the Greek
commentators, when expounding this prayer, pass by the doxology. On the
other hand, it is found in a majority of manuscripts, though not the
oldest; it is found in all the Syriac versions, even the
Peschito--dating probably as early as the second century--although this
version lacks the "Amen," which the doxology, if genuine, could hardly
have wanted; it is found in the Sahidic or Thebaic version made for the
Christians of Upper Egypt, possibly as early as the Old Latin; and it is
found in perhaps most of the later versions. On a review of the
evidence, the strong probability, we think, is that it was no part of
the original text.

[Matthew 6:14](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">mat 6:14</span></span>

For if ye forgive men, &c.--See on [Mat
6:12](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#012).

[Matthew 6:15](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">mat 6:15</span></span>

But if ye forgive not, &c.--See on [Mat
6:12](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#012).

Fasting ([Mat 6:16-18](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#016)). Having
concluded His supplementary directions on the subject of prayer with
this Divine Pattern, our Lord now returns to the subject of
Unostentatiousness in our deeds of righteousness, in order to give one
more illustration of it, in the matter of fasting.

[Matthew 6:16](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">mat 6:16</span></span>

Moreover, when ye fast--referring, probably, to private and voluntary
fasting, which was to be regulated by each individual for himself;
though in spirit it would apply to any fast.

be not, as the hypocrites, of a sad countenance: for they disfigure
their faces--literally, "make unseen"; very well rendered "disfigure."
They went about with a slovenly appearance, and ashes sprinkled on their
head.

that they may appear unto men to fast--It was not the deed, but
reputation for the deed which they sought; and with this view those
hypocrites multiplied their fasts. And are the exhausting fasts of the
Church of Rome, and of Romanizing Protestants, free from this taint?

Verily I say unto you, They have their reward.

[Matthew 6:17](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">mat 6:17</span></span>

But thou, when thou fastest, anoint thine head, and wash thy face--as
the Jews did, except when mourning ([Dan
10:3](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#003)); so that the meaning is, "Appear
as usual"--appear so as to attract no notice.

[Matthew 6:18](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">mat 6:18</span></span>

That thou appear not unto men to fast, but unto thy Father which is in
secret: and thy Father, which seeth in secret, shall reward thee
openly--The "openly" seems evidently a later addition to the text of
this verse from [Mat 6:4](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#004), [Mat
6:7](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#007), though of course the idea is
implied.

[Matthew 6:19](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">mat 6:19</span></span>

CONCLUDING ILLUSTRATIONS OF THE RIGHTEOUSNESS OF THE
KINGDOM--HEAVENLY-MINDEDNESS AND FILIAL CONFIDENCE. (Mat. 6:19-34)

Lay not up for ourselves treasures upon earth--hoard not.

where moth--a "clothes-moth." Eastern treasures, consisting partly in
costly dresses stored up ([Job 27:16](../../../bib/kjv/job027.htm#016)),
were liable to be consumed by moths ([Job
13:28](../../../bib/kjv/job013.htm#028); [Isa
50:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa050.htm#009); [Isa
51:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa051.htm#008)). In [Jam
5:2](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#002) there is an evident reference to
our Lord's words here.

and rust--any "eating into" or "consuming"; here, probably, "wear and
tear."

doth corrupt--cause to disappear. By this reference to moth and rust our
Lord would teach how perishable are such earthly treasures.

and where thieves break through and steal--Treasures these, how
precarious!

[Matthew 6:20](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">mat 6:20</span></span>

But lay up for yourselves treasures in heaven--The language in Luke
([Luk 12:33](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#033)) is very bold--"Sell that
ye have, and give alms; provide yourselves bags which wax not old, a
treasure in the heavens that faileth not," &c.

where neither moth nor rust doth corrupt, and where thieves do not break
through nor steal--Treasures these, imperishable and unassailable!
(Compare [Col 3:2](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#002)).

[Matthew 6:21](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">mat 6:21</span></span>

For where your treasure is--that which ye value most.

there will your heart be also--"Thy treasure--thy heart" is probably the
true reading here: "your," in [Luk
12:34](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#034), from which it seems to have
come in here. Obvious though this maxim be, by what multitudes who
profess to bow to the teaching of Christ is it practically disregarded!
"What a man loves," says LUTHER, quoted by THOLUCK, "that is his God.
For he carries it in his heart, he goes about with it night and day, he
sleeps and wakes with it; be it what it may--wealth or pelf, pleasure or
renown." But because "laying up" is not in itself sinful, nay, in some
cases enjoined ([Co2 12:14](../../../bib/kjv/co2012.htm#014)), and
honest industry and sagacious enterprise are usually rewarded with
prosperity, many flatter themselves that all is right between them and
God, while their closest attention, anxiety, zeal, and time are
exhausted upon these earthly pursuits. To put this right, our Lord adds
what follows, in which there is profound practical wisdom.

[Matthew 6:22](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">mat 6:22</span></span>

The light--the lamp.

of the body is the eye: if therefore thine eye be single--simple, clear.
As applied to the outward eye, this means general soundness;
particularly, not looking two ways. Here, as also in classical Greek, it
is used figuratively to denote the simplicity of the mind's eye,
singleness of purpose, looking right at its object, as opposed to having
two ends in view. (See [Pro 4:25-27](../../../bib/kjv/pro004.htm#025)).

thy whole body shall be full of light--illuminated. As with the bodily
vision, the man who looks with a good, sound eye, walks in light, seeing
every object clear; so a simple and persistent purpose to serve and
please God in everything will make the whole character consistent and
bright.

[Matthew 6:23](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">mat 6:23</span></span>

But if thine eye be evil--distempered, or, as we should say, If we have
got a bad eye.

thy whole body shall be full of darkness--darkened. As a vitiated eye,
or an eye that looks not straight and full at its object, sees nothing
as it is, so a mind and heart divided between heaven and earth is all
dark.

If therefore the light that is in thee be darkness, how great is that
darkness!--As the conscience is the regulative faculty, and a man's
inward purpose, scope, aim in life, determines his character--if these
be not simple and heavenward, but distorted and double, what must all
the other faculties and principles of our nature be which take their
direction and character from these, and what must the whole man and the
whole life be but a mass of darkness? In Luke ([Luk
11:36](../../../bib/kjv/luk011.htm#036)) the converse of this statement
very strikingly expresses what pure, beautiful, broad perceptions the
clarity of the inward eye imparts: "If thy whole body therefore be full
of light, having no part dark, the whole shall be full of light, as when
the bright shining of a candle doth give thee light." But now for the
application of this.

[Matthew 6:24](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">mat 6:24</span></span>

No man can serve--The word means to "belong wholly and be entirely under
command to."

two masters: for either he will hate the one, and love the other; or
else he will hold to the one, and despise the other--Even if the two
masters be of one character and have but one object, the servant must
take law from one or the other: though he may do what is agreeable to
both, he cannot, in the nature of the thing, be servant to more than
one. Much less if, as in the present case, their interests are quite
different, and even conflicting. In this case, if our affections be in
the service of the one--if we "love the one"--we must of necessity "hate
the other"; if we determine resolutely to "hold to the one," we must at
the same time disregard, and (if he insist on his claims upon us) even
"despise the other."

Ye cannot serve God and mammon--The word "mamon"--better written with
one m--is a foreign one, whose precise derivation cannot certainly be
determined, though the most probable one gives it the sense of "what one
trusts in." Here, there can be no doubt it is used for riches,
considered as an idol master, or god of the heart. The service of this
god and the true God together is here, with a kind of indignant
curtness, pronounced impossible. But since the teaching of the preceding
verses might seem to endanger our falling short of what is requisite for
the present life, and so being left destitute, our Lord now comes to
speak to that point.

[Matthew 6:25](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">mat 6:25</span></span>

Therefore I say unto you, Take no thought--"Be not solicitous." The
English word "thought," when our version was made, expressed this idea
of "solicitude," "anxious concern"--as may be seen in any old English
classic; and in the same sense it is used in [Sa1
9:5](../../../bib/kjv/sa1009.htm#005), &c. But this sense of the word
has now nearly gone out, and so the mere English reader is apt to be
perplexed. Thought or forethought, for temporal things--in the sense of
reflection, consideration--is required alike by Scripture and common
sense. It is that anxious solicitude, that oppressive care, which
springs from unbelieving doubts and misgivings, which alone is here
condemned. (See [Phi 4:6](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#006)).

for your life, what ye shall eat, or what ye shall drink; nor yet for
your body, what ye shall put on--In Luke ([Luk
12:29](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#029)) our Lord adds, "neither be ye
unsettled"--not "of doubtful mind," as in our version. When "careful (or
'full of care') about nothing," but committing all in prayer and
supplication with thanksgiving unto God, the apostle assures us that
"the peace of God, which passeth all understanding, shall keep our
hearts and minds in Christ Jesus" ([Phi
4:6-7](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#006)); that is, shall guard both our
feelings and our thoughts from undue agitation, and keep them in a holy
calm. But when we commit our whole temporal condition to the wit of our
own minds, we get into that "unsettled" state against which our Lord
exhorts His disciples.

Is not the life more than meat--food.

and the body than raiment?--If God, then, gives and keeps up the
greater--the life, the body--will He withhold the less, food to sustain
life and raiment to clothe the body?

[Matthew 6:26](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">mat 6:26</span></span>

Behold the fowls of the air--in [Mat
6:28](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#028), "observe well," and in [Luk
12:24](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#024), "consider"--so as to learn
wisdom from them.

for they sow not, neither do they reap, nor gather into barns; yet your
heavenly Father feedeth them. Are ye not much better than they?--nobler
in yourselves and dearer to God. The argument here is from the greater
to the less; but how rich in detail! The brute creation--void of
reason--are incapable of sowing, reaping, and storing: yet your heavenly
Father suffers them not helplessly to perish, but sustains them without
any of those processes. Will He see, then, His own children using all
the means which reason dictates for procuring the things needful for the
body--looking up to Himself at every step--and yet leave them to starve?

[Matthew 6:27](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">mat 6:27</span></span>

Which of you, by taking thought--anxious solicitude.

can add one cubit unto his stature?--"Stature" can hardly be the thing
intended here: first, because the subject is the prolongation of life,
by the supply of its necessaries of food and clothing: and next, because
no one would dream of adding a cubit--or a foot and a half--to his
stature, while in the corresponding passage in Luke ([Luk
12:25-26](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#025)) the thing intended is
represented as "that thing which is least." But if we take the word in
its primary sense of "age" (for "stature" is but a secondary sense) the
idea will be this, "Which of you, however anxiously you vex yourselves
about it, can add so much as a step to the length of your life's
journey?" To compare the length of life to measures of this nature is
not foreign to the language of Scripture (compare [Psa
39:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa039.htm#005); [Ti2
4:7](../../../bib/kjv/ti2004.htm#007), &c.). So understood, the meaning
is clear and the connection natural. In this the best critics now agree.

[Matthew 6:28](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">mat 6:28</span></span>

And why take ye thought for raiment? Consider--observe well.

the lilies of the field, how they grow: they toil not--as men, planting
and preparing the flax.

neither do they spin--as women.

[Matthew 6:29](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">mat 6:29</span></span>

And yet I say unto you, That even Solomon in all his glory was not
arrayed like one of these--What incomparable teaching!--best left in its
own transparent clearness and rich simplicity.

[Matthew 6:30](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">mat 6:30</span></span>

Wherefore, if God so clothe the grass--the "herbage."

of the field, which to-day is, and to-morrow is cast into the oven--wild
flowers cut with the grass, withering by the heat, and used for fuel.
(See [Jam 1:11](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#011)).

shall He not much more clothe you, O ye of little faith?--The argument
here is something fresh. Gorgeous as is the array of the flowers that
deck the fields, surpassing all artificial human grandeur, it is for but
a brief moment; you are ravished with it to-day, and to-morrow it is
gone; your own hands have seized and cast it into the oven: Shall, then,
God's children, so dear to Him, and instinct with a life that cannot
die, be left naked? He does not say, Shall they not be more beauteously
arrayed? but, Shall He not much more clothe them? that being all He will
have them regard as secured to them (compare [Heb
13:5](../../../bib/kjv/heb013.htm#005)). The expression, "Little-faithed
ones," which our Lord applies once and again to His disciples ([Mat
8:26](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#026); [Mat
14:31](../../../bib/kjv/mat014.htm#031); [Mat
16:8](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#008)), can hardly be regarded as
rebuking any actual manifestations of unbelief at that early period, and
before such an audience. It is His way of gently chiding the spirit of
unbelief, so natural even to the best, who are surrounded by a world of
sense, and of kindling a generous desire to shake it off.

[Matthew 6:31](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">mat 6:31</span></span>

Therefore take no thought--solicitude.

saying, What shall we eat? or, What shall we drink? or, Wherewithal
shall we be clothed?

[Matthew 6:32](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#032)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">mat 6:32</span></span>

(For after all these things do the Gentiles seek)--rather, "pursue."
Knowing nothing definitely beyond the present life to kindle their
aspirations and engage their supreme attention, the heathen naturally
pursue present objects as their chief, their only good. To what an
elevation above these does Jesus here lift His disciples!

for your heavenly Father knoweth that ye have need of all these
things--How precious this word! Food and raiment are pronounced needful
to God's children; and He who could say, "No man knoweth the Father but
the Son, and he to whomsoever the Son will reveal Him" ([Mat
11:27](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#027)), says with an authority which
none but Himself could claim, "Your heavenly Father knoweth that ye have
need of all these things." Will not that suffice you, O ye needy ones of
the household of faith?

[Matthew 6:33](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#033)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">mat 6:33</span></span>

But seek ye first the kingdom of God, and his righteousness; and all
these things shall be added unto you--This is the great summing up.
Strictly speaking, it has to do only with the subject of the present
section--the right state of the heart with reference to heavenly trod
earthly things; but being couched in the form of a brief general
directory, it is so comprehensive in its grasp as to embrace the whole
subject of this discourse. And, as if to make this the more evident, the
two keynotes of this great sermon seem purposely struck in it--"the
KINGDOM" and "the RIGHTEOUSNESS" Of the kingdom--as the grand objects,
in the supreme pursuit of which all things needful for the present life
will be added to us. The precise sense of every word in this golden
verse should be carefully weighed. "The kingdom of God" is the primary
subject of the Sermon on the Mount--that kingdom which the God of heaven
is erecting in this fallen world, within which are all the spiritually
recovered and inwardly subject portion of the family of Adam, under
Messiah as its Divine Head and King. "The righteousness thereof" is the
character of all such, so amply described and variously illustrated in
the foregoing portions of this discourse. The "seeking" of these is the
making them the object of supreme choice and pursuit; and the seeking of
them "first" is the seeking of them before and above all else. The "all
these things" which shall in that case be added to us are just the "all
these things" which the last words of [Mat
6:32](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#032) assured us "our heavenly Father
knoweth that we have need of"; that is, all we require for the present
life. And when our Lord says they shall be "added," it is implied, as a
matter of course, that the seekers of the kingdom and its righteousness
shall have these as their proper and primary portion: the rest being
their gracious reward for not seeking them. (See an illustration of the
principle of this in [Ch2 1:11-12](../../../bib/kjv/ch2001.htm#011)).
What follows is but a reduction of this great general direction into a
practical and ready form for daily use.

[Matthew 6:34](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#034)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">mat 6:34</span></span>

Take therefore no thought--anxious care.

for the morrow: for the morrow shall take thought for the things of
itself--(or, according to other authorities, "for itself")--shall have
its own causes of anxiety.

Sufficient unto the day is the evil thereof--An admirable practical
maxim, and better rendered in our version than in almost any other, not
excepting the preceding English ones. Every day brings its own cares;
and to anticipate is only to double them.

SERMON ON THE MOUNT--concluded.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Matthew Chapter 7](mat007)

</div>
