<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Matthew Index](mat.md)  
  [Previous](mat006)  [Next](mat008.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*A Commentary, Critical, Practical, and Explanatory on the Old and New
Testaments*, by Robert Jamieson, A.R. Fausset and David Brown \[1882\]
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Matthew Chapter 7](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#001.md)

[Matthew 7:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">mat 7:1</span></span>

MISCELLANEOUS SUPPLEMENTARY COUNSELS. ([Mat
7:1-12](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#001).md)

Judge not, that ye be not judged--To "judge" here does not exactly mean
to pronounce condemnatory judgment, nor does it refer to simple judging
at all, whether favorable or the reverse. The context makes it clear
that the thing here condemned is that disposition to look unfavorably on
the character and actions of others, which leads invariably to the
pronouncing of rash, unjust, and unlovely judgments upon them. No doubt
it is the judgments so pronounced which are here spoken of; but what our
Lord aims at is the spirit out of which they spring. Provided we eschew
this unlovely spirit, we are not only warranted to sit in judgment upon
a brother's character and actions, but in the exercise of a necessary
discrimination are often constrained to do so for our own guidance. It
is the violation of the law of love involved in the exercise of a
censorious disposition which alone is here condemned. And the argument
against it--"that ye be not judged"--confirms this: "that your own
character and actions be not pronounced upon with the like severity";
that is, at the great day.

[Matthew 7:2](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">mat 7:2</span></span>

For with what judgments ye Judge, ye shall be judged: and with what
measure ye mete--whatever standard of judgment ye apply to others.

it shall be measured to you again--This proverbial maxim is used by our
Lord in other connections--as in [Mar
4:24](../../../bib/kjv/mar004.htm#024.md), and with a slightly different
application in [Luk 6:38](../../../bib/kjv/luk006.htm#038.md) --as a great
principle in the divine administration. Unkind judgment of others will
be judicially returned upon ourselves, in the day when God shall judge
the secrets of men by Jesus Christ. But, as in many other cases under
the divine administration, such harsh judgment gets self-punished even
here. For people shrink from contact with those who systematically deal
out harsh judgment upon others--naturally concluding that they
themselves may be the next victims--and feel impelled in self-defense,
when exposed to it, to roll back upon the assailant his own censures.

[Matthew 7:3](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">mat 7:3</span></span>

And why beholdest thou the mote--"splinter," here very well rendered
"mote," denoting any small fault.

that is in thy brother's eye, but considerest not the beam that is in
thine own eye?--denoting the much greater fault which we overlook in
ourselves.

[Matthew 7:4](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">mat 7:4</span></span>

Or how wilt thou say to thy brother, Let me pull out the mote out of
thine eye; and, behold, a beam is in thine own eye?

[Matthew 7:5](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">mat 7:5</span></span>

Thou hypocrite--"Hypocrite."

first cast out the beam out of thine own eye; and then shalt thou see
clearly to cast out the mote out of thy brother's eye--Our Lord uses a
most hyperbolical, but not unfamiliar figure, to express the monstrous
inconsistency of this conduct. The "hypocrisy" which, not without
indignation, He charges it with, consists in the pretense of a zealous
and compassionate charity, which cannot possibly be real in one who
suffers worse faults to lie uncorrected in himself. He only is fit to be
a reprover of others who jealously and severely judges himself. Such
persons will not only be slow to undertake the office of censor on their
neighbors, but, when constrained in faithfulness to deal with them, will
make it evident that they do it with reluctance and not satisfaction,
with moderation and not exaggeration, with love and not harshness.

Prostitution of Holy Things ([Mat
7:6](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#006).md). The opposite extreme to that of
censoriousness is here condemned--want of discrimination of character.

[Matthew 7:6](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">mat 7:6</span></span>

Give not that which is holy unto the dogs--savage or snarling haters of
truth and righteousness.

neither cast ye your pearls before swine--the impure or coarse, who are
incapable of appreciating the priceless jewels of Christianity. In the
East, dogs are wilder and more gregarious, and, feeding on carrion and
garbage, are coarser and fiercer than the same animals in the West. Dogs
and swine, besides being ceremonially unclean, were peculiarly repulsive
to the Jews, and indeed to the ancients generally.

lest they trample them under their feet--as swine do.

and turn again and rend you--as dogs do. Religion is brought into
contempt, and its professors insulted, when it is forced upon those who
cannot value it and will not have it. But while the indiscriminately
zealous have need of this caution, let us be on our guard against too
readily setting our neighbors down as dogs and swine, and excusing
ourselves from endeavoring to do them good on this poor plea.

Prayer ([Mat 7:7-11](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#007).md). Enough, one
might think, had been said on this subject in [Mat
6:5-15](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#005.md). But the difficulty of the
foregoing duties seems to have recalled the subject, and this gives it
quite a new turn. "How shall we ever be able to carry out such precepts
as these, of tender, holy, yet discriminating love?" might the humble
disciple inquire. "Go to God with it," is our Lord's reply; but He
expresses this with a fulness which leaves nothing to be desired, urging
now not only confidence, but importunity in prayer.

[Matthew 7:7](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">mat 7:7</span></span>

Ask, and it shall be given you; seek, and ye shall find; knock, and it
shall be opened unto you--Though there seems evidently a climax here,
expressive of more and more importunity, yet each of these terms used
presents what we desire of God in a different light. We ask for what we
wish; we seek for what we miss; we knock for that from which we feel
ourselves shut out. Answering to this threefold representation is the
triple assurance of success to our believing efforts. "But ah!" might
some humble disciple say, "I cannot persuade myself that I have any
interest with God." To meet this, our Lord repeats the triple assurance
He had just given, but in such a form as to silence every such
complaint.

[Matthew 7:8](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">mat 7:8</span></span>

For every one that asketh receiveth; and he that seeketh findeth; and to
him that knocketh it shall be opened--Of course, it is presumed that he
asks aright--that is, in faith--and with an honest purpose to make use
of what he receives. "If any of you lack wisdom, let him ask of God. But
let him ask in faith, nothing wavering (undecided whether to be
altogether on the Lord's side). For he that wavereth is like a wave of
the sea driven with the wind and tossed. For let not that man think that
he shall receive any thing of the Lord" ([Jam
1:5-7](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#005).md). Hence, "Ye ask, and receive
not, because ye ask amiss, that ye may consume it upon your lusts" ([Jam
4:3](../../../bib/kjv/jam004.htm#003).md).

[Matthew 7:9](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">mat 7:9</span></span>

Or what man is there of you, whom if his son ask bread--a loaf.

will he give him a stone?--round and smooth like such a loaf or cake as
was much in use, but only to mock him.

[Matthew 7:10](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">mat 7:10</span></span>

Or if he ask a fish, will he give him a serpent?--like it, indeed, but
only to sting him.

[Matthew 7:11](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">mat 7:11</span></span>

If ye then, being evil, know how to give good gifts unto your children,
how much more shall your Father which is in heaven give good things to
them that ask him!--Bad as our fallen nature is, the father in us is not
extinguished. What a heart, then, must the Father of all fathers have
towards His pleading children! In the corresponding passage in Luke (see
on [Luk 11:13](../../../bib/kjv/luk011.htm#013).md), instead of "good
things," our Lord asks whether He will not much more give the Holy
Spirit to them that ask Him. At this early stage of His ministry, and
before such an audience, He seems to avoid such sharp doctrinal teaching
as was more accordant with His plan at the riper stage indicated in
Luke, and in addressing His own disciples exclusively.

Golden Rule ([Mat 7:12](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#012).md).

[Matthew 7:12](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">mat 7:12</span></span>

Therefore--to say all in one word.

all things whatsoever ye would that men should do to you, do ye even so
to them--the same thing and in the same way.

for this is the law and the prophets--"This is the substance of all
relative duty; all Scripture in a nutshell." Incomparable summary! How
well called "the royal law!" ([Jam
2:8](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#008.md); compare [Rom
13:9](../../../bib/kjv/rom013.htm#009).md). It is true that similar maxims
are found floating in the writings of the cultivated Greeks and Romans,
and naturally enough in the Rabbinical writings. But so expressed as it
is here--in immediate connection with, and as the sum of such duties as
has been just enjoined, and such principles as had been before
taught--it is to be found nowhere else. And the best commentary upon
this fact is, that never till our Lord came down thus to teach did men
effectually and widely exemplify it in their practice. The precise sense
of the maxim is best referred to common sense. It is not, of course,
what--in our wayward, capricious, gasping moods--we should wish that men
would do to us, that we are to hold ourselves bound to do to them; but
only what--in the exercise of an impartial judgment, and putting
ourselves in their place--we consider it reasonable that they should do
to us, that we are to do to them.

[Matthew 7:13](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">mat 7:13</span></span>

CONCLUSION AND EFFECT OF THE SERMON ON THE MOUNT. (Mat. 7:13-29)

Enter ye in at the strait gate--as if hardly wide enough to admit one at
all. This expresses the difficulty of the first right step in religion,
involving, as it does, a triumph over all our natural inclinations.
Hence the still stronger expression in Luke ([Luk
13:24](../../../bib/kjv/luk013.htm#024).md), "Strive to enter in at the
strait gate."

for wide is the gate--easily entered.

and broad is the way--easily trodden.

that leadeth to destruction, and--thus lured "many there be which go in
thereat."

[Matthew 7:14](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">mat 7:14</span></span>

Because strait is the gate, and narrow is the way, which leadeth unto
life--In other words, the whole course is as difficult as the first
step; and (so it comes to pass that).

few there be that find it--The recommendation of the broad way is the
ease with which it is trodden and the abundance of company to be found
in it. It is sailing with a fair wind and a favorable tide. The natural
inclinations are not crossed, and fears of the issue, if not easily
hushed, are in the long run effectually subdued. The one disadvantage of
this course is its end--it "leadeth to destruction." The great Teacher
says it, and says it as "One having authority." To the supposed
injustice or harshness of this He never once adverts. He leaves it to be
inferred that such a course righteously, naturally, necessarily so ends.
But whether men see this or no, here He lays down the law of the
kingdom, and leaves it with us. As to the other way, the disadvantage of
it lies in its narrowness and solicitude. Its very first step involves a
revolution in all our purposes and plans for life, and a surrender of
all that is dear to natural inclination, while all that follows is but a
repetition of the first great act of self-sacrifice. No wonder, then,
that few find and few are found in it. But it has one advantage--it
"leadeth unto life." Some critics take "the gate" here, not for the
first, but the last step in religion; since gates seldom open into
roads, but roads usually terminate in a gate, leading straight to a
mansion. But as this would make our Lord's words to have a very inverted
and unnatural form as they stand, it is better, with the majority of
critics, to view them as we have done. But since such teaching would be
as unpopular as the way itself, our Lord next forewarns His hearers that
preachers of smooth things--the true heirs and representatives of the
false prophets of old--would be rife enough in the new kingdom.

[Matthew 7:15](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">mat 7:15</span></span>

Beware--But beware.

of false prophets--that is, of teachers coming as authorized expounders
of the mind of God and guides to heaven. (See [Act
20:29-30](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#029.md); [Pe2
2:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/pe2002.htm#001).md).

which come to you in sheep's clothing--with a bland, gentle, plausible
exterior; persuading you that the gate is not strait nor the way narrow,
and that to teach so is illiberal and bigoted--precisely what the old
prophets did ([Eze 13:1-10](../../../bib/kjv/eze013.htm#001.md), [Eze
13:22](../../../bib/kjv/eze013.htm#022).md).

but inwardly they are ravening wolves--bent on devouring the flock for
their own ends ([Co2 11:2-3](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#002.md), [Co2
11:13-15](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#013).md).

[Matthew 7:16](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">mat 7:16</span></span>

Ye shall know them by their fruits--not their doctrines--as many of the
elder interpreters and some later ones explain it--for that corresponds
to the tree itself; but the practical effect of their teaching, which is
the proper fruit of the tree.

Do men gather grapes of thorns--any kind of prickly plant.

or figs of thistles?--a three-pronged variety. The general sense is
obvious--Every tree bears its own fruit.

[Matthew 7:17](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">mat 7:17</span></span>

Even so every good tree bringeth forth good fruit: but a corrupt tree
bringeth forth evil fruit.

[Matthew 7:18](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">mat 7:18</span></span>

A good tree cannot bring forth evil fruit, neither can a corrupt tree
bring forth good fruit--Obvious as is the truth here expressed in
different forms--that the heart determines and is the only proper
interpreter of the actions of our life--no one who knows how the Church
of Rome makes a merit of actions, quite apart from the motives that
prompt them, and how the same tendency manifests itself from time to
time even among Protestant Christians, can think it too obvious to be
insisted on by the teachers of divine truth. Here follows a wholesome
digression.

[Matthew 7:19](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#019.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">mat 7:19</span></span>

Every tree that bringeth not forth good fruit is hewn down, and cast
into the fire--(See on [Mat 3:10](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#010).md).

[Matthew 7:20](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#020.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">mat 7:20</span></span>

Wherefore by their fruits ye shall know them--that is, But the point I
now press is not so much the end of such, as the means of detecting
them; and this, as already said, is their fruits. The hypocrisy of
teachers now leads to a solemn warning against religious hypocrisy in
general.

[Matthew 7:21](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#021.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">mat 7:21</span></span>

Not every one that saith unto me, Lord, Lord--the reduplication of the
title "Lord" denoting zeal in according it to Christ (see [Mar
14:45](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#045).md). Yet our Lord claims and
expects this of all His disciples, as when He washed their feet: "Ye
call me Master and Lord: and ye say well; for so I am" ([Joh
13:13](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#013).md).

shall enter into the kingdom of heaven; but he that doeth the will of my
Father which is in heaven--that will which it had been the great object
of this discourse to set forth. Yet our Lord says warily, not "the will
of your Father," but "of My Father"; thus claiming a relationship to His
Father with which His disciples might not intermeddle, and which He
never lets down. And He so speaks here to give authority to His
asseverations. But now He rises higher still--not formally announcing
Himself as the Judge, but intimating what men will say to Him, and He to
them, when He sits as their final judge.

[Matthew 7:22](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#022.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">mat 7:22</span></span>

Many will say to me in that day--What day? It is emphatically unnamed.
But it is the day to which He had just referred, when men shall "enter"
or not enter "into the kingdom of heaven." (See a similar way of
speaking of "that day" in [Ti2 1:12](../../../bib/kjv/ti2001.htm#012.md);
[Ti2 4:8](../../../bib/kjv/ti2004.htm#008).md).

Lord, Lord--The reiteration denotes surprise. "What, Lord? How is this?
Are we to be disowned?"

have we not prophesied--or, "publicly taught." As one of the special
gifts of the Spirit in the early Church, it has the sense of "inspired
and authoritative teaching," and is ranked next to the apostleship. (See
[Co1 12:28](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#028.md); [Eph
4:11](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#011).md). In this sense it is used here,
as appears from what follows.

in thy name--or, "to thy name," and so in the two following
clauses--"having reference to Thy name as the sole power in which we did
it."

and in thy name have cast out devils? and in thy name done many
wonderful works--or, miracles. These are selected as three examples of
the highest services rendered to the Christian cause, and through the
power of Christ's own name, invoked for that purpose; He Himself, too,
responding to the call. And the threefold repetition of the question,
each time in the same form, expresses in the liveliest manner the
astonishment of the speakers at the view now taken of them.

[Matthew 7:23](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#023.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">mat 7:23</span></span>

And then will I profess unto them--or, openly proclaim--tearing off the
mask.

I never knew you--What they claimed intimacy with Christ, is just what
He repudiates, and with a certain scornful dignity. "Our acquaintance
was not broken off--there never was any."

depart from me--(Compare [Mat 25:41](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#041).md).
The connection here gives these words an awful significance. They
claimed intimacy with Christ, and in the corresponding passage, [Luk
13:26](../../../bib/kjv/luk013.htm#026.md), are represented as having gone
out and in with Him on familiar terms. "So much the worse for you," He
replies: "I bore with that long enough; but now--begone!"

ye that work iniquity--not "that wrought iniquity"; for they are
represented as fresh from the scenes and acts of it as they stand before
the Judge. (See on the almost identical, but even more vivid and awful,
description of the scene in [Luk
13:24-27](../../../bib/kjv/luk013.htm#024).md). That the apostle alludes to
these very words in [Ti2 2:19](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#019.md) there
can hardly be any doubt--"Nevertheless the foundation of God standeth
sure, having this seal, The Lord knoweth them that are His. And, Let
every one that nameth the name of Christ depart from iniquity."

[Matthew 7:24](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#024.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">mat 7:24</span></span>

Therefore--to bring this discourse to a close.

whosoever heareth these sayings of mine, and doeth them--see [Jam
1:22](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#022.md), which seems a plain allusion to
these words; also [Luk 11:28](../../../bib/kjv/luk011.htm#028.md); [Rom
2:13](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#013.md); [Jo1
3:7](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#007.md).

I will liken him unto a wise man--a shrewd, prudent, provident man.

which built his house upon a rock--the rock of true discipleship, or
genuine subjection to Christ.

[Matthew 7:25](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#025.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">mat 7:25</span></span>

And the rain descended--from above.

and the floods came--from below.

and the winds blew--sweeping across.

and beat upon that house--thus from every direction.

and it fell not; for it was founded upon a rock--See [Jo1
2:17](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#017.md).

[Matthew 7:26](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#026.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">mat 7:26</span></span>

And every one that heareth these sayings of mine--in the attitude of
discipleship.

and doeth them not, shall be likened unto a foolish man, which built his
house upon the sand--denoting a loose foundation--that of an empty
profession and mere external services.

[Matthew 7:27](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#027.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">mat 7:27</span></span>

And the rain descended, and the floods came, and the winds blew, and
beat upon that house--struck against that house;

and it fell: and great was the fall of it--terrible the ruin! How lively
must this imagery have been to an audience accustomed to the fierceness
of an Eastern tempest, and the suddenness and completeness with which it
sweeps everything unsteady before it!

Effect of the Sermon on the Mount ([Mat
7:28-29](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#028).md).

[Matthew 7:28](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#028.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">mat 7:28</span></span>

And it came to pass, when Jesus had ended these sayings, the people were
astonished at his doctrine--rather, "His teaching," for the reference is
to the manner of it quite as much as the matter, or rather more so.

[Matthew 7:29](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#029.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">mat 7:29</span></span>

For he taught them as one having authority--The word "one," which our
translators have here inserted, only weakens the statement.

and not as the scribes--The consciousness of divine authority, as
Lawgiver, Expounder and Judge, so beamed through His teaching, that the
scribes teaching could not but appear drivelling in such a light.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Matthew Chapter 8](mat008.md)

</div>
