<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Matthew Index](mat)  
  [Previous](mat001)  [Next](mat003) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*A Commentary, Critical, Practical, and Explanatory on the Old and New
Testaments*, by Robert Jamieson, A.R. Fausset and David Brown \[1882\]
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Matthew Chapter 2](../../../bib/kjv/mat002.htm#001)

[Matthew 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat002.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">mat 2:1</span></span>

VISIT OF THE MAGI TO JERUSALEM AND BETHLEHEM. ([Mat
2:1-12](../../../bib/kjv/mat002.htm#001))

Now when Jesus was born in Bethlehem of Judea--so called to distinguish
it from another Bethlehem in the tribe of Zebulun, near the Sea of
Galilee ([Jos 19:15](../../../bib/kjv/jos019.htm#015)); called also
Beth-lehem-judah, as being in that tribe ([Jdg
17:7](../../../bib/kjv/jdg017.htm#007)); and Ephrath ([Gen
35:16](../../../bib/kjv/gen035.htm#016)); and combining both, Beth-lehem
Ephratah ([Mic 5:2](../../../bib/kjv/mic005.htm#002)). It lay about six
miles southwest of Jerusalem. But how came Joseph and Mary to remove
thither from Nazareth, the place of their residence? Not of their own
accord, and certainly not with the view of fulfilling the prophecy
regarding Messiah's birthplace; nay, they stayed at Nazareth till it was
almost too late for Mary to travel with safety; nor would they have
stirred from it at all, had not an order which left them no choice
forced them to the appointed place. A high hand was in all these
movements. (See on [Luk 2:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#001)).

in the days of Herod the king--styled the Great; son of Antipater, an
Edomite, made king by the Romans. Thus was "the sceptre departing from
Judah" ([Gen 49:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#010)), a sign that
Messiah was now at hand. As Herod is known to have died in the year of
Rome 750, in the fourth year before the commencement of our Christian
era, the birth of Christ must be dated four years before the date
usually assigned to it, even if He was born within the year of Herod's
death, as it is next to certain that He was.

there came wise men--literally, "Magi" or "Magians," probably of the
learned class who cultivated astrology and kindred sciences. Balaam's
prophecy ([Num 24:17](../../../bib/kjv/num024.htm#017)), and perhaps
Daniel's ([Dan 9:24](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#024), &c.), might have
come down to them by tradition; but nothing definite is known of them.

from the east--but whether from Arabia, Persia, or Mesopotamia is
uncertain.

to Jerusalem--as the Jewish metropolis.

[Matthew 2:2](../../../bib/kjv/mat002.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">mat 2:2</span></span>

Saying, Where is he that is born King of the Jews?--From this it would
seem they were not themselves Jews. (Compare the language of the Roman
governor, [Joh 18:33](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#033), and of the Roman
soldiers, [Mat 27:29](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#029), with the very
different language of the Jews themselves, [Mat
27:42](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#042), &c.). The Roman historians,
SUETONIUS and TACITUS, bear witness to an expectation, prevalent in the
East, that out of Judea should arise a sovereign of the world.

for we have seen his star in the east--Much has been written on the
subject of this star; but from all that is here said it is perhaps
safest to regard it as simply a luminous meteor, which appeared under
special laws and for a special purpose.

and are come to worship him--to do Him homage, as the word signifies;
the nature of that homage depending on the circumstances of the case.
That not civil but religious homage is meant here is plain from the
whole strain of the narrative, and particularly [Mat
2:11](../../../bib/kjv/mat002.htm#011). Doubtless these simple strangers
expected all Jerusalem to be full of its new-born King, and the time,
place, and circumstances of His birth to be familiar to every one.
Little would they think that the first announcement of His birth would
come from themselves, and still less could they anticipate the
startling, instead of transporting, effect which it would produce--else
they would probably have sought their information regarding His
birthplace in some other quarter. But God overruled it to draw forth a
noble testimony to the predicted birthplace of Messiah from the highest
ecclesiastical authority in the nation.

[Matthew 2:3](../../../bib/kjv/mat002.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">mat 2:3</span></span>

When Herod the king had heard these things, he was troubled--viewing
this as a danger to his own throne: perhaps his guilty conscience also
suggested other grounds of fear.

and all Jerusalem with him--from a dread of revolutionary commotions,
and perhaps also of Herod's rage.

[Matthew 2:4](../../../bib/kjv/mat002.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">mat 2:4</span></span>

And when he had gathered all the chief priests and scribes of the people
together--The class of the "chief priests" included the high priest for
the time being, together with all who had previously filled this office;
for though the then head of the Aaronic family was the only rightful
high priest, the Romans removed them at pleasure, to make way for
creatures of their own. In this class probably were included also the
heads of the four and twenty courses of the priests. The "scribes" were
at first merely transcribers of the law and synagogue readers;
afterwards interpreters of the law, both civil and religious, and so
both lawyers and divines. The first of these classes, a proportion of
the second, and "the elders"--that is, as LIGHTFOOT thinks, "those
elders of the laity that were not of the Levitical tribe"--constituted
the supreme council of the nation, called the Sanhedrim, the members of
which, at their full complement, numbered seventy-two. That this was the
council which Herod now convened is most probable, from the solemnity of
the occasion; for though the elders are not mentioned, we find a similar
omission where all three were certainly meant (compare [Mat
26:59](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#059); [Mat
27:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#001)). As MEYER says, it was all the
theologians of the nation whom Herod convened, because it was a
theological response that he wanted.

he demanded of them--as the authorized interpreters of Scripture.

where Christ--the Messiah.

should be born--according to prophecy.

[Matthew 2:5](../../../bib/kjv/mat002.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">mat 2:5</span></span>

And they said unto him, In Bethlehem of Judea--a prompt and involuntary
testimony from the highest tribunal; which yet at length condemned Him
to die.

for thus it is written by the prophet-- ([Mic
5:2](../../../bib/kjv/mic005.htm#002)).

[Matthew 2:6](../../../bib/kjv/mat002.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">mat 2:6</span></span>

And thou, Bethlehem, in the land of Juda--the "in" being familiarly left
out, as we say, "London, Middlesex."

art not the least among the princes of Juda: for out of thee shall come
a Governor, &c.--This quotation, though differing verbally, agrees
substantially with the Hebrew and the Septuagint. For says the prophet,
"Though thou be little, yet out of thee shall come the Ruler"--this
honor more than compensating for its natural insignificance; while our
Evangelist, by a lively turn, makes him say, "Thou art not the least:
for out of thee shall come a Governor"--this distinction lifting it from
the lowest to the highest rank. The "thousands of Juda," in the prophet,
mean the subordinate divisions of the tribe: our Evangelist, instead of
these, merely names the "princes" or heads of these families, including
the districts which they occupied

that shall rule--or "feed," as in the Margin.

my people Israel--In the Old Testament, kings are, by a beautiful
figure, styled "shepherds" ([Eze
34:1-10](../../../bib/kjv/eze034.htm#001), &c.). The classical writers
use the same figure. The pastoral rule of Jehovah and Messiah over His
people is a representation pervading all Scripture, and rich in import.
(See [Psa 23:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/psa023.htm#001); [Isa
40:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#011); [Eze
37:24](../../../bib/kjv/eze037.htm#024); [Joh
10:11](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#011); [Rev
7:17](../../../bib/kjv/rev007.htm#017)). That this prophecy of Micah
referred to the Messiah, was admitted by the ancient Rabbins.

The Wise Men Despatched to Bethlehem by Herod to See the Babe, and Bring
Him Word, Make a Religious Offering to the Infant King, but Divinely
Warned, Return Home by Another Way ([Mat
2:7-12](../../../bib/kjv/mat002.htm#007)).

[Matthew 2:7](../../../bib/kjv/mat002.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">mat 2:7</span></span>

Then Herod, when he had privily called the wise men--Herod has so far
succeeded in his murderous design: he has tracked the spot where lies
his victim, an unconscious babe. But he has another point to fix--the
date of His birth--without which he might still miss his mark. The one
he had got from the Sanhedrim; the other he will have from the sages;
but secretly, lest his object should be suspected and defeated. So he

inquired of them diligently--rather, "precisely."

what time the star appeared--presuming that this would be the best clue
to the age of the child. The unsuspecting strangers tell him all. And
now he thinks he is succeeding to a wish, and shall speedily clutch his
victim; for at so early an age as they indicate, He would not likely
have been removed from the place of His birth. Yet he is wary. He sends
them as messengers from himself, and bids them come to him, that he may
follow their pious example.

[Matthew 2:8](../../../bib/kjv/mat002.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">mat 2:8</span></span>

And he sent them to Bethlehem, and said, Go and search
diligently--"Search out carefully."

for the young child; and when ye have found him, bring me word again,
that I may come and worship him also--The cunning and bloody hypocrite!
Yet this royal mandate would meantime serve as a safe conduct to the
strangers.

[Matthew 2:9](../../../bib/kjv/mat002.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">mat 2:9</span></span>

When they had heard the king, they departed--But where were ye, O Jewish
ecclesiastics, ye chief priests and scribes of the people? Ye could tell
Herod where Christ should be born, and could hear of these strangers
from the far East that the Desire of all nations had actually come; but
I do not see you trooping to Bethlehem--I find these devout strangers
journeying thither all alone. Yet God ordered this too, lest the news
should be blabbed, and reach the tyrant's ears, before the Babe could be
placed beyond his reach. Thus are the very errors and crimes and cold
indifferences of men all overruled.

and, lo, the star, which they saw in the east--implying apparently that
it had disappeared in the interval.

went before them, and stood over where the young child was--Surely this
could hardly be but by a luminous meteor, and not very high.

[Matthew 2:10](../../../bib/kjv/mat002.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">mat 2:10</span></span>

When they saw the star, they rejoiced with exceeding great joy--The
language is very strong, expressing exuberant transport.

[Matthew 2:11](../../../bib/kjv/mat002.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">mat 2:11</span></span>

And when they were come into the house--not the stable; for as soon as
Bethlehem was emptied of its strangers, they would have no difficulty in
finding a dwelling-house.

they saw--The received text has "found"; but here our translators
rightly depart from it, for it has no authority.

the young child with Mary his mother--The blessed Babe is naturally
mentioned first, then the mother; but Joseph, though doubtless present,
is not noticed, as being but the head of the house.

and fell down and worshipped him--Clearly this was no civil homage to a
petty Jewish king, whom these star-guided strangers came so far, and
inquired so eagerly, and rejoiced with such exceeding joy, to pay, but a
lofty spiritual homage. The next clause confirms this.

and when they had opened their treasures they presented--rather,
"offered."

unto him gifts--This expression, used frequently in the Old Testament of
the oblations presented to God, is in the New Testament employed seven
times, and always in a religious sense of offerings to God. Beyond
doubt, therefore, we are to understand the presentation of these gifts
by the Magi as a religious offering.

gold, frankincense, and myrrh--Visits were seldom paid to sovereigns
without a present ([Kg1 10:2](../../../bib/kjv/kg1010.htm#002), &c.;
compare [Psa 72:10-11](../../../bib/kjv/psa072.htm#010), [Psa
72:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa072.htm#015); [Isa
60:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa060.htm#003), [Isa
60:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa060.htm#006)). "Frankincense" was an aromatic
used in sacrificial offerings: "myrrh" was used in perfuming ointments.
These, with the "gold" which they presented, seem to show that the
offerers were persons in affluent circumstances. That the gold was
presented to the infant King in token of His royalty; the frankincense
in token of His divinity, and the myrrh, of His sufferings; or that they
were designed to express His divine and human natures; or that the
prophetical, priestly, and kingly offices of Christ are to be seen in
these gifts; or that they were the offerings of three individuals
respectively, each of them kings, the very names of whom tradition has
handed down--all these are, at the best, precarious suppositions. But
that the feelings of these devout givers are to be seen in the richness
of their gifts, and that the gold, at least, would be highly serviceable
to the parents of the blessed Babe in their unexpected journey to Egypt
and stay there--that much at least admits of no dispute.

[Matthew 2:12](../../../bib/kjv/mat002.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">mat 2:12</span></span>

And being warned of God in a dream that they should not return to Herod,
they departed--or, "withdrew."

to their own country another way--What a surprise would this vision be
to the sages, just as they were preparing to carry the glad news of what
they had seen to the pious king! But the Lord knew the bloody old tyrant
better than to let him see their face again.

[Matthew 2:13](../../../bib/kjv/mat002.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">mat 2:13</span></span>

THE FLIGHT INTO EGYPT--THE MASSACRE AT BETHLEHEM--THE RETURN OF JOSEPH
AND MARY WITH THE BABE, AFTER HEROD'S DEATH, AND THEIR SETTLEMENT AT
NAZARETH. ( = [Luk 2:39](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#039)). ([Mat
2:13-23](../../../bib/kjv/mat002.htm#013))

And when they were departed, behold, the angel of the Lord appeareth to
Joseph in a dream, saying, Arise, and take the young child and his
mother--Observe this form of expression, repeated in [Mat
2:14](../../../bib/kjv/mat002.htm#014) --another indirect hint that
Joseph was no more than the Child's guardian. Indeed, personally
considered, Joseph has no spiritual significance, and very little place
at all, in the Gospel history.

and flee into Egypt--which, being near, as ALFORD says, and a Roman
province independent of Herod, and much inhabited by Jews, was an easy
and convenient refuge. Ah! blessed Saviour, on what a checkered career
hast Thou entered here below! At Thy birth there was no room for Thee in
the inn; and now all Judea is too hot for Thee. How soon has the sword
begun to pierce through the Virgin's soul ([Luk
2:35](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#035))! How early does she taste the
reception which this mysterious Child of hers is to meet with in the
world! And whither is He sent? To "the house of bondage?" Well, it once
was that. But Egypt was a house of refuge before it was a house of
bondage, and now it has but returned to its first use.

and be thou there until I bring thee word; for Herod will seek the young
child to destroy him--Herod's murderous purpose was formed before the
Magi had reached Bethlehem.

[Matthew 2:14](../../../bib/kjv/mat002.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">mat 2:14</span></span>

When he arose, he took the young child and his mother by night, and
departed into Egypt--doubtless the same night.

[Matthew 2:15](../../../bib/kjv/mat002.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">mat 2:15</span></span>

And was there until the death of Herod--which took place not very long
after this of a horrible disease; the details of which will be found in
JOSEPHUS \[Antiquities, 17.6.1,5,7,8\].

that it might be fulfilled which was spoken of the Lord by the prophet,
saying-- ([Hos 11:1](../../../bib/kjv/hos011.htm#001)).

Out of Egypt have I called my son--Our Evangelist here quotes directly
from the Hebrew, warily departing from the Septuagint, which renders the
words, "From Egypt have I recalled his children," meaning Israel's
children. The prophet is reminding his people how dear Israel was to God
in the days of his youth; how Moses was bidden to say to Pharaoh, "Thus
saith the Lord, Israel is My son, My first-born; and I say unto thee,
Let My son go, that he may serve Me; and if thou refuse to let him go,
behold, I will slay thy son, even thy first-born" ([Exo
4:22-23](../../../bib/kjv/exo004.htm#022)); how, when Pharaoh refused,
God having slain all his first-born, "called His own son out of Egypt,"
by a stroke of high-handed power and love. Viewing the words in this
light, even if our Evangelist had not applied them to the recall from
Egypt of God's own beloved, Only-begotten Son, the application would
have been irresistibly made by all who have learnt to pierce beneath the
surface to the deeper relations which Christ bears to His people, and
both to God; and who are accustomed to trace the analogy of God's
treatment of each respectively.

[Matthew 2:16](../../../bib/kjv/mat002.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">mat 2:16</span></span>

Then Herod, &c.--As Deborah sang of the mother of Sisera: "She looked
out at a window, and cried through the lattice, Why is his chariot so
long in coming? why tarry the wheels of his chariots? Have they not
sped?" so Herod wonders that his messengers, with pious zeal, are not
hastening with the news that all is ready to receive him as a
worshipper. What can be keeping them? Have they missed their way? Has
any disaster befallen them? At length his patience is exhausted. He
makes his inquiries and finds they are already far beyond his reach on
their way home.

when he saw that he was mocked--was trifled with.

of the wise men--No, Herod, thou art not mocked of the wise men, but of
a Higher than they. He that sitteth in the heavens doth laugh at thee;
the Lord hath thee in derision. He disappointeth the devices of the
crafty, so that their hands cannot perform their enterprise. He taketh
the wise in their own craftiness, and the counsel of the froward is
carried headlong ([Psa 2:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#004); [Job
5:12-13](../../../bib/kjv/job005.htm#012)). That blessed Babe shall die
indeed, but not by thy hand. As He afterwards told that son of thine--as
cunning and as unscrupulous as thyself--when the Pharisees warned Him to
depart, for Herod would seek to kill Him--"Go ye, and tell that fox,
Behold, I cast out devils, and I do cures to-day and to-morrow, and the
third day I shall be perfected. Nevertheless I must walk to-day, and
to-morrow, and the day following: for it cannot be that a prophet perish
out of Jerusalem" ([Luk 13:32-33](../../../bib/kjv/luk013.htm#032)).
Bitter satire!

was exceeding wroth--To be made a fool of is what none like, and proud
kings cannot stand. Herod burns with rage and is like a wild bull in a
net. So he

sent forth--a band of hired murderers.

and slew all the children--male children.

that were in Bethlehem, and in all the coasts thereof--environs.

from two years old and under, according to the time which he had
diligently--carefully.

inquired of the wise men--In this ferocious step Herod was like
himself--as crafty as cruel. He takes a large sweep, not to miss his
mark. He thinks this will surely embrace his victim. And so it had, if
He had been there. But He is gone. Heaven and earth shall sooner pass
away than thou shalt have that Babe into thy hands. Therefore, Herod,
thou must be content to want Him: to fill up the cup of thy bitter
mortifications, already full enough--until thou die not less of a broken
heart than of a loathsome and excruciating disease. Why, ask skeptics
and skeptical critics, is not this massacre, if it really occurred,
recorded by JOSEPHUS, who is minute enough in detailing the cruelties of
Herod? To this the answer is not difficult. If we consider how small a
town Bethlehem was, it is not likely there would be many male children
in it from two years old and under; and when we think of the number of
fouler atrocities which JOSEPHUS has recorded of him, it is unreasonable
to make anything of his silence on this.

[Matthew 2:17](../../../bib/kjv/mat002.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">mat 2:17</span></span>

Then was fulfilled that which was spoken by Jeremy the prophet, saying--
([Jer 31:15](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#015), from which the quotation
differs but verbally).

[Matthew 2:18](../../../bib/kjv/mat002.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">mat 2:18</span></span>

In Rama was there a voice heard, lamentation, and weeping, and great
mourning, Rachel weeping for her children, and would not be comforted,
because they are not--These words, as they stand in Jeremiah,
undoubtedly relate to the Babylonish captivity. Rachel, the mother of
Joseph and Benjamin, was buried in the neighborhood of Bethlehem ([Gen
35:19](../../../bib/kjv/gen035.htm#019)), where her sepulchre is still
shown. She is figuratively represented as rising from the tomb and
uttering a double lament for the loss of her children--first, by a
bitter captivity, and now by a bloody death. And a foul deed it was. O
ye mothers of Bethlehem! methinks I hear you asking why your innocent
babes should be the ram caught in the thicket, while Isaac escapes. I
cannot tell you, but one thing I know, that ye shall, some of you, live
to see a day when that Babe of Bethlehem shall be Himself the Ram,
caught in another sort of thicket, in order that your babes may escape a
worse doom than they now endure. And if these babes of yours be now in
glory, through the dear might of that blessed Babe, will they not deem
it their honor that the tyrant's rage was exhausted upon themselves
instead of their infant Lord?

[Matthew 2:19](../../../bib/kjv/mat002.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">mat 2:19</span></span>

But when Herod was dead--Miserable Herod! Thou thoughtest thyself safe
from a dreaded Rival; but it was He only that was safe from thee; and
thou hast not long enjoyed even this fancied security. See on [Mat
2:15](../../../bib/kjv/mat002.htm#015).

behold, an angel of the Lord appeareth in a dream to Joseph in
Egypt--Our translators, somewhat capriciously, render the same
expression "the angel of the Lord," [Mat
1:20](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#020); [Mat
2:13](../../../bib/kjv/mat002.htm#013); and "an angel of the Lord," as
here. As the same angel appears to have been employed on all these high
occasions--and most likely he to whom in Luke is given the name of
"Gabriel," [Luk 1:19](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#019), [Luk
1:26](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#026) --perhaps it should in every
instance except the first, be rendered "the angel."

[Matthew 2:20](../../../bib/kjv/mat002.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">mat 2:20</span></span>

Saying, Arise, and take the young child and his mother, and go into the
land of Israel--not to the land of Judea, for he was afterward expressly
warned not to settle there, nor to Galilee, for he only went thither
when he found it unsafe to settle in Judea but to "the land of Israel,"
in its most general sense; meaning the Holy Land at large--the
particular province being not as yet indicated. So Joseph and the Virgin
had, like Abraham, to "go out, not knowing whither they went," till they
should receive further direction.

for they are dead which sought the young child's life--a common
expression in most languages where only one is meant, who here is Herod.
But the words are taken from the strikingly analogous case in [Exo
4:19](../../../bib/kjv/exo004.htm#019), which probably suggested the
plural here; and where the command is given to Moses to return to Egypt
for the same reason that the greater than Moses was now ordered to be
brought back from it--the death of him who sought his life. Herod died
in the seventieth year of his age, and thirty-seventh of his reign.

[Matthew 2:21](../../../bib/kjv/mat002.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">mat 2:21</span></span>

And he arose, and took the young child and his mother, and came into the
land of Israel--intending, as is plain from what follows, to return to
Bethlehem of Judea, there, no doubt, to rear the Infant King, as at His
own royal city, until the time should come when they would expect Him to
occupy Jerusalem, "the city of the Great King."

[Matthew 2:22](../../../bib/kjv/mat002.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">mat 2:22</span></span>

But when he heard that Archelaus did reign in Judea in the room of his
father Herod--Archelaus succeeded to Judea, Samaria, and Idumea; but
Augustus refused him the title of king till it should be seen how he
conducted himself; giving him only the title of ethnarch \[JOSEPHUS,
Antiquities, 17.11,4\]. Above this, however, he never rose. The people,
indeed, recognized him as his father's successor; and so it is here said
that he "reigned in the room of his father Herod." But, after ten years'
defiance of the Jewish law and cruel tyranny, the people lodged heavy
complaints against him, and the emperor banished him to Vienne in Gaul,
reducing Judea again to a Roman province. Then the "scepter" clean
"departed from Judah."

he was afraid to go thither--and no wonder, for the reason just
mentioned.

notwithstanding--or more simply, "but."

being warned of God in a dream, he turned aside--withdrew.

into the parts of Galilee--or the Galilean parts. The whole country west
of the Jordan was at this time, as is well known, divided into three
provinces--GALILEE being the northern, JUDEA the southern, and SAMARIA
the central province. The province of Galilee was under the jurisdiction
of Herod Antipas, the brother of Archelaus, his father having left him
that and Perea, on the east side of the Jordan, as his share of the
kingdom, with the title of tetrarch, which Augustus confirmed. Though
crafty and licentious, according to JOSEPHUS--precisely what the Gospel
history shows him to be (see on Mark 6:14-30; [Luk
13:31-35](../../../bib/kjv/luk013.htm#031)) --he was of a less cruel
disposition than Archelaus; and Nazareth being a good way off from the
seat of government, and considerably secluded, it was safer to settle
there.

[Matthew 2:23](../../../bib/kjv/mat002.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">mat 2:23</span></span>

And he came and dwelt in a city called Nazareth--a small town in Lower
Galilee, lying in the territory of the tribe of Zebulun, and about
equally distant from the Mediterranean Sea on the west and the Sea of
Galilee on the east. Note--If, from [Luk
2:39](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#039), one would conclude that the
parents of Jesus brought Him straight back to Nazareth after His
presentation in the temple--as if there had been no visit of the Magi,
no flight to Egypt, no stay there, and no purpose on returning to settle
again at Bethlehem--one might, from our Evangelist's way of speaking
here, equally conclude that the parents of our Lord had never been at
Nazareth until now. Did we know exactly the sources from which the
matter of each of the Gospels was drawn up, or the mode in which these
were used, this apparent discrepancy would probably disappear at once.
In neither case is there any inaccuracy. At the same time it is
difficult, with these facts before us, to conceive that either of these
two Evangelists wrote his Gospel with that of the other before
him--though many think this a precarious inference.

that it might be fulfilled which was spoken by the prophets, He shall be
called a Nazarene--better, perhaps, "Nazarene." The best explanation of
the origin of this name appears to be that which traces it to the word
netzer in [Isa 11:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#001) --the small twig,
sprout, or sucker, which the prophet there says, "shall come forth from
the stem (or rather, 'stump') of Jesse, the branch which should fructify
from his roots." The little town of Nazareth, mentioned neither in the
Old Testament nor in JOSEPHUS, was probably so called from its
insignificance: a weak twig in contrast to a stately tree; and a special
contempt seemed to rest upon it--"Can any good thing come out of
Nazareth?" ([Joh 1:46](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#046)) --over and
above the general contempt in which all Galilee was held, from the
number of Gentiles that settled in the upper territories of it, and, in
the estimation of the Jews, debased it. Thus, in the providential
arrangement by which our Lord was brought up at the insignificant and
opprobrious town called Nazareth, there was involved, first, a local
humiliation; next, an allusion to Isaiah's prediction of His lowly,
twig-like upspringing from the branchless, dried-up stump of Jesse; and
yet further, a standing memorial of that humiliation which "the
prophets," in a number of the most striking predictions, had attached to
the Messiah.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Matthew Chapter 3](mat003)

</div>
