<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Nehemiah Index](neh.md)  
  [Previous](neh004)  [Next](neh006.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*A Commentary, Critical, Practical, and Explanatory on the Old and New
Testaments*, by Robert Jamieson, A.R. Fausset and David Brown \[1882\]
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Nehemiah Chapter 5](../../../bib/kjv/neh005.htm#001.md)

[Nehemiah 5:1](../../../bib/kjv/neh005.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">neh 5:1</span></span>

THE PEOPLE COMPLAIN OF THEIR DEBT, MORTGAGE, AND BONDAGE. ([Neh
5:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/neh005.htm#001).md)

there was a great cry of the people . . . against their brethren--Such a
crisis in the condition of the Jews in Jerusalem--fatigued with hard
labor and harassed by the machinations of restless enemies, the majority
of them poor, and the bright visions which hope had painted of pure
happiness on their return to the land of their fathers being
unrealized--must have been very trying to their faith and patience. But,
in addition to these vexatious oppressions, many began to sink under a
new and more grievous evil. The poor made loud complaints against the
rich for taking advantage of their necessities, and grinding them by
usurious exactions. Many of them had, in consequence of these
oppressions, been driven to such extremities that they had to mortgage
their lands and houses to enable them to pay the taxes to the Persian
government, and ultimately even to sell their children for slaves to
procure the means of subsistence. The condition of the poorer
inhabitants was indeed deplorable; for, besides the deficient harvests
caused by the great rains ([Ezr 10:9](../../../bib/kjv/ezr010.htm#009.md);
also [Hag 1:6-11](../../../bib/kjv/hag001.htm#006).md), a dearth was now
threatened by the enemy keeping such a multitude pent up in the city,
and preventing the country people bringing in provisions.

[Nehemiah 5:6](../../../bib/kjv/neh005.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">neh 5:6</span></span>

THE USURERS REBUKED. ([Neh 5:6-19](../../../bib/kjv/neh005.htm#006).md)

I was very angry when I heard their cry and these words--When such
disorders came to the knowledge of the governor, his honest indignation
was roused against the perpetrators of the evil. Having summoned a
public assembly, he denounced their conduct in terms of just severity.
He contrasted it with his own in redeeming with his money some of the
Jewish exiles who, through debt or otherwise, had lost their personal
liberty in Babylon. He urged the rich creditors not only to abandon
their illegal and oppressive system of usury, but to restore the fields
and vineyards of the poor, so that a remedy might be put to an evil the
introduction of which had led to much actual disorder, and the
continuance of which would inevitably prove ruinous to the newly
restored colony, by violating the fundamental principles of the Hebrew
constitution. The remonstrance was effectual. The conscience of the
usurious oppressors could not resist the touching and powerful appeal.
With mingled emotions of shame, contrition, and fear, they with one
voice expressed their readiness to comply with the governor's
recommendation. The proceedings were closed by the parties binding
themselves by a solemn oath, administered by the priests, that they
would redeem their pledge, as well as by the governor invoking, by the
solemn and significant gesture of shaking a corner of his garment, a
malediction on those who should violate it. The historian has taken care
to record that the people did according to this promise.

[Nehemiah 5:14](../../../bib/kjv/neh005.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">neh 5:14</span></span>

Moreover from the time that I was appointed . . . I and my brethren have
not eaten the bread of the governor--We have a remarkable proof both of
the opulence and the disinterestedness of Nehemiah. As he declined, on
conscientious grounds, to accept the lawful emoluments attached to his
government, and yet maintained a style of princely hospitality for
twelve years out of his own resources, it is evident that his office of
cup-bearer at the court of Shushan must have been very lucrative.

[Nehemiah 5:15](../../../bib/kjv/neh005.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">neh 5:15</span></span>

the former governors . . . had taken . . . bread and wine, besides forty
shekels of silver--The income of Eastern governors is paid partly in
produce, partly in money. "Bread" means all sorts of provision. The
forty shekels of silver per day would amount to a yearly salary of
Â£1800 sterling.

[Nehemiah 5:17](../../../bib/kjv/neh005.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">neh 5:17</span></span>

Moreover there were at my table an hundred and fifty of the Jews--In the
East it has been always customary to calculate the expense of a king's
or grandee's establishment, not by the amount of money disbursed, but by
the quantity of provisions consumed (see [Kg1
4:22](../../../bib/kjv/kg1004.htm#022.md); [Kg1
18:19](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#019.md); [Ecc
5:11](../../../bib/kjv/ecc005.htm#011).md).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Nehemiah Chapter 6](neh006.md)

</div>
