<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Nehemiah Index](neh)  
  [Previous](neh011)  [Next](neh013) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*A Commentary, Critical, Practical, and Explanatory on the Old and New
Testaments*, by Robert Jamieson, A.R. Fausset and David Brown \[1882\]
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Nehemiah Chapter 12](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#001)

[Nehemiah 12:1](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">neh 12:1</span></span>

PRIESTS AND LEVITES WHO CAME UP WITH ZERUBBABEL. ([Neh
12:1-9](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#001))

these are the priests--according to [Neh
12:7](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#007), "the chief of the priests," the
heads of the twenty-four courses into which the priesthood was divided
(1Ch. 24:1-20). Only four of the courses returned from the captivity
([Neh 7:39-42](../../../bib/kjv/neh007.htm#039); [Ezr
2:36-39](../../../bib/kjv/ezr002.htm#036)). But these were divided by
Zerubbabel, or Jeshua, into the original number of twenty-four.
Twenty-two only are enumerated here, and no more than twenty in [Neh
12:12-21](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#012). The discrepancy is due to
the extremely probable circumstance that two of the twenty-four courses
had become extinct in Babylon; for none belonging to them are reported
as having returned ([Neh 12:2-5](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#002)).
Hattush and Maadiah may be omitted in the account of those persons'
families ([Neh 12:12](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#012)), for these had
no sons.

Shealtiel--or Salathiel.

Ezra--This was most likely a different person from the pious and
patriotic leader. If he were the same person, he would now have reached
a very patriarchal age--and this longevity would doubtless be due to his
eminent piety and temperance, which are greatly conducive to the
prolongation of life, but, above all, to the special blessing of God,
who had preserved and strengthened him for the accomplishment of the
important work he was called upon to undertake in that critical period
of the Church's history.

[Nehemiah 12:4](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">neh 12:4</span></span>

Abijah--one of the ancestors of John the Baptist ([Luk
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#005)).

[Nehemiah 12:9](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">neh 12:9</span></span>

their brethren, were over against them in the watches--that is,
according to some, their stations--the places where they stood when
officiating--"ward over against ward" ([Neh
12:24](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#024)); or, according to others, in
alternate watches, in course of rotation.

[Nehemiah 12:10](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">neh 12:10</span></span>

SUCCESSION OF THE HIGH PRIESTS. (Neh. 12:10-47)

Jeshua begat Joiakim, &c.--This enumeration was of great importance, not
only as establishing their individual purity of descent, but because the
chronology of the Jews was henceforth to be reckoned, not as formerly by
the reigns of their kings, but by the successions of their high priests.

[Nehemiah 12:11](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">neh 12:11</span></span>

Jaddua--It is an opinion entertained by many commentators that this
person was the high priest whose dignified appearance, solemn manner,
and splendid costume overawed and interested so strongly the proud mind
of Alexander the Great; and if he were not this person (as some object
that this Jaddua was not in office till a considerable period after the
death of Nehemiah), it might probably be his father, called by the same
name.

[Nehemiah 12:12](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">neh 12:12</span></span>

in the days of Joiakim were priests, the chief of the fathers--As there
had been priests in the days of Jeshua, so in the time of Joiakim, the
son and successor of Jeshua, the sons of those persons filled the
priestly office in the place of their fathers, some of whom were still
alive, though many were dead.

[Nehemiah 12:23](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">neh 12:23</span></span>

The sons of Levi . . . were written in the book of the chronicles--that
is, the public registers in which the genealogies were kept with great
regularity and exactness.

[Nehemiah 12:27](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">neh 12:27</span></span>

at the dedication of the wall of Jerusalem--This ceremony of
consecrating the wall and gates of the city was an act of piety on the
part of Nehemiah, not merely to thank God in a general way for having
been enabled to bring the building to a happy completion, but especially
because that city was the place which He had chosen. It also contained
the temple which was hallowed by the manifestation of His presence, and
anew set apart to His service. It was on these accounts that Jerusalem
was called "the holy city," and by this public and solemn act of
religious observance, after a long period of neglect and desecration, it
was, as it were, restored to its rightful proprietor. The dedication
consisted in a solemn ceremonial, in which the leading authorities,
accompanied by the Levitical singers, summoned from all parts of the
country, and by a vast concourse of people, marched in imposing
procession round the city walls, and, pausing at intervals to engage in
united praises, prayer, and sacrifices, supplicated the continued
presence, favor, and blessing on "the holy city." "The assembly convened
near Jaffa Gate, where the procession commences. Then ([Neh
12:31](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#031)) I brought up the princes of
Judah upon the wall (near the Valley Gate), and appointed two great
companies of them that gave thanks, whereof one went on the right hand
upon the wall towards the dung gate (through Bethzo). And after them
went Hoshaiah, and half of the princes of Judah. And ([Neh
12:37](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#037)) at the fountain gate, which was
over against them, they (descending by the Tower of Siloam on the
interior, and then reascending) went up by the stairs of the city of
David, at the going up of the wall, above the house of David, even unto
the water gate eastward (by the staircase of the rampart, having
descended to dedicate the fountain structures). And the other company of
them that gave thanks went over against them (both parties having
started from the junction of the first and second walls), and I after
them, and the half of the people upon the wall, from beyond the tower of
the furnaces even unto the broad wall (beyond the corner gate). And from
above the gate of Ephraim, and above the old gate (and the gate of
Benjamin), and above the fish gate, and the tower of Hananeel, and the
tower of Meah, even unto the sheep gate; and they stood still in the
prison gate (or high gate, at the east end of the bridge). So stood the
two companies of them that gave thanks in the house of God, and I, and
half of the rulers with me (having thus performed the circuit of the
investing walls), and arrived in the courts of the temple" \[BARCLAY,
City of the Great King\].

[Nehemiah 12:43](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#043)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_043">neh 12:43</span></span>

the joy of Jerusalem was heard even afar off--The events of the day,
viewed in connection with the now repaired and beautified state of the
city, raised the popular feeling to the highest pitch of enthusiasm, and
the fame of their rejoicings was spread far and near.

[Nehemiah 12:44](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#044)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_044">neh 12:44</span></span>

portions of the law--that is, "prescribed by the law."

for Judah rejoiced for the priests and . . . Levites that waited--The
cause of this general satisfaction was either the full restoration of
the temple service and the reorganized provision for the permanent
support of the ministry, or it was the pious character and eminent gifts
of the guardians of religion.

[Nehemiah 12:45](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#045)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_045">neh 12:45</span></span>

the singers and the porters kept . . . the ward of the
purification--that is, took care that no unclean person was allowed to
enter within the precincts of the sacred building. This was the official
duty of the porters ([Ch2 23:19](../../../bib/kjv/ch2023.htm#019)), with
whom, owing to the pressure of circumstances, it was deemed expedient
that the singers should be associated as assistants.

[Nehemiah 12:47](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#047)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_047">neh 12:47</span></span>

all Israel . . . sanctified holy things unto the Levites,--&c. The
people, selecting the tithes and first-fruits, devoted them to the use
of the Levites, to whom they belonged by appointment of the law. The
Levites acted in the same way with the tithes due from them to the
priests. Thus all classes of the people displayed a conscientious
fidelity in paying the dues to the temple and the servants of God who
were appointed to minister in it.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Nehemiah Chapter 13](neh013)

</div>
