<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Nehemiah Index](neh)  
  [Previous](neh008)  [Next](neh010) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*A Commentary, Critical, Practical, and Explanatory on the Old and New
Testaments*, by Robert Jamieson, A.R. Fausset and David Brown \[1882\]
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Nehemiah Chapter 9](../../../bib/kjv/neh009.htm#001)

[Nehemiah 9:1](../../../bib/kjv/neh009.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">neh 9:1</span></span>

A SOLEMN FAST AND REPENTANCE OF THE PEOPLE. ([Neh
9:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/neh009.htm#001))

Now in the twenty and fourth day of this month--that is, on the second
day after the close of the feast of tabernacles, which commenced on the
fourteenth and terminated on the twenty-second ([Lev
23:34-37](../../../bib/kjv/lev023.htm#034)). The day immediately after
that feast, the twenty-third, had been occupied in separating the
delinquents from their unlawful wives, as well, perhaps, as in taking
steps for keeping aloof in future from unnecessary intercourse with the
heathen around them. For although this necessary measure of reformation
had been begun formerly by Ezra (Ezra 10:1-17), and satisfactorily
accomplished at that time (in so far as he had information of the
existing abuses, or possessed the power of correcting them) yet it
appears that this reformatory work of Ezra had been only partial and
imperfect. Many cases of delinquency had escaped, or new defaulters had
appeared who had contracted those forbidden alliances; and there was an
urgent necessity for Nehemiah again to take vigorous measures for the
removal of a social evil which threatened the most disastrous
consequences to the character and prosperity of the chosen people. A
solemn fast was now observed for the expression of those penitential and
sorrowful feelings which the reading of the law had produced, but which
had been suppressed during the celebration of the feast; and the
sincerity of their repentance was evinced by the decisive steps taken
for the correction of existing abuses in the matter of marriage.

[Nehemiah 9:2](../../../bib/kjv/neh009.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">neh 9:2</span></span>

confessed their sins, and the iniquities of their fathers--Not only did
they read in their recent sufferings a punishment of the national
apostasy and guilt, but they had made themselves partakers of their
fathers' sins by following the same evil ways.

[Nehemiah 9:3](../../../bib/kjv/neh009.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">neh 9:3</span></span>

they . . . read in the book of the law--Their extraordinary zeal led
them to continue this as before.

one fourth part of the day--that is, for three hours, twelve hours being
the acknowledged length of the Jewish day ([Joh
11:9](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#009)). This solemn diet of worship,
which probably commenced at the morning sacrifice, was continued for six
hours, that is, till the time of the evening sacrifice. The worship
which they gave to the Lord their God, at this season of solemn national
humiliation, consisted in acknowledging and adoring His great mercy in
the forgiveness of their great and multiplied offenses, in delivering
them from the merited judgments which they had already experienced or
which they had reason to apprehend, in continuing amongst them the light
and blessings of His word and worship, and in supplicating the extension
of His grace and protection.

[Nehemiah 9:4](../../../bib/kjv/neh009.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">neh 9:4</span></span>

THE LEVITES CONFESS GOD'S MANIFOLD GOODNESS, AND THEIR OWN WICKEDNESS.
(Neh. 9:4-38)

Then stood up upon the stairs--the scaffolds or pulpits, whence the
Levites usually addressed the people. There were probably several placed
at convenient distances, to prevent confusion and the voice of one
drowning those of the others.

cried with a loud voice unto the Lord--Such an exertion, of course, was
indispensably necessary, in order that the speakers might be heard by
the vast multitude congregated in the open air. But these speakers were
then engaged in expressing their deep sense of sin, as well as fervently
imploring the forgiving mercy of God; and "crying with a loud voice" was
a natural accompaniment of this extraordinary prayer meeting, as violent
gestures and vehement tones are always the way in which the Jews, and
other people in the East, have been accustomed to give utterance to deep
and earnest feelings.

[Nehemiah 9:5](../../../bib/kjv/neh009.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">neh 9:5</span></span>

Then the Levites . . . said, Stand up and bless the Lord your God--If
this prayer was uttered by all these Levites in common, it must have
been prepared and adopted beforehand, perhaps, by Ezra; but it may only
embody the substance of the confession and thanksgiving.

[Nehemiah 9:6](../../../bib/kjv/neh009.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">neh 9:6</span></span>

Thou, even thou, art Lord alone, &c.--In this solemn and impressive
prayer, in which they make public confession of their sins, and
deprecate the judgments due to the transgressions of their fathers, they
begin with a profound adoration of God, whose supreme majesty and
omnipotence is acknowledged in the creation, preservation, and
government of all. Then they proceed to enumerate His mercies and
distinguished favors to them as a nation, from the period of the call of
their great ancestor and the gracious promise intimated to him in the
divinely bestowed name of Abraham, a promise which implied that he was
to be the Father of the faithful, the ancestor of the Messiah, and the
honored individual in whose seed all the families of the earth should be
blessed. Tracing in full and minute detail the signal instances of
divine interposition for their deliverance and their interest--in their
deliverance from Egyptian bondage--their miraculous passage through the
Red Sea--the promulgation of His law--the forbearance and long-suffering
shown them amid their frequent rebellions--the signal triumphs given
them over their enemies--their happy settlement in the promised
land--and all the extraordinary blessings, both in the form of temporal
prosperity and of religious privilege, with which His paternal goodness
had favored them above all other people, they charge themselves with
making a miserable requital. They confess their numerous and determined
acts of disobedience. They read, in the loss of their national
independence and their long captivity, the severe punishment of their
sins. They acknowledge that, in all heavy and continued judgments upon
their nation, God had done right, but they had done wickedly. And in
throwing themselves on His mercy, they express their purpose of entering
into a national covenant, by which they pledge themselves to dutiful
obedience in future.

[Nehemiah 9:22](../../../bib/kjv/neh009.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">neh 9:22</span></span>

Moreover thou gavest them kingdoms and nations--that is, put them in
possession of a rich country, of an extensive territory, which had been
once occupied by a variety of princes and people.

and didst divide them into corners--that is, into tribes. The propriety
of the expression arose from the various districts touching at points or
angles on each other.

the land of Sihon, and the land of the king of Heshbon--Heshbon being
the capital city, the passage should run thus: "the land of Sihon or the
land of the king of Heshbon."

[Nehemiah 9:32](../../../bib/kjv/neh009.htm#032)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">neh 9:32</span></span>

Now therefore, our God . . . who keepest covenant and mercy--God's
fidelity to His covenant is prominently acknowledged, and well it might;
for their whole national history bore testimony to it. But as this could
afford them little ground of comfort or of hope while they were so
painfully conscious of having violated it, they were driven to seek
refuge in the riches of divine grace; and hence the peculiar style of
invocation here adopted: "Now therefore, our God, the great, the mighty,
and the terrible God, who keepest covenant and mercy."

[Nehemiah 9:36](../../../bib/kjv/neh009.htm#036)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_036">neh 9:36</span></span>

Behold, we are servants this day--Notwithstanding their happy
restoration to their native land, they were still tributaries of a
foreign prince whose officers ruled them. They were not, like their
fathers, free tenants of the land which God gave them.

[Nehemiah 9:37](../../../bib/kjv/neh009.htm#037)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_037">neh 9:37</span></span>

it yieldeth much increase unto the kings whom thou hast set over us
because of our sins--Our agricultural labors have been resumed in the
land--we plough, and sow, and till, and Thou blessest the work of our
hands with a plentiful return; but this increase is not for ourselves,
as once it was, but for our foreign masters, to whom we have to pay
large and oppressive tribute.

they have dominion over our bodies--Their persons were liable to be
pressed, at the mandate of their Assyrian conqueror, into the service of
his empire, either in war or in public works. And our beasts are taken
to do their pleasure.

[Nehemiah 9:38](../../../bib/kjv/neh009.htm#038)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_038">neh 9:38</span></span>

we make a sure covenant, and write--that is, subscribe or sign it. This
written document would exercise a wholesome influence in restraining
their backslidings or in animating them to duty, by being a witness
against them if in the future they were unfaithful to their engagements.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Nehemiah Chapter 10](neh010)

</div>
