<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Nehemiah Index](neh.md)  
  [Previous](neh009)  [Next](neh011.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*A Commentary, Critical, Practical, and Explanatory on the Old and New
Testaments*, by Robert Jamieson, A.R. Fausset and David Brown \[1882\]
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Nehemiah Chapter 10](../../../bib/kjv/neh010.htm#001.md)

[Nehemiah 10:1](../../../bib/kjv/neh010.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">neh 10:1</span></span>

THE NAMES OF THOSE WHO SEALED THE COVENANT. (Neh. 10:1-27)

Nehemiah, the Tirshatha--His name was placed first in the roll on
account of his high official rank, as deputy of the Persian monarch. All
classes were included in the subscription; but the people were
represented by their elders ([Neh
10:14](../../../bib/kjv/neh010.htm#014).md), as it would have been
impossible for every one in the country to have been admitted to the
sealing.

Those who were not present at the sealing ratified the covenant by
giving their assent, either in words or by lifting up their hands, and
bound themselves, by a solemn oath, to walk in God's law, imprecating a
curse upon themselves in the event of their violating it.

[Nehemiah 10:29](../../../bib/kjv/neh010.htm#029.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">neh 10:29</span></span>

POINTS OF THE COVENANT. ([Neh
10:29-39](../../../bib/kjv/neh010.htm#029).md)

to observe and do all the commandments, &c.--This national covenant,
besides containing a solemn pledge of obedience to the divine law
generally, specified their engagement to some particular duties, which
the character and exigency of the times stamped with great urgency and
importance, and which may be summed up under the following heads: that
they abstain from contracting matrimonial alliances with the heathen;
that they would rigidly observe the sabbath; that they would let the
land enjoy rest and remit debts every seventh year; that they would
contribute to the maintenance of the temple service, the necessary
expenses of which had formerly been defrayed out of the treasury of the
temple ([Ch1 26:20](../../../bib/kjv/ch1026.htm#020).md), and when it was
drained, given out from the king's privy purse ([Ch2
31:3](../../../bib/kjv/ch2031.htm#003).md); and that they would make an
orderly payment of the priests' dues. A minute and particular
enumeration of the first-fruits was made, that all might be made fully
aware of their obligations, and that none might excuse themselves on
pretext of ignorance from withholding taxes which the poverty of many,
and the irreligion of others, had made them exceedingly prone to evade.

[Nehemiah 10:32](../../../bib/kjv/neh010.htm#032.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">neh 10:32</span></span>

the third part of a shekel for the service of the house of our God--The
law required every individual above twenty years of age to pay half a
shekel to the sanctuary. But in consequence of the general poverty of
the people, occasioned by war and captivity, this tribute was reduced to
a third part of a shekel.

[Nehemiah 10:34](../../../bib/kjv/neh010.htm#034.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">neh 10:34</span></span>

we cast the lots . . . for the wood offering--The carrying of the wood
had formerly been the work of the Nethinims. But few of them having
returned, the duty was assigned as stated in the text. The practice
afterwards rose into great importance, and JOSEPHUS speaks \[The Wars of
the Jews, 2.17, sect. 6\] of the Xylophoria, or certain stated and
solemn times at which the people brought up wood to the temple.

[Nehemiah 10:38](../../../bib/kjv/neh010.htm#038.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_038">neh 10:38</span></span>

the priest the son of Aaron shall be with the Levites, when the Levites
take tithes--This was a prudential arrangement. The presence of a
dignified priest would ensure the peaceful delivery of the tithes; at
least his superintendence and influence would tend to prevent the
commission of any wrong in the transaction, by the people deceiving the
Levites, or the Levites defrauding the priests.

the tithe of the tithes--The Levites, having received a tenth of all
land produce, were required to give a tenth of this to the priests. The
Levites were charged with the additional obligation to carry the tithes
when received, and deposit them in the temple stores, for the use of the
priests.

[Nehemiah 10:39](../../../bib/kjv/neh010.htm#039.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_039">neh 10:39</span></span>

and we will not forsake the house of our God--This solemn pledge was
repeated at the close of the covenant as an expression of the intense
zeal by which the people at this time were animated for the glory and
the worship of God. Under the pungent feelings of sorrow and repentance
for their national sins, of which apostasy from the service of the true
God was the chief, and under the yet fresh and painful remembrance of
their protracted captivity, they vowed, and (feeling the impulse of
ardent devotion as well as of gratitude for their restoration) flattered
themselves they would never forget their vow, to be the Lord's.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Nehemiah Chapter 11](neh011.md)

</div>
