<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Numbers Index](num.md)  
  [Previous](num013)  [Next](num015.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*A Commentary, Critical, Practical, and Explanatory on the Old and New
Testaments*, by Robert Jamieson, A.R. Fausset and David Brown \[1882\]
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Numbers Chapter 14](../../../bib/kjv/num014.htm#001.md)

[Numbers 14:1](../../../bib/kjv/num014.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">num 14:1</span></span>

THE PEOPLE MURMUR AT THE SPIES' REPORT. (Num. 14:1-45)

all the congregation lifted up their voice and cried--Not literally all,
for there were some exceptions.

[Numbers 14:2](../../../bib/kjv/num014.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">num 14:2</span></span>

Would God that we had died in Egypt--Such insolence to their generous
leaders, and such base ingratitude to God, show the deep degradation of
the Israelites, and the absolute necessity of the decree that debarred
that generation from entering the promised land \[[Num
14:29-35](../../../bib/kjv/num014.htm#029.md)\]. They were punished by
their wishes being granted to die in that wilderness \[[Heb
3:17](../../../bib/kjv/heb003.htm#017.md); [Jde
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/jde001.htm#005.md)\]. A leader to reconduct them to
Egypt is spoken of ([Neh 9:17](../../../bib/kjv/neh009.htm#017).md) as
actually nominated. The sinfulness and insane folly of their conduct are
almost incredible. Their conduct, however, is paralleled by too many
among us, who shrink from the smallest difficulties and rather remain
slaves to sin than resolutely try to surmount the obstacles that lie in
their way to the Canaan above.

[Numbers 14:5](../../../bib/kjv/num014.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">num 14:5</span></span>

Moses and Aaron fell on their faces--as humble and earnest
suppliants--either to the people, entreating them to desist from so
perverse a design; or rather, to God, as the usual and only refuge from
the violence of that tumultuous and stiff-necked rabble--a hopeful means
of softening and impressing their hearts.

[Numbers 14:6](../../../bib/kjv/num014.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">num 14:6</span></span>

Joshua . . . and Caleb, which were of them that searched the land, rent
their clothes--The two honest spies testified their grief and horror, in
the strongest manner, at the mutiny against Moses and the blasphemy
against God; while at the same time they endeavored, by a truthful
statement, to persuade the people of the ease with which they might
obtain possession of so desirable a country, provided they did not, by
their rebellion and ingratitude, provoke God to abandon them.

[Numbers 14:8](../../../bib/kjv/num014.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">num 14:8</span></span>

a land flowing with milk and honey--a general expression, descriptive of
a rich and fertile country. The two articles specified were among the
principal products of the Holy Land.

[Numbers 14:9](../../../bib/kjv/num014.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">num 14:9</span></span>

their defence is departed--Hebrew, "their shadow." The Sultan of Turkey
and the Shah of Persia are called "the shadow of God," "the refuge of
the world." So that the meaning of the clause, "their defence is
departed from them," is, that the favor of God was now lost to those
whose iniquities were full ([Gen
15:16](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#016).md), and transferred to the
Israelites.

[Numbers 14:10](../../../bib/kjv/num014.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">num 14:10</span></span>

the glory of the Lord appeared--It was seasonably manifested on this
great emergency to rescue His ambassadors from their perilous situation.

[Numbers 14:12](../../../bib/kjv/num014.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">num 14:12</span></span>

the Lord said, . . . I will smite them with the pestilence--not a final
decree, but a threatening, suspended, as appeared from the issue, on the
intercession of Moses and the repentance of Israel.

[Numbers 14:17](../../../bib/kjv/num014.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">num 14:17</span></span>

let the power of my Lord be great--be magnified.

[Numbers 14:21](../../../bib/kjv/num014.htm#021.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">num 14:21</span></span>

all the earth shall be filled with the glory of the Lord--This promise,
in its full acceptation, remains to be verified by the eventual and
universal prevalence of Christianity in the world. But the terms were
used restrictively in respect to the occasion, to the report which would
spread over all the land of the "terrible things in righteousness"
\[[Psa 65:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa065.htm#005.md)\] which God would do in
the infliction of the doom described, to which that rebellious race was
now consigned.

[Numbers 14:22](../../../bib/kjv/num014.htm#022.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">num 14:22</span></span>

ten times--very frequently.

[Numbers 14:24](../../../bib/kjv/num014.htm#024.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">num 14:24</span></span>

my servant Caleb--Joshua was also excepted, but he is not named because
he was no longer in the ranks of the people, being a constant attendant
on Moses.

because he had another spirit with him, and hath followed me
fully--Under the influence of God's Spirit, Caleb was a man of bold,
generous, heroic courage, above worldly anxieties and fears.

[Numbers 14:25](../../../bib/kjv/num014.htm#025.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">num 14:25</span></span>

(Now the Amalekites and the Canaanites dwelt in the valley)--that is, on
the other side of the Idumean mountain, at whose base they were then
encamped. Those nomad tribes had at that time occupied it with a
determination to oppose the further progress of the Hebrew people. Hence
God gave the command that they seek a safe and timely retreat into the
desert, to escape the pursuit of those resolute enemies, to whom, with
their wives and children, they would fall a helpless prey because they
had forfeited the presence and protection of God. This verse forms an
important part of the narrative and should be freed from the
parenthetical form which our English translators have given it.

[Numbers 14:30](../../../bib/kjv/num014.htm#030.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">num 14:30</span></span>

save Caleb . . . and Joshua--These are specially mentioned, as honorable
exceptions to the rest of the scouts, and also as the future leaders of
the people. But it appears that some of the old generation did not join
in the mutinous murmuring, including in that number the whole order of
the priests ([Jos 14:1](../../../bib/kjv/jos014.htm#001).md).

[Numbers 14:34](../../../bib/kjv/num014.htm#034.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">num 14:34</span></span>

ye shall know my breach of promise--that is, in consequence of your
violation of the covenant betwixt you and Me, by breaking the terms of
it, it shall be null and void on My part, as I shall withhold the
blessings I promised in that covenant to confer on you on condition of
your obedience.

[Numbers 14:36](../../../bib/kjv/num014.htm#036.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_036">num 14:36</span></span>

those men that did bring up the evil report upon the land, died by the
plague before the Lord--Ten of the spies struck dead on the spot--either
by the pestilence or some other judgment. This great and appalling
mortality clearly betokened the hand of the Lord.

[Numbers 14:40](../../../bib/kjv/num014.htm#040.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_040">num 14:40</span></span>

they rose up early in the morning, and gat them up into the top of the
mountain--Notwithstanding the tidings that Moses communicated and which
diffused a general feeling of melancholy and grief throughout the camp,
the impression was of very brief continuance. They rushed from one
extreme of rashness and perversity to another, and the obstinacy of
their rebellious spirit was evinced by their active preparations to
ascend the hill, notwithstanding the divine warning they had received
not to undertake that enterprise.

for we have sinned--that is, realizing our sin, we now repent of it, and
are eager to do as Caleb and Joshua exhorted us--or, as some render it,
though we have sinned, we trust God will yet give us the land of
promise. The entreaties of their prudent and pious leader, who
represented to them that their enemies, scaling the other side of the
valley, would post themselves on the top of the hill before them, were
disregarded. How strangely perverse the conduct of the Israelites, who,
shortly before, were afraid that, though their Almighty King was with
them, they could not get possession of the land; and yet now they act
still more foolishly in supposing that, though God were not with them,
they could expel the inhabitants by their unaided efforts. The
consequences were such as might have been anticipated. The Amalekites
and Canaanites, who had been lying in ambuscade expecting their
movement, rushed down upon them from the heights and became the
instruments of punishing their guilty rebellion.

[Numbers 14:45](../../../bib/kjv/num014.htm#045.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_045">num 14:45</span></span>

even unto Hormah--The name was afterwards given to that place in memory
of the immense slaughter of the Israelites on this occasion.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Numbers Chapter 15](num015.md)

</div>
