<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Numbers Index](num.md)  
  [Previous](num014)  [Next](num016.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*A Commentary, Critical, Practical, and Explanatory on the Old and New
Testaments*, by Robert Jamieson, A.R. Fausset and David Brown \[1882\]
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Numbers Chapter 15](../../../bib/kjv/num015.htm#001.md)

[Numbers 15:1](../../../bib/kjv/num015.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">num 15:1</span></span>

THE LAW OF SUNDRY OFFERINGS. (Num. 15:1-41)

The Lord spake unto Moses, saying, Speak unto the children of
Israel--Some infer from [Num 15:23](../../../bib/kjv/num015.htm#023.md)
that the date of this communication must be fixed towards the close of
the wanderings in the wilderness; and, also, that all the sacrifices
prescribed in the law were to be offered only after the settlement in
Canaan.

[Numbers 15:3](../../../bib/kjv/num015.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">num 15:3</span></span>

make an offering by fire unto the Lord, a burnt offering--It is evident
that a peace offering is referred to because this term is frequently
used in such a sense ([Exo 18:12](../../../bib/kjv/exo018.htm#012.md); [Lev
17:5](../../../bib/kjv/lev017.htm#005).md).

[Numbers 15:4](../../../bib/kjv/num015.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">num 15:4</span></span>

tenth deal--that is, an omer, the tenth part of an ephah ([Exo
16:36](../../../bib/kjv/exo016.htm#036).md).

fourth part of an hin of oil--This element shows it to have been
different from such meat offerings as were made by themselves, and not
merely accompaniments of other sacrifices.

[Numbers 15:6](../../../bib/kjv/num015.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">num 15:6</span></span>

two tenth deals--The quantity of flour was increased because the
sacrifice was of superior value to the former. The accessory sacrifices
were always increased in proportion to the greater worth and magnitude
of its principal.

[Numbers 15:13](../../../bib/kjv/num015.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">num 15:13</span></span>

a stranger--one who had become a proselyte. There were scarcely any of
the national privileges of the Israelites, in which the Gentile stranger
might not, on conforming to certain conditions, fully participate.

[Numbers 15:19](../../../bib/kjv/num015.htm#019.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">num 15:19</span></span>

when ye eat of the bread of the land, ye shall offer up an heave
offering--The offering prescribed was to precede the act of eating.

unto the Lord--that is, the priests of the Lord ([Eze
44:30](../../../bib/kjv/eze044.htm#030).md).

[Numbers 15:20](../../../bib/kjv/num015.htm#020.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">num 15:20</span></span>

heave offering of the threshing-floor--meaning the corn on the
threshing-floor; that is, after harvest.

so shall ye heave it--to the priests accompanying the ceremony with the
same rites.

[Numbers 15:22](../../../bib/kjv/num015.htm#022.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">num 15:22</span></span>

if ye have erred, and not observed all these commandments,
&c.--respecting the performance of divine worship, and the rites and
ceremonies that constitute the holy service. The law relates only to any
omission and consequently is quite different from that laid down in [Lev
4:13](../../../bib/kjv/lev004.htm#013.md), which implies a transgression or
positive neglect of some observances required. This law relates to
private parties or individual tribes; that to the whole congregation of
Israel.

[Numbers 15:24](../../../bib/kjv/num015.htm#024.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">num 15:24</span></span>

if aught be committed by ignorance--The Mosaic ritual was complicated,
and the ceremonies to be gone through in the various instances of
purification which are specified, would expose a worshipper, through
ignorance, to the risk of omitting or neglecting some of them. This law
includes the stranger in the number of those for whom the sacrifice was
offered for the sin of general ignorance.

[Numbers 15:27](../../../bib/kjv/num015.htm#027.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">num 15:27</span></span>

if any soul sin through ignorance--not only in common with the general
body of the people, but his personal sins were to be expiated in the
same manner.

[Numbers 15:30](../../../bib/kjv/num015.htm#030.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">num 15:30</span></span>

the soul that doeth aught presumptuously--Hebrew, "with an high" or
"uplifted hand"--that is, knowingly, wilfully, obstinately. In this
sense the phraseology occurs ([Exo
14:8](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#008.md); [Lev
26:21](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#021.md); [Psa
19:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#013).md).

the same reproacheth the Lord--sets Him at open defiance and dishonors
His majesty.

[Numbers 15:31](../../../bib/kjv/num015.htm#031.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">num 15:31</span></span>

his iniquity shall be upon him--The punishment of his sins shall fall on
himself individually; no guilt shall be incurred by the nation, unless
there be a criminal carelessness in overlooking the offense.

[Numbers 15:32](../../../bib/kjv/num015.htm#032.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">num 15:32</span></span>

a man that gathered sticks upon the sabbath day--This incident is
evidently narrated as an instance of presumptuous sin. The mere
gathering of sticks was not a sinful act and might be necessary for fuel
to warm him or to make ready his food. But its being done on the Sabbath
altered the entire character of the action. The law of the Sabbath being
a plain and positive commandment, this transgression of it was a known
and wilful sin, and it was marked by several aggravations. For the deed
was done with unblushing boldness in broad daylight, in open defiance of
the divine authority--in flagrant inconsistency with His religious
connection with Israel, as the covenant-people of God; and it was an
application to improper purposes of time, which God had consecrated to
Himself and the solemn duties of religion. The offender was brought
before the rulers, who, on hearing the painful report, were at a loss to
determine what ought to be done. That they should have felt any
embarrassment in such a case may seem surprising, in the face of the
sabbath law ([Exo 31:14](../../../bib/kjv/exo031.htm#014).md). Their
difficulty probably arose from this being the first public offense of
the kind which had occurred; and the appeal might be made to remove all
ground of complaint--to produce a more striking effect, so that the fate
of this criminal might be a beacon to warn all Israelites in the future.

[Numbers 15:35](../../../bib/kjv/num015.htm#035.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_035">num 15:35</span></span>

The Lord said unto Moses, The man shall be surely put to death--The Lord
was King, as well as God of Israel, and the offense being a violation of
the law of the realm, the Sovereign Judge gave orders that this man
should be put to death; and, moreover, He required the whole
congregation unite in executing the fatal sentence.

[Numbers 15:38](../../../bib/kjv/num015.htm#038.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_038">num 15:38</span></span>

bid them that they make them fringes in the borders of their
garments--These were narrow strips, in a wing-like form, wrapped over
the shoulders and on various parts of the attire. "Fringe," however, is
the English rendering of two distinct Hebrew words--the one meaning a
narrow lappet or edging, called the "hem" or "border" ([Mat
23:5](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#005.md); [Luk
8:44](../../../bib/kjv/luk008.htm#044).md), which, in order to make it more
attractive to the eye and consequently more serviceable to the purpose
described, was covered with a riband of blue or rather purple color; the
other term signifies strings with tassels at the end, fastened to the
corners of the garment. Both of these are seen on the Egyptian and
Assyrian frocks; and as the Jewish people were commanded by express and
repeated ordinances to have them, the fashion was rendered subservient,
in their case, to awaken high and religious associations--to keep them
in habitual remembrance of the divine commandments.

[Numbers 15:41](../../../bib/kjv/num015.htm#041.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_041">num 15:41</span></span>

I am the Lord your God--The import of this solemn conclusion is, that
though He was displeased with them for their frequent rebellions, for
which they would be doomed to forty years' wanderings, He would not
abandon them but continue His divine protection and care of them till
they were brought into the land of promise.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Numbers Chapter 16](num016.md)

</div>
