<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Numbers Index](num)  
  [Previous](num008)  [Next](num010) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*A Commentary, Critical, Practical, and Explanatory on the Old and New
Testaments*, by Robert Jamieson, A.R. Fausset and David Brown \[1882\]
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Numbers Chapter 9](../../../bib/kjv/num009.htm#001)

[Numbers 9:2](../../../bib/kjv/num009.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">num 9:2</span></span>

THE PASSOVER ENJOINED. ([Num 9:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/num009.htm#001))

Let the children of Israel also keep the passover at his appointed
season, &c.--The date of this command to keep the passover in the
wilderness was given shortly after the erection and consecration of the
tabernacle and preceded the numbering of the people by a month. (Compare
[Num 9:1](../../../bib/kjv/num009.htm#001) with [Num
1:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/num001.htm#001)). But it is narrated after that
transaction in order to introduce the notice of a particular case, for
which a law was provided to meet the occasion. This was the first
observance of the passover since the exodus; and without a positive
injunction, the Israelites were under no obligation to keep it till
their settlement in the land of Canaan ([Exo
12:25](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#025)). The anniversary was kept on
the exact day of the year on which they, twelve months before, had
departed from Egypt; and it was marked by all the peculiar rites--the he
lamb and the unleavened bread. The materials would be easily
procured--the lambs from their numerous flocks and the meal for the
unleavened bread, by the aid of Jethro, from the land of Midian, which
was adjoining their camp ([Exo 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo003.htm#001)).
But their girded loins, their sandaled feet, and their staff in their
hand, being mere circumstances attending a hurried departure and not
essential to the rite, were not repeated. It is supposed to have been
the only observance of the feast during their forty years' wandering;
and Jewish writers say that, as none could eat the passover except they
were circumcised ([Exo 12:43-44](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#043), [Exo
12:48](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#048)), and circumcision was not
practised in the wilderness \[[Jos
5:4-7](../../../bib/kjv/jos005.htm#004)\], there could be no renewal of
the paschal solemnity.

[Numbers 9:6](../../../bib/kjv/num009.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">num 9:6</span></span>

A SECOND PASSOVER ALLOWED. ([Num
9:6-14](../../../bib/kjv/num009.htm#006))

there were certain men, who were defiled by the dead body of a man--To
discharge the last offices to the remains of deceased relatives was
imperative; and yet attendance on a funeral entailed ceremonial
defilement, which led to exclusion from all society and from the camp
for seven days. Some persons who were in this situation at the arrival
of the first paschal anniversary, being painfully perplexed about the
course of duty because they were temporarily disqualified at the proper
season, and having no opportunity of supplying their want were liable to
a total privation of all their privileges, laid their case before Moses.
Jewish writers assert that these men were the persons who had carried
out the dead bodies of Nadab and Abihu \[[Lev
10:4-5](../../../bib/kjv/lev010.htm#004)\].

[Numbers 9:8](../../../bib/kjv/num009.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">num 9:8</span></span>

Moses said unto them, Stand still, and I will hear what the Lord will
command concerning you--A solution of the difficulty was soon obtained,
it being enacted, by divine authority, that to those who might be
disqualified by the occurrence of a death in their family circle or
unable by distance to keep the passover on the anniversary day, a
special license was granted of observing it by themselves on the same
day and hour of the following month, under a due attendance to all the
solemn formalities. (See on [Ch2
30:2](../../../bib/kjv/ch2030.htm#002)). But the observance was
imperative on all who did not labor under these impediments.

[Numbers 9:14](../../../bib/kjv/num009.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">num 9:14</span></span>

if a stranger shall sojourn among you, and will keep the
passover--Gentile converts, or proselytes, as they were afterwards
called, were admitted, if circumcised, to the same privileges as native
Israelites, and were liable to excommunication if they neglected the
passover. But circumcision was an indispensable condition; and whoever
did not submit to that rite, was prohibited, under the sternest
penalties, from eating the passover.

[Numbers 9:15](../../../bib/kjv/num009.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">num 9:15</span></span>

A CLOUD GUIDES THE ISRAELITES. ([Num
9:15-23](../../../bib/kjv/num009.htm#015))

the cloud covered the tabernacle--The inspired historian here enters on
an entirely new subject, which might properly have formed a separate
chapter, beginning at this verse and ending at [Num
10:29](../../../bib/kjv/num010.htm#029) \[CALMET\]. The cloud was a
visible token of God's special presence and guardian care of the
Israelites ([Exo 14:20](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#020); [Psa
105:39](../../../bib/kjv/psa105.htm#039)). It was easily distinguishable
from all other clouds by its peculiar form and its fixed position; for
from the day of the completion of the tabernacle it rested by day as a
dark, by night as a fiery, column on that part of the sanctuary which
contained the ark of the testimony ([Lev
16:2](../../../bib/kjv/lev016.htm#002)).

[Numbers 9:17](../../../bib/kjv/num009.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">num 9:17</span></span>

when the cloud was taken up--that is, rose to a higher elevation, so as
to be conspicuous at the remotest extremities of the camp. That was a
signal for removal; and, accordingly, it is properly called ([Num
9:18](../../../bib/kjv/num009.htm#018)) "the commandment of the Lord."
It was a visible token of the presence of God; and from it, as a
glorious throne, He gave the order. So that its motion regulated the
commencement and termination of all the journeys of the Israelites. (See
on [Exo 14:19](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#019)).

[Numbers 9:19](../../../bib/kjv/num009.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">num 9:19</span></span>

when the cloud tarried long upon the tabernacle, . . . then Israel kept
the charge of the Lord, and journeyed not--A desert life has its
attractions, and constant movements create a passionate love of change.
Many incidents show that the Israelites had strongly imbibed this nomad
habit and were desirous of hastening to Canaan. But still the phases of
the cloud indicated the command of God: and whatsoever irksomeness they
might have felt in remaining long stationary in camp, "when the cloud
tarried upon the tabernacle many days, they kept the charge of the Lord,
and journeyed not." Happy for them had they always exhibited this spirit
of obedience! and happy for all if, through the wilderness of this
world, we implicitly follow the leadings of God's Providence and the
directions of God's Word!

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Numbers Chapter 10](num010)

</div>
