<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Numbers Index](num)  
  [Previous](num020)  [Next](num022) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*A Commentary, Critical, Practical, and Explanatory on the Old and New
Testaments*, by Robert Jamieson, A.R. Fausset and David Brown \[1882\]
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Numbers Chapter 21](../../../bib/kjv/num021.htm#001)

[Numbers 21:1](../../../bib/kjv/num021.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">num 21:1</span></span>

ISRAEL ATTACKED BY THE CANAANITES. (Num. 21:1-35)

King Arad the Canaanite--rather, "the Canaanite king of Arad"--an
ancient town on the southernmost borders of Palestine, not far from
Kadesh. A hill called Tell Arad marks the spot.

heard tell that Israel came by the way of the spies--in the way or
manner of spies, stealthily, or from spies sent by himself to ascertain
the designs and motions of the Israelites. The Septuagint and others
consider the Hebrew word "spies" a proper name, and render it: "Came by
the way of Atharim towards Arad" \[KENNICOTT\].

he fought against Israel, and took some of them prisoners--This
discomfiture was permitted to teach them to expect the conquest of
Canaan not from their own wisdom and valor, but solely from the favor
and help of God ([Deu 9:4](../../../bib/kjv/deu009.htm#004); [Psa
44:3-4](../../../bib/kjv/psa044.htm#003)).

[Numbers 21:2](../../../bib/kjv/num021.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">num 21:2</span></span>

Israel vowed a vow unto the Lord--Made to feel their own weakness, they
implored the aid of Heaven, and, in anticipation of it, devoted the
cities of this king to future destruction. The nature and consequence of
such anathemas are described (Lev. 27:1-34; Deu. 13:1-18). This vow of
extermination against Arad \[[Num
21:2](../../../bib/kjv/num021.htm#002)\] gave name to the place Hormah
(slaughter and destruction) though it was not accomplished till after
the passage of the Jordan. Others think Hormah the name of a town
mentioned ([Jos 12:14](../../../bib/kjv/jos012.htm#014)).

[Numbers 21:4](../../../bib/kjv/num021.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">num 21:4</span></span>

they journeyed from mount Hor--On being refused the passage requested,
they returned through the Arabah, "the way of the Red Sea," to Elath, at
the head of the eastern gulf of the Red Sea, and thence passed up
through the mountains to the eastern desert, so as to make the circuit
of the land of Edom ([Num 33:41-42](../../../bib/kjv/num033.htm#041)).

the soul of the people was much discouraged because of the
way--Disappointment on finding themselves so near the confines of the
promised land without entering it; vexation at the refusal of a passage
through Edom and the absence of any divine interposition in their favor;
and above all, the necessity of a retrograde journey by a long and
circuitous route through the worst parts of a sandy desert and the dread
of being plunged into new and unknown difficulties--all this produced a
deep depression of spirits. But it was followed, as usually, by a gross
outburst of murmuring at the scarcity of water, and of expressions of
disgust at the manna.

[Numbers 21:5](../../../bib/kjv/num021.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">num 21:5</span></span>

our soul loatheth this light bread--that is, bread without substance or
nutritious quality. The refutation of this calumny appears in the fact,
that on the strength of this food they performed for forty years so many
and toilsome journeys. But they had been indulging a hope of the better
and more varied fare enjoyed by a settled people; and disappointment,
always the more bitter as the hope of enjoyment seems near, drove them
to speak against God and against Moses ([Co1
10:9](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#009)).

[Numbers 21:6](../../../bib/kjv/num021.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">num 21:6</span></span>

The Lord sent fiery serpents among the people--That part of the desert
where the Israelites now were--near the head of the gulf of Akaba--is
greatly infested with venomous reptiles, of various kinds, particularly
lizards, which raise themselves in the air and swing themselves from
branches; and scorpions, which, being in the habit of lying in long
grass, are particularly dangerous to the barelegged, sandaled people of
the East. The only known remedy consists in sucking the wound, or, in
the case of cattle, in the application of ammonia. The exact species of
serpents that caused so great mortality among the Israelites cannot be
ascertained. They are said to have been "fiery," an epithet applied to
them either from their bright, vivid color, or the violent inflammation
their bite occasioned.

[Numbers 21:7](../../../bib/kjv/num021.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">num 21:7</span></span>

the people came to Moses, and said, We have sinned--The severity of the
scourge and the appalling extent of mortality brought them to a sense of
sin, and through the intercessions of Moses, which they implored, they
were miraculously healed. He was directed to make the figure of a
serpent in brass, to be elevated on a pole or standard, that it might be
seen at the extremities of the camp and that every bitten Israelite who
looked to it might be healed. This peculiar method of cure was designed,
in the first instance, to show that it was the efficacy of God's power
and grace, not the effect of nature or art, and also that it might be a
type of the power of faith in Christ to heal all who look to Him because
of their sins ([Joh 3:14-15](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#014); see also
on [Kg2 18:4](../../../bib/kjv/kg2018.htm#004)).

[Numbers 21:10](../../../bib/kjv/num021.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">num 21:10</span></span>

the children of Israel set forward--along the eastern frontier of the
Edomites, encamping in various stations.

[Numbers 21:12](../../../bib/kjv/num021.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">num 21:12</span></span>

pitched in the valley--literally, the "woody brook-valley" of Zared
([Deu 2:13](../../../bib/kjv/deu002.htm#013); [Isa
15:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa015.htm#007); [Amo
6:14](../../../bib/kjv/amo006.htm#014)). This torrent rises among the
mountains to the east of Moab, and flowing west, empties itself into the
Dead Sea. Ije-Abarim is supposed to have been its ford \[CALMET\].

[Numbers 21:13](../../../bib/kjv/num021.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">num 21:13</span></span>

pitched on the other side of Arnon--now El-Mojib, a deep, broad, and
rapid stream, dividing the dominions of the Moabites and Amorites.

[Numbers 21:14](../../../bib/kjv/num021.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">num 21:14</span></span>

book of the wars of the Lord--A fragment or passage is here quoted from
a poem or history of the wars of the Israelites, principally with a view
to decide the position of Arnon.

[Numbers 21:15](../../../bib/kjv/num021.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">num 21:15</span></span>

Ar--the capital of Moab.

[Numbers 21:16](../../../bib/kjv/num021.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">num 21:16</span></span>

from thence they went to Beer--that is, a "well." The name was probably
given to it afterwards \[see [Jdg
9:21](../../../bib/kjv/jdg009.htm#021)\], as it is not mentioned (Num.
33:1-56).

[Numbers 21:17](../../../bib/kjv/num021.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">num 21:17</span></span>

Then Israel sang--This beautiful little song was in accordance with the
wants and feelings of travelling caravans in the East, where water is an
occasion both of prayer and thanksgiving. From the princes using their
official rods only, and not spades, it seems probable that this well was
concealed by the brushwood or the sand, as is the case with many wells
in Idumea still. The discovery of it was seasonable, and owing to the
special interposition of God.

[Numbers 21:21](../../../bib/kjv/num021.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">num 21:21</span></span>

Israel sent messengers unto Sihon--The rejection of their respectful and
pacific message was resented--Sihon was discomfited in battle--and
Israel obtained by right of conquest the whole of the Amorite dominions.

[Numbers 21:24](../../../bib/kjv/num021.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">num 21:24</span></span>

from Arnon unto Jabbok--now the Zurka. These rivers formed the southern
and northern boundaries of his usurped territory.

for the border of . . . Ammon was strong--a reason stated for Sihon not
being able to push his invasion further.

[Numbers 21:25](../../../bib/kjv/num021.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">num 21:25</span></span>

Israel dwelt in all the cities--after exterminating the inhabitants who
had been previously doomed ([Deu
2:34](../../../bib/kjv/deu002.htm#034)).

[Numbers 21:26](../../../bib/kjv/num021.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">num 21:26</span></span>

Heshbon-- ([Sol 7:4](../../../bib/kjv/sol007.htm#004)) --situated
sixteen English miles north of the Arnon, and from its ruins it appears
to have been a large city.

[Numbers 21:27](../../../bib/kjv/num021.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">num 21:27</span></span>

Wherefore they that speak in proverbs--Here is given an extract from an
Amorite song exultingly anticipating an extension of their conquests to
Arnon. The quotation from the poem of the Amorite bard ends at [Num
21:28](../../../bib/kjv/num021.htm#028). The two following verses appear
to be the strains in which the Israelites expose the impotence of the
usurpers.

[Numbers 21:29](../../../bib/kjv/num021.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">num 21:29</span></span>

people of Chemosh--the name of the Moabite idol (1Ki. 11:7-33; [Kg2
23:13](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#013); [Jer
48:46](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#046)).

he--that is, their god, hath surrendered his worshippers to the
victorious arms of Sihon.

[Numbers 21:33](../../../bib/kjv/num021.htm#033)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">num 21:33</span></span>

they turned and went up by the way of Bashan--a name given to that
district from the richness of the soil--now Batanea or El-Bottein--a
hilly region east of the Jordan lying between the mountains of Hermon on
the north and those of Gilead on the south.

Og--a giant, an Amoritish prince, who, having opposed the progress of
the Israelites, was defeated.

[Numbers 21:34](../../../bib/kjv/num021.htm#034)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">num 21:34</span></span>

The Lord said unto Moses, Fear him not--a necessary encouragement, for
Og's gigantic stature ([Deu 3:11](../../../bib/kjv/deu003.htm#011)) was
calculated to inspire terror. He and all his were put to the sword.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Numbers Chapter 22](num022)

</div>
