<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Numbers Index](num.md)  
  [Previous](num017)  [Next](num019.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*A Commentary, Critical, Practical, and Explanatory on the Old and New
Testaments*, by Robert Jamieson, A.R. Fausset and David Brown \[1882\]
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Numbers Chapter 18](../../../bib/kjv/num018.htm#001.md)

[Numbers 18:1](../../../bib/kjv/num018.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">num 18:1</span></span>

THE CHARGE OF THE PRIESTS AND LEVITES. ([Num
18:1-7](../../../bib/kjv/num018.htm#001).md)

the Lord said unto Aaron, Thou and thy sons and thy father's house with
thee shall bear the iniquity of the sanctuary--Security is here given to
the people from the fears expressed ([Num
17:12](../../../bib/kjv/num017.htm#012).md), by the responsibility of
attending to all sacred things being devolved upon the priesthood,
together with the penalties incurred through neglect; and thus the
solemn responsibilities annexed to their high dignity, of having to
answer not only for their own sins, but also for the sins of the people,
were calculated in a great measure to remove all feeling of envy at the
elevation of Aaron's family, when the honor was weighed in the balance
with its burdens and dangers.

[Numbers 18:2](../../../bib/kjv/num018.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">num 18:2</span></span>

thy brethren also of the tribe of Levi--The departments of the sacred
office, to be filled respectively by the priests and Levites, are here
assigned to each. To the priests was committed the charge of the
sanctuary and the altar, while the Levites were to take care of
everything else about the tabernacle. The Levites were to attend the
priests as servants--bestowed on them as "gifts" to aid in the service
of the tabernacle--while the high and dignified office of the priesthood
was a "service of gift." "A stranger," that is, one, neither a priest
nor a Levite, who should intrude into any departments of the sacred
office, should incur the penalty of death.

[Numbers 18:8](../../../bib/kjv/num018.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">num 18:8</span></span>

THE PRIESTS' PORTION. ([Num 18:8-20](../../../bib/kjv/num018.htm#008).md)

the Lord spake unto Aaron, Behold, I also have given thee the charge of
my heave offerings--A recapitulation is made in this passage of certain
perquisites specially appropriated to the maintenance of the priests.
They were parts of the votive and freewill offerings, including both
meat and bread, wine and oil, and the first-fruits, which formed a large
and valuable item.

[Numbers 18:14](../../../bib/kjv/num018.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">num 18:14</span></span>

Every thing devoted in Israel shall be thine--provided it was adapted
for food or consumable by use; for the gold and silver vessels that were
dedicated as the spoils of victory were not given to the priests, but
for the use and adornment of the sacred edifice.

[Numbers 18:19](../../../bib/kjv/num018.htm#019.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">num 18:19</span></span>

it is a covenant of salt--that is, a perpetual ordinance. This
figurative form of expression was evidently founded on the conservative
property of salt, which keeps meat from corruption; and hence it became
an emblem of inviolability and permanence. It is a common phrase among
Oriental people, who consider the eating of salt a pledge of fidelity,
binding them in a covenant of friendship. Hence the partaking of the
altar meats, which were appropriated to the priests on condition of
their services and of which salt formed a necessary accompaniment, was
naturally called "a covenant of salt" ([Lev
2:13](../../../bib/kjv/lev002.htm#013).md).

[Numbers 18:21](../../../bib/kjv/num018.htm#021.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">num 18:21</span></span>

THE LEVITES' PORTION. ([Num 18:21-32](../../../bib/kjv/num018.htm#021).md)

I have given the children of Levi all the tenth in Israel for an
inheritance, for their service which they serve--Neither the priests nor
the Levites were to possess any allotments of land but to depend
entirely upon Him who liberally provided for them out of His own
portion; and this law was subservient to many important purposes--such
as that, being exempted from the cares and labors of worldly business,
they might be exclusively devoted to His service; that a bond of mutual
love and attachment might be formed between the people and the Levites,
who, as performing religious services for the people, derived their
subsistence from them; and further, that being the more easily dispersed
among the different tribes, they might be more useful in instructing and
directing the people.

[Numbers 18:23](../../../bib/kjv/num018.htm#023.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">num 18:23</span></span>

But the Levites shall do the service of the tabernacle of the
congregation: they shall bear their iniquity--They were to be
responsible for the right discharge of those duties that were assigned
to them, and consequently to bear the penalty that was due to negligence
or carelessness in the guardianship of the holy things.

[Numbers 18:26](../../../bib/kjv/num018.htm#026.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">num 18:26</span></span>

the Levites . . . offer . . . a tenth of the tithe--Out of their own
they were to pay tithes to the priests equally as the people gave to
them. The best of their tithes was to be assigned to the priests, and
afterwards they enjoyed the same liberty to make use of the remainder
that other Israelites had of the produce of their threshing-floors and
wine-presses.

[Numbers 18:32](../../../bib/kjv/num018.htm#032.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">num 18:32</span></span>

ye shall bear no sin by reason of it, &c.--Neglect in having the best
entailed sin in the use of such unhallowed food. And the holy things
would be polluted by the reservation to themselves of what should be
offered to God and the priests.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Numbers Chapter 19](num019.md)

</div>
