<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Numbers Index](num.md)  
  [Previous](num007)  [Next](num009.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*A Commentary, Critical, Practical, and Explanatory on the Old and New
Testaments*, by Robert Jamieson, A.R. Fausset and David Brown \[1882\]
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Numbers Chapter 8](../../../bib/kjv/num008.htm#001.md)

[Numbers 8:1](../../../bib/kjv/num008.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">num 8:1</span></span>

HOW THE LAMPS ARE TO BE LIGHTED. ([Num
8:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/num008.htm#001).md)

the Lord spake unto Moses--The order of this chapter suggests the idea
that the following instructions were given to Moses while he was within
the tabernacle of the congregation, after the princes had completed
their offering. But from the tenor of the instructions, it is more
likely that they were given immediately after the Levites had been given
to the priests (see on Num. 3:1-4:49), and that the record of these
instructions had been postponed till the narrative of other transactions
in the camp had been made \[PATRICK\].

[Numbers 8:2](../../../bib/kjv/num008.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">num 8:2</span></span>

Speak unto Aaron, &c.--The candlestick, which was made of one solid,
massive piece of pure gold, with six lamps supported on as many
branches, a seventh in the center surmounting the shaft itself ([Exo
25:31](../../../bib/kjv/exo025.htm#031.md); [Exo
37:17](../../../bib/kjv/exo037.htm#017).md), and completed according to the
pattern shown in the mount, was now to be lighted, when the other things
in the sanctuary began to be applied to religious service. It was
Aaron's personal duty, as the servant of God, to light His house, which,
being without windows, required the aid of lights ([Pe2
1:19](../../../bib/kjv/pe2001.htm#019).md). And the course he was ordered
to follow was first to light the middle lamp from the altar-fire, and
then the other lamps from each other--a course symbolical of all the
light of heavenly truth being derived from Christ, and diffused by His
ministers throughout the world ([Rev
4:5](../../../bib/kjv/rev004.htm#005).md).

the seven lamps shall give light over against the candlestick--The
candlestick stood close to the boards of the sanctuary, on the south
side, in full view of the table of showbread on the north ([Exo
26:35](../../../bib/kjv/exo026.htm#035).md), having one set of its lamps
turned towards the east, and another towards the west; so that all parts
of the tabernacle were thus lighted up.

[Numbers 8:6](../../../bib/kjv/num008.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">num 8:6</span></span>

THE CONSECRATION OF THE LEVITES. (Num. 8:5-22)

Take the Levites . . . and cleanse them--This passage describes the
consecration of the Levites. Although the tribe was to be devoted to the
divine service, their hereditary descent alone was not a sufficient
qualification for entering on the duties of the sacred office. They were
to be set apart by a special ceremony, which, however, was much simpler
than that appointed for the priests; neither washing nor anointing, nor
investiture with official robes, was necessary. Their purification
consisted, along with the offering of the requisite sacrifices ([Lev
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/lev001.htm#004.md); [Lev
3:2](../../../bib/kjv/lev003.htm#002.md); [Lev
4:4](../../../bib/kjv/lev004.htm#004).md), in being sprinkled by water
mixed with the ashes of a red heifer ([Num
19:9](../../../bib/kjv/num019.htm#009).md), and shaved all over, and their
clothes washed--a combination of symbolical acts which was intended to
remind them of the mortification of carnal and worldly desires, and the
maintenance of that purity in heart and life which became the servants
of God.

[Numbers 8:9](../../../bib/kjv/num008.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">num 8:9</span></span>

thou shalt gather the whole assembly of the children of Israel together,
&c.--As it was plainly impossible that the whole multitude of the
Israelites could do this, a select portion of them must be meant. This
party, who laid their hands upon the Levites, are supposed by some to
have been the first-born, who by that act, transferred their peculiar
privilege of acting as God's ministers to the Levitical tribe; and by
others, to have been the princes, who thus blessed them. It appears,
from this passage, that the imposition of hands was a ceremony used in
consecrating persons to holy offices in the ancient, as, from the
example of our Lord and His apostles, it has been perpetuated in the
Christian Church.

[Numbers 8:11](../../../bib/kjv/num008.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">num 8:11</span></span>

And Aaron shall offer the Levites--Hebrew, "as a wave offering"; and it
has been thought probable that the high priest, in bringing the Levites
one by one to the altar, directed them to make some simple movements of
their persons, analogous to what was done at the presentation of the
wave offerings before the Lord. Thus were they first devoted as an
offering to God, and by Him surrendered to the priests to be employed in
His service. The consecration ceremonial was repeated in the case of
every Levite who was taken (as was done at a later period) to assist the
priests in the tabernacle and temple. (See on [Ch2
29:34](../../../bib/kjv/ch2029.htm#034).md).

[Numbers 8:14](../../../bib/kjv/num008.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">num 8:14</span></span>

and the Levites shall be mine--that is, exempt from all military duty or
secular work--free from all pecuniary imposition and wholly devoted to
the custody and service of the sanctuary.

[Numbers 8:15](../../../bib/kjv/num008.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">num 8:15</span></span>

after that, shall the Levites go in to do the service of the tabernacle
of the congregation--into the court, to assist the priests; and at
removal into the tabernacle--that is, into the door of it--to receive
the covered furniture.

[Numbers 8:19](../../../bib/kjv/num008.htm#019.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">num 8:19</span></span>

to make an atonement for the children of Israel, &c.--to aid the priests
in that expiatory work; or, as the words may be rendered, "to make
redemption for" the Levites being exchanged or substituted for the
first-born for this important end, that there might be a sanctified body
of men appointed to guard the sanctuary, and the people not allowed to
approach or presumptuously meddle with holy things, which would expose
them to the angry judgments of Heaven.

[Numbers 8:24](../../../bib/kjv/num008.htm#024.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">num 8:24</span></span>

from twenty and five years old, &c.--(Compare [Num
4:3](../../../bib/kjv/num004.htm#003).md). They entered on their work in
their twenty-fifth year, as pupils and probationers, under the
superintendence and direction of their senior brethren; and at thirty
they were admitted to the full discharge of their official functions.

[Numbers 8:25](../../../bib/kjv/num008.htm#025.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">num 8:25</span></span>

from the age of fifty years they shall cease waiting upon the service
thereof, &c.--that is, on the laborious and exhausting parts of their
work.

[Numbers 8:26](../../../bib/kjv/num008.htm#026.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">num 8:26</span></span>

But shall minister with their brethren--in the performance of easier and
higher duties, instructing and directing the young, or superintending
important trusts. "They also serve who only wait" \[MILTON\].

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Numbers Chapter 9](num009.md)

</div>
