<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Numbers Index](num)  
  [Previous](num009)  [Next](num011) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*A Commentary, Critical, Practical, and Explanatory on the Old and New
Testaments*, by Robert Jamieson, A.R. Fausset and David Brown \[1882\]
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Numbers Chapter 10](../../../bib/kjv/num010.htm#001)

[Numbers 10:2](../../../bib/kjv/num010.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">num 10:2</span></span>

THE USE OF THE SILVER TRUMPETS. (Num. 10:1-36)

Make thee two trumpets of silver--These trumpets were of a long form, in
opposition to that of the Egyptian trumpets, with which the people were
convened to the worship of Osiris and which were curved like rams'
horns. Those which Moses made, as described by JOSEPHUS and represented
on the arch of Titus, were straight, a cubit or more in length, the
tubes of the thickness of a flute. Both extremities bore a close
resemblance to those in use among us. They were of solid silver--so as,
from the purity of the metal, to give a shrill, distinct sound; and
there were two of them, probably because there were only two sons of
Aaron; but at a later period the number was greatly increased ([Jos
6:8](../../../bib/kjv/jos006.htm#008); [Ch2
5:12](../../../bib/kjv/ch2005.htm#012)). And although the camp
comprehended 2,500,000 of people, two trumpets would be quite
sufficient, for sound is conveyed easily through the pure atmosphere and
reverberated strongly among the valleys of the Sinaitic hills.

[Numbers 10:3](../../../bib/kjv/num010.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">num 10:3</span></span>

when they shall blow with them--There seem to have been signals made by
a difference in the loudness and variety in the notes, suited for
different occasions, and which the Israelites learned to distinguish. A
simple uniform sound by both trumpets summoned a general assembly of the
people; the blast of a single trumpet convoked the princes to consult on
public affairs; notes of some other kind were made to sound an alarm,
whether for journeying or for war. One alarm was the recognized signal
for the eastern division of the camp (the tribes of Judah, Issachar, and
Zebulun) to march; two alarms gave the signal for the southern to move;
and, though it is not in our present Hebrew text, the Septuagint has,
that on three alarms being sounded, those on the west; while on four
blasts, those on the north decamped. Thus the greatest order and
discipline were established in the Israelitish camp--no military march
could be better regulated.

[Numbers 10:8](../../../bib/kjv/num010.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">num 10:8</span></span>

the sons of Aaron the priests shall blow with the trumpets, &c.--Neither
the Levites nor any in the common ranks of the people could be employed
in this office of signal giving. In order to attract greater attention
and more faithful observance, it was reserved to the priests alone, as
the Lord's ministers; and as anciently in Persia and other Eastern
countries the alarm trumpets were sounded from the tent of the
sovereign, so were they blown from the tabernacle, the visible residence
of Israel's King.

[Numbers 10:9](../../../bib/kjv/num010.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">num 10:9</span></span>

If ye go to war--In the land of Canaan, either when attacked by foreign
invaders or when they went to take possession according to the divine
promise, "ye \[that is, the priests\] shall blow an alarm." This advice
was accordingly acted upon ([Num 31:6](../../../bib/kjv/num031.htm#006);
[Ch2 13:12](../../../bib/kjv/ch2013.htm#012)); and in the circumstances
it was an act of devout confidence in God. A solemn and religious act on
the eve of a battle has often animated the hearts of those who felt they
were engaged in a good and just cause; and so the blowing of the
trumpet, being an ordinance of God, produced that effect on the minds of
the Israelites. But more is meant by the words--namely, that God would,
as it were, be aroused by the trumpet to bless with His presence and
aid.

[Numbers 10:10](../../../bib/kjv/num010.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">num 10:10</span></span>

Also in the day of your gladness, and in your solemn days--Festive and
thanksgiving occasions were to be ushered in with the trumpets, as all
feasts afterwards were ([Psa 81:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa081.htm#003);
[Ch2 29:27](../../../bib/kjv/ch2029.htm#027)) to intimate the joyous and
delighted feelings with which they engaged in the service of God.

[Numbers 10:11](../../../bib/kjv/num010.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">num 10:11</span></span>

It came to pass on the twentieth day of the second month, in the second
year, &c.--The Israelites had lain encamped in Wady-Er-Rahah and the
neighboring valleys of the Sinaitic range for the space of eleven months
and twenty-nine days. (Compare [Exo
19:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#001)). Besides the religious purposes
of the highest importance to which their long sojourn at Sinai was
subservient, the Israelites, after the hardships and oppression of the
Egyptian servitude, required an interval of repose and refreshment. They
were neither physically nor morally in a condition to enter the lists
with the warlike people they had to encounter before obtaining
possession of Canaan. But the wondrous transactions at Sinai--the arm of
Jehovah so visibly displayed in their favor--the covenant entered into,
and the special blessings guaranteed, beginning a course of moral and
religious education which moulded the character of this people--made
them acquainted with their high destiny and inspired them with those
noble principles of divine truth and righteousness which alone make a
great nation.

[Numbers 10:12](../../../bib/kjv/num010.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">num 10:12</span></span>

wilderness of Paran--It stretched from the base of the Sinaitic group,
or from Et-Tyh, over that extensive plateau to the southwestern borders
of Palestine.

[Numbers 10:13](../../../bib/kjv/num010.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">num 10:13</span></span>

the children of Israel took their journey . . . by the hand of Moses--It
is probable that Moses, on the breaking up of the encampment, stationed
himself on some eminence to see the ranks defile in order through the
embouchure of the mountains. The marching order is described (Num.
2:1-34); but, as the vast horde is represented here in actual migration,
let us notice the extraordinary care that was taken for ensuring the
safe conveyance of the holy things. In the rear of Judah, which, with
the tribes of Issachar and Zebulun, led the van, followed the
Gershonites and Merarites with the heavy and coarser materials of the
tabernacle. Next in order were set in motion the flank divisions of
Reuben and Ephraim. Then came the Kohathites, who occupied the center of
the moving mass, bearing the sacred utensils on their shoulder. They
were so far behind the other portions of the Levitical body that these
would have time at the new encampment to rear the framework of the
tabernacle before the Kohathites arrived. Last of all, Dan, with the
associated tribes, brought up the rear of the immense caravan. Each
tribe was marshalled under its prince or chief and in all their
movements rallied around its own standard.

[Numbers 10:29](../../../bib/kjv/num010.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">num 10:29</span></span>

Hobab, the son of Raguel the Midianite--called also Reuel (the same as
Jethro \[[Exo 2:18](../../../bib/kjv/exo002.htm#018), Margin\]). Hobab,
the son of this Midianite chief and brother-in-law to Moses, seems to
have sojourned among the Israelites during the whole period of their
encampment at Sinai and now on their removal proposed returning to his
own abode. Moses urged him to remain, both for his own benefit from a
religious point of view, and for the useful services his nomad habits
could enable him to render.

[Numbers 10:31](../../../bib/kjv/num010.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">num 10:31</span></span>

Leave us not, I pray thee . . . and thou mayest be to us instead of
eyes--The earnest importunity of Moses to secure the attendance of this
man, when he enjoyed the benefit of the directing cloud, has surprised
many. But it should be recollected that the guidance of the cloud,
though it showed the general route to be taken through the trackless
desert, would not be so special and minute as to point out the places
where pasture, shade, and water were to be obtained and which were often
hid in obscure spots by the shifting sands. Besides, several detachments
were sent off from the main body; the services of Hobab, not as a single
Arab, but as a prince of a powerful clan, would have been exceedingly
useful.

[Numbers 10:32](../../../bib/kjv/num010.htm#032)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">num 10:32</span></span>

if thou go with us . . . what goodness the Lord will show unto us, the
same will we do unto thee--A strong inducement is here held out; but it
seems not to have changed the young man's purpose, for he departed and
settled in his own district. (See on [Jdg
1:16](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#016) and [Sa1
15:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa1015.htm#006)).

[Numbers 10:33](../../../bib/kjv/num010.htm#033)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">num 10:33</span></span>

they departed . . . three days' journey--the first day's progress being
very small, about eighteen or twenty miles.

ark of the covenant of the Lord went before them--It was carried in the
center, and hence some eminent commentators think the passage should be
rendered, "the ark went in their presence," the cloud above upon it
being conspicuous in their eyes. But it is probable that the cloudy
pillar, which, while stationary, rested upon the ark, preceded them in
the march--as, when in motion at one time ([Exo
14:19](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#019)) it is expressly said to have
shifted its place.

[Numbers 10:35](../../../bib/kjv/num010.htm#035)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_035">num 10:35</span></span>

when the ark set forward that Moses said, Rise up, Lord, and let thine
enemies be scattered--Moses, as the organ of the people, uttered an
appropriate prayer both at the commencement and the end of each journey.
Thus all the journeys were sanctified by devotion; and so should our
prayer be, "If thy presence go not with us, carry us not hence" \[[Exo
33:15](../../../bib/kjv/exo033.htm#015)\].

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Numbers Chapter 11](num011)

</div>
