<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Numbers Index](num)  
  [Previous](num003)  [Next](num005) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*A Commentary, Critical, Practical, and Explanatory on the Old and New
Testaments*, by Robert Jamieson, A.R. Fausset and David Brown \[1882\]
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Numbers Chapter 4](../../../bib/kjv/num004.htm#001)

[Numbers 4:2](../../../bib/kjv/num004.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">num 4:2</span></span>

OF THE LEVITES' SERVICE. (Num. 4:1-49)

sons of Kohath, from thirty years old and upward--This age was
specifically fixed (see on [Num 8:24](../../../bib/kjv/num008.htm#024))
as the full maturity of bodily energy to perform the laborious duties
assigned them in the wilderness, as well as of mental activity to assist
in the management of the sacred services. And it was the period of life
at which John the Baptist and Christ entered on their respective
ministries.

even unto fifty--The term prescribed for active duty was a period of
twenty years, at the end of which they were exempted from the physical
labors of the office, though still expected to attend in the tabernacle
([Num 8:26](../../../bib/kjv/num008.htm#026)).

all that enter into the host--so called from their number, the order and
discipline maintained through their ranks, and their special duty as
guards of the tabernacle. The Hebrew word, however, signifies also a
station or office; and hence the passage may be rendered, "All that
enter into the sacerdotal office" ([Num
4:23](../../../bib/kjv/num004.htm#023)).

[Numbers 4:4](../../../bib/kjv/num004.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">num 4:4</span></span>

This shall be the service of the sons of Kohath, &c.--They are mentioned
first, from their close connection with Aaron; and the special
department of duty assigned to them during the journeyings of Israel
accorded with the charge they had received of the precious contents of
the tabernacle. But these were to be previously covered by the common
priests, who, as well as the high priest, were admitted on such
necessary occasions into the holy place. This was an exception to the
general rule, which prohibited the entrance of any but the high priest.
But when the cloud removed from the tabernacle, the sanctuary might be
entered by the common priests, as to them was reserved the exclusive
privilege of packing the sacred utensils; and it was not till the holy
things were thus ready for carriage, that the Kohathites were allowed to
approach.

[Numbers 4:5](../../../bib/kjv/num004.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">num 4:5</span></span>

covering veil--the inner veil, which separated the holy from the most
holy place. (See on [Exo 36:35](../../../bib/kjv/exo036.htm#035)).

[Numbers 4:6](../../../bib/kjv/num004.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">num 4:6</span></span>

covering of badgers' skins--(See on [Exo
25:5](../../../bib/kjv/exo025.htm#005)). The covering, however, referred
to was not that of the tabernacle, but one made for the special purpose
of protecting the ark.

put in the staves--These golden staves were now taken out. (See on [Exo
25:15](../../../bib/kjv/exo025.htm#015), compared with [Kg1
8:8](../../../bib/kjv/kg1008.htm#008)). The Hebrew word rendered "put
in," signifies also "dispose," and probably refers here to their
insertion through the openings in the coverings made for receiving them,
to preserve them from the touch of the carriers as well as from the
influence of the weather. It is worthy of notice that the coverings did
not consist of canvas or coarse tarpaulin, but of a kind which united
beauty with decency.

[Numbers 4:7](../../../bib/kjv/num004.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">num 4:7</span></span>

continual showbread--Though the people were in the wilderness fed upon
manna, the sacred loaves were constantly made of corn, which was
probably raised in small quantities from the verdant patches of the
desert.

[Numbers 4:10](../../../bib/kjv/num004.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">num 4:10</span></span>

a bar--or bier, formed of two poles fastened by two cross pieces and
borne by two men, after the fashion of a sedan chair.

[Numbers 4:12](../../../bib/kjv/num004.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">num 4:12</span></span>

instruments of ministry--the official dress of the priests ([Exo
31:10](../../../bib/kjv/exo031.htm#010)).

[Numbers 4:13](../../../bib/kjv/num004.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">num 4:13</span></span>

shall take away the ashes from the altar, &c.--The necessity of removing
ashes from the altar plainly implies that sacrifices were offered in the
wilderness (compare [Exo 18:12](../../../bib/kjv/exo018.htm#012); [Exo
24:4](../../../bib/kjv/exo024.htm#004)), though that rebellious race
seems frequently to have neglected the duty ([Amo
5:25](../../../bib/kjv/amo005.htm#025)). No mention is made of the
sacred fire; but as, by divine command, it was to be kept constantly
burning, it must have been transferred to some pan or brazier under the
covering, and borne by the appointed carriers.

[Numbers 4:15](../../../bib/kjv/num004.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">num 4:15</span></span>

the sons of Kohath shall come to bear it, but they shall not touch any
holy thing, lest they die--The mode of transport was upon the shoulders
of the Levites (see on [Num 7:9](../../../bib/kjv/num007.htm#009)),
although afterwards wheeled vehicles were employed ([Sa2
6:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa2006.htm#003); [Ch1
15:12](../../../bib/kjv/ch1015.htm#012)). And it was allowed to touch
the covering, but not the things covered, on the penalty of death, which
was inflicted more than once ([Sa1
6:19](../../../bib/kjv/sa1006.htm#019); [Sa2
6:6-7](../../../bib/kjv/sa2006.htm#006)). This stern denunciation was
designed to inspire a sentiment of deep and habitual reverence in the
minds of those who were officially engaged about holy things.

[Numbers 4:16](../../../bib/kjv/num004.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">num 4:16</span></span>

to the office of Eleazar . . . pertaineth the oil for the light, and the
sweet incense, &c.--He was charged with the special duty of
superintending the squadron who were employed in the carrying of the
sacred furniture; besides, to his personal care were committed the
materials requisite for the daily service, and which it was necessary he
should have easily at his command ([Exo
29:38](../../../bib/kjv/exo029.htm#038)).

[Numbers 4:17](../../../bib/kjv/num004.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">num 4:17</span></span>

Cut ye not off the tribe of the families of the Kohathites from among
the Levites, &c.--a solemn admonition to Moses and Aaron to beware,
lest, by any negligence on their part, disorder and improprieties should
creep in, and to take the greatest care that all the parts of this
important service be apportioned to the proper parties, lest the
Kohathites should be disqualified for their high and honorable duties.
The guilt of their death would be incurred by the superintending priest,
if he failed to give proper directions or allowed any irreverent
familiarity with sacred things.

[Numbers 4:24](../../../bib/kjv/num004.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">num 4:24</span></span>

This is the service of the families of the Gershonites, &c.--They were
appointed to carry "the curtains of the tabernacle"--that is, the goats'
hair covering of the tent--the ten curious curtains and embroidered
hangings at the entrance, with their red morocco covering, &c.

[Numbers 4:28](../../../bib/kjv/num004.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">num 4:28</span></span>

their charge shall be under the hand of Ithamar the son of Aaron,
&c.--The Levites were generally subject to the official command of the
priests in doing the ordinary work of the tabernacle. But during the
journeyings Eleazar, who was next in succession to his father, took the
special charge of the Kohathites \[[Num
4:16](../../../bib/kjv/num004.htm#016)\], while his brother Ithamar had
the superintendence of the Gershonites and Merarites \[[Num
4:33](../../../bib/kjv/num004.htm#033)\].

[Numbers 4:29](../../../bib/kjv/num004.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">num 4:29</span></span>

As for the sons of Merari--They carried the coarser and heavier
appurtenances, which, however, were so important and necessary, that an
inventory was kept of them--not only on account of their number and
variety, but of their comparative commonness and smallness, which might
have led to their being lost or missing through carelessness,
inadvertency, or neglect. It was a useful lesson, showing that God
disregards nothing pertaining to His service, and that even in the least
and most trivial matters, He requires the duty of faithful obedience.

[Numbers 4:34](../../../bib/kjv/num004.htm#034)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">num 4:34</span></span>

Moses and Aaron and the chief of the congregation numbered the sons of
the Kohathites, &c.--This enumeration was made on a different principle
from that which is recorded in the preceding chapter \[[Num
3:15](../../../bib/kjv/num003.htm#015)\]. That was confined to the males
from a month old and upward, while this was extended to all capable of
service in the three classes of the Levitical tribe. In considering
their relative numbers, the wisdom of Divine Providence appears in
arranging that, whereas in the Kohathites and Gershonites, whose burdens
were few and easier, there were but about a third part of them which
were fit for service; the Merarites, whose burdens were more and
heavier, had above one half of them fit for this work \[POOLE\]. The
small population of this tribe, so inferior to that of the other tribes,
is attempted to be explained (see on [Num
3:39](../../../bib/kjv/num003.htm#039)).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Numbers Chapter 5](num005)

</div>
