<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Numbers Index](num.md)  
  [Previous](num034)  [Next](num036.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*A Commentary, Critical, Practical, and Explanatory on the Old and New
Testaments*, by Robert Jamieson, A.R. Fausset and David Brown \[1882\]
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Numbers Chapter 35](../../../bib/kjv/num035.htm#001.md)

[Numbers 35:2](../../../bib/kjv/num035.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">num 35:2</span></span>

EIGHT AND FORTY CITIES GIVEN TO THE LEVITES. ([Num
35:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/num035.htm#001).md)

give unto the Levites of the inheritance of their possession cities to
dwell in--As the Levites were to have no territorial domain allocated to
them like the other tribes on the conquest of Canaan, they were to be
distributed throughout the land in certain cities appropriated to their
use; and these cities were to be surrounded by extensive suburbs. There
is an apparent discrepancy between [Num
35:4](../../../bib/kjv/num035.htm#004.md) and [Num
35:5](../../../bib/kjv/num035.htm#005.md), with regard to the extent of
these suburbs; but the statements in the two verses refer to totally
different things--the one to the extent of the suburbs from the walls of
the city, the other to the space of two thousand cubits from their
extremity. In point of fact, there was an extent of ground, amounting to
three thousand cubits, measured from the wall of the city. One thousand
were most probably occupied with outhouses for the accommodation of
shepherds and other servants, with gardens, vineyards, or oliveyards.
And these which were portioned out to different families ([Ch1
6:60](../../../bib/kjv/ch1006.htm#060).md) might be sold by one Levite to
another, but not to any individual of another tribe ([Jer
32:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#007).md). The other two thousand cubits
remained a common for the pasturing of cattle ([Lev
25:34](../../../bib/kjv/lev025.htm#034).md) and, considering their number,
that space would be fully required.

[Numbers 35:6](../../../bib/kjv/num035.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">num 35:6</span></span>

CITIES OF REFUGE. ([Num 35:6-8](../../../bib/kjv/num035.htm#006).md)

there shall be six cities for refuge, which ye shall appoint for the
manslayer--The establishment of those privileged sanctuaries among the
cities of the Levites is probably traceable to the idea, that they would
be the most suitable and impartial judges--that their presence and
counsels might calm or restrain the stormy passions of the blood
avenger--and that, from their being invested with the sacred character,
they might be types of Christ, in whom sinners find a refuge from the
destroyer (see [Deu 4:43](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#043.md); [Jos
20:8](../../../bib/kjv/jos020.htm#008).md).

[Numbers 35:8](../../../bib/kjv/num035.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">num 35:8</span></span>

the cities which ye shall give shall be of the possession of the
children of Israel--The burden of furnishing those places for the
residence and support of the Levitical order was to fall in equitable
proportions upon the different tribes (see [Num
33:54](../../../bib/kjv/num033.htm#054.md); [Jos
20:7](../../../bib/kjv/jos020.htm#007).md).

[Numbers 35:11](../../../bib/kjv/num035.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">num 35:11</span></span>

THE BLOOD AVENGER. (Num. 35:9-34)

that the slayer may flee thither, which killeth any person at
unawares--The practice of Goelism, that is, of the nearest relation of
an individual who was killed being bound to demand satisfaction from the
author of his death, existed from a very remote antiquity ([Gen
4:14](../../../bib/kjv/gen004.htm#014.md); [Gen
27:45](../../../bib/kjv/gen027.htm#045).md). It seems to have been an
established usage in the age of Moses; and although in a rude and
imperfect state of society, it is a natural and intelligible principle
of criminal jurisprudence, it is liable to many great abuses; the chief
of the evils inseparable from it is that the kinsman, who is bound in
duty and honor to execute justice, will often be precipitate--little
disposed, in the heat of passion or under the impulse of revenge, to
examine into the circumstances of the case, to discriminate between the
premeditated purpose of the assassin and the misfortune of the
unintentional homicide. Moreover, it had a tendency, not only to foster
a vindictive spirit, but in case of the Goel being unsuccessful in
finding his victim, to transmit animosities and feuds against his
descendants from one generation to another. This is exemplified among
the Arabs in the present day. Should an Arab of one tribe happen to kill
one of another tribe, there is "blood" between the tribes, and the stain
can only be wiped out by the death of some individual of the tribe with
which the offense originated. Sometimes the penalty is commuted by the
payment of a stipulated number of sheep or camels. But such an
equivalent, though offered, is as often refused, and blood has to be
repaid only by blood. This practice of Goelism obtained among the
Hebrews to such an extent that it was not perhaps expedient to abolish
it; and Moses, while sanctioning its continuance, was directed, by
divine authority, to make some special regulations, which tended both to
prevent the unhappy consequences of sudden and personal vengeance, and,
at the same time, to afford an accused person time and means of proving
his innocence. This was the humane and equitable end contemplated in the
institution of cities of refuge. There were to be six of these legalized
asyla, three on the east of Jordan, both because the territory there was
equal in length, though not in breadth, to Canaan, and because it might
be more convenient for some to take refuge across the border. They were
appointed for the benefit, not of the native Israelites only, but of all
resident strangers.

[Numbers 35:16](../../../bib/kjv/num035.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">num 35:16</span></span>

If he smite him with an instrument of iron, so that he die, &c.--Various
cases are here enumerated in which the Goel or avenger was at liberty to
take the life of the murderer; and every one of them proves a
premeditated purpose.

[Numbers 35:22](../../../bib/kjv/num035.htm#022.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">num 35:22</span></span>

But if he thrust him suddenly without enmity, or have cast upon him any
thing without laying of wait, &c.--Under the excitement of a sudden
provocation, or violent passion, an injury might be inflicted issuing in
death; and for a person who had thus undesignedly committed slaughter,
the Levitical cities offered the benefit of full protection. Once having
reached the nearest, for one or other of them was within a day's journey
of all parts of the land, he was secure. But he had to "abide in it."
His confinement within its walls was a wise and salutary rule, designed
to show the sanctity of human blood in God's sight, as well as to
protect the manslayer himself, whose presence and intercourse in society
might have provoked the passions of the deceased's relatives. But the
period of his release from this confinement was not until the death of
the high priest. That was a season of public affliction, when private
sorrows were sunk or overlooked under a sense of the national calamity,
and when the death of so eminent a servant of God naturally led all to
serious consideration about their own mortality. The moment, however,
that the refugee broke through the restraints of his confinement and
ventured beyond the precincts of the asylum, he forfeited the privilege,
and, if he was discovered by his pursuer, he might be slain with
impunity.

[Numbers 35:29](../../../bib/kjv/num035.htm#029.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">num 35:29</span></span>

these things shall be for a statute of judgment unto you throughout your
generations--The law of the blood-avenger, as thus established by divine
authority, was a vast improvement on the ancient practice of Goelism. By
the appointment of cities of refuge, the manslayer was saved, in the
meantime, from the blind and impetuous fury of vindictive relatives; but
he might be tried by the local court, and, if proved guilty on
sufficient evidence, condemned and punished as a murderer, without the
possibility of deliverance by any pecuniary satisfaction. The enactment
of Moses, which was an adaptation to the character and usages of the
Hebrew people, secured the double advantage of promoting the ends both
of humanity and of justice.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Numbers Chapter 36](num036.md)

</div>
