<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Numbers Index](num)  
  [Previous](num029)  [Next](num031) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*A Commentary, Critical, Practical, and Explanatory on the Old and New
Testaments*, by Robert Jamieson, A.R. Fausset and David Brown \[1882\]
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Numbers Chapter 30](../../../bib/kjv/num030.htm#001)

[Numbers 30:1](../../../bib/kjv/num030.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">num 30:1</span></span>

VOWS ARE NOT TO BE BROKEN. (Num. 30:1-16)

This is the thing which the Lord hath commanded--The subject of this
chapter relates to vowing, which seems to have been an ancient usage,
allowed by the law to remain, and by which some people declared their
intention of offering some gift on the altar or abstaining from
particular articles of meat or drink, of observing a private fast, or
doing something to the honor or in the service of God, over and above
what was authoritatively required. In [Num
29:39](../../../bib/kjv/num029.htm#039), mention was made of "vows and
freewill offerings," and it is probable, from the explanatory nature of
the rules laid down in this chapter, that these were given for the
removal of doubts and difficulties which conscientious persons had felt
about their obligation to perform their vows in certain circumstances
that had arisen.

[Numbers 30:2](../../../bib/kjv/num030.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">num 30:2</span></span>

If a man vow a vow unto the Lord--A mere secret purpose of the mind was
not enough to constitute a vow; it had to be actually expressed in
words; and though a purely voluntary act, yet when once the vow was
made, the performance of it, like that of every other promise, became an
indispensable duty--all the more because, referring to a sacred thing,
it could not be neglected without the guilt of prevarication and
unfaithfulness to God.

he shall not break his word--literally, "profane his word"--render it
vain and contemptible ([Psa 55:20](../../../bib/kjv/psa055.htm#020);
[Psa 89:34](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#034)). But as it would
frequently happen that parties would vow to do things which were neither
good in themselves nor in their power to perform, the law ordained that
their natural superiors should have the right of judging as to the
propriety of those vows, with discretionary power to sanction or
interdict their fulfilment. Parents were to determine in the case of
their children, and husbands in that of their wives--being, however,
allowed only a day for deliberation after the matter became known to
them; and their judgment, if unfavorable, released the devotee from all
obligation \[[Num 30:3-8](../../../bib/kjv/num030.htm#003)\].

[Numbers 30:3](../../../bib/kjv/num030.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">num 30:3</span></span>

If a woman also vow a vow unto the Lord, and bind herself by a bond,
being in her father's house in her youth--Girls only are specified; but
minors of the other sex, who resided under the parental roof, were
included, according to Jewish writers, who also consider the name
"father" as comprehending all guardians of youth. We are also told that
the age at which young people were deemed capable of vowing was thirteen
for boys and twelve for girls. The judgment of a father or guardian on
the vow of any under his charge might be given either by an expressed
approval or by silence, which was to be construed as approval. But in
the case of a husband who, after silence from day to day, should
ultimately disapprove or hinder his wife's vow, the sin of
non-performance was to be imputed to him and not to her \[[Num
30:15](../../../bib/kjv/num030.htm#015)\].

[Numbers 30:9](../../../bib/kjv/num030.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">num 30:9</span></span>

every vow of a widow--In the case of a married woman, who, in the event
of a separation from her husband, or of his death, returned, as was not
uncommon, to her father's house, a doubt might have been entertained
whether she was not, as before, subject to paternal jurisdiction and
obliged to act with the paternal consent. The law ordained that the vow
was binding if it had been made in her husband's lifetime, and he, on
being made aware of it, had not interposed his veto \[[Num
30:10-11](../../../bib/kjv/num030.htm#010)\]; as, for instance, she
might have vowed, when not a widow, that she would assign a portion of
her income to pious and charitable uses, of which she might repent when
actually a widow; but by this statute she was required to fulfil the
obligation, provided her circumstances enabled her to redeem the pledge.
The rules laid down must have been exceedingly useful for the prevention
or cancelling of rash vows, as well as for giving a proper sanction to
such as were legitimate in their nature, and made in a devout,
reflecting spirit.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Numbers Chapter 31](num031)

</div>
