<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Numbers Index](num.md)  
  [Previous](num005)  [Next](num007.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*A Commentary, Critical, Practical, and Explanatory on the Old and New
Testaments*, by Robert Jamieson, A.R. Fausset and David Brown \[1882\]
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Numbers Chapter 6](../../../bib/kjv/num006.htm#001.md)

[Numbers 6:2](../../../bib/kjv/num006.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">num 6:2</span></span>

THE LAW OF THE NAZARITE IN HIS SEPARATION. (Num. 6:1-22)

When either man or woman . . . shall vow a vow of a Nazarite--that is,
"a separated one," from a Hebrew word, "to separate." It was used to
designate a class of persons who, under the impulse of extraordinary
piety and with a view to higher degrees of religious improvement,
voluntarily renounced the occupations and pleasures of the world to
dedicate themselves unreservedly to the divine service. The vow might be
taken by either sex, provided they had the disposal of themselves ([Num
30:4](../../../bib/kjv/num030.htm#004).md), and for a limited
period--usually a month or a lifetime ([Jdg
13:5](../../../bib/kjv/jdg013.htm#005.md); [Jdg
16:17](../../../bib/kjv/jdg016.htm#017).md). We do not know, perhaps, the
whole extent of abstinence they practised. But they separated themselves
from three things in particular--namely, from wine, and all the
varieties of vinous produce; from the application of a razor to their
head, allowing their hair to grow; and from pollution by a dead body.
The reasons of the self-restrictions are obvious. The use of wine tended
to inflame the passions, intoxicate the brain, and create a taste for
luxurious indulgence. The cutting off the hair being a recognized sign
of uncleanness ([Lev 14:8-9](../../../bib/kjv/lev014.htm#008).md), its
unpolled luxuriance was a symbol of the purity he professed. Besides,
its extraordinary length kept him in constant remembrance of his vow, as
well as stimulated others to imitate his pious example. Moreover,
contact with a dead body, disqualifying for the divine service, the
Nazarite carefully avoided such a cause of unfitness, and, like the high
priest, did not assist at the funeral rites of his nearest relatives,
preferring his duty to God to the indulgence of his strongest natural
affections.

[Numbers 6:9](../../../bib/kjv/num006.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">num 6:9</span></span>

If any man die very suddenly by him, and he hath defiled the head of his
consecration--Cases of sudden death might occur to make him contract
pollution; and in such circumstances he was required, after shaving his
head, to make the prescribed offerings necessary for the removal of
ceremonial defilement ([Lev 15:13](../../../bib/kjv/lev015.htm#013.md);
[Num 19:11](../../../bib/kjv/num019.htm#011).md). But by the terms of this
law an accidental defilement vitiated the whole of his previous
observances, and he was required to begin the period of his Nazaritism
afresh. But even this full completion did not supersede the necessity of
a sin offering at the close. Sin mingles with our best and holiest
performances, and the blood of sprinkling is necessary to procure
acceptance to us and our services.

[Numbers 6:13](../../../bib/kjv/num006.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">num 6:13</span></span>

when the days of his separation are fulfilled, &c.--On the
accomplishment of a limited vow of Nazaritism, Nazarites might cut their
hair wherever they happened to be ([Act
18:18](../../../bib/kjv/act018.htm#018).md); but the hair was to be
carefully kept and brought to the door of the sanctuary. Then after the
presentation of sin offerings and burnt offerings, it was put under the
vessel in which the peace offerings were boiled; and the priest, taking
the shoulder ([Lev 7:32](../../../bib/kjv/lev007.htm#032).md), when boiled,
and a cake and wafer of the meat offering, put them on the hands of the
Nazarites to wave before the Lord, as a token of thanksgiving, and thus
released them from their vow.

[Numbers 6:23](../../../bib/kjv/num006.htm#023.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">num 6:23</span></span>

THE FORM OF BLESSING THE PEOPLE. ([Num
6:23-27](../../../bib/kjv/num006.htm#023).md)

Speak unto Aaron and unto his sons, saying, On this wise ye shall bless
the congregation of Israel, &c.--This passage records the solemn
benediction which God appointed for dismissing the people at the close
of the daily service. The repetition of the name "Lord" or "Jehovah"
three times, expresses the great mystery of the Godhead--three persons,
and yet one God. The expressions in the separate clauses correspond to
the respective offices of the Father, to "bless and keep us"; of the
Son, to be "gracious to us"; and of the Holy Ghost, to "give us peace."
And because the benediction, though pronounced by the lips of a fellow
man, derived its virtue, not from the priest but from God, the
encouraging assurance was added, "I the Lord will bless them."

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Numbers Chapter 7](num007.md)

</div>
