<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Numbers Index](num.md)  
  [Previous](num010)  [Next](num012.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*A Commentary, Critical, Practical, and Explanatory on the Old and New
Testaments*, by Robert Jamieson, A.R. Fausset and David Brown \[1882\]
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Numbers Chapter 11](../../../bib/kjv/num011.htm#001.md)

[Numbers 11:1](../../../bib/kjv/num011.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">num 11:1</span></span>

MANNA LOATHED. (Num. 11:1-35)

When the people complained it displeased the Lord, &c.--Unaccustomed to
the fatigues of travel and wandering into the depths of a desert, less
mountainous but far more gloomy and desolate than that of Sinai, without
any near prospect of the rich country that had been promised, they fell
into a state of vehement discontent, which was vented at these irksome
and fruitless journeyings. The displeasure of God was manifested against
the ungrateful complainers by fire sent in an extraordinary manner. It
is worthy of notice, however, that the discontent seems to have been
confined to the extremities of the camp, where, in all likelihood, "the
mixed multitude" \[see on [Exo 12:38](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#038.md)\]
had their station. At the intercession of Moses, the appalling judgment
ceased \[[Num 11:2](../../../bib/kjv/num011.htm#002.md)\], and the name
given to the place, "Taberah" (a burning), remained ever after a
monument of national sin and punishment. (See on [Num
11:34](../../../bib/kjv/num011.htm#034).md).

[Numbers 11:4](../../../bib/kjv/num011.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">num 11:4</span></span>

the mixed multitude that was among them fell a lusting--These consisted
of Egyptians. \[See on [Exo 12:38](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#038.md).\]
To dream of banquets and plenty of animal food in the desert becomes a
disease of the imagination; and to this excitement of the appetite no
people are more liable than the natives of Egypt. But the Israelites
participated in the same feelings and expressed dissatisfaction with the
manna on which they had hitherto been supported, in comparison with the
vegetable luxuries with which they had been regaled in Egypt.

[Numbers 11:5](../../../bib/kjv/num011.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">num 11:5</span></span>

We remember the fish, which we did eat in Egypt freely--(See on [Exo
7:17](../../../bib/kjv/exo007.htm#017).md). The people of Egypt are
accustomed to an almost exclusive diet of fish, either fresh or
sun-dried, during the hot season in April and May--the very season when
the Israelites were travelling in this desert. Lower Egypt, where were
the brick-kilns in which they were employed, afforded great facilities
for obtaining fish in the Mediterranean, the lakes, and the canals of
the Nile.

cucumbers--The Egyptian species is smooth, of a cylindrical form, and
about a foot in length. It is highly esteemed by the natives and when in
season is liberally partaken of, being greatly mellowed by the influence
of the sun.

melons--The watermelons are meant, which grow on the deep, loamy soil
after the subsidence of the Nile; and as they afford a juicy and cooling
fruit, all classes make use of them for food, drink, and medicine.

leeks--by some said to be a species of grass cresses, which is much
relished as a kind of seasoning.

onions--the same as ours; but instead of being nauseous and affecting
the eyes, they are sweet to the taste, good for the stomach, and form to
a large extent the aliment of the laboring classes.

garlic--is now nearly if not altogether extinct in Egypt although it
seems to have grown anciently in great abundance. The herbs now
mentioned form a diet very grateful in warm countries where vegetables
and other fruits of the season are much used. We can scarcely wonder
that both the Egyptian hangers-on and the general body of the
Israelites, incited by their clamors, complained bitterly of the want of
the refreshing viands in their toilsome wanderings. But after all their
experience of the bounty and care of God, their vehement longing for the
luxuries of Egypt was an impeachment of the divine arrangements; and if
it was the sin that beset them in the desert, it became them more
strenuously to repress a rebellious spirit, as dishonoring to God and
unbecoming their relation to Him as a chosen people.

[Numbers 11:6](../../../bib/kjv/num011.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">num 11:6</span></span>

But now . . . there is nothing . . . beside this manna--Daily
familiarity had disgusted them with the sight and taste of the
monotonous food; and, ungrateful for the heavenly gift, they longed for
a change of fare. It may be noticed that the resemblance of the manna to
coriander seed was not in the color, but in the size and figure; and
from its comparison to bdellium, which is either a drop of white gum or
a white pearl, we are enabled to form a better idea of it. Moreover, it
is evident, from the process of baking into cakes, that it could not
have been the natural manna of the Arabian desert, for that is too gummy
or unctuous to admit of being ground into meal. In taste it is said to
have been like "wafers made with honey" ([Exo
16:31](../../../bib/kjv/exo016.htm#031).md), and here to have the taste of
fresh oil. The discrepancy in these statements is only apparent; for in
the latter the manna is described in its raw state; in the former, after
it was ground and baked. The minute description given here of its nature
and use was designed to show the great sinfulness of the people, in
being dissatisfied with such excellent food, furnished so plentifully
and gratuitously.

[Numbers 11:10](../../../bib/kjv/num011.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">num 11:10</span></span>

Moses said unto the Lord, Wherefore hast thou afflicted thy servant,
&c.--It is impossible not to sympathize with his feelings although the
tone and language of his remonstrances to God cannot be justified. He
was in a most distressing situation--having a mighty multitude under his
care, with no means of satisfying their clamorous demands. Their conduct
shows how deeply they had been debased and demoralized by long
oppression: while his reveals a state of mind agonized and almost
overwhelmed by a sense of the undivided responsibilities of his office.

[Numbers 11:16](../../../bib/kjv/num011.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">num 11:16</span></span>

the Lord said unto Moses, Gather unto me seventy men of the elders--
([Exo 3:16](../../../bib/kjv/exo003.htm#016.md); [Exo
5:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo005.htm#006.md); [Exo
24:9](../../../bib/kjv/exo024.htm#009.md); [Exo
18:21](../../../bib/kjv/exo018.htm#021.md), [Exo
18:24](../../../bib/kjv/exo018.htm#024.md); [Lev
4:15](../../../bib/kjv/lev004.htm#015).md). An order of seventy was to be
created, either by a selection from the existing staff of elders or by
the appointment of new ones, empowered to assist him by their collective
wisdom and experience in the onerous cares of government. The Jewish
writers say that this was the origin of the Sanhedrin, or supreme
appellate court of their nation. But there is every reason to believe
that it was only a temporary expedient, adopted to meet a trying
exigency.

[Numbers 11:17](../../../bib/kjv/num011.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">num 11:17</span></span>

I will come down--that is, not in a visible manner or by local descent,
but by the tokens of the divine presence and operations.

and I will take of the spirit which is upon thee--"The spirit" means the
gifts and influences of the Spirit ([Num
27:18](../../../bib/kjv/num027.htm#018.md); [Joe
2:28](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#028.md); [Joh
7:39](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#039.md); [Co1
14:12](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#012).md), and by "taking the spirit of
Moses, and putting it upon them," is not to be understood that the
qualities of the great leader were to be in any degree impaired but that
the elders would be endowed with a portion of the same gifts, especially
of prophecy ([Num 11:25](../../../bib/kjv/num011.htm#025).md) --that is, an
extraordinary penetration in discovering hidden and settling difficult
things.

[Numbers 11:18](../../../bib/kjv/num011.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">num 11:18</span></span>

say thou unto the people, Sanctify yourselves against to-morrow, and ye
shall eat flesh--that is, "prepare yourselves," by repentance and
submission, to receive to-morrow the flesh you clamor for. But it is
evident that the tenor of the language implied a severe rebuke and that
the blessing promised would prove a curse.

[Numbers 11:21](../../../bib/kjv/num011.htm#021.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">num 11:21</span></span>

Moses said, The people, among whom I am, are six hundred thousand . . .
Shall the flocks and herds be slain for them, to suffice them?--The
great leader, struck with a promise so astonishing as that of suddenly
furnishing, in the midst of the desert, more than two millions of people
with flesh for a whole month, betrayed an incredulous spirit, surprising
in one who had witnessed so many stupendous miracles. But it is probable
that it was only a feeling of the moment--at all events, the incredulous
doubt was uttered only to himself--and not, as afterwards, publicly and
to the scandal of the people. (See on [Num
20:10](../../../bib/kjv/num020.htm#010).md). It was, therefore, sharply
reproved, but not punished.

[Numbers 11:24](../../../bib/kjv/num011.htm#024.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">num 11:24</span></span>

Moses . . . gathered the seventy men of the elders of the people,
&c.--The tabernacle was chosen for the convocation, because, as it was
there God manifested Himself, there His Spirit would be directly
imparted--there the minds of the elders themselves would be inspired
with reverential awe and their office invested with greater respect in
the eyes of the people.

[Numbers 11:25](../../../bib/kjv/num011.htm#025.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">num 11:25</span></span>

when the spirit rested upon them, they prophesied, and did not cease--As
those elders were constituted civil governors, their "prophesying" must
be understood as meaning the performance of their civil and sacred
duties by the help of those extraordinary endowments they had received;
and by their not "ceasing" we understand, either that they continued to
exercise their gifts uninterruptedly the first day (see [Sa1
19:24](../../../bib/kjv/sa1019.htm#024).md), or that these were permanent
gifts, which qualified them in an eminent degree for discharging the
duty of public magistrates.

[Numbers 11:26](../../../bib/kjv/num011.htm#026.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">num 11:26</span></span>

But there remained two of the men in the camp--They did not repair with
the rest to the tabernacle, either from modesty in shrinking from the
assumption of a public office, or being prevented by some ceremonial
defilement. They, however, received the gifts of the Spirit as well as
their brethren. And when Moses was urged to forbid their prophesying,
his answer displayed a noble disinterestedness as well as zeal for the
glory of God akin to that of our Lord ([Mar
9:39](../../../bib/kjv/mar009.htm#039).md).

[Numbers 11:31](../../../bib/kjv/num011.htm#031.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">num 11:31</span></span>

There went forth a wind from the Lord, and brought quails from the sea,
&c.--These migratory birds (see on [Exo
16:13](../../../bib/kjv/exo016.htm#013).md) were on their journey from
Egypt, when "the wind from the Lord," an east wind ([Psa
78:26](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#026).md) forcing them to change their
course, wafted them over the Red Sea to the camp of Israel.

let them fall a day's journey--If the journey of an individual is meant,
this space might be thirty miles; if the inspired historian referred to
the whole host, ten miles would be as far as they could march in one day
in the sandy desert under a vertical sun. Assuming it to be twenty miles
this immense cloud of quails ([Psa
78:27](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#027).md) covered a space of forty miles
in diameter. Others reduce it to sixteen. But it is doubtful whether the
measurement be from the center or the extremities of the camp. It is
evident, however, that the language describes the countless number of
these quails.

as it were two cubits high--Some have supposed that they fell on the
ground above each other to that height--a supposition which would leave
a vast quantity useless as food to the Israelites, who were forbidden to
eat any animal that died of itself or from which the blood was not
poured out. Others think that, being exhausted with a long flight, they
could not fly more than three feet above the earth, and so were easily
felled or caught. A more recent explanation applies the phrase, "two
cubits high," not to the accumulation of the mass, but to the size of
the individual birds. Flocks of large red-legged cranes, three feet
high, measuring seven feet from tip to tip, have been frequently seen on
the western shores of the Gulf of Akaba, or eastern arm of the Red Sea
\[STANLEY; SHUBERT\].

[Numbers 11:32](../../../bib/kjv/num011.htm#032.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">num 11:32</span></span>

people stood up--rose up in eager haste--some at one time, others at
another; some, perhaps through avidity, both day and night.

ten homers--ten asses' loads; or, "homers" may be used indefinitely (as
in [Exo 8:14](../../../bib/kjv/exo008.htm#014.md); [Jdg
15:16](../../../bib/kjv/jdg015.htm#016).md); and "ten" for many: so that
the phrase "ten homers" is equivalent to "great heaps." The collectors
were probably one or two from each family; and, being distrustful of
God's goodness, they gathered not for immediate consumption only, but
for future use. In eastern and southern seas, innumerable quails are
often seen, which, when weary, fall down, covering every spot on the
deck and rigging of vessels; and in Egypt they come in such myriads that
the people knock them down with sticks.

spread them all abroad for themselves round about the camp--salted and
dried them for future use, by the simple process to which they had been
accustomed in Egypt.

[Numbers 11:33](../../../bib/kjv/num011.htm#033.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">num 11:33</span></span>

while the flesh was yet between their teeth, ere it was
chewed--literally, "cut off"; that is, before the supply of quails,
which lasted a month ([Num 11:20](../../../bib/kjv/num011.htm#020).md), was
exhausted. The probability is, that their stomachs, having been long
inured to manna (a light food), were not prepared for so sudden a change
of regimen--a heavy, solid diet of animal food, of which they seem to
have partaken to so intemperate a degree as to produce a general
surfeit, and fatal consequences. On a former occasion their murmurings
for flesh were raised ([Exo 16:1-8](../../../bib/kjv/exo016.htm#001).md)
because they were in want of food. Here they proceeded, not from
necessity, but wanton, lustful desire; and their sin, in the righteous
judgment of God, was made to carry its own punishment.

[Numbers 11:34](../../../bib/kjv/num011.htm#034.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">num 11:34</span></span>

called the name of that place Kibrothhattaavah--literally, "The graves
of lust," or "Those that lusted"; so that the name of the place proves
that the mortality was confined to those who had indulged inordinately.

[Numbers 11:35](../../../bib/kjv/num011.htm#035.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_035">num 11:35</span></span>

Hazeroth--The extreme southern station of this route was a
watering-place in a spacious plain, now Ain-Haderah.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Numbers Chapter 12](num012.md)

</div>
