<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[1 Peter Index](pe1)  
  [Previous](pe1004)  [Next](pe2000) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*A Commentary, Critical, Practical, and Explanatory on the Old and New
Testaments*, by Robert Jamieson, A.R. Fausset and David Brown \[1882\]
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [1 Peter Chapter 5](../../../bib/kjv/pe1005.htm#001)

[1 Peter 5:1](../../../bib/kjv/pe1005.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">pe1 5:1</span></span>

EXHORTATIONS TO ELDERS, JUNIORS, AND ALL IN GENERAL. PARTING PRAYER.
CONCLUSION. ([Pe1 5:1-14](../../../bib/kjv/pe1005.htm#001))

elders--alike in office and age ([Pe1
5:5](../../../bib/kjv/pe1005.htm#005)).

I . . . also an elder--To put one's self on a level with those whom we
exhort, gives weight to one's exhortations (compare [Jo2
1:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/jo2001.htm#001)). Peter, in true humility for
the Gospel's sake, does not put forward his apostleship here, wherein he
presided over the elders. In the apostleship the apostles have no
successors, for "the signs of an apostle" have not been transmitted. The
presidents over the presbyters and deacons, by whatever name designated,
angel, bishop, or moderator, &c., though of the same ORDER as the
presbyters, yet have virtually succeeded to a superintendency of the
Church analogous to that exercised by the apostles (this superintendency
and priority existed from the earliest times after the apostles
\[TERTULLIAN\]); just as the Jewish synagogue (the model which the
Church followed) was governed by a council of presbyters, presided over
by one of themselves, "the chief ruler of the synagogue." (Compare
VITRINGA \[Synagogue and Temple, Part II, chs. 3 and 7\]).

witness--an eye-witness of Christ's sufferings, and so qualified to
exhort you to believing patience in suffering for well-doing after His
example ([Pe1 4:19](../../../bib/kjv/pe1004.htm#019); [Pe1
2:20](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#020)). This explains the "therefore"
inserted in the oldest manuscripts, "I therefore exhort," resuming
exhortation from [Pe1 4:19](../../../bib/kjv/pe1004.htm#019). His higher
dignity as an apostle is herein delicately implied, as eye-witnessing
was a necessary qualification for apostleship: compare Peter's own
speeches, [Act 1:21-22](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#021); [Act
2:32](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#032); [Act
10:39](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#039).

also--implying the righteous recompense corresponding to the sufferings.

partaker of the glory--according to Christ's promise; an earnest of
which was given in the transfiguration.

[1 Peter 5:2](../../../bib/kjv/pe1005.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">pe1 5:2</span></span>

Feed--Greek, "Tend as a shepherd," by discipline and doctrine. Lead,
feed, heed: by prayer, exhortation, government, and example. The dignity
is marked by the term "elder"; the duties of the office, to tend or
oversee, by "bishop." Peter has in mind Christ's injunction to him,
"Feed (tend) My sheep . . . Feed (pasture) My lambs" ([Joh
21:16](../../../bib/kjv/joh021.htm#016)). He invites the elders to share
with him the same duty (compare [Act
20:28](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#028)). The flock is Christ's.

which is among you--While having a concern for all the Church, your
special duty is to feed that portion of it "which is among you."

oversight--Greek, "bishopric," or duty of bishops, that is, overseer.

not by constraint--Necessity is laid upon them, but willingness prevents
it being felt, both in undertaking and in fulfilling the duty
\[BENGEL\]. "He is a true presbyter and minister of the counsel of God
who doeth and teacheth the things of the Lord, being not accounted
righteous merely because he is a presbyter, but because righteous,
chosen into the presbytery" \[CLEMENT OF ALEXANDRIA\].

willingly--One oldest manuscript, Vulgate, Syriac, and Coptic, add, "as
God would have it to be done" ([Rom
8:27](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#027)).

not for filthy lucre-- ([Isa 56:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa056.htm#011);
[Tit 1:7](../../../bib/kjv/tit001.htm#007)).

of a ready mind--promptly and heartily, without selfish motive of
gain-seeking, as the Israelites gave their services willing-heartedly to
the sanctuary.

[1 Peter 5:3](../../../bib/kjv/pe1005.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">pe1 5:3</span></span>

being lords--Greek, "lording it": implying pride and oppression. "Not
that we have dominion over your faith."

God's heritage--Greek, "the inheritances," that is, the portions of the
Church committed severally to your pastoral charge \[BENGEL\]. It is
explained by "the flock" in the next clause. However, in [Pe1
5:2](../../../bib/kjv/pe1005.htm#002), "flock of God which is among
you," answering to "(God's) heritages" (plural to express the sheep who
are God's portion and inheritance, [Deu
32:9](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#009)) committed to you, favors English
Version. The flock, as one whole, is God's heritage, or flock in the
singular. Regarded in relation to its component sheep, divided among
several pastors, it is in the plural "heritages." Compare [Act
1:17](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#017), [Act
1:25](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#025), "part" (the same Greek). BERNARD
OF CLAIRVAUX, wrote to Pope Eugene, "Peter could not give thee what he
had not: what he had he gave: the care over the Church, not dominion."

being--Greek, "becoming."

ensamples--the most effective recommendation of precept ([Ti1
4:12](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#012)). [Tit
2:7](../../../bib/kjv/tit002.htm#007), "patterns." So Jesus. "A
monstrosity it is to see the highest rank joined with the meanest mind,
the first seat with the lowest life, a grandiloquent tongue with a lazy
life, much talking with no fruit" \[BERNARD\].

[1 Peter 5:4](../../../bib/kjv/pe1005.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">pe1 5:4</span></span>

And--"And so": as the result of "being ensamples" ([Pe1
5:3](../../../bib/kjv/pe1005.htm#003)).

chief Shepherd--the title peculiarly Christ's own, not Peter's or the
pope's.

when . . . shall appear--Greek, "be manifested" ([Col
3:4](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#004)). Faith serves the Lord while
still unseen.

crown--Greek, "stephanos," a garland of victory, the prize in the
Grecian games, woven of ivy, parsley, myrtle, olive, or oak. Our crown
is distinguished from theirs in that it is "incorruptible" and "fadeth
not away," as the leaves of theirs soon did. "The crown of life." Not a
kingly "crown" (a different Greek word, diadema): the prerogative of the
Lord Jesus ([Rev 19:12](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#012)).

glory--Greek, "the glory," namely, to be then revealed ([Pe1
5:1](../../../bib/kjv/pe1005.htm#001); [Pe1
4:13](../../../bib/kjv/pe1004.htm#013)).

that fadeth not away--Greek, "amaranthine" (compare [Pe1
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#004)).

[1 Peter 5:5](../../../bib/kjv/pe1005.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">pe1 5:5</span></span>

ye younger--The deacons were originally the younger men, the presbyters
older; but subsequently as presbyter expressed the office of Church
ruler or teacher, so Greek "neoteros" means not (as literally) young men
in age, but subordinate ministers and servants of the Church. So Christ
uses the term "younger." For He explains it by "he that doth serve,"
literally, "he that ministereth as a deacon"; just as He explains "the
greatness" by "he that is chief," literally, "he that ruleth," the very
word applied to the bishops or presbyters. So "the young men" are
undoubtedly the deacons of the Church of Jerusalem, of whom, as being
all Hebrews, the Hellenistic Christians subsequently complained as
neglecting their Grecian widows, whence arose the appointment of the
seven others, Hellenistic deacons. So here, Peter, having exhorted the
presbyters, or elders, not to lord it over those committed to them,
adds, Likewise ye neoters or younger, that is, subordinate ministers and
deacons, submit cheerfully to the command of the elders \[MOSHEIM\].
There is no Scripture sanction for "younger" meaning laymen in general
(as ALFORD explains): its use in this sense is probably of later date.
The "all of you" that follows, refers to the congregation generally; and
it is likely that, like Paul, Peter should notice, previous to the
general congregation, the subordinate ministers as well as the
presbyters, writing as he did to the same region (Ephesus), and to
confirm the teaching of the apostle of the Gentiles.

Yea--to sum up all my exhortations in one.

be subject--omitted in the oldest manuscripts and versions, but
TISCHENDORF quotes the Vatican manuscript for it. Then translate, "Gird
([Pe1 1:13](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#013); [Pe1
4:1](../../../bib/kjv/pe1004.htm#001)) fast on humility (lowliness of
mind) to one another." The verb is literally, "tie on with a fast knot"
\[WAHL\]. Or, "gird on humility as the slave dress (encomboma)": as the
Lord girded Himself with a towel to perform a servile office of humility
and love, washing His disciples' feet, a scene in which Peter had played
an important part, so that he would naturally have it before his mind.
Compare similarly [Pe1 5:2](../../../bib/kjv/pe1005.htm#002) with [Joh
21:15-17](../../../bib/kjv/joh021.htm#015). Clothing was the original
badge of man's sin and shame. Pride caused the need of man's clothing,
and pride still reigns in dress; the Christian therefore clothes himself
in humility ([Pe1 3:3-4](../../../bib/kjv/pe1003.htm#003)). God provides
him with the robe of Christ's righteousness, in order to receive which
man must be stripped of pride.

God resisteth the proud--Quoted, as [Jam
4:6](../../../bib/kjv/jam004.htm#006), from [Pro
3:34](../../../bib/kjv/pro003.htm#034). Peter had James before his mind,
and gives his Epistle inspired sanction. Compare [Pe1
5:9](../../../bib/kjv/pe1005.htm#009) with [Jam
4:7](../../../bib/kjv/jam004.htm#007), literally, "arrayeth Himself
against." Other sins flee from God: pride alone opposeth itself to God;
therefore, God also in turn opposes Himself to the proud \[GERHARD in
ALFORD\]. Humility is the vessel of all graces \[AUGUSTINE\].

[1 Peter 5:6](../../../bib/kjv/pe1005.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">pe1 5:6</span></span>

under the mighty hand--afflicting you ([Pe1
3:15](../../../bib/kjv/pe1003.htm#015)): "accept" His chastisements, and
turn to Him that smiteth you. He depresses the proud and exalts the
humble.

in due time--Wait humbly and patiently for His own fit time. One oldest
manuscript and Vulgate read, "In the season of visitation," namely, His
visitation in mercy.

[1 Peter 5:7](../../../bib/kjv/pe1005.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">pe1 5:7</span></span>

Casting--once for all: so the Greek aorist.

care--"anxiety? The advantage flowing from humbling ourselves under
God's hand ([Pe1 5:6](../../../bib/kjv/pe1005.htm#006)) is confident
reliance on His goodness. Exemption from care goes along with humble
submission to God.

careth for you--literally "respecting you." Care is a burden which faith
casts off the man on his God. Compare [Psa
22:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#010); [Psa
37:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#005); [Psa
55:22](../../../bib/kjv/psa055.htm#022), to which Peter alludes; [Luk
12:22](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#022), [Luk
12:37](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#037); [Phi
4:6](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#006).

careth--not so strong a Greek word as the previous Greek "anxiety."

[1 Peter 5:8](../../../bib/kjv/pe1005.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">pe1 5:8</span></span>

Peter has in mind Christ's warning to himself to watch against Satan,
from forgetting which he fell.

Be sober . . . vigilant--"Care," that is, anxiety, will intoxicate the
soul; therefore be sober, that is, self-restrained. Yet, lest this
freedom from care should lead any to false security, he adds, "Be
vigilant" against "your adversary." Let this be your "care." God
provides, therefore do not be anxious. The devil seeks, therefore watch
\[BENGEL\].

because--omitted in the oldest manuscripts The broken and disjointed
sentences are more fervid and forcible. LUCIFER OF CAGLIARI reads as
English Version.

adversary--literally, "opponent in a court of justice" ([Zac
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/zac003.htm#001)). "Satan" means opponent. "Devil,"
accuser or slanderer ([Rev 12:10](../../../bib/kjv/rev012.htm#010)).
"The enemy" ([Mat 13:39](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#039)). "A murderer
from the beginning" ([Joh 8:44](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#044)). He
counteracts the Gospel and its agents. "The tempter."

roaring lion--implying his violent and insatiable thirst for prey as a
hungry lion. Through man's sin he got God's justice on his side against
us; but Christ, our Advocate, by fulfilling all the demands of justice
for us, has made our redemption altogether consistent with justice.

walketh about-- ([Job 1:7](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#007); [Job
2:2](../../../bib/kjv/job002.htm#002)). So the children of the wicked
one cannot rest. Evil spirits are in [Pe2
2:4](../../../bib/kjv/pe2002.htm#004); [Jde
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/jde001.htm#006), said to be already in chains of
darkness and in hell. This probably means that this is their doom
finally: a doom already begun in part; though for a time they are
permitted to roam in the world (of which Satan is prince), especially in
the dark air that surrounds the earth. Hence perhaps arises the miasma
of the air at times, as physical and moral evil are closely connected.

devour--entangle in worldly "care" ([Pe1
5:7](../../../bib/kjv/pe1005.htm#007)) and other snares, so as finally
to destroy. Compare [Rev 12:15-16](../../../bib/kjv/rev012.htm#015).

[1 Peter 5:9](../../../bib/kjv/pe1005.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">pe1 5:9</span></span>

([Luk 4:13](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#013); [Eph
6:11-17](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#011); [Jam
4:7](../../../bib/kjv/jam004.htm#007).)

steadfast--Compare established in the truth," [Pe2
1:12](../../../bib/kjv/pe2001.htm#012). Satan's power exists only in
respect to the unbelieving; the faithful he cannot hurt ([Jo1
5:18](../../../bib/kjv/jo1005.htm#018)). Faith gives strength to prayer,
the great instrument against the foe ([Jam
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#006), &c.).

knowing, &c.--"encouragement not to faint in afflictions": your brethren
suffer the same; nothing beyond the common lot of Christians befalls you
([Co1 10:13](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#013)). It is a sign of God's
favor rather than displeasure, that Satan is allowed to harass you, as
he did Job. Your fellow Christians have the same battle of faith and
prayer against Satan.

are--are being accomplished according to the appointment of God.

in the world--lying in the wicked one, and therefore necessarily the
scene of "tribulation" ([Joh 16:33](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#033)).

[1 Peter 5:10](../../../bib/kjv/pe1005.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">pe1 5:10</span></span>

Comforting assurance that God will finally "perfect" His work of "grace"
in them, after they have undergone the necessary previous suffering.

But--Only do you watch and resist the foe: God will perform the rest
\[BENGEL\].

of all grace--(Compare [Pe1 4:10](../../../bib/kjv/pe1004.htm#010)). The
God to whom as its source all grace is to be referred; who in grace
completes what in grace He began. He from the first "called (so the
oldest manuscripts read for "us") unto (with a view to) glory." He will
not let His purpose fall short of completion. If He does so in
punishing, much more in grace. The three are fitly conjoined: the call,
the glory to which we are called, and the way (suffering); the fourth is
the ground of the calling, namely, the grace of God in Christ.

by--Greek, "in." Christ is He in virtue of whom, and in union with whom,
believers are called to glory. The opposite is "in the world" ([Pe1
5:9](../../../bib/kjv/pe1005.htm#009); [Joh
16:33](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#033)).

after that ye have suffered--Join to "called you": suffering, as a
necessary preliminary to glory, was contemplated in God's calling.

a while--short and inconsiderable, as compared with the glory.

perfect, &c.--The two oldest manuscripts, and Vulgate and Coptic
versions, read, "shall perfect (so that there shall be nothing defective
in you), stablish, strengthen," and omit "settle," literally, "ground,"
or "fix on a foundation." ALFORD reads it in spite of the oldest
manuscripts The authority of the latter I prefer; moreover the climax
seems to require rather a verb of completing the work of grace, than, as
the Greek means, founding it. The Greek has, "shall HIMSELF perfect
you": though you are called on to watch and resist the foe, God Himself
must really do all in and through you. The same God who begins must
Himself complete the work. The Greek for "stablish" (so as to be
"steadfast in the faith," [Pe1 5:9](../../../bib/kjv/pe1005.htm#009)) is
the same as "strengthen," [Luk 22:32](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#032).
Peter has in mind Christ's charge, "When thou art converted, strengthen
thy brethren." His exhortation accords with his name Peter, "Thou art
Peter, and upon this rock I will build My Church." "Stablish," so as not
to waver. "Strengthen" with might in the inner man by His Spirit,
against the foe.

[1 Peter 5:11](../../../bib/kjv/pe1005.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">pe1 5:11</span></span>

To him--emphatic. To Him and Him alone: not to ourselves. Compare
"Himself," see on [Pe1 5:10](../../../bib/kjv/pe1005.htm#010).

glory and--omitted in the oldest manuscripts and versions.

dominion--Greek, "the might" shown in so "perfecting," you, [Pe1
5:10](../../../bib/kjv/pe1005.htm#010).

[1 Peter 5:12](../../../bib/kjv/pe1005.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">pe1 5:12</span></span>

Silvanus--Silas, the companion of Paul and Timothy: a suitable messenger
by whom to confirm, as Peter here does, Paul's doctrine of "the true
grace of God" in the same churches (compare [Pe2
3:16](../../../bib/kjv/pe2003.htm#016)). We never meet with Silvanus as
Paul's companion after Paul's last journey to Jerusalem. His connection
with Peter was plainly subsequent to that journey.

as I suppose--Join "faithful unto you \[STEIGER\], as I suppose."
Silvanus may have stood in a close relation to the churches in Asia,
perhaps having taken the oversight of them after Paul's departure, and
had afterwards gone to Peter, by whom he is now sent back to them with
this Epistle. He did not know, by positive observation, Silvanus'
faithfulness to them; he therefore says, "faithful to you, as I
suppose," from the accounts I hear; not expressing doubt. ALFORD joins
"I have written unto you," which the Greek order favors. The seeming
uncertainty, thus, is not as to Silvanus' faithfulness, which strongly
marked by the Greek article, but as to whether he or some other would
prove to be the bearer of the letter, addressed as it was to five
provinces, all of which Silvanus might not reach: "By Silvanus, that
faithful brother, as expect, I have Written to you" \[BIRKS\].

briefly--Greek, "in few (words)," as compared with the importance of the
subject ([Heb 13:22](../../../bib/kjv/heb013.htm#022)).

exhorting--not so much formally teaching doctrines, which could not be
done in so "few words."

testifying--bearing my testimony in confirmation (so the Greek compound
verb implies) of that truth which ye have already heard from Paul and
Silas ([Jo1 2:27](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#027)).

that this--of which I have just written, and of which Paul before
testified to you (whose testimony, now that he was no longer in those
regions, was called in question probably by some; compare [Pe2
3:15-16](../../../bib/kjv/pe2003.htm#015)). [Pe2
1:12](../../../bib/kjv/pe2001.htm#012), "the present truth," namely, the
grace formerly promised by the prophets, and now manifested to you.
"Grace" is the keynote of Paul's doctrine which Peter now confirms ([Eph
2:5](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#005), [Eph
2:8](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#008)). Their sufferings for the Gospel
made them to need some attestation and confirmation of the truth, that
they should not fall back from it.

wherein ye stand--The oldest manuscripts read imperatively, "Stand ye."
Literally, "into which (having been already admitted, [Pe1
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#008), [Pe1
1:21](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#021); [Pe1
2:7-9](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#007)) stand (therein)." Peter seems
to have in mind Paul's words ([Rom
5:2](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#002); [Co1
15:1](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#001)). "The grace wherein we stand
must be true, and our standing in it true also" \[BENGEL\]. Compare in
"He began his Epistle with grace ([Pe1
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#002)), he finishes it with grace, he
has besprinkled the middle with grace, that in every part he might teach
that the Church is not saved but by grace."

[1 Peter 5:13](../../../bib/kjv/pe1005.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">pe1 5:13</span></span>

The . . . at Babylon--ALFORD, BENGEL, and others translate, "She that is
elected together with you in Babylon," namely, Peter's wife, whom he led
about with him in his missionary journeys. Compare [Pe1
3:7](../../../bib/kjv/pe1003.htm#007), "heirs together of the grace of
life." But why she should be called "elected together with you in
Babylon," as if there had been no Christian woman in Babylon besides, is
inexplicable on this view. In English Version the sense is clear: "That
portion of the whole dispersion ([Pe1
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#001), Greek), or Church of
Christianized Jews, with Gentile converts, which resides in Babylon." As
Peter and John were closely associated, Peter addresses the Church in
John's peculiar province, Asia, and closes with "your co-elect sister
Church at Babylon saluteth you"; and John similarly addresses the "elect
lady," that is, the Church in Babylon, and closes with "the children of
thine elect sister (the Asiatic Church) greet thee"; (compare
Introduction to Second John). ERASMUS explains, "Mark who is in the
place of a son to me": compare [Act
12:12](../../../bib/kjv/act012.htm#012), implying Peter's connection
with Mark; whence the mention of him in connection with the Church at
Babylon, in which he labored under Peter before he went to Alexandria is
not unnatural. PAPIAS reports from the presbyter John \[EUSEBIUS,
Ecclesiastical History, 3.39\], that Mark was interpreter of Peter,
recording in his Gospel the facts related to him by Peter. Silvanus or
Silas had been substituted for John Mark, as Paul's companion, because
of Mark's temporary unfaithfulness. But now Mark restored is associated
with Silvanus, Paul's companion, in Peter's esteem, as Mark was already
reinstated in Paul's esteem. That Mark had a spiritual connection with
the Asiatic' churches which Peter addresses, and so naturally salutes
them, appears from [Ti2 4:11](../../../bib/kjv/ti2004.htm#011); [Col
4:10](../../../bib/kjv/col004.htm#010).

Babylon--The Chaldean Babylon on the Euphrates. See Introduction, ON THE
PLACE OF WRITING this Epistle, in proof that Rome is not meant as
Papists assert; compare LIGHTFOOT sermon. How unlikely that in a
friendly salutation the enigmatical title of Rome given in prophecy
(John, [Rev 17:5](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#005)), should be used!
Babylon was the center from which the Asiatic dispersion whom Peter
addresses was derived. PHILO \[The Embassy to Gaius, 36\] and JOSEPHUS
\[Antiquities, 15.2.2; 23.12\] inform us that Babylon contained a great
many Jews in the apostolic age (whereas those at Rome were comparatively
few, about eight thousand \[JOSEPHUS, Antiquities, 17.11\]); so it would
naturally be visited by the apostle of the circumcision. It was the
headquarters of those whom he had so successfully addressed on
Pentecost, [Act 2:9](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#009), Jewish "Parthians
. . . dwellers in Mesopotamia" (the Parthians were then masters of
Mesopotamian Babylon); these he ministered to in person. His other
hearers, the Jewish "dwellers in Cappadocia, Pontus, Asia, Phrygia,
Pamphylia," he now ministers to by letter. The earliest distinct
authority for Peter's martyrdom at Rome is DIONYSIUS, bishop of Corinth,
in the latter half of the second century. The desirableness of
representing Peter and Paul, the two leading apostles, as together
founding the Church of the metropolis, seems to have originated the
tradition. CLEMENT OF ROME \[First Epistle to the Corinthians, 4.5\],
often quoted for, is really against it. He mentions Paul and Peter
together, but makes it as a distinguishing circumstance of Paul, that he
preached both in the East and West, implying that Peter never was in the
West. In [Pe2 1:14](../../../bib/kjv/pe2001.htm#014), he says, "I must
shortly put off this tabernacle," implying his martyrdom was near, yet
he makes no allusion to Rome, or any intention of his visiting it.

[1 Peter 5:14](../../../bib/kjv/pe1005.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">pe1 5:14</span></span>

kiss of charity-- [Rom 16:16](../../../bib/kjv/rom016.htm#016), "an holy
kiss": the token of love to God and the brethren. Love and holiness are
inseparable. Compare the instance, [Act
20:37](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#037).

Peace--Peter's closing salutation; as Paul's is, "Grace be with you,"
though he accompanies it with "peace be to the brethren." "Peace"
(flowing from salvation) was Christ's own salutation after the
resurrection, and from Him Peter derives it.

be with you all that are in Christ Jesus--The oldest manuscripts omit
"Jesus." In [Eph 6:24](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#024), addressed to
the same region, the same limitation of the salutation occurs, whence,
perhaps, Peter here adopts it. Contrast, "Be with you all," [Rom
16:24](../../../bib/kjv/rom016.htm#024); [Co1
16:23](../../../bib/kjv/co1016.htm#023).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 Peter Introduction](pe2000)

</div>
