<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[1 Peter Index](pe1)  
  [Previous](jam005)  [Next](pe1001) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*A Commentary, Critical, Practical, and Explanatory on the Old and New
Testaments*, by Robert Jamieson, A.R. Fausset and David Brown \[1882\]
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [1 Peter Introduction](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#001)

[1 Peter](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">pe1 0:0</span></span>

ITS GENUINENESS is attested by [Pe2
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/pe2003.htm#001). On the authority of Second Peter,
see the Introduction. Also by POLYCARP (in EUSEBIUS \[Ecclesiastical
History, 4.14\]), who, in writing to the Philippians, quotes many
passages: in the second chapter he quotes [Pe1
1:13](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#013), [Pe1
1:21](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#021); [Pe1
3:9](../../../bib/kjv/pe1003.htm#009); in the fifth chapter, [Pe1
2:11](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#011). EUSEBIUS says of PAPIAS
\[Ecclesiastical History, 3.39\] that he, too, quotes Peter's First
Epistle. IRENÃ†US \[Against Heresies, 4.9.2\] expressly mentions it; and
in \[4.16.5\], [Pe1 2:16](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#016). CLEMENT OF
ALEXANDRIA \[Miscellanies, 1.3, p. 544\], quotes [Pe1
2:11-12](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#011), [Pe1
2:15-16](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#015); and \[p. 562\], [Pe1
1:21-22](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#021); and \[4, p. 584\], [Pe1
3:14-17](../../../bib/kjv/pe1003.htm#014); and \[p. 585\], [Pe1
4:12-14](../../../bib/kjv/pe1004.htm#012). ORIGEN (in EUSEBIUS
\[Ecclesiastical History, 6.25\]) mentions this Epistle; in \[Homily 7,
on Joshua, vol. 2, p. 63\], he mentions both Epistles; and \[Commentary
on Psalm 3 and on John\], he mentions [Pe1
3:18-21](../../../bib/kjv/pe1003.htm#018). TERTULLIAN \[Antidote to the
Scorpion's Sting, 12\], quotes expressly [Pe1
2:20-21](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#020); and \[Antidote to the
Scorpion's Sting, 14\], [Pe1 2:13](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#013),
[Pe1 2:17](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#017). EUSEBIUS states it as the
opinion of those before him that this was among the universally
acknowledged Epistles. The Peschito Syriac Version contains it. The
fragment of the canon called MURATORI'S omits it. Excepting this, and
the Paulician heretics, who rejected it, all ancient testimony is on its
side. The internal evidence is equally strong. The author calls himself
the apostle Peter, [Pe1 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#001), and "a
witness of Christ's sufferings," and an "elder," [Pe1
5:1](../../../bib/kjv/pe1005.htm#001). The energy of the style
harmonizes with the warmth of Peter's character; and, as ERASMUS says,
this Epistle is full of apostolic dignity and authority and is worthy of
the leader among the apostles.

PETER'S PERSONAL HISTORY.--Simon, Or Simeon, was a native of Bethsaida
on the Sea of Galilee, son of Jonas or John. With his father and his
brother Andrew he carried on trade as a fisherman at Capernaum, his
subsequent place of abode. He was a married man, and tradition
represents his wife's name as Concordia or Perpetua. CLEMENT OF
ALEXANDRIA says that she suffered martyrdom, her husband encouraging her
to be faithful unto death, "Remember, dear, our Lord." His wife's mother
was restored from a fever by Christ. He was brought to Jesus by his
brother Andrew, who had been a disciple of John the Baptist, but was
pointed to the Saviour as "the Lamb of God" by his master ([Joh
1:29](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#029)). Jesus, on first beholding him,
gave him the name by which chiefly he is known, indicative of his
subsequent character and work in the Church, "Peter" (Greek) or "Cephas"
(Aramaic), a stone ([Mat 4:18](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#018)). He did
not join our Lord finally until a subsequent period. The leading
incidents in his apostolic life are well known: his walking on the
troubled waters to meet Jesus, but sinking through doubting ([Mat
14:30](../../../bib/kjv/mat014.htm#030)); his bold and clear
acknowledgment of the divine person and office of Jesus ([Mat
16:16](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#016); [Mar
8:29](../../../bib/kjv/mar008.htm#029); [Joh
11:27](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#027)), notwithstanding the
difficulties in the way of such belief, whence he was then also
designated as the stone, or rock ([Mat
16:18](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#018)); but his rebuke of his Lord
when announcing what was so unpalatable to carnal prejudices, Christ's
coming passion and death ([Mat 16:22](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#022));
his passing from one extreme to the opposite, in reference to Christ's
offer to wash his feet ([Joh 13:8-9](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#008));
his self-confident assertion that he would never forsake his Lord,
whatever others might do ([Mat 26:33](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#033)),
followed by his base denial of Christ thrice with curses ([Mat
26:75](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#075)); his deep penitence; Christ's
full forgiveness and prophecy of his faithfulness unto death, after he
had received from him a profession of "love" as often repeated as his
previous denial ([Joh 21:15-17](../../../bib/kjv/joh021.htm#015)). These
incidents illustrate his character as zealous, pious, and ardently
attached to the Lord, but at the same time impulsive in feeling, rather
than calmly and continuously steadfast. Prompt in action and ready to
avow his convictions boldly, he was hasty in judgment, precipitate, and
too self-confident in the assertion of his own steadfastness; the result
was that, though he abounded in animal courage, his moral courage was
too easily overcome by fear of man's opinion. A wonderful change was
wrought in him by his restoration after his fall, through the grace of
his risen Lord. His zeal and ardor became sanctified, being chastened by
a spirit of unaffected humility. His love to the Lord was, if possible,
increased, while his mode of manifesting it now was in doing and
suffering for His name, rather than in loud protestations. Thus, when
imprisoned and tried before the Sanhedrim for preaching Christ, he
boldly avowed his determination to continue to do so. He is well called
"the mouth of the apostles." His faithfulness led to his apprehension by
Herod Agrippa, with a view to his execution, from which, however, he was
delivered by the angel of the Lord.

After the ascension he took the lead in the Church; and on the descent
of the Holy Spirit at Pentecost, he exercised the designed power of "the
keys" of Christ's kingdom, by opening the door of the Church, in
preaching, for the admission of thousands of Israelites; and still more
so in opening (in obedience to a special revelation) an entrance to the
"devout" (that is, Jewish proselyte from heathendom) Gentile, Cornelius:
the forerunner of the harvest gathered in from idolatrous Gentiles at
Antioch. This explains in what sense Christ used as to him the words,
"Upon this rock I will build my Church" ([Mat
16:18](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#018)), namely, on the preaching of
Christ, the true "Rock," by connection with whom only he was given the
designation: a title shared in common on the same grounds by the rest of
the apostles, as the first founders of the Church on Christ, "the chief
corner-stone" ([Eph 2:20](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#020)). A name is
often given in Hebrew, not that the person is actually the thing itself,
but has some special relation to it; as Elijah means Mighty Jehovah, so
Simon is called Peter "the rock," not that he is so, save by connection
with Jesus, the only true Rock ([Isa
28:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa028.htm#016); [Co1
3:11](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#011)). As subsequently he identified
himself with "Satan," and is therefore called so ([Mat
16:23](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#023)), in the same way, by his clear
confession of Christ, the Rock, he became identified with Him, and is
accordingly so called ([Mat 16:18](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#018)). It
is certain that there is no instance on record of Peter's having ever
claimed or exercised supremacy; on the contrary, he is represented as
sent by the apostles at Jerusalem to confirm the Samaritans baptized by
Philip the deacon; again at the council of Jerusalem, not he, but James
the president, or leading bishop in the Church of that city, pronounced
the authoritative decision: [Act
15:19](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#019), "My sentence is," &c. A kind of
primacy, doubtless (though certainly not supremacy), was given him on
the ground of his age, and prominent earnestness, and boldness in taking
the lead on many important occasions. Hence he is called "first" in
enumerating the apostles. Hence, too, arise the phrases, "Peter and the
Eleven," "Peter and the rest of the apostles"; and Paul, in going up to
Jerusalem after his conversion, went to see Peter in particular.

Once only he again betrayed the same spirit of vacillation through fear
of man's reproach which had caused his denial of his Lord. Though at the
Jerusalem council he advocated the exemption of Gentile converts from
the ceremonial observances of the law, yet he, after having associated
in closest intercourse with the Gentiles at Antioch, withdrew from them,
through dread of the prejudices of his Jewish brethren who came from
James, and timidly dissembled his conviction of the religious equality
of Jew and Gentile; for this Paul openly withstood and rebuked him: a
plain refutation of his alleged supremacy and infallibility (except
where specially inspired, as in writing his Epistles). In all other
cases he showed himself to be, indeed, as Paul calls him, "a pillar"
([Gal 2:9](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#009)). Subsequently we find him
in "Babylon," whence he wrote this First Epistle to the Israelite
believers of the dispersion, and the Gentile Christians united in
Christ, in Pontus, Galatia, Cappadocia, Asia, and Bithynia.

JEROME \[On Illustrious Men, 1\] states that "Peter, after having been
bishop of Antioch, and after having preached to the believers of the
circumcision in Pontus, &c. \[plainly inferred from [Pe1
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#001)\], in the second year of Claudius
went to Rome to refute Simon Magus, and for twenty-five years there held
the episcopal chair, down to the last year of Nero, that is, the
fourteenth, by whom he was crucified with his head downwards, declaring
himself unworthy to be crucified as his Lord, and was buried in the
Vatican, near the triumphal way." EUSEBIUS \[Chronicles, Anno 3\], also
asserts his episcopate at Antioch; his assertion that Peter founded that
Church contradicts [Act 11:19-22](../../../bib/kjv/act011.htm#019). His
journey to Rome to oppose Simon Magus arose from JUSTIN'S story of the
statue found at Rome (really the statue of the Sabine god, Semo Sanctus,
or Hercules, mistaken as if Simon Magus were worshipped by that name,
"Simoni Deo Sancto"; found in the Tiber in 1574, or on an island in the
Tiber in 1662), combined with the account in Acts 8:9-24. The
twenty-five years' bishopric is chronologically impossible, as it would
make Peter, at the interview with Paul at Antioch, to have been then for
some years bishop of Rome! His crucifixion is certain from Christ's
prophecy, [Joh 21:18-19](../../../bib/kjv/joh021.htm#018). DIONYSIUS OF
CORINTH (in EUSEBIUS \[Ecclesiastical History, 2.25\]) asserted in an
epistle to the Romans, that Paul and Peter planted both the Roman and
Corinthian churches, and endured martyrdom in Italy at the same time. So
TERTULLIAN \[Against Marcion, 4.5, and The Prescription Against
Heretics, 36, 38\]. Also Caius, the presbyter of Rome, in EUSEBIUS
\[Ecclesiastical History, 2.25\] asserts that some memorials of their
martyrdom were to be seen at Rome on the road to Ostia. So EUSEBIUS
\[Ecclesiastical History, 2.25, and Demonstration of the Gospel,
3.116\]. So LACTANTIUS \[Of the Manner in Which the Persecutors Died,
2\]. Many of the details are palpably false; whether the whole be so or
not is dubious, considering the tendency to concentrate at Rome events
of interest \[ALFORD\]. What is certain is, that Peter was not there
before the writing of the Epistle to the Romans (A.D. 58), otherwise he
would have been mentioned in it; nor during Paul's first imprisonment at
Rome, otherwise he would have been mentioned in some one of Paul's many
other Epistles written from Rome; nor during Paul's second imprisonment,
at least when he was writing the Second Epistle to Timothy, just before
his martyrdom. He may have gone to Rome after Paul's death, and, as
common tradition represents, been imprisoned in the Mamertine dungeon,
and crucified on the Janiculum, on the eminence of St. Pietro in
Montorio, and his remains deposited under the great altar in the center
of the famous basilica of St. Peter. AMBROSE \[Epistles, 33 (Edition
Paris, 1586), p. 1022\] relates that St. Peter, not long before his
death, being overcome by the solicitations of his fellow Christians to
save himself, was fleeing from Rome when he was met by our Lord, and on
asking, "Lord, whither goest Thou?" received the answer, "I go to be
crucified afresh." On this he returned and joyfully went to martyrdom.
The church called "Domine quo vadis" on the Appian Way, commemorates the
legend. It is not unlikely that the whole tradition is built on the
connection which existed between Paul and Peter. As Paul, "the apostle
of the uncircumcision," wrote Epistles to Galatia, Ephesus, and Colosse,
and to Philemon at Colosse, making the Gentile Christians the persons
prominently addressed, and the Jewish Christians subordinately so; so,
vice versa, Peter, "the apostle of the circumcision," addressed the same
churches, the Jewish Christians in them primarily, and the Gentile
Christians also, secondarily.

TO WHOM HE ADDRESSES THIS EPISTLE.--The heading, [Pe1
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#001), "to the elect strangers
(spiritually pilgrims) of the dispersion" (Greek), clearly marks the
Christians of the Jewish dispersion as prominently addressed, but still
including also Gentile Christians as grafted into the Christian Jewish
stock by adoption and faith, and so being part of the true Israel. [Pe1
1:14](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#014); [Pe1
2:9-10](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#009); [Pe1
3:6](../../../bib/kjv/pe1003.htm#006); [Pe1
4:3](../../../bib/kjv/pe1004.htm#003) clearly prove this. Thus he, the
apostle of the circumcision, sought to unite in one Christ Jew and
Gentile, promoting thereby the same work and doctrine as Paul the
apostle of the uncircumcision. The provinces are named by Peter in the
heading in the order proceeding from northeast to south and west. Pontus
was the country of the Christian Jew Aquila. To Galatia Paul paid two
visits, founding and confirming churches. Crescens, his companion, went
there about the time of Paul's last imprisonment, just before his
martyrdom. Ancyra was subsequently its ecclesiastical metropolis. Men of
Cappadocia, as well as of "Pontus" and "Asia," were among the hearers of
Peter's effective sermon on the Pentecost whereon the Spirit decended on
the Church; these probably brought home to their native land the first
tidings of the Gospel. Proconsular "Asia" included Mysia, Lydia, Caria,
Phrygia, Pisidia, and Lyaconia. In Lycaonia were the churches of
Iconium, founded by Paul and Barnabas; of Lystra, Timothy's birthplace,
where Paul was stoned at the instigation of the Jews; and of Derbe, the
birthplace of Gaius, or Caius. In Pisidia was Antioch, where Paul was
the instrument of converting many, but was driven out by the Jews. In
Caria was Miletus, containing doubtless a Christian Church. In Phrygia,
Paul preached both times when visiting Galatia in its neighborhood, and
in it were the churches of Laodicea, Hierapolis, and Colosse, of which
last Church Philemon and Onesimus were members, and Archippus and
Epaphras leaders. In Lydia was the Philadelphian Church, favorably
noticed in [Rev 3:7](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#007), &c.; that of
Sardis, the capital, and of Thyatira, and of Ephesus, founded by Paul,
and a scene of the labors of Aquila and Priscilla and Apollos, and
subsequently of more than two whole years' labor of Paul again, and
subsequently censured for falling from its first love in [Rev
2:4](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#004). Smyrna of Ionia was in the same
quarter, and as one of the seven churches receives unqualified praise.
In Mysia was Pergamos. Troas, too, is known as the scene of Paul's
preaching and raising Eutychus to life ([Act
20:6-10](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#006)), and of his subsequently
staying for a time with Carpus ([Ti2
4:13](../../../bib/kjv/ti2004.htm#013)). Of "Bithynia," no Church is
expressly named in Scripture elsewhere. When Paul at an earlier period
"assayed to go into Bithynia" ([Act
16:7](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#007)), the Spirit suffered him not.
But afterwards, we infer from [Pe1
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#001), the Spirit did impart the Gospel
to that country, possibly by Peter's ministry, In government, these
several churches, it appears from this Epistle ([Pe1
5:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/pe1005.htm#001), "Feed," &c.), were much in the
same states as when Paul addressed the Ephesian "elders" at Miletus
([Act 20:17](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#017), [Act
20:28](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#028), "feed") in very similar
language; elders or presbyter-bishops ruled, while the apostles
exercised the general superintendence. They were exposed to
persecutions, though apparently not systematic, but rather annoyances
and reproach arising from their not joining their heathen neighbors in
riotous living, into which, however, some of them were in danger of
falling. The evils which existed among themselves, and which are
therefore reproved, were ambition and lucre-seeking on the part of the
presbyters ([Pe1 5:2-3](../../../bib/kjv/pe1005.htm#002)), evil thoughts
and words among the members in general, and a want of sympathy and
generosity towards one another.

HIS OBJECT seems to be, by the prospect of their heavenly portion and by
Christ's example, to afford consolation to the persecuted, and prepare
them for a greater approaching ordeal, and to exhort all, husbands,
wives, servants, presbyters, and people, to a due discharge of relative
duties, so as to give no handle to the enemy to reproach Christianity,
but rather to win them to it, and so to establish them in "the true
grace of God wherein they stand" ([Pe1
5:12](../../../bib/kjv/pe1005.htm#012)). However, see on [Pe1
5:12](../../../bib/kjv/pe1005.htm#012), on the oldest reading. ALFORD
rightly argues that "exhorting and testifying" there, refer to Peter's
exhortations throughout the Epistle grounded on testimony which he bears
to the Gospel truth, already well known to his readers by the teaching
of Paul in those churches. They were already introduced "into" (so the
Greek, [Pe1 5:12](../../../bib/kjv/pe1005.htm#012)) this grace of God as
their safe standing-ground. Compare [Co1
15:1](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#001), "I declare unto you the Gospel
wherein ye stand." Therefore he does not, in this Epistle, set forth a
complete statement of this Gospel doctrine of grace, but falls back on
it as already known. Compare [Pe1 1:8](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#008),
[Pe1 1:18](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#018), "ye know"; [Pe1
3:15](../../../bib/kjv/pe1003.htm#015); [Pe2
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/pe2003.htm#001). Not that Peter servilely copies
the style and mode of teaching of Paul, but as an independent witness in
his own style attests the same truths. We may divide the Epistle into:
(I) The inscription ([Pe1 1:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#001)). (II)
The stirring-up of a pure feeling in believers as born again of God. By
the motive of hope to which God has regenerated us ([Pe1
1:3-12](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#003)); bringing forth the fruit of
faith, considering the costly price paid for our redemption from sin
([Pe1 1:14-21](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#014)). Being purified by the
Spirit unto love of the brethren as begotten of God's eternal word, as
spiritual priest-kings, to whom alone Christ is precious ([Pe1
1:22](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#022); [Pe1
2:10](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#010)); after Christ's example in
suffering, maintaining a good conversation in every relation ([Pe1
2:10](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#010); [Pe1
3:14](../../../bib/kjv/pe1003.htm#014)), and a good profession of faith
as having in view Christ's once-offered sacrifice, and His future coming
to judgment ([Pe1 3:15](../../../bib/kjv/pe1003.htm#015); [Pe1
4:11](../../../bib/kjv/pe1004.htm#011)); and exhibiting patience in
adversity, as looking for future glorification with Christ, (1) in
general as Christians, [Pe1 4:12-19](../../../bib/kjv/pe1004.htm#012);
(2) each in his own sphere, [Pe1
5:1-11](../../../bib/kjv/pe1005.htm#001). "The title "Beloved" marks the
separation of the second part from the first, [Pe1
2:11](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#011); and of the third part from the
second, [Pe1 4:12](../../../bib/kjv/pe1004.htm#012)" \[BENGEL\]. (III).
The conclusion.

TIME AND PLACE OF WRITING.--It was plainly before the open and
systematic persecution of the later years of Nero had begun. That this
Epistle was written after Paul's Epistles, even those written during his
imprisonment at Rome, ending in A.D. 63, appears from the acquaintance
which Peter in this Epistle shows he has with them. Compare [Pe1
2:13](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#013) with [Ti1
2:2-4](../../../bib/kjv/ti1002.htm#002); [Pe1
2:18](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#018) with [Eph
6:5](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#005); [Pe1
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#002) with [Eph
1:4-7](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#004); [Pe1
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#003) with [Eph
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#003); [Pe1
1:14](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#014) with [Rom
12:2](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#002); [Pe1
2:6-10](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#006) with [Rom
9:32-33](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#032); [Pe1
2:13](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#013) with [Rom
13:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/rom013.htm#001); [Pe1
2:16](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#016) with [Gal
5:13](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#013); [Pe1
2:18](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#018) with [Eph
6:5](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#005); [Pe1
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/pe1003.htm#001) with [Eph
5:22](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#022); [Pe1
3:9](../../../bib/kjv/pe1003.htm#009) with [Rom
12:17](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#017); [Pe1
4:9](../../../bib/kjv/pe1004.htm#009) with [Phi
2:14](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#014); [Rom
12:13](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#013) and [Heb
13:2](../../../bib/kjv/heb013.htm#002); [Pe1
4:10](../../../bib/kjv/pe1004.htm#010) with [Rom
12:6-8](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#006); [Pe1
5:1](../../../bib/kjv/pe1005.htm#001) with [Rom
8:18](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#018); [Pe1
5:5](../../../bib/kjv/pe1005.htm#005) with [Eph
5:21](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#021); [Phi
2:3](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#003), [Phi
2:5-8](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#005); [Pe1
5:8](../../../bib/kjv/pe1005.htm#008) with [Th1
5:6](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#006); [Pe1
5:14](../../../bib/kjv/pe1005.htm#014) with [Co1
16:20](../../../bib/kjv/co1016.htm#020). Moreover, in [Pe1
5:13](../../../bib/kjv/pe1005.htm#013), Mark is mentioned as with Peter
in Babylon. This must have been after [Col
4:10](../../../bib/kjv/col004.htm#010) (A.D. 61-63), when Mark was with
Paul at Rome, but intending to go to Asia Minor. Again, in [Ti2
4:11](../../../bib/kjv/ti2004.htm#011) (A.D. 67 or 68), Mark was in or
near Ephesus, in Asia Minor, and Timothy is told to bring him to Rome.
So that it is likely it was after this, namely, after Paul's martyrdom,
that Mark joined Peter, and consequently that this Epistle was written.
It is not likely that Peter would have entrenched on Paul's field of
labor, the churches of Asia Minor, during Paul's lifetime. The death of
the apostle of the uncircumcision, and the consequent need of someone to
follow up his teachings, probably gave occasion to the testimony given
by Peter to the same churches, collectively addressed, in behalf of the
same truth. The relation in which the Pauline Gentile churches stood
towards the apostles at Jerusalem favors this view. Even the Gentile
Christians would naturally look to the spiritual fathers of the Church
at Jerusalem, the center whence the Gospel had emanated to them, for
counsel wherewith to meet the pretensions of Judaizing Christians and
heretics; and Peter, always prominent among the apostles in Jerusalem,
would even when elsewhere feel a deep interest in them, especially when
they were by death bereft of Paul's guidance. BIRKS \[HorÃ&brvbr;
EvangelicÃ&brvbr;\] suggests that false teachers may have appealed from
Paul's doctrine to that of James and Peter. Peter then would naturally
write to confirm the doctrines of grace and tacitly show there was no
difference between his teaching and Paul's. BIRKS prefers dating the
Epistle A.D. 58, after Paul's second visit to Galatia, when Silvanus was
with him, and so could not have been with Peter (A.D. 54), and before
his imprisonment at Rome, when Mark was with him, and so could not have
been with Peter (A.D. 62); perhaps when Paul was detained at
CÃ&brvbr;sarea, and so debarred from personal intercourse with those
churches. I prefer the view previously stated. This sets aside the
tradition that Paul and Peter suffered martyrdom together at Rome.
ORIGEN'S and EUSEBIUS' statement that Peter visited the churches of Asia
in person seems very probable.

The PLACE OF WRITING was doubtless Babylon on the Euphrates ([Pe1
5:13](../../../bib/kjv/pe1005.htm#013)). It is most improbable that in
the midst of writing matter-of-fact communications and salutations in a
remarkably plain Epistle, the symbolical language of prophecy (namely,
"Babylon" for Rome) should be used. JOSEPHUS \[Antiquities, 15.2.2;
3.1\] states that there was a great multitude of Jews in the Chaldean
Babylon; it is therefore likely that "the apostle of the circumcision"
([Gal 2:7-8](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#007)) would at some time or
other visit them. Some have maintained that the Babylon meant was in
Egypt because Mark preached in and around Alexandria after Peter's
death, and therefore it is likely he did so along with that apostle in
the same region previously. But no mention elsewhere in Scripture is
made of this Egyptian Babylon, but only of the Chaldean one. And though
towards the close of Caligula's reign a persecution drove the Jews
thence to Seleucia, and a plague five years after still further thinned
their numbers, yet this does not preclude their return and
multiplication during the twenty years that elapsed between the plague
and the writing of the Epistle. Moreover, the order in which the
countries are enumerated, from northeast to south and west, is such as
would be adopted by one writing from the Oriental Babylon on the
Euphrates, not from Egypt or Rome. Indeed, COSMAS INDICOPLEUSTES, in the
sixth century, understood the Babylon meant to be outside the Roman
empire. Silvanus, Paul's companion, became subsequently Peter's, and was
the carrier of this Epistle.

STYLE.--Fervor and practical truth, rather than logical reasoning, are
the characteristics, of this Epistle, as they were of its energetic,
warm-hearted writer. His familiarity with Paul's Epistles shown in the
language accords with what we should expect from the fact of Paul's
having "communicated the Gospel which he preached among the Gentiles"
(as revealed specially to him) to Peter among others "of reputation"
([Gal 2:2](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#002)). Individualities occur,
such as baptism, "the answer of a good conscience toward God" ([Pe1
3:21](../../../bib/kjv/pe1003.htm#021)); "consciousness of God" (Greek),
[Pe1 2:19](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#019), as a motive for enduring
sufferings; "living hope" ([Pe1 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#003));
"an inheritance incorruptible, undefiled, and that fadeth not away"
([Pe1 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#004)); "kiss of charity" ([Pe1
5:14](../../../bib/kjv/pe1005.htm#014)). Christ is viewed less in
relation to His past sufferings than as at present exalted and hereafter
to be manifested in all His majesty. Glory and hope are prominent
features in this Epistle ([Pe1 1:8](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#008)),
so much so that WEISS entitles him "the apostle of hope." The
realization of future bliss as near causes him to regard believers as
but "strangers" and "sojourners" here. Chastened fervor, deep humility,
and ardent love appear, just as we should expect from one who had been
so graciously restored after his grievous fall. "Being converted," he
truly does "strengthen his brethren." His fervor shows itself in often
repeating the same thought in similar words.

In some passages he shows familiarity with the Epistle of James, the
apostle of special weight with the Jewish legalizing party, whose
inspiration he thus confirms (compare [Pe1
1:6-7](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#006) with [Jam
1:2-3](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#002); [Pe1
1:24](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#024) with [Jam
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#010); [Pe1
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#001) with [Jam
1:21](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#021); [Pe1
4:8](../../../bib/kjv/pe1004.htm#008) with [Jam
5:20](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#020), both quoting [Pro
10:12](../../../bib/kjv/pro010.htm#012); [Pro
5:5](../../../bib/kjv/pro005.htm#005) with [Jam
4:6](../../../bib/kjv/jam004.htm#006), both quoting [Pro
3:34](../../../bib/kjv/pro003.htm#034)). In most of these cases Old
Testament quotations are the common ground of both. "Strong
susceptibility to outward impressions, liveliness of feeling, dexterity
in handling subjects, dispose natures like that of Peter to repeat
afresh the thoughts of others" \[STEIGER\].

The diction of this Epistle and of his speeches in Acts is very similar:
an undesigned coincidence, and so a mark of genuineness (compare [Pe1
2:7](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#007) with [Act
4:11](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#011); [Pe1
1:12](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#012) with [Act
5:32](../../../bib/kjv/act005.htm#032); [Pe1
2:24](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#024) with [Act
5:30](../../../bib/kjv/act005.htm#030); [Act
10:39](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#039); [Pe1
5:1](../../../bib/kjv/pe1005.htm#001) with [Act
2:32](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#032); [Act
3:15](../../../bib/kjv/act003.htm#015); [Pe1
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#010) with [Act
3:18](../../../bib/kjv/act003.htm#018); [Act
10:43](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#043); [Pe1
1:21](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#021) with [Act
3:15](../../../bib/kjv/act003.htm#015); [Act
10:40](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#040); [Pe1
4:5](../../../bib/kjv/pe1004.htm#005) with [Act
10:42](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#042); [Pe1
2:24](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#024) with [Act
3:19](../../../bib/kjv/act003.htm#019), [Act
3:26](../../../bib/kjv/act003.htm#026)).

There is, too, a recurrence to the language of the Lord at the last
interview after His resurrection, recorded in [Joh
21:15-23](../../../bib/kjv/joh021.htm#015). Compare "the Shepherd . . .
of . . . souls," [Pe1 2:25](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#025); "Feed the
flock of God," "the chief Shepherd," [Pe1
5:2](../../../bib/kjv/pe1005.htm#002), [Pe1
5:4](../../../bib/kjv/pe1005.htm#004), with [Joh
21:15-17](../../../bib/kjv/joh021.htm#015); "Feed My lambs . . . sheep";
also "Whom . . . ye love," [Pe1 1:8](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#008);
[Pe1 2:7](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#007), with [Joh
21:15-17](../../../bib/kjv/joh021.htm#015); "lovest thou Me?" and [Pe2
1:14](../../../bib/kjv/pe2001.htm#014), with [Joh
21:18-19](../../../bib/kjv/joh021.htm#018). WIESINGER well says, "He who
in loving impatience cast himself into the sea to meet the Lord, is also
the man who most earnestly testifies to the hope of His return; he who
dated his own faith from the sufferings of his Master, is never weary in
holding up the suffering form of the Lord before his readers to comfort
and stimulate them; he before whom the death of a martyr is in assured
expectation, is the man who, in the greatest variety of aspects, sets
forth the duty, as well as the consolation, of suffering for Christ; as
a rock of the Church he grounds his readers against the storm of present
tribulation on the true Rock of ages."

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Peter Chapter 1](pe1001)

</div>
