<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Philemon Index](plm)  
  [Previous](plm000)  [Next](heb000) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*A Commentary, Critical, Practical, and Explanatory on the Old and New
Testaments*, by Robert Jamieson, A.R. Fausset and David Brown \[1882\]
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Philemon Chapter 1](../../../bib/kjv/plm001.htm#001)

[Philemon 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/plm001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">plm 1:1</span></span>

ADDRESS. THANKSGIVING FOR PHILEMON'S LOVE AND FAITH. INTERCESSION FOR
ONESIMUS. CONCLUDING REQUEST AND SALUTATIONS. (Phm. 1:1-25)

prisoner of Jesus Christ--one whom Christ's cause has made a prisoner
(compare "in the bonds of the Gospel," ([Plm
1:13](../../../bib/kjv/plm001.htm#013)). He does not call himself, as in
other Epistles, "Paul an apostle," as he is writing familiarly, not
authoritatively.

our . . . fellow labourer--in building up the Church at Colosse, while
we were at Ephesus. See my Introduction to Colossians.

[Philemon 1:2](../../../bib/kjv/plm001.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">plm 1:2</span></span>

Apphia--the Latin, "Appia"; either the wife or some close relative of
Philemon. She and Archippus, if they had not belonged to his family,
would not have been included with Philemon in the address of a letter on
a domestic matter.

Archippus--a minister of the Colossian Church ([Col
4:17](../../../bib/kjv/col004.htm#017)).

fellow soldier-- ([Ti2 2:3](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#003)).

church in thy house--In the absence of a regular church building, the
houses of particular saints were used for that purpose. Observe Paul's
tact in associating with Philemon those associated by kindred or
Christian brotherhood with his house, and not going beyond it.

[Philemon 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/plm001.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">plm 1:4</span></span>

always--joined by ALFORD with, "I thank my God."

[Philemon 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/plm001.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">plm 1:5</span></span>

Hearing--the ground of his thanksgiving. It is a delicate mark of
authenticity, that he says "hearing" as to churches and persons whom he
had not seen or then visited. Now Colosse, Philemon's place of
residence, he had never yet seen. Yet [Plm
1:19](../../../bib/kjv/plm001.htm#019) here implies that Philemon was
his convert. Philemon, doubtless, was converted at Ephesus, or in some
other place where he met Paul.

love and faith--The theological order is first faith then love, the
fruit of faith. But he purposely puts Philemon's love in the first
place, as it is to an act of love that he is exhorting him.

toward . . . toward--different Greek words: "towards" . . . "unto."
Towards implies simply direction; unto, to the advantage of.

[Philemon 1:6](../../../bib/kjv/plm001.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">plm 1:6</span></span>

That--The aim of my thanksgiving and prayers for thee is, in order that
the, &c.

the communication of thy faith--the imparting of it and its fruits
(namely, acts of love and beneficence: as [Heb
13:16](../../../bib/kjv/heb013.htm#016), "to communicate," that is, to
impart a share) to others; or, the liberality to others flowing from thy
faith (so the Greek is translated, "liberal distribution," [Co2
9:13](../../../bib/kjv/co2009.htm#013)).

effectual by--Greek, "in"; the element in which his liberality had
place, that is, may be proved by acts in, &c.

acknowledging--Greek, "the thorough knowledge," that is, the
experimental or practical recognition.

of every good thing which is in you--The oldest manuscripts read, "which
is in US," that is, the practical recognition of every grace which is in
us Christians, in so far as we realize the Christian character. In
short, that thy faith may by acts be proved to be "a faith which worketh
by love."

in Christ Jesus--rather as Greek, "unto Christ Jesus," that is, to the
glory of Christ Jesus. Two of the oldest manuscripts omit "Jesus." This
verse answers to [Plm 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/plm001.htm#005), "thy love
and faith toward all saints"; Paul never ceases to mention him in his
prayers, in order that his faith may still further show its power in his
relation to others, by exhibiting every grace which is in Christians to
the glory of Christ. Thus he paves the way for the request in behalf of
Onesimus.

[Philemon 1:7](../../../bib/kjv/plm001.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">plm 1:7</span></span>

For--a reason for the prayer, [Plm
1:4-6](../../../bib/kjv/plm001.htm#004).

we have--Greek, "we had."

joy and consolation--joined in [Co2
7:4](../../../bib/kjv/co2007.htm#004).

saints are refreshed by thee--His house was open to them.

brother--put last, to conciliate his favorable attention to the request
which follows.

[Philemon 1:8](../../../bib/kjv/plm001.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">plm 1:8</span></span>

Wherefore--Because of my love to thee, I prefer to "beseech," rather
than "enjoin," or authoritatively command.

I might . . . enjoin--in virtue of the obligation to obedience which
Philemon lay under to Paul, as having been converted through his
instrumentality.

in Christ--the element in which his boldness has place.

[Philemon 1:9](../../../bib/kjv/plm001.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">plm 1:9</span></span>

for love's sake--mine to thee, and (what ought to be) thine to Onesimus.
Or, that Christian love of which thou showest so bright an example ([Plm
1:7](../../../bib/kjv/plm001.htm#007)).

being such an one--Explain, Being such a one as thou knowest me to be,
namely,

Paul--the founder of so many churches, and an apostle of Christ, and thy
father in the faith.

the aged--a circumstance calculated to secure thy respect for anything I
request.

and now also a prisoner of Jesus Christ--the strongest claim I have on
thy regard: if for no other reason, at least in consideration of this,
through commiseration gratify me.

[Philemon 1:10](../../../bib/kjv/plm001.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">plm 1:10</span></span>

I beseech thee--emphatically repeated from [Plm
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/plm001.htm#009). In the Greek, the name "Onesimus"
is skilfully put last, he puts first a favorable description of him
before he mentions the name that had fallen into so bad repute with
Philemon. "I beseech thee for my son, whom I have begotten in my bonds,
Onesimus." Scripture does not sanction slavery, but at the same time
does not begin a political crusade against it. It sets forth principles
of love to our fellow men which were sure (as they have done) in due
time to undermine and overthrow it, without violently convulsing the
then existing political fabric, by stirring up slaves against their
masters.

[Philemon 1:11](../../../bib/kjv/plm001.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">plm 1:11</span></span>

Which . . . was . . . unprofitable--belying his name Onesimus, which
means "profitable." Not only was he "unprofitable," but positively
injurious, having "wronged" his master. Paul uses a mild expression.

now profitable--Without godliness a man has no station. Profitable in
spiritual, as well as in temporal things.

[Philemon 1:12](../../../bib/kjv/plm001.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">plm 1:12</span></span>

mine own bowels--as dear to me as my own heart \[ALFORD\]. Compare [Plm
1:17](../../../bib/kjv/plm001.htm#017), "as myself." The object of my
most intense affection as that of a parent for a child.

[Philemon 1:13](../../../bib/kjv/plm001.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">plm 1:13</span></span>

I--emphatical. I for my part. Since I had such implicit trust in him as
to desire to keep him with me for his services, thou mayest.

I would have retained--different Greek from the "would," [Plm
1:14](../../../bib/kjv/plm001.htm#014), "I could have wished," "I was
minded" here; but "I was not willing," [Plm
1:14](../../../bib/kjv/plm001.htm#014).

in thy stead--that he might supply in your place all the services to me
which you, if you were here, would render in virtue of the love you bear
to me ([Plm 1:19](../../../bib/kjv/plm001.htm#019)).

bonds of the gospel--my bonds endured for the Gospel's sake ([Plm
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/plm001.htm#009)).

[Philemon 1:14](../../../bib/kjv/plm001.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">plm 1:14</span></span>

without thy mind--that is, consent.

should not be as--"should not appear as a matter of necessity, but of
free will." Had Paul kept Onesimus, however willing to gratify Paul
Philemon might be, he would have no opportunity given him of showing he
was so, his leave not having been asked.

[Philemon 1:15](../../../bib/kjv/plm001.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">plm 1:15</span></span>

perhaps--speaking in human fashion, yet as one believing that God's
Providence probably (for we cannot dogmatically define the hidden
purposes of God in providence) overruled the past evil to ultimately
greater good to him. This thought would soften Philemon's indignation at
Onesimus' past offense. So Joseph in [Gen
45:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen045.htm#005).

departed--literally, "was parted from thee"; a softening term for "ran
away," to mitigate Philemon's wrath.

receive him--Greek, "have him for thyself in full possession" (see on
[Phi 4:18](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#018)). The same Greek as in [Mat
6:2](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#002).

for ever--in this life and in that to come (compare [Exo
21:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo021.htm#006)). Onesimus' time of absence,
however long, was but a short "hour" (so Greek) compared with the
everlasting devotion henceforth binding him to his master.

[Philemon 1:16](../../../bib/kjv/plm001.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">plm 1:16</span></span>

No longer as a mere servant or slave (though still he is that), but
above a servant, so that thou shalt derive from him not merely the
services of a slave, but higher benefits: a servant "in the flesh," he
is a brother "in the Lord."

beloved, specially to me--who am his spiritual father, and who have
experienced his faithful attentions. Lest Philemon should dislike
Onesimus being called "brother," Paul first recognizes him as a brother,
being the spiritual son of the same God.

much more unto thee--to whom he stands in so much nearer and more
lasting relation.

[Philemon 1:17](../../../bib/kjv/plm001.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">plm 1:17</span></span>

a partner--in the Christian fellowship of faith, hope, and love.

receive him as myself--resuming "receive him that is mine own bowels."

[Philemon 1:18](../../../bib/kjv/plm001.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">plm 1:18</span></span>

Greek, "But it (thou art not inclined to 'receive him' because) he hath
wronged thee"; a milder term than "robbed thee." Onesimus seems to have
confessed some such act to Paul.

put that on mine account--I am ready to make good the loss to thee if
required. The latter parts of [Plm
1:19](../../../bib/kjv/plm001.htm#019), [Plm
1:21](../../../bib/kjv/plm001.htm#021), imply that he did not expect
Philemon would probably demand it.

[Philemon 1:19](../../../bib/kjv/plm001.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">plm 1:19</span></span>

with mine own hand--not employing an amanuensis, as in other Epistles: a
special compliment to Philemon which he ought to show his appreciation
of by granting Paul's request. Contrast [Col
4:18](../../../bib/kjv/col004.htm#018), which shows that the Epistle to
the Colossian Church, accompanying this Epistle, had only its closing
"salutation" written by Paul's own hand.

albeit, &c.--literally, "that I may not say . . . not to say," &c.

thou owest . . . even thine own self--not merely thy possessions. For to
my instrumentality thou owest thy salvation. So the debt which "he oweth
thee" being transferred upon me (I making myself responsible for it) is
cancelled.

[Philemon 1:20](../../../bib/kjv/plm001.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">plm 1:20</span></span>

let me--"me" is emphatic: "Let me have profit (so Greek 'for joy,'
onainen, referring to the name Onesimus, 'profitable') from thee, as
thou shouldst have had from Onesimus"; for "thou owest thine ownself to
me."

in the Lord--not in worldly gain, but in thine increase in the graces of
the Lord's Spirit \[ALFORD\].

my bowels--my heart. Gratify my feelings by granting this request.

in the Lord--The oldest manuscripts read, "in Christ," the element or
sphere in which this act of Christian love naturally ought to have
place.

[Philemon 1:21](../../../bib/kjv/plm001.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">plm 1:21</span></span>

Having confidence in thy obedience--to my apostolic authority, if I were
to "enjoin" it ([Plm 1:8](../../../bib/kjv/plm001.htm#008)), which I do
not, preferring to beseech thee for it as a favor ([Plm
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/plm001.htm#009)).

thou will also do more--towards Onesimus: hinting at his possible
manumission by Philemon, besides, being kindly received.

[Philemon 1:22](../../../bib/kjv/plm001.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">plm 1:22</span></span>

This prospect of Paul's visiting Colosse would tend to secure a kindly
reception for Onesimus, as Paul would know in person how he had been
treated.

your . . . you--referring to Philemon, Apphia, Archippus, and the Church
in Philemon's house. The same expectation is expressed by him, [Phi
2:23-24](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#023), written in the same
imprisonment.

[Philemon 1:23](../../../bib/kjv/plm001.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">plm 1:23</span></span>

The same persons send salutations in the accompanying Epistle, except
that "Jesus Justus" is not mentioned here.

Epaphras, my fellow prisoner--He had been sent by the Colossian Church
to inquire after, and minister to, Paul, and possibly was cast into
prison by the Roman authorities on suspicion. However, he is not
mentioned as a prisoner in [Col 4:12](../../../bib/kjv/col004.htm#012),
so that "fellow prisoner" here may mean merely one who was a faithful
companion to Paul in his imprisonment, and by his society put himself in
the position of a prisoner. So also "Aristarchus, my fellow prisoner,"
[Col 4:10](../../../bib/kjv/col004.htm#010), may mean. Benson
conjectures the meaning to be that on some former occasion these two
were Paul's "fellow prisoners," not at the time.

[Philemon 1:25](../../../bib/kjv/plm001.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">plm 1:25</span></span>

be with your spirit-- ([Gal 6:18](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#018); [Ti2
4:22](../../../bib/kjv/ti2004.htm#022)).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Hebrews Introduction](heb000)

</div>
