<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Philemon Index](plm)  
  [Previous](tit003)  [Next](plm001) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*A Commentary, Critical, Practical, and Explanatory on the Old and New
Testaments*, by Robert Jamieson, A.R. Fausset and David Brown \[1882\]
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Philemon Introduction](../../../bib/kjv/plm001.htm#001)

[Philemon](../../../bib/kjv/plm001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">plm 0:0</span></span>

The testimonies to its authenticity are--ORIGEN \[Homily 19, on
Jeremiah, vol. 1., p. 185, Edition Huetius\], cites it as the letter of
Paul to Philemon concerning Onesimus; TERTULLIAN \[Against Marcion,
5.21\]: "The brevity of this Epistle is the sole cause of its escaping
the falsifying hands of Marcion." EUSEBIUS \[Ecclesiastical History,
3.25\], mentions it among "the universally acknowledged Epistles of the
canon"; JEROME \[Commentary on Philemon, vol. iv., p. 442\], argues for
it against those who objected to its canonicity on the ground of its
subject being beneath an apostle to write about. IGNATIUS \[Epistle to
the Ephesians, 2; Epistle to the Magnesians, 12\], seems to allude to
[Plm 1:20](../../../bib/kjv/plm001.htm#020). Compare Epistle to Polycarp
\[1 and 6\]. Its brevity is the cause of its not being often quoted by
the Fathers. PALEY \[HorÃ&brvbr; PaulinÃ&brvbr;\], has shown striking
proofs of its authenticity in the undesigned coincidences between it and
the Epistle to the Colossians.

PLACE AND TIME OF WRITING.--This Epistle is closely linked with the
Epistle to the Colossians. Both were carried by the same bearer,
Onesimus (with whom, however, Tychicus is joined in the Epistle to the
Colossians), [Col 4:9](../../../bib/kjv/col004.htm#009). The persons
sending salutations are the same, except one, Jesus called Justus ([Col
4:11](../../../bib/kjv/col004.htm#011)). In both alike Archippus is
addressed ([Plm 1:2](../../../bib/kjv/plm001.htm#002); [Col
4:17](../../../bib/kjv/col004.htm#017)). Paul and Timothy stand in the
headings of both. And in both Paul appears as a prisoner ([Plm
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/plm001.htm#009); [Col
4:18](../../../bib/kjv/col004.htm#018)). Hence it follows, it was
written at the same time and place as the Epistle to the Colossians
(which was about the same time as the Epistle to the Ephesians), namely,
at Rome, during Paul's first imprisonment, A.D. 61 or 62.

OBJECT.--Onesimus, of Colosse ("one of you," [Col
4:9](../../../bib/kjv/col004.htm#009)), slave of Philemon, had fled from
his master to Rome, after having probably defrauded him ([Plm
1:18](../../../bib/kjv/plm001.htm#018)). He there was converted to
Christianity by Paul, and being induced by him to return to his master,
he was furnished with this Epistle, recommending him to Philemon's
favorable reception, as being now no longer a mere servant, but also a
brother in Christ. Paul ends by requesting Philemon to prepare him a
lodging, as he trusted soon to be set free and visit Colosse. This
Epistle is addressed also to Apphia, supposed from its domestic subject
to have been Philemon's wife, and Archippus (a minister of the Colossian
Church, [Col 4:17](../../../bib/kjv/col004.htm#017)), for the same
reason, supposed to be a near relative.

Onesimus in the Apostolical Canons \[73\], is said to have been
emancipated by his master. The Apostolical Constitutions \[7.46\] state
that he was consecrated by Paul, bishop of Berea, in Macedonia, and that
he was martyred at Rome. IGNATIUS \[Epistle to the Ephesians, 1\],
speaks of him as bishop of the Ephesians.

STYLE.--It has been happily termed, from its graceful and delicate
urbanity, "the polite Epistle." Yet there is nothing of insincere
compliment, miscalled politeness by the world. It is manly and
straightforward, without misrepresentation or suppression of facts; at
the same time it is most captivatingly persuasive. ALFORD quotes
LUTHER'S eloquent description, "This Epistle showeth a right, noble,
lovely example of Christian love. Here we see how St. Paul layeth
himself out for the poor Onesimus, and with all his means pleadeth his
cause with his master, and so setteth himself as if he were Onesimus,
and had himself done wrong to Philemon. Yet all this doeth he, not with
force, as if he had right thereto, but he stripped himself of his right,
and thus enforceth Philemon to forego his right also. Even as Christ did
for us with God the Father, thus also doth St. Paul for Onesimus with
Philemon: for Christ also stripped Himself of His right, and by love and
humility enforced \[?\] the Father to lay aside His wrath and power, and
to take us to His grace for the sake of Christ, who lovingly pleadeth
our cause, and with all His heart layeth Himself out for us; for we are
all His Onesimi, to my thinking."

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Philemon Chapter 1](plm001)

</div>
