<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Revelation Index](rev)  
  [Previous](rev021) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*A Commentary, Critical, Practical, and Explanatory on the Old and New
Testaments*, by Robert Jamieson, A.R. Fausset and David Brown \[1882\]
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Revelation Chapter 22](../../../bib/kjv/rev022.htm#001)

[Revelation 22:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev022.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">rev 22:1</span></span>

THE RIVER OF LIFE: THE TREE OF LIFE: THE OTHER BLESSEDNESSES OF THE
REDEEMED. JOHN FORBIDDEN TO WORSHIP THE ANGEL. NEARNESS OF CHRIST'S
COMING TO FIX MAN'S ETERNAL STATE. TESTIMONY OF JESUS, HIS SPIRIT, AND
THE BRIDE, ANY ADDITION TO WHICH, OR SUBTRACTION FROM WHICH, SHALL BE
ETERNALLY PUNISHED. CLOSING BENEDICTION. (Rev. 22:1-21)

pure--A, B, Vulgate, and HILARY 22, omit.

water of life--infinitely superior to the typical waters in the first
Paradise ([Gen 2:10-14](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#010)); and even
superior to those figurative ones in the millennial Jerusalem ([Eze
47:1](../../../bib/kjv/eze047.htm#001), [Eze
47:12](../../../bib/kjv/eze047.htm#012); [Zac
14:8](../../../bib/kjv/zac014.htm#008)), as the matured fruit is
superior to the flower. The millennial waters represent full Gospel
grace; these waters of new Jerusalem represent Gospel glory perfected.
Their continuous flow from God, the Fountain of life, symbolizes the
uninterrupted continuance of life derived by the saints, ever fresh,
from Him: life in fulness of joy, as well as perpetual vitality. Like
pure crystal, it is free from every taint: compare [Rev
4:6](../../../bib/kjv/rev004.htm#006), "before the throne a sea of
glass, like crystal."

clear--Greek, "bright."

[Revelation 22:2](../../../bib/kjv/rev022.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">rev 22:2</span></span>

The harmonious unity of Scripture is herein exhibited. The Fathers
compared it to a ring, an unbroken circle, returning into itself.
Between the events of Genesis and those at the close of the Apocalypse,
at least six thousand or seven thousand years intervene; and between
Moses the first writer and John the last about one thousand five hundred
years. How striking it is that, as in the beginning we found Adam and
Eve, his bride, in innocence m Paradise, then tempted by the serpent,
and driven from the tree of life, and from the pleasant waters of Eden,
yet not without a promise of a Redeemer who should crush the serpent; so
at the close, the old serpent cast out for ever by the second Adam, the
Lord from heaven, who appears with His Bride, the Church, in a better
Paradise, and amidst better waters ([Rev
22:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev022.htm#001)): the tree of life also is there
with all its healing properties, not guarded with a flaming sword, but
open to all who overcome ([Rev 2:7](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#007)),
and there is no more curse.

street of it--that is, of the city.

on either side of the river--ALFORD translates, "In the midst of the
street of it (the city) and of the river, on one side and on the other"
(for the second Greek, "enteuthen," A, B, and Syriac read, ekeithen: the
sense is the same; compare Greek, [Joh
19:18](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#018)); thus the trees were on each
side in the middle of the space between the street and the river. But
from [Eze 47:7](../../../bib/kjv/eze047.htm#007), I prefer English
Version. The antitype exceeds the type: in the first Paradise was only
one tree of life; now there are "very many trees at the bank of the
river, on the one side and on the other." To make good sense, supposing
there to be but one tree, we should either, as MEDE, suppose that the
Greek for street is a plain washed on both sides by the river (as the
first Paradise was washed on one side by the Tigris, on the other by the
Euphrates), and that in the midst of the plain, which itself is in the
midst of the river's branches, stood the tree: in which case we may
translate, "In the midst of the street (plain) itself, and of the river
(having two branches flowing) on this and on that side, was there the
tree of life." Or else with DURHAM suppose, the tree was in the midst of
the river, and extending its branches to both banks. But compare [Eze
47:12](../../../bib/kjv/eze047.htm#012), the millennial type of the
final Paradise; which shows that there are several trees of the one
kind, all termed "the tree of life." Death reigns now because of sin;
even in the millennial earth sin, and therefore death, though much
limited, shall not altogether cease. But in the final and heavenly city
on earth, sin and death shall utterly cease.

yielded her fruit every month--Greek, "according to each month"; each
month had its own proper fruit, just as different seasons are now marked
by their own productions; only that then, unlike now, there shall be no
season without its fruit, and there shall be an endless variety,
answering to twelve, the number symbolical of the world-wide Church
(compare Note, see on [Rev 12:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev012.htm#001); [Rev
21:14](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#014)). ARCHBISHOP WHATLEY thinks that
the tree of life was among the trees of which Adam freely ate ([Gen
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#009), [Gen
2:16-17](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#016)), and that his continuance in
immortality was dependent on his continuing to eat of this tree; having
forfeited it, he became liable to death; but still the effects of having
eaten of it for a time showed themselves in the longevity of the
patriarchs. God could undoubtedly endue a tree with special medicinal
powers. But [Gen 3:22](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#022) seems to imply,
man had not yet taken of the tree, and that if he had, he would have
lived for ever, which in his then fallen state would have been the
greatest curse.

leaves . . . for . . . healing-- ([Eze
47:9](../../../bib/kjv/eze047.htm#009), [Eze
47:12](../../../bib/kjv/eze047.htm#012)). The leaves shall be the
health-giving preventive securing the redeemed against, not healing them
of, sicknesses, while "the fruit shall be for meat." In the millennium
described in Eze. 47:1-23 and [Rev
20:1-15](../../../bib/kjv/rev020.htm#001), the Church shall give the
Gospel-tree to the nations outside Israel and the Church, and so shall
heal their spiritual malady; but in the final and perfect new Jerusalem
here described, the state of all is eternally fixed, and no saving
process goes on any longer (compare [Rev
22:11](../../../bib/kjv/rev022.htm#011)). ALFORD utterly mistakes in
speaking of "nations outside," and "dwelling on the renewed earth,
organized under kings, and saved by the influences of the heavenly city"
(!) Compare [Rev 21:2](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#002), Rev. 21:10-27;
the "nations" mentioned ([Rev 21:24](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#024))
are those which have long before, namely, in the millennium ([Rev
11:15](../../../bib/kjv/rev011.htm#015)), become the Lord's and His
Christ's.

[Revelation 22:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev022.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">rev 22:3</span></span>

no more curse--of which the earnest shall be given in the millennium
([Zac 14:11](../../../bib/kjv/zac014.htm#011)). God can only dwell where
the curse and its cause, the cursed thing sin ([Jos
7:12](../../../bib/kjv/jos007.htm#012)), are removed. So there follows
rightly, "But the throne of God and of the Lamb (who redeemed us from
the curse, [Gal 3:10](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#010), [Gal
3:13](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#013)) shall be in it." Compare in the
millennium, [Eze 48:35](../../../bib/kjv/eze048.htm#035).

serve him--with worship ([Rev 7:15](../../../bib/kjv/rev007.htm#015)).

[Revelation 22:4](../../../bib/kjv/rev022.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">rev 22:4</span></span>

see his face--revealed in divine glory, in Christ Jesus. They shall see
and know Him with intuitive knowledge of Him, even as they are known by
Him ([Co1 13:9-12](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#009)), and face to face.
Compare [Ti1 6:16](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#016), with [Joh
14:9](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#009). God the Father can only be seen
in Christ.

in--Greek, "on their foreheads." Not only shall they personally and in
secret ([Rev 3:17](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#017)) know their sonship,
but they shall be known as sons of God to all the citizens of the new
Jerusalem, so that the free flow of mutual love among the members of
Christ's family will not be checked by suspicion as here.

[Revelation 22:5](../../../bib/kjv/rev022.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">rev 22:5</span></span>

there--so ANDREAS. But A, B, Vulgate, and Syriac read, "(there shall be
no night) any longer"; Greek, "eti," for "ekei."

they need--A, Vulgate, and Coptic read the future, "they shall not have
need." B reads, "(and there shall be) no need."

candle--Greek, "lamp." A, Vulgate, Syriac, and Coptic insert "light (of
a candle, or lamp)." B Omits it.

of the sun--so A. But B omits it.

giveth . . . light--"illumines." So Vulgate and Syriac. But A reads,
"shall give light."

them--so B and ANDREAS. But A reads, "upon them."

reign--with a glory probably transcending that of their reign in heaven
with Christ over the millennial nations in the flesh described in [Rev
20:4](../../../bib/kjv/rev020.htm#004), [Rev
20:6](../../../bib/kjv/rev020.htm#006); that reign was but for a limited
time, "a thousand years"; this final reign is "unto the ages of the
ages."

[Revelation 22:6](../../../bib/kjv/rev022.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">rev 22:6</span></span>

These sayings are true--thrice repeated ([Rev
19:9](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#009); [Rev
21:5](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#005)). For we are slow to believe that
God is as good as He is. The news seems to us, habituated as we are to
the misery of this fallen world, too good to be true \[NANGLE\]. They
are no dreams of a visionary, but the realities of God's sure word.

holy--so ANDREAS. But A, B, Vulgate, Syriac, and Coptic read, "(the Lord
God of the) spirits (of the prophets)." The Lord God who with His Spirit
inspired their spirits so as to be able to prophesy. There is but one
Spirit, but individual prophets, according to the measure given them
([Co1 12:4-11](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#004)), had their own spirits
\[BENGEL\] ([Pe1 1:11](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#011); [Pe2
1:21](../../../bib/kjv/pe2001.htm#021)).

be done--Greek, "come to pass."

[Revelation 22:7](../../../bib/kjv/rev022.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">rev 22:7</span></span>

"And" is omitted in Coptic and ANDREAS with English Version, but is
inserted by A, B, Vulgate and Syriac.

blessed-- ([Rev 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#003)).

[Revelation 22:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev022.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">rev 22:8</span></span>

Both here and in [Rev 19:9-10](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#009), the
apostle's falling at the feet of the angel is preceded by a glorious
promise to the Church, accompanied with the assurance, that "These are
the true sayings of God," and that those are "blessed" who keep them.
Rapturous emotion, gratitude, and adoration, at the prospect of the
Church's future glory transport him out of himself, so as all but to
fall into an unjustifiable act; contrast his opposite feeling at the
prospect of the Church's deep fall \[AUBERLEN\], see on [Rev
17:6](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#006); [Rev
19:9-10](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#009).

saw . . . and heard--A, B, Vulgate, and Syriac transpose these verbs.
Translate literally, "I John (was he) who heard and saw these things."
It is observable that in [Rev 19:10](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#010),
the language is, "I fell before his feet to worship him"; but here, "I
fell down to worship (God?) before the feet of the angel." It seems
unlikely that John, when once reproved, would fall into the very same
error again. BENGEL'S view, therefore, is probable; John had first
intended to worship the angel ([Rev
19:10](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#010)), but now only at his feet
intends to worship (God). The angel does not even permit this.

[Revelation 22:9](../../../bib/kjv/rev022.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">rev 22:9</span></span>

Literally, "See not"; the abruptness of the phrase marking the angel's
abhorrence of the thought of his being worshipped however indirectly.
Contrast the fallen angel's temptation to Jesus, "Fall down and worship
me" ([Mat 4:9](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#009)).

for--A, B, Vulgate, Syriac, Coptic, ANDREAS, and CYPRIAN omit "for";
which accords with the abrupt earnestness of the angel's prohibition of
an act derogatory to God.

and of--"and (the fellow servant) of thy brethren."

[Revelation 22:10](../../../bib/kjv/rev022.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">rev 22:10</span></span>

Seal not--But in [Dan 12:4](../../../bib/kjv/dan012.htm#004), [Dan
12:9](../../../bib/kjv/dan012.htm#009) (compare [Dan
8:26](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#026)), the command is, "Seal the
book," for the vision shall be "for many days." The fulfilment of
Daniel's prophecy was distant, that of John's prophecy is near. The New
Testament is the time of the end and fulfilment. The Gentile Church, for
which John wrote his Revelation, needs more to be impressed with the
shortness of the period, as it is inclined, owing to its Gentile origin,
to conform to the world and forget the coming of the Lord. The
Revelation points, on the one hand, to Christ's coming as distant, for
it shows the succession of the seven seals, trumpets, and vials; on the
other hand, it proclaims, "Behold, I come quickly." So Christ marked
many events as about to intervene before His coming, and yet He also
says "Behold, I come quickly," because our right attitude is that of
continual prayerful watching for His coming ([Mat
25:6](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#006), [Mat
25:13](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#013), [Mat
25:19](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#019); [Mar
13:32-37](../../../bib/kjv/mar013.htm#032) \[AUBERLEN\]; compare [Rev
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#003)).

[Revelation 22:11](../../../bib/kjv/rev022.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">rev 22:11</span></span>

unjust--"unrighteous"; in relation to one's fellow men; opposed to
"righteous," or "just" (as the Greek may be translated) below. More
literally, "he that doeth unjustly, let him do unjustly still."

filthy--in relation to one's own soul as unclean before God; opposed to
holy," consecrated to God as pure. A omits the clause, "He which is
filthy let him be filthy still." But B supports it. In the letter of the
Vienne and Lyons Martyrs (in EUSEBIUS) in the second century, the
reading is, "He that is lawless (Greek, 'anomos') let him be lawless;
and he that is righteous let him be righteous (literally, 'be
justified') still." No manuscript is so old. A, B, Vulgate, Syriac,
Coptic, ANDREAS, and CYPRIAN read, "let him do righteousness" ([Jo1
2:29](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#029); [Jo1
3:7](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#007)). The punishment of sin is sin,
the reward of holiness is holiness. Eternal punishment is not so much an
arbitrary law, as a result necessarily following in the very nature of
things, as the fruit results from the bud. No worse punishment can God
lay on ungodly men than to give them up to themselves. The solemn lesson
derivable from this verse is, Be converted now in the short time left
([Rev 22:10](../../../bib/kjv/rev022.htm#010), end) before "I come"
([Rev 22:7](../../../bib/kjv/rev022.htm#007), [Rev
22:12](../../../bib/kjv/rev022.htm#012)), or else you must remain
unconverted for ever; sin in the eternal world will be left to its own
natural consequences; holiness in germ will there develop itself into
perfect holiness, which is happiness.

[Revelation 22:12](../../../bib/kjv/rev022.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">rev 22:12</span></span>

And--in none of our manuscripts. But A, B, Vulgate, Syriac, Coptic, and
CYPRIAN omit it.

behold, I come quickly--(Compare [Rev
22:7](../../../bib/kjv/rev022.htm#007)).

my reward is with me-- ([Isa 40:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#010);
[Isa 62:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa062.htm#011)).

to give--Greek, "to render."

every man--Greek, "to each."

shall be--so B in MAI. But B in TISCHENDORF, and A, Syriac, read, "is."

[Revelation 22:13](../../../bib/kjv/rev022.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">rev 22:13</span></span>

I am Alpha--Greek, ". . . the Alpha and the Omega." A, B, Vulgate,
Syriac, ORIGEN, and CYPRIAN transpose thus, "the First and the Last, the
Beginning and the End." ANDREAS supports English Version. Compare with
these divine titles assumed here by the Lord Jesus, [Rev
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#008), [Rev
1:17](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#017); [Rev
21:6](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#006). At the winding up of the whole
scheme of revelation He announces Himself as the One before whom and
after whom there is no God.

[Revelation 22:14](../../../bib/kjv/rev022.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">rev 22:14</span></span>

do his commandments--so B, Syriac, Coptic, and CYPRIAN. But A, Aleph,
and Vulgate read, "(Blessed are they that) wash their robes," namely, in
the blood of the Lamb (compare [Rev
7:14](../../../bib/kjv/rev007.htm#014)). This reading takes away the
pretext for the notion of salvation by works. But even English Version
reading is quite compatible with salvation by grace; for God's first and
grand Gospel "commandment" is to believe on Jesus. Thus our "right" to
(Greek, "privilege" or "lawful authority over") the tree of life is due
not to our doings, but to what He has done for us. The right, or
privilege, is founded, not on our merits, but on God's grace.

through--Greek, "by the gates."

[Revelation 22:15](../../../bib/kjv/rev022.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">rev 22:15</span></span>

But--so Coptic. But A, B, HIPPOLYTUS, ANDREAS, and CYPRIAN omit.

dogs--Greek, "the dogs"; the impure, filthy ([Rev
22:11](../../../bib/kjv/rev022.htm#011); compare [Phi
3:2](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#002)).

maketh--including also "whosoever practiceth a lie" \[W. KELLY\].

[Revelation 22:16](../../../bib/kjv/rev022.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">rev 22:16</span></span>

mine angel--for Jesus is Lord of the angels.

unto you--ministers and people in the seven representative churches,
and, through you, to testify to Christians of all times and places.

root . . . offspring of David--appropriate title here where assuring His
Church of "the sure mercies of David," secured to Israel first, and
through Israel to the Gentiles. Root of David, as being Jehovah; the
offspring of David as man. David's Lord, yet David's son ([Mat
22:42-45](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#042)).

the morning star--that ushered in the day of grace in the beginning of
this dispensation and that shall usher in the everlasting day of glory
at its close.

[Revelation 22:17](../../../bib/kjv/rev022.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">rev 22:17</span></span>

Reply of the spiritual Church and John to Christ's words ([Rev
22:7](../../../bib/kjv/rev022.htm#007), [Rev
22:12](../../../bib/kjv/rev022.htm#012), [Rev
22:16](../../../bib/kjv/rev022.htm#016)).

the Spirit--in the churches and in the prophets.

the bride--not here called "wife," as that title applies to her only
when the full number constituting the Church shall have been completed.
The invitation, "Come," only holds good while the Church is still but an
affianced Bride, and not the actually wedded wife. However, "Come" may
rather be the prayer of the Spirit in the Church and in believers in
reply to Christ's "I come quickly," crying, Even so, "Come" ([Rev
22:7](../../../bib/kjv/rev022.htm#007), [Rev
22:12](../../../bib/kjv/rev022.htm#012)); [Rev
22:20](../../../bib/kjv/rev022.htm#020) confirms this view. The whole
question of your salvation hinges on this, that you be able to hear with
joy Christ's announcement, "I come," and to reply, "Come" \[BENGEL\].
Come to fully glorify Thy Bride.

let him that heareth--that is, let him that heareth the Spirit and Bride
saying to the Lord Jesus, "Come," join the Bride as a true believer,
become part of her, and so say with her to Jesus, "Come." On "heareth"
means "obeyeth"; for until one has obeyed the Gospel call, he cannot
pray to Jesus "Come"; so "hear" is used, [Rev
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#003); [Joh
10:16](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#016). Let him that hears and obeys
Jesus' voice ([Rev 22:16](../../../bib/kjv/rev022.htm#016); [Rev
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#003)) join in praying "Come." Compare
[Rev 6:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev006.htm#001), [Rev
6:10](../../../bib/kjv/rev006.htm#010); see on [Rev
6:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev006.htm#001). In the other view, which makes
"Come" an invitation to sinners, this clause urges those who themselves
hear savingly the invitation to address the same to others, as did
Andrew and Philip after they themselves had heard and obeyed Jesus'
invitation, "Come."

let him that is athirst come--As the Bride, the Church, prays to Jesus,
"Come," so she urges all whosoever thirst for participation in the full
manifestation of redemption-glory at His coming to us, to COME in the
meantime and drink of the living waters, which are the earnest of "the
water of life pure as crystal . . . out of the throne of God of the
Lamb" ([Rev 22:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev022.htm#001)) in the regenerated
heaven and earth.

And--so Syriac. But A, B, Vulgate, and Coptic omit "and."

whosoever will--that is, is willing and desirous. There is a descending
climax; Let him that heareth effectually and savingly Christ's voice,
pray individually, as the Bride, the Church, does collectively, "Come,
Lord Jesus" ([Rev 22:20](../../../bib/kjv/rev022.htm#020)). Let him who,
though not yet having actually heard unto salvation, and so not yet able
to join in the prayer, "Lord Jesus, come, "still thirsts for it, come to
Christ. Whosoever is even willing, though his desires do not yet amount
to positive thirsting, let him take the water of life freely, that is,
gratuitously.

[Revelation 22:18](../../../bib/kjv/rev022.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">rev 22:18</span></span>

For I testify--None of our manuscripts have this. A, B, Vulgate, and
ANDREAS read, "I" emphatic in the Greek. "I testify."

unto these things--A, B, and ANDREAS read, "unto them."

add . . . add--just retribution in kind.

[Revelation 22:19](../../../bib/kjv/rev022.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">rev 22:19</span></span>

book--None of our manuscripts read this. A, B, Aleph, Vulgate, Syriac,
and Coptic read, "(take away his part, that is, portion) from the tree
of life," that is, shall deprive him of participation in the tree of
life.

and from the things--so Vulgate. But A, B, Aleph, Syriac, Coptic, and
ANDREAS omit "and"; then "which are written in this book" will refer to
"the holy city and the tree of life." As in the beginning of this book
([Rev 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#003)) a blessing was promised to
the devout, obedient student of it, so now at its close a curse is
denounced against those who add to, or take from, it.

[Revelation 22:20](../../../bib/kjv/rev022.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">rev 22:20</span></span>

Amen. Even so, come--The Song of Solomon ([Sol
8:14](../../../bib/kjv/sol008.htm#014)) closes with the same yearning
prayer for Christ's coming. A, B, and Aleph omit "Even so," Greek,
"nai": then translate for Amen, "So be it, come, Lord Jesus"; joining
the "Amen," or "So be it," not with Christ's saying (for He calls
Himself the "Amen" at the beginning of sentences, rather than puts it as
a confirmation at the end), but with John's reply. Christ's "I come,"
and John's "Come," are almost coincident in time; so truly does the
believer reflect the mind of his Lord.

[Revelation 22:21](../../../bib/kjv/rev022.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">rev 22:21</span></span>

our--so Vulgate, Syriac, and Coptic. But A, B, and Aleph omit.

Christ--so B, Vulgate, Syriac, Coptic, and ANDREAS. But A and Aleph
omit.

with you all--so none of our manuscripts. B has, "with all the saints."
A and Vulgate have, "with all." Aleph has, "with the saints." This
closing benediction, Paul's mark in his Epistles, was after Paul's death
taken up by John. The Old Testament ended with a "curse" in connection
with the law; the New Testament ends with a blessing in union with the
Lord Jesus.

Amen--so B, Aleph, and ANDREAS. A and Vulgate Fuldensis omit it.

May the Blessed Lord who has caused all holy Scriptures to be written
for our learning, bless this humble effort to make Scripture expound
itself, and make it an instrument towards the conversion of sinners and
the edification of saints, to the glory of His great name and the
hastening of His kingdom! Amen.
