<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Revelation Index](rev)  
  [Previous](rev014)  [Next](rev016) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*A Commentary, Critical, Practical, and Explanatory on the Old and New
Testaments*, by Robert Jamieson, A.R. Fausset and David Brown \[1882\]
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Revelation Chapter 15](../../../bib/kjv/rev015.htm#001)

[Revelation 15:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev015.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">rev 15:1</span></span>

THE LAST SEVEN VIALS OF PLAGUES: SONG OF THE VICTORS OVER THE BEAST.
([Rev 15:1-8](../../../bib/kjv/rev015.htm#001))

the seven last plagues--Greek, "seven plagues which are the last."

is filled up--literally, "was finished," or "consummated": the
prophetical past for the future, the future being to God as though it
were past, so sure of accomplishment is His word. This verse is the
summary of the vision that follows: the angels do not actually receive
the vials till [Rev 15:7](../../../bib/kjv/rev015.htm#007); but here, in
[Rev 15:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev015.htm#001), by anticipation they are
spoken of as having them. There are no more plagues after these until
the Lord's coming in judgment. The destruction of Babylon ([Rev
18:2](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#002)) is the last: then in [Rev
19:11-16](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#011) He appears.

[Revelation 15:2](../../../bib/kjv/rev015.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">rev 15:2</span></span>

sea of glass--Answering to the molten sea or great brazen laver before
the mercy seat of the earthly temple, for the purification of the
priests; typifying the baptism of water and the Spirit of all who are
made kings and priests unto God.

mingled with fire--answering to the baptism on earth with fire, that is,
fiery trial, as well as with the Holy Ghost, which Christ's people
undergo to purify them, as gold is purified of its dross in the furnace.

them that had gotten the victory over--Greek, "those (coming) off from
(the conflict with) the beast-conquerors."

over the number of his name--A, B, C, Vulgate, Syriac, and Coptic omit
the words in English Version, "over his mark." The mark, in fact, is the
number of his name which the faithful refused to receive, and so were
victorious over it.

stand on the sea of glass--ALFORD and DE BURGH explain "on (the shore
of) the sea": at the sea. So the preposition, Greek, "epi," with the
accusative case, is used for at, [Rev
3:20](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#020). It has a pregnant sense:
"standing" implies rest, Greek "epi" with the accusative case implies
motion "towards." Thus the meaning is, Having come TO the sea, and now
standing AT it. In [Mat 14:26](../../../bib/kjv/mat014.htm#026), where
Christ walks on the sea, the Greek oldest manuscripts have the genitive,
not the accusative as here. Allusion is made to the Israelites standing
on the shore at the Red Sea, after having passed victoriously through
it, and after the Lord had destroyed the Egyptian foe (type of
Antichrist) in it. Moses and the Israelites' song of triumph ([Exo
15:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#001)) has its antitype in the saints'
"song of Moses and the Lamb" ([Rev
15:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev015.htm#003)). Still English Version is
consistent with good Greek, and the sense will then be: As the sea
typifies the troubled state out of which the beast arose, and which is
to be no more in the blessed world to come ([Rev
21:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#001)), so the victorious saints stand
on it, having it under their feet (as the woman had the moon, see on
[Rev 12:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev012.htm#001)); but it is now no longer
treacherous wherein the feet sink, but solid like glass, as it was under
the feet of Christ, whose triumph and power the saints now share.
Firmness of footing amidst apparent instability is thus represented.
They can stand, not merely as victorious Israel at the Red Sea, and as
John upon the sand of the shore, but upon the sea itself, now firm, and
reflecting their glory as glass, their past conflict shedding the
brighter luster on their present triumph. Their happiness is heightened
by the retrospect of the dangers through which they have passed. Thus
this corresponds to [Rev 7:14-15](../../../bib/kjv/rev007.htm#014).

harps of God--in the hands of these heavenly virgins, infinitely
surpassing the timbrels of Miriam and the Israelitesses.

[Revelation 15:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev015.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">rev 15:3</span></span>

song of Moses . . . and . . . the Lamb--The New Testament song of the
Lamb (that is, the song which the Lamb shall lead, as being "the Captain
of our salvation," just as Moses was leader of the Israelites, the song
in which those who conquer through Him \[[Rom
8:37](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#037)\] shall join, [Rev
12:11](../../../bib/kjv/rev012.htm#011)) is the antitype to the
triumphant Old Testament song of Moses and the Israelites at the Red Sea
(Exo. 15:1-21). The Churches of the Old and New Testament are
essentially one in their conflicts and triumphs. The two appear joined
in this phrase, as they are in the twenty-four elders. Similarly, [Isa
12:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/isa012.htm#001) foretells the song of the
redeemed (Israel foremost) after the second antitypical exodus and
deliverance at the Egyptian Sea. The passage through the Red Sea under
the pillar of cloud was Israel's baptism, to which the believer's
baptism in trials corresponds. The elect after their trials (especially
those arising from the beast) shall be taken up before the vials of
wrath be poured on the beast and his kingdom. So Noah and his family
were taken out of the doomed world before the deluge; Lot was taken out
of Sodom before its destruction; the Christians escaped by a special
interposition of Providence to Pella before the destruction of
Jerusalem. As the pillar of cloud and fire interposed between Israel and
the Egyptian foe, so that Israel was safely landed on the opposite shore
before the Egyptians were destroyed; so the Lord, coming with clouds and
in flaming fire, shall first catch up His elect people "in the clouds to
meet Him in the air," and then shall with fire destroy the enemy. The
Lamb leads the song in honor of the Father amidst the great
congregation. This is the "new song" mentioned in [Rev
14:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#003). The singing victors are the
144,000 of Israel, "the first-fruits," and the general "harvest" of the
Gentiles.

servant of God-- ([Exo 14:31](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#031); [Num
12:7](../../../bib/kjv/num012.htm#007); [Jos
22:5](../../../bib/kjv/jos022.htm#005)). The Lamb is more: He is the
SON.

Great and marvellous are thy works, &c.--part of Moses' last song ([Deu
32:3-4](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#003)). The vindication of the
justice of God that so He may be glorified is the grand end of God's
dealings. Hence His servants again and again dwell upon this in their
praises ([Rev 16:7](../../../bib/kjv/rev016.htm#007); [Rev
19:2](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#002); [Pro
16:4](../../../bib/kjv/pro016.htm#004); [Jer
10:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer010.htm#010); [Dan
4:37](../../../bib/kjv/dan004.htm#037)). Especially at the judgment
([Psa 50:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#001); [Psa
145:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa145.htm#017)).

saints--There is no manuscript authority for this. A, B, Coptic, and
CYPRIAN read, "of the NATIONS." C reads "of the ages," and so Vulgate
and Syriac. The point at issue in the Lord's controversy with the earth
is, whether He, or Satan's minion, the beast, is "the King of the
nations"; here at the eve of the judgments descending on the kingdom of
the beast, the transfigured saints hail Him as "the King of the nations"
([Eze 21:27](../../../bib/kjv/eze021.htm#027)).

[Revelation 15:4](../../../bib/kjv/rev015.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">rev 15:4</span></span>

Who shall not--Greek, "Who is there but must fear Thee?" Compare Moses'
song, [Exo 15:14-16](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#014), on the fear which
God's judgments strike into the foe.

thee--so Syriac. But A, B, C, Vulgate, and CYPRIAN reject "thee."

all nations shall come--alluding to [Psa
22:27-31](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#027); compare [Isa
66:23](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#023); [Jer
16:19](../../../bib/kjv/jer016.htm#019). The conversion of all nations,
therefore, shall be when Christ shall come, and not till then; and the
first moving cause will be Christ's manifested judgments preparing all
hearts for receiving Christ's mercy. He shall effect by His presence
what we have in vain tried to effect in His absence. The present
preaching of the Gospel is gathering out the elect remnant; meanwhile
"the mystery of iniquity" is at work, and will at last come to its
crisis; then shall judgment descend on the apostates at the harvest-end
of this age (Greek, [Mat 13:39-40](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#039))
when the tares shall be cleared out of the earth, which thenceforward
becomes Messiah's kingdom. The confederacy of 'the apostates against
Christ becomes, when overthrown with fearful judgments, the very means
in God's overruling providence of preparing the nations not joined in
the Antichristian league to submit themselves to Him.

judgments--Greek, "righteousnesses."

are--literally, "were": the prophetical past for the immediate future.

[Revelation 15:5](../../../bib/kjv/rev015.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">rev 15:5</span></span>

So [Rev 11:19](../../../bib/kjv/rev011.htm#019); compare [Rev
16:17](../../../bib/kjv/rev016.htm#017). "The tabernacle of the
testimony" appropriately here comes to view, where God's faithfulness in
avenging His people with judgments on their foes is about to be set
forth. We need to get a glimpse within the Holy place to "understand"
the secret spring and the end of God's righteous dealings.

behold--omitted by A, B, C, Syriac, and ANDREAS. It is supported only by
Vulgate, Coptic, and PRIMASIUS, but no manuscript.

[Revelation 15:6](../../../bib/kjv/rev015.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">rev 15:6</span></span>

having--So B reads. But A and C, read "who have": not that they had them
yet (compare [Rev 15:7](../../../bib/kjv/rev015.htm#007)), but they are
by anticipation described according to their office.

linen--So B reads. But A, C, and Vulgate, "a stone." On the principle
that the harder reading is the one least likely to be an interpolation,
we should read, "a stone pure ('and' is omitted in A, B, C, and
ANDREAS), brilliant" (so the Greek): probably the diamond. With English
Version, compare [Act 1:10](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#010); [Act
10:30](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#030).

golden girdles--resembling the Lord in this respect ([Rev
1:13](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#013)).

[Revelation 15:7](../../../bib/kjv/rev015.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">rev 15:7</span></span>

one of the four beasts--Greek, "living creatures." The presentation of
the vials to the angels by one of the living creatures implies the
ministry of the Church as the medium for manifesting to angels the
glories of redemption ([Eph 3:10](../../../bib/kjv/eph003.htm#010)).

vials--"bowls"; a broad shallow cup or bowl. The breadth of the vials in
their upper part would tend to cause their contents to pour out all at
once, implying the overwhelming suddenness of the woes.

full of . . . wrath--How sweetly do the vials full of odors, that is,
the incense-perfumed prayers of the saints, contrast with these!

[Revelation 15:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev015.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">rev 15:8</span></span>

temple . . . filled-- ([Isa 6:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa006.htm#004));
compare [Exo 40:34](../../../bib/kjv/exo040.htm#034); [Ch2
5:14](../../../bib/kjv/ch2005.htm#014), as to the earthly temple, of
which this is the antitype.

the glory of God and . . . power--then fully manifested.

no man was able to enter . . . the temple--because of God's presence in
His manifested glory and power during the execution of these judgments.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Revelation Chapter 16](rev016)

</div>
