<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Revelation Index](rev)  
  [Previous](rev005)  [Next](rev007) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*A Commentary, Critical, Practical, and Explanatory on the Old and New
Testaments*, by Robert Jamieson, A.R. Fausset and David Brown \[1882\]
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Revelation Chapter 6](../../../bib/kjv/rev006.htm#001)

[Revelation 6:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev006.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">rev 6:1</span></span>

THE OPENING OF THE FIRST SIX OF THE SEVEN SEALS. (Rev. 6:1-17)

one of the seals--The oldest manuscripts, A, B, C, Vulgate, and Syriac
read, "one of the seven seals."

noise--The three oldest manuscripts read this in the nominative or
dative, not the genitive, as English Version, "I heard one from among
the four living creatures saying, as (it were) the voice (or, 'as with
the voice') of thunder." The first living creature was like a lion ([Rev
4:7](../../../bib/kjv/rev004.htm#007)): his voice is in consonance.
Implying the lion-like boldness with which, in the successive great
revivals, the faithful have testified for Christ, and especially a
little before His coming shall testify. Or, rather, their earnestness in
praying for Christ's coming.

Come and see--One oldest manuscript, B, has "And see." But A, C, and
Vulgate reject it. ALFORD rightly objects to English Version reading:
"Whither was John to come? Separated as he was by the glassy sea from
the throne, was he to cross it?" Contrast the form of expression, [Rev
10:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev010.htm#008). It is much more likely to be the
cry of the redeemed to the Redeemer, "Come" and deliver the groaning
creature from the bondage of corruption. Thus, [Rev
6:2](../../../bib/kjv/rev006.htm#002) is an answer to the cry, went
(literally, "came") forth corresponding to "Come." "Come," says GROTIUS,
is the living creature's address to John, calling his earnest attention.
But it seems hard to see how "Come" by itself can mean this. Compare the
only other places in Revelation where it is used, [Rev
4:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev004.htm#001); [Rev
22:17](../../../bib/kjv/rev022.htm#017). If the four living creatures
represent the four Gospels, the "Come" will be their invitation to
everyone (for it is not written that they addressed John) to accept
Christ's salvation while there is time, as the opening of the seals
marks a progressive step towards the end (compare [Rev
22:17](../../../bib/kjv/rev022.htm#017)). Judgments are foretold as
accompanying the preaching of the Gospel as a witness to all nations
([Rev 14:6-11](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#006); [Mat
24:6-14](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#006)). Thus the invitation, "Come,"
here, is aptly parallel to [Mat 24:14](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#014).
The opening of the first four seals is followed by judgments preparatory
for His coming. At the opening of the fifth seal, the martyrs above
express the same ([Rev 6:9-10](../../../bib/kjv/rev006.htm#009); compare
[Zac 1:10](../../../bib/kjv/zac001.htm#010)). At the opening of the
sixth seal, the Lord's coming is ushered in with terrors to the ungodly.
At the seventh, the consummation is fully attained ([Rev
11:15](../../../bib/kjv/rev011.htm#015)).

[Revelation 6:2](../../../bib/kjv/rev006.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">rev 6:2</span></span>

Evidently Christ, whether in person, or by His angel, preparatory to His
coming again, as appears from [Rev
19:11-12](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#011).

bow-- ([Psa 45:4-5](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#004)).

crown--Greek, "stephanos," the garland or wreath of a conqueror, which
is also implied by His white horse, white being the emblem of victory.
In [Rev 19:11-12](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#011) the last step in His
victorious progress is represented; accordingly there He wears many
diadems (Greek, "diademata"; not merely Greek, "stephanoi," "crowns" or
"wreaths"), and is personally attended by the hosts of heaven. Compare
[Zac 1:7-17](../../../bib/kjv/zac001.htm#007); [Zac
6:1-8](../../../bib/kjv/zac006.htm#001); especially [Rev
6:10](../../../bib/kjv/rev006.htm#010) below, with [Zac
1:12](../../../bib/kjv/zac001.htm#012); also compare the colors of the
four horses.

and to conquer--that is, so as to gain a lasting victory. All four seals
usher in judgments on the earth, as the power which opposes the reign of
Himself and His Church. This, rather than the work of conversion and
conviction, is primarily meant, though doubtless, secondarily, the elect
will be gathered out through His word and His judgments.

[Revelation 6:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev006.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">rev 6:3</span></span>

and see--omitted in the three oldest manuscripts, A, B, C, and Vulgate.

[Revelation 6:4](../../../bib/kjv/rev006.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">rev 6:4</span></span>

red--the color of blood. The color of the horse in each case answers to
the mission of the rider. Compare [Mat
10:24-36](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#024), "Think not I am come to send
peace on earth; I came not to send peace, but a sword." The white horse
of Christ's bloodless victories is soon followed, through man's
perversion of the Gospel, by the red horse of bloodshed; but this is
overruled to the clearing away of the obstacles to Christ's coming
kingdom. The patient ox is the emblem of the second living creature who,
at the opening of this seal, saith, "Come." The saints amidst judgments
on the earth in patience "endure to the end."

that they should kill--The Greek is indicative future, "that they may,
as they also shall, kill one another."

[Revelation 6:5](../../../bib/kjv/rev006.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">rev 6:5</span></span>

Come and see--The two oldest manuscripts, A, C, and Vulgate omit "and
see." B retains the words.

black--implying sadness and want.

had--Greek, "having."

a pair of balances--the symbol of scarcity of provisions, the bread
being doled out by weight.

[Revelation 6:6](../../../bib/kjv/rev006.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">rev 6:6</span></span>

a voice--Two oldest manuscripts, A, C, read, "as it were a voice." B
reads as English Version. The voice is heard "in the midst of the four
living creatures" (as Jehovah in the Shekinah-cloud manifested His
presence between the cherubim); because it is only for the sake of, and
in connection with, His redeemed, that God mitigates His judgments on
the earth.

A measure--"A chÅ“nix." While making food scarce, do not make it so much
so that a chÅ“nix (about a day's provision of wheat, variously estimated
at two or three pints) shall not be obtainable "for a penny" (denarius,
eight and a half pence of our money, probably the day's wages of a
laborer). Famine generally follows the sword. Ordinarily, from sixteen
to twenty measures were given for a denarius. The sword, famine, noisome
beasts, and the pestilence, are God's four judgments on the earth. A
spiritual famine, too, may be included in the judgment. The "Come," in
the case of this third seal, is said by the third of the four living
creatures, whose likeness is a man indicative of sympathy and human
compassion for the sufferers. God in it tempers judgment with mercy.
Compare [Mat 24:7](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#007), which indicates the
very calamities foretold in these seals, nation rising against nation
(the sword), famines, pestilences ([Rev
6:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev006.htm#008)), and earthquakes ([Rev
6:12](../../../bib/kjv/rev006.htm#012)).

three measures of barley for a penny--the cheaper and less nutritious
grain, bought by the laborer who could not buy enough wheat for his
family with his day's wages, a denarius, and, therefore, buys barley.

see thou hurt not the oil, and the wine--the luxuries of life, rather
than necessaries; the oil and wine were to be spared for the refreshment
of the sufferers.

[Revelation 6:7](../../../bib/kjv/rev006.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">rev 6:7</span></span>

and see--supported by B; omitted by A, C, and Vulgate. The fourth living
creature, who was "like a flying eagle," introduces this seal; implying
high-soaring intelligence, and judgment descending from on high fatally
on the ungodly, as the king of birds on his prey.

[Revelation 6:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev006.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">rev 6:8</span></span>

pale--"livid" \[ALFORD\].

Death--personified.

Hell--Hades personified.

unto them--Death and Hades. So A, C read. But B and Vulgate read, "to
him."

fourth part of the earth--answering to the first four seals; his portion
as one of the four, being a fourth part.

death--pestilence; compare [Eze 14:21](../../../bib/kjv/eze014.htm#021)
with the four judgments here, the sword, famine, pestilence, and wild
beasts; the famine the consequence of the sword; pestilence, that of
famine; and beasts multiplying by the consequent depopulation.

with the beasts--Greek, "by"; more direct agency. These four seals are
marked off from the three last, by the four living creatures introducing
them with "Come." The calamities indicated are not restricted to one
time, but extend through the whole period of Church history to the
coming of Christ, before which last great and terrible day of the Lord
they shall reach highest aggravation. The first seal is the summary,
Christ going forth conquering till all enemies are subdued under Him,
with a view to which the judgments subsequently specified accompany the
preaching of the Gospel for a witness to all nations.

[Revelation 6:9](../../../bib/kjv/rev006.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">rev 6:9</span></span>

The three last seals relate to the invisible, as the first four to the
visible world; the fifth, to the martyrs who have died as believers; the
sixth, to those who have died, or who shall be found at Christ's coming,
unbelievers, namely, "the kings . . . great men . . . bondman . . .
freeman"; the seventh, to the silence in heaven. The scene changes from
earth to heaven; so that interpretations which make these three last
consecutive to the first four seals, are very doubtful.

I saw--in spirit. For souls are not naturally visible.

under the altar--As the blood of sacrificial victims slain on the altar
was poured at the bottom of the altar, so the souls of those sacrificed
for Christ's testimony are symbolically represented as under the altar,
in heaven; for the life or animal soul is in the blood, and blood is
often represented as crying for vengeance ([Gen
4:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen004.htm#010)). The altar in heaven,
antitypical to the altar of sacrifice, is Christ crucified. As it is the
altar that sanctifies the gift, so it is Christ alone who makes our
obedience, and even our sacrifice of life for the truth, acceptable to
God. The sacrificial altar was not in the sanctuary, but outside; so
Christ's literal sacrifice and the figurative sacrifice of the martyrs
took place, not in the heavenly sanctuary, but outside, here on earth.
The only altar in heaven is that antitypical to the temple altar of
incense. The blood of the martyrs cries from the earth under Christ's
cross, whereon they may be considered virtually to have been sacrificed;
their souls cry from under the altar of incense, which is Christ in
heaven, by whom alone the incense of praise is accepted before God. They
are under Christ, in His immediate presence, shut up unto Him in joyful
eager expectancy until He shall come to raise the sleeping dead. Compare
the language of 2 Maccabees 7:36 as indicating Jewish opinion on the
subject. Our brethren who have now suffered a short pain are dead under
(Greek) God's covenant of everlasting life.

testimony which they held--that is, which they bore, as committed to
them to bear. Compare [Rev 12:17](../../../bib/kjv/rev012.htm#017),
"Have (same Greek as here) the testimony of Jesus."

[Revelation 6:10](../../../bib/kjv/rev006.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">rev 6:10</span></span>

How long--Greek, "Until when?" As in the parable the woman (symbol of
the Church) cries day and night to the unjust judge for justice against
her adversary who is always oppressing her (compare below, [Rev
12:10](../../../bib/kjv/rev012.htm#010)); so the elect (not only on
earth, but under Christ's covering, and in His presence in Paradise) cry
day and night to God, who will assuredly, in His own time, avenge His
and their cause, "though He bear long with them." These passages need
not be restricted to some particular martyrdoms, but have been, and are
receiving, and shall receive partial fulfilments, until their last
exhaustive fulfilment before Christ's coming. So as to the other events
foretold here. The glory even of those in Paradise will only be complete
when Christ's and the Church's foes are cast out, and the earth will
become Christ's kingdom at His coming to raise the sleeping saints.

Lord--Greek, "Master"; implying that He has them and their foes and all
His creatures as absolutely at His disposal, as a master has his slaves;
hence, in [Rev 6:11](../../../bib/kjv/rev006.htm#011), "fellow
servants," or fellow slaves follows.

holy--Greek, "the Holy one."

avenge--"exact vengeance for our blood."

on--Greek, "from them."

that dwell on the earth--the ungodly, of earth, earthly, as
distinguished from the Church, whose home and heart are even now in
heavenly places.

[Revelation 6:11](../../../bib/kjv/rev006.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">rev 6:11</span></span>

white robes--The three oldest manuscripts, A, B, C, read, "A white robe
was given."

every one of--One oldest manuscript, B, omits this. A and C read, "unto
them, unto each," that is, unto them severally. Though their joint cry
for the riddance of the earth from the ungodly is not yet granted, it is
intimated that it will be so in due time; meanwhile, individually they
receive the white robe, indicative of light, joy, and triumphant victory
over their foes; even as the Captain of their salvation goes forth on a
white horse conquering and to conquer; also of purity and sanctity
through Christ. MAIMONIDES says that the Jews used to array priests,
when approved of, in white robes; thus the sense is, they are admitted
among the blessed ones, who, as spotless priests, minister unto God and
the Lamb.

should--So C reads. But A and B, "shall rest."

a little season--One oldest manuscript, B, omits "little." A and C
support it. Even if it be omitted, is it to be inferred that the
"season" is short as compared with eternity? BENGEL fancifully made a
season (Greek, "chronus," the word here used) to be one thousand one
hundred and eleven one-ninth years, and a time ([Rev
12:12](../../../bib/kjv/rev012.htm#012), [Rev
12:14](../../../bib/kjv/rev012.htm#014), Greek, "kairos") to be a fifth
of a season, that is, two hundred and twenty-two two-ninths years. The
only distinction in the Greek is, a season (Greek, "chronus") is a sort
of aggregate of times. Greek, "kairos," a specific time, and so of short
duration. As to their rest, compare [Rev
14:13](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#013) (the same Greek, "anapauomai");
[Isa 57:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa057.htm#002); [Dan
12:13](../../../bib/kjv/dan012.htm#013).

until their . . . brethren . . . be fulfilled--in number. Until their
full number shall have been completed. The number of the elect is
definitely fixed: perhaps to fill up that of the fallen angels. But this
is mere conjecture. The full blessedness and glory of all the saints
shall be simultaneous. The earlier shall not anticipate the later
saints. A and C read, "shall have been accomplished"; B and Aleph read,
"shall have accomplished (their course)."

[Revelation 6:12](../../../bib/kjv/rev006.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">rev 6:12</span></span>

As [Rev 6:4](../../../bib/kjv/rev006.htm#004), [Rev
6:6-8](../../../bib/kjv/rev006.htm#006), the sword, famine, and
pestilence, answer to [Mat 24:6-7](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#006);
[Rev 6:9-10](../../../bib/kjv/rev006.htm#009), as to martyrdoms, answer
to [Mat 24:9-10](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#009); so this passage, [Rev
6:12](../../../bib/kjv/rev006.htm#012), [Rev
6:17](../../../bib/kjv/rev006.htm#017), answers to [Mat
24:29-30](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#029), "the sun shall be darkened,
and the moon shall not give her light, and the stars shall fall from
heaven; . . . then shall all the tribes of the earth mourn, and they
shall see the Son of man coming"; imagery describing the portents of the
immediate coming of the day of the Lord; but not the coming itself until
the elect are sealed, and the judgments invoked by the martyrs descend
on the earth, the sea, and the trees ([Rev
7:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/rev007.htm#001)).

and, lo--So A reads. But B and C omit "lo."

earthquake--Greek, "shaking" of the heavens, the sea, and the dry land;
the shaking of these mutable things being the necessary preliminary to
the setting up of those things which cannot be shaken. This is one of
the catchwords \[WORDSWORTH\] connecting the sixth seal with the sixth
trumpet ([Rev 11:13](../../../bib/kjv/rev011.htm#013)) and the seventh
vial ([Rev 16:17-21](../../../bib/kjv/rev016.htm#017)); also the seventh
seal ([Rev 8:5](../../../bib/kjv/rev008.htm#005)).

sackcloth--One kind, made of the "hair" of Cilician goats, was called
"cilicium," or Cilician cloth, and was used for tents, &c. Paul, a
Cilician, made such tents ([Act 18:3](../../../bib/kjv/act018.htm#003)).

moon--A, B, C, and oldest versions read, "the whole moon"; the full
moon; not merely the crescent moon.

as blood-- ([Joe 2:31](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#031)).

[Revelation 6:13](../../../bib/kjv/rev006.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">rev 6:13</span></span>

stars . . . fell . . . as a fig tree casteth her . . . figs-- ([Isa
34:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa034.htm#004); [Nah
3:12](../../../bib/kjv/nah003.htm#012)). The Church shall be then ripe
for glorification, the Antichristian world for destruction, which shall
be accompanied with mighty phenomena in nature. As to the stars falling
to the earth, Scripture describes natural phenomena as they would appear
to the spectator, not in the language of scientific accuracy; and yet,
while thus adapting itself to ordinary men, it drops hints which show
that it anticipates the discoveries of modern science.

[Revelation 6:14](../../../bib/kjv/rev006.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">rev 6:14</span></span>

departed--Greek, "was separated from" its place; "was made to depart."
Not as ALFORD, "parted asunder"; for, on the contrary, it was rolled
together as a scroll which had been open is rolled up and laid aside.
There is no "asunder one from another" here in the Greek, as in [Act
15:39](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#039), which ALFORD copies.

mountain . . . moved out of . . . places-- ([Psa
121:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa121.htm#001), Margin; [Jer
3:23](../../../bib/kjv/jer003.htm#023); [Jer
4:24](../../../bib/kjv/jer004.htm#024); [Nah
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/nah001.htm#005)). This total disruption shall be
the precursor of the new earth, just as the pre-Adamic convulsions
prepared it for its present occupants.

[Revelation 6:15](../../../bib/kjv/rev006.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">rev 6:15</span></span>

kings . . . hid themselves--Where was now the spirit of those whom the
world has so greatly feared? \[BENGEL\].

great men--statesmen and high civil officers.

rich men . . . chief captains--The three oldest manuscripts, A, B, C,
transpose thus, "chief captains . . . rich men."

mighty--The three oldest manuscripts, A, B, and C read, "strong"
physically ([Psa 33:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa033.htm#016)).

in--literally "into"; ran into, so as to hide themselves in.

dens--"caves."

[Revelation 6:16](../../../bib/kjv/rev006.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">rev 6:16</span></span>

from the face-- ([Psa 34:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa034.htm#016)). On the
whole verse, compare [Hos 10:8](../../../bib/kjv/hos010.htm#008); [Luk
23:30](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#030).

[Revelation 6:17](../../../bib/kjv/rev006.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">rev 6:17</span></span>

Literally, "the day, the great (day)," which can only mean the last
great day. After the Lord has exhausted all His ordinary judgments, the
sword, famine, pestilence, and wild beasts, and still sinners are
impenitent, the great day of the Lord itself' shall come. Mat. 24:6-29
plainly forms a perfect parallelism to the six seals, not only in the
events, but also in the order of their occurrence: [Mat
24:3](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#003), the first seal; [Mat
24:6](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#006), the second seal; [Mat
24:7](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#007), the third seal; [Mat
24:7](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#007), end, the fourth seal; [Mat
24:9](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#009), the fifth seal, the persecutions
and abounding iniquity under which, as well as consequent judgments
accompanied with gospel preaching to all nations as a witness, are
particularly detailed, Mat. 24:9-28; [Mat
24:29](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#029), the sixth seal.

to stand--to stand justified, and not condemned before the Judge. Thus
the sixth seal brings us to the verge of the Lord's coming. The ungodly
"tribes of the earth" tremble at the signs of His immediate approach.
But before He actually inflicts the blow in person, "the elect" must be
"gathered "out.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Revelation Chapter 7](rev007)

</div>
