<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Revelation Index](rev)  
  [Previous](rev012)  [Next](rev014) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*A Commentary, Critical, Practical, and Explanatory on the Old and New
Testaments*, by Robert Jamieson, A.R. Fausset and David Brown \[1882\]
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Revelation Chapter 13](../../../bib/kjv/rev013.htm#001)

[Revelation 13:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev013.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">rev 13:1</span></span>

VISION OF THE BEAST THAT CAME OUT OF THE SEA: THE SECOND BEAST, OUT OF
THE EARTH, EXERCISING THE POWER OF THE FIRST BEAST, AND CAUSING THE
EARTH TO WORSHIP HIM. (Rev. 13:1-18)

I stood--So B, Aleph, and Coptic read. But A, C, Vulgate, and Syriac,
"He stood." Standing on the sand of the sea, HE gave his power to the
beast that rose out of the sea.

upon the sand of the sea--where the four winds were to be seen striving
upon the great sea ([Dan 7:2](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#002)).

beast--Greek, "wild beast." Man becomes "brutish" when he severs himself
from God, the archetype and true ideal, in whose image he was first
made, which ideal is realized by the man Christ Jesus. Hence, the world
powers seeking their own glory, and not God's, are represented as
beasts; and Nebuchadnezzar, when in self-deification he forgot that "the
Most High ruleth in the kingdom of men," was driven among the beasts. In
[Dan 7:4-7](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#004) there are four beasts: here
the one beast expresses the sum-total of the God-opposed world power
viewed in its universal development, not restricted to one manifestation
alone, as Rome. This first beast expresses the world power attacking the
Church more from without; the second, which is a revival of, and
minister to, the first, is the world power as the false prophet
corrupting and destroying the Church from within.

out of the sea-- ([Dan 7:3](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#003); compare
Note, see on [Rev 8:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev008.htm#008)); out of the
troubled waves of peoples, multitudes, nations, and tongues. The earth
([Rev 13:11](../../../bib/kjv/rev013.htm#011)), on the other hand, means
the consolidated, ordered world of nations, with its culture and
learning.

seven heads and ten horns--A, B, and C transpose, "ten horns and seven
heads." The ten horns are now put first (contrast the order, [Rev
12:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev012.htm#003)) because they are crowned. They
shall not be so till the last stage of the fourth kingdom (the Roman),
which shall continue until the fifth kingdom, Christ's, shall supplant
it and destroy it utterly; this last stage is marked by the ten toes of
the two feet of the image in [Dan
2:33](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#033), [Dan
2:41-42](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#041). The seven implies the world
power setting up itself as God, and caricaturing the seven Spirits of
God; yet its true character as God-opposed is detected by the number ten
accompanying the seven. Dragon and beast both wear crowns, but the
former on the heads, the latter on the horns ([Rev
12:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev012.htm#003); [Rev
13:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev013.htm#001)). Therefore, both heads and horns
refer to kingdoms; compare [Rev 17:7](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#007),
[Rev 17:10](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#010), [Rev
17:12](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#012), "kings" representing the
kingdoms whose heads they are. The seven kings, as peculiarly
powerful--the great powers of the world--are distinguished from the ten,
represented by the horns (simply called "kings," [Rev
17:12](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#012)). In Daniel, the ten mean the
last phase of the world power, the fourth kingdom divided into ten
parts. They are connected with the seventh head ([Rev
17:12](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#012)), and are as yet future
\[AUBERLEN\]. The mistake of those who interpret the beast to be Rome
exclusively, and the ten horns to mean kingdoms which have taken the
place of Rome in Europe already, is, the fourth kingdom in the image has
TWO legs, representing the eastern as well as the western empire; the
ten toes are not upon the one foot (the west), as these interpretations
require, but on the two (east and west) together, so that any theory
which makes the ten kingdoms belong to the west alone must err. If the
ten kingdoms meant were those which sprung up on the overthrow of Rome,
the ten would be accurately known, whereas twenty-eight different lists
are given by so many interpreters, making in all sixty-five kingdoms!
\[TYSO in DE BURGH\]. The seven heads are the seven world monarchies,
Egypt, Assyria, Babylon, Persia, Greece, Rome, the Germanic empire,
under the last of which we live \[AUBERLEN\], and which devolved for a
time on Napoleon, after Francis, emperor of Germany and king of Rome,
had resigned the title in 1806. FABER explains the healing of the deadly
wound to be the revival of the Napoleonic dynasty after its overthrow at
Waterloo. That secular dynasty, in alliance with the ecclesiastical
power, the Papacy ([Rev 13:11](../../../bib/kjv/rev013.htm#011), &c.),
being "the eighth head," and yet "of the seven" ([Rev
17:11](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#011)), will temporarily triumph over
the saints, until destroyed in Armageddon ([Rev
19:17-21](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#017)). A Napoleon, in this view,
will be the Antichrist, restoring the Jews to Palestine, and accepted as
their Messiah at first, and afterwards fearfully oppressing them.
Antichrist, the summing up and concentration of all the world evil that
preceded, is the eighth, but yet one of the seven ([Rev
17:11](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#011)).

crowns--Greek, "diadems."

name of blasphemy--So C, Coptic, and ANDREAS. A, B, and Vulgate read,
"names of blasphemy," namely, a name on each of the heads; blasphemously
arrogating attributes belonging to God alone (compare Note, see on [Rev
17:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#003)). A characteristic of the little
horn in [Dan 7:8](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#008), [Dan
7:20-21](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#020); [Th2
2:4](../../../bib/kjv/th2002.htm#004).

[Revelation 13:2](../../../bib/kjv/rev013.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">rev 13:2</span></span>

leopard . . . bear . . . lion--This beast unites in itself the
God-opposed characteristics of the three preceding kingdoms, resembling
respectively the leopard, bear, and lion. It rises up out of the sea, as
Daniel's four beasts, and has ten horns, as Daniel's fourth beast, and
seven heads, as Daniel's four beasts had in all, namely, one on the
first, one on the second, four on the third, and one on the fourth. Thus
it represents comprehensively in one figure the world power (which in
Daniel is represented by four) of all times and places, not merely of
one period and one locality, viewed as opposed to God; just as the woman
is the Church of all ages. This view is favored also by the fact, that
the beast is the vicarious representative of Satan, who similarly has
seven heads and ten horns: a general description of his universal power
in all ages and places of the world. Satan appears as a serpent, as
being the archetype of the beast nature ([Rev
12:9](../../../bib/kjv/rev012.htm#009)). "If the seven heads meant
merely seven Roman emperors, one cannot understand why they alone should
be mentioned in the original image of Satan, whereas it is perfectly
intelligible if we suppose them to represent Satan's power on earth
viewed collectively" \[AUBERLEN\].

[Revelation 13:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev013.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">rev 13:3</span></span>

One of--literally, "from among."

wounded . . . healed--twice again repeated emphatically ([Rev
13:12](../../../bib/kjv/rev013.htm#012), [Rev
13:14](../../../bib/kjv/rev013.htm#014)); compare [Rev
17:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#008), [Rev
17:11](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#011), "the beast that was, and is
not, and shall ascend out of the bottomless pit" (compare [Rev
13:11](../../../bib/kjv/rev013.htm#011)); the Germanic empire, the
seventh head (revived in the eighth), as yet future in John's time ([Rev
17:10](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#010)). Contrast the change whereby
Nebuchadnezzar, being humbled from his self-deifying pride, was
converted from his beast-like form and character to MAN'S form and true
position towards God; symbolized by his eagle wings being plucked, and
himself made to stand upon his feet as a man ([Dan
7:4](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#004)). Here, on the contrary, the
beast's head is not changed into a human head, but receives a deadly
wound, that is, the world kingdom which this head represents does not
truly turn to God, but for a time its God-opposed character remains
paralyzed ("as it were slain"; the very words marking the beast's
outward resemblance to the Lamb, "as it were slain," see on [Rev
5:6](../../../bib/kjv/rev005.htm#006). Compare also the second beast's
resemblance to the Lamb, [Rev 13:11](../../../bib/kjv/rev013.htm#011)).
Though seemingly slain (Greek for "wounded"), it remains the beast
still, to rise again in another form ([Rev
13:11](../../../bib/kjv/rev013.htm#011)). The first six heads were
heathenish, Egypt, Assyria, Babylon, Persia, Greece, Rome; the new
seventh world power (the pagan German hordes pouring down on
Christianized Rome), whereby Satan had hoped to stifle Christianity
([Rev 11:15-16](../../../bib/kjv/rev011.htm#015)), became itself
Christianized (answering to the beast's, as it were, deadly wound: it
was slain, and it is not, [Rev 17:11](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#011)).
Its ascent out of the bottomless pit answers to the healing of its
deadly wound ([Rev 17:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#008)). No essential
change is noticed in Daniel as effected by Christianity upon the fourth
kingdom; it remains essentially God-opposed to the last. The beast,
healed of its temporary and external wound, now returns, not only from
the sea, but from the bottomless pit, whence it draws new Antichristian
strength of hell ([Rev 13:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev013.htm#003), [Rev
13:11-12](../../../bib/kjv/rev013.htm#011), [Rev
13:14](../../../bib/kjv/rev013.htm#014); [Rev
11:7](../../../bib/kjv/rev011.htm#007); [Rev
17:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#008)). Compare the seven evil spirits
taken into the temporarily dispossessed, and the last state worse than
the first, [Mat 12:43-45](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#043). A new and
worse heathenism breaks in upon the Christianized world, more devilish
than the old one of the first heads of the beast. The latter was an
apostasy only from the general revelation of God in nature and
conscience; but this new one is from God's revelation of love in His
Son. It culminates in Antichrist, the man of sin, the son of perdition
(compare [Rev 17:11](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#011)); [Th2
2:3](../../../bib/kjv/th2002.htm#003); compare [Ti2
3:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/ti2003.htm#001), the very characteristics of old
heathenism ([Rom 1:29-32](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#029))
\[AUBERLEN\]. More than one wound seems to me to be meant, for example,
that under Constantine (when the pagan worship of the emperor's image
gave way to Christianity), followed by the healing, when image worship
and the other papal errors were introduced into the Church; again, that
at the Reformation, followed by the lethargic form of godliness without
the power, and about to end in the last great apostasy, which I identify
with the second beast ([Rev 13:11](../../../bib/kjv/rev013.htm#011)),
Antichrist, the same seventh world power in another form.

wondered after--followed with wondering gaze.

[Revelation 13:4](../../../bib/kjv/rev013.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">rev 13:4</span></span>

which gave--A, B, C, Vulgate, Syriac, and ANDREAS read, "because he
gave."

power--Greek, "the authority" which it had; its authority.

Who is like unto the beast?--The very language appropriated to God, [Exo
15:11](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#011) (whence, in the Hebrew, the
Maccabees took their name; the opponents of the Old Testament
Antichrist, Antiochus); [Psa 35:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa035.htm#010);
[Psa 71:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa071.htm#019); [Psa
113:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa113.htm#005); [Mic
7:18](../../../bib/kjv/mic007.htm#018); blasphemously ([Rev
13:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev013.htm#001), [Rev
13:5](../../../bib/kjv/rev013.htm#005)) assigned to the beast. It is a
parody of the name "Michael" (compare [Rev
12:7](../../../bib/kjv/rev012.htm#007)), meaning, "Who is like unto
God?"

[Revelation 13:5](../../../bib/kjv/rev013.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">rev 13:5</span></span>

blasphemies--So ANDREAS reads. B reads "blasphemy." A, "blasphemous
things" (compare [Dan 7:8](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#008); [Dan
11:25](../../../bib/kjv/dan011.htm#025)).

power--"authority"; legitimate power (Greek, "exousia").

to continue--Greek, "poiesai," "to act," or "work." B reads, "to make
war" (compare [Rev 13:4](../../../bib/kjv/rev013.htm#004)). But A, C,
Vulgate, Syriac, and ANDREAS omit "war."

forty . . . two month--(See on [Rev
11:2-3](../../../bib/kjv/rev011.htm#002); [Rev
12:6](../../../bib/kjv/rev012.htm#006)).

[Revelation 13:6](../../../bib/kjv/rev013.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">rev 13:6</span></span>

opened . . . mouth--The usual formula in the case of a set speech, or
series of speeches. [Rev 13:6-7](../../../bib/kjv/rev013.htm#006) expand
[Rev 13:5](../../../bib/kjv/rev013.htm#005).

blasphemy--So B and ANDREAS. A and C read "blasphemies."

and them--So Vulgate, Coptic, ANDREAS, and PRIMASIUS read. A and C omit
"and": "them that dwell (literally, 'tabernacle') in heaven," mean not
only angels and the departed souls of the righteous, but believers on
earth who have their citizenship in heaven, and whose true life is
hidden from the Antichristian persecutor in the secret of God's
tabernacle. See on [Rev 12:12](../../../bib/kjv/rev012.htm#012); [Joh
3:7](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#007).

[Revelation 13:7](../../../bib/kjv/rev013.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">rev 13:7</span></span>

power--Greek, "authority."

all kindreds . . . tongues . . . nations--Greek, "every tribe . . .
tongue . . . nation." A, B, C, Vulgate, Syriac, ANDREAS, and PRIMASIUS
add "and people," after "tribe" or "kindred."

[Revelation 13:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev013.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">rev 13:8</span></span>

all that dwell upon the earth--being of earth earthy; in contrast to
"them that dwell in heaven."

whose names are not written--A, B, C, Syriac, Coptic, and ANDREAS read
singular, "(every one) whose (Greek, 'hou'; but B, Greek, 'hon,' plural)
name is not written."

Lamb slain from the foundation of the world--The Greek order of words
favors this translation. He was slain in the Father's eternal counsels:
compare [Pe1 1:19-20](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#019), virtually
parallel. The other way of connecting the words is, "Written from the
foundation of the world in the book of life of the Lamb slain." So in
[Rev 17:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#008). The elect. The former is in
the Greek more obvious and simple. "Whatsoever virtue was in the
sacrifices, did operate through Messiah's death alone. As He was "the
Lamb slain from the foundation of the world," so all atonements ever
made were only effectual by His blood" \[BISHOP PEARSON, Exposition of
the Creed\].

[Revelation 13:9](../../../bib/kjv/rev013.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">rev 13:9</span></span>

A general exhortation. Christ's own words of monition calling solemn
attention.

[Revelation 13:10](../../../bib/kjv/rev013.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">rev 13:10</span></span>

He that leadeth into captivity--A, B, C, and Vulgate read, "if any one
(be) for captivity."

shall go into captivity--Greek present, "goeth into captivity." Compare
[Jer 15:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer015.htm#002), which is alluded to here.
Aleph, B, and C read simply, "he goeth away," and omit "into captivity."
But A and Vulgate support the words.

he that killeth with the sword, must be killed with the sword--So B and
C read. But A reads, "if any (is for) being (literally, 'to be') killed
with the sword." As of old, so now, those to be persecuted by the beast
in various ways, have their trials severally appointed them by God's
fixed counsel. English Version is quite a different sense, namely, a
warning to the persecutors that they shall be punished with retribution
in kind.

Here--"Herein": in bearing their appointed sufferings lies the patient
endurance . . . of the saints. This is to be the motto and watchword of
the elect during the period of the world kingdom. As the first beast is
to be met by patience and faith ([Rev
13:10](../../../bib/kjv/rev013.htm#010)), the second beast must be
opposed by true wisdom ([Rev 13:18](../../../bib/kjv/rev013.htm#018)).

[Revelation 13:11](../../../bib/kjv/rev013.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">rev 13:11</span></span>

another beast--"the false prophet."

out of the earth--out of society civilized, consolidated, and ordered,
but still, with all its culture, of earth earthy: as distinguished from
"the sea," the troubled agitations of various peoples out of which the
world power and its several kingdoms have emerged. "The sacerdotal
persecuting power, pagan and Christian; the pagan priesthood making an
image of the emperors which they compelled Christians to worship, and
working wonders by magic and omens; the Romish priesthood, the
inheritors of pagan rites, images, and superstitions, lamb-like in
Christian professions, dragon-like in word and act" \[ALFORD, and so the
Spanish Jesuit, LACUNZA, writing under the name BEN EZRA\]. As the first
beast was like the Lamb in being, as it were, wounded to death, so the
second is like the Lamb in having two lamb-like horns (its essential
difference from the Lamb is marked by its having TWO, but the Lamb SEVEN
horns, [Rev 5:6](../../../bib/kjv/rev005.htm#006)). The former paganism
of the world power, seeming to be wounded to death by Christianity,
revives. In its second beast-form it is Christianized heathendom
ministering to the former, and having earthly culture and learning to
recommend it. The second beast's, or false prophet's rise, coincides in
time with the healing of the beast's deadly wound and its revival ([Rev
13:12-14](../../../bib/kjv/rev013.htm#012)). Its manifold character is
marked by the Lord ([Mat 24:11](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#011), [Mat
24:24](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#024)), "Many false prophets shall
rise," where He is speaking of the last days. As the former beast
corresponds to the first four beasts of Daniel, so the second beast, or
the false prophet, to the little horn starting up among the ten horns of
the fourth beast. This Antichristian horn has not only the mouth of
blasphemy ([Rev 13:5](../../../bib/kjv/rev013.htm#005)), but also "the
eyes of man" ([Dan 7:8](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#008)): the former is
also in the first beast ([Rev 13:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev013.htm#001),
[Rev 13:5](../../../bib/kjv/rev013.htm#005)), but the latter not so.
"The eyes of man" symbolize cunning and intellectual culture, the very
characteristic of "the false prophet" ([Rev
13:13-15](../../../bib/kjv/rev013.htm#013); [Rev
16:14](../../../bib/kjv/rev016.htm#014)). The first beast is physical
and political; the second a spiritual power, the power of knowledge,
ideas (the favorite term in the French school of politics), and
scientific cultivation. Both alike are beasts, from below, not from
above; faithful allies, worldly Antichristian wisdom standing in the
service of the worldly Antichristian power: the dragon is both lion and
serpent: might and cunning are his armory. The dragon gives his external
power to the first beast ([Rev 13:2](../../../bib/kjv/rev013.htm#002)),
his spirit to the second, so that it speaks as a dragon ([Rev
13:11](../../../bib/kjv/rev013.htm#011)). The second, arising out of the
earth, is in [Rev 11:7](../../../bib/kjv/rev011.htm#007); [Rev
17:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#008), said to ascend out of the
bottomless pit: its very culture and world wisdom only intensify its
infernal character, the pretense to superior knowledge and rationalistic
philosophy (as in the primeval temptation, [Gen
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#005), [Gen
3:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#007), "their EYES \[as here\] were
opened") veiling the deification of nature, self, and man. Hence spring
Idealism, Materialism, Deism, Pantheism, Atheism. Antichrist shall be
the culmination. The Papacy's claim to the double power, secular and
spiritual, is a sample and type of the twofold beast, that out of the
sea, and that out of the earth, or bottomless pit. Antichrist will be
the climax, and final form. PRIMASIUS OF ADRUMENTUM, in the sixth
century, says, "He feigns to be a lamb that he may assail the Lamb--the
body of Christ."

[Revelation 13:12](../../../bib/kjv/rev013.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">rev 13:12</span></span>

power--Greek, "authority."

before him--"in his presence"; as ministering to, and upholding him.
"The non-existence of the beast embraces the whole Germanic Christian
period. The healing of the wound and return of the beast is represented
\[in regard to its final Antichristian manifestation though including
also, meanwhile, its healing and return under Popery, which is baptized
heathenism\] in that principle which, since 1789, has manifested itself
in beast-like outbreaks" \[AUBERLEN\].

which dwell therein--the earthly-minded. The Church becomes the harlot:
the world's political power, the Antichristian beast; the world's wisdom
and civilization, the false prophet. Christ's three offices are thus
perverted: the first beast is the false kingship; the harlot, the false
priesthood; the second beast, the false prophet. The beast is the
bodily, the false prophet the intellectual, the harlot the spiritual
power of Antichristianity \[AUBERLEN\]. The Old-Testament Church stood
under the power of the beast, the heathen world power: the Middle-Ages
Church under that of the harlot: in modern times the false prophet
predominates. But in the last days all these God-opposed powers which
have succeeded each other shall co-operate, and raise each other to the
most terrible and intense power of their nature: the false prophet
causes men to worship the beast, and the beast carries the harlot. These
three forms of apostasy are reducible to two: the apostate Church and
the apostate world, pseudo-Christianity and Antichristianity, the harlot
and the beast; for the false prophet is also a beast; and the two
beasts, as different manifestations of the same beast-like principle,
stand in contradistinction to the harlot, and are finally judged
together, whereas separate judgment falls on the harlot \[AUBERLEN\].

deadly wound--Greek, "wound of death."

[Revelation 13:13](../../../bib/kjv/rev013.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">rev 13:13</span></span>

wonders--Greek, "signs."

so that--so great that.

maketh fire--Greek, "maketh even fire." This is the very miracle which
the two witnesses perform, and which Elijah long ago had performed; this
the beast from the bottomless pit, or the false prophet, mimics. Not
merely tricks, but miracles of a demoniacal kind, and by demon aid, like
those of the Egyptian magicians, shall be wrought, most calculated to
deceive; wrought "after the working (Greek, 'energy') of Satan."

[Revelation 13:14](../../../bib/kjv/rev013.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">rev 13:14</span></span>

deceiveth them that dwell on the earth--the earthly-minded, but not the
elect. Even a miracle is not enough to warrant belief in a professed
revelation unless that revelation be in harmony with God's already
revealed will.

by the means of those miracles--rather as Greek, "on account of (because
of; in consequence of) those miracles."

which he had power to do--Greek, "which were given him to do."

in the sight of the beast--"before him" ([Rev
13:12](../../../bib/kjv/rev013.htm#012)).

which--A, B, and C read, "who"; marking, perhaps, a personal Antichrist.

had--So B and ANDREAS read. But A, C, and Vulgate read, "hath."

[Revelation 13:15](../../../bib/kjv/rev013.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">rev 13:15</span></span>

he had power--Greek, "it was given to him."

to give life--Greek, "breath," or "spirit."

image--Nebuchadnezzar set up in Dura a golden image to be worshipped,
probably of himself; for his dream had been interpreted, "Thou art this
head of gold"; the three Hebrews who refused to worship the image were
east into a burning furnace. All this typifies the last apostasy. PLINY,
in his letter to Trajan, states that he consigned to punishment those
Christians who would not worship the emperor's image with incense and
wine. So JULIAN, the apostate, set up his own image with the idols of
the heathen gods in the Forum, that the Christians in doing reverence to
it, might seem to worship the idols. So Charlemagne's image was set up
for homage; and the Pope adored the new emperor \[DUPIN, vol. 6, p.
126\]. Napoleon, the successor of Charlemagne, designed after he had
first lowered the Pope by removing him to Fontainebleau, then to "make
an idol of him" \[Memorial de Sainte Helene\]; keeping the Pope near
him, he would, through the Pope's influence, have directed the
religious, as well as the political world. The revived Napoleonic
dynasty may, in some one representative, realize the project, becoming
the beast supported by the false prophet (perhaps some openly infidel
supplanter of the papacy, under a spiritual guise, after the harlot, or
apostate Church, who is distinct from the second beast, has been
stripped and judged by the beast, [Rev
17:16](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#016)); he then might have an image
set up in his honor as a test of secular and spiritual allegiance.

speak--"False doctrine will give a spiritual, philosophical appearance
to the foolish apotheosis of the creaturely personified by Antichrist"
\[AUBERLEN\]. JEROME, on Daniel 7, says, Antichrist shall be "one of the
human race in whom the whole of Satan shall dwell bodily." Rome's
speaking images and winking pictures of the Virgin Mary and the saints
are an earnest of the future demoniacal miracles of the false prophet in
making the beast's or Antichrist's image to speak.

[Revelation 13:16](../../../bib/kjv/rev013.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">rev 13:16</span></span>

to receive a mark--literally, "that they should give them a mark"; such
a brand as masters stamp on their slaves, and monarchs on their
subjects. Soldiers voluntarily punctured their arms with marks of the
general under whom they served. Votaries of idols branded themselves
with the idol's cipher or symbol. Thus Antiochus Epiphanes branded the
Jews with the ivy leaf, the symbol of Bacchus (2 Maccabees 6:7; 3
Maccabees 2:29). Contrast God's seal and name in the foreheads of His
servants, [Rev 7:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev007.htm#003); [Rev
14:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#001); [Rev
22:4](../../../bib/kjv/rev022.htm#004); and [Gal
6:17](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#017), "I bear in my body the marks of
the Lord Jesus," that is, I am His soldier and servant. The mark in the
right hand and forehead implies the prostration of bodily and
intellectual powers to the beast's domination. "In the forehead by way
of profession; in the hand with respect to work and service"
\[AUGUSTINE\].

[Revelation 13:17](../../../bib/kjv/rev013.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">rev 13:17</span></span>

And--So A, B, and Vulgate read. C, IRENÃ†US, 316, Coptic, and Syriac
omit it.

might buy--Greek, "may be able to buy."

the mark, or the name--Greek, "the mark (namely), the name of the
beast." The mark may be, as in the case of the sealing of the saints in
the forehead, not a visible mark, but symbolical of allegiance. So the
sign of the cross in Popery. The Pope's interdict has often shut out the
excommunicate from social and commercial intercourse. Under the final
Antichrist this shall come to pass in its most violent form.

number of his name--implying that the name has some numerical meaning.

[Revelation 13:18](../../../bib/kjv/rev013.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">rev 13:18</span></span>

wisdom--the armory against the second beast, as patience and faith
against the first. Spiritual wisdom is needed to solve the mystery of
iniquity, so as not to be beguiled by it.

count . . . for--The "for" implies the possibility of our calculating or
counting the beast's number.

the number of a man--that is, counted as men generally count. So the
phrase is used in [Rev 21:17](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#017). The
number is the number of a man, not of God; he shall extol himself above
the power of the Godhead, as the MAN of sin \[AQUINAS\]. Though it is an
imitation of the divine name, it is only human.

six hundred threescore and six--A and Vulgate write the numbers in full
in the Greek. But B writes merely the three Greek letters standing for
numbers, Ch, X, St. "C reads" 616, but IRENÃ†US, 328, opposes this and
maintains "666." IRENÃ†US, in the second century, disciple of POLYCARP,
John's disciple, explained this number as contained in the Greek letters
of Lateinos (L being thirty; A, one; T, three hundred; E, five; I, ten;
N, fifty; O, seventy; S, two hundred). The Latin is peculiarly the
language of the Church of Rome in all her official acts; the forced
unity of language in ritual being the counterfeit of the true unity; the
premature and spurious anticipation of the real unity, only to be
realized at Christ's coming, when all the earth shall speak "one
language" ([Zep 3:9](../../../bib/kjv/zep003.htm#009)). The last
Antichrist may have a close connection with Rome, and so the name
Lateinos (666) may apply to him. The Hebrew letters of Balaam amount to
666 \[BUNSEN\]; a type of the false prophet, whose characteristic, like
Balaam's, will be high spiritual knowledge perverted to Satanic ends.
The number six is the world number; in 666 it occurs in units, tens, and
hundreds. It is next neighbor to the sacred seven, but is severed from
it by an impassable gulf. It is the number of the world given over to
judgment; hence there is a pause between the sixth and seventh seals,
and the sixth and seventh trumpets. The judgments on the world are
complete in six; by the fulfilment of seven, the kingdoms of the world
become Christ's. As twelve is the number of the Church, so six, its
half, symbolizes the world kingdom broken. The raising of the six to
tens and hundreds (higher powers) indicates that the beast,
notwithstanding his progression to higher powers, can only rise to
greater ripeness for judgment. Thus 666, the judged world power,
contrasts with the 144,000 sealed and transfigured ones (the Church
number, twelve, squared and multiplied by one thousand, the number
symbolizing the world pervaded by God; ten, the world number, raised to
the power of three the number of God) \[AUBERLEN\]. The "mark" (Greek,
"charagma") and "name" are one and the same. The first two radical
letters of Christ (Greek, "Christos"), Ch and R, are the same as the
first two of charagma, and were the imperial monogram of Christian Rome.
Antichrist, personating Christ, adopts a symbol like, but not agreeing
with, Christ's monogram, Ch, X, St; whereas the radicals in "Christ" are
Ch, R, St. Papal Rome has similarly substituted the standard of the Keys
for the standard of the Cross; so on the papal coinage (the image of
power, [Mat 22:20](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#020)). The two first
letters of "Christ," Ch, R, represent seven hundred, the perfect number.
The Ch, X, St represent an imperfect number, a triple falling away
(apostasy) from septenary perfection \[WORDSWORTH\].

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Revelation Chapter 14](rev014)

</div>
