<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Revelation Index](rev)  
  [Previous](rev016)  [Next](rev018) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*A Commentary, Critical, Practical, and Explanatory on the Old and New
Testaments*, by Robert Jamieson, A.R. Fausset and David Brown \[1882\]
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Revelation Chapter 17](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#001)

[Revelation 17:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">rev 17:1</span></span>

THE HARLOT BABYLON'S GAUD: THE BEAST ON WHICH SHE RIDES, HAVING SEVEN
HEADS AND TEN HORNS, SHALL BE THE INSTRUMENT OF JUDGMENT ON HER. (Rev.
17:1-18)

unto me--A, B, Vulgate, Syriac, and Coptic omit.

many--So A. But B, "the many waters" ([Jer
51:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#013)); [Rev
17:15](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#015), below, explains the sense. The
whore is the apostate Church, just as "the woman" ([Rev
12:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/rev012.htm#001)) is the Church while faithful.
Satan having failed by violence, tries too successfully to seduce her by
the allurements of the world; unlike her Lord, she was overcome by this
temptation; hence she is seen sitting on the scarlet-colored beast, no
longer the wife, but the harlot; no longer Jerusalem, but spiritually
Sodom ([Rev 11:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev011.htm#008)).

[Revelation 17:2](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">rev 17:2</span></span>

drunk with--Greek, "owing to." It cannot be pagan Rome, but papal Rome,
if a particular seat of error be meant, but I incline to think that the
judgment ([Rev 18:2](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#002)) and the spiritual
fornication ([Rev 18:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#003)), though
finding their culmination in Rome, are not restricted to it, but
comprise the whole apostate Church, Roman, Greek, and even Protestant,
so far as it has been seduced from its "first love" ([Rev
2:4](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#004)) to Christ, the heavenly
Bridegroom, and given its affections to worldly pomps and idols. The
woman ([Rev 12:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev012.htm#001)) is the congregation
of God in its purity under the Old and New Testament, and appears again
as the Bride of the Lamb, the transfigured Church prepared for the
marriage feast. The woman, the invisible Church, is latent in the
apostate Church, and is the Church militant; the Bride is the Church
triumphant.

[Revelation 17:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">rev 17:3</span></span>

the wilderness--Contrast her in [Rev
12:6](../../../bib/kjv/rev012.htm#006), [Rev
12:14](../../../bib/kjv/rev012.htm#014), having a place in the
wilderness-world, but not a home; a sojourner here, looking for the city
to come. Now, on the contrary, she is contented to have her portion in
this moral wilderness.

upon a scarlet . . . beast--The same as in [Rev
13:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev013.htm#001), who there is described as here,
"having seven heads and ten horns (therein betraying that he is
representative of the dragon, [Rev
12:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev012.htm#003)), and upon his heads names (so
the oldest manuscripts read) of blasphemy"; compare also [Rev
17:12-14](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#012), below, with [Rev
19:19-20](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#019), and [Rev
17:13-14](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#013), [Rev
17:16](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#016). Rome, resting on the world
power and ruling it by the claim of supremacy, is the chief, though not
the exclusive, representative of this symbol. As the dragon is
fiery-red, so the beast is blood-red in color; implying its
blood-guiltiness, and also deep-dyed sin. The scarlet is also the symbol
of kingly authority.

full--all over; not merely "on his heads," as in [Rev
13:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev013.htm#001), for its opposition to God is now
about to develop itself in all its intensity. Under the harlot's
superintendence, the world power puts forth blasphemous pretensions
worse than in pagan days. So the Pope is placed by the cardinals in
God's temple on the altar to sit there, and the cardinals kiss the feet
of the Pope. This ceremony is called in Romish writers "the adoration."
\[Historie de Clerge, Amsterd., 1716; and LETTENBURGH'S Notitia
CuriÃ&brvbr; RomanÃ&brvbr;, 1683, p. 125; HEIDEGGER, Myst. Bab., 1, 511,
514, 537\]; a papal coin \[Numismata Pontificum, Paris, 1679, p. 5\] has
the blasphemous legend, "Quem creant, adorant." Kneeling and kissing are
the worship meant by John's word nine times used in respect to the rival
of God (Greek, "proskunein"). Abomination, too, is the scriptural term
for an idol, or any creature worshipped with the homage due to the
Creator. Still, there is some check on the God-opposed world power while
ridden by the harlot; the consummated Antichrist will be when, having
destroyed her, the beast shall be revealed as the concentration and
incarnation of all the self-deifying God-opposed principles which have
appeared in various forms and degrees heretofore. "The Church has gained
outward recognition by leaning on the world power which in its turn uses
the Church for its own objects; such is the picture here of Christendom
ripe for judgment" \[AUBERLEN\]. The seven heads in the view of many are
the seven successive forms of government of Rome: kings, consuls,
dictators, decemvirs, military tribunes, emperors, the German emperors
\[WORDSWORTH\], of whom Napoleon is the successor ([Rev
17:11](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#011)). But see the view given, see on
[Rev 17:9-10](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#009), which I prefer. The
crowns formerly on the ten horns ([Rev
13:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev013.htm#001)) have now disappeared, perhaps an
indication that the ten kingdoms into which the Germanic-Slavonic world
\[the old Roman empire, including the East as well as the West, the two
legs of the image with five toes on each, that is, ten in all\] is to be
divided, will lose their monarchical form in the end \[AUBERLEN\]; but
see [Rev 17:12](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#012), which seems to imply
crowned kings.

[Revelation 17:4](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">rev 17:4</span></span>

The color scarlet, it is remarkable, is that reserved for popes and
cardinals. Paul II made it penal for anyone but cardinals to wear hats
of scarlet; compare Roman Ceremonial \[3.5.5\]. This book was compiled
several centuries ago by MARCELLUS, a Romish archbishop, and dedicated
to Leo X. In it are enumerated five different articles of dress of
scarlet color. A vest is mentioned studded with pearls. The Pope's miter
is of gold and precious stones. These are the very characteristics
outwardly which Revelation thrice assigns to the harlot or Babylon. So
Joachim an abbot from Calabria, about A.D. 1200, when asked by Richard
of England, who had summoned him to Palestine, concerning Antichrist,
replied that "he was born long ago at Rome, and is now exalting himself
above all that is called God." ROGER HOVEDEN \[Annals, 1.2\], and
elsewhere, wrote, "The harlot arrayed in gold is the Church of Rome."
Whenever and wherever (not in Rome alone) the Church, instead of being
"clothed (as at first, [Rev 12:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev012.htm#001)) with
the sun" of heaven, is arrayed in earthly meretricious gauds,
compromising the truth of God through fear, or flattery, of the world's
power, science, or wealth, she becomes the harlot seated on the beast,
and doomed in righteous retribution to be judged by the beast ([Rev
17:16](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#016)). Soon, like Rome, and like the
Jews of Christ's and the apostles' time leagued with the heathen Rome,
she will then become the persecutor of the saints ([Rev
17:6](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#006)). Instead of drinking her Lord's
"cup" of suffering, she has "a cup full of abominations and
filthinesses." Rome, in her medals, represents herself holding a cup
with the self-condemning inscription, "Sedet super universum." Meanwhile
the world power gives up its hostility and accepts Christianity
externally; the beast gives up its God-opposed character, the woman
gives up her divine one. They meet halfway by mutual concessions;
Christianity becomes worldly, the world becomes Christianized. The
gainer is the world; the loser is the Church. The beast for a time
receives a deadly wound ([Rev 13:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev013.htm#003)),
but is not really transfigured; he will return worse than ever ([Rev
17:11-14](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#011)). The Lord alone by His
coming can make the kingdoms of this world become the kingdoms of our
Lord and His Christ. The "purple" is the badge of empire; even as in
mockery it was put on our Lord.

decked--literally, "gilded."

stones--Greek, "stone."

filthiness--A, B, and ANDREAS read, "the filthy (impure) things."

[Revelation 17:5](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">rev 17:5</span></span>

upon . . . forehead . . . name--as harlots usually had. What a contrast
to "HOLINESS TO THE LORD," inscribed on the miter on the high priest's
forehead!

mystery--implying a spiritual fact heretofore hidden, and incapable of
discovery by mere reason, but now revealed. As the union of Christ and
the Church is a "great mystery" (a spiritual truth of momentous
interest, once hidden, now revealed, [Eph
5:31-32](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#031)), so the Church conforming to
the world and thereby becoming a harlot is a counter "mystery" (or
spiritual truth, symbolically now revealed). As iniquity in the harlot
is a leaven working in "mystery," and therefore called "the mystery of
iniquity," so when she is destroyed, the iniquity heretofore working
(comparatively) latently in her, shall be revealed in the man of
iniquity, the open embodiment of all previous evil. Contrast the
"mystery of God" and "godliness," [Rev
10:7](../../../bib/kjv/rev010.htm#007); [Ti1
3:16](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#016). It was Rome that crucified
Christ; that destroyed Jerusalem and scattered the Jews; that persecuted
the early Christians in pagan times, and Protestant Christians in papal
times; and probably shall be again restored to its pristine grandeur,
such as it had under the CÃ&brvbr;sars, just before the burning of the
harlot and of itself with her. So HIPPOLYTUS \[On Antichrist\] (who
lived in the second century), thought. Popery cannot be at one and the
same time the "mystery of iniquity," and the manifested or revealed
Antichrist. Probably it will compromise for political power ([Rev
17:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#003)) the portion of Christianity
still in its creed, and thus shall prepare the way for Antichrist's
manifestation. The name Babylon, which in the image, [Dan
2:32](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#032), [Dan
2:38](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#038), is given to the head, is here
given to the harlot, which marks her as being connected with the fourth
kingdom, Rome, the last part of the image. Benedict XIII, in his
indiction for a jubilee, A.D. 1725, called Rome "the mother of all
believers, and the mistress of all churches" (harlots like herself). The
correspondence of syllables and accents in Greek is striking; "He porne
kai to therion; He numphe kai to arnion." "The whore and the beast; the
Bride and the Lamb."

of harlots--Greek, "of the harlots and of the abominations." Not merely
Rome, but Christendom as a whole, even as formerly Israel as a whole,
has become a harlot. The invisible Church of true believers is hidden
and dispersed in the visible Church. The boundary lines which separate
harlot and woman are not denominational nor drawn externally, but can
only be spiritually discerned. If Rome were the only seat of Babylon,
much of the spiritual profit of Revelation would be lost to us; but the
harlot "sitteth upon many waters" ([Rev
17:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#001)), and "ALL nations have drunk of
the wine of her fornication" ([Rev
17:2](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#002); [Rev
18:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#003); "the earth," [Rev
19:2](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#002)). External extensiveness over the
whole world and internal conformity to the world--worldliness in extent
and contents--is symbolized by the name of the world city, "Babylon." As
the sun shines on all the earth, thus the woman clothed with the sun is
to let her light penetrate to the uttermost parts of the earth. But she,
in externally Christianizing the world, permits herself to be seduced by
the world; thus her universality or catholicity is not that of the
Jerusalem which we look for ("the MOTHER of us all," [Rev
21:2](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#002); [Isa
2:2-4](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#002); [Gal
4:26](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#026)), but that of Babylon, the
world-wide but harlot city! (As Babylon was destroyed, and the Jews
restored to Jerusalem by Cyrus, so our Cyrus--a Persian name meaning the
sun--the Sun of righteousness, shall bring Israel, literal and
spiritual, to the holy Jerusalem at His coming. Babylon and Jerusalem
are the two opposite poles of the spiritual world). Still, the Romish
Church is not only accidentally and as a matter of fact, but in virtue
of its very PRINCIPLE, a harlot, the metropolis of whoredom, "the mother
of harlots"; whereas the evangelical Protestant Church is, according to
her principle and fundamental creed, a chaste woman; the Reformation was
a protest of the woman against the harlot. The spirit of the heathen
world kingdom Rome had, before the Reformation, changed the Church in
the West into a Church-State, Rome; and in the East, into a
State-Church, fettered by the world power, having its center in
Byzantium; the Roman and Greek churches have thus fallen from the
invisible spiritual essence of the Gospel into the elements of the world
\[AUBERLEN\]. Compare with the "woman" called "Babylon" here, the woman
named "wickedness," or "lawlessness," "iniquity" ([Zac
5:7-8](../../../bib/kjv/zac005.htm#007), [Zac
5:11](../../../bib/kjv/zac005.htm#011)), carried to Babylon: compare
"the mystery of iniquity" and "the man of sin," "that wicked one,"
literally, "the lawless one" ([Th2
2:7-8](../../../bib/kjv/th2002.htm#007); also [Mat
24:12](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#012)).

[Revelation 17:6](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">rev 17:6</span></span>

martyrs--witnesses.

I wondered with great admiration--As the Greek is the same in the verb
and the noun, translate the latter "wonder." John certainly did not
admire her in the modern English sense. Elsewhere ([Rev
17:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#008); [Rev
13:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev013.htm#003)), all the earthly-minded ("they
that dwell on the earth") wonder in admiration of the beast. Here only
is John's wonder called forth; not the beast, but the woman sunken into
the harlot, the Church become a world-loving apostate, moves his
sorrowful astonishment at so awful a change. That the world should be
beastly is natural, but that the faithful bride should become the whore
is monstrous, and excites the same amazement in him as the same awful
change in Israel excited in Isaiah and Jeremiah. "Horrible thing" in
them answers to "abominations" here. "Corruptio optimi pessima"; when
the Church falls, she sinks lower than the godless world, in proportion
as her right place is higher than the world. It is striking that in [Rev
17:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#003), "woman" has not the article,
"the woman," as if she had been before mentioned: for though identical
in one sense with the woman, [Rev
12:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/rev012.htm#001), in another sense she is not.
The elect are never perverted into apostates, and still remain as the
true woman invisibly contained in the harlot; yet Christendom regarded
as the woman has apostatized from its first faith.

[Revelation 17:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">rev 17:8</span></span>

beast . . . was, and is not--(Compare [Rev
17:11](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#011)). The time when the beast "is
not" is the time during which it has "the deadly wound"; the time of the
seventh head becoming Christian externally, when its beast-like
character was put into suspension temporarily. The healing of its wound
answers to its ascending out of the bottomless pit. The beast, or
Antichristian world power, returns worse than ever, with satanic powers
from hell ([Rev 11:7](../../../bib/kjv/rev011.htm#007)), not merely from
the sea of convulsed nations ([Rev
13:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev013.htm#001)). Christian civilization gives
the beast only a temporary wound, whence the deadly wound is always
mentioned in connection with its being healed up the non-existence of
the beast in connection with its reappearance; and Daniel does not even
notice any change in the world power effected by Christianity. We are
endangered on one side by the spurious Christianity of the harlot, on
the other by the open Antichristianity of the beast; the third class is
Christ's little flock."

go--So B, Vulgate, and ANDREAS read the future tense. But A and
IRENÃ†US, "goeth."

into perdition--The continuance of this revived seventh (that is, the
eighth) head is short: it is therefore called "the son of perdition,"
who is essentially doomed to it almost immediately after his appearance.

names were--so Vulgate and ANDREAS. But A, B, Syriac, and Coptic read
the singular, "name is."

written in--Greek, "upon."

which--rather, "when they behold the beast that it was," &c. So Vulgate.

was, and is not, and yet is--A, B, and ANDREAS read, "and shall come"
(literally, "be present," namely, again: Greek, "kai parestai"). The
Hebrew, "tetragrammaton," or sacred four letters in Jehovah, "who is,
who was, and who is to come," the believer's object of worship, has its
contrasted counterpart in the beast "who was, and is not, and shall be
present," the object of the earth's worship \[BENGEL\]. They exult with
wonder in seeing that the beast which had seemed to have received its
death blow from Christianity, is on the eve of reviving with greater
power than ever on the ruins of that religion which tormented them ([Rev
11:10](../../../bib/kjv/rev011.htm#010)).

[Revelation 17:9](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">rev 17:9</span></span>

Compare [Rev 13:18](../../../bib/kjv/rev013.htm#018); [Dan
12:10](../../../bib/kjv/dan012.htm#010), where similarly spiritual
discernment is put forward as needed in order to understand the
symbolical prophecy.

seven heads and seven mountains--The connection between mountains and
kings must be deeper than the mere outward fact to which incidental
allusion is made, that Rome (the then world city) is on seven hills
(whence heathen Rome had a national festival called Septimontium, the
feast of the seven-hilled city \[PLUTARCH\]; and on the imperial coins,
just as here, she is represented as a woman seated on seven hills. Coin
of Vespasian, described by CAPTAIN SMYTH \[Roman Coins, p. 310;
ACKERMAN, 1, p. 87\]). The seven heads can hardly be at once seven kings
or kingdoms ([Rev 17:10](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#010)), and seven
geographical mountains. The true connection is, as the head is the
prominent part of the body, so the mountain is prominent in the land.
Like "sea" and "earth"and "waters . . . peoples" ([Rev
17:15](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#015)), so "mountains" have a
symbolical meaning, namely, prominent seats of power. Especially such as
are prominent hindrances to the cause of God ([Psa
68:16-17](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#016); [Isa
40:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#004); [Isa
41:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa041.htm#015); [Isa
49:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#011); [Eze
35:2](../../../bib/kjv/eze035.htm#002)); especially Babylon (which
geographically was in a plain, but spiritually is called a destroying
mountain, [Jer 51:25](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#025)), in majestic
contrast to which stands Mount Zion, "the mountain of the Lord's house"
([Isa 2:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#002)), and the heavenly mount;
[Rev 21:10](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#010), "a great and high mountain
. . . and that great city, the holy Jerusalem." So in [Dan
2:35](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#035), the stone becomes a
mountain--Messiah's universal kingdom supplanting the previous world
kingdoms. As nature shadows forth the great realities of the spiritual
world, so seven-hilled Rome is a representative of the seven-headed
world power of which the dragon has been, and is the prince. The "seven
kings" are hereby distinguished from the "ten kings" ([Rev
17:12](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#012)): the former are what the latter
are not, "mountains," great seats of the world power. The seven
universal God-opposed monarchies are Egypt (the first world power which
came into collision with God's people,) Assyria, Babylon, Greece,
Medo-Persia, Rome, the Germanic-Slavonic empire (the clay of the fourth
kingdom mixed with its iron in Nebuchadnezzar's image, a fifth material,
[Dan 2:33-34](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#033), [Dan
2:42-43](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#042), symbolizing this last head).
These seven might seem not to accord with the seven heads in [Dan
7:4-7](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#004), one head on the first beast
(Babylon), one on the second (Medo-Persia), four on the third (Greece;
namely, Egypt, Syria, Thrace with Bithynia, and Greece with Macedon):
but Egypt and Greece are in both lists. Syria answers to Assyria (from
which the name Syria is abbreviated), and Thrace with Bithynia answers
to the Gothic-Germanic-Slavonic hordes which, pouring down on Rome from
the North, founded the Germanic-Slavonic empire. The woman sitting on
the seven hills implies the Old and New Testament Church conforming to,
and resting on, the world power, that is, on all the seven world
kingdoms. Abraham and Isaac dissembling as to their wives through fear
of the kings of Egypt foreshadowed this. Compare Eze. 16:1-63; Eze.
23:1-49, on Israel's whoredoms with Egypt, Assyria, Babylon; and [Mat
7:24](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#024); [Mat
24:10-12](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#010), [Mat
24:23-26](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#023), on the characteristics of
the New Testament Church's harlotry, namely, distrust, suspicion,
hatred, treachery, divisions into parties, false doctrine.

[Revelation 17:10](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">rev 17:10</span></span>

there are--Translate, "they (the seven heads) are seven kings."

five . . . one--Greek, "the five . . . the one"; the first five of the
seven are fallen (a word applicable not to forms of government passing
away, but to the fall of once powerful empires: Egypt, Eze. 29:1-30:26;
Assyria and Nineveh, Nah. 3:1-19; Babylon, [Rev
18:2](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#002); Jer. 50:1-51:64; Medo-Persia,
[Dan 8:3-7](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#003), [Dan
8:20-22](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#020); [Dan
10:13](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#013); [Dan
11:2](../../../bib/kjv/dan011.htm#002); Greece, [Dan
11:4](../../../bib/kjv/dan011.htm#004)). Rome was "the one" existing in
John's days. "Kings" is the Scripture phrase for kingdoms, because these
kingdoms are generally represented in character by some one prominent
head, as Babylon by Nebuchadnezzar, Medo-Persia by Cyrus, Greece by
Alexander, &c.

the other is not yet come--not as ALFORD, inaccurately representing
AUBERLEN, the Christian empire beginning with Constantine; but, the
Germanic-Slavonic empire beginning and continuing in its beast-like,
that is, HEATHEN Antichristian character for only "a short space." The
time when it is said of it, "it is not" ([Rev
17:11](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#011)), is the time during which it is
"wounded to death," and has the "deadly wound" ([Rev
13:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev013.htm#003)). The external Christianization
of the migrating hordes from the North which descended on Rome, is the
wound to the beast answering to the earth swallowing up the flood
(heathen tribes) sent by the dragon, Satan, to drown the woman, the
Church. The emphasis palpably is on "a short space," which therefore
comes first in the Greek, not on "he must continue," as if his
continuance for some \[considerable\] time were implied, as ALFORD
wrongly thinks. The time of external Christianization (while the beast's
wound continues) has lasted for centuries, ever since Constantine. Rome
and the Greek Church have partially healed the wound by image worship.

[Revelation 17:11](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">rev 17:11</span></span>

beast that . . . is not--his beastly character being kept down by
outward Christianization of the state until he starts up to life again
as "the eighth" king, his "wound being healed" ([Rev
13:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev013.htm#003)), Antichrist manifested in
fullest and most intense opposition to God. The "he" is emphatic in the
Greek. He, peculiarly and pre-eminently: answering to "the little horn"
with eyes like the eyes of a man, and a mouth speaking great things,
before whom three of the ten horns were plucked up by the roots, and to
whom the whole ten "give their power and strength" ([Rev
17:12-13](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#012), [Rev
17:17](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#017)). That a personal Antichrist
will stand at the head of the Antichristian kingdom, is likely from the
analogy of Antiochus Epiphanes, the Old Testament Antichrist, "the
little horn" in [Dan 8:9-12](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#009); also,
"the man of sin, son of perdition" ([Th2
2:3-8](../../../bib/kjv/th2002.htm#003)), answers here to "goeth into
perdition," and is applied to an individual, namely, Judas, in the only
other passage where the phrase occurs ([Joh
17:12](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#012)). He is essentially a child of
destruction, and hence he has but a little time ascended out of the
bottomless pit, when he "goes into perdition" ([Rev
17:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#008), [Rev
17:11](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#011)). "While the Church passes
through death of the flesh to glory of the Spirit, the beast passes
through the glory of the flesh to death" \[AUBERLEN\].

is of the seven--rather "springs out of the seven." The eighth is not
merely one of the seven restored, but a new power or person proceeding
out of the seven, and at the same time embodying all the God-opposed
features of the previous seven concentrated and consummated; for which
reason there are said to be not eight, but only seven heads, for the
eighth is the embodiment of all the seven. In the birth-pangs which
prepare the "regeneration" there are wars, earthquakes, and disturbances
\[AUBERLEN\], wherein Antichrist takes his rise ("sea," [Rev
13:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev013.htm#001); [Mar
13:8](../../../bib/kjv/mar013.htm#008); [Luk
21:9-11](../../../bib/kjv/luk021.htm#009)). He does not fall like the
other seven ([Rev 17:10](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#010)), but is
destroyed, going to his own perdition, by the Lord in person.

[Revelation 17:12](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">rev 17:12</span></span>

ten kings . . . received no kingdom as yet; but receive power as kings .
. . with the beast--Hence and from [Rev
17:14](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#014), [Rev
17:16](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#016), it seems that these ten kings
or kingdoms, are to be contemporaries with the beast in its last or
eighth form, namely, Antichrist. Compare [Dan
2:34](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#034), [Dan
2:44](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#044), "the stone smote the image upon
his feet," that is, upon the ten toes, which are, in [Dan
2:41-44](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#041), interpreted to be "kings."
The ten kingdoms are not, therefore, ten which arose in the overthrow of
Rome (heathen), but are to rise out of the last state of the fourth
kingdom under the eighth head. I agree with ALFORD that the phrase "as
kings," implies that they reserve their kingly rights in their alliance
with the beast, wherein "they give their power and strength unto" him
([Rev 17:13](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#013)). They have the name of
kings, but not with undivided kingly power \[WORDSWORTH\]. See
AUBERLEN'S not so probable view, see on [Rev
17:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#003).

one hour--a definite time of short duration, during which "the devil is
come down to the inhabitant of the earth and of the sea, having great
wrath, because he knoweth that he hath but a short time." Probably the
three and a half years ([Rev 11:2-3](../../../bib/kjv/rev011.htm#002);
[Rev 13:5](../../../bib/kjv/rev013.htm#005)). Antichrist is in existence
long before the fall of Babylon; but it is only at its fail he obtains
the vassalage of the ten kings. He in the first instance imposes on the
Jews as the Messiah, coming in his own name; then persecutes those of
them who refuse his blasphemous pretensions. Not until the sixth vial,
in the latter part of his reign, does he associate the ten kings with
him in war with the Lamb, having gained them over by the aid of the
spirits of devils working miracles. His connection with Israel appears
from his sitting "in the temple of God" ([Th2
2:4](../../../bib/kjv/th2002.htm#004)), and as the antitypical
"abomination of desolation standing in the Holy place" ([Dan
9:27](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#027); [Dan
12:11](../../../bib/kjv/dan012.htm#011); [Mat
24:15](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#015)), and "in the city where our
Lord was crucified" ([Rev 11:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev011.htm#008)). It is
remarkable that IRENÃ†US \[Against Heresies, 5:25\] and CYRIL OF
JERUSALEM \[RUFINUS, Historia Monachorum, 10.37\] prophesied that
Antichrist would have his seat at Jerusalem and would restore the
kingdom of the Jews. JULIAN the apostate, long after, took part with the
Jews, and aided in building their temple, herein being Antichrist's
forerunner.

[Revelation 17:13](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">rev 17:13</span></span>

one mind--one sentiment.

shall give--So Coptic. But A, B, and Syriac, "give."

strength--Greek, "authority." They become his dependent allies ([Rev
17:14](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#014)). Thus Antichrist sets up to be
King of kings, but scarcely has he put forth his claim when the true
KING OF KINGS appears and dashes him down in a moment to destruction.

[Revelation 17:14](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">rev 17:14</span></span>

These shall . . . war with the Lamb--in league with the beast. This is a
summary anticipation of [Rev 19:19](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#019).
This shall not be till after they have first executed judgment on the
harlot ([Rev 17:15-16](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#015)).

Lord of lords, &c.--anticipating [Rev
19:16](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#016).

are--not in the Greek. Therefore translate, "And they that are with Him,
called chosen, and faithful (shall overcome them, namely, the beast and
his allied kings)." These have been with Christ in heaven unseen, but
now appear with Him.

[Revelation 17:15](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">rev 17:15</span></span>

([Rev 17:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#001); [Isa
8:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#007).) An impious parody of Jehovah who
"sitteth upon the flood" \[ALFORD\]. Also, contrast the "many waters"
[Rev 19:6](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#006), "Alleluia."

peoples, and multitudes, and nations, and tongues--The "peoples," &c.,
here mark the universality of the spiritual fornication of the Church.
The "tongues" remind us of the original Babel, the confusion of tongues,
the beginning of Babylon, and the first commencement of idolatrous
apostasy after the flood, as the tower was doubtless dedicated to the
deified heavens. Thus, Babylon is the appropriate name of the harlot.
The Pope, as the chief representative of the harlot, claims a double
supremacy over all peoples, typified by the "two swords" according to
the interpretation of Boniface VIII in the Bull, "Unam Sanctam," and
represented by the two keys: spiritual as the universal bishop, whence
he is crowned with the miter; and temporal, whence he is also crowned
with the tiara in token of his imperial supremacy. Contrast with the
Pope's diadems the "many diadems" of Him who alone has claim to, and
shall exercise when He shall come, the twofold dominion ([Rev
19:12](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#012)).

[Revelation 17:16](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">rev 17:16</span></span>

upon the beast--But A, B, Vulgate, and Syriac read, "and the beast."

shall make her desolate--having first dismounted her from her seat on
the beast ([Rev 17:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#003)).

naked--stripped of all her gaud ([Rev
17:4](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#004)). As Jerusalem used the world
power to crucify her Saviour, and then was destroyed by that very power,
Rome; so the Church, having apostatized to the world, shall have
judgment executed on her first by the world power, the beast and his
allies; and these afterwards shall have judgment executed on them by
Christ Himself in person. So Israel leaning on Egypt, a broken reed, is
pierced by it; and then Egypt itself is punished. So Israel's whoredom
with Assyria and Babylon was punished by the Assyrian and Babylonian
captivities. So the Church when it goes a-whoring after the word as if
it were the reality, instead of witnessing against its apostasy from
God, is false to its profession. Being no longer a reality itself, but a
sham, the Church is rightly judged by that world which for a time had
used the Church to further its own ends, while all the while "hating"
Christ's unworldly religion, but which now no longer wants the Church's
aid.

eat her flesh--Greek plural, "masses of flesh," that is, "carnal
possessions"; implying the fulness of carnality into which the Church is
sunk. The judgment on the harlot is again and again described ([Rev
18:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#001); [Rev
19:5](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#005)); first by an "angel having great
power" ([Rev 18:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#001)), then by "another
voice from heaven" (Rev. 18:4-20), then by "a mighty angel" ([Rev
18:21-24](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#021)). Compare [Eze
16:37-44](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#037), originally said of Israel,
but further applicable to the New Testament Church when fallen into
spiritual fornication. On the phrase, "eat . . . flesh" for prey upon
one's property, and injure the character and person, compare [Psa
14:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa014.htm#004); [Psa
27:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa027.htm#002); [Jer
10:25](../../../bib/kjv/jer010.htm#025); [Mic
3:3](../../../bib/kjv/mic003.htm#003). The First Napoleon's Edict
published at Rome in 1809, confiscating the papal dominions and joining
them to France, and later the severance of large portions of the Pope's
territory from his sway and the union of them to the dominions of the
king of Italy, virtually through Louis Napoleon, are a first instalment
of the full realization of this prophecy of the whore's destruction.
"Her flesh" seems to point to her temporal dignities and resources, as
distinguished from "herself" (Greek). How striking a retribution, that
having obtained her first temporal dominions, the exarchate of Ravenna,
the kingdom of the LOMBARDs, and the state of Rome, by recognizing the
usurper Pepin as lawful king of France, she should be stripped of her
dominions by another usurper of France, the Napoleonic dynasty!

burn . . . with fire--the legal punishment of an abominable fornication.

[Revelation 17:17](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">rev 17:17</span></span>

hath put--the prophetical past tense for the future.

fulfil--Greek, "do," or "accomplish." The Greek, "poiesai," is distinct
from that which is translated, "fulfilled," Greek, "telesthesontai,"
below.

his will--Greek, "his mind," or purpose; while they think only of doing
their own purpose.

to agree--literally, "to do" (or accomplish) one mind" or "purpose." A
and Vulgate omit this clause, but B supports it.

the words of God--foretelling the rise and downfall of the beast; Greek,
"hoi logoi," in A, B, and ANDREAS. English Version reading is Greek, "ta
rhemata," which is not well supported. No mere articulate utterances,
but the efficient words of Him who is the Word: Greek, "logos."

fulfilled-- ([Rev 10:7](../../../bib/kjv/rev010.htm#007)).

[Revelation 17:18](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">rev 17:18</span></span>

reigneth--literally, "hath kingship over the kings." The harlot cannot
be a mere city literally, but is called so in a spiritual sense ([Rev
11:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev011.htm#008)). Also the beast cannot represent
a spiritual power, but a world power. In this verse the harlot is
presented before us ripe for judgment. The eighteenth chapter details
that judgment.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Revelation Chapter 18](rev018)

</div>
