<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Romans Index](rom)  
  [Previous](rom005)  [Next](rom007) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*A Commentary, Critical, Practical, and Explanatory on the Old and New
Testaments*, by Robert Jamieson, A.R. Fausset and David Brown \[1882\]
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Romans Chapter 6](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#001)

[Romans 6:1](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">rom 6:1</span></span>

THE BEARING OF JUSTIFICATION BY GRACE UPON A HOLY LIFE. ([Rom
6:1-11](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#001))

What, &c.--The subject of this third division of our Epistle announces
itself at once in the opening question, "Shall we (or, as the true
reading is, "May we," "Are we to") continue in sin, that grace may
abound?" Had the apostle's doctrine been that salvation depends in any
degree upon our good works, no such objection to it could have been
made. Against the doctrine of a purely gratuitous justification, the
objection is plausible; nor has there ever been an age in which it has
not been urged. That it was brought against the apostles, we know from
[Rom 3:8](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#008); and we gather from [Gal
5:13](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#013); [Pe1
2:16](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#016); [Jde
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/jde001.htm#004), that some did give occasion to
the charge; but that it was a total perversion of the doctrine of Grace
the apostle here proceeds to show.

[Romans 6:2](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">rom 6:2</span></span>

God forbid--"That be far from us"; the instincts of the new creature
revolting at the thought.

How shall we, that are dead, &c.--literally, and more forcibly, "We who
died to sin (as presently to be explained), how shall we live any longer
therein?"

[Romans 6:3](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">rom 6:3</span></span>

Know ye not, that so many of us as were baptized into Jesus
Christ--compare [Co1 10:2](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#002).

were baptized into his death?--sealed with the seal of heaven, and as it
were formally entered and articled, to all the benefits and all the
obligations of Christian discipleship in general, and of His death in
particular. And since He was "made sin" and "a curse for us" ([Co2
5:21](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#021); [Gal
5:13](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#013)), "bearing our sins in His own
body on the tree," and "rising again for our justification" ([Rom
4:25](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#025); [Pe1
2:24](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#024)), our whole sinful case and
condition, thus taken up into His Person, has been brought to an end in
His death. Whoso, then, has been baptized into Christ's death has
formally surrendered the whole state and life of sin, as in Christ a
dead thing. He has sealed himself to be not only "the righteousness of
God in Him," but "a new creature"; and as he cannot be in Christ to the
one effect and not to the other, for they are one thing, he has bidden
farewell, by baptism into Christ's death, to his entire connection with
sin. "How," then, "can he live any longer therein?" The two things are
as contradictory in the fact as they are in the terms.

[Romans 6:4](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">rom 6:4</span></span>

Therefore we are--rather, "were" (it being a past act, completed at
once).

buried with him, by baptism into death--(The comma we have placed after
"him" will show what the sense is. It is not, "By baptism we are buried
with Him into death," which makes no sense at all; but, "By baptism with
Him into death we are buried with Him"; in other words, "By the same
baptism which publicly enters us into His death, we are made partakers
of His burial also"). To leave a dead body unburied is represented,
alike in heathen authors as in Scripture, as the greatest indignity
([Rev 11:8-9](../../../bib/kjv/rev011.htm#008)). It was fitting,
therefore, that Christ, after "dying for our sins according to the
Scriptures," should "descend into the lower parts of the earth" ([Eph
4:9](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#009)). As this was the last and lowest
step of His humiliation, so it was the honorable dissolution of His last
link of connection with that life which He laid down for us; and we, in
being "buried with Him by our baptism into His death," have by this
public act severed our last link of connection with that whole sinful
condition and life which Christ brought to an end in His death.

that like as Christ was raised from the dead by the glory of the
Father--that is, by such a forth-putting of the Father's power as was
the effulgence of His whole glory.

even so we also--as risen to a new life with Him.

should walk in newness of life--But what is that "newness?" Surely if
our old life, now dead and buried with Christ, was wholly sinful, the
new, to which we rise with the risen Saviour, must be altogether a holy
life; so that every time we go back to "those things whereof we are now
ashamed" ([Rom 6:21](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#021)), we belie our
resurrection with Christ to newness of life, and "forget that we have
been purged from our old sins" ([Pe2
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/pe2001.htm#009)). (Whether the mode of baptism by
immersion be alluded to in this verse, as a kind of symbolical burial
and resurrection, does not seem to us of much consequence. Many
interpreters think it is, and it may be so. But as it is not clear that
baptism in apostolic times was exclusively by immersion \[see on [Act
2:41](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#041)\], so sprinkling and washing are
indifferently used in the New Testament to express the cleansing
efficacy of the blood of Jesus. And just as the woman with the issue of
blood got virtue out of Christ by simply touching Him, so the essence of
baptism seems to lie in the simple contact of the element with the body,
symbolizing living contact with Christ crucified; the mode and extent of
suffusion being indifferent and variable with climate and
circumstances).

[Romans 6:5](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">rom 6:5</span></span>

For if we have been planted together--literally, "have become formed
together." (The word is used here only).

in the likeness of his death, we shall be also in the likeness of his
resurrection--that is, "Since Christ's death and resurrection are
inseparable in their efficacy, union with Him in the one carries with it
participation in the other, for privilege and for duty alike." The
future tense is used of participation in His resurrection, because this
is but partially realized in the present state. (See on [Rom
5:19](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#019)).

[Romans 6:6](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">rom 6:6</span></span>

Knowing this, &c.--The apostle now grows more definite and vivid in
expressing the sin-destroying efficacy of our union with the crucified
Saviour.

that our old man--"our old selves"; that is, "all that we were in our
old unregenerate condition, before union with Christ" (compare [Col
3:9-10](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#009); [Eph
4:22-24](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#022); [Gal
2:20](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#020); [Gal
5:24](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#024); [Gal
6:14](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#014)).

is--rather, "was."

crucified with him--in order.

that the body of sin--not a figure for "the mass of sin"; nor the
"material body," considered as the seat of sin, which it is not; but (as
we judge) for "sin as it dwells in us in our present embodied state,
under the law of the fall."

might be destroyed--(in Christ's death)--to the end.

that henceforth we should not serve sin--"be in bondage to sin."

[Romans 6:7](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">rom 6:7</span></span>

For he that is dead--rather, "hath died."

is freed--"hath been set free."

from sin--literally, "justified," "acquitted," "got his discharge from
sin." As death dissolves all claims, so the whole claim of sin, not only
to "reign unto death," but to keep its victims in sinful bondage, has
been discharged once for all, by the believer's penal death in the death
of Christ; so that he is no longer a "debtor to the flesh to live after
the flesh" ([Rom 8:12](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#012)).

[Romans 6:8](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">rom 6:8</span></span>

Now if we be dead--"if we died."

with Christ, &c.--See on [Rom 6:5](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#005).

[Romans 6:9](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">rom 6:9</span></span>

Christ being raised from the dead dieth no more; death hath no more
dominion over him--Though Christ's death was in the most absolute sense
a voluntary act ([Joh 10:17-18](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#017); [Act
2:24](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#024)), that voluntary surrender gave
death such rightful "dominion over Him" as dissolved its dominion over
us. But this once past, "death hath," even in that sense, "dominion over
Him no more."

[Romans 6:10](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">rom 6:10</span></span>

For in that he died, he died unto--that is, in obedience to the claims
of

sin once--for all.

but in that he liveth, he liveth unto--in obedience to the claims of
God.

God--There never, indeed, was a time when Christ did not "live unto
God." But in the days of His flesh He did so under the continual burden
of sin "laid on Him" ([Isa 53:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#006); [Co2
5:21](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#021)); whereas, now that He has "put
away sin by the sacrifice of Himself," He "liveth unto God," the
acquitted and accepted Surety, unchallenged and unclouded by the claims
of sin.

[Romans 6:11](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">rom 6:11</span></span>

Likewise--even as your Lord Himself.

reckon ye also yourselves to be dead indeed--"dead on the one hand"

unto sin, but alive unto God through Jesus Christ our Lord--(The words,
"our Lord," at the close of this verse, are wanting in the best
manuscripts.)

Note, (1) "Antinomianism is not only an error; it is a falsehood and a
slander" \[HODGE\]. That "we should continue in sin that grace may
abound," not only is never the deliberate sentiment of any real believer
in the doctrine of Grace, but is abhorrent to every Christian mind, as a
monstrous abuse of the most glorious of all truths ([Rom
6:1](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#001)). (2) As the death of Christ is
not only the expiation of guilt, but the death of sin itself in all who
are vitally united to Him; so the resurrection of Christ is the
resurrection of believers, not only to acceptance with God, but to
newness of life ([Rom 6:2-11](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#002)). (3) In
the light of these two truths, let all who name the name of Christ
"examine themselves whether they be in the faith."

[Romans 6:12](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">rom 6:12</span></span>

WHAT PRACTICAL USE BELIEVERS SHOULD MAKE OF THEIR DEATH TO SIN AND LIFE
TO GOD THROUGH UNION TO THE CRUCIFIED SAVIOUR. ([Rom
6:12-23](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#012))

Let not sin therefore--as a Master

reign--(The reader will observe that wherever in this section the words
"Sin," "Obedience," "Righteousness," "Uncleanness," "Iniquity," are
figuratively used, to represent a Master, they are here printed in
capitals, to make this manifest to the eye, and so save explanation).

in your mortal body, that ye should obey it--sin.

in the lusts thereof--"the lusts of the body," as the Greek makes
evident. (The other reading, perhaps the true one, "that ye should obey
the lusts thereof," comes to the same thing). The "body" is here viewed
as the instrument by which all the sins of the heart become facts of the
outward life, and as itself the seat of the lower appetites; and it is
called "our mortal body," probably to remind us how unsuitable is this
reign of sin in those who are "alive from the dead." But the reign here
meant is the unchecked dominion of sin within us. Its outward acts are
next referred to.

[Romans 6:13](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">rom 6:13</span></span>

Neither yield ye your members instruments of unrighteousness unto Sin,
but yield yourselves--this is the great surrender.

unto God as those that are alive from the dead, and--as the fruit of
this.

your members--till now prostituted to sin.

instruments of righteousness unto God--But what if indwelling sin should
prove too strong for us? The reply is: But it will not.

[Romans 6:14](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">rom 6:14</span></span>

For Sin shall not have dominion over you--as the slaves of a tyrant
lord.

for ye are not under the law, but under grace--The force of this
glorious assurance can only be felt by observing the grounds on which it
rests. To be "under the law" is, first, to be under its claim to entire
obedience; and so, next under its curse for the breach of these. And as
all power to obey can reach the sinner only through Grace, of which the
law knows nothing, it follows that to be "under the law" is, finally, to
be shut up under an inability to keep it, and consequently to be the
helpless slave of sin. On the other hand, to be "under grace," is to be
under the glorious canopy and saving effects of that "grace which reigns
through righteousness unto eternal life through Jesus Christ our Lord"
(see on [Rom 5:20-21](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#020)). The curse of
the law has been completely lifted from off them; they are made "the
righteousness of God in Him"; and they are "alive unto God through Jesus
Christ." So that, as when they were "under the law," Sin could not but
have dominion over them, so now that they are "under grace," Sin cannot
but be subdued under them. If before, Sin resistlessly triumphed, Grace
will now be more than conqueror.

[Romans 6:15](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">rom 6:15</span></span>

What then? . . . Know ye not--it is a dictate of common sense.

[Romans 6:16](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">rom 6:16</span></span>

that to whom ye yield yourselves servants to obey--with the view of
obeying him.

his servants ye are to whom ye obey--to whom ye yield that obedience.

whether of Sin unto death--that is, "issuing in death," in the awful
sense of [Rom 8:6](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#006), as the sinner's
final condition.

or of Obedience unto righteousness--that is, obedience resulting in a
righteous character, as the enduring condition of the servant of new
Obedience ([Jo1 2:17](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#017); [Joh
8:34](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#034); [Pe2
2:19](../../../bib/kjv/pe2002.htm#019); [Mat
6:24](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#024)).

[Romans 6:17](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">rom 6:17</span></span>

But God be thanked, that ye were the servants of Sin--that is, that this
is a state of things now past and gone.

but ye have obeyed from the heart that form of doctrine which was
delivered you--rather, "whereunto ye were delivered" (Margin), or cast,
as in a mould. The idea is, that the teaching to which they had heartily
yielded themselves had stamped its own impress upon them.

[Romans 6:18](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">rom 6:18</span></span>

Being then--"And being"; it is the continuation and conclusion of the
preceding sentence; not a new one.

made free from Sin, ye became the servants of--"servants to"

Righteousness--The case is one of emancipation from entire servitude to
one Master to entire servitude to another, whose property we are (see on
[Rom 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#001)). There is no middle state of
personal independence; for which we were never made, and to which we
have no claim. When we would not that God should reign over us, we were
in righteous judgment "sold under Sin"; now being through grace "made
free from Sin," it is only to become "servants to Righteousness," which
is our true freedom.

[Romans 6:19](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">rom 6:19</span></span>

I speak after the manner of men--descending, for illustration, to the
level of common affairs.

because of the infirmity of your flesh--the weakness of your spiritual
apprehension.

for as ye have yielded--"as ye yielded," the thing being viewed as now
past.

your members servants to Uncleanness and to Iniquity unto--the practice
of

iniquity; even so now yield your members servants to Righteousness unto
holiness--rather, "unto (the attainment of) sanctification," as the same
word is rendered in [Th2 2:13](../../../bib/kjv/th2002.htm#013); [Co1
1:30](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#030); [Pe1
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#002) : --that is, "Looking back upon
the heartiness with which ye served Sin, and the lengths ye went to be
stimulated now to like zeal and like exuberance in the service of a
better Master."

[Romans 6:20](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">rom 6:20</span></span>

For when ye were the servants--"were servants"

of Sin, ye were free from--rather, "in respect of"

Righteousness--Difficulties have been made about this clause where none
exist. The import of it seems clearly to be this:--"Since no servant can
serve two masters, much less where their interests come into deadly
collision, and each demands the whole man, so, while ye were in the
service of Sin ye were in no proper sense the servants of Righteousness,
and never did it one act of real service: whatever might be your
conviction of the claims of Righteousness, your real services were all
and always given to Sin: Thus had ye full proof of the nature and
advantages of Sin's service." The searching question with which this is
followed up, shows that this is the meaning.

[Romans 6:21](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">rom 6:21</span></span>

What fruit had ye then in those things whereof ye are now ashamed? for
the end of those things is death--What permanent advantage, and what
abiding satisfaction, have those things yielded? The apostle answers his
own question:--"Abiding satisfaction, did I ask? They have left only a
sense of 'shame.' Permanent advantage? 'The end of them is death.'" By
saying they were "now ashamed," he makes it plain that he is not
referring to that disgust at themselves, and remorse of conscience by
which those who are the most helplessly "sold under sin" are often stung
to the quick; but that ingenuous feeling of self-reproach, which pierces
and weighs down the children of God, as they think of the dishonor which
their past life did to His name, the ingratitude it displayed, the
violence it did to their own conscience, its deadening and degrading
effects, and the death--"the second death"--to which it was dragging
them down, when mere Grace arrested them. (On the sense of "death" here,
see on [Rom 5:12-21](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#012), Note 3, and [Rom
6:16](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#016) : see also [Rev
21:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#008) --The change proposed in the
pointing of this verse: "What fruit had ye then? things whereof ye are
now ashamed" \[LUTHER, THOLUCK, DE WETTE, PHILIPPI, ALFORD, &c.\], seems
unnatural and uncalled for. The ordinary pointing has at least powerful
support \[CHRYSOSTOM, CALVIN, BEZA, GROTIUS, BENGEL, STUART,
FRITZSCHE\]).

[Romans 6:22](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">rom 6:22</span></span>

But now--as if to get away from such a subject were unspeakable relief.

being made free from Sin, and become servants to God--in the absolute
sense intended throughout all this passage.

ye have--not "ought to have," but "do have," in point of fact.

your fruit unto holiness--"sanctification," as in [Rom
6:19](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#019); meaning that permanently holy
state and character which is built up out of the whole "fruits of
righteousness," which believers successively bring forth. They "have
their fruit" unto this, that is, all going towards this blessed result.

and the end everlasting life--as the final state of the justified
believer; the beatific experience not only of complete exemption from
the fall with all its effects, but of the perfect life of acceptance
with God, and conformity to His likeness, of unveiled access to Him, and
ineffable fellowship with Him through all duration.

[Romans 6:23](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">rom 6:23</span></span>

For the wages of sin is death; but the gift of God is eternal life
through--"in"

Jesus Christ our Lord--This concluding verse--as pointed as it is
brief--contains the marrow, the most fine gold, of the Gospel. As the
laborer is worthy of his hire, and feels it to be his due--his own of
right--so is death the due of sin, the wages the sinner has well wrought
for, his own. But "eternal life" is in no sense or degree the wages of
our righteousness; we do nothing whatever to earn or become entitled to
it, and never can: it is therefore, in the most absolute sense, "THE
GIFT OF GOD." Grace reigns in the bestowal of it in every case, and that
"in Jesus Christ our Lord," as the righteous Channel of it. In view of
this, who that hath tasted that the Lord is gracious can refrain from
saying, "Unto Him that loved us, and washed us from our sins in His own
blood, and hath made us kings and priests unto God and His Father, to
Him be glory and dominion for ever and ever. Amen!" ([Rev
1:5-6](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#005)).

Note, (1) As the most effectual refutation of the oft-repeated calumny,
that the doctrine of Salvation by grace encourages to continue in sin,
is the holy life of those who profess it, let such ever feel that the
highest service they can render to that Grace which is all their hope,
is to "yield themselves unto God, as those that are alive from the dead,
and their members instruments of righteousness unto God" ([Rom
6:12-13](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#012)). By so doing they will "put
to silence the ignorance of foolish men," secure their own peace, carry
out the end of their calling, and give substantial glory to Him that
loved them. (2) The fundamental principle of Gospel obedience is as
original as it is divinely rational; that "we are set free from the law
in order to keep it, and are brought graciously under servitude to the
law in order to be free" ([Rom
6:14-15](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#014), [Rom
6:18](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#018)). So long as we know no principle
of obedience but the terrors of the law, which condemns all the breakers
of it, and knows nothing whatever of grace, either to pardon the guilty
or to purify the stained, we are shut up under a moral impossibility of
genuine and acceptable obedience: whereas when Grace lifts us out of
this state, and through union to a righteous Surety, brings us into a
state of conscious reconciliation, and loving surrender of heart to a
God of salvation, we immediately feel the glorious liberty to be holy,
and the assurance that "Sin shall not have dominion over us" is as sweet
to our renewed tastes and aspirations as the ground of it is felt to be
firm, "because we are not under the Law, but under Grace." (3) As this
most momentous of all transitions in the history of a man is wholly of
God's free grace, the change should never be thought, spoken, or written
of but with lively thanksgiving to Him who so loved us ([Rom
6:17](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#017)). (4) Christians, in the service
of God, should emulate their former selves in the zeal and steadiness
with which they served sin, and the length to which they went in it
([Rom 6:19](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#019)). (5) To stimulate this
holy rivalry, let us often "look back to the rock whence we were hewn,
the hole of the pit whence we were digged," in search of the enduring
advantages and permanent satisfactions which the service of Sin yielded;
and when we find to our "shame" only gall and wormwood, let us follow a
godless life to its proper "end," until, finding ourselves in the
territories of "death," we are fain to hasten back to survey the service
of Righteousness, that new Master of all believers, and find Him leading
us sweetly into abiding "holiness," and landing us at length in
"everlasting life" ([Rom 6:20-22](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#020)). (6)
Death and life are before all men who hear the Gospel: the one, the
natural issue and proper reward of sin; the other, the absolutely free
"GIFT OF GOD" to sinners, "in Jesus Christ our Lord." And as the one is
the conscious sense of the hopeless loss of all blissful existence, so
the other is the conscious possession and enjoyment of all that
constitutes a rational creature's highest "life" for evermore ([Rom
6:23](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#023)). Ye that read or hear these
words, "I call heaven and earth to record this day against you, that I
have set before you life and death, blessing and cursing, therefore
choose life, that both thou and thy seed may live!" ([Deu
30:19](../../../bib/kjv/deu030.htm#019)).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Romans Chapter 7](rom007)

</div>
