<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Romans Index](rom)  
  [Previous](rom013)  [Next](rom015) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*A Commentary, Critical, Practical, and Explanatory on the Old and New
Testaments*, by Robert Jamieson, A.R. Fausset and David Brown \[1882\]
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Romans Chapter 14](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#001)

[Romans 14:1](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">rom 14:1</span></span>

SAME SUBJECT CONTINUED--CHRISTIAN FORBEARANCE. (Rom. 14:1-23)

Him that is weak in the faith--rather, "in faith"; that is, not "him
that is weak in the truth believed" \[CALVIN, BEZA, ALFORD, &c.\], but
(as most interpreters agree), "him whose faith wants that firmness and
breadth which would raise him above small scruples." (See on [Rom
14:22-23](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#022)).

receive ye--to cordial Christian fellowship.

but not to doubtful disputations--rather, perhaps, "not to the deciding
of doubts," or "scruples;" that is, not for the purpose of arguing him
out of them: which indeed usually does the reverse; whereas to receive
him to full brotherly confidence and cordial interchange of Christian
affection is the most effectual way of drawing them off. Two examples of
such scruples are here specified, touching Jewish meats and days. "The
strong," it will be observed, are those who knew these to be abolished
under the Gospel; "the weak" are those who had scruples on this point.

[Romans 14:2](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">rom 14:2</span></span>

one believeth that he may eat all things--See [Act
10:16](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#016).

another, who is weak, eateth herbs--restricting himself probably to a
vegetable diet, for fear of eating what might have been offered to
idols, and so would be unclean. (See [Co1
8:1-13](../../../bib/kjv/co1008.htm#001)).

[Romans 14:3](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">rom 14:3</span></span>

Let not him that eateth despise--look down superciliously upon "him that
eateth not."

and let not him that eateth not judge--sit in judgment censoriously upon
"him that eateth."

for God hath received him--as one of His dear children, who in this
matter acts not from laxity, but religious principle.

[Romans 14:4](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">rom 14:4</span></span>

Who art thou that judges another man's--rather, "another's"

servant?--that is, CHRIST'S, as the whole context shows, especially [Rom
14:8-9](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#008).

Yea, &c.--"But he shall be made to stand, for God is able to make him
stand"; that is, to make good his standing, not at the day of judgment,
of which the apostle treats in [Rom
14:10](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#010), but in the true fellowship of
the Church here, in spite of thy censures.

[Romans 14:5](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">rom 14:5</span></span>

One man esteemeth one day above another: another esteemeth every
day--The supplement "alike" should be omitted, as injuring the sense.

Let every man be fully persuaded in his own mind--be guided in such
matters by conscientious conviction.

[Romans 14:6](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">rom 14:6</span></span>

He that regardeth the day, regardeth it to the Lord--the Lord CHRIST, as
before.

and he . . . not, to the Lord he doth not--each doing what he believes
to be the Lord's will.

He that earth, eateth to the Lord, for he giveth God thanks; and he that
eateth not, to the Lord he eateth not, and giveth God thanks--The one
gave thanks to God for the flesh which the other scrupled to use; the
other did the same for the herbs to which, for conscience' sake, he
restricted himself. From this passage about the observance of days,
ALFORD unhappily infers that such language could not have been used if
the sabbath law had been in force under the Gospel in any form.
Certainly it could not, if the sabbath were merely one of the Jewish
festival days; but it will not do to take this for granted merely
because it was observed under the Mosaic economy. And certainly, if the
sabbath was more ancient than Judaism; if, even under Judaism, it was
enshrined among the eternal sanctities of the Decalogue, uttered, as no
other parts of Judaism were, amidst the terrors of Sinai; and if the
Lawgiver Himself said of it when on earth, "The Son of man is LORD EVEN
OF THE SABBATH DAY" (see [Mar 2:28](../../../bib/kjv/mar002.htm#028))
--it will be hard to show that the apostle must have meant it to be
ranked by his readers among those vanished Jewish festival days, which
only "weakness" could imagine to be still in force--a weakness which
those who had more light ought, out of love, merely to bear with.

[Romans 14:7](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">rom 14:7</span></span>

For none of us--Christians

liveth to himself--(See [Co2 5:14-15](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#014)),
to dispose of himself or shape his conduct after his own ideas and
inclinations.

and no man--"and none" of us Christians "dieth to himself."

[Romans 14:8](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">rom 14:8</span></span>

For whether we live, we live unto the Lord--the Lord CHRIST; see [Rom
14:9](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#009).

and whether we die, we die unto the Lord; whether we live therefore, or
die, we are the Lord's--Nothing but the most vivid explanation of these
remarkable words could make them endurable to any Christian ear, if
Christ were a mere creature. For Christ is here--in the most emphatic
terms, and yet in the most unimpassioned tone--held up as the supreme
Object of the Christian's life, and of his death too; and that by the
man whose horror of creature worship was such, that when the poor
Lycaonians would have worshipped him, he rushed forth to arrest the
deed, directing them to "the living God," as the only legitimate Object
of worship ([Act 14:15](../../../bib/kjv/act014.htm#015)). Nor does Paul
teach this here, but rather appeals to it as a known and recognized
fact, of which he had only to remind his readers. And since the apostle,
when he wrote these words, had never been at Rome, he could only know
that the Roman Christians would assent to this view of Christ, because
it was the common teaching of all the accredited preachers of
Christianity, and the common faith of all Christians.

[Romans 14:9](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">rom 14:9</span></span>

For to this end Christ both, &c.--The true reading here is, To this end
Christ died and lived ("again").

that he might be Lord both of the dead and--"and of the"

living--The grand object of His death was to acquire this absolute
Lordship over His redeemed, both in their living and in their dying, as
His of right.

[Romans 14:10](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">rom 14:10</span></span>

But why, &c.--The original is more lively:--"But thou (the weaker
believer), why judgest thou thy brother? And thou again (the stronger),
why despisest thou thy brother?"

for we shall all--the strong and the weak together.

stand before the judgment-seat of Christ--All the most ancient and best
manuscripts read here, "the judgment-seat of God." The present reading
doubtless crept in from [Co2 5:10](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#010),
where "the judgment-seat of Christ" occurs. But here "the judgment-seat
of God" seems to have been used, with reference to the quotation and the
inference in [Rom 14:11-12](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#011).

[Romans 14:11](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">rom 14:11</span></span>

For it is written-- ([Isa 45:23](../../../bib/kjv/isa045.htm#023)).

As I live, saith the Lord--Hebrew, JEHOVAH.

every knee shall bow to me, and every tongue shall confess to
God--consequently, shall bow to the award of God upon their character
and actions.

[Romans 14:12](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">rom 14:12</span></span>

So then--infers the apostle.

every one of us shall give account of himself to God--Now, if it be
remembered that all this is adduced quite incidentally, to show that
CHRIST is the absolute Master of all Christians, to rule their judgments
and feelings towards each other while "living," and to dispose of them
"dying," the testimony which it bears to the absolute Divinity of Christ
will appear remarkable. On any other view, the quotation to show that we
shall all stand before the judgment-seat of God would be a strange proof
that Christians are all amenable to Christ.

[Romans 14:13](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">rom 14:13</span></span>

Let us not therefore judge--"assume the office of judge over"

one another; but judge this rather, &c.--a beautiful sort of play upon
the word "judge," meaning, "But let this be your judgment, not to put a
stumbling-block," &c.

[Romans 14:14](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">rom 14:14</span></span>

I know, and am persuaded by--or rather, "in"

the Lord Jesus--as "having the mind of Christ" ([Co1
2:16](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#016)).

that there is nothing unclean of itself--Hence it is that he calls those
"the strong" who believed in the abolition of all ritual distinctions
under the Gospel. (See [Act 10:15](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#015)).

but--"save that"

to him that esteemeth anything to be unclean, to him it is unclean--"and
therefore, though you can eat of it with out sin, he cannot."

[Romans 14:15](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">rom 14:15</span></span>

But if thy brother be grieved--has his weak conscience hurt

with thy meat--rather, "because of meat." The word "meat" is purposely
selected as something contemptible in contrast with the tremendous risk
run for its sake. Accordingly, in the next clause, that idea is brought
out with great strength.

Destroy not him with--"by"

thy meat for whom Christ died--"The worth of even the poorest and
weakest brother cannot be more emphatically expressed than by the words,
'for whom Christ died'" \[OLSHAUSEN\]. The same sentiment is expressed
with equal sharpness in [Co1 8:11](../../../bib/kjv/co1008.htm#011).
Whatever tends to make anyone violate his conscience tends to the
destruction of his soul; and he who helps, whether wittingly or no, to
bring about the one is guilty of aiding to accomplish the other.

[Romans 14:16](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">rom 14:16</span></span>

Let not then your good--that is, this liberty of yours as to Jewish
meats and days, well founded though it be.

be evil spoken of--for the evil it does to others.

[Romans 14:17](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">rom 14:17</span></span>

For the kingdom of God--or, as we should say, Religion; that is, the
proper business and blessedness for which Christians are formed into a
community of renewed men in thorough subjection to God (compare [Co1
4:20](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#020)).

is not meat and drink--"eating and drinking"

but righteousness, and peace, and joy in the Holy Ghost--a beautiful and
comprehensive division of living Christianity. The
first--"righteousness"--has respect to God, denoting here "rectitude,"
in its widest sense (as in [Mat 6:33](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#033));
the second--"peace"--has respect to our neighbors, denoting "concord"
among brethren (as is plain from [Rom
14:19](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#019); compare [Eph
4:3](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#003); [Col
3:14-15](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#014)); the third--"joy in the Holy
Ghost"--has respect to ourselves. This phrase, "joy in the Holy Ghost,"
represents Christians as so thinking and feeling under the workings of
the Holy Ghost, that their joy may be viewed rather as that of the
blessed Agent who inspires it than their own (compare [Th1
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/th1001.htm#006)).

[Romans 14:18](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">rom 14:18</span></span>

For he that in these things--"in this," meaning this threefold life.

serveth Christ--Here again observe how, though we do these three things
as a "kingdom of God," yet it is "Christ" that we serve in so doing; the
apostle passing here from God to Christ as naturally as before from
Christ to God--in a way to us inconceivable, if Christ had been viewed
as a mere creature (compare [Co2
8:21](../../../bib/kjv/co2008.htm#021)).

is acceptable to God, and approved of men--these being the things which
God delights in, and men are constrained to approve. (Compare [Pro
3:4](../../../bib/kjv/pro003.htm#004); [Luk
2:52](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#052); [Act
2:47](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#047); [Act
19:20](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#020)).

[Romans 14:19](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">rom 14:19</span></span>

the things, &c.--more simply, "the things of peace, and the things of
mutual edification."

[Romans 14:20](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">rom 14:20</span></span>

For--"For the sake of"

meat destroy not the work of God--(See on [Rom
14:15](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#015)). The apostle sees in whatever
tends to violate a brother's conscience the incipient destruction of
God's work (for every converted man is such)--on the same principle as
"he that hateth his brother is a murderer" ([Jo1
3:15](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#015)).

All things indeed are pure--"clean"; the ritual distinctions being at an
end.

but it is evil to that man--there is criminality in the man

who eateth with offence--that is, so as to stumble a weak brother.

[Romans 14:21](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">rom 14:21</span></span>

It is good not to eat flesh, nor to drink wine, nor any thing--"nor to
do any thing"

whereby--"wherein"

thy brother stumbleth, or is offended, or is made weak--rather, "is
weak." These three words, it has been remarked, are each intentionally
weaker than the other:--"Which may cause a brother to stumble, or even
be obstructed in his Christian course, nay--though neither of these may
follow--wherein he continues weak; unable wholly to disregard the
example, and yet unprepared to follow it." But this injunction to
abstain from flesh, from wine, and from whatsoever may hurt the
conscience of a brother, must be properly understood. Manifestly, the
apostle is treating of the regulation of the Christian's conduct with
reference simply to the prejudices of the weak in faith; and his
directions are to be considered not as prescriptions for one's entire
lifetime, even to promote the good of men on a large scale, but simply
as cautions against the too free use of Christian liberty in matters
where other Christians, through weakness, are not persuaded that such
liberty is divinely allowed. How far the principle involved in this may
be legitimately extended, we do not inquire here; but ere we consider
that question, it is of great importance to fix how far it is here
actually expressed, and what is the precise nature of the illustrations
given of it.

[Romans 14:22](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">rom 14:22</span></span>

Hast thou faith--on such matters?

have it to thyself--within thine own breast

before God--a most important clause. It is not mere sincerity, or a
private opinion, of which the apostle speaks; it is conviction as to
what is the truth and will of God. If thou hast formed this conviction
in the sight of God, keep thyself in this frame before Him. Of course,
this is not to be over-pressed, as if it were wrong to discuss such
points at all with our weaker brethren. All that is here condemned is
such a zeal for small points as endangers Christian love.

Happy is he that condemneth not himself in that which he
alloweth--allows himself to do nothing, about the lawfulness of which he
has scruples; does only what he neither knows nor fears to be sinful.

[Romans 14:23](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">rom 14:23</span></span>

And--rather, "But"

he that doubteth is damned--On the word "damnation," see on [Rom
13:2](../../../bib/kjv/rom013.htm#002).

if he eat, because he eateth not of faith--On the meaning of "faith"
here, see on [Rom 14:22](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#022).

for whatsoever is not of faith is sin--a maxim of unspeakable importance
in the Christian life.

Note, (1) Some points in Christianity are unessential to Christian
fellowship; so that though one may be in error upon them, he is not on
that account to be excluded either from the communion of the Church or
from the full confidence of those who have more light. This distinction
between essential and non-essential truths is denied by some who affect
more than ordinary zeal for the honor and truth of God. But they must
settle the question with our apostle. (2) Acceptance with God is the
only proper criterion of right to Christian fellowship. Whom God
receives, men cannot lawfully reject ([Rom
14:3-4](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#003)). (3) As there is much
self-pleasing in setting up narrow standards of Christian fellowship, so
one of the best preservatives against the temptation to do this will be
found in the continual remembrance that CHRIST is the one Object for
whom all Christians live, and to whom all Christians die; this will be
such a living and exalted bond of union between the strong and the weak
as will overshadow all their lesser differences and gradually absorb
them ([Rom 14:7-9](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#007)). (4) The
consideration of the common judgment-seat at which the strong and the
weak shall stand together will be found another preservative against the
unlovely disposition to sit in judgment one on another ([Rom
14:10-12](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#010)). (5) How brightly does the
supreme Divinity of Christ shine out in this chapter! The exposition
itself supersedes further illustration here. (6) Though forbearance be a
great Christian duty, indifference to the distinction between truth and
error is not thereby encouraged. The former is, by the tax, made an
excuse for the latter. But our apostle, while teaching "the strong" to
bear with "the weak," repeatedly intimates in this chapter where the
truth really lay on the points in question, and takes care to call those
who took the wrong side "the weak" ([Rom
14:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#001), [Rom
14:14](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#014)). (7) With what holy jealousy
ought the purity of the conscience to be guarded, since every deliberate
violation of it is incipient perdition ([Rom
14:15](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#015), [Rom
14:20](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#020))! Some, who seem to be more
jealous for the honor of certain doctrines than for the souls of men,
enervate this terrific truth by asking how it bears upon the
"perseverance of the saints"; the advocates of that doctrine thinking it
necessary to explain away what is meant by "destroying the work of God"
([Rom 14:20](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#020)), and "destroying him for
whom Christ died" ([Rom 14:15](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#015)), for
fear of the doctrinal consequences of taking it nakedly; while the
opponents of that doctrine are ready to ask, How could the apostle have
used such language if he had believed that such a catastrophe was
impossible? The true answer to both lies in dismissing the question as
impertinent. The apostle is enunciating a great and eternal principle in
Christian Ethics--that the wilful violation of conscience contains
within itself a seed of destruction; or, to express it otherwise, that
the total destruction of the work of God in the renewed soul, and,
consequently, the loss of that soul for eternity, needs only the
carrying out to its full effect of such violation of the conscience.
Whether such effects do take place, in point of fact, the apostle gives
not the most distant hint here; and therefore that point must be settled
elsewhere. But, beyond all doubt, as the position we have laid down is
emphatically expressed by the apostle, so the interests of all who call
themselves Christians require to be proclaimed and pressed on every
suitable occasion. (8) Zeal for comparatively small points of truth is a
poor substitute for the substantial and catholic and abiding realities
of the Christian life ([Rom 14:17-18](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#017)).
(9) "Peace" among the followers of Christ is a blessing too precious to
themselves, and, as a testimony to them that are without, too important,
to be ruptured for trifles, even though some lesser truths be involved
in these ([Rom 14:19-20](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#019)). Nor are
those truths themselves disparaged or endangered thereby, but the
reverse. (10) Many things which are lawful are not expedient. In the use
of any liberty, therefore, our question should be, not simply, Is this
lawful? but even if so, Can it be used with safety to a brother's
conscience?--How will it affect my brother's soul ([Rom
14:21](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#021))? It is permitted to no
Christian to say with Cain, "Am I my brother's keeper?" ([Gen
4:9](../../../bib/kjv/gen004.htm#009)). (11) Whenever we are in doubt as
to a point of duty--where abstinence is manifestly sinless, but
compliance not clearly lawful--the safe course is ever to be preferred,
for to do otherwise is itself sinful. (12) How exalted and beautiful is
the Ethics of Christianity--by a few great principles teaching us how to
steer our course amidst practical difficulties, with equal regard to
Christian liberty, love, and confidence!

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Romans Chapter 15](rom015)

</div>
