<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Ruth Index](rut)  
  [Previous](rut001)  [Next](rut003) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*A Commentary, Critical, Practical, and Explanatory on the Old and New
Testaments*, by Robert Jamieson, A.R. Fausset and David Brown \[1882\]
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Ruth Chapter 2](../../../bib/kjv/rut002.htm#001)

[Ruth 2:2](../../../bib/kjv/rut002.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">rut 2:2</span></span>

RUTH GLEANS IN THE FIELD OF BOAZ. ([Rut
2:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/rut002.htm#001))

Ruth . . . said unto Naomi, Let me now go to the field, and glean--The
right of gleaning was conferred by a positive law on the widow, the
poor, and the stranger (see on [Lev
19:9](../../../bib/kjv/lev019.htm#009) and [Deu
24:19](../../../bib/kjv/deu024.htm#019)). But liberty to glean behind
the reapers \[[Rut 2:3](../../../bib/kjv/rut002.htm#003)\] was not a
right that could be claimed; it was a privilege granted or refused
according to the good will or favor of the owner.

[Ruth 2:3](../../../bib/kjv/rut002.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">rut 2:3</span></span>

her hap was to light on a part of the field belonging unto Boaz--Fields
in Palestine being unenclosed, the phrase signifies that portion of the
open ground which lay within the landmarks of Boaz.

[Ruth 2:4](../../../bib/kjv/rut002.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">rut 2:4</span></span>

HE TAKES KNOWLEDGE OF HER, AND SHOWS HER FAVOR. (Rth. 2:4-23)

Boaz came from Beth-lehem, and said unto the reapers, The Lord be with
you--This pious salutation between the master and his laborers strongly
indicates the state of religious feeling among the rural population of
Israel at that time, as well as the artless, happy, and unsuspecting
simplicity which characterized the manners of the people. The same
patriarchal style of speaking is still preserved in the East.

[Ruth 2:5](../../../bib/kjv/rut002.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">rut 2:5</span></span>

his servant that was set over the reapers--an overseer whose special
duty was to superintend the operations in the field, to supply provision
to the reapers, and pay them for their labor in the evening.

[Ruth 2:7](../../../bib/kjv/rut002.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">rut 2:7</span></span>

she said . . . Let me glean and gather after the reapers among the
sheaves--Various modes of reaping are practised in the East. Where the
crop is thin and short, it is plucked up by the roots. Sometimes it is
cut with the sickle. Whether reaped in the one way or the other, the
grain is cast into sheaves loosely thrown together, to be subjected to
the process of threshing, which takes place, for the most part,
immediately after the reaping. Field labors were begun early in the
morning--before the day became oppressively hot.

she tarried a little in the house--that is, the field tent, erected for
the occasional rest and refreshment of the laborers.

[Ruth 2:8](../../../bib/kjv/rut002.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">rut 2:8</span></span>

said Boaz unto Ruth, . . . bide here fast by my maidens--The reaping was
performed by women while the assortment of sheaves was the duty of
men-servants. The same division of harvest labor obtains in Syria still.
Boaz not only granted to Ruth the full privilege of gleaning after his
reapers, but provided for her personal comfort.

[Ruth 2:9](../../../bib/kjv/rut002.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">rut 2:9</span></span>

go unto the vessels, and drink of that which the young men have
drawn--Gleaners were sometimes allowed, by kind and charitable masters,
to partake of the refreshments provided for the reapers. The vessels
alluded to were skin bottles, filled with water--and the bread was
soaked in vinegar ([Rut 2:14](../../../bib/kjv/rut002.htm#014)); a kind
of poor, weak wine, sometimes mingled with a little olive oil--very
cooling, as would be required in harvest-time. This grateful refection
is still used in the harvest-field.

[Ruth 2:14](../../../bib/kjv/rut002.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">rut 2:14</span></span>

he reached her parched corn, and she did eat, and was sufficed, and
left--some of the new grain, roasted on the spot, and fit for use after
being rubbed in the hands--a favorite viand in the East. He gave her so
much, that after satisfying her own wants, she had some ([Rut
2:18](../../../bib/kjv/rut002.htm#018)) in reserve for her
mother-in-law.

[Ruth 2:16](../../../bib/kjv/rut002.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">rut 2:16</span></span>

let fall also some of the handfuls of purpose for her--The gleaners in
the East glean with much success; for a great quantity of corn is
scattered in the reaping, as well as in their manner of carrying it. One
may judge, then, of the large quantity which Ruth would gather in
consequence of the liberal orders given to the servants. These
extraordinary marks of favor were not only given from a kindly
disposition, but from regard to her good character and devoted
attachment to her venerable relative.

[Ruth 2:17](../../../bib/kjv/rut002.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">rut 2:17</span></span>

and beat out that she had gleaned--When the quantity of grain was small,
it was beat out by means of a stick.

an ephah--supposed to contain about a bushel.

[Ruth 2:20](../../../bib/kjv/rut002.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">rut 2:20</span></span>

the man is . . . one of our next kinsmen--Hebrew, "one of our
redeemers," on whom it devolves to protect us, to purchase our lands,
and marry you, the widow of his next kinsman. She said, "one of them,"
not that there were many in the same close relationship, but that he was
a very near kinsman, one other individual only having the precedence.

[Ruth 2:21](../../../bib/kjv/rut002.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">rut 2:21</span></span>

all my harvest--both barley and wheat harvests. The latter was at the
end of May or the beginning of June.

[Ruth 2:22](../../../bib/kjv/rut002.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">rut 2:22</span></span>

Naomi said unto Ruth . . . It is good . . . that thou go out with his
maidens--a prudent recommendation to Ruth to accept the generous
invitation of Boaz, lest, if she were seen straying into other fields,
she might not only run the risk of rude treatment, but displease him by
seeming indifferent to his kind liberality. Moreover, the observant mind
of the old matron had already discerned, in all Boaz' attentions to
Ruth, the germs of a stronger affection, which she wished to increase.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ruth Chapter 3](rut003)

</div>
