<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Ruth Index](rut)  
  [Previous](rut002)  [Next](rut004) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*A Commentary, Critical, Practical, and Explanatory on the Old and New
Testaments*, by Robert Jamieson, A.R. Fausset and David Brown \[1882\]
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Ruth Chapter 3](../../../bib/kjv/rut003.htm#001)

[Ruth 3:2](../../../bib/kjv/rut003.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">rut 3:2</span></span>

BY NAOMI'S INSTRUCTIONS, RUTH LIES AT BOAZ'S FEET, WHO ACKNOWLEDGES THE
DUTY OF A KINSMAN. ([Rut 3:1-13](../../../bib/kjv/rut003.htm#001))

he winnoweth barley to-night in the threshing-floor--The winnowing
process is performed by throwing up the grain, after being trodden down,
against the wind with a shovel. The threshing-floor, which was commonly
on the harvest-field, was carefully leveled with a large cylindric
roller and consolidated with chalk, that weeds might not spring up, and
that it might not chop with drought. The farmer usually remained all
night in harvest-time on the threshing-floor, not only for the
protection of his valuable grain, but for the winnowing. That operation
was performed in the evening to catch the breezes which blow after the
close of a hot day, and which continue for the most part of the night.
This duty at so important a season the master undertakes himself; and,
accordingly, in the simplicity of ancient manners, Boaz, a person of
considerable wealth and high rank, laid himself down to sleep on the
barn floor, at the end of the heap of barley he had been winnowing.

[Ruth 3:4](../../../bib/kjv/rut003.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">rut 3:4</span></span>

go in, and uncover his feet and lay thee down--Singular as these
directions may appear to us, there was no impropriety in them, according
to the simplicity of rural manners in Beth-lehem. In ordinary
circumstances these would have seemed indecorous to the world; but in
the case of Ruth, it was a method, doubtless conformable to prevailing
usage, of reminding Boaz of the duty which devolved on him as the
kinsman of her deceased husband. Boaz probably slept upon a mat or skin;
Ruth lay crosswise at his feet--a position in which Eastern servants
frequently sleep in the same chamber or tent with their master; and if
they want a covering, custom allows them that benefit from part of the
covering on their master's bed. Resting, as the Orientals do at night,
in the same clothes they wear during the day, there was no indelicacy in
a stranger, or even a woman, putting the extremity of this cover over
her.

[Ruth 3:9](../../../bib/kjv/rut003.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">rut 3:9</span></span>

I am Ruth thine handmaid: spread therefore thy skirt over thine
handmaid; for thou art a near kinsman--She had already drawn part of the
mantle over her; and she asked him now to do it, that the act might
become his own. To spread a skirt over one is, in the East, a symbolical
action denoting protection. To this day in many parts of the East, to
say of anyone that he put his skirt over a woman, is synonymous with
saying that he married her; and at all the marriages of the modern Jews
and Hindus, one part of the ceremony is for the bridegroom to put a
silken or cotton cloak around his bride.

[Ruth 3:15](../../../bib/kjv/rut003.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">rut 3:15</span></span>

Bring the veil that thou hast upon thee, and hold it--Eastern veils are
large sheets--those of ladies being of red silk; but the poorer or
common class of women wear them of blue, or blue and white striped linen
or cotton. They are wrapped round the head, so as to conceal the whole
face except one eye.

[Ruth 3:17](../../../bib/kjv/rut003.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">rut 3:17</span></span>

six measures of barley--Hebrew, "six seahs," a seah contained about two
gallons and a half, six of which must have been rather a heavy load for
a woman.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ruth Chapter 4](rut004)

</div>
