<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[1 Kings (1 Samuel) Index](sa1.md)  
  [Previous](sa1023)  [Next](sa1025.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*A Commentary, Critical, Practical, and Explanatory on the Old and New
Testaments*, by Robert Jamieson, A.R. Fausset and David Brown \[1882\]
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [1 Kings (1 Samuel) Chapter 24](../../../bib/kjv/sa1024.htm#001.md)

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 24:2](../../../bib/kjv/sa1024.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">sa1 24:2</span></span>

DAVID IN A CAVE AT ENGEDI CUTS OFF SAUL'S SKIRT, BUT SPARES HIS LIFE.
([Sa1 24:1-7](../../../bib/kjv/sa1024.htm#001).md)

Saul . . . went . . . to seek David . . . upon the rocks of the wild
goats--Nothing but the blind infatuation of fiendish rage could have led
the king to pursue his outlawed son-in-law among those craggy and
perpendicular precipices, where were inaccessible hiding places. The
large force he took with him seemed to give him every prospect of
success. But the overruling providence of God frustrated all his
vigilance.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 24:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa1024.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">sa1 24:3</span></span>

he came to the sheepcotes--most probably in the upper ridge of Wady
Chareitun. There a large cave--I am quite disposed to say the cave--lies
hardly five minutes to the east of the village ruin, on the south side
of the wady. It is high upon the side of the calcareous rock, and it has
undergone no change since David's time. The same narrow natural vaulting
at the entrance; the same huge natural chamber in the rock, probably the
place where Saul lay down to rest in the heat of the day; the same side
vaults, too, where David and his men were concealed. There, accustomed
to the obscurity of the cavern, they saw Saul enter, while, blinded by
the glare of the light outside, he saw nothing of him whom he so
bitterly persecuted.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 24:4](../../../bib/kjv/sa1024.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">sa1 24:4</span></span>

the men of David said . . . Behold the day of which the Lord said unto
thee, Behold, I will deliver thine enemy into thine hand--God had never
made any promise of delivering Saul into David's hand; but, from the
general and repeated promises of the kingdom to him, they concluded that
the king's death was to be effected by taking advantage of some such
opportunity as the present. David steadily opposed the urgent
instigations of his followers to put an end to his and their troubles by
the death of their persecutor (a revengeful heart would have followed
their advice, but David rather wished to overcome evil with good, and
heap coals of fire upon his head); he, however, cut off a fragment from
the skirt of the royal robe. It is easy to imagine how this dialogue
could be carried on and David's approach to the king's person could have
been effected without arousing suspicion. The bustle and noise of Saul's
military men and their beasts, the number of cells or divisions in these
immense caverns (and some of them far interior) being enveloped in
darkness, while every movement could be seen at the cave's mouth--the
probability that the garment David cut from might have been a loose or
upper cloak lying on the ground, and that Saul might have been
asleep--these facts and presumptions will be sufficient to account for
the incidents detailed.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 24:8](../../../bib/kjv/sa1024.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">sa1 24:8</span></span>

HE URGES THEREBY HIS INNOCENCY. ([Sa1
24:8-15](../../../bib/kjv/sa1024.htm#008).md)

David also arose . . . and went out of the cave, and cried after
Saul--The closeness of the precipitous cliffs, though divided by deep
wadies, and the transparent purity of the air enable a person standing
on one rock to hear distinctly the words uttered by a speaker standing
on another ([Jdg 9:7](../../../bib/kjv/jdg009.htm#007).md). The
expostulation of David, followed by the visible tokens he furnished of
his cherishing no evil design against either the person or the
government of the king, even when he had the monarch in his power, smote
the heart of Saul in a moment and disarmed him of his fell purpose of
revenge. He owned the justice of what David said, acknowledged his own
guilt, and begged kindness to his house. He seems to have been naturally
susceptible of strong, and, as in this instance, of good and grateful
impressions. The improvement of his temper, indeed, was but
transient--his language that of a man overwhelmed by the force of
impetuous emotions and constrained to admire the conduct, and esteem the
character, of one whom he hated and dreaded. But God overruled it for
ensuring the present escape of David. Consider his language and
behavior. This language--"a dead dog," "a flea," terms by which, like
Eastern people, he strongly expressed a sense of his lowliness and the
entire committal of his cause to Him who alone is the judge of human
actions, and to whom vengeance belongs, his steady repulse of the
vindictive counsels of his followers; the relentings of heart which he
felt even for the apparent indignity he had done to the person of the
Lord's anointed; and the respectful homage he paid the jealous tyrant
who had set a price on his head--evince the magnanimity of a great and
good man, and strikingly illustrate the spirit and energy of his prayer
"when he was in the cave" ([Psa
142:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa142.htm#001).md).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Kings (1 Samuel) Chapter 25](sa1025.md)

</div>
