<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[1 Kings (1 Samuel) Index](sa1.md)  
  [Previous](sa1002)  [Next](sa1004.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*A Commentary, Critical, Practical, and Explanatory on the Old and New
Testaments*, by Robert Jamieson, A.R. Fausset and David Brown \[1882\]
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [1 Kings (1 Samuel) Chapter 3](../../../bib/kjv/sa1003.htm#001.md)

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa1003.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">sa1 3:1</span></span>

THE LORD APPEARS TO SAMUEL IN A VISION. ([Sa1
3:1-10](../../../bib/kjv/sa1003.htm#001).md)

the child Samuel ministered unto the Lord before Eli--His ministry
consisted, of course, of such duties in or about the sanctuary as were
suited to his age, which is supposed now to have been about twelve
years. Whether the office had been specially assigned him, or it arose
from the interest inspired by the story of his birth, Eli kept him as
his immediate attendant; and he resided not in the sanctuary, but in one
of the tents or apartments around it, assigned for the accommodation of
the priests and Levites, his being near to that of the high priest.

the word of the Lord was precious in those days--It was very rarely
known to the Israelites; and in point of fact only two prophets are
mentioned as having appeared during the whole administration of the
judges ([Jdg 4:4](../../../bib/kjv/jdg004.htm#004.md); [Jdg
6:8](../../../bib/kjv/jdg006.htm#008).md).

there was no open vision--no publicly recognized prophet whom the people
could consult, and from whom they might learn the will of God. There
must have been certain indubitable evidences by which a communication
from heaven could be distinguished. Eli knew them, for he may have
received them, though not so frequently as is implied in the idea of an
"open vision."

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 3:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa1003.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">sa1 3:3</span></span>

ere the lamp of God went out in the temple of the Lord--The "temple"
seems to have become the established designation of the tabernacle, and
the time indicated was towards the morning twilight, as the lamps were
extinguished at sunrise (see [Lev
6:12-13](../../../bib/kjv/lev006.htm#012).md).

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 3:5](../../../bib/kjv/sa1003.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">sa1 3:5</span></span>

he ran unto Eli, and said, Here am I; for thou calledst me--It is
evident that his sleeping chamber was close to that of the aged high
priest and that he was accustomed to be called during the night. The
three successive calls addressed to the boy convinced Eli of the divine
character of the speaker, and he therefore exhorted the child to give a
reverential attention to the message. The burden of \[the Lord's
message\] was an extraordinary premonition of the judgments that
impended over Eli's house; and the aged priest, having drawn the painful
secret from the child, exclaimed, "It is the Lord; let him do what
seemeth him good." Such is the spirit of meek and unmurmuring submission
in which we ought to receive the dispensations of God, however severe
and afflictive. But, in order to form a right estimate of Eli's language
and conduct on this occasion, we must consider the overwhelming
accumulation of judgments denounced against his person, his sons, his
descendants--his altar, and nation. With such a threatening prospect
before him, his piety and meekness were wonderful. In his personal
character he seems to have been a good man, but his sons' conduct was
flagrantly bad; and though his misfortunes claim our sympathy, it is
impossible to approve or defend the weak and unfaithful course which, in
the retributive justice of God, brought these adversities upon him.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Kings (1 Samuel) Chapter 4](sa1004.md)

</div>
