<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[1 Kings (1 Samuel) Index](sa1.md)  
  [Previous](sa1014)  [Next](sa1016.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*A Commentary, Critical, Practical, and Explanatory on the Old and New
Testaments*, by Robert Jamieson, A.R. Fausset and David Brown \[1882\]
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [1 Kings (1 Samuel) Chapter 15](../../../bib/kjv/sa1015.htm#001.md)

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 15:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa1015.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">sa1 15:1</span></span>

SAUL SENT TO DESTROY AMALEK. ([Sa1
15:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/sa1015.htm#001).md)

Samuel also said unto Saul, The Lord sent me to anoint thee . . .: now
therefore hearken thou unto . . . the Lord--Several years had been
passed in successful military operations against troublesome neighbors.
During these Saul had been left to act in a great measure at his own
discretion as an independent prince. Now a second test is proposed of
his possessing the character of a theocratic monarch in Israel; and in
announcing the duty required of him, Samuel brought before him his
official station as the Lord's vicegerent, and the peculiar obligation
under which he was laid to act in that capacity. He had formerly done
wrong, for which a severe rebuke and threatening were administered to
him ([Sa1 13:13-14](../../../bib/kjv/sa1013.htm#013).md). Now an
opportunity was afforded him of retrieving that error by an exact
obedience to the divine command.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 15:2](../../../bib/kjv/sa1015.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">sa1 15:2</span></span>

Amalek--the powerful tribe which inhabited the country immediately to
the eastward of the northern Cushites. Their territory extended over the
whole of the eastern portion of the desert of Sinai to Rephidim--the
earliest opponent ([Deu 25:18](../../../bib/kjv/deu025.htm#018.md); [Exo
17:8-16](../../../bib/kjv/exo017.htm#008).md) --the hereditary and restless
enemy of Israel ([Num 14:45](../../../bib/kjv/num014.htm#045.md); [Jdg
3:13](../../../bib/kjv/jdg003.htm#013.md); [Jdg
6:3](../../../bib/kjv/jdg006.htm#003).md), and who had not repented ([Sa1
14:48](../../../bib/kjv/sa1014.htm#048).md) of their bitter and sleepless
hatred during the five hundred years that had elapsed since their doom
was pronounced. Being a people of nomadic habits, they were as
plundering and dangerous as the Bedouin Arabs, particularly to the
southern tribes. The national interest required, and God, as KING OF
ISRAEL, decreed that this public enemy should be removed. Their
destruction was to be without reservation or exception.

I remember--I am reminded of what Amalek did--perhaps by the still
remaining trophy or memorial erected by Moses ([Exo
17:15-16](../../../bib/kjv/exo017.htm#015).md).

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 15:4](../../../bib/kjv/sa1015.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">sa1 15:4</span></span>

Saul gathered the people together--The alacrity with which he entered on
the necessary preparations for the expedition gave a fair, but delusive
promise of faithfulness in its execution.

Telaim--or Telem, among the uttermost cities of the tribe of Judah
towards the coast of Edom ([Jos 15:21](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#021.md),
[Jos 15:24](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#024).md).

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 15:5](../../../bib/kjv/sa1015.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">sa1 15:5</span></span>

Saul came to a city of Amalek--probably their capital.

laid wait in the valley--following the strategic policy of Joshua at Ai
([Jos 8:4](../../../bib/kjv/jos008.htm#004).md).

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 15:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa1015.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">sa1 15:6</span></span>

Kenites--(See on [Jdg 1:16](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#016).md). In
consequence, probably, of the unsettled state of Judah, they seem to
have returned to their old desert tracts. Though now intermingled with
the Amalekites, they were not implicated in the offenses of that wicked
race; but for the sake of their ancestors, between whom and those of
Israel there had been a league of amity, a timely warning was afforded
them to remove from the scene of danger.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 15:7](../../../bib/kjv/sa1015.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">sa1 15:7</span></span>

HE SPARES AGAG AND THE BEST OF THE SPOIL. ([Sa1
15:7-9](../../../bib/kjv/sa1015.htm#007).md)

Saul smote the Amalekites--His own view of the proper and expedient
course to follow was his rule, not the command of God.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 15:8](../../../bib/kjv/sa1015.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">sa1 15:8</span></span>

he took Agag . . . alive--This was the common title of the Amalekite
kings. He had no scruple about the apparent cruelty of it, for he made
fierce and indiscriminate havoc of the people. But he spared Agag,
probably to enjoy the glory of displaying so distinguished a captive,
and, in like manner, the most valuable portions of the booty, as the
cattle. By this wilful and partial obedience to a positive command
\[[Sa1 15:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa1015.htm#003.md)\], complying with it in
some parts and violating it in others, as suited his own taste and
humor, Saul showed his selfish, arbitrary temper, and his love of
despotic power, and his utter unfitness to perform the duties of a
delegated king in Israel.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 15:10](../../../bib/kjv/sa1015.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">sa1 15:10</span></span>

GOD REJECTS HIS FOR DISOBEDIENCE. ([Sa1
15:10-11](../../../bib/kjv/sa1015.htm#010).md)

Then came the word of the Lord unto Samuel, saying, It repenteth me that
I have set up Saul--Repentance is attributed in Scripture to Him when
bad men give Him cause to alter His course and method of procedure, and
to treat them as if He did "repent" of kindness shown. To the heart of a
man like Samuel, who was above all envious considerations, and really
attached to the king, so painful an announcement moved all his pity and
led him to pass a sleepless night of earnest intercession.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 15:12](../../../bib/kjv/sa1015.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">sa1 15:12</span></span>

Saul came to Carmel--in the south of Judah ([Jos
15:55](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#055.md); [Sa1
25:2](../../../bib/kjv/sa1025.htm#002).md).

he set him up a place--that is, a pillar ([Sa2
18:18](../../../bib/kjv/sa2018.htm#018).md); literally, a hand, indicating
that whatever was the form of the monument, it was surmounted, according
to the ancient fashion, by the figure of a hand, the symbol of power and
energy. The erection of this vainglorious trophy was an additional act
of disobedience. His pride had overborne his sense of duty in first
raising this monument to his own honor, and then going to Gilgal to
offer sacrifice to God.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 15:13](../../../bib/kjv/sa1015.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">sa1 15:13</span></span>

Saul said unto him, Blessed be thou of the Lord: I have performed the
commandment of the Lord--Saul was either blinded by a partial and
delusive self-love, or he was, in his declaration to Samuel, acting the
part of a bold and artful hypocrite. He professed to have fulfilled the
divine command, and that the blame of any defects in the execution lay
with the people. Samuel saw the real state of the case, and in discharge
of the commission he had received before setting out, proceeded to
denounce his conduct as characterized by pride, rebellion, and obstinate
disobedience. When Saul persisted in declaring that he had obeyed,
alleging that the animals, whose bleating was heard, had been reserved
for a liberal sacrifice of thanksgiving to God, his shuffling,
prevaricating answer called forth a stern rebuke from the prophet. It
well deserved it--for the destination of the spoil to the altar was a
flimsy pretext--a gross deception, an attempt to conceal the selfishness
of the original motive under the cloak of religious zeal and gratitude.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 15:24](../../../bib/kjv/sa1015.htm#024.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">sa1 15:24</span></span>

I have sinned . . . turn again with me, that I may worship the Lord--The
erring, but proud and obstinate monarch was now humbled. He was
conscience-smitten for the moment, but his confession proceeded not from
sincere repentance, but from a sense of danger and desire of averting
the sentence denounced against him. For the sake of public appearance,
he besought Samuel not to allow their serious differences to transpire,
but to join with him in a public act of worship. Under the influence of
his painfully agitated feelings, he designed to offer sacrifice, partly
to express his gratitude for the recent victory, and partly to implore
mercy and a reversal of his doom. It was, from another angle, a politic
scheme, that Samuel might be betrayed into a countenancing of his design
in reserving the cattle for sacrificing. Samuel declined to accompany
him.

I feared the people, and obeyed their voice--This was a different reason
from the former he had assigned. It was the language of a man driven to
extremities, and even had it been true, the principles expounded by
Samuel showed that it could have been no extenuation of the offense. The
prophet then pronounced the irreversible sentence of the rejection of
Saul and his family. He was judicially cut off for his disobedience.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 15:27](../../../bib/kjv/sa1015.htm#027.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">sa1 15:27</span></span>

he laid hold upon the skirt of his mantle--the moil, upper tunic,
official robe. In an agony of mental excitement, he took hold of the
prophet's dress to detain him; the rending of the mantle \[[Sa1
15:27](../../../bib/kjv/sa1015.htm#027.md)\] was adroitly pointed to as a
significant and mystical representation of his severance from the
throne.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 15:29](../../../bib/kjv/sa1015.htm#029.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">sa1 15:29</span></span>

the Strength of Israel will not lie--Hebrew, "He that gives a victory to
Israel," a further rebuke of his pride in rearing the Carmel trophy, and
an intimation that no loss would be sustained in Israel by his
rejection.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 15:31](../../../bib/kjv/sa1015.htm#031.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">sa1 15:31</span></span>

Samuel turned again after Saul--not to worship along with him; but
first, that the people might have no ground, on pretense of Saul's
rejection, to withdraw their allegiance from him; and secondly, to
compensate for Saul's error, by executing God's judgment upon Agag.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 15:32](../../../bib/kjv/sa1015.htm#032.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">sa1 15:32</span></span>

Agag came unto him delicately--or cheerfully, since he had gained the
favor and protection of the king.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 15:33](../../../bib/kjv/sa1015.htm#033.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">sa1 15:33</span></span>

Samuel hewed Agag--This cruel tyrant met the retribution of a righteous
Providence. Never has it been unusual for great or official personages
in the East to perform executions with their own hands. Samuel did it
"before the Lord" in Gilgal, appointing that same mode of punishment
(hitherto unknown in Israel) to be used towards him, which he had
formerly used towards others.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Kings (1 Samuel) Chapter 16](sa1016.md)

</div>
