<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[1 Kings (1 Samuel) Index](sa1)  
  [Previous](sa1003)  [Next](sa1005) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*A Commentary, Critical, Practical, and Explanatory on the Old and New
Testaments*, by Robert Jamieson, A.R. Fausset and David Brown \[1882\]
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [1 Kings (1 Samuel) Chapter 4](../../../bib/kjv/sa1004.htm#001)

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 4:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa1004.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">sa1 4:1</span></span>

ISRAEL OVERCOME BY THE PHILISTINES. ([Sa1
4:1-11](../../../bib/kjv/sa1004.htm#001))

the word of Samuel came to all Israel--The character of Samuel as a
prophet was now fully established. The want of an "open vision" was
supplied by him, for "none of his words were let fall to the ground"
([Sa1 3:19](../../../bib/kjv/sa1003.htm#019)); and to his residence in
Shiloh all the people of Israel repaired to consult him as an oracle,
who, as the medium of receiving the divine command, or by his gift of a
prophet, could inform them what was the mind of God. It is not
improbable that the rising influence of the young prophet had alarmed
the jealous fears of the Philistines. They had kept the Israelites in
some degree of subjection ever since the death of Samson and were
determined, by further crushing, to prevent the possibility of their
being trained by the counsels, and under the leadership, of Samuel, to
reassert their national independence. At all events, the Philistines
were the aggressors ([Sa1 4:2](../../../bib/kjv/sa1004.htm#002)). But,
on the other hand, the Israelites were rash and inconsiderate in rushing
to the field without obtaining the sanction of Samuel as to the war, or
having consulted him as to the subsequent measures they took.

Israel went out against the Philistines to battle--that is, to resist
this new incursion.

Eben-ezer . . . Aphek--Aphek, which means "strength," is a name applied
to any fort or fastness. There were several Apheks in Palestine; but the
mention of Eben-ezer determines this "Aphek" to be in the south, among
the mountains of Judah, near the western entrance of the pass of
Beth-horon, and consequently on the borders of the Philistine territory.
The first encounter at Aphek being unsuccessful, the Israelites
determined to renew the engagement in better circumstances.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 4:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa1004.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">sa1 4:3</span></span>

Let us fetch the ark of the covenant of the Lord out of Shiloh unto
us--Strange that they were so blind to the real cause of the disaster
and that they did not discern, in the great and general corruption of
religion and morals ([Sa1 2:22-25](../../../bib/kjv/sa1002.htm#022);
[Sa1 7:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa1007.htm#003); [Psa
78:58](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#058)), the reason why the presence
and aid of God were not extended to them. Their first measure for
restoring the national spirit and energy ought to have been a complete
reformation--a universal return to purity of worship and morals. But,
instead of cherishing a spirit of deep humiliation and sincere
repentance, instead of resolving on the abolition of existing abuses,
and the re-establishing of the pure faith, they adopted what appeared an
easier and speedier course--they put their trust in ceremonial
observances, and doubted not but that the introduction of the ark into
the battlefield would ensure their victory. In recommending this
extraordinary step, the elders might recollect the confidence it
imparted to their ancestors ([Num
10:35](../../../bib/kjv/num010.htm#035); [Num
14:44](../../../bib/kjv/num014.htm#044)), as well as what had been done
at Jericho. But it is more probable that they were influenced by the
heathenish ideas of their idolatrous neighbors, who carried their idol
Dagon, or his sacred symbols, to their wars, believing that the power of
their divinities was inseparably associated with, or residing in, their
images. In short, the shout raised in the Hebrew camp, on the arrival of
the ark, indicated very plainly the prevalence among the Israelites at
this time of a belief in national deities--whose influence was local,
and whose interest was especially exerted in behalf of the people who
adored them. The joy of the Israelites was an emotion springing out of
the same superstitious sentiments as the corresponding dismay of their
enemies; and to afford them a convincing, though painful proof of their
error, was the ulterior object of the discipline to which they were now
subjected--a discipline by which God, while punishing them for their
apostasy by allowing the capture of the ark, had another end in
view--that of signally vindicating His supremacy over all the gods of
the nations.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 4:13](../../../bib/kjv/sa1004.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">sa1 4:13</span></span>

ELI HEARING THE TIDINGS. ([Sa1
4:12-22](../../../bib/kjv/sa1004.htm#012))

Eli sat upon a seat by the wayside--The aged priest, as a public
magistrate, used, in dispensing justice, to seat himself daily in a
spacious recess at the entrance gate of the city. In his intense anxiety
to learn the issue of the battle, he took up his usual place as the most
convenient for meeting with passers-by. His seat was an official chair,
similar to those of the ancient Egyptian judges, richly carved, superbly
ornamented, high, and without a back. The calamities announced to Samuel
as about to fall upon the family of Eli \[[Sa1
2:34](../../../bib/kjv/sa1002.htm#034)\] were now inflicted in the death
of his two sons, and after his death, by that of his daughter-in-law,
whose infant son received a name that perpetuated the fallen glory of
the church and nation \[[Sa1
4:19-22](../../../bib/kjv/sa1004.htm#019)\]. The public disaster was
completed by the capture of the ark. Poor Eli! He was a good man, in
spite of his unhappy weaknesses. So strongly were his sensibilities
enlisted on the side of religion, that the news of the capture of the
ark proved to him a knell of death; and yet his overindulgence, or sad
neglect of his family--the main cause of all the evils that led to its
fall--has been recorded, as a beacon to warn all heads of Christian
families against making shipwreck on the same rock.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Kings (1 Samuel) Chapter 5](sa1005)

</div>
