<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[1 Kings (1 Samuel) Index](sa1.md)  
  [Previous](sa1018)  [Next](sa1020.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*A Commentary, Critical, Practical, and Explanatory on the Old and New
Testaments*, by Robert Jamieson, A.R. Fausset and David Brown \[1882\]
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [1 Kings (1 Samuel) Chapter 19](../../../bib/kjv/sa1019.htm#001.md)

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 19:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa1019.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">sa1 19:1</span></span>

JONATHAN DISCLOSES HIS FATHER'S PURPOSE TO KILL DAVID. ([Sa1
19:1-7](../../../bib/kjv/sa1019.htm#001).md)

Saul spake to Jonathan his son, and to all his servants, that they
should kill David--The murderous design he had secretly cherished he now
reveals to a few of his intimate friends. Jonathan was among the number.
He prudently said nothing at the time, but secretly apprised David of
his danger; and waiting till the morning, when his father's excited
temper would be cooled, he stationed his friend in a place of
concealment, where, overhearing the conversation, he might learn how
matters really stood and take immediate flight, if necessary.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 19:4](../../../bib/kjv/sa1019.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">sa1 19:4</span></span>

Jonathan spake good of David--He told his father he was committing a
great sin to plot against the life of a man who had rendered the most
invaluable services to his country and whose loyalty had been uniformly
steady and devoted. The strong remonstrances of Jonathan produced an
effect on the impulsive mind of his father. As he was still susceptible
of good and honest impressions, he bound himself by an oath to
relinquish his hostile purpose; and thus, through the intervention of
the noble-minded prince, a temporary reconciliation was effected, in
consequence of which David was again employed in the public service.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 19:8](../../../bib/kjv/sa1019.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">sa1 19:8</span></span>

SAUL'S MALICIOUS RAGE BREAKS OUT AGAINST DAVID. ([Sa1
19:8-17](../../../bib/kjv/sa1019.htm#008).md)

David went out, and fought with the Philistines, and slew them with a
great slaughter--A brilliant victory was gained over the public enemy.
But these fresh laurels of David reawakened in the moody breast of Saul
the former spirit of envy and melancholy. On David's return to court,
the temper of Saul became more fiendish than ever; the melodious strains
of the harp had lost all their power to charm; and in a paroxysm of
uncontrollable frenzy he aimed a javelin at the person of David--the
missile having been thrown with such force that it pierced the chamber
wall. David providentially escaped; but the king, having now thrown off
the mask and being bent on aggressive measures, made his son-in-law's
situation everywhere perilous.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 19:11](../../../bib/kjv/sa1019.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">sa1 19:11</span></span>

Saul sent messengers unto David's house, to watch him, and to slay
him--The fear of causing a commotion in the town, or favoring his escape
in the darkness, seemed to have influenced the king in ordering them to
patrol till the morning. This infatuation was overruled by Providence to
favor David's escape; for his wife, secretly apprised by Jonathan, who
was aware of the design, or by spying persons in court livery watching
the gate, let him down through a window (see on [Jos
2:15](../../../bib/kjv/jos002.htm#015).md).

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 19:13](../../../bib/kjv/sa1019.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">sa1 19:13</span></span>

And Michal took an image, and laid it in the bed--"an image," literally,
"the teraphim," and laid, not in the bed, but literally on the "divan";
and "the pillows," that is, the cushion, which usually lay at the back
of the divan and was stuffed with "goat's hair," she took from its
bolster or heading at the upper part of the divan. This she placed lower
down, and covered with a mantle, as if to foster a proper warmth in a
patient; at the same time spreading the goat's hair skin, so as to
resemble human hair in a dishevelled state. The pretext was that David
lay there sick. The first messengers of Saul, keeping at a respectable
distance, were deceived; but the imposition was detected on a closer
inspection.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 19:15](../../../bib/kjv/sa1019.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">sa1 19:15</span></span>

Bring him to me in the bed--a portable couch or mattress.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 19:18](../../../bib/kjv/sa1019.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">sa1 19:18</span></span>

DAVID FLEES TO SAMUEL. ([Sa1 19:18-23](../../../bib/kjv/sa1019.htm#018).md)

David fled, . . . and came to Samuel to Ramah--Samuel was living in
great retirement, superintending the school of the prophets, established
in the little hamlet of Naioth, in the neighborhood of Ramah. It was a
retreat congenial to the mind of David; but Saul, having found out his
asylum, sent three successive bodies of men to apprehend him. The
character of the place and the influence of the sacred exercises
produced such an effect on them that they were incapable of discharging
their commission, and were led, by a resistless impulse, to join in
singing the praises of God. Saul, in a fit of rage and disappointment,
determined to go himself. But, before reaching the spot, his mental
susceptibilities were roused even more than his messengers, and he was
found, before long, swelling the ranks of the young prophets. This
singular change can be ascribed only to the power of Him who can turn
the hearts of men even as the rivers of water.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 19:24](../../../bib/kjv/sa1019.htm#024.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">sa1 19:24</span></span>

SAUL PROPHESIES. ([Sa1 19:24](../../../bib/kjv/sa1019.htm#024).md)

lay down naked--that is, divested of his armor and outer robes--in a
state of trance. Thus God, in making the wrath of man to praise Him,
preserved the lives of all the prophets, frustrated all the purposes of
Saul, and preserved the life of His servant.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Kings (1 Samuel) Chapter 20](sa1020.md)

</div>
