<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[1 Kings (1 Samuel) Index](sa1.md)  
  [Previous](sa1009)  [Next](sa1011.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*A Commentary, Critical, Practical, and Explanatory on the Old and New
Testaments*, by Robert Jamieson, A.R. Fausset and David Brown \[1882\]
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [1 Kings (1 Samuel) Chapter 10](../../../bib/kjv/sa1010.htm#001.md)

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 10:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa1010.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">sa1 10:1</span></span>

SAMUEL ANOINTS SAUL, AND CONFIRMS HIM BY THE PREDICTION OF THREE SIGNS.
(1Sa. 10:1-27)

Then Samuel took a vial of oil--This was the ancient ([Jdg
9:8](../../../bib/kjv/jdg009.htm#008).md) ceremony of investiture with the
royal office among the Hebrews and other Eastern nations. But there were
two unctions to the kingly office; the one in private, by a prophet
([Sa1 16:13](../../../bib/kjv/sa1016.htm#013).md), which was meant to be
only a prophetic intimation of the person attaining that high
dignity--the more public and formal inauguration ([Sa2
2:4](../../../bib/kjv/sa2002.htm#004.md); [Sa2
5:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa2005.htm#003).md) was performed by the high priest,
and perhaps with the holy oil, but that is not certain. The first of a
dynasty was thus anointed, but not his heirs, unless the succession was
disputed ([Kg1 1:39](../../../bib/kjv/kg1001.htm#039.md); [Kg2
11:12](../../../bib/kjv/kg2011.htm#012.md); [Kg2
23:30](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#030.md); [Ch2
23:11](../../../bib/kjv/ch2023.htm#011).md).

kissed him--This salutation, as explained by the words that accompanied
it, was an act of respectful homage, a token of congratulation to the
new king ([Psa 2:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#012).md).

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 10:2](../../../bib/kjv/sa1010.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">sa1 10:2</span></span>

When thou art departed from me to-day--The design of these specific
predictions of what should be met with on the way, and the number and
minuteness of which would arrest attention, was to confirm Saul's
reliance on the prophetic character of Samuel, and lead him to give full
credence to what had been revealed to him as the word of God.

Rachel's sepulchre--near Beth-lehem (see on [Gen
35:16](../../../bib/kjv/gen035.htm#016).md).

Zelzah--or Zelah, now Bet-jalah, in the neighborhood of that town.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 10:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa1010.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">sa1 10:3</span></span>

the plain--or, "the oak of Tabor," not the celebrated mount, for that
was far distant.

three men going up to God to Beth-el--apparently to offer sacrifices
there at a time when the ark and the tabernacle were not in a settled
abode, and God had not yet declared the permanent place which He should
choose. The kids were for sacrifice, the loaves for the offering, and
the wine for the libations.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 10:5](../../../bib/kjv/sa1010.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">sa1 10:5</span></span>

the hill of God--probably Geba ([Sa1
13:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa1013.htm#003).md), so called from a school of the
prophets being established there. The company of prophets were,
doubtless, the pupils at this seminary, which had probably been
instituted by Samuel, and in which the chief branches of education
taught were a knowledge of the law, and of psalmody with instrumental
music, which is called "prophesying" (here and in [Ch1
25:1](../../../bib/kjv/ch1025.htm#001.md), [Ch1
25:7](../../../bib/kjv/ch1025.htm#007).md).

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 10:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa1010.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">sa1 10:6</span></span>

the Spirit of the Lord will come upon thee--literally, "rush upon thee,"
suddenly endowing thee with a capacity and disposition to act in a
manner far superior to thy previous character and habits; and instead of
the simplicity, ignorance, and sheepishness of a peasant, thou wilt
display an energy, wisdom, and magnanimity worthy of a prince.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 10:8](../../../bib/kjv/sa1010.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">sa1 10:8</span></span>

thou shalt go down before me to Gilgal--This, according to JOSEPHUS, was
to be a standing rule for the observance of Saul while the prophet and
he lived; that in every great crisis, such as a hostile incursion on the
country, he should repair to Gilgal, where he was to remain seven days,
to afford time for the tribes on both sides Jordan to assemble, and
Samuel to reach it.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 10:9](../../../bib/kjv/sa1010.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">sa1 10:9</span></span>

when he had turned his back to go from Samuel, God gave him another
heart--Influenced by the words of Samuel, as well as by the
accomplishment of these signs, Saul's reluctance to undertake the
onerous office was overcome. The fulfilment of the two first signs
\[[Sa1 10:7-8](../../../bib/kjv/sa1010.htm#007.md)\] is passed over, but
the third is specially described. The spectacle of a man, though more
fit to look after his father's cattle than to take part in the sacred
exercises of the young prophets--a man without any previous instruction,
or any known taste, entering with ardor into the spirit, and skilfully
accompanying the melodies of the sacred band, was so extraordinary a
phenomenon, that it gave rise to the proverb, "Is Saul also among the
prophets?" (see [Sa1 19:24](../../../bib/kjv/sa1019.htm#024).md). The
prophetic spirit had come upon him; and to Saul it was as personal and
experimental an evidence of the truth of God's word that had been spoken
to him, as converts to Christianity have in themselves from the
sanctifying power of the Gospel.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 10:12](../../../bib/kjv/sa1010.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">sa1 10:12</span></span>

But who is their father?--The Septuagint reads, "Who is his father?"
referring to Saul the son of Kish.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 10:17](../../../bib/kjv/sa1010.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">sa1 10:17</span></span>

Samuel called the people together . . . at Mizpeh--a shaft-like hill
near Hebron, five hundred feet in height. The national assemblies of the
Israelites were held there. A day having been appointed for the election
of a king, Samuel, after having charged the people with a rejection of
God's institution and a superseding of it by one of their own, proceeded
to the nomination of the new monarch. As it was of the utmost importance
that the appointment should be under the divine direction and control,
the determination was made by the miraculous lot, tribes, families, and
individuals being successively passed until Saul was found. His
concealment of himself must have been the result either of innate
modesty, or a sudden nervous excitement under the circumstances. When
dragged into view, he was seen to possess all those corporeal advantages
which a rude people desiderate in their sovereigns; and the exhibition
of which gained for the prince the favorable opinion of Samuel also. In
the midst of the national enthusiasm, however, the prophet's deep piety
and genuine patriotism took care to explain "the manner of the kingdom,"
that is, the royal rights and privileges, together with the limitations
to which they were to be subjected; and in order that the constitution
might be ratified with all due solemnity, the charter of this
constitutional monarchy was recorded and laid up "before the Lord," that
is, deposited in the custody of the priests, along with the most sacred
archives of the nation.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 10:26](../../../bib/kjv/sa1010.htm#026.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">sa1 10:26</span></span>

And Saul also went home to Gibeah--near Geba. This was his place of
residence (see [Jdg 20:20](../../../bib/kjv/jdg020.htm#020).md), about five
miles north of Jerusalem.

there went . . . a band of men, whose hearts God had touched--who feared
God and regarded allegiance to their king as a conscientious duty. They
are opposed to "the children of Belial."

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 10:27](../../../bib/kjv/sa1010.htm#027.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">sa1 10:27</span></span>

the children of Belial said, How shall this man save us? And they
despised him, and brought him no presents--In Eastern countries, the
honor of the sovereign and the splendor of the royal household are
upheld, not by a fixed rate of taxation, but by presents brought at
certain seasons by officials, and men of wealth, from all parts of the
kingdom, according to the means of the individual, and of a customary
registered value. Such was the tribute which Saul's opponents withheld,
and for want of which he was unable to set up a kingly establishment for
a while. But "biding his time," he bore the insult with a prudence and
magnanimity which were of great use in the beginning of his government.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Kings (1 Samuel) Chapter 11](sa1011.md)

</div>
