<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[1 Kings (1 Samuel) Index](sa1.md)  
  [Previous](sa1025)  [Next](sa1027.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*A Commentary, Critical, Practical, and Explanatory on the Old and New
Testaments*, by Robert Jamieson, A.R. Fausset and David Brown \[1882\]
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [1 Kings (1 Samuel) Chapter 26](../../../bib/kjv/sa1026.htm#001.md)

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 26:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa1026.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">sa1 26:1</span></span>

SAUL COMES TO THE HILL OF HACHILAH AGAINST DAVID. ([Sa1
26:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/sa1026.htm#001).md)

the Ziphites came unto Saul to Gibeah--This people seem to have thought
it impossible for David to escape, and therefore recommended themselves
to Saul, by giving him secret information (see on [Sa1
23:19](../../../bib/kjv/sa1023.htm#019).md). The knowledge of their
treachery makes it appear strange that David should return to his former
haunt in their neighborhood; but, perhaps he did it to be near Abigail's
possessions, and under the impression that Saul had become mollified.
But the king had relapsed into his old enmity. Though Gibeah, as its
name imports, stood on an elevated position, and the desert of Ziph,
which was in the hilly region of Judea, may have been higher than
Gibeah, it was still necessary to descend in leaving the latter place;
thence Saul ([Sa1 26:2](../../../bib/kjv/sa1026.htm#002).md) "went down to
the wilderness of Ziph."

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 26:4](../../../bib/kjv/sa1026.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">sa1 26:4</span></span>

David . . . sent out spies . . . and David arose, and came to the place
where Saul had pitched--Having obtained certain information of the
locality, he seems, accompanied by his nephew ([Sa1
26:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa1026.htm#006).md), to have hid himself, perhaps
disguised, in a neighboring wood, or hill, on the skirts of the royal
camp towards night, and waited to approach it under covert of the
darkness.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 26:5](../../../bib/kjv/sa1026.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">sa1 26:5</span></span>

DAVID STAYS ABISHAI FROM KILLING SAUL, BUT TAKES HIS SPEAR AND CRUSE.
(1Sa. 26:5-25)

Saul lay in the trench, and the people pitched round about him--Among
the nomad people of the East, the encampments are usually made in a
circular form. The circumference is lined by the baggage and the men,
while the chief's station is in the center, whether he occupy a tent or
not. His spear, stuck in the ground, indicates his position. Similar was
the disposition of Saul's camp--in this hasty expedition he seems to
have carried no tent, but to have slept on the ground. The whole troop
was sunk in sleep around him.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 26:8](../../../bib/kjv/sa1026.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">sa1 26:8</span></span>

Then said Abishai to David, God hath delivered thine enemy into thine
hand--This midnight stratagem shows the activity and heroic enterprise
of David's mind, and it was in unison with the style of warfare in
ancient times.

let me smite him . . . even to the earth at once--The ferocious
vehemence of the speaker is sufficiently apparent from his language, but
David's magnanimity soared far above the notions of his followers.
Though Saul's cruelty and perfidy and general want of right principle
had sunk him to a low pitch of degradation, yet that was no reason for
David's imitating him in doing wrong. Besides, he was the sovereign;
David was a subject. Though God had rejected him from the kingdom, it
was in every way the best and most dutiful course, instead of
precipitating his fall by imbruing their hands in his blood and thereby
contracting the guilt of a great crime, to wait the awards of that
retributive providence which sooner or later would take him off by some
sudden and mortal blow. He who, with impetuous haste was going to
exterminate Nabal, meekly spared Saul. But Nabal refused to give a
tribute to which justice and gratitude, no less than custom, entitled
David. Saul was under the judicial infatuation of heaven. Thus David
withheld the hand of Abishai; but, at the same time, he directed him to
carry off some things which would show where they had been, and what
they had done. Thus he obtained the best of victories over him, by
heaping coals of fire on his head.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 26:11](../../../bib/kjv/sa1026.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">sa1 26:11</span></span>

the spear that is at his bolster, and the cruse of water--The Oriental
spear had, and still has, a spike at the lower extremity, intended for
the purpose of sticking the spear into the ground when the warrior is at
rest. This common custom of Arab sheiks was also the practice of the
Hebrew chiefs.

at his bolster--literally, "at his head"; perhaps, Saul as a sovereign
had the distinguished luxury of a bolster carried for him. A "cruse of
water" is usually, in warm climates, kept near a person's couch, as a
drink in the night time is found very refreshing. Saul's cruse would
probably be of superior materials, or more richly ornamented than common
ones, and therefore by its size or form be easily distinguished.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 26:13](../../../bib/kjv/sa1026.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">sa1 26:13</span></span>

Then David . . . stood on the top of an hill afar off . . . and cried to
the people--(See on [Jdg 9:7](../../../bib/kjv/jdg009.htm#007).md). The
extraordinary purity and elasticity of the air in Palestine enable words
to be distinctly heard that are addressed by a speaker from the top of
one hill to people on that of another, from which it is separated by a
deep intervening ravine. Hostile parties can thus speak to each other,
while completely beyond the reach of each other's attack. It results
from the peculiar features of the country in many of the mountain
districts.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 26:15](../../../bib/kjv/sa1026.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">sa1 26:15</span></span>

David said to Abner, Art not thou a valiant man: . . . wherefore then
hast thou not kept thy lord the king?--The circumstance of David having
penetrated to the center of the encampment, through the circular rows of
the sleeping soldiers, constituted the point of this sarcastic taunt.
This new evidence of David's moderation and magnanimous forbearance,
together with his earnest and kindly expostulation, softened the
obduracy of Saul's heart.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 26:19](../../../bib/kjv/sa1026.htm#019.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">sa1 26:19</span></span>

If the Lord have stirred thee up against me--By the evil spirit He had
sent, or by any spiritual offenses by which we have mutually displeased
Him.

let him accept an offering--that is, let us conjointly offer a sacrifice
for appeasing His wrath against us.

if they be the children of men--The prudence, meekness, and address of
David in ascribing the king's enmity to the instigations of some
malicious traducers, and not to the jealousy of Saul himself, is worthy
of notice.

saying, Go, serve other gods--This was the drift of their conduct. By
driving him from the land and ordinances of the true worship, into
foreign and heathen countries, they were exposing him to all the
seductions of idolatry.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 26:20](../../../bib/kjv/sa1026.htm#020.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">sa1 26:20</span></span>

as when one doth hunt a partridge--People in the East, in hunting the
partridge and other game birds, pursue them, till observing them
becoming languid and fatigued after they have been put up two or three
times, they rush upon the birds stealthily and knock them down with
bludgeons \[SHAW, Travels\]. It was exactly in this manner that Saul was
pursuing David. He drove him from time to time from his hiding-place,
hoping to render him weary of his life, or obtain an opportunity of
accomplishing his destruction.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 26:25](../../../bib/kjv/sa1026.htm#025.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">sa1 26:25</span></span>

So David went on his way--Notwithstanding this sudden relenting of Saul,
David placed no confidence in his professions or promises, but wisely
kept at a distance and awaited the course of Providence.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Kings (1 Samuel) Chapter 27](sa1027.md)

</div>
