<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[1 Kings (1 Samuel) Index](sa1.md)  
  [Previous](sa1008)  [Next](sa1010.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*A Commentary, Critical, Practical, and Explanatory on the Old and New
Testaments*, by Robert Jamieson, A.R. Fausset and David Brown \[1882\]
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [1 Kings (1 Samuel) Chapter 9](../../../bib/kjv/sa1009.htm#001.md)

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 9:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa1009.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">sa1 9:1</span></span>

SAUL, DESPAIRING TO FIND HIS FATHER'S ASSES, COMES TO SAMUEL. ([Sa1
9:1-14](../../../bib/kjv/sa1009.htm#001).md)

a mighty man of power--that is, of great wealth and substance. The
family was of high consideration in the tribe of Benjamin, and therefore
Saul's words must be set down among the common forms of affected
humility, which Oriental people are wont to use.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 9:2](../../../bib/kjv/sa1009.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">sa1 9:2</span></span>

Saul, a choice young man, and a goodly--He had a fine appearance; for it
is evident that he must have been only a little under seven feet tall. A
gigantic stature and an athletic frame must have been a popular
recommendation at that time in that country.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 9:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa1009.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">sa1 9:3</span></span>

the asses of Kish Saul's father were lost. And Kish said to Saul . . .
arise, go seek the asses--The probability is that the family of Kish,
according to the immemorial usage of Oriental shepherds in the purely
pastoral regions, had let the animals roam at large during the grazing
season, at the close of which messengers were despatched in search of
them. Such travelling searches are common; and, as each owner has his
own stamp marked on his cattle, the mention of it to the shepherds he
meets gradually leads to the discovery of the strayed animals. This
ramble of Saul's had nothing extraordinary in it, except its superior
directions and issue, which turned its uncertainty into certainty.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 9:4](../../../bib/kjv/sa1009.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">sa1 9:4</span></span>

he passed through mount Ephraim--This being situated on the north of
Benjamin, indicates the direction of Saul's journey. The district
explored means the whole of the mountainous region, with its valleys and
defiles, which belonged to Ephraim. Turning apparently
southwards--probably through the verdant hills between Shiloh and the
vales of Jordan (Shalisha and Shalim)--he approached again the borders
of Benjamin, scoured the land of Zuph, and was proposing to return, when
his servant recollected that they were in the immediate neighborhood of
the man of God, who would give them counsel.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 9:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa1009.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">sa1 9:6</span></span>

there is in this city a man of God--Ramah was the usual residence of
Samuel, but several circumstances, especially the mention of Rachel's
sepulchre, which lay in Saul's way homeward \[[Sa1
10:2](../../../bib/kjv/sa1010.htm#002.md)\], lead to the conclusion that
"this city" was not the Ramah where Samuel dwelt.

peradventure he can show us our way that we should go--It seems strange
that a dignified prophet should be consulted in such an affair. But it
is probable that at the introduction of the prophetic office, the seers
had discovered things lost or stolen, and thus their power for higher
revelations was gradually established.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 9:7](../../../bib/kjv/sa1009.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">sa1 9:7</span></span>

Saul said to his servant, But, behold, if we go, what shall we bring the
man?--According to Eastern notions, it would be considered a want of
respect for any person to go into the presence of a superior man of rank
or of official station without a present of some kind in his hand,
however trifling in value.

the bread is spent in our vessels--Shepherds, going in quest of their
cattle, put up in a bag as much flour for making bread as will last
sometimes for thirty days. It appears that Saul thought of giving the
man of God a cake from his travelling bag, and this would have been
sufficient to render the indispensable act of civility--the customary
tribute to official dignity.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 9:8](../../../bib/kjv/sa1009.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">sa1 9:8</span></span>

the fourth part of a shekel of silver--rather more than sixpence.
Contrary to our Western notions, money is in the East the most
acceptable form in which a present can be made to a man of rank.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 9:9](../../../bib/kjv/sa1009.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">sa1 9:9</span></span>

seer . . . Prophet--The recognized distinction in latter times was, that
a seer was one who was favored with visions of God--a view of things
invisible to mortal sight; and a prophet foretold future events.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 9:11](../../../bib/kjv/sa1009.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">sa1 9:11</span></span>

as they went up the hill--The modern village, Er-Rameh, lies on an
eminence; and on their way they met a band of young maidens going out to
the well, which, like all similar places in Palestine, was beyond the
precincts of the town. From these damsels they learned that the day was
devoted to a festival occasion, in honor of which Samuel had arrived in
the city; that a sacrifice had been offered, which was done by prophets
in extraordinary circumstances at a distance from the tabernacle, and
that a feast was to follow--implying that it had been a peace offering;
and that, according to the venerable practice of the Israelites, the man
of God was expected to ask a special blessing on the food in a manner
becoming the high occasion.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 9:14](../../../bib/kjv/sa1009.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">sa1 9:14</span></span>

Samuel came out against them, for to go up to the high place--Such were
the simple manners of the times that this prophet, the chief man in
Israel, was seen going to preside at a high festival undistinguished
either by his dress or equipage from any ordinary citizen.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 9:15](../../../bib/kjv/sa1009.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">sa1 9:15</span></span>

GOD REVEALS TO SAMUEL SAUL'S COMING, AND HIS APPOINTMENT TO THE KINGDOM.
([Sa1 9:15-27](../../../bib/kjv/sa1009.htm#015).md)

Now the Lord had told Samuel in his ear a day before--The description of
Saul, the time of his arrival, and the high office to which he was
destined, had been secretly intimated to Samuel from heaven. The future
king of Israel was to fight the battles of the Lord and protect His
people. It would appear that they were at this time suffering great
molestation from the Philistines, and that this was an additional reason
of their urgent demands for the appointment of a king (see [Sa1
10:5](../../../bib/kjv/sa1010.htm#005.md); [Sa1
13:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa1013.htm#003).md).

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 9:18](../../../bib/kjv/sa1009.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">sa1 9:18</span></span>

Tell me, I pray thee, where the seer's house is--Satisfying the
stranger's inquiry, Samuel invited him to the feast, as well as to
sojourn till the morrow; and, in order to reconcile him to the delay, he
assured him that the strayed asses had been recovered.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 9:20](../../../bib/kjv/sa1009.htm#020.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">sa1 9:20</span></span>

on whom is all the desire of Israel? Is it not on thee, and on all thy
father's house?--This was a covert and indirect premonition of the royal
dignity that awaited him; and, though Saul's answer shows that he fully
understood it, he affected to doubt that the prophet was in earnest.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 9:21](../../../bib/kjv/sa1009.htm#021.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">sa1 9:21</span></span>

And Saul answered and said, Am not I a Benjamite, of the smallest of the
tribes of Israel, &c.--By selecting a king from this least and nearly
extinct tribe ([Jdg 20:46-48](../../../bib/kjv/jdg020.htm#046).md), divine
wisdom designed to remove all grounds of jealousy among the other
tribes.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 9:22](../../../bib/kjv/sa1009.htm#022.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">sa1 9:22</span></span>

Samuel took Saul and his servant, and brought them into the parlour--The
toil-worn but noble-looking traveller found himself suddenly seated
among the principal men of the place and treated as the most
distinguished guest.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 9:24](../../../bib/kjv/sa1009.htm#024.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">sa1 9:24</span></span>

the cook took up the shoulder . . . and set it before Saul. And Samuel
said, Behold that which is left; set it before thee, and eat--that is,
reserved (see on [Gen 18:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen018.htm#007.md); [Gen
43:34](../../../bib/kjv/gen043.htm#034).md). This was, most probably, the
right shoulder; which, as the perquisite of the sacrifice, belonged to
Samuel, and which he had set aside for his expected guest. In the
sculptures of the Egyptian shambles, also, the first joint taken off was
always the right shoulder for the priest. The meaning of those
distinguished attentions must have been understood by the other guests.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 9:25](../../../bib/kjv/sa1009.htm#025.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">sa1 9:25</span></span>

Samuel communed with Saul upon the top of the house--Saul was taken to
lodge with the prophet for that night. Before retiring to rest, they
communed on the flat roof of the house, the couch being laid there ([Jos
2:6](../../../bib/kjv/jos002.htm#006).md), when, doubtless, Samuel revealed
the secret and described the peculiar duties of a monarch in a nation so
related to the Divine King as Israel. Next morning early, Samuel roused
his guest, and conveying him on his way towards the skirts of the city,
sought, before parting, a private interview--the object of which is
narrated in the next chapter.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Kings (1 Samuel) Chapter 10](sa1010.md)

</div>
