<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[1 Kings (1 Samuel) Index](sa1.md)  
  [Previous](sa1027)  [Next](sa1029.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*A Commentary, Critical, Practical, and Explanatory on the Old and New
Testaments*, by Robert Jamieson, A.R. Fausset and David Brown \[1882\]
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [1 Kings (1 Samuel) Chapter 28](../../../bib/kjv/sa1028.htm#001.md)

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 28:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa1028.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">sa1 28:1</span></span>

ACHISH'S CONFIDENCE IN DAVID. ([Sa1
28:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/sa1028.htm#001).md)

The Philistines gathered their armies together for warfare, to fight
with Israel--The death of Samuel, the general dissatisfaction with Saul,
and the absence of David, instigated the cupidity of those restless
enemies of Israel.

Achish said to David, Know thou assuredly, that thou shalt go out with
me to battle--This was evidently to try him. Achish, however, seems to
have thought he had gained the confidence of David and had a claim on
his services.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 28:2](../../../bib/kjv/sa1028.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">sa1 28:2</span></span>

Surely thou shalt know what thy servant can do--This answer, while it
seemed to express an apparent cheerfulness in agreeing to the proposal,
contained a studied ambiguity--a wary and politic generality.

Therefore will I make thee keeper of mine head for ever--or, "my life";
that is, "captain of my bodyguard," an office of great trust and high
honor.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 28:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa1028.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">sa1 28:3</span></span>

Now Samuel is dead, &c.--This event is here alluded to as affording an
explanation of the secret and improper methods by which Saul sought
information and direction in the present crisis of his affairs.
Overwhelmed in perplexity and fear, he yet found the common and
legitimate channels of communication with Heaven shut against him. And
so, under the impulse of that dark, distempered, superstitious spirit
which had overmastered him, he resolved, in desperation, to seek the aid
of one of those fortune telling impostors whom, in accordance with the
divine command ([Lev 19:31](../../../bib/kjv/lev019.htm#031.md); [Lev
20:6](../../../bib/kjv/lev020.htm#006.md), [Lev
20:27](../../../bib/kjv/lev020.htm#027.md); [Deu
18:11](../../../bib/kjv/deu018.htm#011).md), he had set himself formerly to
exterminate from his kingdom.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 28:4](../../../bib/kjv/sa1028.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">sa1 28:4</span></span>

the Philistines . . . pitched in Shunem--Having collected their forces
for a last grand effort, they marched up from the seacoast and encamped
in the "valley of Jezreel." The spot on which their encampment was fixed
was Shunem ([Jos 19:18](../../../bib/kjv/jos019.htm#018).md), now Sulem, a
village which still exists on the slope of a range called "Little
Hermon." On the opposite side, on the rise of Mount Gilboa, hard by "the
spring of Jezreel," was Saul's army--the Israelites, according to their
wont, keeping to the heights, while their enemies clung to the plain.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 28:7](../../../bib/kjv/sa1028.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">sa1 28:7</span></span>

SAUL SEEKS A WITCH, WHO, BEING ENCOURAGED BY HIM, RAISES UP SAMUEL.
(1Sa. 28:7-25)

Then said Saul unto his servants, Seek me a woman that hath a familiar
spirit--From the energetic measures which he himself had taken for
extirpating the dealers in magical arts (the profession having been
declared a capital offense), his most attached courtiers might have had
reason to doubt the possibility of gratifying their master's wish.
Anxious inquiries, however, led to the discovery of a woman living very
secluded in the neighborhood, who had the credit of possessing the
forbidden powers. To her house he repaired by night in disguise,
accompanied by two faithful servants.

En-dor--"the fountain of the circle" (that figure being constantly
affected by magicians) was situated directly on the other side of the
Gilboa range, opposite Tabor; so that, in this midnight adventure, Saul
had to pass over the shoulder of the ridge on which the Philistines were
encamped.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 28:8](../../../bib/kjv/sa1028.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">sa1 28:8</span></span>

bring me him up, whom I shall name unto thee--This pythoness united to
the arts of divination a claim to be a necromancer ([Deu
18:11](../../../bib/kjv/deu018.htm#011).md); and it was her supposed power
in calling back the dead of which Saul was desirous to avail himself.
Though she at first refused to listen to his request, she accepted his
pledge that no risk would be incurred by her compliance. It is probable
that his extraordinary stature, the deference paid him by his
attendants, the easy distance of his camp from En-dor, and the proposal
to call up the great prophet and first magistrate in Israel (a proposal
which no private individual would venture to make), had awakened her
suspicions as to the true character and rank of her visitor. The story
has led to much discussion whether there was a real appearance of Samuel
or not. On the one hand, the woman's profession, which was forbidden by
the divine law, the refusal of God to answer Saul by any divinely
constituted means, the well-known age, figure, and dress of Samuel,
which she could easily represent herself, or by an accomplice--his
apparition being evidently at some distance, being muffled, and not
actually seen by Saul, whose attitude of prostrate homage, moreover,
must have prevented him distinguishing the person though he had been
near, and the voice seemingly issuing out of the ground, and coming
along to Saul--and the vagueness of the information, imparted much which
might have been reached by natural conjecture as to the probable result
of the approaching conflict--the woman's representation--all of this has
led many to think that this was a mere deception. On the other hand,
many eminent writers (considering that the apparition came before her
arts were put in practice; that she herself was surprised and alarmed;
that the prediction of Saul's own death and the defeat of his forces was
confidently made), are of opinion that Samuel really appeared.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 28:24](../../../bib/kjv/sa1028.htm#024.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">sa1 28:24</span></span>

the woman had a fat calf . . . and she hasted, and killed it, &c.--(See
on [Gen 18:1-8](../../../bib/kjv/gen018.htm#001).md).

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 28:25](../../../bib/kjv/sa1028.htm#025.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">sa1 28:25</span></span>

Then they rose up, and went away that night--Exhausted by long
abstinence, overwhelmed with mental distress, and now driven to despair,
the cold sweat broke on his anxious brow, and he sank helpless on the
ground. But the kind attentions of the woman and his servants having
revived him, he returned to the camp to await his doom.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Kings (1 Samuel) Chapter 29](sa1029.md)

</div>
