<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[1 Kings (1 Samuel) Index](sa1)  
  [Previous](sa1007)  [Next](sa1009) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*A Commentary, Critical, Practical, and Explanatory on the Old and New
Testaments*, by Robert Jamieson, A.R. Fausset and David Brown \[1882\]
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [1 Kings (1 Samuel) Chapter 8](../../../bib/kjv/sa1008.htm#001)

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 8:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa1008.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">sa1 8:1</span></span>

OCCASIONED BY THE ILL-GOVERNMENT OF SAMUEL'S SONS, THE ISRAELITES ASK A
KING. (1Sa. 8:1-18)

when Samuel was old--He was now about fifty-four years of age, having
discharged the office of sole judge for twelve years. Unable, from
growing infirmities, to prosecute his circuit journeys through the
country, he at length confined his magisterial duties to Ramah and its
neighborhood ([Sa1 7:15](../../../bib/kjv/sa1007.htm#015)), delegating
to his sons as his deputies the administration of justice in the
southern districts of Palestine, their provincial court being held at
Beer-sheba. The young men, however, did not inherit the high qualities
of their father. Having corrupted the fountains of justice for their own
private aggrandizement, a deputation of the leading men in the country
lodged a complaint against them in headquarters, accompanied with a
formal demand for a change in the government. The limited and occasional
authority of the judges, the disunion and jealousy of the tribes under
the administration of those rulers, had been creating a desire for a
united and permanent form of government; while the advanced age of
Samuel, together with the risk of his death happening in the then
unsettled state of the people, was the occasion of calling forth an
expression of this desire now.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 8:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa1008.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">sa1 8:6</span></span>

the thing displeased Samuel when they said, Give us a king to judge
us--Personal and family feelings might affect his views of this public
movement. But his dissatisfaction arose principally from the proposed
change being revolutionary in its character. Though it would not
entirely subvert their theocratic government, the appointment of a
visible monarch would necessarily tend to throw out of view their unseen
King and Head. God intimated, through Samuel, that their request would,
in anger, be granted, while at the same time he apprised them of some of
the evils that would result from their choice.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 8:11](../../../bib/kjv/sa1008.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">sa1 8:11</span></span>

This will be the manner of the king--The following is a very just and
graphic picture of the despotic governments which anciently and still
are found in the East, and into conformity with which the Hebrew
monarchy, notwithstanding the restrictions prescribed by the law,
gradually slid.

He will take your sons, and appoint them for himself--Oriental
sovereigns claim a right to the services of any of their subjects at
pleasure.

some shall run before his chariots--The royal equipages were, generally
throughout the East (as in Persia they still are), preceded and
accompanied by a number of attendants who ran on foot.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 8:12](../../../bib/kjv/sa1008.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">sa1 8:12</span></span>

he will appoint him captains--In the East, a person must accept any
office to which he may be nominated by the king, however irksome it may
be to his taste or ruinous to his interests.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 8:13](../../../bib/kjv/sa1008.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">sa1 8:13</span></span>

he will take your daughters to be confectionaries--Cookery, baking, and
the kindred works are, in Eastern countries, female employment, and
thousands of young women are occupied with these offices in the palaces
even of petty princes.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 8:14](../../../bib/kjv/sa1008.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">sa1 8:14</span></span>

he will take your fields, &c.--The circumstances mentioned here might be
illustrated by exact analogies in the conduct of many Oriental monarchs
in the present day.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 8:19](../../../bib/kjv/sa1008.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">sa1 8:19</span></span>

Nevertheless the people refused to obey the voice of Samuel--They
sneered at Samuel's description as a bugbear to frighten them.
Determined, at all hazards, to gain their object, they insisted on being
made like all the other nations, though it was their glory and happiness
to be unlike other nations in having the Lord for their King and
Lawgiver ([Num 23:9](../../../bib/kjv/num023.htm#009); [Deu
33:28](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#028)). Their demand was conceded, for
the government of a king had been provided for in the law; and they were
dismissed to wait the appointment, which God had reserved to Himself
([Deu 17:14-20](../../../bib/kjv/deu017.htm#014)).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Kings (1 Samuel) Chapter 9](sa1009)

</div>
