<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[2 Kings (2 Samuel) Index](sa2)  
  [Previous](sa2000)  [Next](sa2002) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*A Commentary, Critical, Practical, and Explanatory on the Old and New
Testaments*, by Robert Jamieson, A.R. Fausset and David Brown \[1882\]
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [2 Kings (2 Samuel) Chapter 1](../../../bib/kjv/sa2001.htm#001)

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa2001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">sa2 1:1</span></span>

AN AMALEKITE BRINGS TIDINGS OF SAUL'S DEATH. (2Sa. 1:1-16)

David had abode two days in Ziklag--Though greatly reduced by the
Amalekite incendiaries, that town was not so completely sacked and
destroyed, but David and his six hundred followers, with their families,
could still find some accommodation.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 1:2](../../../bib/kjv/sa2001.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">sa2 1:2</span></span>

a man came out of the camp from Saul--As the narrative of Saul's death,
given in the last chapter, is inspired, it must be considered the true
account, and the Amalekite's story a fiction of his own, invented to
ingratiate himself with David, the presumptive successor to the throne.
David's question, "How went the matter?" evinces the deep interest he
took in the war, an interest that sprang from feelings of high and
generous patriotism, not from views of ambition. The Amalekite, however,
judging him to be actuated by a selfish principle, fabricated a story
improbable and inconsistent, which he thought would procure him a
reward. Having probably witnessed the suicidal act of Saul, he thought
of turning it to his own account, and suffered the penalty of his
grievously mistaken calculation (compare [Sa2
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/sa2001.htm#009) with [Sa1
31:4-5](../../../bib/kjv/sa1031.htm#004)).

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 1:10](../../../bib/kjv/sa2001.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">sa2 1:10</span></span>

the crown--a small metallic cap or wreath, which encircled the temples,
serving the purpose of a helmet, with a very small horn projecting in
front, as the emblem of power.

the bracelet that was on his arm--the armlet worn above the elbow; an
ancient mark of royal dignity. It is still worn by kings in some Eastern
countries.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 1:13](../../../bib/kjv/sa2001.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">sa2 1:13</span></span>

David said unto the young man . . . Whence art thou?--The man had at the
outset stated who he was. But the question was now formally and
judicially put. The punishment inflicted on the Amalekite may seem too
severe, but the respect paid to kings in the West must not be regarded
as the standard for that which the East may think due to royal station.
David's reverence for Saul, as the Lord's anointed, was in his mind a
principle on which he had faithfully acted on several occasions of great
temptation. In present circumstances it was especially important that
his principle should be publicly known; and to free himself from the
imputation of being in any way accessory to the execrable crime of
regicide was the part of a righteous judge, no less than of a good
politician.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 1:17](../../../bib/kjv/sa2001.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">sa2 1:17</span></span>

DAVID LAMENTS SAUL AND JONATHAN. ([Sa2
1:17-27](../../../bib/kjv/sa2001.htm#017))

David lamented with this lamentation--It has always been customary for
Eastern people, on the death of great kings and warriors, to celebrate
their qualities and deeds in funeral songs. This inimitable pathetic
elegy is supposed by many writers to have become a national war song,
and to have been taught to the young Israelites under the name of "The
Bow," in conformity with the practice of Hebrew and many classical
writers in giving titles to their songs from the principal theme ([Psa
22:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#001); [Psa
56:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa056.htm#001); [Psa
60:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa060.htm#001); [Psa
80:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa080.htm#001); [Psa
100:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa100.htm#001)). Although the words "the use
of" are a supplement by our translators, they may be rightly introduced,
for the natural sense of this parenthetical verse is, that David took
immediate measures for instructing the people in the knowledge and
practice of archery, their great inferiority to the enemy in this
military arm having been the main cause of the late national disaster.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 1:19](../../../bib/kjv/sa2001.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">sa2 1:19</span></span>

The beauty of Israel is slain upon thy high places--literally, "the
gazelle" or "antelope of Israel." In Eastern countries, that animal is
the chosen type of beauty and symmetrical elegance of form.

how are the mighty fallen!--This forms the chorus.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 1:21](../../../bib/kjv/sa2001.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">sa2 1:21</span></span>

let there be no dew, neither let there be rain--To be deprived of the
genial atmospheric influences which, in those anciently cultivated
hills, seem to have reared plenty of first-fruits in the corn harvests,
was specified as the greatest calamity the lacerated feelings of the
poet could imagine. The curse seems still to lie upon them; for the
mountains of Gilboa are naked and sterile.

the shield of the mighty is vilely cast away--To cast away the shield
was counted a national disgrace. Yet, on that fatal battle of Gilboa,
many of the Jewish soldiers, who had displayed unflinching valor in
former battles, forgetful of their own reputation and their country's
honor, threw away their shields and fled from the field. This
dishonorable and cowardly conduct is alluded to with exquisitely
touching pathos.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 1:24](../../../bib/kjv/sa2001.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">sa2 1:24</span></span>

Ye daughters of Israel, weep over Saul, who clothed you in scarlet, with
other delights, &c.--The fondness for dress, which anciently
distinguished Oriental women, is their characteristic still. It appears
in their love of bright, gay, and divers colors, in profuse display of
ornaments, and in various other forms. The inmost depths of the poet's
feeling are stirred, and his amiable disposition appears in the strong
desire to celebrate the good qualities of Saul, as well as Jonathan. But
the praises of the latter form the burden of the poem, which begins and
ends with that excellent prince.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 Kings (2 Samuel) Chapter 2](sa2002)

</div>
