<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[2 Kings (2 Samuel) Index](sa2)  
  [Previous](sa2019)  [Next](sa2021) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*A Commentary, Critical, Practical, and Explanatory on the Old and New
Testaments*, by Robert Jamieson, A.R. Fausset and David Brown \[1882\]
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [2 Kings (2 Samuel) Chapter 20](../../../bib/kjv/sa2020.htm#001)

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 20:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa2020.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">sa2 20:1</span></span>

SHEBA MAKES A PARTY IN ISRAEL. ([Sa2
20:1-9](../../../bib/kjv/sa2020.htm#001))

Sheba . . . a Benjamite--Though nothing is known of this man, he must
have been a person of considerable power and influence, before he could
have raised so sudden and extensive a sedition. He belonged to the tribe
of Benjamin, where the adherents of Saul's dynasty were still numerous;
and perceiving the strong disgust of the other tribes with the part
assumed by Judah in the restoration, his ill-designing heart resolved to
turn it to the overthrow of David's authority in Israel.

every man to his tents--This proverbial expression may have had its
foundation in the fact, that many of the Israelite peasantry adhered to
the custom of the patriarchs who tilled land, and yet lived in tents, as
Syrian peasants often do still. This was the usual watchword of national
insurrection, and from the actual temper of the people, it was followed
by effects beyond what he probably anticipated.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 20:2](../../../bib/kjv/sa2020.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">sa2 20:2</span></span>

from Jordan even to Jerusalem--The quarrel had broken out shortly after
the crossing of the Jordan, between Judah and the other tribes, who
withdrew; so that Judah was left nearly alone to conduct the king to the
metropolis.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 20:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa2020.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">sa2 20:3</span></span>

the king took the ten women his concubines--Jewish writers say that the
widowed queens of Hebrew monarchs were not allowed to marry again but
were obliged to pass the rest of their lives in strict seclusion. David
treated his concubines in the same manner after the outrage committed on
them by Absalom. They were not divorced, for they were guiltless; but
they were no longer publicly recognized as his wives; nor was their
confinement to a sequestered life a very heavy doom, in a region where
women have never been accustomed to go much abroad.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 20:4](../../../bib/kjv/sa2020.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">sa2 20:4</span></span>

Then said the king to Amasa, Assemble me the men of Judah within three
days--Amasa is now installed in the command which David had promised
him. The revolt of the ten tribes, probably, hastened the public
declaration of this appointment, which he hoped would be popular with
them, and Amasa was ordered within three days to levy a force from Judah
sufficient to put down the insurrection. The appointment was a blunder,
and the king soon perceived his error. The specified time passed, but
Amasa could not muster the men. Dreading the loss of time, the king gave
the commission to Abishai, and not to Joab--a new affront, which, no
doubt, wounded the pride of the stern and haughty old general. But he
hastened with his attached soldiers to go as second to his brother,
determined to take the first opportunity of wreaking his vengeance on
his successful rival.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 20:8](../../../bib/kjv/sa2020.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">sa2 20:8</span></span>

Amasa went before them--Having collected some forces, he by a rapid
march overtook the expedition at Gibeon, and assumed the place of
commander; in which capacity, he was saluted, among others, by Joab.

Joab's garment, that he had put on was girded unto him--in the fashion
of travellers and soldiers.

a sword . . . and as he went forth it fell out--that is, out of the
scabbard. According to JOSEPHUS, he let it drop on purpose as he was
accosting Amasa, that stooping, as it were accidentally, to pick it up,
he might salute the new general with the naked sword in his hand,
without exciting any suspicion of his design.

He went forth--in a ceremonious manner to meet Amasa, now
commander-in-chief, in order to seem to render to that officer, whom he
considered as usurping his post, a conspicuous honor and homage.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 20:9](../../../bib/kjv/sa2020.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">sa2 20:9</span></span>

took Amasa by the beard with the right hand to kiss him--This act,
common with two friends on meeting when one of them returns from a
journey, indicates respect as well as kindliness, and the performance of
it evinced the deep hypocrisy of Joab, who thereby put Amasa off his
guard. No wonder, then, that while this act of friendly gratulation
after long absence occupied Amasa's attention, he did not perceive the
sword that was in Joab's left hand. The action of Joab was indeed a high
compliment, but neither suspicious nor unusual and to this compliment,
Amasa paying attention and no doubt returning it with suitable
politeness, he could little expect the fatal event that Joab's perfidy
produced.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 20:10](../../../bib/kjv/sa2020.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">sa2 20:10</span></span>

AMASA IS SLAIN. ([Sa2 20:10-13](../../../bib/kjv/sa2020.htm#010))

smote him . . . in the fifth rib--the seat of the liver and bowels,
where wounds are mortal.

struck him not again--that is, despatched him at the first blow.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 20:11](../../../bib/kjv/sa2020.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">sa2 20:11</span></span>

He that favoureth Joab, and he that is for David, let him go after
Joab--It is a striking proof of Joab's unrivalled influence over the
army, that with this villainous murder perpetrated before their eyes
they unanimously followed him as their leader in pursuit of Sheba. A
soldier conjoined his name with David's, and such a magic spell was in
the word "Joab," that all the people "went on"--Amasa's men as well as
the rest. The conjunction of these two names is very significant. It
shows that the one could not afford to do without the other--neither
Joab to rebel against David, nor David to get rid of Joab, though hating
him.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 20:14](../../../bib/kjv/sa2020.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">sa2 20:14</span></span>

JOAB PURSUES SHEBA UNTO ABEL. ([Sa2
20:14-15](../../../bib/kjv/sa2020.htm#014))

he went through all the tribes of Israel unto Abel--beating up for
recruits. But there the prompt marches of Joab overtook and hemmed him
in by a close siege of the place.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 20:15](../../../bib/kjv/sa2020.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">sa2 20:15</span></span>

Abel of Beth-maachah--a verdant place--the addition of "Maachah"
betokening that it belonged to the district Maachah, which lay far up
the Jordan at the foot of Lebanon.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 20:16](../../../bib/kjv/sa2020.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">sa2 20:16</span></span>

A WISE WOMAN SAVES THE CITY BY SHEBA'S HEAD. ([Sa2
20:16-22](../../../bib/kjv/sa2020.htm#016))

Then cried a wise woman--The appeal of this woman, who, like Deborah,
was probably a judge or governess of the place, was a strong one.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 20:18](../../../bib/kjv/sa2020.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">sa2 20:18</span></span>

They were wont to speak in old time--The translation of the Margin gives
a better meaning, which is to this effect: When the people saw thee lay
siege to Abel, they said, Surely he will ask if we will have peace, for
the law ([Deu 20:10](../../../bib/kjv/deu020.htm#010)) prescribes that
he should offer peace to strangers, much more then to Israelitish
cities; and if he do this, we shall soon bring things to an amicable
agreement, for we are a peaceable people. The answer of Joab brings out
the character of that ruthless veteran as a patriot at heart, who, on
securing the author of this insurrection, was ready to put a stop to
further bloodshed and release the peaceable inhabitants from all
molestation.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 20:23](../../../bib/kjv/sa2020.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">sa2 20:23</span></span>

DAVID'S GREAT OFFICERS. ([Sa2
20:23-26](../../../bib/kjv/sa2020.htm#023))

Now Joab was over all the host of Israel--David, whatever his private
wishes, found that he possessed not the power of removing Joab; so
winking at the murder of Amasa, he re-established that officer in his
former post of commander-in-chief. The enumeration of David's cabinet is
here given to show that the government was re-established in its wonted
course.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 Kings (2 Samuel) Chapter 21](sa2021)

</div>
