<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[2 Kings (2 Samuel) Index](sa2)  
  [Previous](sa2012)  [Next](sa2014) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*A Commentary, Critical, Practical, and Explanatory on the Old and New
Testaments*, by Robert Jamieson, A.R. Fausset and David Brown \[1882\]
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [2 Kings (2 Samuel) Chapter 13](../../../bib/kjv/sa2013.htm#001)

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 13:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa2013.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">sa2 13:1</span></span>

AMNON LOVES TAMAR. ([Sa2 13:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/sa2013.htm#001))

Tamar--daughter of David by Maachah ([Sa2
3:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa2003.htm#003)).

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 13:2](../../../bib/kjv/sa2013.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">sa2 13:2</span></span>

for she was a virgin--Unmarried daughters were kept in close seclusion
from the company of men; no strangers, nor even their relatives of the
other sex, being permitted to see them without the presence of
witnesses. Of course, Amnon must have seen Tamar, for he had conceived a
violent passion for her, which, though forbidden by the law ([Lev
18:11](../../../bib/kjv/lev018.htm#011)), yet with the sanction of
Abraham's example ([Gen 20:12](../../../bib/kjv/gen020.htm#012)), and
the common practice in neighboring countries for princes to marry their
half sisters, he seems not to have considered an improper connection.
But he had no means of making it known to her, and the pain of that
disappointment preying upon his mind produced a visible change in his
appearance and health.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 13:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa2013.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">sa2 13:3</span></span>

Jonadab, the son of Shimeah--or Shammah ([Sa1
16:9](../../../bib/kjv/sa1016.htm#009)). By the counsel and contrivance
of this scheming cousin a plan was devised for obtaining an unrestricted
interview with the object of his attachment.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 13:4](../../../bib/kjv/sa2013.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">sa2 13:4</span></span>

my brother Absalom's sister--In Eastern countries, where polygamy
prevails, the girls are considered to be under the special care and
protection of their uterine brother, who is the guardian of their
interests and their honor, even more than their father himself (see on
Gen. 34:6-25).

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 13:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa2013.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">sa2 13:6</span></span>

HE DEFILES HER. (2Sa. 13:6-27)

Amnon lay down, and made himself sick--The Orientals are great adepts in
feigning sickness, whenever they have any object to accomplish.

let Tamar my sister come and make me a couple of cakes--To the king
Amnon spoke of Tamar as "his sister," a term artfully designed to
hoodwink his father; and the request appeared so natural, the delicate
appetite of a sick man requiring to be humored, that the king promised
to send her. The cakes seem to have been a kind of fancy bread, in the
preparation of which Oriental ladies take great delight. Tamar,
flattered by the invitation, lost no time in rendering the required
service in the house of her sick brother.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 13:12](../../../bib/kjv/sa2013.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">sa2 13:12</span></span>

do not force me--The remonstrances and arguments of Tamar were so
affecting and so strong, that had not Amnon been violently goaded on by
the lustful passion of which he had become the slave, they must have
prevailed with him to desist from his infamous purpose. In bidding him,
however, "speak to the king, for he will not withhold me from thee," it
is probable that she urged this as her last resource, saying anything
she thought would please him, in order to escape for the present out of
his hands.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 13:15](../../../bib/kjv/sa2013.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">sa2 13:15</span></span>

Then Amnon hated her exceedingly--It is not unusual for persons
instigated by violent and irregular passions to go from one extreme to
another. In Amnon's case the sudden revulsion is easily accounted for;
the atrocity of his conduct, with all the feelings of shame, remorse,
and dread of exposure and punishment, now burst upon his mind, rendering
the presence of Tamar intolerably painful to him.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 13:17](../../../bib/kjv/sa2013.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">sa2 13:17</span></span>

bolt the door after her--The street door of houses in the East is always
kept barred--the bolts being of wood. In the great mansions, where a
porter stands at the outside, this precaution is dispensed with; and the
circumstance, therefore, of a prince giving an order so unusual shows
the vehement perturbation of Ammon's mind.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 13:18](../../../bib/kjv/sa2013.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">sa2 13:18</span></span>

garment of divers colours--As embroidery in ancient times was the
occupation or pastime of ladies of the highest rank, the possession of
these parti-colored garments was a mark of distinction; they were worn
exclusively by young women of royal condition. Since the art of
manufacturing cloth stuffs has made so great progress, dresses of this
variegated description are now more common in the East.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 13:19](../../../bib/kjv/sa2013.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">sa2 13:19</span></span>

Tamar put ashes on her head, and rent her garment of divers colours . .
. laid her hand on her head, and went on crying--that is, sobbing.
Oriental manners would probably see nothing beyond a strong sense of the
injury she had sustained, if Tamar actually rent her garments. But, as
her veil is not mentioned, it is probable that Amnon had turned her out
of doors without it, and she raised her hand with the design to conceal
her face. By these signs, especially the rending of her distinguishing
robe, Absalom at once conjectured what had taken place. Recommending her
to be silent about it and not publish her own and her family's dishonor,
he gave no inkling of his angry feelings to Amnon. But all the while he
was in secret "nursing his wrath to keep it warm," and only "biding his
time" to avenge his sister's wrongs, and by the removal of the
heir-apparent perhaps further also his ambitious designs.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 13:20](../../../bib/kjv/sa2013.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">sa2 13:20</span></span>

So Tamar remained desolate in her brother Absalom's house--He was her
natural protector, and the children of polygamists lived by themselves,
as if they constituted different families.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 13:23](../../../bib/kjv/sa2013.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">sa2 13:23</span></span>

Absalom had sheep-shearers in Baal-hazor, which is beside Ephraim--A
sheep-shearing feast is a grand occasion in the East. Absalom proposed
to give such an entertainment at his estate in Baal-hazor, about eight
miles northeast of Jerusalem near a town called Ephraim ([Jos
11:10](../../../bib/kjv/jos011.htm#010)). He first invited the king and
his court; but the king declining, on account of the heavy expense to
which the reception of royalty would subject him \[[Sa2
13:25](../../../bib/kjv/sa2013.htm#025)\], Absalom then limited the
invitation to the king's sons \[[Sa2
13:26](../../../bib/kjv/sa2013.htm#026)\], which David the more readily
agreed to, in the hope that it might tend to the promotion of brotherly
harmony and union.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 13:28](../../../bib/kjv/sa2013.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">sa2 13:28</span></span>

AMNON IS SLAIN. ([Sa2 13:28-36](../../../bib/kjv/sa2013.htm#028))

Absalom had commanded his servants, saying . . . when Amnon's heart is
merry with wine . . . kill him, fear not--On a preconcerted signal from
their master, the servants, rushing upon Amnon, slew him at the table,
while the rest of the brothers, horror-struck, and apprehending a
general massacre, fled in affrighted haste to Jerusalem.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 13:29](../../../bib/kjv/sa2013.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">sa2 13:29</span></span>

every man gat him up upon his mule--This had become the favorite
equipage of the great. King David himself had a state mule ([Kg1
1:33](../../../bib/kjv/kg1001.htm#033)). The Syrian mules are, in
activity, strength, and capabilities, still far superior to ours.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 13:30](../../../bib/kjv/sa2013.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">sa2 13:30</span></span>

tidings came to David, saying, Absalom hath slain all the king's
sons--It was natural that in the consternation and tumult caused by so
atrocious a deed, an exaggerated report should reach the court, which
was at once plunged into the depths of grief and despair. But the
information of Jonadab, who seems to have been aware of the plan, and
the arrival of the other princes, made known the real extent of the
catastrophe.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 13:37](../../../bib/kjv/sa2013.htm#037)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_037">sa2 13:37</span></span>

ABSALOM FLEES TO TALMAI. ([Sa2
13:37-39](../../../bib/kjv/sa2013.htm#037))

Absalom fled, and went to Talmai--The law as to premeditated murder
([Num 35:21](../../../bib/kjv/num035.htm#021)) gave him no hope of
remaining with impunity in his own country. The cities of refuge could
afford him no sanctuary, and he was compelled to leave the kingdom,
taking refuge at the court of Geshur, with his maternal grandfather, who
would, doubtless, approve of his conduct.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 Kings (2 Samuel) Chapter 14](sa2014)

</div>
