<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[2 Kings (2 Samuel) Index](sa2)  
  [Previous](sa2016)  [Next](sa2018) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*A Commentary, Critical, Practical, and Explanatory on the Old and New
Testaments*, by Robert Jamieson, A.R. Fausset and David Brown \[1882\]
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [2 Kings (2 Samuel) Chapter 17](../../../bib/kjv/sa2017.htm#001)

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 17:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa2017.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">sa2 17:1</span></span>

AHITHOPHEL'S COUNSEL OVERTHROWN BY HUSHAI. ([Sa2
17:1-14](../../../bib/kjv/sa2017.htm#001))

Moreover Ahithophel said unto Absalom--The recommendation to take prompt
and decisive measures before the royalist forces could be collected and
arranged, evinced the deep political sagacity of this councillor. The
adoption of his advice would have extinguished the cause of David; and
it affords a dreadful proof of the extremities to which the heartless
prince was, to secure his ambitious objects, prepared to go, that the
parricidal counsel "pleased Absalom well, and all the elders of Israel."
It was happily overruled, however, by the address of Hushai, who saw the
imminent danger to which it would expose the king and the royal cause.
He dwelt upon the warlike character and military experience of the old
king--represented him and his adherents as mighty men, who would fight
with desperation; and who, most probably, secure in some stronghold,
would be beyond reach, while the smallest loss of Absalom's men at the
outset might be fatal to the success of the conspiracy. But his
dexterity was chiefly displayed in that part of his counsel which
recommended a general levy throughout the country; and that Absalom
should take command of it in person--thereby flattering at once the
pride and ambition of the usurper. The bait was caught by the
vainglorious and wicked prince.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 17:12](../../../bib/kjv/sa2017.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">sa2 17:12</span></span>

we will light upon him as the dew falleth on the ground--No image could
have symbolized the sudden onset of an enemy so graphically to an
Oriental mind as the silent, irresistible, and rapid descent of this
natural moisture on every field and blade of grass.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 17:13](../../../bib/kjv/sa2017.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">sa2 17:13</span></span>

all Israel shall bring ropes to that city--In besieging a town, hooks or
cranes were often thrown upon the walls or turrets, by which, with ropes
attached to them, the besiegers, uniting all their force, pulled down
the fortifications in a mass of ruins.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 17:14](../../../bib/kjv/sa2017.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">sa2 17:14</span></span>

The counsel of Hushai the Archite is better than the counsel of
Ahithophel--The reasons specified being extremely plausible, and
expressed in the strong hyperbolical language suited to dazzle an
Oriental imagination, the council declared in favor of Hushai's advice;
and their resolution was the immediate cause of the discomfiture of the
rebellion, although the council itself was only a link in the chain of
causation held by the controlling hand of the Lord.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 17:16](../../../bib/kjv/sa2017.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">sa2 17:16</span></span>

SECRET INTELLIGENCE SENT TO DAVID. ([Sa2
17:15-22](../../../bib/kjv/sa2017.htm#015))

send quickly, and tell David--Apparently doubting that his advice would
be followed, Hushai ordered secret intelligence to be conveyed to David
of all that transpired, with an urgent recommendation to cross the
Jordan without a moment's delay, lest Ahithophel's address and influence
might produce a change on the prince's mind, and an immediate pursuit be
determined on.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 17:17](../../../bib/kjv/sa2017.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">sa2 17:17</span></span>

by En-rogel--the fuller's well in the neighborhood of Jerusalem, below
the junction of the valley of Hinnom with that of Jehoshaphat.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 17:18](../../../bib/kjv/sa2017.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">sa2 17:18</span></span>

and came to a man's house in Bahurim, which had a well in his court--The
court was that of the house, and the well an empty cistern. All the
houses of the better class are furnished with such reservoirs. Nothing
could more easily happen than that one of these wells, in consequence of
a deficiency of water, should become dry and it would then answer as a
place of retreat, such as David's friends found in the man's house at
Bahurim. The spreading of a covering over the well's mouth for the
drying of corn is a common practice.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 17:23](../../../bib/kjv/sa2017.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">sa2 17:23</span></span>

AHITHOPHEL HANGS HIMSELF. ([Sa2
17:23-29](../../../bib/kjv/sa2017.htm#023))

when Ahithophel saw that his counsel was not followed--His vanity was
wounded, his pride mortified on finding that his ascendency was gone;
but that chagrin was aggravated by other feelings--a painful conviction
that through the delay which had been resolved on, the cause of Absalom
was lost. Hastening home, therefore, he arranged his private affairs,
and knowing that the storm of retributive vengeance would fall chiefly
upon him as the instigator and prop of the rebellion, he hanged himself.
It may be remarked that the Israelites did not, at that time, refuse the
rites of sepulture even to those who died by their own hands. He had an
imitator in Judas, who resembled him in his treason, as well as in his
infamous end.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 17:24](../../../bib/kjv/sa2017.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">sa2 17:24</span></span>

Then David came to Mahanaim--in the high eastern country of Gilead, the
seat of Ish-bosheth's government.

Absalom passed over Jordan--It is not said how long an interval elapsed,
but there must have been sufficient time to make the intended levy
throughout the kingdom.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 17:25](../../../bib/kjv/sa2017.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">sa2 17:25</span></span>

Amasa--By the genealogy it appears that this captain stood in the same
relation to David as Joab, both being his nephews. Of course, Amasa was
Absalom's cousin, and though himself an Israelite, his father was an
Ishmaelite ([Ch1 2:17](../../../bib/kjv/ch1002.htm#017)).

Nahash--is thought by some to be another name of Jesse, or according to
others, the name of Jesse's wife.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 17:27](../../../bib/kjv/sa2017.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">sa2 17:27</span></span>

when David was come to Mahanaim--The necessities of the king and his
followers were hospitably ministered to by three chiefs, whose generous
loyalty is recorded with honor in the sacred narrative.

Shobi--must have been a brother of Hanun. Disapproving, probably, of
that young king's outrage upon the Israelite ambassadors, he had been
made governor of Ammon by David on the conquest of that country.

Machir--(See [Sa2 9:4](../../../bib/kjv/sa2009.htm#004)). Supposed by
some to have been a brother of Bath-sheba, and

Barzillai--a wealthy old grandee, whose great age and infirmities made
his loyal devotion to the distressed monarch peculiarly affecting. The
supplies they brought, which (besides beds for the weary) consisted of
the staple produce of their rich lands and pastures, may be classified
as follows: eatables--wheat, barley, flour, beans, lentils, sheep, and
cheese; drinkables--"honey and butter" or cream, which, being mixed
together, form a thin, diluted beverage, light, cool, and refreshing.
Being considered a luxurious refreshment ([Sol
4:11](../../../bib/kjv/sol004.htm#011)), the supply of it shows the high
respect that was paid to David by his loyal and faithful subjects at
Mahanaim.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 17:29](../../../bib/kjv/sa2017.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">sa2 17:29</span></span>

in the wilderness--spread out beyond the cultivated tablelands into the
steppes of Hauran.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 Kings (2 Samuel) Chapter 18](sa2018)

</div>
