<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[2 Kings (2 Samuel) Index](sa2.md)  
  [Previous](sa2021)  [Next](sa2024.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*A Commentary, Critical, Practical, and Explanatory on the Old and New
Testaments*, by Robert Jamieson, A.R. Fausset and David Brown \[1882\]
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [2 Kings (2 Samuel) Chapter 23](../../../bib/kjv/sa2023.htm#001.md)

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 23:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa2023.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">sa2 23:1</span></span>

DAVID PROFESSES HIS FAITH IN GOD'S PROMISES. ([Sa2
23:1-7](../../../bib/kjv/sa2023.htm#001).md)

Now these be the last words of David--Various opinions are entertained
as to the precise meaning of this statement, which, it is obvious,
proceeded from the compiler or collector of the sacred canon. Some think
that, as there is no division of chapters in the Hebrew Scriptures, this
introduction was intended to show that what follows is no part of the
preceding song. Others regard this as the last of the king's poetical
compositions; while still others consider it the last of his utterances
as an inspired writer.

raised up on high--from an obscure family and condition to a throne.

the anointed of the God of Jacob--chosen to be king by the special
appointment of that God, to whom, by virtue of an ancient covenant, the
people of Israel owed all their peculiar destiny and distinguished
privileges.

the sweet psalmist of Israel--that is, delightful, highly esteemed.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 23:2](../../../bib/kjv/sa2023.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">sa2 23:2</span></span>

The Spirit of the Lord spake by me--Nothing can more clearly show that
all that is excellent in spirit, beautiful in language, or grand in
prophetic imagery, which the Psalms of David contain, were owing, not to
his superiority in natural talents or acquired knowledge, but to the
suggestion and dictates of God's Spirit.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 23:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa2023.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">sa2 23:3</span></span>

the Rock of Israel--This metaphor, which is commonly applied by the
sacred writers to the Almighty, was very expressive to the minds of the
Hebrew people. Their national fortresses, in which they sought security
in war, were built on high and inaccessible rocks.

spake to me--either preceptively, giving the following counsels
respecting the character of an upright ruler in Israel, or
prophetically, concerning David and his royal dynasty, and the great
Messiah, of whom many think this is a prophecy, rendering the words, "he
that ruleth"--"there shall be a ruler over men."

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 23:4](../../../bib/kjv/sa2023.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">sa2 23:4</span></span>

as the tender grass springing out of the earth by clear shining after
rain--Little patches of grass are seen rapidly springing up in Palestine
after rain; and even where the ground has been long parched and bare,
within a few days or hours after the enriching showers begin to fall,
the face of the earth is so renewed that it is covered over with a pure
fresh mantle of green.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 23:5](../../../bib/kjv/sa2023.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">sa2 23:5</span></span>

Although my house be not so with God; yet he hath made with me an
everlasting covenant, ordered in all things, and sure--"the light of the
morning," that is, the beginning of David's kingdom, was unlike the
clear brilliant dawn of an Eastern day but was overcast by many black
and threatening clouds; neither he nor his family had been like the
tender grass springing up from the ground and flourishing by the united
influences of the sun and rain; but rather like the grass that withereth
and is prematurely cut down. The meaning is: although David's house had
not flourished in an uninterrupted course of worldly prosperity and
greatness, according to his hopes; although great crimes and calamities
had beclouded his family history; some of the most promising branches of
the royal tree had been cut down in his lifetime and many of his
successors should suffer in like manner for their personal sins;
although many reverses and revolutions may overtake his race and his
kingdom, yet it was to him a subject of the highest joy and thankfulness
that God will inviolably maintain His covenant with his family, until
the advent of his greatest Son, the Messiah, who was the special object
of his desire, and the author of his salvation.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 23:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa2023.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">sa2 23:6</span></span>

But the sons of Belial shall be all of them as thorns--that is, the
wicked enemies and persecutors of this kingdom of righteousness. They
resemble those prickly, thorny plants which are twisted together, whose
spires point in every direction, and which are so sharp and strong that
they cannot be touched or approached without danger; but hard
instruments and violent means must be taken to destroy or uproot them.
So God will remove or destroy all who are opposed to this kingdom.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 23:8](../../../bib/kjv/sa2023.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">sa2 23:8</span></span>

A CATALOGUE OF HIS MIGHTY MEN. (2Sa. 23:8-39)

These be the names of the mighty men whom David had--This verse should
be translated thus: He who sits in the seat of the Tachmonite (that is,
of Jashobeam the Hachmonite), who was chief among the captains, the same
is Adino the Eznite; he lift up his spear against eight hundred, whom he
slew at one time. The text is corrupt in this passage; the number eight
hundred should be three hundred \[DAVIDSON, Hermeneutics\]. Under Joab
he was chief or president of the council of war. The first or highest
order was composed of him and his two colleagues, Eleazar and Shammah.
Eleazar seems to have been left to fight the Philistines alone; and on
his achieving the victory, they returned to the spoil. In like manner
Shammah was left to stand alone in his glory, when the Lord, by him,
wrought a great victory. It is not very easy to determine whether the
exploits that are afterwards described were performed by the first or
the second three.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 23:15](../../../bib/kjv/sa2023.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">sa2 23:15</span></span>

the well of Beth-lehem--An ancient cistern, with four or five holes in
the solid rock, at about ten minutes distance to the north of the
eastern corner of the hill of Beth-lehem, is pointed out by the natives
as Bir-Daoud; that is, David's well. Dr. ROBINSON doubts the identity of
the well; but others think that there are no good grounds for doing so.
Certainly, considering this to be the ancient well, Beth-lehem must have
once extended ten minutes further to the north, and must have lain in
times of old, not as now, on the summit, but on the northern rise of the
hill; for the well is by or ([Ch1
11:7](../../../bib/kjv/ch1011.htm#007).md) at the gate. I find in the
description of travellers, that the common opinion is, that David's
captains had come from the southeast, in order to obtain, at the risk of
their lives, the so-much-longed-for water; while it is supposed that
David himself was then in the great cave that is not far to the
southeast of Beth-lehem; which cave is generally held to have been that
of Adullam. But ([Jos 15:35](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#035).md) Adullam
lay "in the valley"; that is, in the undulating plain at the western
base of the mountains of Judea and consequently to the southwest of
Beth-lehem. Be this as it may, David's men had in any case to break
through the host of the Philistines, in order to reach the well; and the
position of Bir-Daoud agrees well with this \[VAN DE VELDE\].

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 23:19](../../../bib/kjv/sa2023.htm#019.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">sa2 23:19</span></span>

the first three--The mighty men or champions in David's military staff
were divided into three classes--the highest, Jashobeam, Eleazar, and
Shammah; the second class, Abishai, Benaiah, and Asahel; and the third
class, the thirty, of which Asahel was the chief. There are thirty-one
mentioned in the list, including Asahel; and these added to the two
superior orders make thirty-seven. Two of them, we know, were already
dead; namely, Asahel \[[Sa2 3:30](../../../bib/kjv/sa2003.htm#030.md)\] and
Uriah \[[Sa2 11:17](../../../bib/kjv/sa2011.htm#017.md)\]; and if the dead,
at the drawing up of the list, amounted to seven, then we might suppose
a legion of honor, consisting of the definite number thirty, where the
vacancies, when they occurred, were replaced by fresh appointments.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 Kings (2 Samuel) Chapter 24](sa2024.md)

</div>
