<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[2 Kings (2 Samuel) Index](sa2.md)  
  [Previous](sa2018)  [Next](sa2020.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*A Commentary, Critical, Practical, and Explanatory on the Old and New
Testaments*, by Robert Jamieson, A.R. Fausset and David Brown \[1882\]
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [2 Kings (2 Samuel) Chapter 19](../../../bib/kjv/sa2019.htm#001.md)

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 19:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa2019.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">sa2 19:3</span></span>

JOAB CAUSES THE KING TO CEASE MOURNING. ([Sa2
19:1-8](../../../bib/kjv/sa2019.htm#001).md)

the people gat them by stealth . . . to the city--The rumor of the
king's disconsolate condition spread a universal and unseasonable gloom.
His troops, instead of being welcomed back (as a victorious army always
was) with music and other demonstrations of public joy, slunk secretly
and silently into the city, as if ashamed after the commission of some
crime.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 19:4](../../../bib/kjv/sa2019.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">sa2 19:4</span></span>

the king covered his face--one of the usual signs of mourning (see on
[Sa2 15:30](../../../bib/kjv/sa2015.htm#030).md).

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 19:5](../../../bib/kjv/sa2019.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">sa2 19:5</span></span>

Thou hast shamed . . . the faces of all thy servants--by withdrawing
thyself to indulge in grief, as if their services were disagreeable and
their devotion irksome to thee. Instead of hailing their return with joy
and gratitude, thou hast refused them the small gratification of seeing
thee. Joab's remonstrance was right and necessary, but it was made with
harshness. He was one of those persons who spoil their important
services by the insolence of their manners, and who always awaken a
feeling of obligation in those to whom they render any services. He
spoke to David in a tone of hauteur that ill became a subject to show
towards his king.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 19:7](../../../bib/kjv/sa2019.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">sa2 19:7</span></span>

Now . . . arise, go forth, and speak comfortably unto thy servants--The
king felt the truth of Joab's reprimand; but the threat by which it was
enforced, grounded as it was on the general's unbounded popularity with
the army, showed him to be a dangerous person; and that circumstance,
together with the violation of an express order to deal gently for his
sake with Absalom, produced in David's mind a settled hatred, which was
strongly manifested in his last directions to Solomon.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 19:8](../../../bib/kjv/sa2019.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">sa2 19:8</span></span>

the king arose, and sat in the gate--He appeared daily in the usual
place for the hearing of causes.

all the people came before the king--that is, the loyal natives who had
been faithful to his government, and fought in his cause.

Israel had fled--that is, the adherents of Absalom, who, on his defeat,
had dispersed and saved themselves by flight.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 19:9](../../../bib/kjv/sa2019.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">sa2 19:9</span></span>

THE ISRAELITES BRING THE KING BACK. (2Sa. 19:9-43)

all the people were at strife throughout all the tribes of Israel--The
kingdom was completely disorganized. The sentiments of three different
parties are represented in [Sa2
19:9-10](../../../bib/kjv/sa2019.htm#009.md) : the royalists, the adherents
of Absalom who had been very numerous, and those who were indifferent to
the Davidic dynasty. In these circumstances the king was right in not
hastening back, as a conqueror, to reascend his throne. A re-election
was, in some measure, necessary. He remained for some time on the other
side of Jordan, in expectation of being invited back. That invitation
was given without, however, the concurrence of Judah. David,
disappointed and vexed by his own tribe's apparent lukewarmness,
despatched the two high priests to rouse the Judahites to take a
prominent interest in his cause. It was the act of a skilful politician.
Hebron having been the seat of the rebellion, it was graceful on his
part to encourage their return to allegiance and duty; it was an appeal
to their honor not to be the last of the tribes. But this separate
message, and the preference given to them, occasioned an outburst of
jealousy among the other tribes that was nearly followed by fatal
consequences \[see [Sa2 19:40-43](../../../bib/kjv/sa2019.htm#040.md)\].

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 19:13](../../../bib/kjv/sa2019.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">sa2 19:13</span></span>

And say ye to Amasa, &c.--This also was a dextrous stroke of policy.
David was fully alive to the importance, for extinguishing the
rebellion, of withdrawing from that cause the only leader who could keep
it alive; and he, therefore, secretly intimated his intention to raise
Amasa to the command of the army in the place of Joab, whose overbearing
haughtiness had become intolerable. The king justly reckoned, that from
natural temper as well as gratitude for the royal pardon, he would prove
a more tractable servant; and David, doubtless, intended in all
sincerity to fulfil this promise. But Joab managed to retain his high
position (see on [Sa2 20:4-10](../../../bib/kjv/sa2020.htm#004).md).

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 19:14](../../../bib/kjv/sa2019.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">sa2 19:14</span></span>

he bowed the heart of all the men of Judah--that is, Amasa, who had been
won over, used his great influence in re-attaching the whole tribe of
Judah to the interest of David.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 19:15](../../../bib/kjv/sa2019.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">sa2 19:15</span></span>

Judah came to Gilgal--the most convenient place where preparations could
be made for bringing the king and court over the Jordan.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 19:16](../../../bib/kjv/sa2019.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">sa2 19:16</span></span>

Shemei . . . a thousand men of Benjamin with him--This display of
\[Shemei's\] followers was to show what force he could raise against or
in support of the king. Expressing the deepest regret for his former
outrageous conduct, he was pardoned on the spot; and although the son of
Zeruiah urged the expediency of making this chief a public example, his
officiousness was repulsed by David with magnanimity, and with the
greater confidence that he felt himself now re-established in the
kingdom (see on [Kg1 2:8](../../../bib/kjv/kg1002.htm#008).md).

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 19:17](../../../bib/kjv/sa2019.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">sa2 19:17</span></span>

Ziba, the servant of the house of Saul--He had deceived his master; and
when ordered to make ready the ass for the lame prince to go and meet
the king, he slipped away by himself to pay court first; so that
Mephibosheth, being lame, had to remain in Jerusalem till the king's
arrival.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 19:18](../../../bib/kjv/sa2019.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">sa2 19:18</span></span>

ferry boat--probably rafts, which are still used on that part of the
river.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 19:20](../../../bib/kjv/sa2019.htm#020.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">sa2 19:20</span></span>

I am come the first . . . of all the house of Joseph--that is, before
all the rest of Israel ([Psa 77:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa077.htm#015.md);
[Psa 80:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa080.htm#001.md); [Psa
81:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa081.htm#005.md); [Zac
10:6](../../../bib/kjv/zac010.htm#006).md).

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 19:24](../../../bib/kjv/sa2019.htm#024.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">sa2 19:24</span></span>

Mephibosheth . . . came down to meet the king--The reception given to
Mephibosheth was less creditable to David. The sincerity of that
prince's grief for the misfortunes of the king cannot be doubted.

He had neither dressed his feet--not taken the bath,

nor trimmed his beard--The Hebrews cut off the hair on the upper lip
(see on [Lev 13:45](../../../bib/kjv/lev013.htm#045).md), and cheeks, but
carefully cherished it on the chin from ear to ear. Besides dyeing it
black or red colors, which, however, is the exception, and not the rule
in the East, there are various modes of trimming it: they train it into
a massy, bushy form, swelling and round; or they terminate it like a
pyramid, in a sharp point. Whatever the mode, it is always trimmed with
the greatest care; and they usually carry a small comb for the purpose.
The neglect of this attention to his beard was an undoubted proof of the
depth of Mephibosheth's grief. The king seems to have received him
upbraidingly, and not to have been altogether sure either of his guilt
or innocence. It is impossible to commend the cavalier treatment, any
more than to approve the partial award, of David in this case. If he
were too hurried and distracted by the pressure of circumstances to
inquire fully into the matter, he should have postponed his decision;
for if by "dividing the land" ([Sa2
19:29](../../../bib/kjv/sa2019.htm#029).md) he meant that the former
arrangement should be continued by which Mephibosheth was acknowledged
the proprietor, and Ziba the farmer, it was a hardship inflicted on the
owner to fix him with a tenant who had so grossly slandered him. But if
by "dividing the land," they were now to share alike, the injustice of
the decision was greatly increased. In any view, the generous,
disinterested spirit displayed by Mephibosheth was worthy a son of the
noble-hearted Jonathan.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 19:31](../../../bib/kjv/sa2019.htm#031.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">sa2 19:31</span></span>

Barzillai the Gileadite--The rank, great age, and chivalrous devotion of
this Gileadite chief wins our respect. His declining to go to court, his
recommendation of his son, his convoy across the Jordan, and his parting
scene with the king, are interesting incidents. What mark of royal favor
was bestowed on Chimham has not been recorded; but it is probable that
David gave a great part of his personal patrimony in Beth-lehem to
Chimham and his heirs in perpetuity ([Jer
41:17](../../../bib/kjv/jer041.htm#017).md).

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 19:35](../../../bib/kjv/sa2019.htm#035.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_035">sa2 19:35</span></span>

the voice of singing men and singing women--Bands of professional
musicians form a prominent appendage to the courts of Oriental princes.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 19:37](../../../bib/kjv/sa2019.htm#037.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_037">sa2 19:37</span></span>

buried by the grave of my father and of my mother--This is an instance
of the strong affection of people in the East towards the places of
sepulture appropriated to their families.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 19:40](../../../bib/kjv/sa2019.htm#040.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_040">sa2 19:40</span></span>

the king went on to Gilgal, . . . and all the people of Judah conducted
the king, and also half the people of Israel--Whether from impatience to
move on or from some other cause, David did not wait till all the tribes
had arrived to conduct him on his return to the capital. The procession
began as soon as Amasa had brought the Judahite escort, and the
preference given to this tribe produced a bitter jealousy, which was
nearly kindling a civil war fiercer than that which had just ended. A
war of words ensued between the tribes--Israel resting their argument on
their superior numbers; "they had ten parts in the king," whereas Judah
had no more than one. Judah grounded their right to take the lead, on
the ground of their nearer relationship to the king. This was a claim
dangerous to the house of David; and it shows the seeds were already
sown for that tribal dissension which, before long, led to the
dismemberment of the kingdom.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 Kings (2 Samuel) Chapter 20](sa2020.md)

</div>
