<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Titus Index](tit.md)  
  [Previous](tit002)  [Next](plm000.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*A Commentary, Critical, Practical, and Explanatory on the Old and New
Testaments*, by Robert Jamieson, A.R. Fausset and David Brown \[1882\]
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Titus Chapter 3](../../../bib/kjv/tit003.htm#001.md)

[Titus 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/tit003.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">tit 3:1</span></span>

WHAT TITUS IS TO TEACH CONCERNING CHRISTIANS' BEHAVIOR TOWARDS THE
WORLD: HOW HE IS TO TREAT HERETICS: WHEN AND WHERE HE IS TO MEET PAUL.
SALUTATION. CONCLUSION. ([Tit 3:1-15](../../../bib/kjv/tit003.htm#001).md)

Put them in mind--as they are in danger of forgetting their duty, though
knowing it. The opposition of Christianity to heathenism, and the
natural disposition to rebellion of the Jews under the Roman empire (of
whom many lived in Crete), might lead many to forget practically what
was a recognized Christian principle in theory, submission to the powers
that be. DIODORUS SICULUS mentions the tendency of the Cretans to
riotous insubordination.

to be subject--"willingly" (so the Greek).

principalities . . . powers--Greek, "magistracies . . . authorities."

to obey--the commands of "magistrates"; not necessarily implying
spontaneous obedience. Willing obedience is implied in "ready to every
good work." Compare [Rom 13:3](../../../bib/kjv/rom013.htm#003.md), as
showing that obedience to the magistracy would tend to good works, since
the magistrate's aim generally is to favor the good and punish the bad.
Contrast "disobedient" ([Tit 3:3](../../../bib/kjv/tit003.htm#003).md).

[Titus 3:2](../../../bib/kjv/tit003.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">tit 3:2</span></span>

To speak evil of no man--especially, not of "dignities" and magistrates.

no brawlers--"not quarrelsome," not attacking others.

gentle--towards those who attack us. Yielding, considerate, not urging
one's rights to the uttermost, but forbearing and kindly (see on [Phi
4:5](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#005).md). Very different from the innate
greediness and spirit of aggression towards others which characterized
the Cretans.

showing--in acts.

all--all possible.

meekness--(See on [Co2 10:1](../../../bib/kjv/co2010.htm#001).md); the
opposite of passionate severity.

unto all men--The duty of Christian conduct towards all men is the
proper consequence of the universality of God's grace to all men, so
often set forth in the pastoral Epistles.

[Titus 3:3](../../../bib/kjv/tit003.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">tit 3:3</span></span>

For--Our own past sins should lead us to be lenient towards those of
others. "Despise none, for such wast thou also." As the penitent thief
said to his fellow thief, "Dost thou not fear God . . . seeing that thou
art in the same condemnation."

we--Christians.

were--Contrast [Tit 3:4](../../../bib/kjv/tit003.htm#004.md), "But when,"
that is, now: a favorite contrast in Paul's writing, that between our
past state by nature, and our present state of deliverance from it by
grace. As God treated us, we ought to treat our neighbor.

sometimes--once.

foolish--wanting right reason in our course of living. Irrational. The
exact picture of human life without grace. Grace is the sole remedy for
foolishness.

disobedient--to God.

deceived--led astray. The same Greek, "out of the way" ([Heb
5:2](../../../bib/kjv/heb005.htm#002).md).

serving--Greek, "in bondage to," serving as slaves."

divers--The cloyed appetite craves constant variety.

pleasures--of the flesh.

malice--malignity.

hateful . . . hating--correlatives. Provoking the hatred of others by
their detestable character and conduct, and in turn hating them.

[Titus 3:4](../../../bib/kjv/tit003.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">tit 3:4</span></span>

To show how little reason the Cretan Christians had to be proud of
themselves, and despise others not Christians (see on [Tit
3:2-3](../../../bib/kjv/tit003.htm#002).md). It is to the "kindness and
love of God," not to their own merits, that they owe salvation.

kindness--Greek, "goodness," "benignity," which manifests His grace.

love . . . toward man--teaching us to have such "love (benevolence)
toward man" (Greek, "philanthropy"), "showing all meekness unto all men"
([Tit 3:2](../../../bib/kjv/tit003.htm#002).md), even as God had "toward
man" ([Tit 2:11](../../../bib/kjv/tit002.htm#011).md); opposed to the
"hateful and hating" characteristics of unrenewed men, whose
wretchedness moved God's benevolent kindness.

of God our Saviour--Greek, "of our Saviour God," namely, the Father
([Tit 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/tit001.htm#003).md), who "saved us" ([Tit
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/tit003.htm#005).md) "through Jesus Christ our
Saviour" ([Tit 3:6](../../../bib/kjv/tit003.htm#006).md).

appeared--Greek, "was made to appear"; was manifested.

[Titus 3:5](../../../bib/kjv/tit003.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">tit 3:5</span></span>

Not by--Greek, "Out of"; "not as a result springing from works," &c.

of righteousness--Greek, "in righteousness," that is, wrought "in a
state of righteousness": as "deeds . . . wrought in God." There was an
utter absence in us of the element ("righteousness") in which alone
righteous works could be done, and so necessarily an absence of the
works. "We neither did works of righteousness, nor were saved in
consequence of them; but His goodness did the whole" \[THEOPHYLACT\].

we--emphatically opposed to "His."

mercy--the prompting cause of our salvation individually: "In pursuance
of His mercy." His kindness and love to man were manifested in
redemption once for all wrought by Him for mankind generally; His mercy
is the prompting cause for our individual realization of it. Faith is
presupposed as the instrument of our being "saved"; our being so, then,
is spoken of as an accomplished fact. Faith is not mentioned, but only
God's part. as Paul's object here is not to describe man's new state,
but the saving agency of God in bringing about that state, independent
of all merit on the man's part (see on [Tit
3:4](../../../bib/kjv/tit003.htm#004).md).

by--Greek, "through"; by means of.

the washing--rather, "the laver," that is, the baptismal font.

of regeneration--designed to be the visible instrument of regeneration.
"The apostles are wont to draw an argument from the sacraments to prove
the thing therein signified, because it ought to be a recognized
principle among the godly, that God does not mark us with empty signs,
but by His power inwardly makes good what He demonstrates by the outward
sign. Wherefore baptism is congruously and truly called the laver of
regeneration. We must connect the sign and thing signified, so as not to
make the sign empty and ineffectual; and yet not, for the sake of
honoring the sign, to detract from the Holy Spirit what is peculiarly
His" \[CALVIN\], ([Pe1 3:21](../../../bib/kjv/pe1003.htm#021).md). Adult
candidates for baptism are presupposed to have had repentance and faith
(for Paul often assumes in faith and charity that those addressed are
what they profess to be, though in fact some of them were not so, [Co1
6:11](../../../bib/kjv/co1006.htm#011).md), in which case baptism would be
the visible "laver or regeneration" to them, "faith being thereby
confirmed, and grace increased, by virtue of prayer to God" \[Article
XXVII, Church of England\]. Infants are charitably presumed to have
received a grace in connection with their Christian descent, in answer
to the believing prayers of their parents or guardians presenting them
for baptism, which grace is visibly sealed and increased by baptism,
"the laver of regeneration." They are presumed to be then regenerated,
until years of developed consciousness prove whether they have been
actually so or not. "Born of (from) water and (no 'of' in Greek) the
Spirit." The Word is the remote and anterior instrument of the new
birth; Baptism, the proximate instrument. The Word, the instrument to
the individual; Baptism, in relation to the Society of Christians. The
laver of cleansing stood outside the door of the tabernacle, wherein the
priest had to wash before entering the Holy Place; so we must wash in
the laver of regeneration before we can enter the Church, whose members
are "a royal priesthood." "Baptism by the Spirit" (whereof water baptism
is the designed accompanying seal) makes the difference between
Christian baptism and that of John. As Paul presupposes the outward
Church is the visible community of the redeemed, so he speaks of baptism
on the supposition that it answers to its idea; that all that is inward
belonging to its completeness accompanied the outward. Hence he here
asserts of outward baptism whatever is involved in the believing
appropriation of the divine facts which it symbolizes, whatever is
realized when baptism fully corresponds to its original design. So [Gal
3:27](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#027.md); language holding good only of
those in whom the inward living communion and outward baptism coalesce.
"Saved us" applies fully to those truly regenerate alone; in a general
sense it may include many who, though put within reach of salvation,
shall not finally be saved. "Regeneration" occurs only once more in New
Testament, [Mat 19:28](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#028.md), that is, the
new birth of the heaven and earth at Christ's second coming to renew all
material things, the human body included, when the creature, now
travailing in labor-throes to the birth, shall be delivered from the
bondage of corruption into the glorious liberty of the children of God.
Regeneration, which now begins in the believer's soul, shall then be
extended to his body, and thence to all creation.

and renewing--not "the laver ('washing') of renewing," but "and BY the
renewing," &c., following "saved us." To make "renewing of the Holy
Ghost" follow "the laver" would destroy the balance of the clauses of
the sentence, and would make baptism the seal, not only of regeneration,
but also of the subsequent process of progressive sanctification
("renewing of the Holy Ghost"). Regeneration is a thing once for all
done; renewing is a process daily proceeding. As "the washing," or
"laver," is connected with "regeneration," so the "renewing of the Holy
Ghost" is connected with "shed on us abundantly" ([Tit
3:6](../../../bib/kjv/tit003.htm#006).md).

[Titus 3:6](../../../bib/kjv/tit003.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">tit 3:6</span></span>

Which--the Holy Ghost.

he shed--Greek, "poured out"; not only on the Church in general at
Pentecost, but also "on us" individually. This pouring out of the Spirit
comprehends the grace received before, in, and subsequently to, baptism.

abundantly--Greek, "richly" ([Col
3:16](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#016).md).

through Jesus Christ--the channel and Mediator of the gift of the Holy
Ghost.

our Saviour--immediately; as the Father is mediately "our Saviour." The
Father is the author of our salvation and saves us by Jesus Christ.

[Titus 3:7](../../../bib/kjv/tit003.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">tit 3:7</span></span>

That, &c.--the purpose which He aimed at in having "saved us" ([Tit
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/tit003.htm#005).md), namely, "That being (having
been) justified (accounted righteous through faith at our
'regeneration,' and made righteous by the daily 'renewing of the Holy
Ghost') by His grace (as opposed to works, [Tit
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/tit003.htm#005).md) we should be made heirs."

his grace--Greek, "the grace of the former," that is, God ([Tit
3:4](../../../bib/kjv/tit003.htm#004.md); [Rom
5:15](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#015).md).

heirs-- ([Gal 3:29](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#029).md).

according to the hope of eternal life-- [Tit
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/tit001.htm#002.md), and also the position of the
Greek words, confirm English Version, that is, agreeably to the hope of
eternal life; the eternal inheritance fully satisfying the hope. BENGEL
and ELLICOTT explain it, "heirs of eternal life, in the way of hope,"
that is, not yet in actual possession. Such a blessed hope, which once
was not possessed, will lead a Christian to practice holiness and
meekness toward others, the lesson especially needed by the Cretans.

[Titus 3:8](../../../bib/kjv/tit003.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">tit 3:8</span></span>

Greek, "faithful is the saying." A formula peculiar to the Pastoral
Epistles. Here "the saying" is the statement ([Tit
3:4-7](../../../bib/kjv/tit003.htm#004).md) as to the gratuitousness of
God's gift of salvation. Answering to the "Amen."

these things, &c.--Greek, "concerning these things (the truths dwelt on,
[Tit 3:4-7](../../../bib/kjv/tit003.htm#004.md); not as English Version,
what follow), I will that thou affirm (insist) strongly and
persistently, in order that they who have believed God (the Greek for
'believed in God' is different, [Joh
14:1](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#001.md). 'They who have learnt to credit
God' in what He saith) may be careful ('Solicitously sedulous';
diligence is necessary) to maintain (literally, 'to set before
themselves so as to sustain') good works." No longer applying their care
to "unprofitable" and unpractical speculations ([Tit
3:9](../../../bib/kjv/tit003.htm#009).md).

These things--These results of doctrine ("good works") are "good and
profitable unto men," whereas no such practical results flow from
"foolish questions." So GROTIUS and WIESINGER. But ALFORD, to avoid the
tautology, "these (good works) are good unto men," explains, "these
truths" ([Tit 3:4-7](../../../bib/kjv/tit003.htm#004).md).

[Titus 3:9](../../../bib/kjv/tit003.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">tit 3:9</span></span>

avoid--stand aloof from. Same Greek, as in [Ti2
2:16](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#016.md); see on [Ti2
2:16](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#016.md).

foolish--Greek, "insipid"; producing no moral fruit. "Vain talkers."

genealogies--akin to the "fables" (see on [Ti1
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#004).md). Not so much direct heresy as yet
is here referred to, as profitless discussions about genealogies of
aeons, &c., which ultimately led to Gnosticism. Synagogue discourses
were termed daraschoth, that is, "discussions." Compare "disputer of
this world (Greek, 'dispensation')."

strivings about the law--about the authority of the "commandments of
men," which they sought to confirm by the law ([Tit
1:14](../../../bib/kjv/tit001.htm#014.md); see on [Ti1
1:7](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#007).md), and about the mystical meaning
of the various parts of the law in connection with the "genealogies."

[Titus 3:10](../../../bib/kjv/tit003.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">tit 3:10</span></span>

heretic--Greek "heresy," originally meant a division resulting from
individual self-will; the individual doing and teaching what he chose,
independent of the teaching and practice of the Church. In course of
time it came to mean definitely "heresy" in the modern sense; and in the
later Epistles it has almost assumed this meaning. The heretics of
Crete, when Titus was there, were in doctrine followers of their own
self-willed "questions" reprobated in [Tit
3:9](../../../bib/kjv/tit003.htm#009.md), and immoral in practice.

reject--decline, avoid; not formal excommunication, but, "have nothing
more to do with him," either in admonition or intercourse.

[Titus 3:11](../../../bib/kjv/tit003.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">tit 3:11</span></span>

is . . . subverted--"is become perverse."

condemned of himself--He cannot say, no one told him better: continuing
the same after frequent admonition, he is self-condemned. "He sinneth"
wilfully against knowledge.

[Titus 3:12](../../../bib/kjv/tit003.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">tit 3:12</span></span>

When I shall send--have sent.

Artemas or Tychicus--to supply thy place in Crete. Artemas is said to
have been subsequently bishop of Lystra. Tychicus was sent twice by Paul
from Rome to Lesser Asia in his first imprisonment (which shows how well
qualified he was to become Titus' successor in Crete); [Eph
6:21](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#021.md); and in his second, [Ti2
4:12](../../../bib/kjv/ti2004.htm#012.md). Tradition makes him subsequently
bishop of Chalcedon, in Bithynia.

Nicopolis--"the city of victory," called so from the battle of Actium,
in Epirus. This Epistle was probably written from Corinth in the autumn.
Paul purposed a journey through Ã†tolia and Acarnania, into Epirus, and
there "to winter." See my Introduction to the Pastoral Epistles.

[Titus 3:13](../../../bib/kjv/tit003.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">tit 3:13</span></span>

Bring . . . on their journey--Enable them to proceed forward by
supplying necessaries for their journey.

Zenas--the contracted form of Zenodorus.

lawyer--a Jewish "scribe," who, when converted, still retained the title
from his former occupation. A civil lawyer.

Apollos--with Zenas, probably the bearers of this Epistle. In [Co1
16:12](../../../bib/kjv/co1016.htm#012.md), Apollos is mentioned as
purposing to visit Corinth; his now being at Corinth (on the theory of
Paul being at Corinth when he wrote) accords with this purpose. Crete
would be on his way either to Palestine or his native place, Alexandria.
Paul and Apollos thus appear in beautiful harmony in that very city
where their names had been formerly the watchword of unchristian party
work. It was to avoid this party rivalry that Apollos formerly was
unwilling to visit Corinth though Paul desired him. HIPPOLYTUS mentions
Zenas as one of the Seventy, and afterwards bishop of Diospolis.

[Titus 3:14](../../../bib/kjv/tit003.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">tit 3:14</span></span>

And . . . also--Greek, "But . . . also." Not only thou, but let others
also of "our" fellow believers (or "whom we have gained over at Crete")
with thee.

for necessary uses--to supply the necessary wants of Christian
missionaries and brethren, according as they stand in need in their
journeys for the Lord's cause. Compare [Tit
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/tit001.htm#008.md), "a lover of hospitality."

[Titus 3:15](../../../bib/kjv/tit003.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">tit 3:15</span></span>

Greet--"Salute them that love us in the faith." All at Crete had not
this love rooted in faith, the true bond of fellowship. A salutation
peculiar to this Epistle, such as no forger would have used.

Grace--Greek, "The grace," namely, of God.

with you all--not that the Epistle is addressed to all the Cretan
Christians, but Titus would naturally impart it to his flock.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Philemon Introduction](plm000.md)

</div>
