[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](wil16)  [Next](wil18) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_237">p. 237</span>

# CHAPTER XV

### AN INDIAN PILGRIMAGE

THE old roads of Asia are the footways of the world's ideas. There is a
camel-track that crosses the desert from Egypt into "Sooria," broken at
the Suez Canal by a ferry. What road in Europe, Roman or barbarian, can
compare in charm and pathos with this sandy path? On it we might yet see
a woman carrying a child on the back of an ass, and an old man leading
them, even as the legends picture the Flight of the Holy Family. By it
long ago marched the armies of Egypt to meet those of Assyria in
destructive conflict on the borders of Israel. By it Judea sent the
streams of her burning thought and fierce ethical emotion to Alexandria,
before Christianity was born.

Similarly, all over India, away from her ancient high roads, and thrown
like a network across her proudest Himalayas, are little thread-like
paths like this--ways made indeed by the feet of men, but worn far
deeper by the weight of impelling ideas than by the footprints of the
toil-stained crowds.

Such roads must once have connected China with Kashmir. Afghanistan,
always a province of India, must by just such paths have sent its
wandering merchants with nuts and raisins to the South, as long ago as
the days of Solomon. Even now it is by ways unpaved, deep-trodden, that
the long-haired

<span id="page_238">p. 238</span>

goats scramble down with their loads through the snowy defiles from
Bokhara and Thibet, to be sheared in the sunny valley of the Jhelum, and
furnish wool for its famous shawls. Which comes first, we wonder,
commerce or pilgrimage, the trade route or the palmer's path? Would it
not appear that the utilities of exchange draw men from their homes to
points organically related, and does it not seem reasonable to believe
that associations of beauty, arising spontaneously at place after place
on the line of march, give birth to the notion of religious privilege
and obligation in making a return to particular spots?

At any rate, it is certain that behind sanctity of pilgrimage lies
admiration of place, of art, even of geographical significance. Benares
in the North, and Conjeeveram <span id="fr_38"></span>[\*](#fn_38) in
the South, are loved and visited in India for the same reason as Durham
or Cologne amongst ourselves. They are cathedral cities, rich in
architecture, in treasure, and in the associations of saints and
scholars. Jagannath <span id="fr_39"></span>[†](#fn_39) is placed where
it is, for sheer beauty of the sea, and perhaps a little also for the
old cosmopolitan grandeur of the port through which flowed the Eastern
trade. Allahabad is sacred, because there two mighty rivers join their
waters, making her the strategic key to two vast basins, inhabited by
different races, with diverse traditions, hopes, and folk-lore. It is
the solemn beauty of the Himalayas that makes them the refuge

<span id="page_239">p. 239</span>

of holy men. The four most meritorious pilgrimages <span
id="fr_40"></span>[\*](#fn_40) of the Hindus are the four extreme points
of India--North, South, East, and West--knowing which the country must
be known. The worship of the Ganges, and the reverence that makes a
Dekkan villager journey, as an act of piety, to look on the face of one
who has seen any of the seven sacred rivers, amongst peoples less
poetic, would be simply called the love of place. How large an element
in Hinduism is the folk-lore of the country! To the student who is
looking for this, it appears to be past all computing. The Mahabharata,
the Ramayana, and the Puranas are to a great extent the outpouring of
passionate fancy in local interpretation. In the story of Sati, the
perfect wife, who can miss the significance of the fifty-two places in
which fragments of the smitten body fell? "And one finger fell in
Calcutta, and that is still the Kalighat. . . . And the tongue fell at
Kangra (Jowalla Mukhi) in the North Punjaub, and appears to this day as
licking tongues of fire, from underneath the ground. . . . And the left
hand fell at Benares, which is for ever Onnopurna, the Giver of Bread."
No foreigner can understand the crowding of associations into these few
sentences.

Even the Pole Star has its Indian myth in the legend of the child
Dhruwa, whose heart was the steadiest point in all the universe.

Nor is the historic element lacking, in this unconscious worship of
country. Like that of some Indian Bernadette is the story told at a
beautiful Southern temple of a cowherd who had one cow that gave no
milk. He followed her into the jungle, and found a natural lingam in the
rock, over which she poured her offering freely, of her own devotion.

<span id="page_240">p. 240</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> And, in proof of
the occurrence, does the temple altar not consist to-day of that same
lingam set in rough living rock? Of such stories the villages are full.
Assuredly, a deep and conscious love of place pervades the whole of the
Indian scheme. It has never been called patriotism, only because it has
never been defined by boundaries of contrast; but the home, the village,
the soil, and, in a larger sense, the rivers, the mountains, and the
country as a whole, are the objects of an almost passionate adoration.
And nowhere are we more impressed by the completeness of Eastern
idealism, than in this, its relating of itself to Nature. Norway, with
her broken crags and azure seas and sombre pines, her glacier-crowned
mountains, and her island-dotted fjords, is surely beautiful. But
Norway's memories are always of the heroes, and we miss those voices of
the saints that greet us at every turn in every part of India. Brittany,
windy and grey, storm-tost and boulder-strewn, is beautiful. Here. too
the miles are marked with rude *Calvaires*, and the tales of the saints
lie like her own moorland mists across the whole Breton land. But this
Catholic sainthood never reaches the stern intellectual discipline of
Hinduism, and we long in vain for that mingling of mystic passion and
philosophic freedom, where holiness merges into scholarship, that at
once distinguishes the Orient, and weds its races and all their dreams
to their own soil. It might almost have been S. Francis, but it is
actually a Bengali poem of the people, that says:

Oh, Mother Earth, Father Sky,  
Brother Wind, Friend Light,  
Sweetheart Water,  
Here take my last salutation with folded hands!  
For to-day I am melting away into the Supreme,  
Because my heart became pure, And all delusion vanished,  
Through the power of your good company:

<span id="page_241">p. 241</span>

Beauty of place translates itself to the Indian consciousness as God's
cry to the soul. Had Niagara been situated on the Ganges, it is odd to
think how different would have been its valuation by humanity. instead
of fashionable picnics and railway pleasure-trips, the yearly or monthly
incursion of worshipping crowds. Instead of hotels, temples. Instead of
ostentatious excess, austerity. Instead of the desire to harness its
mighty forces to the chariot of human utility, the unrestrainable
longing to throw away the body, and realise at once the ecstatic madness
of Supreme Union. Could contrast be greater?

It is commonly said that Hindus derive the idea of pilgrimage from the
Buddhist worship of relics. But the psychological aspects of the custom
make this appear unlikely. Doubtless the great commercial nexus of the
Buddhist period made transport easy, and thus strengthened and
stimulated the tendency, just as railways have in modern times opened up
the country, and created the possibility of a geographical sense amongst
classes who in older days could not have aspired to travel far or often.
But in its essence, the institution is so entirely an expression of love
for the Motherland, that it must have been anterior to Buddhism by at
least as much as the Aryan occupation of India. If one visits the
Kennery caves, hidden amongst the jungles to the north of Bombay, this
fact is brought home to one. Here are a hundred and eight cells, cut out
of the solid rock. They are grouped in pairs; each pair has its own
water-supply; and, wherever the view is finest, wherever a glimpse can
be caught of the meeting-line of sea and forest, there a staircase and
seat will be found specially carved in the stone, for purposes of
contemplation. For Nature is the eternal fact, and the landscape from
this point a thousand years ago was as beautiful as it is to-day.

<span id="page_242">p. 242</span>

Ellora shows at a glance that through century after century it has been
a holy place. The Buddhist found it already so, and in due time the
Mussulman confirmed the ancient choice, by bringing his illustrious dead
to lie in the mighty fane on its hilltop. But why was it first selected?
None who has wakened to the dewy freshness of its morning, none who has
gazed thence across the sea-like plain, can ask. To all eternity, while
the earth remains what she is, Ellora will be one of the spots where the
mystery of God is borne in, in overwhelming measure, upon the souls of
men, whatever their associations, whatever their creed.

But we are dominated more by the idea that is behind us than by the
spontaneous impressions of our senses. To the nomad of the desert,
accustomed to the shifting of hot sands, and ceaseless moving of the
camp, with what coolness and refreshment must rise the thought of death!
Mussulman piety has three motives--the glory of man, the charm of woman,
and the holiness of the grave. In very early times we see the august
pastor Abraham seeking out a cave in which to place the body of his
wife. Death, the fixed, the still, the cold, must be shrined within the
steady and imperishable. "The long home," a great rock in a weary land,
endless rest, eternal cold and silence, all these are to be found in the
grave. Is it not easy to understand that while the peasant, from the
banks of the Ganges to the banks of the Tiber, turns naturally to
burning of the dead, the wilderness-dwellers bury him deep in mother
earth, or build him about with unyielding granite, and thenceforth make
this dwelling-house of the beloved as the centre of their own
wanderings?

Hence, what the sacred place of pilgrimage is to the Hindu, that the Taj
Mahal or the tomb of Aurungzeeb, or the ever-memorable grave at Medina,
is to the pious Mussulman. Almost every Mohammedan

<span id="page_243">p. 243</span>

village in India, too, has its sleeping-place of some "pir" or saint;
and I have seen a poverty-stricken God's acre, where the sole treasure
of the people was a gnarled and scarcely-living stump, that marked the
last home of a long-remembered holy man. For it is the ideal of the
desert--rest from their wanderings and shadow from its scorching sun--it
is this ideal, and not the natural dictation of their own birth-place,
that has become the guiding-power behind the life and choice of these
Moslemised Indian folk. And yet all their old poetry of soil comes out
in the spot they choose! The tomb in the village-grove; the Taj at the
river-bend; the iris-covered graves on the riversides and hillocks of
Kashmir; what pictures do these make at dawn and sunset, or through the
long Indian night, with its mysterious voices sighing and whispering
about the dead! Surely, by thus adding the pastoral tradition to her
own, India grows rich, not poor, in the things that form the true wealth
of men.

A pilgrim's camp is like some scene taken out of the Middle Ages, Or,
rather, it would be like it, but that is so largely depleted of militant
elements. The Nagas, or armed friars, are no menace to anything in the
modern system, which indeed at this moment they do not understand; and
the authority that actually protects and keeps order amongst the
pilgrims is to be sought rather in the unarmed district officer, or
*tehsildar*, than in anything that could be recognised as forceful by
the naked eye. In the South, which is the home of orthodoxy, pilgrimage
has gone out of fashion since the advent of railways. Fewer people,
certainly fewer widows, visit Benares, since it became easier to do so.
And those who have seen a genuine crowd of shrine-farers, in some place
remote from steam, cannot wonder at the shock which the pious
imagination suffers at the sight of a locomotive. Amongst other

<span id="page_244">p. 244</span>

things that the religious traveller has a right to expect is the
opportunity of a flight from the New India to the Old, as an actual
environment. From any point where many ways meet, and various streams of
pilgrims converge upon each other, the road to the sacred place will be
divided into regular stages of a day's journey, and at each
halting-place a camp will be pitched for the night. Even these
rest-camps will be situated as far as possible at spots peculiar for
their beauty or interest. Is there a cluster of springs? The place is
said to be "holy," and we must halt there for worship. Originally, this
referred only to beauty and convenience; but in process of time one
cannot doubt that a certain atmosphere of insight and devotion has
really thrown its halo about the dust and water of the locality, and in
the place where so much simple faith has spent its rapture, the highest
love and prayer have become easier to all corners.

But the temples are all visited, the bathing is performed, evening
worship is over, and silence and sleep fall upon the pilgrims' camp. The
moon grows to the full, for we must arrive at the goal on the fifteenth
day. And again, it is the simple beauty of the world which determines
the law, that under the young moon shall be the going forth, and with
her wane the return home. The moon is near the full, and weariness
sleeps sound. At what hour is the first tent struck? When does the first
sleeper rouse himself, and take again to the road? Who can tell?
Certainly not one who has never been able to rise so long before dawn
that others were not up and afoot before her, their tents gone, and
little heaps of white ashes from the cooking-fires the only sign of
their twelve hours' tenancy of tree-shadow or stream-side.

On go the pilgrims, singly or in groups. Old women, bent double with age
and toil, hobbling along

<span id="page_245">p. 245</span>

by the help of the pointed alpenstock: Monks of all descriptions are to
be seen. Some of them are covered with ashes, have long reddish-looking
hair, wear only the yellow loin-cloth, and carry curious tongs and
begging-bowls. These may be Yogis, of the order that believes in the
mortification of the flesh; or Nagas, the militant monks, who were once
ready to defend the Faith at any moment, and who to this day are
powerfully organised to meet the shock of a world that has long ago,
alas, passed away like a dream. The *sannyasin*, often a man of modern
education, decently clad in the sacred salmon-yellow, accepting no alms
save food, refusing the touch of any metal, is here, doing the distance
cheerfully on foot. Next comes an ascetic, with withered arm held aloft
and useless this many a long year. Again, a proud *mahunt*, abbot of
some rich foundation, master of elephants and treasure uncounted, is
borne past. Or, as one climbs, having abandoned the open dandy that
costs such intolerable labour to the bearers on a mountain march, one
may be joined in kindly chat by some one or two of the "Naked
Swamis"--men who wear neither ashes nor clothing beyond the necessary
scanty rag, who wander amongst sunny deserts and snowy mountains alike
indifferent to heat and cold, and of whom, when one talks with them, one
remembers nothing, save that here are friends of the culture of
scholars, and the breeding and rank of gentlemen.

But the crowd is still more motley. In camp, the strips of yellow cloth
that so often do duty as a shelter for the religious, stand side by side
with tents of all sizes and conditions. And here now are zenana-ladies
carried in scarlet-covered palkees; other women, again, on horseback;
men and women alike on foot, or in open dandies; householders, widows,
sannyasinis in beads and yellow cloth; there are even some, too weak for
walking or climbing,

<span id="page_246">p. 246</span>

who are borne in straw chairs, strapped to the back of a man carrying a
stout staff. On and on presses the irregular host, mixed up with
Mohammedan baggage-carriers and servants, cooks, and food-vendors of all
sorts.

Here the road is broken by a glacier. There it becomes a mere goat-path,
running across dangerous crags. Here is the lake into which an
avalanche, brought down by their hymn of triumph, once precipitated
thousands of returning pilgrims. Now we have reached the heights where
the ground is carpeted with edelweiss instead of grass. Again, we are
wandering amidst wildernesses of flowers, while every few yards the
dominant note in the composition is changed imperceptibly: first the
yellow wallflower, then flame-coloured Iceland poppies, again the
long-stalked single-headed Michaelmas daisy of the Himalayas. When the
journey began, almost the only blossoms were the orchids on the
tree-trunks in the region of maidenhair fern. Now we have passed the
last of the pine woods. Even the white birches, like smitten silver
veining blown sharp and twisted against the mountain sides, are gone:
and to-night, when the tents are pitched over purple and white anemones,
there will be no fuel save the juniper scrub that clings to the face of
the rock in sheltered niches. On the edge of the last glacier, growing
beside the gentian, we find an evergreen forget-me-not, unknown to us
hitherto, and making the third or fourth new species--from a large
crimson and purple myosotis onwards--which our pilgrimage has bestowed.

Our neighbours in the tents about us are not amusing themselves by
botanising, probably, but they are communing with Nature none the less
truly than ourselves. On the last day, drawing gear to the shrine, we
shall see them risk their lives to gather the great nodding columbines
and the

<span id="page_247">p. 247</span>

little Alpine roses growing on the rocks. Their talk is all of Siva. As
they are borne along, they are striving, doubtless, to fix their minds
on the repetition of His name, or the contemplation of His form. But the
awesome grandeur and beauty of the heights about them will always be
remembered by them as the Great God's fit dwelling-place. They are in a
church. Rocks and glaciers form the sanctuary. Snowy passes are the
pillared aisles. Behind them stand the pine-forests for processions of
singers carrying banners, and overhead are the heavens themselves for
cathedral roof. It is the peculiarity of Eastern peoples to throw upon
the whole of Nature that feeling which we associate only with the place
of worship. But is their love less real, or greater, for this fact?

The day of the full moon comes, the last and most dangerous points are
surmounted, and the Shrine is reached. Happy the man or woman, who, on
this journey to God, is snatched out of life! One false step, and the
soul that was struggling to see may be carried up at once in a swift
sure flight. Or death may come in other ways. "It is so beautiful! I
must be one with it!" sighed a man who stood on a precipice, looking
down at the valleys. And before any one could stop him, he was gone.
Such things are not premeditated. There is a genuine ecstasy of the soul
in which it hears the voice of the Eternities calling to it, and the
prisoning body becomes suddenly intolerable. Is it a stain upon Hinduism
that it has never called this "suicide while of unsound mind"?

But the Shrine itself--where is it? what is it? Perhaps a temple, placed
above some gorge, on a beetling rock, with sister snows in sight.
Perhaps the source of a sacred river. Perhaps a cave, in which continual
dripping of water makes a stalagmite of ice, a huge crystalline lingam
that never melts.

<span id="page_248">p. 248</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> One can picture
how such a place would first be discovered. Some party of shepherds,
losing themselves and their flocks amongst the ravines on a summer day,
and entering the cavern by accident, to find there the presence of the
Lord Himself. Men and beasts, awed and worshipping, how dear is such a
picture to the Christian heart!

Worship! Worship! The very air is rent with prayer and hymns. From the
Unreal to the Real! From the Many to the One! Lord of Animals! Refuge of
Weariness! Siva! Siva! the Free! the Free!

Hours pass, and ere dawn next day the descent to the valleys is begun.
Wonderful is the snowy stillness of the lofty pass, when, with our faces
set homewards, the moon fades behind us, and the sun rises before. The
pilgrims march with less regularity now. All are anxious to return, and
some push on, while others break off from the line of route. We reach
our own village, and say farewell to the acquaintances of the
pilgrimage, adding what comfort we may to the provision for their
further journeying. The nights grow dark now, and the great experience
becomes a memory, marked always, however, in the Hindu's life, by some
special abstinence, practised henceforth as the pilgrim's
thank-offering.

It is easy to believe that the scenes in which we have mingled are
nowadays denuded of half their rightful elements; that once upon a time
as many of the travellers would have been Tartar or Chinese as Indian;
that the shrine represents what may have been the summer meeting of
great trading caravans; that Nagarjuna and Bodhidharmma, going out to
the Further East with their treasures of Indian thought, were in the
first place pilgrims on some such pilgrimage as this. Even now, many of
the functions of a university are served by the great

<span id="page_249">p. 249</span>

gathering. Hundreds, or even thousands, of religious men meet, in a
manner to eliminate personal ties of friendship and affection, and
emphasise and refresh the ideal and intellectual aspects of their lives.

At the vast assemblies of *sadhus*, which occur once in every twelve
years at Hurdwar, at Nasick, at Ujjain, and at Allahabad, there are
fixed halls of learned disputation, where, for hundreds of years, Hindu
philosophy has been discussed, determined, and expanded, something in
the fashion of the Welsh Eisteddfod. Here come the wandering monks from
every part of India. Here the householder finds himself in vigorous and
renewed relation to his faith. Here fresh voices of learning and
devotion are able to win for themselves ecclesiastical authority. Such
opportunities must have been the means by which Sankaracharya asserted
his undisputed mastery of the world of Hindu scholarship. Did it, we
wonder, occur to Alexander that learned Greeks might be sent to such
wandering colleges in order to hear and to tell new things?

Sanskrit is the *lingua franca* of this ancient learning. To this day
the visitor to a Calcutta *toll* <span id="fr_41"></span>[\*](#fn_41)
may hear the boys dispute with each other on timeworn themes in the
classic tongue, and may picture himself back in the colleges of Thebes
or Athens in the long ago. But here in the great *melas* are the
crowning achievements towards which are directed the hardier ambitions
of those Brahman boys. And we need not wonder at their enthusiasm for
such distinction. The great open competition, with its

<span id="page_250">p. 250</span>

thousands of years of the prestige of learning, is like all the learned
societies of a European metropolis thrown into one. The canvas city of a
few weeks at Nasick or Allahabad serves all the purposes of Burlington
House to London. But the system of culture to which Nasick belongs is no
longer growing, it will be said. This is, indeed, its defect. The
statement is not entirely true, for even now the test of a supremely
national personality would still be, for the Hindu world, his power to
add to their philosophy. But it is true to the extent that there is
nothing left for collective thought to discover. The common mind of
India has now to sweep great circles of intellectual exploration in
worlds that as yet are virgin as the Polar ice, or India will die. Of
this there can be no doubt.

Far away from the noisy throng of learned saints, or taking a humble
place in white cotton garb as visitors amongst them, are the men whose
lives are passed in the libraries of kings. For the system of patronage
is part and parcel of Indian scholarship, and as the Japanese *daimio*
or the Italian prince maintained his artists and artificers, so, under
the old *régime*, did every Indian palace possess its staff of
palace-pundits--men whose lives were made free of anxiety in order that
they might heap up knowledge and pore over ancient texts.

The supreme privilege of the great is to foster piety and learning. But,
on the other hand, Manu does not fail to point out that there is no
crime for the Brahman like the acceptance of gifts from one who is not
the lawful king. And it is not royal persons alone who are charged with
the duty of supporting scholars. Never a wedding or a requiem can take
place amongst the higher ranks of society without the distribution of
money to tolls and pundits. For it is one of the postulates of ethical,
and therefore of Eastern, economics,

<span id="page_251">p. 251</span>

that all great accumulation is for subsequent great distribution.

It is a strange world that has been revealed to us in this camp of
pilgrimage, and it is not easy to reach its full significance. Scarcely
in any two tents do they understand each other's language, and we shall
do better to ask for bread in Sanskrit than in English. Malabaris and
Bengalis, Sikhs and Madrasis, Mahrattas and even Mussulmans, dwell side
by side for the nonce. Could incongruity and disunion be more strongly
illustrated?

Yet it was unity and not disunity that impressed us as we looked. From
one end of the camp to the other the same simple way of life, the same
sacramental reverence for food and bathing, the same gentleness and
courtesy, the same types of face and character, and, above all, one
great common scheme of thought and purpose.

The talk may be in different languages; but no matter at what tent door
we might become eavesdroppers, we should find its tone and subject much
the same--always the lives of the saints, always the glory of the soul,
always fidelity to *guru* and *dharmma*. By two formulæ, and two alone,
renunciation and freedom from personality, is all life here interpreted.

Other countries have produced art, chivalry, heroic poems, inventive
systems In none of these has India been altogether wanting, yet none is
her distinguishing characteristic. What, then, has she given to the
world that is beyond all competition? To-day her gifts are decried by
all men, for to-day the mighty mother is become widowed and abased. She
who has held open port to all fugitives is unable now to give bread to
her own children. She with whom Parsi, Jew, and Christian have been
thankful to take refuge, is despised and ostracised by all three alike.
She who has prized knowledge above all her

<span id="page_252">p. 252</span>

treasures, finds her learning now without value in the markets of the
world. It is urged that the test of utility is the true standard for
things transcendental, and that an emancipation into modern commerce and
mechanics is a worthier goal for her sons' striving than the old-time
aim of knowledge for its own sake, the ideal for itself.

And the modern world may be right.

But, even so, has India in the past given nothing, without which our
whole present would be the poorer?

Who that has caught even a whisper of what her name means can say so?
Custom kept always as an open door, through which the saints may dance
into our company, thought sustained at a level where religion and
science are one, a maze of sublime apostrophes and world-piercing
prayers; above all, the power to dream rare dreams of the Word becoming
flesh and dwelling among men that they may behold His glory--are these
things nothing? If, after all the higher transformation of man be the
ultimate end of human effort, which has more deeply vindicated its right
to exist, the modern nexus of commerce and finance, or that old world on
which we have gazed in the pilgrims' camp?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_38"></span>[238:\*](wil17.htm#fr_38) Conjeeveram.--A town
in the Madras Presidency, which contains some of the most beautiful
specimens of Dravidian architecture. Often called the Benares of the
South. Ramanuja lived here, and Sankaracharya visited it.

<span id="fn_39"></span>[238:†](wil17.htm#fr_39) Jagannath.--Or
Juggurnath--Lord of the Universe. The famous place of pilgrimage, and
the "Car of Juggurnath," on the coast of Orissa, at Puri. This temple is
distinguished for the fact that all castes eat together of its
consecrated food. The oneness of all men is the religious idea which is
associated with it.

<span id="fn_40"></span>[239:\*](wil17.htm#fr_40) "The four
pilgrimages," which constitute the Hindu counsel of perfection, are
Kedar Nath in the Himalayas, in the extreme North; Dwarka Nath in the
West; Rameshwaram in the South; and Puri, or Jagannath in the East.

<span id="fn_41"></span>[249:\*](wil17.htm#fr_41) Toll.--A toll is a
Sanskrit school, in which a Brahman lived with his disciples, studying
and teaching. The ideal toll consisted of a series of mud cottages with
wide verandahs, built round a small lake or "tank," with its cluster of
bamboos, palms, and fruit-trees. Poverty and learning were the
inspiration of the community. These tolls formed the old Indian
universities.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XVI. On the Loom of Time](wil18)
