[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](pr03)  [Next](pr05) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0766180832/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Pagan Regeneration*, by Harold R. Willoughby, \[1929\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# CHAPTER II

### THE GREATER MYSTERIES AT ELEUSIS

AMONG the cults of Greece none was more favorably known in the first
century of the Christian era than the Eleusinian mysteries. Although it
was more definitely localized and centralized than were the other Greek
mysteries, this circumstance did not detract from either its reputation
or its influence. Locally it was associated with an antique tradition
that ran back to prehistoric times, and such antiquity was a valued
credential for any first-century religion. The home of this cult was the
town of Eleusis on the fertile Rharian plain a few miles from Athens,
where in prehistoric times the cereal goddess Demeter was revered by an
agricultural community. Legends of the special initiation of foreigners
like Heracles and the Dioscuri recall the primitive time when membership
in the cult was open to citizens of Eleusis only. With the political
fusion of Eleusis and Athens, however, the local barriers were broken
down and rebuilt along much extended lines. The dominant city-state of
Athens adopted the cult as her own, brought it under state supervision,
and entrusted the general management of the mysteries to the Archon
Basileus. Inscriptions of the Periclean period attest the
well-considered plan of Athens to use the mysteries as a religious
support for her political hegemony. This combination of ancient
Eleusinian tradition and the official patronage of the Athenian state
gave dignity and prestige to the mysteries of Demeter even in the first
century.

But this cult was more than merely a state religion of the usual Greek
model. In the first century its appeal and its guaranties were for the
individual rather than for the citizen. On the one hand not all
Athenians, by any means, were members of the cult. The citizen of Athens
did not automatically come under the protection of Demeter by natural
birth as he found himself under the aegis of Athena. It was by special
initiation alone, conceived and represented as a process of rebirth,
that he could avail himself of the cult privileges. No less an Athenian
than Socrates was reproached for not seeking initiation into these
mysteries. The state cult of Demeter operated as a voluntary religious
association in which Athenian citizens were eligible for membership; but
their adherence was a matter of their own volition.

Conversely, eligibility for admission was not limited to Athenians only.
When, as a result of the absorption of Eleusis by Athens, the mysteries
lost their local exclusiveness, they further took on a pan-Hellenic
character. The so-called Homeric Hymn to Demeter, one of the earliest
and most valuable of Eleusinian documents, invites the whole Greek world
to come and participate in the mysteries. Herodotus states that in his
day whoever wished to do so, whether they were Athenians or other
Greeks, might come to be initiated. Later, even the Hellenic limitation
was removed and persons of any nationality were received, providing they
understood the Greek language in which the ritual was conducted. In the
time of Cicero, just before the beginning of our era, "the most distant
nations were initiated into the sacred and august Eleusinia."

It is interesting to note further that women and slaves, even, were
admitted to this cult. The author of the oration In Neaeram, which was
once attributed to Demosthenes, states that Lysias, without any
difficulty, was able to arrange for the initiation of his mistress
Metanira. That slaves were admitted is suggested by a fragment from the
comic poet Theophilus in which a slave speaks with gratitude of his
beloved master who taught him his letters and got him initiated into the
sacred mysteries. An inscription dated in the administration of Lycurgus
(329-328 B.C.) further puts the question of the admission of slaves
beyond doubt. It is an expense account of an Eleusinian official, and
among the items included is the following: "For the initiation of two
public slaves; thirty drachmae." The mysteries of Demeter, therefore,
once a local cult and later a state religion, came in the end to assume
an international character and to make an individualistic appeal. In its
developed form, the cult received into membership not only Greeks but
also "barbarians," and women and slaves as well as free men.

### I

It is indubitable that the influence of the Eleusinian mysteries was
widespread in the Graeco-Roman world. Though localized at Eleusis this
cult influenced rites that were celebrated elsewhere in widely scattered
centers. In Ionia, at Eleusis this cult influenced rites that were
celebrated elsewhere in widely scattered centers. In Ionia, at Ephesus
and Mycale, and again in the Arcadian city of Pheneus, Demeter Eleusinia
was worshipped and her cult was related in local legend to the Attic
foundation. Pausanias vouches for the statement that Celeae near
Philius, and Megalopolis in Arcadia each had an "initiation mystery of
Demeter" in which the proceedings were conducted "in imitation of those
at Eleusis." According to a late inscription (third century A.D.), a
mystery of Demeter flourished at Lerna in Argolis, and the hierophant in
charge was the son of an Athenian priest. There are further records that
Demeter Eleusinia was worshiped in Boeotia and Laconia on the Greek
mainland, and in Crete and Thera among the Greek islands. At Naples, in
Italy, mysteries in honor of Demeter were celebrated after the Attic
manner. It is even possible that the Andanian mysteries in Messenia,
which Pausanias regarded as second in dignity and prestige to the
Eleusinian alone, were also related to the Attic cult. In each of these
instances two possibilities are to be considered. Either the similar
rites had their origin in the Eleusinian ceremonies or else both came
from a common parentage. In either case it is patent that there was
widespread interest in Demeter cults in the Graeco-Roman world.

Quite apart from the question of related Demeter cults, however, there
is an abundance of testimonia to prove the world-wide reputation of the
Eleusinian rites themselves at the beginning of the common era.
Crinagoras, the Greek epigrammatist of Mytilene, writing in the time of
Augustus, advised his friend by all means to go to Athens and see the
mysteries, even though he traveled nowhere else. If we may credit
Philostratus, his hero Apollonius of Tyana, certainly one of the most
famous and respected religionists of his day, applied in person for
admission to the Eleusinian mysteries. "But the hierophant was not
disposed to admit him to the rites, for he said he would never initiate
a wizard and charlatan, nor open the Eleusinian Mysteries to a man who
dabbled in impure rites."

During the early imperial period some very famous non-Greeks showed
their deep interest in the mysteries at Eleusis, among them the Emperor
Augustus himself. Though normally not attracted by foreign religions, he
was initiated at Eleusis in 21 B.C. Later, according to Suetonius, he
gave signal proof of his reverence for the mysteries.

"He was hearing a case at Rome which involved the privileges of the
priests of the Attic Ceres. When some of the mysteries of their sacred
rites were to be introduced into the pleadings, he dismissed those who
sat upon the bench with him as judges, as well as the bystanders, and
heard the arguments upon these points himself."

Seutonius also tells us that when Nero was in Greece, "he dared not
attend the Eleusinian Mysteries at the initiation of which impious and
wicked persons are warned by the voice of the herald from approaching
the rites." However, there were other emperors who like Augustus
attained the goal which Nero failed to gain. Marcus Aurelius and
Commodus were two of these illustrious mystae. The epitaph of an
Eleusinian priestess mentions it as a matter of special pride that she
set the crown upon their heads as they participated in the solemn rites.
The fact that the first citizens of the Roman Empire sought membership
in the Eleusinian cult is striking proof of its great influence.

Other significant testimony is given by the philosophers and moralists
of this period. At the close of the pre-Christian era, Cicero declared
it was his personal opinion that Athens had given nothing to the world
more excellent or divine than the Eleusinian mysteries. At the beginning
of the Christian centuries, the Stoic Epictetus spoke of the
impressiveness of these mysteries in terms of genuine appreciation.
Thus, at the beginning of our era, when Olympian Zeus had lost his
ancient supremacy and Delphian Apollo, though reviving, was yet reduced
in influence, Demeter of Eleusis still enjoyed a high reputation. The
influence of her mysteries was literally world-wide during the early
imperial period.

### II

In order to understand the type of religious experience represented by
this important cult, it is necessary clearly to keep in mind the main
points of the Eleusinian myth which was developed to explain and justify
the cult rites. These are stated with sufficient elaboration in the
Homeric Hymn to Demeter, although this document does not give the myth
in its fully developed form. According to the story, Persephone,
daughter of Demeter, "giver of goodly crops," was stolen by Pluto and
carried off to the underworld to be his bride. This was done with the
knowledge and tacit approval of Zeus himself. The mother, frenzied with
grief, rushed about the earth for nine days, torch in hand, abstaining
from eating and drinking, and searching wildly for her lost daughter. As
she rested at the "maiden well of fragrant Eleusis" she was welcomed by
the daughters of Celeus, who took her to their father's house for
refreshment. Here she finally broke her fast and dwelt for a time. ln
her resentment against Zeus, she brought famine upon the fruitful earth
so that no crops grew for men and no offerings were made to the gods.
Finally, an arrangement was made with Pluto whereby Persephone was
restored to her sorrowing mother. Since, however, the daughter had eaten
a sweet pomegranate seed in the underworld she was forced to return
there regularly for a portion of each year. Demeter, in her joy at the
restoration of her lost daughter, allowed the crops to grow once more
and instituted in honor of the event the Eleusinian mysteries which gave
to mortals the assurance of a happy future life. Such was the myth which
stood in the background of thought for one who participated in the
Eleusinian rites.

The experiential basis for this story is quite clear. It was a nature
myth, a vivid depiction of the action of life in the vegetable world
with the changing of the seasons. Each year nature passed through the
cycle of apparent death and resurrection. In winter vegetable life was
dead while Demeter, the giver of life, grieved for the loss of her
daughter. But with the coming of spring the life of nature revived
again, for the sorrowing mother had received her daughter back with
rejoicing. Through the summer the mother abundantly maintained the life
of nature until autumn, when again her daughter returned to the
underworld and earth became desolate once more. Thus year after year
nature re-enacted the myth of Eleusis.

It was also a reflection of poignant human experiences, mirroring the
joys, sorrows, and hopes of mankind in face of inevitable death. The
three actors of the Eleusinian tragedy, the mater dolorosa as the
protagonist, the maiden daughter is the deuteragonist, and the sinister
figure of the ravisher as the mysterious third actor, these three
enacted the mystery of human life and death. The god of death himself
stole the beloved daughter away from the life-giver; but the divine
mother would not give up her loved one, and in the end she accomplished
her daughter's resurrection. Here was human experience made heroic and
divine; for man has ever loved and lost, but rarely has he ceased to
hope for reunion with the loved one. The Eleusinian myth told of these
fundamental human experiences as well as of the life of nature.

### III

With this mythological background in mind the Eleusinian ritual should
be examined, at least in its more important features, in order to define
the variety of religious experience fostered by this cult. It was an
elaborate ceremonial, extending over a long period of time. The
classical analysis of the Eleusinian rite divided it into four distinct
stages: the katharsis, or preliminary purification, the sustasis, or
preparatory rites and sacrifices, the telete, i.e., the initiation
proper, and the epopteia, or highest grade of initiation. Of these
various stages the first two were public, and concerning them there is a
large amount of information. But the last two were very strictly private
and therefore they remain for us shrouded in mystery. Unfortunately, it
is these very private ceremonials that are most important for the
student who is interested in the personal religious experiences of
paganism. The elaborate preliminary ceremonies do not concern us in
detail except as a preparation for the all-important rites which
followed.

More than six months before the "great mysteries" in September the
"lesser mysteries" were celebrated at Agrae, a suburb of Athens, on the
banks of the Illisus. Clement of Alexandria spoke of "the minor
mysteries which have some foundation of instruction and of preliminary
preparation for what is to come after." This statement emphasizes what
for our purpose was the most significant feature of the mysteries at
Agrae--they were important as a prerequisite for the "great mysteries."

On the thirteenth of September the "great mysteries" began and they
lasted over a full week. Early in the festival there was a solemn
assembly in the Stoa Poicile, the main item of which was a proclamation
by the hierophant. This was not a sermon but rather a warning to depart,
addressed to those who for one reason or another were disqualified or
unworthy of initiation. As to the content of the formal warning,
Libanius states that the "leaders of the mystae" proclaimed to those
seeking initiation that they must be "pure in hand and soul and of
Hellenic speech." These terms are confirmed in part by a mathematician
of the imperial period who compared his studies to the mysteries. "Not
all who wish," he said, "have a share in the Mysteries. But there are
some who are forewarned to abstain; such as those whose hands are not
clean and whose speech is unintelligible." Celsus, as reported by
Origen, gives two formulas of invitation, one altogether similar to
those already cited and the other of a somewhat different character. He
is quoted as follows:

"Those who invite people to other mysteries make proclamation thus:
'Everyone who has clean hands and intelligible speech,' others again
thus: 'He who is pure from all pollution, and whose soul is conscious of
no evil and who has lived well and justly.' Such is the proclamation
made by those who promise purification from sins."

These quotations from late pagan writers indicate that the Athenian
proclamation included not only ritualistic requirements but elements of
moral scrutiny as well. One may say that over the Eleusinian shrine as
over the doorway of the Rhodian temple were inscribed the words "\[Those
can rightfully enter\] who are pure and healthy in hand and heart and
who have no evil conscience in themselves."

On the day following the assembly came the cry, "To the sea, O Mystae!"
and the candidates for initiation ran down to the sea, there to purify
themselves in its salt waves--a lustration believed to be of greater
virtue than that of fresh water. "Sea waves wash away ill sin," said
Euripides. The potent effect of the cleansing by salt water was further
enhanced by sprinkling with pig's blood. Each of the mystae carried with
him a sucking pig which he purified by immersion in the waters of the
sea. Later the pig was sacrificed and its blood sprinkled on the
candidate. Tertullian, in speaking of this rite, declared, "At the
Eleusinian mysteries men are baptized and they assume that the effect of
this is their regeneration and the remission of the penalties due to
their perjuries." This striking affirmation by a Christian writer shows
that the initiates themselves applied the new birth comparison to their
own experiences in Eleusinian baptism. The rite was believed to be more
than cathartic, merely. Regenerative powers were credited to it which
operated to make the initiate in some sense a new being. It was with
this rite particularly that the Eleusinian devotees associated the idea
of personal transformation.

After the preliminary rites at Athens, the purified candidates formed in
solemn procession on the nineteenth of September and marched to Eleusis,
there to complete the celebration of the festival. Along the Sacred Way
leading from Athens there were many holy places, and since the mystae
performed ritualistic observances en route the company arrived at
Eleusis by torchlight late in the evening. The long march was followed
by a midnight revel under the stars, a ceremony that Aristophanes
described in glowing terms. This was held on the Rharian plain, and it
is not improbable that it partook of the nature of a mimetic ritual.
Near the great propylaea of the sacred precinct was the Well of
Callichoros, where the first choral dances were organized by the women
of Eleusis in honor of Demeter. Close at hand was the Unsmiling Rock,
where the desolate mother sat when she first came to Eleusis. Not far
away were the meadows which had seen her torchlit wanderings. It would
not be strange if the mystae beginning their choral dances at the Well
of Callichoros, continuing their revel by torchlight in the meadows, or
resting at the Unsmiling Rock--it would not be strange if they felt that
they were really sharing in the antique experiences of their goddess.
Certainly in their wearied state, weakened by fasting, they would be
peculiarly susceptible to such mystical emotions.

Thus the mystae were prepared for the climactic feature of the
celebration which took place in the telesterion, or Hall of Initiation.
This sacred place was closed to all save the initiated, and the events
which occurred there were strictly private and shrouded in the densest
mystery. The initiates were under pledge of secrecy not to divulge the
revelation there given. Apparently, Public opinion enforced this pledge
in a very remarkable manner. Once when Aeschylus was acting in one of
his own tragedies the audience became suspicious that he was betraying
certain secrets of the Eleusinian mysteries. They arose in real fury and
attacked the author-actor, who saved his life only by fleeing to the
altar of Dionysus, a refuge that the Athenian mob respected. Later,
however, Aeschylus was brought to trial before the Areopagus for
revealing forbidden secrets and was acquitted quite as much because of
his bravery at Marathon as because of his plea of ignorance. Alcibiades,
on the eve of his departure for the Sicilian expedition, was charged
with "impious mockery of the goddesses Demeter and Persephone" because
he had "profanely acted the sacred mysteries at a drunken meeting." Even
such a garrulous historian as Herodotus, though he was "accurately
acquainted with the sacred rites of Demeter" yet felt that he "must
observe a discreet silence" concerning them. The secret of Eleusis was
guarded all too well and as a result we know almost nil concerning the
central rites of the mysteries of Demeter.

One of the incidents just mentioned, however, makes it clear that the
heart of the Eleusinian ritual was in the nature of a religious drama.
The accusation against Alcibiades very definitely specified actors in a
mock pageant which he staged at his drunken revel. "Theodorus
represented the herald, Polytion the torch-bearer, and Alcibiades the
chief priest, while the rest of the party appeared is candidates for
initiation and received the title of initiates." This describes the
situation in the telesterion at Eleusis on the night of initiation; the
priests took the part of actors in a religious drama or pageant of which
the initiates were the spectators. The archaeological remains of the
Hall of Initiation at Eleusis bear out this theory. It was a great
square hall around the four sides of which ran stone seats eight steps
high, one above the other. Here the initiates sat and watched the
spectacle staged in their midst.

Of what did the dramatic action in the telesterion consist? Only hints
are given; yet these are sufficient to suggest what was probably the
subject matter of the mystery play. Clement of Alexandria tells us that
"Deo \[Demeter\] and Kore became \[the personages of\] a mystic drama,
and Eleusis with its dadouchos celebrates the wandering, the abduction,
and the sorrow." Apparently the drama of the telesterion was a sort of
passion play, the subject matter of which was essentially the same as
that of the Homeric Hymn. It concerned the loss of the daughter, the
sorrow of the mother, and the final return of the loved one from Hades.
This view is further confirmed by the words which Apuleius puts into the
mouth of Psyche when she appeals to Demeter "by the unspoken secrets of
the mystic chests, the winged chariots of thy dragon ministers, the
bridal descent of Proserpine, the torchlit wanderings to find thy
daughter, and all the other mysteries which Attic Eleusis shrouds in
secret." From these two references it is evident that the important
parts of the great myth of Demeter were enacted as a drama before the
eyes of the mystae gathered in the telesterion.

Various writers, pagan is well as Christian, furnish additional evidence
on this point and emphasize certain crises in the unfolding plot of the
passion drama. Apollodorus, an Athenian historian and mythographer of
the second century B.C., is quoted as saying, "The hierophant is in the
habit of sounding the so-called gong when Kore calls for aid."
Undoubtedly this statement has reference to the Eleusinian ritual, as
the mention of the hierophant proves. One can easily understand that the
cry of Persephone marked a high point of interest in the course of the
Eleusinian drama, and that it was accentuated by the sounding of a gong.
The effect of this on the devotees can easily be imagined. It was an
unexpected sound coming suddenly in the midst of a solemn ceremonial. It
focused attention entirely and sharply on the immediate action. In
emotional effect, it was probably not unlike the sounding of the gong
during the celebration of mass. By this simple expedient, the abduction
of Persephone was made a memorable part of the passion play of Eleusis.

The statement already quoted from the Alexandrian Clement concerning the
actors in the Eleusinian drama makes specific reference to the grief of
Demeter as constituting a part of the action. This reference is further
confirmed by a quotation from a late pagan author, Proclus, who asserts,
"The ceremonies of the mysteries in their secret part, transmit certain
sacred lamentations of Kore, of Demeter, of the Great Goddess herself."
Thus again it becomes clear that the Eleusinian passion play was not
merely a pantomime, reproducing the actions and gestures of the divine
personages, but that it included vocal expression as well. By recitative
or chant the actors who impersonated the goddesses gave expression to
the emotions of the moment. The text suggests that these chants were
traditional and were characterized by the fixity of form usual in
ritual. Such being the case, the sorrow of Demeter which formed a
distinct episode in the Eleusinian drama was further made impressive by
traditional liturgical expression.

An important but very vague reference to the secret part of the
Eleusinian mysteries is found in the Panegyric oration of Isocrates. "In
her wanderings after the abduction of Persephone, Demeter came into our
land. She wished to give testimony of her benevolence to our ancestors
in recompense for the good offices of which initiates alone are
permitted to hear." What were these services with which only initiates
into the Eleusinian mysteries were familiar and of which they could
speak only among themselves? Obviously it could not be the welcome given
to Demeter by the household of Celeus. That was known to the wide world
through the Homeric Hymn. A Latin poet of the first century furnishes a
possible explanation of this veiled reference in Isocrates. Addressing
the goddess herself, Statius says:

"Tuque, Actaea Ceres, cursu cui semper anelo Votivam taciti quassamus
lampada mystae."

Here the Latin poet speaks as an initiate himself. He is contemplating a
ceremony which is not a mere spectacle but a religious rite, shared in
by the devotees. In solemn silence, torch in hand, they accompanied
Demeter in her breathless wanderings. Just as the priestess personified
the goddess, they temporarily represented the legendary inhabitants of
Eleusis who not only welcomed the goddess but also assisted her in her
search. These were probably the services of which Isocrates hinted with
such reserve. In the wanderings of Demeter, then, the initiates actually
participated by mimetic action. They did the very things which would
enable them best to share emotionally in the profound experiences of
their goddess.

A quotation from a fourth-century Christian writer, Lactantius, adds
confirmatory evidence here and further suggests what was probably the
closing scene of the Eleusinian drama. Referring specifically to the
mysteries of Demeter, Lactantius says, "With burning torches Proserpina
is sought, and when she is found, the rite is closed with general
thanksgiving and a waving of torches." The search was not in vain. The
lost daughter was found and restored; and the initiates who had shared
in the anxious wanderings of the mother now shared in her happiness at
the recovery of her daughter. With joyous acclamation and the waving of
torches the return of the lost daughter was hailed by the initiates.
This scene of happiness, according to Lactantius, closed the drama of
Eleusis.

Thus, notwithstanding the meagerness of information concerning the
Eleusinian passion play, we can yet distinguish the main episodes of its
action. The abduction of Persephone, the grief of her mother, the search
for the lost daughter, and the reunion of the two goddesses--these were
the principle scenes. The indecent actions suggested by a few Christian
writers must be ruled out as vouched for only on the testimony of
prejudiced and highly interested witnesses. On the other hand, the
well-certified scenes, though so few in number, constitute the basis for
a religious rite of impressive possibilities.

True, the actors in this passion play were few. But classical Greek
tragedy at its best boasted of but three actors. And in the telesterion
the protagonist was Demeter, the goddess of grain, and the deuteragonist
was Persephone, the goddess of the underworld. Clad in gorgeous and
traditional costumes the personages of the Eleusinian passion play must
have been very impressive figures. Of scenic effect there was little or
nothing. The architectural remains of the telesterion show no provision
for anything like stage settings or machinery. There was not even a
stage, and the properties were probably the simplest
possible--torchlight and rich robes. Again the familiar effects of Greek
drama may serve to account for this absence of properties. On the Greek
stage all was simplicity and convention. Greek audiences, like the
spectators of the Elizabethan drama, were trained to depend upon their
imaginations to supply what was lacking in stage settings. So at
Eleusis, the effectiveness of the passion play depended much upon the
cultivated imaginations of the mystae. Moreover, by simple expedients
the participation of the initiates in the action of the drama was
brought about. They were not merely spectators of a pageant; they were
participants in a ritual. The gong focused their attention upon the
first great crisis of the drama, the abduction of the daughter. With
torches they followed the mother in her frantic search and again with
the waving of torches they expressed their joy at the return of her
daughter. Thus, by participation in the dramatic action, as well as by
active imagination, the mystae were enabled to share emotionally in the
experiences of the great goddesses.

Does the plot centering around the abduction of Persephone and her
restoration to her sorrowing mother mark the limits of the dramatic
representation in the telesterion? Many students believe it does not. M.
Foucart, for example, goes so far as to distinguish a second drama,
enacted at Eleusis on the evening following the passion play just
outlined. According to M. Foucart, the main features of this second
mystery drama were a sacred marriage and the birth of a holy child.

The citations supporting this view are not numerous. A commentator on a
passage in Plato's Gorgias says, "The Mysteries are celebrated in honor
of Demeter and Kore, because the latter was abducted by Pluto and
because Zeus was united with Demeter." This reference does suggest the
possibility of two different Eleusinian dramas along the lines
indicated. From the context, however, it is evident that the scholiast
is drawing uncritically from Christian sources; hence the value of his
testimony is not certain. Tertullian's question, "Why is the priestess
of Ceres ravished, unless Ceres herself suffered the same sort of
thing?" is a passage of doubtful reference and interpretation that can
scarcely be cited in proof of a sacred marriage at Eleusis. It is most
reasonable to think that Tertullian in speaking thus merely confused
Demeter and Persephone. As a subsidiary bit of evidence from a pagan
source, it should be noted that Lucian had his false-prophet Alexander
introduce a sacred marriage into his mysteries, which were modeled in
part after the Eleusinian rites. However, the clearest passage in
support of the sacred marriage idea is found in the writings of
Asterius, a fourth-century Christian bishop. With unpleasant
insinuation, he speaks of "the underground chamber and the solemn
meeting of the hierophant and the priestess, each with the other alone,
when the torches are extinguished, and the vast crowd believes that its
salvation depends on what goes on there."

If this passage may be taken as conclusive evidence of a sacred marriage
in the Eleusinian telesterion, then it has a further significance that
is noteworthy. It shows that the marriage was a representative act
whereby the initiates entered into mystical communion with their deity.
As such it would be a more or less realistic rite after the order of the
marriage of the Basilinna at Athens with the god Dionysus, in which the
city was united by proxy to the god. The point has this importance: if a
sacred marriage was part of the Eleusinian ritual, then this rite
assured the initiates of a more direct and immediate communion with the
goddess than would otherwise be possible. Whether or not the testimony
of Asterius is accepted, his insinuations deserve to be repudiated.
There is no reason to assume that any part of the rites were indelicate
or were regarded otherwise than with reverence by the initiates. We may
be sure of this, that if there was a sacred marriage at Eleusis it was a
solemn ceremonial, probably a liturgical fiction, and not an exhibition
of licentiousness. Indeed, we have the positive statement of Hippolytus
as to the scrupulous purity of the hierophant.

Closely connected with the question of a sacred marriage is that
relative to a holy birth at Eleusis. Hippolytus, in the Naassenic sermon
just cited, is almost the only authority for this episode. He says:

"The hierophant himself .... celebrating at Eleusis the great and
ineffable mysteries beside a huge fire cries aloud and makes
proclamation, saying: 'August Brimo has brought forth a holy son,
Brimos,' that is, the strong has given birth to the strong. For august,
he says, is the generation which is spiritual, or heavenly, or from
above, and strong is that which is thus generated."

Such a holy birth as this would normally follow the marriage rite just
discussed. What lends exceptional interest to the rite is the idea
suggested unclearly in a brief word study that follows. Quoting from
"those initiated into the mysteries," the name Eleusis is derived from
eleusesthai (to come) "because we spiritual ones came on high." This
suggests that the holy birth of the Eleusinian drama, a birth
"spiritual, heavenly, and from above" was viewed as typifying the new
birth of the initiate which translated him from the earthly, human
sphere to the heavenly, spiritual realm. On this interpretation the rite
came to be viewed as a dramatic enactment of a spiritual rebirth
experienced individually by the initiates themselves.

The possibility of such a two-act drama as this at Eleusis must
certainly be allowed. With lights extinguished, the initiates may have
waited in breathless silence for the consummation of a sacred marriage,
believing that it involved their own direct communion with the goddess.
Again in a blaze of light they may have welcomed the announcement of a
holy birth, believing that their own rebirth as spiritual beings was
involved in the process. If so, the rites of Eleusis held out to the
whole body of initiates the possibility of immediate communion with
deity and complete personal transformation guaranteed by appropriate
rites. The mystical communion fostered by the problematic second drama
at Eleusis was even more intimate and realistic than that cultivated by
the passion play.

Distinct from the dramatic part of the initiation ceremony at Eleusis
was the exhibition of sacred objects. This part of the service was at
least of equal importance with the passion play. The title of the
hierophant was "he who displays the sacred things," and his exhibition
of these objects was an act of the utmost solemnity. Only a part of them
were, shown during the celebration at which the neophytes witnessed the
mystic drama and attained the grade of mystae. Others were reserved for
exhibition a year later at the epopteia, or final grade of initiation,
when the mystae became epoptae. Thus the display of venerable objects
marked the culmination of the "great mysteries" and, so far as we know,
was the all-important feature of the final grade of initiation.

Just what the "sacred things" were is a question not clearly answered.
It is but reasonable to suppose that they were the very objects which
were solemnly escorted to Athens at the beginning of the festival and
were later returned to Eleusis in the procession of the candidates on
the nineteenth of September. In these processions they were treated with
the highest honors and were carefully guarded from public view. Probably
they included statues of the goddesses, images of great antiquity and
sanctity. We know how the crude old wooden statues of the gods were
venerated in other cults. Ordinarily their origin was a matter of
marvel. At Athens, for example, the wooden image of Athena Polias, which
was believed to have fallen from heaven during the reign of Cecrops, was
inextricably bound up with the fortunes of the city. Tertullian speaks
not only of a wooden statute of Athena but also of a like image of
Demeter as well. Accordingly, we may infer that Eleusis had its wooden
image of Demeter even as Athens had its xoanon of Athena Polias, and in
all probability this was the most sacred of all the sacred objects at
Eleusis. Quite certainly it was accompanied also by an image of
Persephone. Within the sacred area at Eleusis, these statues were housed
in the anactoron, or chapel, of Demeter which crowned the citadel. This
was the holy of holies in the Eleusinian precinct and none but the
hierophant might enter here. An Epicurean who had the hardihood to
violate the shrine perished miserably as a result of his impiety. In
this anactoron the sacred objects were carefully guarded from
profanation until the time came for their exhibition.

The display of the hiera was contrived in a most impressive manner. When
the door of the shrine was opened the hierophant, clad in his festival
robes, came out into the full blaze of a bright light and revealed the
sacred objects to the gaze of the initiates. It was an awesome
spectacle. The hierophant in his priestly vestments was himself an
impressive figure. Eleusinian inscriptions also suggest how effective
was the lighting of this scene. One of them speaks of the "holy night,
clearer than the light of the sun." Another one, a metrical inscription
engraved on the base of the statue of a hierophant, exclaims: "O mystae,
formerly you saw me coming from the shrine and appearing in the luminous
nights." Being in an impressionable state of mind, the mystae must have
felt themselves very near to divinity when objects so jealously guarded
and of such sanctity were finally exposed to view. The emotional effect
of the exhibition is well suggested by a passage from Plutarch. In
discussing "Progress in Virtue," he used a figure of speech derived from
the initiation ceremony of these mysteries. According to Plutarch, "He
who once enters into philosophy and sees the great light, as when
shrines are open to view, is silent and awestruck." This passage
probably well describes the impression made by the spectacle at Eleusis
on a company of initiates.

Of the epopteia attained a year after the telete, our knowledge is most
scanty. Apparently it was in the nature of a further revelation of
sacred tokens. But a single rite is known to us and this only on the
authority of Hippolytus. With a fine show of sarcasm he speaks of "the
Athenians initiating people at Eleusis and showing to the epoptae that
great and marvellous mystery of perfect revelation, in solemn silence, a
cut cornstock!" There are two points of emphasis in this passage: first,
that the exhibition of a corn token formed a part of the Eleusinian
mystery, and, second, that this exhibition was reserved for the epoptae.
On these two points there can be little doubt. Indeed, considering the
agricultural background of the Eleusinian festival, it is not only
credible, but even probable that a corn token should be among the most
sacred things of the Eleusinia. The solemnity of this final exhibition
is emphasized by the phrase "in silence." In this case the display took
place without a word of elucidation from the hierophant, whereas the
year before the spectacle had been accompanied with an explanatory
discourse throughout. As to the meaning of this silent exhibition, we
are left entirely to conjecture. It is not unreasonable to suppose that
the corn was regarded as the symbol of a birth and rebirth in man
paralleling the vernal rebirth of nature. This, at least, is the
explanation suggested by Farnell. To the gentile mind of the first
century, however, it was not merely a matter of symbolism, but rather a
conviction arising "in accordance with the naive and primitive belief in
the unity of man's life with the vegetative world." In this final
exhibition, therefore, the initiate would find a proof as well as an
illustration of a personal rebirth like that of the grain in springtime.
The emotional effect of this rite was probably not unlike that of the
hieratic spectacle a year previous. But the conviction arising from it
would be rather the assurance of individual rebirth to new life, instead
of communion with deity.

The revelation in silence at the epopteia serves to throw into relief a
third distinctive element of the Eleusinian mysteries, the discourse or
verbal explanation which accompanied the ceremonial. A quaint rhetorical
fragment preserved under the name of Sopatros suggests the importance of
this discourse. It recounts the dream of a young man who saw the
spectacle of the mysteries. Because he did not hear the words of the
hierophant, however, he could not consider himself initiated. Without
the priestly discourse, then, the initiation was incomplete.

It is difficult to determine precisely what the content of the discourse
was. The references at hand concerning these utterances, however, make
it clear that it was not,in isolated speech but rather a running
commentary which served to expIain to the mystae the meaning of the
tableaux and the significance of the sacred objects. In all probability
the formulas used were liturgical in character, though some freedom of
utterance may have been allowed the hierophant. In the course of the
explanation, he probably descanted on the blessings assured by the
initiation ceremonies, and he may have included moral exhortation as
well. About all that can be said, therefore, concerning the sacred
discourse is that it was an oral interpretation of the Eleusinian
ceremonial intended to give to tableau and drama and exhibition their
full meaning.

Having canvassed the drama, the spectacle, and the discourse, have we
exhausted the significant elements in the Eleusinian ceremonial? Clement
of Alexandria has preserved a formula that suggests the possibility of a
different type of ritualistic observance. His statement is, "The
password of the Eleusinian Mysteries is as follows: 'I have fasted, I
have drunk the barley drink, I have taken things from the sacred chest,
having tasted thereof I have placed them into the basket and again from
the basket into the chest.'" There is no reason for doubting the
genuineness of this password. The meaning of the first two elements in
the process is fairly clear. The fasting of the mystae corresponded to
that of the sorrowing goddess Demeter who "sat smileless, nor tasted
meat nor drink, wasting with long desire for her deep-bosomed daughter."
Likewise the drinking of the barley drink corresponded to the breaking
of her fast; for the goddess had refused a cup of sweet wine, "but she
had them mix meal and water with the tender herb of mint, and give it to
her to drink." This mixed potion the goddess accepted. Accordingly, in
drinking a similar potation the mystae shared the cup from which the
great goddess drank in her sorrow. It was a direct and sympathetic
participation in the experiences of the goddess, an action expressive of
attained fellowship with the deity.

Just what the eating of food from the chest meant to the participant is
less obvious. Like the drinking of the barley drink, it was probably a
sacrament of communion, and it may have implied an even more realistic
communion than was involved in the act of drinking. If, as is most
likely, the sacred food consisted of cereals, then the assimilation of
this food meant a direct and realistic union with Demeter, the goddess
of grain. It meant an incorporation of divine substance into the human
body. However the idea was arrived at, this rite clearly involved a
mystical communion by the act of eating, even as the barley drink stood
for mystical fellowship through the act of drinking. Already emotionally
united with Demeter through participation in her passion, the initiates
now became realistically one with her by the assimilation of food and
drink.

### IV

It is further important to note the effects, both imediate and ultimate,
of this elaborate ceremonial upon the lives of the devotees. According
to Aristotle, the mysteries did not teach rules of conduct but rather
stimulated the emotions. "Aristotle is of the opinion," Synesitis
affirms, "that the initiated learned nothing precisely, but that they
received impressions and were put into a certain frame of mind. To use
the Aristotelian formula, not mathein (to learn) but pathein (to suffer)
was the reason for participation in the Eleusinian ritual; and in its
immediate aspect this was exactly the effect of the celebration.

This stimulation of emotion is so frequently mentioned in Eleusinian
sources that there is little danger of exaggeration at this point.
Plutarch drew several striking comparisons illustrating the emotional
effect of the rites of Eleusis. In his treatise on "Progress in Virtue"
he compared the effect of initiation on a confused and jostling crowd of
candidates to the influence of philosophy on a noisy and talkative group
of students.

"Those who are initiated, come together at first with confusion and
noise, and jostle one another, but when the mysteries are being
performed and exhibited, they give their attention with awe and
silence..... So also at the commencement of philosophy.... you will see
round its doors such confusion and assurance and prating, some rudely
and violently jostling their way to reputation; but he who once enters
in assumes another air and is silent and awestruck, and in humility and
decorum follows reason as if she were a god."

Plutarch used yet other striking similes to illustrate more specifically
the emotional effect of participation in the mysteries. The joy of the
initiated, he affirmed, was like that of the ostracized returning to
their native land after banishment. Again he took advantage of the
mingled trouble and apprehension, the peculiar hope and final joy of the
initiated to describe the feelings of the soul at death. According to
Plutarch:

When a man dies,he is like those who are being initiated into the
mysteries. The one expression teleutan the other teleisthai
correspond..... Our whole life is but a succession of wanderings, of
painful courses, of long journeys by tortuous ways without outlet. At
the moment of quitting it, fears, terrors, quiverings, mortal sweats,
and a lethargic stupor, come over us and overwhelm us; but as soon as we
are out of it pure spots and meadows receive us, with voices and dances
and the solemnities of sacred words and holy sights. It is there that
man, having become perfect and initiated--restored to liberty, really
master of himself--celebrates crowned with myrtle the most august
mysteries, and holds converse with just and pure souls.

With all this evidence it cannot be doubted that the extended ceremonial
of the Eleusinia had a profound effect in stirring deeply the feelings
of the mystae. They experienced the whole gamut of emotions from doubt
and fear to hope and joy.

Furthermore, the Eleusinian rites were so ordered as to enable the
worshiper to enact the legendarv experiences of his goddess, and feel as
she had felt of old. There was, first of all, the careful mental and
physical preparation, the purification of body, and the disposition of
mind, which Epictetus stressed, without which, he said, the mysteries
could bring no benefit. It was a long preparation beginning at Agrae six
months before the initiation proper. At the opening of the greater
mysteries the candidates prepared themselves for approach to divinity by
fasting and lustrations. They marched in solemn procession along the
Sacred Way from Athens to Eleusis, stopping at holy places redolent with
memories of their goddess. After all these preliminaries, they were
impressionable and psychologically prepared to share intensely in the
emotional experiences of the Great Goddess. When in the passion play of
the telesterion they witnessed the abduction of Persephone they were
sensitive to the grief of the mother. They assisted her in her frenzied
search for her lost daughter, and at the reunion of the goddesses they
participated in the joy of the occasion. Like Demeter herself they broke
their fast by drinking of the barley drink. As completely as possible
the devotees of Demeter reproduced her experiences, shared her feelings,
and thereby established a sense of mystical fellowship with their
goddess. This was the great experience of their religion.

It was not, however, a mere matter of temporary emotional satisfaction
to the initiates; for the rites of Eleusis gave positive assurance for
the future as well. The mystical communion established by initiation was
a lasting one. Sharing in the other experiences of the goddess, the
mystae believed they would share also in her triumph over death.
According to Farnell, it was their sense of present fellowship that led
directly to this conviction concerning the future.

"These deities, the mother and the daughter and the dark god in the
background, were the powers that governed the world beyond the grave:
those who had won their friendship by initiation in this life would by
the simple logic of faith regard themselves as certain to win blessing
at their hands in the next. And this, as far as we can discern, was the
ground on which flourished the Eleusinian hope."

Nothing is clearer than that the devotees of Demeter enjoyed the
anticipation of a happy future life. It was not merely the vague promise
of a future existence, it was the definite assurance of a blissful
future that the mysteries of Eleusis offered to seekers for salvation.
In classical antiquity this Eleusinian assurance was generally known and
appreciated. The Homeric Hymn declared, "Happy is he among deathly men
who has seen these things! But he who is uninitiated, and has no lot in
them, will never have equal lot in death beneath the murky gloom."
Pindar and Sophocles re-echoed the same thought. "Thrice happy they who
go to the world below, having seen these mysteries; to them alone is
life there, to all others is misery." Among the orators, Isocrates
declared, "Those who share this initiation have sweet hopes for the end
of life and for all future time." Plato also gave recognition to this
conviction when he said that the mysteries taught enigmatically "that he
who passes unsanctified and uninitiated into the world below will lie in
a slough, but he who arrives there after initiation and purification
will dwell with the gods." At the beginning of the Christian era, this
was still the strong hope that the mysteries of Eleusis guaranteed.
Cicero said of them, "In the mysteries we learn not only to live happily
but to die with fairer hope." Thus, the mythical experiences of the
Eleusinian goddesses in breaking the power of death became the basis for
a definite assurance of a happy life beyond the grave. Precisely what
the relationship was between the mythological experiences of the Great
Goddess and the hopes of her devotees is, indeed, unclear, but that the
relationship existed is certain and that the mysteries gave prized
assurance of immortality is indubitable.

Not only did the experience of initiation result in a temporary
emotional exaltation and a lasting guaranty of future bliss, but it
eventuated also in a purification and elevation of the present life of
men as well. It is true that the Eleusinian mysteries were criticized at
exactly this point. Diogenes of Sinope, for example, sarcastically
declared, "It will be an absurd thing if Aegesilaus and Epaminondas are
to live in the mire and some miserable wretches who have been initiated
are to be in the island of the blest." Undoubtedly there was reason
enough for his criticism. Nevertheless, the general testimony of the
ancients was on the other side of the case. Andocides, on trial for
impiety before a jury of mystae, assumed that those who had been
initiated would be more ready to punish the impious and save the
righteous than others would be, and that sin was the more heinous in one
who was consecrated to the service of the mother and daughter. At the
close of one of his beautiful odes, Aristophanes had the happy initiated
sing, "To us alone is there joyous light after death, who have been
initiated and who lived in pious fashion as touching our duty to
strangers and private people." Cicero stated as his conviction that in
the mysteries we perceive the real principles of life. Even such a stern
moralist as Epictetus encouraged reverence for the mysteries, recognized
their benefits, and asserted that they were established by those of old
for our education and the amendment of life." In face of such an
imposing array of evidence, the modern student cannot avoid the
conclusion that the Eleusinian mysteries did exert an elevating
influence on the moral life.

Here again, the precise relationship between the Eleusinian ritual and
its moral effect is exceedingly unclear. We do not know what was the
basis for the Eleusinian ethic. There may have been no exhortation to
the mystae to lead pure and good lives. Indeed, the immediate and
conscious aim of the rites may not have been an ethical one at all.
Nevertheless, it is undeniable that the mysteries of Demeter did
exercise a salutary influence in the matter of practical living. Not
only a temporary stimulation of the emotions, not only a positive
guaranty of future happiness, but also a lasting elevation of moral
standards was a result of initiation into the mysteries at Eleusis.

### V

For the devotees of Demeter initiation into her cult marked the
beginning of a new kind of life more divine than they had known before.
It was virtually for them the experience of a new birth. True, the exact
word palingenesia does not occur on any of the Eleusinian monuments, but
Tertullian attests that the mystae applied this very figure of speech to
their initiation experiences and to baptism especially. Tertullian
himself did not question the applicability of the term, though as a
Christian he naturally insisted on the superior validity of the
Christian rite and experience. He argued thus:

"If the mere nature of water, in that it is the appropriate material for
washing away, leads men to flatter themselves with a belief in the omens
of purification, how much more truly will waters render that service
through the authority of God, by whom all their matter has been
constituted."

In other words, Christian baptism according to Tertullian was a potent
agency for spiritual regeneration, while Eleusinian baptism was not,
though the Christian lawyer admitted that pagan religionists claimed
regenerative power for their rite.

In the Eleusinian ritual itself there was much besides baptism to
suggest and realistically induce a new birth experience. The mythical
background of Eleusinian thought distinctly picturized the recurrent
revival of life in nature with each successive year. It represented this
fact of common experience in the mythological terms of a goddess who was
carried off to Hades but later returned to the upper air. The lesser
mysteries, celebrated at Agrae in the springtime, were probably
especially suggestive of this renewal of life in nature. The ritual of
purification and the long period of fasting preliminary to the great
mysteries were intended to wash away the stains of the old life so that
the purified candidates might approach the two goddesses prepared for
personal renewal. If a ritual marriage formed a part of the mysteries,
then the initiates realized a real unio mystica with the divine, in
itself a completely transforming process. If the sacred marriage was
followed by a holy birth, then the idea of anew life "spiritual,
heavenly, and from above," was further accentuated. With the exhibition
of sacred relics the initiates were brought very close to things divine,
and the most sacred of these objects, the corn token, was itself a
symbol of regeneration. Furthermore, in a realistic sacrament of eating
and drinking, the neophytes assimilated food charged with such divine
potency that it could transmute human nature into immortal essence.
Thus, by realistic union as well as by sympathetic communion, the
individual neophyte came to realize a new life by means of initiation.

The type of life which was thus induced by the Eleusinian ritual has
been sufficiently characterized. From a purely descriptive standpoint
the new birth experience of Eleusis was temporarily a matter of the
feelings--the arousal of deep emotions by participation in an ancient
and well-ordered ritual. But it resulted in more than a temporary
satisfaction of the emotions merely. It eventuated in an amended moral
life and the ultimate assurance of future happiness. These were the
permanent effects of Eleusinian regeneration.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter III: Dionysian Excesses](pr05)
