[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](pr11.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0766180832/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Pagan Regeneration*, by Harold R. Willoughby, \[1929\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# CHAPTER X

### THE SOCIAL SIGNIFICANCE OF MYSTERY INITIATION

ALL religious systems deserve to be evaluated by the pragmatic test of
their functional significance for human society. The extent to which
they meet the actual needs of individuals and groups in a given period
is the measuring rod to be used in estimating their worth. Modern
historical study has taught us to view the phenomena of religion in
relation to the evolution of the human race and to regard all religious
systems, without exception, as socially conditioned products. This
applies equally to Christian and to non-Christian systems, and to
religions of attainment or religions of redemption like the mysteries.
Any given cult that is a going concern develops its peculiar
characteristics in response to certain vital demands that are put upon
it by society, and these demands, in turn, are but the more or less
articulate expression of certain basic social interests that are
dominant at that particular period. Hence, in order to understand the
needs and desires which found satisfaction in mystery initiations, it is
necessary to take a broad view of the general social situation in the
Graeco-Roman world and to define, if possible, the outstanding religious
interests of Mediterranean peoples in the first century of the Christian
era.

### I

Graeco-Roman society with all of its complexity was yet a closely knit
social fabric unified in large and significant ways. Politically, the
Mediterranean world of the Augustan age was a unit for the first time in
history, welded together by three hundred years of military conquests
preceding the beginning of our era. To hold this Mediterranean world
together in an imperial unity, Rome had thrown over it a great network
of military highways reaching to the farthest provinces and centering in
Rome itself. Cultural and commercial processes operated even more
effectively than military conquests and political organization to unify
the peoples of the Mediterranean area. Society under the early Empire
continued to be highly Hellenized as it had been during the three
centuries previous. Greek continued to be the language of culture and
commerce, with Latin as the lingua Franca of diplomacy. The sea, cleared
of pirates, was a great channel of commerce that led to all the Roman
world, and the military highways provided the necessary land routes.
Because of the easy means of communication, there was a free mingling of
races and classes in the centers of population. In any important
Mediterranean city one met Roman officials and native workmen, Phrygian
slaves and Greek students, Syrian merchants and Egyptian sailors, all
engaged in a common struggle for existence within the bounds of one huge
empire.

This free competition on a world scale gave the individual his
opportunity. Before the days of Alexander the interests of the
individual were quite submerged in comparison with those of the tribe or
state. The larger social group was the end--all of existence and
personal concerns were properly subordinated thereto. It was a proud
thing in one of the city-states of Greece for the citizen to have the
opportunity of furnishing a chorus for a civic festival or of fitting
out a trireme for the protection of the state. But in the changed
conditions of the imperial period all was different. Individual
interests came to the fore and those of the state receded to the
background. The Roman Empire meant far less to the citizen than the
Greek polis had meant. It was too large and too far away to be very
dependent on his support or to contribute much to his happiness. In the
ruthlessness of conquest and the stress of competition, local customs
were ignored, traditions were swept aside, and the unsupported
individual was thrown back upon his own resources, but with a world of
opporttinity before him. Happiness and well-being, if won at all, must
be won by himself and for himself alone. It was tn era of extreme
individualism.

In every department of life almost, the changed point of view was felt
and recorded. Art featured realistic sculpture and portrait busts. Latin
literature became self-conscious and personal, and politics suffered
much from individuals who sought to exploit the state for personal gain.

Religion, like the other phases of Graeco-Roman life, felt the effect of
these changed social conditions. For the masses of men former religious
sanctions and guaranties no longer functioned. In the old, pre-imperial
days the individual was well satisfied with the group guaranties that
were offered by local and nationalistic religions. To be sure, his
relationship to the state deity was only an indirect one--through the
group to which he belonged. To be sure, the goods sought were chiefly
social benefits which he shared with his fellow citizens. But so long as
the gods protected the state and the state protected him he was well
content. Successive conquests by foreign powers, however, rudely
destroyed this complacency, and the victory of Macedonian and Roman arms
wrecked the prestige of merely local and national deities. As racial
barriers were broken down and the individual felt himself free to travel
and trade in a wide world, he became conscious of needs and desires he
had never known before. As a practical matter the time-honored customs
of his fathers could not be maintained in foreign lands. New sanctions
and assurances of a more personal sort were needed. Thus, in line with
the general social movements of the time, there was a distinct breakdown
of traditional religion, and national cults, popular in the Hellenic
period, fell into abeyance.

But the masses of men did not become, irreligious by any means. Instead,
they turned to religions of another type and sought satisfactions of a
different variety. Their quest was no longer for a god powerful enough
to save the state but rather for one who was benevolent enough to save
the individual. Oracles were consulted, not so often in the interest of
the community but more frequently for the guidance of the individual in
his personal affairs. More than ever before the home became a temple and
the daily life of the family was filled with the paraphernalia of piety.
The shrines of healing gods were overcrowded, and magicians, who were
considered the chief mediators of divine power, carried on a thriving
business.

In particular, men turned for the satisfaction of personal desires to
the mystery group of religions, which were indeed very ancient cults but
had hitherto been comparatively insignificant. Most of them came to the
Graeco-Roman world from the Orient, with the authority of a venerable
past, with an air of deep mystery, and with rites that were most
impressive. But the chief reason for their popularity at this time was
the satisfactory way in which they ministered to the needs of the
individual man. Completely denationalized and liberated from racial
prejudices, they welcomed men of all races to their membership. They
were genuinely democratic brotherhoods in which rich and poor, slave and
master, Greek and barbarian met on a parity. Moreover, they touched the
common life of men intimately and in a variety of ways. It is impressive
when one reads the references to these cults in secular literature to
note the complete faith that ordinary folk had in their mystery gods and
how they sought for their divine help and guidance in matters of health
and love and business and in all the other multifarious concerns of
everyday life.

Chief among the personal satisfactions these cults had to offer was the
privilege of a new birth for the individual. When the neophyte was
initiated into the cult he became a new man--this was the gentile
conviction. In earlier centuries, when the emphasis in religion was
tribal or national, this was no special advantage. Then the individual
felt certain of his salvation because of his birth into a particular
tribe or race. The Athenian, for example, did not doubt the peculiar
interest of the maiden goddess on the Acropolis both in himself and in
his native city. The Jew, even throughout the prolonged tragedy of his
vain struggle for a national existence, succeeded in maintaining his
proud consciousness of the sufficiency of his racial birth. But the
generality of men in the Roman world had not this confidence either in
racial connections or in the potentiality of human nature itself. For
salvation such as the first-century Gentile desired--a salvation that
included the immortality of the soul as well as the present welfare of
the body--an essential change of being was felt to be necessary, and
this the mystery religions guaranteed by means of their initiatory
rites. Among the basic religious needs met by mystery initiation,
therefore, this should be mentioned as the first. It answered to the
current demand for individualistic as opposed to racial guaranties in
religion.

### II

It is possible, however, to characterize more closely the type of
individual religious experience which was fostered by Graeco-Oriental
cults of the mystery type. Mystical experience was a common denominator
of them all, and was about as conspicuous in one cult as in another.
This fact cannot but impress one as being quite extraordinary because
mysticism was essentially alien to the leading peoples of the Roman
world. Certainly the Jewish mind was unfriendly to this very subjective
type of personal religious experience. With his rigid monotheism, the
Jew maintained a clear emphasis on individuality, both human and divine.
Furthermore, since he thought of religion in terms of action primarily,
his attention was focused on the externality of statutory observance.
Latin religion, too, was characteristically as legalistic and objective
as was the Jewish, though it was lacking in the minuteness of detailed
application. For the typical Roman, religion was a commercial
transaction between himself and his gods, and mysticism found little
encouragement in such a business arrangement. To the Hellenic mind,
also, mysticism had but slight attractiveness because of the balanced
appreciation of the Greek for the insignificance and the dignity of man.
The thinkers of classical Greece had a full and glad confidence in man's
physical fitness to cope with his environment and his mental fitness to
explore its mysteries.

This made the short span of man's life a glorious and zestful thing for
them. Even so, the destiny of man in Hellenic thought was kept distinct
from that of the gods. The reiterated theme of Greek tragedy was this:
Would you be happy? Then remember your finiteness and be moderate in
your desires and ambitions; else the envy of the gods will bring you
disaster because of your presumptuous pride. "Know yourself" was the
text of Socrates' teaching, and this was at once a warning to respect
one's limitations and a promise that within the limits of human nature
itself man could find full scope for the development of his powers. With
its reasoned moderation Hellenism had characteristically little use for
mysticism.

In spite of all this historical prejudice inherited from the earlier
national period, the student finds mystical phenomena everywhere in the
Graeco-Roman world. The imperial age was a time when religion was
turning inward and becoming more emotional, while philosophy, converted
to religion, was following the same trend. There was a cultivated
antagonism between spirit and matter and the conscious endeavor to
detach one from the other by means of ascetic practices. It was a period
of world-weariness and other-worldliness. There was a demand for fresh
emotional experience, and the culminating effort was to overleap the
bounds of nature and to attain union with the divine in the occult
region beyond. These were some of the currents that indicated the
general direction of religious thought and feeling when the Christian
era began.

They found cult expression supremely in the popular religions of
redemption, in the mysteries of Eleusis and Attis and Isis and the rest.
Even in the ascetic brotherhoods of Judaism these elements found
practical exemplification among the Essenes of Palestine and the
Therapeutae of Egypt--so far did the spirit of the times penetrate the
inhospitable atmosphere of Judaism itself. More significant still was
the philosophical expression of this identical interest. It came to the
surface, for example, in the Hermeticism of Egypt and the revived
Pythagoreanism of Italy, the latter being characterized by a curious
mathematical mysticism accompanied by physical and moral austerities.
Ever since the days of Plato the religio-philosophical movement named
from Pythagoras had continued a concealed existence in connection with
the mysteries of Dionysus and Orpheus. It almost betrayed itself in 181
B.C. by the flagrant forgery of "Numa's Book." But in the next century
it appeared frankly in public view at Alexandria and Rome with a new
religious literature and a sincere Roman champion in Cicero's friend,
the senator Nigidius Figulus. At the time of Christianity's inception it
had a more widely known exponent in the far-traveled Apollonius of
Tyana. Furthermore, prominent thinkers like Philo the Jew, of
Alexandria, and Plutarch the Greek, of Chaeronea, and Seneca the
Spaniard, of Rome, all disclosed a high personal evaluation for this
kind of religious experience. Each of these writers, in adopting a
favorable attitude toward religious mysticism, belied the traditions of
his own people, yet earnestly sought to bring his mystical longings into
conformity with his own religious and philosophical heritage.

Modern scholars have come to recognize a common element, pronouncedly
mystical, running through the writings of these philosophers and have
credited this element to a single dominant personality, Posidonius of
Apamea, who was born on the Orontes in Syria about 135 B.C. It would be
impossible to select a single figure who more completely personified the
intellectual and religious interests of that age than did Posidonius. He
knew the Roman world as few others did for he had traveled even beyond
the Pillars of Hercules and his curiosity ranged freely where he had not
been in person. He was influential in that world--a teacher of Cicero
who sent him an account of his consulship, and of Pompey who twice
turned aside from his eastern campaigns to visit his master in Rhodes.
In philosophy and religion Posidonius stood for popular eclecticism,
mediating between the Orient and the Occident, between astrology and
Stoicism. More than any other man of his era he gathered up the masses
of popular beliefs and gave them effective literary expression. Child of
his age in this as in all else, he felt the contemporary demand for a
more inclusive life and sought to assuage it by a siderial mysticism.
Hence he is chiefly remembered as the "beholder and expounder of
heavens" who found in the enraptured contemplation of the starry skies
an assurance of oneness with the divine. Like the astronomer Ptolemy, he
could say, "Mortal that I am, I know that I am born for a day, but when
I follow the serried multitude of the stars in their circular courses,
my feet no longer touch the earth; I ascend to Zeus himself to feast on
ambrosia, the food of the Gods." In Posidonius one finds a high peak of
mystical enthusiasm; yet he was only one outstanding mystic among many
others whom the pagan world knew at the time when the Roman Republic
fell to pieces to be reassembled as the Roman Empire.

Just why the ever recurrent human quest for larger life should take on a
mystical complexion at this time is a difficult matter to determine.
There are certain general considerations, however, that have distinct
bearing on the case. In the first place, the thought world of the
average man had suddenly enlarged to proportions that were frightening.
The horizon of a Syrian trader in Nero's time was vastly more inclusive
than that of a Macedonian noble who started out with Philip for his
conquest of Greece, and this new horizon included a far greater number
of facts to be classified and accounted for, and a constantly enlarging
group of problems and difficulties to be settled. This expanded
thought-world of the middle of the first century was in a very chaotic
state. The social structure of an earlier age had been completely
wrecked. Greek democracy and Oriental despotism alike had been crushed
by imperial power. National and racial distinctions, once considered
very important, had been all but forgotten. Whole classes in society had
been wiped out. Old things had passed away and what chiefly impressed
the ordinary man about the new order of things imposed by Rome was not
so much its orderliness as its newness. It is difficult, indeed, to
imagine the confusion and perplexity which existed in the popular mind
when men found themselves completely torn away from their old moorings,
yet unaccustomed to the new social environment. The citizen of the Greek
polis had lived in a friendly town that was his own; but the Roman
citizen found himself bewildered in the crowded streets of a strange
city that was everyman's world.

In the second place, the man of the early Empire felt that the ultimate
control of his disordered universe was not at all in his own hands, but
that it rested with supernatural powers on the outside. Although the
people of the Roman Empire were really well equipped with social
agencies new and old for the attainment of their desires, they did not
themselves have much confidence in these securities. After all, these
were merely human adjustments which governed one's relations with his
fellow-men, whereas, according to the first-century point of view, the
more important relationships of life were with the controlling powers in
the supernatural realm. Whether these powers were friendly or unfriendly
or both or either according to circumstances, there was great variety of
opinion; but generally speaking there was no doubt of their power. The
Epicureans, to be sure, considered this belief in the supernatural to be
a blight on the joy of life and harmful to society. But the common man
was not at all troubled by skepticism on this point. He was too much
concerned with the business of establishing safe relations with the
occult powers to debate the problematic social value of supernaturalism.
One way be had of accomplishing this was the way of mysticism, whereby
he either projected himself emotionally into the supernatural realm and
so came into contact with deity, or else by magic and sacrament drew the
god down into the human sphere and in this less exalted fashion realized
the desired alliance. Not until this unio mystica was accomplished did
many men feel completely secure in the face of the uncertainties of
life.

To such a fearing world as this, which stood in abject awe of
supernatural powers, the mystery religions came with the message of
salvation through union with the lord of the cult. This was good news,
indeed, for such an alliance robbed the unknown spiritual world of its
terrors and gave the initiate the assurance of special privilege in
relation to the potent beings who controlled the destinies of men.
Practically, the lords of the mysteries were the most powerful spiritual
beings that gentile religionists of the Graeco-Roman world were
acquainted with. In the background of each of the mysteries hovered the
vague form of the supreme power itself: the Anatolian Magita Mater Deum
or the Ahura Mazda of the Persian system. In the foreground, ready for
action, stood the mediator who chiefly made the divine power manifest in
life and in nature: the youthful Attis or the invincible Mithra. The
mystery gods and goddesses were also potent as netherworld divinities.
Persephone reigned as queen of the dead and Osiris presided as judge of
the souls of the departed. By means of initiation into their cults, the
devotee was enabled to share vividly in the experiences of these
divinities and even to attain realistic union with them. Thus, united
with the gods themselves, the initiate was in touch with currents of
supernatural power which not only operated to transform his very being
but also rendered him immune from evil both in this life and in the
next. In this way the mystery religious, by means of their initiations,
answered to a second great demand of the age--the yearning for the
mystical type of religious experience.

### III

It should at once be noted that the mysticism of the cults was not of
the intellectualized type that one discovers in the writings of Plutarch
or Seneca, nor even of the refined, subjective sort, that is evident in
the Hermetic writings and in Philo. It was rather of a more realistic,
objective, ecstatic, and highly emotional variety. This emotional
character of cult mysticism was not fortuitous, by any means, but
answered directly to another one of the keenly felt social needs of the
age. The first century was a time when the masses of people had a very
inordinate appetite for emotional stimulation. This abnormal craving
itself can be understood even when its pathological character is
recognized. Directly or indirectly it was due, more than to anything
else, to the terribly depressing experiences through which society had
passed during the wars that filled the years immediately preceding the
Christian era.

For four hundred years wars had been unceasing. Greece had no sooner
finished her glorious Persian Wars than she started that inglorious
internecine strife which ended immediately in the exhaustion of all and
the final snuffing out of Greek freedom by Philip at Chaeronea.
Alexander's stupendous world conquest had been followed by the petty
struggles of the Diadochi and the Epigoni, and thus the eastern world
was filled with conflicts which did not cease until Rome's universal
conquest. The Romans themselves had gradually extended their rule over
Italy by a process of long warfare. They had made the Mediterranean a
Roman lake by fighting Carthage to a finish, and finally in their own
civil wars they had deluged the whole world with blood. Directly all
these military operations had entailed terrible suffering for all
classes. Quite apart from the killing or the maiming of combatants there
were pitiful consequences for the non-combatants. Breadwinners had been
drafted into service. Crops over large areas had been destroyed.
Conquered lands had been plunged into debt and bankruptcy, while
thousands of men, women, and children, formerly free, had been sold as
slaves. The Mediterranean world had known war at its worst, and this
long series of conquests, civil wars, proscriptions, and insurrections
had produced an untold amount of agony.

The indirect consequences of these military operations were quite as
disastrous for the happiness of large numbers of people as were the
direct results. One of the most deplorable effects was the practical
destruction of the middle classes which had been the backbone of
society. This left a bad social cleavage between the wealthy and
aristocratic classes on the one hand, and the masses, including the
slaves, on the other. Conditions were such that the classes had the
opportunity of becoming more wealthy and prosperous, while the
proletariat correspondingly became more destitute and wretched. Enormous
sums of gold and silver, the accumulated wealth of the east, was
disgorged on the Empire. This created a demand for luxuries, raised the
standard of living, and multiplied the miseries of the poor. Throughout
the period the number of slaves was constantly being augmented. This
lowered wages and drove free laborers to the idleness of cities where
they were altogether too willing to be enrolled among the state-fed.

With such an unequal distribution of the goods of life, it was
inevitable that both extremes in Roman society should feel the need of
special emotional uplift and stimulation. The aristocrat felt the need
of it because he had pleasures too many, and the poor freeman because he
had pleasures too few. In the literature of the time these differing
points of view were both fully expressed. On the one hand there was
disgust with life, taedium vitae, bred of selfindulgence and brought to
birth by satiety. It was the weariness that comes when amusements cloy
and the means of diversion seem exhausted. "To be ever feeding the
thankless nature of the mind .... though after all we are never filled
with the enjoyments of life .... this is to do what is told of the
maidens who kept pouring water into a sieve," wrote Lucretius, depicting
the mood of too many men whom he knew.

On the other hand there was genuine sensitiveness to suffering in this
age born of a sympathetic understanding of its pain and an earnest
attempt to provide alleviation. The demand for solace in time of
calamity was so great that the office of consoler became almost a
profession and the closing days of the Republic saw the development of a
curious literary type, known as consolation literature. Crantor, who
originated this literature, wrote a book for a bereaved parent which
Cicero pronounced "a golden book, to be learned by heart," and the
latter on the death of his daughter formulated a consolatio for himself.
Plutarch wrote such a consolation to his wife, while Seneca, the prince
of consolers, went far toward making the art a science by the
psychological study of individual cases. Formulas of sympathy were
developed for calamities of all sorts: for ill health, old age,
financial disaster, confiscation of property, exile, and most of all for
death itself. It was a period when all classes were sensitive to
emotional needs, but chiefly the inarticulate masses who were most
miserable and knew not how to express their misery.

Here was religion's opportunity. Some cults strove to meet it while
others did not. Generally speaking the officials of state religion
remained unresponsive, and the marble gods of Greece and Rome had no
word for men in agony. Judaism, which had itself gone through a
prolonged martyrdom, should have learned from suffering to minister to
personal need, but it had not. Its hope was still a national one, not
personal.

But the religions of redemption that came from the east furnished
exactly the emotional satisfaction that the age demanded. Hence they
were popular. They told men of savior-gods that were very human, who had
come to earth and toiled and suffered with men, experiencing to an
intensified degree the sufferings to which flesh is heir. These
savior-gods had known the agony of parting from loved ones, of
persecution, of mutilation, of death itself. In this hard way they had
won salvation for their devotees and now they stood ready to help all
men who had need. The rites of these mystery religions were impressively
arranged to represent the sufferings and triumphs of the savior-gods.
Thus it was possible for the initiate to feel as his god had felt, and
sometimes more realistically, to repeat the archetypal experiences of
his lord. His initiation was a time of great uplift that elevated him
above commonplace worries and gave him an exalted sense of security. In
after days the memory of that great event remained with him to buoy him
up amid the hardships of his daily lot, or in such special crises as
might come to him. The third great contemporary need which mystery
initiation supplied was that of emotional stimulation through the
mystical experience of contact with a sympathetic savior.

### IV

The majority of gentile religionists, however, were not satisfied with a
merely emotional assurance that the desired mystical union had taken
place. Something more tangible and objective was required to supplement
the evidence furnished by subjective experience. This was in accord with
the vivid realism of contemporary thought concerning divine beings and
spiritual processes. Greeks and Romans both conceived of their gods very
concretely and humanly. They gave them admirable plastic representation
and sought to secure their favor by rites that were correspondingly
realistic. At the beginning of the imperial period when the
uncertainties of life made men feel more dependent than ever on
supernatural assistance, the operations whereby they strove to assure
themselves of the desired aid became, if anything, more realistic than
ever.

Records of the Augustan revival in religion illustrate this tendency in
a hundred different ways. We read of statues whose lips, hands, and feet
were worn smooth by the persistent and devout osculations of worshipers.
To the naive thought of uneducated people these statues were identified
with the divine beings they represented and were treated accordingly.
High and low alike shared in the realistic point of view. The Emperor
Galba kept a necklace of pearls and precious stones to adorn his
favorite goddess Fortuna on his Tusculan estate. When be suddenly
decided to give it to Venus instead, Fortuna appeared to him in a dream
and threatened to withdraw her favors. In genuine fright Galba rushed
off to Tusculum to make amends to Fortuna. Seneca, on a chance visit to
the capital, was aroused to indignation when he saw the statues of the
Roman trinity attended as if they were living persons and found women
there awaiting the pleasure of Jupiter because they believed themselves
loved by him. Philosophers generally had as little patience with these
practices as Seneca had; but occasionally there was a Maximus of Tyre
who would speak a tolerant word for these ingenuous expressions of
religious devotion.

In such an age and amid people who thought in these vivid terms, the
rites of religion, in order to be satisfying, had to partake of the same
pictorial quality. They had to give actual and dramatic representation
of the processes they were intended to typify and induce. This was what
the ceremonies of the mystery cults did, and this was another reason for
the great attractive power of the cults. Most of their rites had come
down in traditional forms from an immemorial antiquity. Originally
performed among primitive people in order to assure the revival of
vegetable life in springtime, they were enacted in these later imperial
days for the higher purpose of assuring the rebirth of the human spirit.
Yet, among the masses at least, the efficacy of these ceremonials was as
little questioned as it had been in their original setting.

The baptismal rite, in particular, whether by water or blood, was
regarded as marking the crucial moment in a genuinely regenerative
process. Once reborn the initiates were treated as such; their birthday
was celebrated and they were nourished in a manner appropriate for
infants. Childish rites they seem, yet to the uneducated and
simpleminded of the first century A.D. they were fraught with spiritual
significance. The semblance of mystic marriage and the partaking of
consecrated foods were other realistic sacraments in which the neophyte
found assurance that he was really and vitally united with his lord and
endowed with the divine spirit. What gives the modern student pause when
he is inclined to smile at the naivete of these practices is the sincere
conviction of pagan initiates that their spiritual transformation was
not only represented but was also really accomplished by these dramatic
ceremonies. By means of initiatory rites of great impressiveness the
mystery cults were enabled to satisfy another conspicuous demand of the
age, the desire for realistic guaranties in religion.

### V

The personal transformation which was the initial feature of cult
mysticism had its ethical as well as its religious aspect, and this
responded to a demand of the age for a blend of ethics and religion. It
is somewhat difficult to define the ethical interests of gentile
religionists in the first century, for the early imperial period was a
time of great moral disorder and confusion, paralleling the stress and
strain in other areas of life. This moral anarchy is comprehensible, for
it grew out of the same social conditions that determined religious
developments in this period. In the polis of Hellenic days, political,
moral, and religious duties were all integrated, and the citizen found
sufficient guidance for the performance of his obligations in community
institutions, ancestral customs, and state laws. These had divine
sanction for him and no other authority was needed. With the wrecking of
that corporate life, however, morals were divorced from politics and the
individual was left to himself without external authority to guide his
conduct. The continuous social upheavals of Hellenistic and republican
times, the free mingling of populations in commerce and conquest, and
the enormous increase of slavery furthered the process of cutting
thousands of human beings loose from moral restraints. No wonder men
were groping after new norms for the conduct of life at this time!

It is ordinarily assumed that society in the middle of the first century
was conspicuously lacking in ethical interests and had sunk to the
lowest point of moral degradation. This impression is gained chiefly
from two sources, from Jewish and Christian writers on the one hand and
from Roman satirists on the other. Obviously, however, the former were
prejudiced witnesses from the start, and the latter confined themselves
to a one-sided view of only one class in Roman society. When the student
turns aside from such biased and limited views to consider the general
trend in society as a whole, he discovers that it was not only a period
of moral anarchy but of ethical awakening as well. Interest was alive on
moral questions. It had shifted from politics to ethics. Philosophy had
come down out of its theoretical basket amid the clouds of speculation
and was walking on solid earth once more. It was undertaking to do for
men what religion too frequently did not do--to give guidance in
problems of conduct. There were moralists in plenty who were castigating
vice and holding up models of virtue for imitation.

Almost every characteristic vice in Roman society was being met with the
most vigorous protests and sometimes by active measures for
amelioration. Slavery was a curse to that society, cultivating a cruel
spirit of indifference to human suffering. But brutal masters were in a
minority, and slaves had the right to acquire property and purchase
their freedom. Legal enactment assured them of protection against
cruelty, and an increasingly humane public opinion prevented grosser
abuses. It is true that Roman amusements were debasing. The theater was
obscene and the amphitheater with its gladiatorial combats was beastly;
but Cicero testifies that many regarded the amphitheater as cruel and
inhuman;, while Plutarch, Seneca, and even Petronius joined in a chorus
of personal condemnation of gladiatorial combats. It is true that
marriage at this time was carelessly contracted and easily annulled; but
inscriptions and literature both prove that marriages of love were at
least as common as marriages of convenience--consider Pliny's graceful
love letters to his Calpurnia and the Laudatio Turiae, which tells of
forty-one years of happy married life. Moreover, there was an impressive
and unanimous demand on the part of all moralists and philosophers that
equal virtue should be required of men as of women. It is true that
there was much infanticide in Roman society. Children were exposed and
abortion was freely practiced. But Paulus, the jurist, branded these
practices as assassination and "against the voice of nature and the
voice of conscience." Moreover, one of the primary concerns of moralists
was for the exemplary training of children. It is only too true, also,
that the Romans knew of nameless sins. Yet the philosophers did not
hesitate to denounce the epicenes who practiced them, and Dio Chrysostom
was only the first to attack prostitution as a legalized vice. A
balanced view of the whole social situation therefore shows high ideals
and exceptional interest in moral problems.

There was at this time a particular demand for greater concreteness in
ethical teaching. Abstract instruction was not popular, but the
formulation of definite precepts was desired instead; hence the teachers
of the time studied the writings of philosophers and moralists to find
texts and maxims to use with their pupils. To some, ideals seemed more
useful than particular precepts. So careful catalogues were made of
virtues and vices, and the former were summarized in certain cardinal
qualities especially to be desired. These ideals, however, proved
generally too elusive, and there was a call for living examples which
could be referred to as demonstrations of the practicability of ideals.
This became the great teaching point of the age--the citation of
examples. Each system had its own particular hero, Orpheus or
Pythagoras; but Socrates, most of all, came to be regarded as a
personification of the ideal for humanity. Seneca urged his friend
Lucilius to keep before his mind constantly the picture of some upright
man and to live always as if in his presence. The practical Roman
regarded this as an excellent method in education and he had his sons
taught by appeal to the examples of the past. Biographies were written
with this didactic purpose in view. Notably was this the case with Varro
and Plutarch in composing their parallel lives of Greeks and Romans. The
first century A.D. was an age of hero worship when concrete, living
examples were called for.

Stoicism, the leading philosophy of the Empire, was in a strategic
position to meet the general ethical demands of the time. It had its
first development in Greece just after the old landmarks of Hellenic
morality had collapsed; for it was in 320 B.C. that Zeno, of Citium,
arrived in Athens where he was to end his days lecturing in the Stoa
Poicile. As a thoroughly Hellenized system, it appeared in Rome where it
was disseminated by Panaetius through the Scipionic circle. Its Semitic
earnestness accorded well with the stern severity of the old Roman
character. Seneca, the Spanish prime minister, and Epictetus, the
Phrygian slave, are outstanding figures showing the hold that Stoicism
had on all classes in Roman society at this time. With such a
cosmopolitan background, Stoicism was well furnished to supply the Roman
world with new ethical norms consonant with the spirit and needs of the
age.

It essayed to do so on the purely naturalistic basis furnished by human
nature itself. According to Stoic teaching the chief end of existence
was virtuous living, further defined as living in accordance with the
dictates of reason. This brought all rational beings under a single
ethical standard, at once individualistic and universal in scope. It
made all men the sharers in a common world citizenship. Thus the good of
every creature became the individual's good, and their hurt became his
own. The call for explicit precepts of a moral character was met by
Stoic manuals that are still highly valued. Its ideal of virtue was
analyzed into component elements, wisdom, justice, courage, and
temperance, and these in turn were extensively subdivided. There was no
lack of ideals in Stoicism. It had its ideal wise man, who acted without
desire and made no mistakes; but Epictetus and his contemporaries were
constantly referring rather to the example of Socrates--so concrete were
they in their teaching.

The Stoics, more than others, were outspoken in their denunciation of
social evils. Their antidote for slavery was deliverance by right
thinking and complete indifference to outward circumstances. The
virtuous man only is free and the only slave is he who is in bondage to
bad habits, so the Stoic taught. It was the Stoic Seneca who said
plainly, in reference to a double standard of morality, "You know it is
injustice to demand fidelity from your wife while you seduce another
man's wife," and other Stoic utterances as pointed might be quoted in
regard to gladiatorial combats, prostitution, paiderastia, and the other
vices of Nero's time. The Stoic teachers, who served as moral directors
for the rich and missionaries to the masses, knew better than any others
of their day what the moral weaknesses of their fellow-men were.

For him who had the will to endure its rigors, the ideal of Stoicism was
satisfying. But that ideal was strenuous, almost impossible, and
inhumanly high. The true Stoic must always follow the pure light of
reason and be guided by duty, not desire. Passions must be exterminated
and emotions crushed as perturbing influences which would hinder
achievement. To attain the ideal, man must depend on himself alone, for
the Stoic knew of no power external to himself that could help him. In
the struggle for well-being, he had to act as his own savior. The ethic
of Stoicism was completely rational and naturalistic. It lacked the
authority of revelation and had no other sanction than that furnished by
human nature and experience. In its very strength was the fatal weakness
of Stoicism; it did not deal in supernaturalism, and that was the only
coinage that had general acceptance in the first-century world.

Conditions of life were such at that time that most men did not have
confidence in their own unaided ability to achieve character. They had
"lost nerve," to paraphrase Gilbert Murray's expression, and they looked
away to the supernatural realm for the powers that controlled personal
conduct as well as the more ultimate destinies of mankind. What the men
of the first century wanted was not so much ideals, but the power to
realize those ideals; not a code of morals, but supernatural sanctions
for morality. In the last analysis, it was the divine will, and not
human welfare, that was the generally accepted criterion whereby the
validity of any ethical system was tested. Accordingly, the religion
which could furnish supernatural guaranties along with its ethical
ideals hid a preferred claim to first-century loyalty.

The stern morality of Judaism, like that of the Stoa, was not
unattractive to many Gentiles; but the element that fascinated them was
not the inherent excellence of Jewish rules for living but the fact that
they had venerable sanctions bearing the impress of divine authority.
The Law of the Jews was quoted as the ipse dixit of Yahweh himself and
the scriptures were referred to as authentic documents proving the
genuineness of the representation. Such confirmation was impressive to
men who were seeking for divine authority to make moral conduct
obligatory. The religion of the Egyptian Hermes, also, was one that
offered supernatural guaranties for its ethical ideals. In the process
of Hermetic rebirth, the powers of God drove out the hordes of vices and
left the regenerate individual divinely empowered for right living. That
was Mithraism's point of strength also and accounted not a little for
the vogue it continued to enjoy some time after the beginning of the
Christian era. The "commandments" of Mithraism were believed to be
divinely accredited; for had not the deity himself revealed them to the
ancient Magi? One of the chief reasons why the high Mithraic ideals of
purity, truth, and righteousness had real attraction was because Mithra
himself was the unconquerable champion of these ideals and the ready
helper of men who were willing to join with him in the eternal fight of
right against wrong, good against evil. Mithraism was the outstanding
example of a mystery religion which gave supernatural sanctions to the
demands of plain morality.

The mysticism of the mysteries came in effectively at just this point to
give both realistic content and divine authorization to the ethic of the
brotherhood. The ideals of the group found personification and
embodiment in the divine lord or lady who was the object of cult
worship. Osiris was the model righteous man who functioned in divinized
state as the judge of the departed. Hence the Isiac initiate, reborn as
a new Osiris, was supposed himself to exhibit the Osirian type of
righteousness. So, too, in the other mystery systems, the initiate
realistically united with his lord and, actually transformed by virtue
of that union, had his ideal incorporated within himself as a part of
his N-ery being. Thus, in the end, mystical experience became the
theoretic basis and practical incitement to good conduct. In this close
articulation of mysticism and morality the cults made all important and
distinctive contribution to the ethical life of the age.

It has been a general habit among Christian writers in both ancient and
modern times to depreciate the ethical significance of the mystery
religions and to emphasize instead the ceremonialism and theurgy which
characterized their cult practices. This habit developed first of all
from the apologetic tendency to exalt Christianity by damning its rivals
as much as possible. A fairer view of the case reveals the fact that in
the first century the well-developed mystery religions like nascent
Christianity were vividly responsive to the awakened conscience of the
period and were reinterpreting their rites accordingly. Moral as well as
spiritual cleansing was attributed to ablutions and lustrations, and
ethical as well as essential regeneration was sought in the bath of the
taurobolium. According to Celsus--and Origen has no word to say in
contradiction--the Eleusinian herald demanded of candidates for
initiation not only clean hands and intelligible speech but also purity
of conscience and a good life. This is an eloquent contemporary tribute
to the moral influence of the mysteries. Yet it is only one instance out
of many that might be cited.

When the mystery religions are viewed in their contemporary
relationships, it is possible to distinguish in each instance the
peculiar contribution of each to the moral development of the
Mediterranean peoples. Orphism, true to its initial character as a
reform movement, moralized the process of metempsychosis and placed
exaggerated emphasis on the idea of retribution in the future.
Mithraism, with its ideal of aggressive, militant virtue, had great
appeal for practical-minded people in the Roman world. Isiac
brotherhoods, with their restrained asceticism, registered
characteristic protest against the immoral practices of the period. Each
cult in its own way lent the sanctions of an ancient religious system to
the demands of contemporary morality and in so doing made adjustment to
the ethical requirements of the age.

### VI

The ultimate pledge that the mystery religions made to gentile
religionists pertained not to the present but to the future. It was the
assurance of a happy immortality. That was a matter about which there
was very general and very genuine interest in the first-century world.
Whatever attitude a man might adopt on the question of continued
existence after death, he could not well avoid the issue. The inevitable
fact of death, together with the palpable injustices of first-century
life, forced it upon his attention. As a symptom of the widespread
interest in this problem the great variety of opinion which existed in
educated circles may be cited. Some there were who succeeded in
maintaining an absolute and consistent negative on the question. Others
were just as positive in affirming iinmortality. Still others wavered
between the two opinions.

There were philosophic sects which definitely and finally rejected all
future hope. The Peripatetics, true to the scientific spirit of their
founder, refused to speculate about the existence of a soul that their
reason could not conceive or define. The Skeptics, true to their name,
and the Academics, now turned skeptical, either doubted the possibility
of a future life altogether or else suspended judgment on the problem.
But these schools were not of great impor-

tance in the early Empire. The Epicurean philosophy, however, wss still
influential, and its advocates were sincere and thoroughgoing opponents
of any belief in immortality. Holding consistently to the atomistic
materialism of Democritus and Epicurus, they maintained that the soul
came into existence at conception, that it grew with the body, and at
the body's death it passed into nothingness once more, dissipated like
the other bodily elements. This annihilation the Epicureans did not
dread because death destroyed all sensibility. On the contrary, they
warmly praised their master for liberating men from the terror of future
punishment and teaching them that death was not a frightful thing but a
blessing. Lucretius, in pure Epicurean vein, exulted in the opportunity
of driving from men's hearts "that dread of Acheron which troubles human
life to its inmost depths, and overspreads everything with the blackness
of death, and permits no pleasure to be pure and unalloyed."

There were not a few both among the high and the lowly who were
attracted by this article of Epicurean faith and made it their own.
According to Sallust, no less exalted a personage than Julius Caesar,
the pontiff of Roman religion, opposed the death penalty for the
Catilinarian conspirators because, he said, "Death puts a period to all
human ills and beyond the grave there is no opportunity for either
anxiety or joy." The elder Pliny, a most useful and industrious citizen
whose lot was a very favorable one, was vehement in his rejection of the
idea of a future life. To him it was an invention of human vanity that
robbed death of its virtue and doubled the pain of dying. Latin poets
gave graceful and memorable expression to similar views. Carpe diem was
the motto that Horace recommended. Catullus, at his brother's grave,
took an everlasting farewell of him, and he anticipated that sometime
night would close on his love for Lesbia also: "Suns can set and rise
again, but we, when our brief light is extinguished, must sleep for an
eternal night."

That Epicurean ideas were disseminated among the lower strata of society
is shown by rude and simple grave inscriptions, many of which express
unbelief in any future existence. "We are mortal; we are not immortal,"
was the terse confessional of one. This idea was reiterated in more
extended form, emphasizing the thought that man returns to the same sort
of non-existence from which he came: "Once I had no existence; now I
have none. I am not aware of it, I care not." "We are and we were
nothing. See, reader, how swiftly we mortals go back from nothingness to
nothingness." In some instances the state of non-existence was
contrasted with the conditions of earthly life to the disadvantage of
the latter. The following is a jocose example: "What remains of man, my
bones, rests sweetly here. I no longer have fear of sudden starvation; I
am exempt from attacks of gout; my body is no longer pledged for rent;
and I enjoy perpetual and free hospitality." In some cases, however, the
contrast was in favor of this life; for the advice, "Eat, drink, be
merry, come!" was many times repeated among grave inscriptions. Such
epigraphs testify to a vulgar and sensuous deterioration of original
Epicureanism during this period. But the really pathetic maxim among
them all was one that was so often repeated it was sometimes represented
by initial letters only: "I was not; I was; I am not; I do not care."
This was an epigraphic formula frequently used for slaves and gladiators
to whom death must have come as a blessed release. Inscriptions of this
general character indicate the acceptance of the Epicurean solution by
quite a number among the lower classes. Yet, even so, the proportion of
such inscriptions was not large in comparison with those which expressed
hope regarding the future.

There were many among the cultivated classes and more among the masses
to whom the negative answer of Epicureanism was less than satisfying.
Those who were philosophically inclined turned backward for the
confirmation of their faith to the classical arguments of "divine Plato"
who had made the first great attempt at a rationalization of the belief
in immortality. Cato of Utica, who by his death became an ideal figure
for later Stoicism, spent the night before his suicide in reading the
Phaedo of Plato. This same book was the last consolation of many another
man who was the victim of proscription or of imperial tyranny. Cicero
testified to the lasting influence of Plato in his day. There were many
others also who like Cicero preferred to be wrong with the Greek
idealist on the question of immortality rather than right with those who
criticized him.

One sect in particular, the Neo-Pythagoreans, held Plato in special
reverence and granted him a place next in honor to the founder of their
order. These strange sectaries substantiated the belief in immortality
by the authority of a revelation in definite scriptural form, bearing
the names of Pythagoras and Plato. In detail their beliefs and practices
were like those of their predecessors, the Pythagoreans of south Italy
and the Orphics of Greece. They believed the soul to be divine and
therefore immortal. By generation the soul was imprisoned in the body,
and so long as it remained there it was in danger of corruption and of
successive sojourns in this evil world. The whole aim of their practice
was to secure the soul's liberation from the body and from the cycle of
physical rebirths. By ritual purifications, moral discipline, and the
practice of piety they believed this could be accomplished; so that,
when the soul was freed at death it would ascend through the heavenly
spheres to dwell with the blessed gods. To the Neo-Pythagoreans, death
itself was a spiritual rebirth to immortality. In one of the most
familiar documents of the Augustan religious revival, the sixth book of
the Aeneid, the court poet of the Roman Empire gave lasting literary
expression to the revived Pythagorean hope. This pagan apocalypse is a
curious medley of Orphic-Pythagorean beliefs with an admixture of
Platonic and Stoic ideas and various other elements more primitive; but
it does give a vivid and picturesque impression of hopes and convictions
that were cherished more or less extensively by Vergil's contemporaries.

A large body of first-century thinkers, however, were not satisfied with
either the fantastic beliefs of the Neo-Pythagorean sect or the nihilism
of Epicurus. Many of the most earnest souls of the time wavered in
doubt, inclined toward belief, and found in the varying and ill-defined
positions of Stoicism a harbor of refuge. At one point the Stoics agreed
with the Epicureans. They had no fear of Hell. "There is no prison
house, no lake of fire or river of forgetfulness, no judgment seat, no
renewal of the rule of tyrants." On one other point they were generally
agreed among themselves, that the ultimate destiny of the soul after
death was reabsorption into the primal divine substance whence it had
originally come. In Epictetus' memorable phrase, the soul was "a
fragment of God." It was "fiery spirit" (pneuma puroses), and by virtue
of its very origin and constitution it could have no other end than to
return to its divine source. To quote a Stoic grave inscription: "The
holy spirit which you bore has escaped from your body. The body remains
here and is like the earth. The spirit is naught else but God." Most
Stoics were of the opinion that one day the universe would be reduced by
general conflagration to its primal fiery state and a new cycle of
existence would then begin. The question was, What would be the fate and
condition of souls in the interim? Here most of the leaders disagreed.
The older Stoics had little to say on the subject. Under the influence
of Pythagoreanism and astral mysticism, however, the later Stoics became
more definite. Posidonius, for example, was sure they would pass through
a period of purification, and rising to heaven's height, would delight
themselves by watching the stars go around. In general, then, the Stoics
allowed for only a limited future existence before the soul merged once
more into God.

Among the educated classes of the first century, therefore, one finds
all shades of belief and unbelief, but almost universal interest in the
question of the future. There were many who like Cicero, or Seneca,
included within their own experience a changing series of beliefs. In
the days of their happiness neither of these philosophers had much
concern with the subject. But as years brought wider contacts and
misfortunes of one sort or another, they both developed a more positive
attitude. In 45 B.C. when Cicero was having his troubles in public
affairs, he suffered a cruel blow in the loss of his only daughter
Tullia. The bitterness of this personal experience persuaded him that
his daughter still lived among the gods, and he resolved to erect in her
memory not a tomb but a shrine. Writing to his friend Atticus from
gloomy Astura on the shore of the Pomptine marshes, be confessed this
determination, half apologetically:

"I wish to have a shrine built, and that wish cannot be rooted out of my
heart. I am anxious to avoid any likeness to a tomb .... in order to
attain as nearly as possible to a deification. This I could do if I
built it at the villa itself, but I dread changes of owners. Wherever I
construct it on the land I think I could secure that posterity should
respect its sanctity."

In the Consolatio addressed to himself at about the same time, he dwelt
upon the divine and eternal nature of the soul in words suggesting
Pythagorean inclinations. Cicero, then, was a type of the educated man
who was not ashamed to stand in the crowd of those who "were stretching
out their hands in longing toward the farther shore.

If there were doubts among the educated on the question of the future
life, the masses generally were not perturbed by them. So far as we can
gather, they had much more faith in immortality than their leaders were
inclined to have. Plutarch maintained in so many words that the
Epicurean negation of the future hope was repugnant to the majority. In
contrast with the skeptical and materialistic epitaphs already cited,
there are many touching inscriptions expressing confidence in
immortality and reunion. One found on the grave of a married couple
represents the wife as saying: "I am waiting for my husband." Generally
speaking, the more traditional Greek and Roman ideas regarding the
future seem to have persisted among the common people. Take, for
illustration, a simple item of popular belief, the myth of Charon, that
"grim ferryman of the muddy pool" to whom every dead man must pay an
obol for passage money. Lucian said of this belief: "The mass is so
preoccupied with the idea that, when a man dies, his relatives hasten to
put an obol in his mouth to pay the ferryman for his passage across the
Styx, without first finding out what money is current in the
underworld." Further arrangement was made for the future happiness of
the dead by supplying them with the things they had needed or enjoyed
most in this life. Hence, the belongings of the deceased were frequently
cremated or buried with them, and sometimes definite provision was made
for this in first-century wills. With an acceptance of the idea that the
soul continued to exist after the death of the body, men longed for the
assurance that this future existence was a happy, and not a miserable,
one.

What religions were there in the first-century world to give men
assurances in regard to the future of the individual? Not the new
emperor worship, surely; that was concerned with a present salvation
within the empire. Not Judaism, either, for Jews were still tenacious of
their racial consciousness, and their future hope was predominantly
national and Messianic.

The one group of first-century religions which did specialize in future
guaranties were the mystery cults from Greece and the Orient. Originally
intended to assure the miracle of reviving vegetation in the springtime,
they were perfectly adapted to guarantee the miracle of the spirit's
immortality after physical death. These were the cults which in the form
of Dionysiac and Orphic brotherhoods had first brought the promise of a
happy future life to Greece in the religious revival of the sixth
century B.C. But Greeks at that time were too well satisfied with a life
of present salvation to be much concerned with the future. The Orphic
teachings regarding immortality, however, were taken up by the
Pythagoreans and moralized by Pindar and rationalized by Plato. In
Hellenistic times the Greek cults merged with similar religions from the
east which offered equivalent guaranties, and in this syncretized form
thev came into their own. In the early imperial period they were more
popular than ever, for they gave positive and definite answer to the
questioning of the common man about the future. Their answer had the
authority of revelation and it included the guaranty of divine aid in
the realization of that blessed after-life which they vividly depicted
to their devotees. Altogether the mysteries were unusually well equipped
to meet the contemporary demand for assurances regarding the future.

When consideration is given to the fundamental character of the
interests represented by the mystery religions, one can well understand
their popularity in the Graeco-Roman world. In an era of individualism,
when men were no longer looking to religion for guaranties of a racial
or national order, the mystery cults offered the boon of personal
transformation through participating in rites of initiation. At a time
when men were seeking a larger life through contact with supernatural
powers, the mysteries guaranteed absolute union with the divine beings
who controlled the universe. In an age when men were craving emotional
uplift, mystery initiation gave them such encouragement as they could
scarcely find elsewhere. At a period when realism characterized thought
in all departments of life, the religions of redemption offered men
realistic rites to guarantee the actuality of spiritual processes. When
supernatural sanctions were sought to validate ethical ideals, the
mystery cults provided a unique combination of mysticism and morality
that was practically effective. When, as never before, people were
questioning about the future fate of the individual soul, the mysteries,
through initiation, gave guaranty of a happy immortality. At every one
of these points the gentile religions of redemption were effectively
meeting the needs of large numbers of people in Graeco-Roman society.

END
