##### The Secret Doctrine by H. P. Blavatsky -- Vol. 1

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 668 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

\[\[This page continued from [previous section](sd1-3-17)\]\]

#### XVIII. SUMMARY OF THE MUTUAL POSITION.

**T**HE reader has had the whole case presented to him from both sides,
and it remains with him to decide whether its summary stands in our
favour or not. If there were such a thing as void, a *vacuum* in Nature,
one would find it produced, according to a physical law, in the minds of
helpless admirers of the "lights" of science, who pass their time in
mutually destroying their teachings. If ever the theory that "two lights
make darkness" found its application it is in this case, when one half
of the "lights" imposes its Forces and "modes of motion" on the belief
of the faithful, and the other half opposes the very existence of the
same. "Ether, Matter, Energy" -- the sacred hypostatical trinity, the
three principles of the truly *unknown* God of Science, called by them
**P**HYSICAL **N**ATURE!

Theology is taken to task and ridiculed for believing in the union of
three persons in one Godhead -- one God as to substance, three persons
as to individuality; and we are laughed at for our belief in unproved
and unprovable doctrines, in Angels and Devils, Gods and Spirits. And,

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 669 THE EXACT SCIENCES OF -- NEGATION.

indeed, that which made the Scientists win the day over Theology in the
Great "Conflict between Religion and Science," was precisely the
argument that neither the identity of that substance, nor the triple
individuality claimed, after having been conceived, invented, and worked
out in the depths of Theological Consciousness, could be proved by any
Scientific inductive process of reasoning, least of all on the evidence
of our senses. Religion must perish, it is said, because it teaches
*mysteries. Mystery is the negation of Common Sense*, and Science repels
it. According to Mr. Tyndall, metaphysics is *fiction*, like poetry. The
man of Science *takes nothing on trust;* rejects everything *that is not
proven to him*, while the Theologian accepts *everything on blind
faith.* The Theosophist and the Occultist, who take nothing on trust,
not even *exact* Science, the Spiritualist who denies dogma but believes
in Spirits and in *invisible but potential influences*, all share in the
same contempt. Very well, then; what we have to do now, is to examine
for the last time whether *exact* Science does not act precisely in the
same way as Theosophy, Spiritualism, and Theology do.

In a work by Mr. S. Laing, considered a standard book on Science,
"Modern Science and Modern Thought," the author of which, according to
the laudatory review of the *Times*, "exhibits with much power and
effect the immense discoveries of Science, and its numerous victories
over old opinions, whenever THEY HAVE THE RASHNESS TO CHALLENGE
CONCLUSIONS WITH IT," one reads in chapter **III.**, "On Matter," as
follows:

"**W**HAT IS THE MATERIAL UNIVERSE COMPOSED OF? **ETHER**, **MATTER**,
**ENERGY"** . . . . . is the answer.

We stop to ask, "What is Ether?" And Mr. Laing answers in the name of
Science: --

"*Ether is not actually known to us* BY ANY TEST OF WHICH THE SENSES CAN
TAKE COGNIZANCE, *but is a* *sort of mathematical substance which* WE
ARE COMPELLED TO ASSUME *in order to account for the phenomena of light
and heat.*"

And \[\[sic\]\] what is matter? Do you know more about it than you do
about the "hypothetical" agent, Ether?

"*In perfect strictness*, *it is true that chemical investigations can
tell us* . . . . NOTHING DIRECTLY *of the composition of living matter*,
*and* . . . . *it is also in strictness true*, THAT WE KNOW NOTHING
*about the composition of* ANY (*material*) BODY WHATEVER AS IT IS."
(*Lecture on Protoplasm by Mr. Huxley.*)

And Energy? Surely you can define the third person of the Trinity of
your Material universe?

"**T**HE **E**NERGY IS THAT WHICH IS ONLY KNOWN TO US BY ITS EFFECTS*.*"
(*Books on Physics.*)

Pray explain, for this is rather hazy.

"**I**N MECHANICS THERE IS ACTUAL AND POTENTIAL ENERGY: WORK

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 670 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

ACTUALLY PERFORMED, AND THE CAPACITY FOR PERFORMING IT. **A**S TO THE
NATURE OF MOLECULAR **E**NERGY OR **F**ORCES, THE VARIOUS PHENOMENA
WHICH BODIES PRESENT SHOW THAT THEIR MOLECULES ARE UNDER THE INFLUENCE
OF TWO CONTRARY FORCES -- ONE WHICH TENDS TO BRING THEM TOGETHER, THE
OTHER TO SEPARATE THEM. . . . . **T**HE FIRST IS MOLECULAR ATTRACTION,
THE SECOND FORCE IS DUE TO *vis viva*, OR MOVING FORCE." . . . *.*
(*Ganot's Physics*.)

Just so: it is the nature of this *moving force*, the *vis viva* that we
want to know. What is it? . . . . .

"**WE DO NOT KNOW**!" IS THE INVARIABLE ANSWER. "**I**T IS AN EMPTY
SHADOW OF MY IMAGINATION," explains Mr. Huxley in his *Physical Basis of
Life.*

Thus the whole structure of Modern Science is built on a kind of
"mathematical abstraction," on a Protean "Substance which eludes the
senses," (Dubois Reymond,) and on *effects*, the shadowy and illusive
will-o'-the-wisps of a *something* entirely unknown to and beyond the
reach of Science, "*Self*-*moving*" atoms! *Self*-*moving* Suns,
planets, and stars! But who, then, or *what* are they all, if they are
self-endowed with motion? Why then should you, physicists, laugh and
deride our "Self-moving *ARCHAEUS"?* Mystery is rejected and scorned by
Science, and "*MYSTERY is the fatality of Science*," as Father Felix has
truly said. . . . . Science *cannot* escape it!" The language of the
French preacher is *ours*, and we quote it in "*Isis Unveiled*" (*Vide*
Vol. I. 338-9). Who -- he asks -- who of you, men of Science:

> ". . . . has been able to penetrate the secret of the formation of a
> body, the generation of a single atom? What is there, I will not say
> at the centre of a sun, but at the centre of an atom? Who has sounded
> to the bottom the abyss in a grain of sand? The grain of sand,
> gentlemen, has been studied four thousand years by science, she has
> turned and returned it; she divides it and subdivides it; she torments
> it with her experiments; she vexes it with her questions to snatch
> from it the final word as to its secret constitution; she asks it,
> with an insatiable curiosity: 'Shall I divide thee infinitesimally?'
> Then suspended over this abyss, science hesitates, she stumbles, she
> feels dazzled, she becomes dizzy, and in despair says: ***I DO NOT
> KNOW****.*"

> "But if you are so fatally ignorant of the genesis and hidden nature
> of a grain of sand, how should you have an intuition as to the
> generation of a single living being? Whence in the living being does
> life come? Where does it commence? What is the life principle?"\*

Do the men of science deny all these charges? Not at all, for here is a
confession of Tyndall, which shows how powerless is science, even over
the world of matter.

> "The first marshalling of the atoms, on which all subsequent action
> depends,

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* "Le Mystere et la Science," Conferences, *Pere Felix* *de Notre
Dame*; des Mousseaux: "*Hauts Phen. Magiques.*"

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 671 NO VOID POSSIBLE.

> baffles a keener power than that of the microscope." "Through pure
> excess of complexity, and long before observation can have any voice
> in the matter, the most highly trained intellect, the most refined and
> disciplined imagination, *retires in bewilderment from the
> contemplation of the problem.* We are struck dumb by an astonishment
> which no microscope can relieve, doubting not only the power of our
> instrument, but even whether we ourselves possess the intellectual
> elements which will ever enable us to grapple with the ultimate
> structural energies of nature."

How little is known of the material universe, indeed, has now been
suspected for years, on the very admissions of these men of science
themselves. And now there are some materialists who would even make away
with Ether -- or whatever Science calls the infinite Substance, the
noumenon of which the Buddhists call Swabhavat -- as well as with atoms,
too dangerous both on account of their ancient philosophical and their
present Christian and theological associations. From the earliest
philosophers whose records passed to posterity, down to our present age,
which, if it denies "invisible Beings" in Space, can never be so insane
as to deny a *plenum* of some sort -- the *fulness* of the universe was
an accepted belief. And what it was said to contain, one learns from
Hermes Trismegistus (in Mrs. Kingsford's able rendering) -- who is made
to say: --

"Concerning the void . . . my judgment is that it does not exist, that
it never existed, and that it never will exist, for all the various
parts of the universe are filled, as the earth also is complete and full
of bodies, differing in quality and in form, having their species and
their magnitude, one larger, one smaller, one solid, one tenuous. The
larger . . . are easily perceived; the smaller . . . are difficult to
apprehend, or altogether invisible. We know only of their existence by
the sensation of feeling, wherefore *many persons deny such entities to
be bodies*, *and regard them as simply spaces*,\* but it is impossible
there should be such spaces. For if indeed there should be anything
outside the universe . . . then it would be a space occupied by
intelligent beings analogous to its (the universe's) divinity . . . . .
. I speak of the genii, for I hold they dwell with us, and of the heroes
who dwell above us, between the earth and the highest airs; wherein are
neither clouds nor any tempest" (p. 84).

And we "hold" it too. Only, as already remarked, no Eastern Initiate
would speak of spheres "*above* us, between the earth and the

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* Behold the work of Cycles and their periodical return! Those who
denied such "Entities" (Forces) to be bodies, and called them "Spaces,"
were the prototypes of our modern "Science-struck" public, and their
official teachers, who speak of the Forces of nature as the imponderable
energy of matter and modes of motion, and yet bold electricity (for one)
as being as *atomic as matter* itself -- (Helmholtz). Inconsistency and
contradiction reign as much in official as in heterodox Science.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 672 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

airs," even the highest, as there is no such division or measurement in
*occult* speech, no "*above*" as no "*below*," but an eternal "within,"
*within two other withins*, or the planes of subjectivity merging
gradually into that of terrestrial objectivity -- this being for *man*
the last one, his own plane. This necessary explanation may be closed
here by giving, in the words of Hermes, the belief on this particular
point of the whole world of mystics: --

> "There are many orders of the gods; and in all there is an intelligent
> part. It is not to be supposed they do not come within the range of
> our senses; on the contrary, we perceive them, better even than those
> which are called visible. . . There are then gods, superior to all
> appearances; after them come the gods whose principle is spiritual;
> these gods being sensible, in conformity with their double origin,
> *manifest all things* by a sensible nature, each of them illuminating
> his works one by another.\* The Supreme Being of Heaven, or of all
> that is comprehended under this name, is Zeus, for it is by Heaven
> that Zeus gives life to all things. The Supreme Being of *the Sun* *is
> Light*, for it is by the disk of the Sun that we receive the benefit
> of the light. The thirty-six horoscopes of the fixed stars have for
> supreme Being or Prince, him whose name is *Pantomorphos*, or having
> all forms, because he gives divine forms to divers types. The seven
> planets, or wandering spheres, have for Supreme Spirits Fortune and
> Destiny, who uphold the eternal stability of the laws of nature
> throughout incessant transformation and perpetual agitation. The ether
> is the instrument or medium by which all is produced."

This is quite philosophical and in accordance with the spirit of Eastern
esotericism: for all the Forces, such as Light, Heat, Electricity, etc.,
etc., are called the "Gods" -- esoterically.

It must be so, since the esoteric teachings in Egypt and India were
identical. And, therefore, the personification of *Fohat* synthesizing
all the manifesting forces in nature is a legitimate result. Moreover,
as will be shown in the division that follows this one, the real and
*Occult* forces in nature only now begin to be known -- and even in this
case, by heterodox, not orthodox, Science (*See also* ยง X., **T**HE
**C**OMING **F**ORCE), though their existence, in one instance at any
rate, is corroborated, and certified to by an immense number of educated
people and even by some official men of science.

This sentence, moreover, in Stanza **VI**., "Fohat sets in motion the
primordial World-germs, or the aggregation of Cosmic atoms and matter,
some one way, some another, in the opposite direction" -- looks orthodox
and Scientific enough. For there is, at all events, one fact in support
of this position fully recognized by Science, and it is this. The
meteoric showers (periodical in November and August) belong to

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* "Hermes here includes as gods the *sensible Forces* of nature, the
elements and the phenomena of the Universe," remarks Mrs. A. Kingsford
in a foot-note explaining it very correctly. So does Eastern philosophy.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 673 THE ALIASES OF FOHAT.

a system moving in an elliptical orbit around the Sun. The aphelion of
this ring is 1,732 millions of miles beyond the orbit of Neptune, its
plane is inclined to the Earth's orbit at an angle of 64 \[\[degrees\]\]
3', and the direction of the meteoric swarm moving round this orbit *is
contrary to that of the Earth*'*s revolution.*

This fact, recognized only in 1833, shows it to be the modern
rediscovery of what was very anciently known. *Fohat* turns with his two
hands in contrary directions the "seed" and "the curds," or Cosmic
matter; is turning, in clearer language, particles in a highly
attenuated condition, and nebulae.

Outside the boundaries of the solar system, it is other Suns, and
especially the mysterious "central Sun" (the "Abode of the invisible
deity" as some reverend gentlemen have called it) that determines the
motion of bodies and their direction. That motion serves also to
differentiate the homogeneous matter, round and between the several
bodies, into elements and sub-elements unknown to our earth, which are
regarded by modern Science as distinct individual elements, whereas they
are merely temporary appearances, changing with every small cycle within
the Manvantara, some Esoteric works calling them "Kalpic Masks."

*Fohat* is the key in Occultism which opens and unriddles the multiform
symbols and respective allegories in the so-called mythology of every
nation; demonstrating the wonderful philosophy and the deep insight into
the mysteries of nature, in the Egyptian and Chaldean as well as in the
Aryan religions. Fohat, shown in his true character, proves how deeply
versed were all those prehistoric nations in every science of nature,
now called physical and chemical branches of natural philosophy. In
India, Fohat is the scientific aspect of both Vishnu and Indra, the
latter older and more important in the Rig Veda than his sectarian
successor; while in Egypt Fohat was known as Toum issued of Noot,\* or
Osiris in his character of a primordial god, creator of heaven and of
beings (see chapter xvii., "*Book of the Dead*")*.* For *Toum* is spoken
of as the *Protean* god who *generates other gods* and gives himself the
form he likes; the "master of life" "giving their vigour to the gods"
(chapter lxxix.) He is the *overseer* of the gods, and he "who creates
spirits and gives them shape and life"; he is "the *north wind* and the
*spirit of the west*;" and finally the "Setting Sun of Life," or the
vital electric force that leaves the body at death, wherefore the
*defunct* begs that Toum should give him the breath from his *right*
nostril (positive elec-

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* "Oh Toum, Toum! issued from the great (female) which is in the bosom
of the waters" (the great Deep or *Space*) *.* . . "Thou, luminous
through the *two Lions*" (the dual Force or power of the two *solar
eyes*, or the electro-positive and the electro-negative forces. (See
*Book of* *the Dead*, *III.*, and *Egyptian Pantheon*, chapter ii.)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 674 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

tricity) that he might live in his *second* form. Both the hieroglyph,
and the text of chapter lxii. in the "*Book of the Dead*," show the
identity of Toum with Fohat. The former represents a man standing erect
with the hieroglyph *of the breaths* in his hands. The latter says: --

> "I open to the chief of An (Heliopolis), I am Toum. I cross the water
> spilt by Thot-Hapi, the lord of the horizon, and am the *divider of
> the earth*" (Fohat divides Space and, with his *Sons*, the earth into
> seven zones) . . . .

> . . . . "I cross the heavens, and am the two Lions. I am *Ra*, I am
> *Aam*, I ate my heir.\* . . . . I glide on the soil of the field of
> *Aanroo*,\*\* given me by the master of limitless eternity. I am the
> germ of eternity. I am Toum, to whom eternity is accorded. . . . "

The very words used by Fohat in the **XI**th Book, and the very titles
given him. In the Egyptian Papyri the whole Cosmogony of the Secret
Doctrine is found scattered about in isolated sentences, even in the
"Book of Dead." Number seven is quite as much insisted upon and
emphasized therein as in the *Book of Dzyan.* "The Great Water (the Deep
or Chaos) is said to be *seven* cubits deep" -- "cubits" standing here
of course for divisions, zones, and principles. Therein, "in the great
mother, all the Gods, and the *seven great ones* are born." (See chapter
cviii., 4, *Book of the Dead* and *Egyptian Pantheon*)*.* Both Fohat and
Toum are addressed as the "Great ones of the Seven Magic Forces," who,
"conquer the Serpent *Apap*" or Matter.

No student of occultism, however, ought to be betrayed, by the usual
phraseology used in the translations of Hermetic Works, into believing
that the ancient Egyptians or Greeks spoke of, and referred, monk-like,
at every moment in conversation, to a Supreme Being, God, the "One
Father and Creator of all," etc., as found on every page of such
translations. No such thing indeed; and those texts *are not the
original Egyptian* texts. They are Greek compilations, the earliest of
which does not go beyond the early period of Neo-Platonism. No Hermetic

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* An image expressing the succession of divine functions, the
substitution from one form into another, or the *correlation of forces.
Aam* is the electro-positive force, devouring all others as Saturn
devoured his progeny.

\*\* *Aanroo* is in the domain of Osiris, a field divided into
*fourteen* sections "surrounded with an *iron* enclosure, within which
grows the *corn of life seven* cubits high," the *Kama*-*loka* of the
Egyptians. Those only of the dead, who know the names of the janitors of
the "seven halls," will be admitted into Amenti *for ever; i.e.*, those
who have passed through the seven races of each round -- otherwise they
will rest in the *lower fields;* "and it represents also the seven
successive Devachans, or *lokas.* In Amenti, one becomes pure spirit for
the eternity (xxx. 4.); while in *Aanroo* "the soul of the spirit," or
the defunct, is *devoured* each time by *Uraeus* -- the Serpent, Son of
the earth (in another sense the primordial vital principles in the Sun),
*i.e.*, the Astral body of the deceased or the "Elementary" fades out
and disappears in the "Son of the earth," *limited* time. The soul quits
the fields of Aanroo and goes on earth under any shape it likes to
assume. (See chapter xcix., *Book of the Dead.*)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 675 THE GODS OF EGYPT.

work written by Egyptians (*vide* "Book of the Dead") would speak of the
one universal God of the Monotheistic systems -- the one *Absolute*
cause of all, was as unnameable and unpronounceable in the mind of the
ancient philosopher of Egypt, as it is for ever *Unknowable* in the
conception of Mr. Herbert Spencer. As for the Egyptian in general, as M.
Maspero well remarks, whenever he "arrived at the notion of divine
Unity, the God One was never 'God,' simply." And Lepage Renouf very
justly observed that the word *Nouter*, *nouti*, "god" had never ceased
*being a generic name* with the Egyptians, nor has it ever become a
personal pronoun. Every God was the "one living and unique God" with
them. Their "monotheism was purely geographical. If the Egyptian of
Memphis proclaimed the unity of Phtah to the exclusion of Ammon, the
Thebeian Egyptian proclaimed the unity of Ammon to the exclusion of
Phtah," as we now see done in India in the case of the Saivas and the
Vaishnavas. "*Ra*, the 'One God' at Heliopolis is not the same as
Osiris, the 'One God' at Abydos, and can be worshipped side by side with
him, without being absorbed by his neighbour. The one god is but the god
of the *nome* or the city, *noutir*, *noutti*, and does not exclude the
existence of the one god of that town or of the neighbouring nome. In
short, whenever speaking of Egyptian Monotheism, one ought to speak of
the Gods '*One*' of Egypt, and not of the one god" (Maspero, in the
*Guide au Musee de Boulak.)* It is by this feature, pre-eminently
Egyptian, that the authenticity of the various so-called *Hermetic
Books*, ought to be tested; and it is totally absent from the Greek
fragments known as such. This proves that a Greek Neo-Platonic, or even
a Christian hand, had no small share in the editing of such works. Of
course the fundamental philosophy is there, and in many a place --
intact. But the style has been altered and smoothed in a monotheistic
direction, as much, if not more than that of the Hebrew Genesis in its
Greek and Latin translations. They *may* be *Hermetic* works, but not
works written by either of the two Hermes -- or rather, by Thot (Hermes)
the directing intelligence of the Universe (*See ch. xciv.*, *Book of
the Dead*), or by Thot, his terrestrial incarnation called Trismegistus,
of the Rosetta stone.

But all is doubt, negation, iconoclasm and brutal indifference, in our
age of the hundred "isms" and no religion. Every idol is broken save the
Golden Calf.

Unfortunately, no nation or nations can escape their Karmic fate any
more than units and individuals do. History itself is dealt with by the
so-called historians as unscrupulously as legendary lore. For this,
Augustin Thierry has made the *amende honorable*, if one may believe his
biographers. He deplored the erroneous principle that made them all (the
*would*-*be* historiographers) lose their way, and each presume to

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 676 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

correct tradition, "that *vox populi* which nine times out of ten is
*vox Dei*;" and he finally admitted that *in legend alone rests real
history;* for "legend," he adds, "is *living* tradition, and three times
out of four it is truer than what we call History."\*

While Materialists deny everything in the universe, save matter,
Archaeologists are trying to dwarf antiquity, and seek to destroy every
claim to ancient Wisdom by tampering with Chronology. Our present-day
Orientalists and Historical writers are to ancient History that which
the white ants are to the buildings in India. More dangerous even than
those Termites, the modern Archaeologists -- the "authorities" of the
future in the matter of Universal History -- are preparing for the
History of past nations the fate of certain edifices in tropical
countries: "History will tumble down and break into atoms in the lap of
the twentieth century, devoured to its foundations by her annalists,"
said Michelet. Very soon, indeed, under their combined efforts, it will
share the fate of those ruined cities in both Americas, which lie deeply
buried under impassable virgin forests. Historical facts will remain as
concealed from view by the inextricable jungles of modern hypotheses,
denials and scepticism. But very happily *actual* History repeats
herself, for she proceeds, like everything else, in cycles; and dead
facts and events deliberately drowned in the sea of modern scepticism
will ascend once more and reappear on the surface. . . .

In our Book II. the very fact that a work with pretensions to
philosophy, and which is an exposition of the most abstruse problems,
has to be commenced by tracing the evolution of mankind from what *are*
regarded as supernatural beings -- *Spirits* -- will arouse the most
malevolent criticism. Believers in, and the defenders of, the Secret
Doctrine, however, will have to bear the accusation of madness *and
worse*, as philosophically as for long years already the writer has
done. Whenever a Theosophist is taxed with insanity, he ought to reply
by quoting from Montesquieu's "*Lettres Persanes.*" "By opening so
freely their lunatic asylums to their supposed madmen, men only seek to
assure each other that they are not themselves mad."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

\[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------

\* *Revue des Deux Mondes*, 1865, *pp*. 157 *and* 158.

**E**ND OF **V**OL. **I**.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Contents](sd1-0-co.htm#contents)
