##### *The Secret Doctrine* by H. P. Blavatsky -- Vol. 1

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 53 THE STATE OF PARANIRVANA.

#### STANZA II.

**C**OMMENTARY.

1\. . . . . **W**HERE WERE THE BUILDERS, THE LUMINOUS SONS OF
MANVANTARIC DAWN (*a*)? . . . . IN THE UNKNOWN DARKNESS IN THEIR
**A**H-HI (*Chohanic, Dhyani-Buddhic*) **P**ARANISHPANNA, THE PRODUCERS
OF FORM (*rupa*) FROM NO-FORM (*arupa*)*,* THE ROOT OF THE WORLD -- THE
**D**EVAMATRI\* AND **S**VABHAVAT, RESTED IN THE BLISS OF NON-BEING
(*b*).

(*a*) The "Builders," the "Sons of Manvantaric Dawn," are the real
creators of the Universe; and in this doctrine, which deals only with
our Planetary System, they, as the architects of the latter, are also
called the "Watchers" of the Seven Spheres, which exoterically are the
Seven planets, and esoterically the seven earths or spheres (planets) of
our chain also. The opening sentence of Stanza I., when mentioning
"Seven Eternities," is made to apply both to the *Maha-Kalpa* or "the
(great) Age of Brahma," as well as to the Solar *pralaya* and subsequent
resurrection of our Planetary System on a higher plane. There are many
kinds of *pralaya* (dissolution of a thing visible), as will be shown
elsewhere.

(*b*) Paranishpanna, remember, is the *summum bonum*, the Absolute,
hence the same as Paranirvana. Besides being the final state it is that
condition of subjectivity which has no relation to anything but the one
absolute truth (Para-marthasatya) on its plane. It is that state which
leads one to appreciate correctly the full meaning of Non-Being, which,
as explained, is *absolute* Being. Sooner or later, all that now
*seemingly* exists, will be in reality and actually in the state of
Paranishpanna. But there is a great difference between *conscious* and
*unconscious* "being." The condition of Paranishpanna, without
Paramartha, the Self-analys-

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

"Mother of the Gods," Aditi, or Cosmic Space. In the Zohar, she is
called Sephira the Mother of the Sephiroth, and Shekinah in her
primordial form, *in* *abscondito.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 54 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

ing consciousness (Svasamvedana), is no bliss, but simply extinction
(for Seven Eternities). Thus, an iron ball placed under the scorching
rays of the sun will get heated through, but will not feel or appreciate
the warmth, while a man will. It is only "with a mind clear and
undarkened by personality, and an assimilation of the merit of manifold
existences devoted to being in its collectivity (the whole living and
sentient Universe)," that one gets rid of personal existence, merging
into, becoming one with, the Absolute,\* and continuing in full
possession of Paramartha.

-------

#### STANZA II. -- *Continued*.

2\. . . . . **W**HERE WAS SILENCE? **W**HERE WERE THE EARS TO SENSE IT?
**N**O! **T**HERE WAS NEITHER SILENCE, NOR SOUND (*a*). **N**AUGHT SAVE
CEASELESS, ETERNAL BREATH (*Motion*) WHICH KNOWS ITSELF NOT (*b*).

(*a*) The idea that things can cease to exist and still BE, is a
fundamental one in Eastern psychology. Under this apparent contradiction
in terms, there rests a fact of Nature to realise which in the mind,
rather than to argue about words, is the important thing. A familiar
instance of a similar paradox is afforded by chemical combination. The
question whether Hydrogen and Oxygen cease to exist, when they combine
to form water, is still a moot one, some arguing that since they are
found again when the water is decomposed they must be there all the
while; others contending that as they actually turn into something
totally different they must cease to exist as themselves for the time
being; but neither side is able to form the faintest conception of the
real condition of a thing, which has become something else and yet has
not ceased to be itself. Existence as water may be said to be, for
Oxygen and Hydrogen, a state of Non-being which is "more real being"
than their existence as gases; and it may faintly symbolise the

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* Hence *Non-being* is "**A**BSOLUTE Being," in esoteric philosophy. In
the tenets of the latter even Adi-Budha (first or primeval wisdom) is,
while manifested, in one sense an illusion, Maya, since all the gods,
including Brahma, have to die at the end of the "Age of Brahma"; the
abstraction called Parabrahm alone -- whether we call it Ensoph, or
Herbert Spencer's Unknowable -- being "the One Absolute" Reality. The
One secondless Existence is ADWAITA, "Without a Second," and all the
rest is *Maya,* teaches the Adwaita philosophy.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 55 THE ABSOLUTE KNOWS ITSELF NOT.

condition of the Universe when it goes to sleep, or ceases to be, during
the "Nights of Brahma" -- to awaken or reappear again, when the dawn of
the new Manvantara recalls it to what we call existence.

(*b*) The "Breath" of the One Existence is used in its application only
to the spiritual aspect of Cosmogony by Archaic esotericism; otherwise,
it is replaced by its equivalent in the material plane -- Motion. The
One Eternal Element, or element-containing Vehicle, is *Space*,
dimensionless in every sense; co-existent with which are -- endless
*duration*, primordial (hence indestructible) *matter*, and *motion* --
absolute "perpetual motion" which is the "breath" of the "One" Element.
This breath, as seen, can never cease, not even during the Pralayic
eternities. (*See* "*Chaos*, *Theos*, *Kosmos*," in Part II.)

But the "Breath of the One Existence" does not, all the same, apply to
the *One Causeless Cause* or the "All Be-ness" (in contradistinction to
All-Being, which is Brahma, or the Universe). Brahma (or Hari) the
four-faced god who, after lifting the Earth out of the waters,
"accomplished the Creation," is held to be only the instrumental, and
not, as clearly implied, the ideal Cause. No Orientalist, so far, seems
to have thoroughly comprehended the real sense of the verses in the
Purana, that treat of "creation."

Therein Brahma is the cause of the potencies that are to be generated
subsequently for the work of "creation." When a translator says, "And
from him proceed the potencies to be created, after they had become the
real cause": "and from IT proceed the potencies that *will* *create* as
they *become* the real cause" (on the material plane) would perhaps be
more correct? Save that one (causeless) ideal cause there is no other to
which the universe can be referred. "Worthiest of ascetics! through its
potency -- *i.e.*, through the potency of that cause -- every created
thing comes by its inherent or proper nature." If, in the Vedanta and
Nyaya, *nimitta* is the efficient cause, as contrasted with *upadana,*
the material cause, (and in the Sankhya, *pradhana* implies the
functions of both); in the Esoteric philosophy, which reconciles all
these systems, and the nearest exponent of which is the Vedanta as
expounded by the Advaita Vedantists, none but the *upadana* can be
speculated upon; that which is in the minds of the Vaishnavas (the
Vasishta-dvaita) as the ideal in contradistinction to the real -- or
Parabrahm and Isvara -- can find no room in published speculations,
since

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 56 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

that ideal even is a misnomer, when applied to that of which no human
reason, even that of an adept, can conceive.

To know itself or oneself, necessitates consciousness and perception
(both limited faculties in relation to any subject except Parabrahm), to
be cognized. Hence the "Eternal Breath which knows itself not." Infinity
cannot comprehend Finiteness. The Boundless can have no relation to the
bounded and the conditioned. In the occult teachings, the Unknown and
the Unknowable MOVER, or the Self-Existing, is the absolute divine
Essence. And thus being *Absolute* Consciousness, and *Absolute* Motion
-- to the limited senses of those who describe this indescribable -- it
is unconsciousness and immoveableness. Concrete consciousness cannot be
predicated of abstract Consciousness, any more than the quality wet can
be predicated of water -- wetness being its own attribute and the cause
of the wet quality in other things. Consciousness implies limitations
and qualifications; something to be conscious of, and someone to be
conscious of it. But Absolute Consciousness contains the cognizer, the
thing cognized and the cognition, all three in itself and all three
*one.* No man is conscious of more than that portion of his knowledge
that happens to have been recalled to his mind at any particular time,
yet such is the poverty of language that we have no term to distinguish
the knowledge not actively thought of, from knowledge we are unable to
recall to memory. To forget is synonymous with not to remember. How much
greater must be the difficulty of finding terms to describe, and to
distinguish between, abstract metaphysical facts or differences. It must
not be forgotten, also, that we give names to things according to the
appearances they assume for ourselves. We call absolute consciousness
"unconsciousness," because it seems to us that it must necessarily be
so, just as we call the Absolute, "Darkness," because to our finite
understanding it appears quite impenetrable, yet we recognize fully that
our perception of such things does not do them justice. We involuntarily
distinguish in our minds, for instance, between unconscious absolute
consciousness, and unconsciousness, by secretly endowing the former with
some indefinite quality that corresponds, on a higher plane than our
thoughts can reach, with what we know as consciousness in ourselves. But
this is not any kind of consciousness that we can manage to distinguish
from what appears to us as unconsciousness.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 57 THE GERM OF LIFE.

#### STANZA II. -- *Continued*.

3\. **T**HE HOUR HAD NOT YET STRUCK; THE RAY HAD NOT YET FLASHED INTO
THE GERM (*a*); THE MATRI-PADMA (*mother lotus*) HAD NOT YET SWOLLEN
(*b*).\*

(*a*) The ray of the "Ever Darkness" becomes, as it is emitted, a ray of
effulgent light or life, and flashes into the "Germ" -- the point in the
Mundane Egg, represented by matter in its abstract sense. But the term
"Point" must not be understood as applying to any particular point in
Space, for a germ exists in the centre of every atom, and these
collectively form "the Germ;" or rather, as no atom can be made visible
to our physical eye, the collectivity of these (if the term can be
applied to something which is boundless and infinite) forms the noumenon
of eternal and indestructible matter.

(*b*) One of the symbolical figures for the Dual creative power in
Nature (matter and force on the material plane) is *Padma*, the
water-lily of India. The Lotus is the product of heat (fire) and water
(vapour or Ether); fire standing in every philosophical and religious
system as a representation of the Spirit of Deity,\*\* the active, male,
generative principle; and Ether, or the Soul of matter, the light of the
fire, for the passive female principle from which everything in this
Universe emanated. Hence, Ether or Water is the Mother, and Fire is the
Father. Sir W. Jones (and before him archaic botany) showed that the
seeds of the Lotus contain -- even before they germinate -- perfectly
formed leaves, the miniature shape of what one day, as perfect plants,
they will become: nature thus giving us a specimen of the preformation
of its production . . . the seed of all phanerogamous plants bearing
proper flowers containing an embryo plantlet ready formed.\*\*\* (See
Part II., "The Lotus Flower as an Universal Symbol.") This explains the
sentence "The Mother had not yet swollen" -- the form being usually
sacrificed to the inner or root idea in Archaic symbology.

The Lotus, or Padma, is, moreover, a very ancient and favourite

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* An unpoetical term, yet still very graphic. (See foot-note to Stanza
III.)

\*\* Even in Christianity. (See Part II., "Primordial Substance and
Divine Thought.")

\*\*\* Gross, "The Heathen Religion," p. 195.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 58 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

simile for the Kosmos itself, and also for man. The popular reasons
given are, firstly, the fact just mentioned, that the Lotus-seed
contains within itself a perfect miniature of the future plant, which
typifies the fact that the spiritual prototypes of all things exist in
the immaterial world before those things become materialised on Earth.
Secondly, the fact that the Lotus plant grows up through the water,
having its root in the Ilus, or mud, and spreading its flower in the air
above. The Lotus thus typifies the life of man and also that of the
Kosmos; for the Secret Doctrine teaches that the elements of both are
the same, and that both are developing in the same direction. The root
of the Lotus sunk in the mud represents material life, the stalk passing
up through the water typifies existence in the astral world, and the
flower floating on the water and opening to the sky is emblematical of
spiritual being.

#### STANZA II. -- *Continued*.

4\. **H**ER HEART HAD NOT YET OPENED FOR THE ONE RAY TO ENTER, THENCE TO
FALL AS THREE INTO FOUR IN THE LAP OF **M**AYA (*a*).

(*a*) The Primordial Substance had not yet passed out of its precosmic
latency into differentiated objectivity, or even become the (to man, so
far,) invisible Protyle of Science. But, as the hour strikes and it
becomes receptive of the Fohatic impress of the Divine Thought (the
Logos, or the male aspect of the Anima Mundi, Alaya) -- its heart opens.
It differentiates, and the THREE (Father, Mother, Son) are transformed
into four. Herein lies the origin of the double mystery of the Trinity
and the immaculate Conception. The first and Fundamental dogma of
Occultism is Universal Unity (or Homogeneity) under three aspects. This
led to a possible conception of Deity, which as an absolute unity must
remain forever incomprehensible to finite intellects. "If thou wouldest
believe in the Power which acts within the root of a plant, or imagine
the root concealed under the soil, thou hast to think of its stalk or
trunk and of its leaves and flowers. Thou canst not imagine that Power
independently of these objects. Life can be known only by the Tree of
Life. . . ." (Precepts for Yoga). The idea of *Absolute* Unity

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 59 ASTRAL LIGHT IS NOT THE ANIMA MUNDI.

would be broken entirely in our conception, had we not something
concrete before our eyes to contain that Unity. And the deity being
absolute, must be omnipresent, hence not an atom but contains IT within
itself. The roots, the trunk and its many branches are three distinct
objects, yet they are one tree. Say the Kabalists: "The Deity is one,
because It is infinite. It is triple, because it is ever manifesting."
This manifestation is triple in its aspects, for it requires, as
Aristotle has it, three principles for every natural body to become
objective: privation, form, and matter.\* Privation meant in the mind of
the great philosopher that which the Occultists call the prototypes
impressed in the Astral Light -- the lowest plane and world of Anima
Mundi. The union of these three principles depends upon a fourth -- the
LIFE which radiates from the summits of the Unreachable, to become an
universally diffused Essence on the manifested planes of Existence. And
this QUATERNARY (Father, Mother, Son, as a UNITY, and a quaternary, as a
living manifestation) has been the means of leading to the very archaic
Idea of Immaculate Conception, now finally crystallized into a dogma of
the Christian Church, which carnalized this metaphysical idea beyond any
common sense. For one has but to read the Kabala and study its numerical
methods of interpretation to find the origin of that dogma. It is purely
astronomical, mathematical, and pre-eminently metaphysical: the Male
element in Nature (personified by the male deities and Logoi -- Viraj,
or Brahma; Horus, or Osiris, etc., etc.) is born through, not from, an
immaculate source, personified by the "Mother"; because that Male having
a Mother cannot have a "Father" -- the abstract Deity being sexless, and
not even a Being but Be-ness, or Life itself. Let us render this in the
mathematical language of the author of "The Source of Measures."
Speaking of the "Measure of a Man" and his numerical (Kabalistic) value,
he writes that in Genesis, ch. iv., v. 1, "It is called the 'Man even
Jehovah'

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* A Vedantin of the Visishtadwaita philosophy would say that, though
the only independent Reality, Parabrahmam is inseparable from his
trinity. That He is three, "Parabrahmam, Chit, and Achit," the last two
being dependent realities unable to exist separately; or, to make it
clearer, Parabrahmam is the SUBSTANCE -- changeless, eternal, and
incognizable -- and Chit (Atma), and Achit (Anatma) are its qualities,
as form and colour are the qualities of any object. The two are the
garment, or body, or rather attribute (Sarira) of Parabrahmam. But an
Occultist would find much to say against this claim, and so would the
Adwaitee Vedantin.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page 60\]\] THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

Measure, and this is obtained in this way, viz.: 113 x 5 = 565, and the
value 565 can be placed under the form of expression 56.5 x 10 = 565.
Here the Man-number 113 becomes a factor of 56.5 x 10, and the
(Kabalistic) reading of this last numbered expression is Jod, He, Vau,
He, or Jehovah. . . . The expansion of 565 into 56.5 x 10 is purposed to
show the emanation of the male (Jod) from the female (Eva) principle;
or, so to speak, the birth of a male element from an immaculate source,
in other words, an immaculate conception."

Thus is repeated on Earth the mystery enacted, according to the Seers,
on the divine plane. The "Son" of the immaculate Celestial Virgin (or
the undifferentiated cosmic protyle, Matter in its infinitude) is born
again on Earth as the Son of the terrestrial Eve -- our mother Earth,
and becomes Humanity as a total -- past, present, and future -- for
Jehovah or Jod-he-vau-he is androgyne, or both male and female. Above,
the Son is the whole **K**OSMOS; below, he is **M**ANKIND. The triad or
triangle becomes Tetraktis, the Sacred Pythagorean number, the perfect
Square, and a 6-faced cube on Earth. The Macroprosopus (the Great Face)
is now Microprosopus (the lesser face); or, as the Kabalists have it,
the "Ancient of Days," descending on Adam Kadmon whom he uses as his
vehicle to manifest through, gets transformed into Tetragrammaton. It is
now in the "Lap of Maya," the Great Illusion, and between itself and the
Reality has the Astral Light, the great Deceiver of man's limited
senses, unless Knowledge through Paramarthasatya comes to the rescue.

-------

#### STANZA II. -- *Continued*.

5\. **T**HE **S**EVEN (*Sons*) *WERE* NOT YET BORN FROM THE **W**EB OF
**L**IGHT. **D**ARKNESS ALONE WAS **F**ATHER-**M**OTHER, **S**VABHAVAT,
AND **S**VABHAVAT WAS IN DARKNESS (*a*).

(*a*) The Secret Doctrine, in the Stanzas given here, occupies itself
chiefly, if not entirely, with our Solar System, and especially with our
planetary chain. The "Seven Sons," therefore, are the creators of the
latter. This teaching will be explained more fully hereafter. (See Part
II., "Theogony of the Creative Gods.")

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 61 DIVINE THOUGHT, DIVINE THINKERS.

Svabhavat, the "Plastic Essence" that fills the Universe, is the root of
all things. Svabhavat is, so to say, the Buddhistic concrete aspect of
the abstraction called in Hindu philosophy *Mulaprakriti.* It is the
body of the Soul, and that which Ether would be to Akasa, the latter
being the informing principle of the former. Chinese mystics have made
of it the synonym of "being." In the *Ekasloka-Shastra* of *Nagarjuna*
(the *Lung-shu* of China) called by the Chinese the
*Yih-shu-lu-kia-lun*, it is said that the original word of Yeu is
"Being" or "Subhava," "the Substance giving substance to itself," also
explained by him as meaning " without action and with action," "the
nature which has no nature of its own." *Subhava*, from which
*Svabhavat*, is composed of two words: Su "fair," "handsome," "good";
Sva, "self"; and bhava, "being" or "states of being."

-------

#### STANZA II. -- *Continued*.

6\. **T**HESE TWO ARE THE **G**ERM, AND THE **G**ERM IS -- ONE. **T**HE
**U**NIVERSE WAS STILL CONCEALED IN THE **D**IVINE **T**HOUGHT AND THE
**D**IVINE **B**OSOM.

The "*Divine Thought*" does not imply the idea of a Divine thinker. The
Universe, not only past, present, and future -- which is a human and
finite idea expressed by finite thought -- but in its totality, the
*Sat* (an untranslateable term), the absolute being, with the Past and
Future crystallized in an eternal Present, is that Thought itself
reflected in a secondary or manifest cause. Brahma (neuter) as the
Mysterium Magnum of Paracelsus is an absolute mystery to the human mind.
Brahma, the male-female, its aspect and anthropomorphic reflection, is
conceivable to the perceptions of blind faith, though rejected by human
intellect when it attains its majority. (See Part II., "Primordial
Substance and Divine Thought.")

Hence the statement that during the prologue, so to say, of the drama of
Creation, or the beginning of cosmic evolution, the Universe or the
"Son" lies still concealed "in the Divine Thought," which had not yet
penetrated "into the Divine Bosom." This idea, note well, is at the
root, and forms the origin of all the allegories about the "Sons of God"
born of immaculate virgins.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next Section](sd1-1-04)

[Contents](sd1-0-co.htm#contents)
