##### The Secret Doctrine by H. P. Blavatsky -- Vol. 1

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page 475\]\]

#### BOOK I. -- PART III.

#### ADDENDA.

## SCIENCE AND THE SECRET DOCTRINE CONTRASTED.

> "The knowledge of this nether world --  
> Say, friend, what is it, false or true?  
> The false, what mortal cares to know?  
> The true, what mortal ever knew?"

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page 476\]\]

CONTENTS.

--------------

PAGE

I. **R**EASONS FOR THESE **A**DDENDA ... 477

II.**M**ODERN **P**HYSICISTS ARE **P**LAYING AT **B**LIND **M**AN'S
**B**UFF ... 482

III\. "**A**N **L**UMEN **S**IT **C**ORPUS, **N**EC **N**ON" ... 483

IV\. **I**S **G**RAVITATION A **L**AW? ... 490

V. **T**HE **T**HEORIES OF **R**OTATION IN **S**CIENCE ... 500

VI\. **T**HE **M**ASKS OF **S**CIENCE ... 506

VII\. **A**N **A**TTACK ON THE **S**CIENTIFIC **T**HEORY OF **F**ORCE BY
A **M**AN OF **S**CIENCE ... 523

VIII\. **L**IFE, **F**ORCE, OR **G**RAVITY? ... 529

IX\. **T**HE **S**OLAR **T**HEORY ... 540

X. **T**HE **C**OMING **F**ORCE ... 554

XI\. **O**N THE **E**LEMENTS AND **A**TOMS ... 566

XII\. **A**NCIENT **T**HOUGHT IN **M**ODERN **D**RESS ... 579

XIII\. **T**HE **M**ODERN **N**EBULAR **T**HEORY ... 588

XIV\. **F**ORCES -- **M**ODES OF **M**OTION OR **I**NTELLIGENCES? ...
601

XV\. **G**ODS, **M**ONADS, AND **A**TOMS ... 610

XVI\. **C**YCLIC **E**VOLUTION AND **K**ARMA ... 634

XVII\. **T**HE **Z**ODIAC AND ITS **A**NTIQUITY ... 647

XVIII\. **S**UMMARY OF THE **M**UTUAL **P**OSITION ... 668

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 477 MUTUAL POSITION DEFINED.

### ADDENDA TO BOOK I.

--------------

#### I. REASONS FOR THESE ADDENDA.

**M**ANY of the doctrines contained in the foregoing Seven Stanzas and
Commentaries having been studied and critically examined by some Western
Theosophists, certain of the occult teachings have been found wanting
from the ordinary stand-point of modern scientific knowledge. They
seemed to encounter insuperable difficulties in the way of their
acceptance, and to require reconsideration in view of scientific
criticism. Some friends have already been tempted to regret the
necessity of so often calling in question the assertions of modern
Science. It appeared to them -- and I here repeat only their arguments
-- that "to run counter to the teachings of its most eminent exponents,
was to court a premature discomfiture in the eyes of the Western World."

It is, therefore, desirable to define once and for all the position
which the writer, who does not agree in this with her friends, intends
to maintain. So far as Science remains what in the words of Prof. Huxley
it is, viz., "organized common sense"; so far as its inferences are
drawn from accurate premises -- its generalizations resting on a purely
inductive basis -- every Theosophist and Occultist welcomes respectfully
and with due admiration its contributions to the domain of cosmological
law. There can be no possible conflict between the teachings of occult
and so-called exact Science, where the conclusions of the latter are
grounded on a substratum of unassailable fact. It is only when its more
ardent exponents, over-stepping the limits of observed phenomena in
order to penetrate into the arcana of Being, attempt to wrench the
formation of Kosmos and its *living* Forces from Spirit, and attribute
all to blind matter, that the Occultists claim the right to dispute and
call in question their theories. Science cannot, owing to the very
nature of things, unveil the mystery of the universe around us. Science
can, it is true, collect, classify, and generalize upon phenomena; but
the occultist, arguing from admitted metaphysical data, declares that
the daring explorer, who would probe the inmost secrets of Nature, must
transcend the narrow limitations of sense, and transfer his
consciousness into the region of noumena and the sphere of primal
causes. To effect this, he must develop faculties which are absolutely

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 478 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

dormant -- save in a few rare and exceptional cases -- in the
constitution of the off-shoots of our present Fifth Root-race in Europe
and America. He can in no other conceivable manner collect the facts on
which to base his speculations. Is this not apparent on the principles
of Inductive Logic and Metaphysics alike?

On the other hand, whatever the writer may do, she will never be able to
satisfy both Truth and Science. To offer the reader a systematic and
uninterrupted version of the Archaic Stanzas is impossible. A gap of 43
verses or *Slokas* has to be left between the 7th (already given) and
the 51st, which is the subject of Book II., though the latter are made
to run from 1 *et seq.* for easier reading and reference. The appearance
of man on Earth alone occupies as many stanzas, which describe minutely
his primal evolution from the human Dhyan Chohans; the state of the
globe at that time, etc., etc. A great number of names referring to
chemical substances and other compounds, which have now ceased to
combine together, and are therefore unknown to the later offshoots of
our Fifth Race, occupy a considerable space. As they are simply
untranslateable, and would remain in every case inexplicable, they are
omitted, along with those which cannot be made public. Nevertheless,
even the little that is given will irritate any follower and defender of
dogmatic materialistic Science who happens to read this.

Before proceeding to other Stanzas, it is proposed, therefore, to defend
those already given. They are not in perfect accord or harmony with
modern Science -- this we all know. Had they been, however, as much in
agreement with the views of modern knowledge as a lecture by Sir W.
Thomson, they would have been rejected all the same. For they teach
belief in conscious Powers and Spiritual Entities; in terrestrial,
semi-intelligent, and highly intellectual Forces on other planes\*; and
in Beings that dwell around us in spheres imperceptible, whether through
telescope or microscope. Hence the necessity of examining the beliefs of
materialistic Science: of comparing its views about the "Elements" with
the opinions of the ancients, and of analysing the physical Forces as
they exist in modern perception before the Occultists admit themselves
to be in the wrong. We shall touch upon the constitution of the Sun and
planets, and the occult characteristics of what are called *Devas* and
*Genii*, and are now termed by Science, Force, or "modes of motion," and
see whether esoteric belief is defensible or not (*Vide infra*, "*Gods*,
*Monads*, *and Atoms*)". Notwithstanding the efforts made to the
contrary, an unprejudiced mind will discover

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* Their intellection, of course, being of quite a different nature to
any we can conceive of on Earth.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 479 DUAL NATURE OF THE SUN.

under Newton's "agent, material or immaterial" (of his third letter to
Bentley), the agent which *causes gravity*, and, in his personal
*working* God, one finds just as much of the metaphysical *devas* and
*genii*, as in Kepler's *angelus rector* conducting each planet, and the
*species immateriata* by which the celestial bodies were carried along
in their courses, according to that astronomer.

We shall have, in Book II., to openly approach dangerous subjects. We
must bravely face Science and declare, in the teeth of materialistic
learning, of Idealism, Hylo-Idealism, Positivism and all-denying modern
Psychology, that the true Occultist believes in "Lords of Light;" that
he believes in a Sun, which, far from being simply "a lamp of day"
moving in accordance with physical law, and far from being merely one of
those Suns, which according to Richter -- ". . . . are Sun-flowers of a
higher light" -- is, like milliards of other Suns, the dwelling or the
vehicle of a god, and a host of gods.

In this question, of course, it is the Occultists who will be worsted.
They will be considered on the *prima facie* aspect of the dispute to be
ignoramuses, and labelled with more than one of the usual epithets given
to those whom the superficially judging public, itself ignorant of the
great underlying truths in nature, accuses of believing in mediaeval
superstitions. Let it be so. Submitting beforehand to every criticism in
order to go on with their task, they only claim the privilege of showing
that the physicists are as much at loggerheads among themselves in their
speculations, as the latter are with the teachings of Occultism.

The Sun is matter, and the Sun is Spirit. Our ancestors -- the
"heathen," -- along with their modern successors, the Parsis -- were,
and are, wise enough in their generation to see in it the symbol of
Divinity, and at the same time to sense within, concealed by the
physical Symbol, the bright God of Spiritual and terrestrial Light. Such
belief is now regarded as a superstition only by rank materialism, which
denies Deity, Spirit, Soul, and admits no intelligence outside the mind
of man. But if too much of wrong superstition bred by "Churchianity" --
as Lawrence Oliphant calls it -- "renders a man a fool," too much
scepticism makes him mad. We prefer the charge of folly in believing too
much, to that of a madness which denies everything, as do Materialism
and Idealism. Hence, the Occultists are fully prepared to receive their
dues from Materialism, and to meet the adverse criticism which will be
poured on this work, not for writing it, but *for believing in that
which it contains.*

Therefore the discoveries, hypotheses, and unavoidable objections which
will be brought forward by the scientific critics must be anticipated
and disposed of. It has also to be shown how far the

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 480 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

occult teachings depart from real science, and whether the ancient or
the modern theories are the most logically and philosophically correct.
The unity and mutual relations of all parts of Kosmos were known to the
ancients, before they became evident to modern astronomers and
philosophers. And if even the external and visible portions of the
Universe and their mutual relations cannot be explained in any other
terms than those used by the adherents of the mechanical theory of the
Universe in physical science, it follows that no materialist, who denies
that the Soul of Kosmos (which appertains to metaphysical philosophy)
exists, has the right to trespass upon that metaphysical domain. That
physical science is trying to, and actually does, encroach upon it, is
only one more proof that "might is right," and no more.

Another good reason for these Addenda is this. Since only a certain
portion of the Secret teachings can be given out in the present age, if
they were published without any explanations or commentary, the
doctrines would never be understood even by theosophists. Therefore they
must be contrasted with the speculations of modern science. Archaic
axioms must be placed side by side with modern hypotheses and comparison
left to the sagacious reader.

On the question of the "Seven Governors," as Hermes calls the "Seven
Builders," the Spirits which guide the operations of nature, the
animated atoms of which are the shadows, in their world, of their
Primaries in the astral realms -- this work will, of course, besides the
men of Science, have every materialist against it. But this opposition
can, at most, be only temporary. People have laughed at everything and
scouted every unpopular idea at first, and then ended by accepting it.
Materialism and scepticism are evils that must remain in the world as
long as man has not quitted his present gross form to don the one he had
during the first and second races of this Round. Unless scepticism and
our present natural ignorance are equilibrated by intuition and a
natural spirituality, every being afflicted with such feelings will see
in himself no better than a bundle of flesh, bones, and muscles, with an
empty garret inside him which serves the purpose of storing his
sensations and feelings. Sir Humphry Davy was a great scientist, as
deeply versed in physics as any theorist of our day, yet he loathed
materialism. "I heard with disgust," he says, "in the dissecting-rooms,
the plan of the physiologist, of the gradual secretion of matter, and
its becoming endued with irritability, ripening into sensibility, and
acquiring such organs as were necessary, by its own inherent forces, and
at last rising into intellectual existence." Nevertheless, physiologists
are not the most to be blamed for speaking of that only which they can
see and estimate on the evidence of their physical senses. Astronomers

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 481 THE SONS OF LIGHT.

and physicists are, we consider, far more illogical in their
materialistic views than even physiologists, and this has to be proved.
Milton's --

> . . . . . . . . . . . . "Light  
> Ethereal, first of things, quintessence pure,"

has become with the materialists only --

> . . . . . . Prime cheerer, light,  
> Of all material beings, first and best.

For the occultists it is both Spirit and Matter. Behind the "mode of
motion," now regarded as "the property of matter" and nothing more, they
perceive the radiant noumenon. It is the "Spirit of Light," the first
born of the Eternal pure Element, whose energy (or emanation) is stored
in the Sun, the great Life-Giver of the physical world, as the hidden
Concealed Spiritual Sun is the Light- and Life-Giver of the Spiritual
and Psychic Realms. Bacon was one of the first to strike the key-note of
materialism, not only by his inductive method (renovated from
ill-digested Aristotle), but by the general tenor of his writings. He
inverts the order of mental Evolution when saying that "the first
Creation of God was the light of the sense; the last was the light of
the reason; and his Sabbath work ever since is the illumination of the
Spirit." It is just the reverse. The light of Spirit is the eternal
Sabbath of the mystic or occultist, and he pays little attention to that
of mere sense. That which is meant by the allegorical sentence, "*Fiat
Lux*" is,-- when esoterically rendered -- "Let there be the 'Sons of
Light,' " or the noumena of all phenomena. Thus the Roman Catholics
rightly interpret the passage as referring to Angels, and wrongly as
meaning Powers created by an anthropomorphic God, whom they personify in
the ever thundering and punishing Jehovah.

These beings are the "Sons of Light," because they emanate from, and are
self-generated in, that infinite Ocean of Light, whose one pole is pure
*Spirit* lost in the absoluteness of Non-Being, and the other, the
*matter* in which it condenses, crystallizing into a more and more gross
type as it descends into manifestation. Therefore matter, though it is,
in one sense, but the illusive dregs of that Light whose limbs are the
Creative Forces, yet has in it the full presence of the Soul thereof, of
that Principle, which none -- not even the "Sons of Light," evolved from
its ABSOLUTE DARKNESS -- will ever know. The idea is as beautifully, as
it is truthfully, expressed by Milton, who hails the holy Light, which
is the --

> ". . . . . Offspring of Heaven, first-born,  
> And of th' Eternal co-eternal beam;  
> . . . . . Since God is light,  
> And never but in unapproached Light  
> Dwelt from Eternity,. dwelt then in thee  
> Bright effluence, of bright essence increate."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next Section](sd1-3-02)

[Contents](sd1-0-co.htm#contents)
