##### The Secret Doctrine by H. P. Blavatsky -- Vol. 1

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 325 THE IMPARTIALITY OF SCIENTIFIC DENIALS.

\[\[This page continued from [previous section](sd1-2-02)\]\]

#### ยง III. PRIMORDIAL SUBSTANCE AND DIVINE THOUGHT.

> "As it would seem irrational to affirm that we already know all
> existing causes, permission must be given to assume, if need be, *an
> entirely new agent.*

> "Assuming, what is not strictly accurate as yet, that the undulatory
> hypothesis accounts for all the facts, we are called on to decide
> whether the existence of an undulating Ether is thereby proved. *We
> cannot positively affirm*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 326 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

> *that no other supposition* *will explain the facts.* Newton's
> corpuscular hypothesis is admitted to have broken down on
> Interference; and there is, at the present day, no rival. Still, it is
> extremely desirable in all such hypotheses to find some collateral
> confirmation, some evidence *aliunde*, of THE SUPPOSED ETHER. . . . .
> Some Hypotheses consist of assumptions as to the minute structure and
> operations of bodies. From the nature of the case, these assumptions
> can never be proved by direct means. Their only merit is *their
> suitability to express the phenomena.* They are REPRESENTATIVE
> FICTIONS." -- ("*Logic*," *by Alexander Bain*, *LL.D.*, *Part II.*,
> *p.* 133)

Ether, this *hypothetical* Proteus, one of the "representative
*Fictions*" of modern Science -- which, nevertheless, was so long
*accepted* -- is one of the lower "principles" of what we call
PRIMORDIAL SUBSTANCE (Akasa, in Sanskrit), one of the *dreams* of old,
and which has now become again the dream of modern science. It is the
greatest, just as it is the boldest, of the surviving speculations of
ancient philosophers. For the Occultists, however, both ETHER and the
Primordial Substance are a reality. To put it plainly, ETHER is the
Astral Light, and the Primordial Substance is **A**KASA, the *Upadhi* of
DIVINE THOUGHT.

In modern language, the latter would be better named COSMIC IDEATION --
Spirit; the former, COSMIC SUBSTANCE, Matter. These, the Alpha and the
Omega of Being, are but the two *facets* of the one Absolute Existence.
The latter was never addressed, or even mentioned, by any name in
antiquity, except allegorically. In the oldest Aryan race, the Hindu,
the worship of the intellectual classes never consisted (as with the
Greeks) in a fervent adoration of marvellous form and art, which led
later on to anthropomorphism. But while the Greek philosopher adored
form, and the Hindu sage alone "perceived the true relation of earthly
beauty and eternal truth" -- the uneducated of every nation understood
neither, at any time.

They do not understand it even now. The evolution of the **G**OD-IDEA
proceeds apace with man's own intellectual evolution. So true it is that
the noblest ideal to which the religious Spirit of one age can soar,
will appear but a gross caricature to the philosophic mind in a
succeeding epoch! The philosophers themselves had to be *initiated into
perceptive mysteries*, before they could grasp the correct idea of the
ancients in relation to this most metaphysical subject. Otherwise --
outside such initiation -- for every thinker there will be a "Thus far
shalt thou go and no farther," mapped out by his intellectual capacity,
as clearly and as unmistakeably as there is for the progress of any
nation or race in its cycle by the law of Karma. Outside of initiation,
the ideals of contemporary religious thought must always have their
wings clipped and remain unable to soar higher; for idealistic as well
as realistic thinkers, and even free-thinkers, are but the outcome and
the natural product of their respective environments and periods. The
ideals of both are only

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 327 DIVINE THOUGHT, OR CINERITIOUS MATTER.

the necessary results of their temperaments, and the outcome of that
phase of intellectual progress to which a nation, in its collectivity,
has attained. Hence, as already remarked, the highest flights of modern
(Western) metaphysics have fallen far short of the truth. Much of
current Agnostic speculation on the existence of the "First Cause" is
little better than veiled materialism -- the terminology alone being
different. Even so great a thinker as Mr. Herbert Spencer speaks of the
"Unknowable" occasionally in terms that demonstrate the lethal influence
of materialistic thought, which, like the deadly Sirocco, has withered
and blighted all current ontological speculation.\*

From the early ages of the Fourth Race, when Spirit alone was worshipped
and the mystery was made manifest, down to the last palmy days of
Grecian art at the dawn of Christianity -- the Hellenes alone had dared
to raise publicly an altar to the **U**NKNOWN **G**OD. Whatever St. Paul
may have had in his profound mind when declaring to the Athenians that
this "unknown," ignorantly worshipped by them, was the true God
announced by himself -- that Deity *was not* "Jehovah" (*see* "*The Holy
of Holies*"), nor was he "The Maker of the world and all things." For it
is not the "God of Israel" but the "Unknown" of the ancient and modern
Pantheist that "dwelleth not in temples *made with hands*" (Acts xviii.,
23-4).

Divine thought cannot be defined, or its meaning explained, except by
the numberless manifestations of Cosmic Substance in which the former
*is sensed* spiritually by those who can do so. To say this, after
having defined it as the Unknown Deity, abstract, impersonal, sexless,
which must be placed at the root of every Cosmogony and its subsequent
evolution, is equivalent to saying nothing at all. It is like attempting
a transcendental equation of conditions for the true values of a set,
having in hand for deducing them only a number of *unknown* quantities.
Its place is found in the old primitive Symbolic charts, in which, as
shown in the text, it is represented by a boundless darkness, on the
ground of which appears the first central point in white -- thus
symbolising coeval and co-eternal **S**PIRIT-**M**ATTER making its
appearance in the phenomenal world, before its first differentiation.
When "the one becomes two," it may then be

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* For instance, when he terms the "First Cause" -- the **U**NKNOWABLE
-- a "power *manifesting* through phenomena," and "an infinite eternal
*Energy*" (?) it is clear that he has grasped solely the *physical*
aspect of the mystery of Being -- the Energies of Cosmic Substance only.
The co-eternal aspect of the **O**NE **R**EALITY -- Cosmic Ideation --
(as to its *noumenon*, it seems *non-existent* in the mind of the great
thinker) is absolutely omitted from consideration. Without doubt, this
*one-sided* mode of dealing with the problem is due largely to the
pernicious Western practice of subordinating consciousness, or regarding
it as a "by-product" of molecular motion.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 328 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

referred to as Spirit *and* matter. To "Spirit" is referable every
manifestation of consciousness, reflective or direct, and of
*unconscious purposiveness* (to adopt a modern expression used in
Western *philosophy*, so-called) as evidenced in the Vital Principle,
and Nature's submission to the majestic sequence of immutable law.
"Matter" must be regarded as objectivity in its purest abstraction --
the self-existing basis whose septenary manvantaric differentiations
constitute the objective reality underlying the phenomena of each phase
of conscious existence. During the period of Universal Pralaya, Cosmic
Ideation is nonexistent; and the variously differentiated states of
Cosmic Substance are resolved back again into the primary state of
abstract potential objectivity.

Manvantaric impulse commences with the re-awakening of Cosmic Ideation
(the "Universal Mind") concurrently with, and parallel to the primary
emergence of Cosmic Substance -- the latter being the manvantaric
vehicle of the former -- from its undifferentiated *pralayic* state.
Then, absolute wisdom mirrors itself in its Ideation; which, by a
transcendental process, superior to and incomprehensible by human
Consciousness, results in Cosmic Energy (*Fohat*)*.* Thrilling through
the bosom of inert Substance, *Fohat* impels it to activity, and guides
its primary differentiations on all the Seven planes of Cosmic
Consciousness. There are thus *Seven Protyles* (as they are now called),
while Aryan antiquity called them the Seven Prakriti, or Natures,
serving, severally, as the *relatively* homogeneous basis, which in the
course of the increasing heterogeneity (in the evolution of the
Universe) differentiate into the marvellous complexity presented by
phenomena on the planes of perception. The term "relatively" is used
designedly, because the very existence of such a process, resulting in
the primary segregations of undifferentiated Cosmic Substance into its
septenary bases of evolution, compels us to regard the *protyle\** of
each plane as only a *mediate* phase assumed by Substance in its passage
from abstract, into full objectivity.

Cosmic Ideation is said to be non-existent during Pralayic periods, for
the simple reason that there is no one, and nothing, to perceive its
effects. There can be no manifestation of Consciousness,
semi-consciousness, or even "unconscious purposiveness," except through
the

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* The term *Protyle* is due to Mr. Crookes, the eminent chemist, who
has given that name to *pre-Matter*, if one may so call primordial and
purely homogeneous substances, suspected, if not actually yet found, by
Science in the ultimate composition of the atom. But the incipient
segregation of primordial matter into atoms and molecules takes its rise
subsequent to the evolution of the Seven *Protyles.* It is the last of
these -- having recently detected the possibility of its existence on
our plane -- that Mr. Crookes is in search of.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 329 THE UNIVERSAL ILLUSION.

vehicle of matter; that is to say, on this our plane, wherein human
consciousness *in its normal state* cannot soar beyond what is known as
transcendental metaphysics, it is only through some molecular
aggregation or fabric that Spirit wells up in a stream of individual or
sub-conscious subjectivity. And as Matter existing apart from perception
is a mere abstraction, both of these aspects of the **A**BSOLUTE --
Cosmic Substance and Cosmic Ideation -- are mutually inter-dependent. In
strict accuracy -- to avoid confusion and misconception -- the term
"Matter" ought to be applied to the aggregate of objects of possible
perception, and "Substance" to *noumena;* for inasmuch as the phenomena
of *our* plane are the creation of the perceiving Ego -- the
modifications of its own subjectivity -- all the "states of matter
representing the aggregate of perceived objects" can have but a relative
and purely phenomenal existence for the children of our plane. As the
modern Idealists would say, the co-operation of Subject and Object
results in the Sense-object or phenomenon. But this does not necessarily
lead to the conclusion that it is the same on all other planes; that the
co-operation of the two on the planes of their septenary differentiation
results in a septenary aggregate of phenomena which are likewise
non-existent *per se*, though concrete realities for the Entities of
whose experience they form a part, in the same manner as the rocks and
rivers around us are real from the stand-point of a physicist, though
unreal illusions of sense from that of the metaphysician. It would be an
error to say, or even conceive such a thing. From the stand-point of the
highest metaphysics, the whole Universe, gods included, is an illusion;
but the illusion of him who is in himself an illusion differs on every
plane of consciousness; and we have no more right to dogmatise about the
possible nature of the perceptive faculties of an Ego on, say, the sixth
plane, than we have to identify our perceptions with, or make them a
standard for, those of an ant, in *its* mode of consciousness. The pure
object apart from consciousness\* is unknown to us, while living on the
plane of our three-dimensional World; as we know only the mental states
it excites in the perceiving Ego. And, so long as the contrast of
Subject and Object endures -- to wit, as long as we enjoy our five
senses and no more, and do not know how to divorce our all-perceiving
*Ego* (the Higher Self) from the thraldom of these senses -- so long
will it be impossible for the *personal* Ego to break through the
barrier which separates it from a

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* Cosmic Ideation focussed in a principle or *upadhi* (basis) results
as the consciousness of the individual Ego. Its manifestation varies
with the degree of *upadhi*, *e.g.*, through that known as *Manas* it
wells up as Mind-Consciousness; through the more finely differentiated
fabric (sixth state of matter) of the *Buddhi* resting on the experience
of Manas as its basis -- as a stream of spiritual INTUITION.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 330 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

knowledge of *things in themselves* (*or Substance*)*.* That Ego,
progressing in an arc of ascending subjectivity, must exhaust the
experience of every plane. But not till the Unit is merged in the ALL,
whether on this or any other plane, and Subject and Object alike vanish
in the absolute negation of the Nirvanic State (negation, again, only
*from our plane*), is scaled that peak of Omniscience -- the Knowledge
of things-in-themselves; and the solution of the yet more awful riddle
approached, before which even the highest Dhyan Chohan must bow in
silence and ignorance -- the unspeakable mystery of that which is called
by the Vedantins, the **P**ARABRAHMAM.

Therefore, such being the case, all those who sought to give a name to
the incognizable Principle have simply degraded it. Even to speak of
Cosmic Ideation -- save in its *phenomenal* aspect -- is like trying to
bottle up primordial Chaos, or to put a printed label on **E**TERNITY.

What, then, is the "primordial Substance," that mysterious object of
which Alchemy was ever talking, and which became the subject of
philosophical speculation in every age? What can it be finally, even in
its phenomenal pre-differentiation? Even *that* is ALL in manifested
Nature and -- *nothing* to our senses. It is mentioned under various
names in every Cosmogony, referred to in every philosophy, and shown to
be, to this day, the ever grasp-eluding **P**ROTEUS in Nature. We touch
and do not feel it; we look at it without seeing it; we breathe it and
do not perceive it; we hear and smell it without the smallest cognition
that it is there; for it is in every molecule of that which in our
illusion and ignorance we regard as Matter in any of its states, or
conceive as a feeling, a thought, an emotion. . . . In short, it is the
"*upadhi*," or vehicle, of every possible phenomenon, whether physical,
mental, or psychic. In the opening sentences of *Genesis*, as in the
Chaldean Cosmogony; in the *Puranas* of India, and in the *Book of the
Dead* of Egypt, it opens everywhere the cycle of manifestation. It is
termed "Chaos," and the face of the waters, incubated by the Spirit
proceeding from the Unknown, under whatever name. (*See* "*Chaos*,
*Theos*, *Kosmos.*")

The authors of the sacred Scriptures in India go deeper into the origin
of things evolved than Thales or Job, for they say: --

"From **I**NTELLIGENCE (called **M**AHAT in the Puranas) associated with
**I**GNORANCE (Iswar, as a *personal* deity) *attended by its projective
power*, in which the quality of dulness (*tamas*, insensibility)
predominates, proceeds *Ether* -- from ether, air; from air, heat; from
heat, water; and from water, earth "with everything on it." "From THIS,
from this same SELF, was the Ether produced," says the Veda.
(*Taittiriya Upanishad II*. 1).

It becomes thus evident that it is not *this* Ether -- sprung at the
fourth

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 331 ETHER, AS ITS NOUMENON.

remove from an *Emanation* of Intelligence "associated with Ignorance"
-- which is the high principle, the *deific* Entity worshipped by the
Greeks and Latins under the name of "*Pater omnipotens AEther*," and
"*Magnus AEther*" in its collective aggregates. The septenary gradation,
and the innumerable subdivisions and differences, made by the ancients
between the powers of *Ether* collectively, from its outward fringe of
effects, with which our Science is so familiar, up to the "Imponderable
Substance," once admitted as the "Ether of Space," now about to be
rejected, has been ever a vexing riddle for every branch of knowledge.
The mythologists and symbologists of our day, confused by this
incomprehensible glorification, on the one hand, and degradation on the
other, of the same deified entity and in the same religious systems, are
often driven to the most ludicrous mistakes. The Church, firm as a rock
in each and all of her early errors of interpretation, has made of Ether
the abode of her Satanic legions.\* The whole hierarchy of the "Fallen"
angels is there; the *Cosmocratores* -- or the "world bearers,"
(according to Bossuet); *Mundi Tenentes* -- the "world holders," as
Tertullian calls them; and *Mundi Domini* "world dominations," or rather
*dominators*, the *Curbati*, or "Curved," etc., who thus make of the
stars and celestial orbs in their course -- Devils!

The difference made between the seven states of Ether (itself one of the
Seven Cosmic principles), while the AEther of the Ancients is *universal
Fire*, may be seen in the injunctions by Zoroaster and Psellus,
respectively. The former said: "Consult it only when it is without form
or figure," *absque forma et figura*, which means without flames or
burning coals. "When it has a form -- *heed it not*," teaches Psellus;
"but when it is formless, obey it, for it is then *sacred fire*, and all
it will reveal thee, shall be true."\*\* This proves that Ether, itself
an aspect of Akasa, has in its turn several aspects or "principles."

All the ancient nations deified AEther in its imponderable aspect and
potency. Virgil calls Jupiter, *Pater omnipotens AEther*, "the great
AEther."\*\*\* The Hindus have also placed it among their deities; under
the name of Akasa (the synthesis of AEther). And the author of the
*Homoiomerian*

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* For it is thus that the Church has interpreted verse 12 in the VI.
Chapter to the Ephesians. "For we wrestle not against flesh and blood,
but against principalities, against powers, against the rulers of the
darkness of this world." Further on St. Paul mentions the spiritual
*malices* ("wickedness" in English texts) SPREAD IN THE AIR --
"*Spiritualia nequitiae coelestibus*," the Latin texts giving various
names to these "malices," the innocent "Elementals." But the Church is
right this time, though wrong in calling them all devils. The ASTRAL
LIGHT or lower Ether *is* full of conscious and semi-conscious and
unconscious entities; only the church has less *power* over them than
over invisible microbes or mosquitoes.

\*\* *Effatum* **XVI**. "Oracles of Zoroaster."

\*\*\* *Georgica.* Book II.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 332 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

System of philosophy, Anaxagoras of Clazomenae, firmly believed that the
spiritual prototypes of all things, as well as their elements, were to
be found in the boundless Ether where they were generated, whence they
evolved, and whither they returned -- an Occult teaching.

It thus becomes clear that it is from Ether in its highest synthetic
aspect, once anthropomorphised, that sprung the first idea of a personal
creative deity. With the philosophical Hindus the elements are *Tamas*,
*i.e.*, "unenlightened by *intellect*, which they obscure."

We have now to exhaust the question of the mystical meaning of
"Primordial Chaos" and of the Root-Principle, and show how they were
connected in the ancient philosophies with Akasa, wrongly translated
AEther, and also with *Maya* (illusion) -- of which *Ishwara* is the
male aspect. We shall speak further on of the *intelligent* "principle,"
or rather of the invisible *immaterial* properties, in the visible and
material elements, that "sprung from the *primordial* Chaos."

For, "What is the primordial Chaos but AEther?" it is asked in "ISIS
UNVEILED." Not the *modern* Ether; not such as is recognised now, but
such as *was* known to the ancient philosophers long before the time of
Moses; but AEther, with all its mysterious and occult properties,
containing in itself the germs of universal creation. *Upper A*Ether or
Akasa, is the celestial virgin and mother of every existing form and
being, from whose bosom, as soon as "incubated" by the Divine Spirit,
are called into existence Matter and Life, Force and Action. AEther is
the Aditi of the Hindus, and it is Akasa. Electricity, magnetism, heat,
light, and chemical action are so little understood even now that fresh
facts are constantly widening the range of our knowledge. Who knows
where ends the power of this protean giant -- AEther; or whence its
mysterious origin? Who, we mean, that denies the spirit that works in
it, and evolves out of it all visible forms?

It will be an easy task to show that the cosmogonical legends all over
the world are based on a knowledge by the ancients of those sciences,
which have allied themselves in our days in support of the doctrine of
evolution; and that further research may demonstrate that those ancients
were far better acquainted with the fact of evolution itself, embracing
both its physical and spiritual aspects, than we are now. "With the old
philosophers, evolution was a universal theorem, a doctrine embracing
the *whole*, and an established principle; while our modern
evolutionists are enabled to present us merely with speculative
theoretics; with *particular*, if not wholly *negative* theorems. It is
idle for the representatives of our modern wisdom to close the debate
and pretend that the question is settled, merely because the obscure
phraseology of the Mosaic, far later, account clashes with the definite
exegesis of 'Exact Science'" ("*Isis Unveiled*")*.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 333 WHAT MANU SAYS OF THIS.

If one turns to the "Laws (or Ordinances) of Manu," one finds the
prototype of all these ideas. Mostly lost (to the Western world) in
their original form, disfigured by later interpolations and additions,
they have, nevertheless, preserved quite enough of their ancient Spirit
to show its character. "Removing the darkness, the Self-existent Lord"
(*Vishnu*, *Narayana*, *etc.*) becoming manifest, and "wishing to
produce beings from his Essence, created, in the beginning, water alone.
In that he cast seed. . . . . That became a golden Egg." (V. 6, 7, 8,
9.) Whence this Self-existent Lord? It is called THIS, and is spoken of
as "Darkness, imperceptible, without definite qualities, undiscoverable
as if wholly in sleep." (V. 5.) Having dwelt in that Egg for a whole
divine year, he "who is called in the world Brahma," splits that Egg in
two, and from the upper portion he forms the heaven, from the lower the
earth, and from the middle the sky and "the perpetual place of waters."
(12, 13.)

But there is, directly following these verses, something more important
for us, as it corroborates entirely our esoteric teachings. From verse
14 to 36, evolution is given in the order described in the Esoteric
philosophy. This cannot be easily gainsaid. Even Medhatithi, the son of
Viraswamin, and the author of the Commentary, "the Manubhasya," whose
date, according to the western Orientalists, is 1,000 A.D., helps us
with his remarks to the elucidation of the truth. He showed himself
either unwilling to give out more, because he knew that truth which has
to be kept from the profane, or else he was really puzzled. Still, what
he does give out makes the septenary principle in men and nature plain
enough.

Let us begin with Chapter 1. of the "Ordinances" or "Laws" after the
Self-existent Lord, the *unmanifesting* Logos of the Unknown "Darkness,"
becomes manifested in the golden Egg. It is from this "Egg," from ----

(11.) That which is the undiscrete (undifferentiated) cause, eternal,
which *Is and Is not*, from It issued that male who is called in the
world Brahma. . . . .

Here we find, as in all genuine philosophical systems, even the "Egg" or
the Circle (or Zero), boundless Infinity, referred to as **I**T,\* and
Brahma, the first *unit* only, referred to as the *male* god, *i.e.*,
the fructifying Principle. It is ![](sd1-333.jpg) or 10 (ten) the
Decade. On the plane of the Septenary *or our World* only, it is called
Brahma. On that of the *Unified Decade* in the realm of Reality, this
male Brahma is an illusion.

(14.) "From Self (*atmanah*) he created mind, (1) *which is and is not;*

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

The ideal apex of the Pythagorean triangle: vide Sections in Vol. II.,
"Cross and Circle," and the "Earliest Symbolics of the Cross."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 334 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

\(2\) and from mind, Ego-ism (Self-Consciousness) the ruler; (3) the
Lord."

(1.) The mind is *Manas.* Medhatithi, the commentator, justly observes
here that it is the reverse of this and shows already interpolation and
rearranging; for it is *Manas* that springs from *Ahamkara* or
(Universal) Self-Consciousness, as *Manas* in the microcosm springs from
Mahat, *or Maha-Buddhi* (Buddhi, in man). For Manas is dual, and as
shown and translated by Colebrooke, "is *serving both for sense and
action*, is an organ by affinity, being cognate with the rest." "The
rest" means, here, that Manas, our *fifth* principle (the fifth, because
the body was named the *first*, which is the reverse of the true
philosophical order)\* is in affinity both with Atma-Buddhi and with the
lower four principles. Hence, our teaching: namely, that Manas follows
Atma-Buddhi to Devachan, and that the lower (dregs, the residue of)
Manas remains with Kama rupa, in *Limbus*, or Kama-loka, the abode of
the "Shells."

(2.) Such is the meaning of *Manas*, which "*is*, *and is not.*"

(3.) Medhatithi translates it as "the one conscious of the I," or Ego,
not "ruler," as the Orientalists do. Thus they translate verse 16: "He
also, having made the subtile parts of those six (the Great Self and the
five organs of sense) of unmeasured brightness, to enter into the
elements of Self (*Atmamatrasu*) created all beings."

When, according to Medhatithi, it ought to read *matra-Chit* instead of
"Atmamatrasu," and thus be made to say: --

"He having pervaded the subtile parts of those six, of unmeasured
brightness, by elements of self, created all beings."

This latter reading must be the correct one, since he, the *Self*, is
what we call Atma, and thus constitutes the seventh principle, the
synthesis of the "*six.*" Such is also the opinion of the editor of
*Manava-dharma Shastra*, who seems to have intuitionally entered far
deeper into the spirit of the philosophy than has the translator of the
"Ordinances of Manu," the late Dr. Burnell. For he hesitates little
between the text of Kulluka and the Commentaries of Medhatithi.
Rejecting the *tanmatra*, or subtile elements, and the *atmamatrasu* of
Kulluka, he says, applying the principles to the Cosmic *Self:* "The six
appear rather to be the *manas* plus the five principles of Ether, air,
fire, water, earth"; "having united five portions of these six with the
spiritual element (the *seventh*) he (thus) created all existing
things;" *atmamatra* is therefore the spiritual atom as opposed to the
elementary, not reflective "elements of himself." Thus he corrects the
translation of verse -- "17. As the subtile elements of bodily forms of
This One depend on these six, so

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* *Vide* A. Coke Burnell's translation, edited by Ed. W. Hopkins, Ph.D.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 335 THE SEVEN PRAKRITIS.

the wise call his form *carira*" (sharira) -- and he says that
"Elements" mean here portions or parts (or principles), which reading is
borne out by verse 19, which says: --

"19. This non-eternal (Universe) arises then from the Eternal, by means
of the subtile elements of forms of *those seven* very glorious
principles" (*purusha*)*.*

Commenting upon which, according to Medhatithi, the Editor remarks that
"the five elements plus mind (*Manas*) and Self-Consciousness
(Ahamkara)\* are meant;" "subtile elements," as before (meaning) "five
portions of form" (or principles). For verse 20 shows it, when saying of
these (five elements, or "five portions of form" (*rupa*, *plus Manas*
and Self-Consciousness) that they constitute the "*seven purusha*," or
*principles*, called in the Puranas the "Seven Prakritis."

Moreover, these "five elements" or "five portions" are spoken of in
verse 27 as "those which are called the atomic destructible portions" --
therefore "distinct from the atoms of the *nyaya.*"

This creative Brahma, issuing from the mundane or golden egg, unites in
himself both the male and the female principles. He is, in short, the
same as all the creative Protologoi. Of Brahma, however, it could not be
said, as of Dionysos: "\[\[*protogonon diphue trigonon Baccheion Hanakta
Hagrion arreton kruphion dikerota dimorphon*\]\]" -- a lunar Jehovah --
Bacchus truly, with David dancing nude before his *symbol* in the ark --
because no licentious Dionysia were ever established in his name and
honour. All such public worship was exoteric, and the great universal
symbols were distorted universally, as those of Krishna are now by the
Vallabacharyas of Bombay, the followers of the *infant* god. But are
these popular gods the *true Deity?* Are *they* the Apex and synthesis
of the sevenfold creation, man included? Never! Each and all are one of
the rungs of that septenary ladder of Divine Consciousness, pagan as
Christian. For Ain-Soph also is said to manifest through the *Seven
Letters of Jehovah*'*s name* who, having usurped the place of the
Unknown Limitless, was given by his devotees his Seven Angels of the
Presence -- his *Seven Principles.* Yet they are mentioned in almost
every school. In the pure Sankhya philosophy *mahat*, *ahamkara* and the
five *tanmatras* are called the *seven Prakritis* (or Natures), and they
are counted from *Maha-Buddhi* or Mahat down to Earth. (See *Sankhya
Karika* III. and Commentaries.)

Nevertheless, however disfigured for Rabbinical purposes is the original
*Elohistic* version by Ezra, however repulsive at times even the

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* *Ahamkara*, as universal Self-Consciousness, has a triple aspect, as
also *Manas.* For this conception of "I," or one's *Ego*, is either
*sattwa*, "pure quietude," or appears as *rajas*, "active," or remains
*tamas*, "stagnant," in darkness. It belongs to Heaven and Earth, and
assumes the properties of either.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 336 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

*esoteric* meaning in the Hebrew scrolls, which is far more so than its
outward *veil* or *cloaking* may be\* -- once the *Jehovistic* portions
are eliminated, the Mosaic books are found full of purely occult and
priceless knowledge, especially in the first six chapters.

Read by the aid of the Kabala one finds a matchless temple of occult
truths, a well of deeply concealed beauty hidden under a structure, the
*visible* architecture of which, its apparent symmetry notwithstanding,
is unable to stand the criticism of cold reason, or to reveal its age,
for it belongs to all the ages. There is more wisdom concealed under the
exoteric *fables* of Puranas and Bible than in all the exoteric *facts*
and science in the literature of the world, and more OCCULT true
Science, than there is of exact knowledge in all the academies. Or, in
plainer and stronger language, there is as much esoteric wisdom in some
portions of the *exoteric* Puranas and Pentateuch, as there is of
nonsense and of designed childish fancy in it, when read only in the
dead-letter murderous interpretations of great dogmatic religions, and
especially of sects.

Let anyone read the first verses of chapter i. of *Genesis* and reflect
upon them. There "God" commands to *another* "god," *who does his
bidding* -- even in the *cautious* English Protestant translation of
James the First's authorised edition.

In the "beginning," the Hebrew language having no word to express the
idea of Eternity,\*\* "God" fashions the *heaven* and the *Earth*; and
the latter is "without form and void," while the former is no Heaven in
fact, but the "Deep," *Chaos*, with darkness upon its face.\*\*\*

"And the *Spirit* of **G**OD moved upon the face of the Waters" (v. 2),
or the great Deep of the Infinite Space. And this Spirit is *Nara-yana*,
or Vishnu.

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* See "The Holy of Holies."

\*\* The word "eternity," by which Christian theologians interpret the
term "for ever and ever," does not exist in the Hebrew tongue -- either
as a word or meaning. *Oulam*, says Le Clerc, only imports a time when
beginning or end is not known. It does not mean "*infinite* duration,"
and the word *for ever* in the Old Testament, only signifies a "long
time." Nor is the term "eternity" used in the Christian sense in the
Puranas. For in Vishnu Purana, it is clearly stated that by Eternity and
Immortality only "existence to the end of the Kalpa" is meant (Book II.
chap. viii.).

\*\*\* Orphic theogony is purely Oriental and Indian in its Spirit. The
successive transformations it has undergone, have now separated it
widely from the spirit of ancient Cosmogony, as may be seen by comparing
it even with Hesiod's theogony. Yet the truly Aryan Hindu spirit breaks
forth everywhere in both Hesiod's and the Orphic theogony. (See the
remarkable work of James Darmesteter, *Cosmogonies Aryennes*, in his
*Essais Orientaux.*) Thus the original Greek conception of Chaos is that
of the Secret Wisdom Religion. In Hesiod, therefore, Chaos is infinite,
boundless, endless and beginningless in duration, an abstraction at the
same time as a visible presence. **S**PACE filled with darkness, which
is primordial matter in its *precosmic* state. For in its etymological
sense, Chaos is Space, according to Aristotle, and Space is *the* ever
Unseen and Unknowable Deity in our philosophy.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 337 DARKNESS, IS LIGHT.

"And God said, Let there be a firmament. . ." (v. 6), and "God," the
second, obeyed and "*made* the firmament" (v. 7). "And God said let
there be light," and "there was light." Now the latter does not mean
light at all, but in the Kabala, the androgyne "Adam Kadmon," or Sephira
(*Spiritual light*), for they are one; or, according to the Chaldean
"Book of Numbers," the *secondary* angels, the first being the Elohim
who are the *aggregate* of that "fashioning" *god*. For to whom are
those words of command addressed? And who is it who commands? That which
commands is the *eternal Law*, and he who obeys, the *Elohim*, the known
quantity acting in and with *x*, or the coefficient of the unknown
quantity, the *Forces* of the ONE Force. All this is Occultism, and is
found in the archaic STANZAS. It is perfectly immaterial whether we call
these "Forces" the Dhyan Chohans, or the *Ophanim*, as St. John does.

"The one Universal Light, which to Man is *Darkness*, is ever existent,"
says the Chaldean "Book of Numbers." From it proceeds periodically the
**E**NERGY, which is reflected in the "Deep" or Chaos, the store-house
of future worlds, and, once awakened, stirs up and fructifies the latent
Forces, which are the ever present eternal potentialities in it. Then
awake anew the Brahmas and Buddhas -- the co-eternal Forces -- and a new
Universe springs into being. . . . .

In the *Sepher Jezireh*, the Kabalistic Book of Creation, the author has
evidently repeated the words of Manu. In it, the Divine Substance is
represented as having alone existed from the eternity, boundless and
absolute; and as having emitted from itself the Spirit.\* "One is the
Spirit of the living God, blessed be **I**TS name, which liveth for
ever! Voice, Spirit, and Word, this is the Holy Spirit;"\*\* and this is
the Kabalistic abstract Trinity, so unceremoniously anthropomorphised by
the Christian Fathers. From this triple **O**NE emanated the whole
Kosmos. First from **O**NE emanated number **T**WO, or Air (the Father),
the creative element; and then number **T**HREE, *Water* (the Mother),
proceeded from the air; *Ether* or *Fire* completes the mystic four, the
Arba-il.\*\*\* "When the Concealed of the Concealed wanted to reveal
Himself, he first made a point (primordial point, or the first
Sephiroth, air, or Holy Ghost), shaped into a sacred form (the ten
Sephiroth, or the Heavenly man), and covered it with a rich and splendid
garment, *that is the world.*"\*\*\*\*

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* The *manifested* Spirit; Absolute, Divine Spirit is one with absolute
Divine Substance: Parabrahm and Mulaprakriti are one in essence.
Therefore, Cosmic Ideation and Cosmic Substance in their primal
character are one also.

\*\* "Sepher Jezireh," chap. 1, Mishna ix.

\*\*\* Ibid. It is from *Arba* that Abram is made to come.

\*\*\*\* "Zohar," I., 2a.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 338 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

"He maketh the wind His messengers, flaming Fire His servants," says the
Jezireh, showing the cosmical character of the later euhemerised
Elements,\* and that the Spirit permeates every atom in Kosmos.

This "primordial Substance" is called by some *Chaos:* Plato and the
Pythagoreans named it the *Soul of the World* after it had been
impregnated by the Spirit of *that* which broods over the Primeval
Waters, or *Chaos.* It is by being reflected in it, say the Kabalists,
that the brooding Principle *created* the phantasmagoria of a visible,
manifested Universe. *Chaos*, before -- Ether, after, the "reflection;"
it is still the deity that pervades all Space and things. It is the
invisible, imponderable Spirit of things and the invisible, but too
tangible fluid that radiates from the fingers of the healthy magnetizer,
for it is Vital Electricity -- **L**IFE itself. Called in derision by
the Marquis de Mirville "the nebulous Almighty," it is termed by the
Theurgists and Occultists to this day "the living Fire"; and there is
not a Hindu who practises at dawn a certain kind of meditation but knows
its effects.\*\* It is the "Spirit of

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* "Sepher Jezireh," Mishna ix., 10. Everywhere throughout the Acts,
Paul calls the invisible Kosmic Beings the "Elements." (*See Greek
Texts.*) But now the Elements are degraded into and limited to atoms of
which nothing is known, so far, and which are only "children of
necessity" as Ether is too --

as we said in "**I**SIS." "The poor primordial elements have long been
exiled, and our ambitious physicists run races to determine who shall
add one more to the fledgling brood of the sixty and odd elementary
substances." Meanwhile there rages a war in modern chemistry about
terms. We are denied the right to call these substances "chemical
elements," for they are not "primordial principles of self-existing
essences out of which the universe was fashioned," according to Plato.
Such ideas associated with the word *element* were good enough for the
"old Greek philosophy," but modern science rejects them; for, as
Professor Crookes says, "they are unfortunate terms," and experimental
science will have "nothing to do with any kind of essences except those
which it can see, smell, or taste. It leaves others to the
metaphysicians. . . ." We must feel grateful even for so much.

\*\* Writing upon this subject in *Isis Unveiled* we said of it that it
was: "The Chaos of the ancients, the Zoroastrian sacred fire, or the
*Atash-Behram* of the Parsees; the Hermes-fire, the Elmes-fire of the
ancient Germans; the lightning of Cybele; the burning torch of Apollo;
the flame on the altar of Pan; the inextinguishable fire in the temple
on the Acropolis, and in that of Vesta; the fire-flame of Pluto's helm;
the brilliant sparks on the hats of the Dioscuri, on the Gorgon head,
the helm of Pallas, and the staff of Mercury; the Egyptian Phtha-Ra; the
Grecian *Zeus Cataibates* (the descending) of Pausanias; the pentacostal
fire-tongues; the burning bush of Moses; the pillar of fire of the
*Exodus*, and the "burning lamp" of Abram, the eternal fire of the
"bottomless pit"; the Delphic oracular vapours; the Sidereal light of
the Rosicrucians; the **A**KASA of the Hindu adepts; the Astral Light of
Eliphas Levi; the nerve-aura and the fluid of the magnetists; the *od*
of the Reichenbach; the *Psychod* and ectenic force of Thury; the
psychic force of Sergeant Cox, and the atmospheric magnetism of some
naturalists; galvanism; and finally, electricity -- all these are but
various names for many different manifestations or effects of the same
mysterious, all-pervading cause, the Greek *Archeus.*" We now add -- it
is all this and much more.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 339 THE MYSTIC FIRE.

Light" and *Magnes.* As truly expressed by an opponent, *Magus* and
*magnes* are two branches growing from the same trunk and shooting forth
the same resultants. And in this appellation of "living fire" we may
also discover the meaning of the puzzling sentence in the *Zend-Avesta*
saying that there is "a fire that gives knowledge of the future. Science
and amiable speech," *i.e.*, develops an extraordinary eloquence in the
sybil, the sensitive, and even some orators.

This "fire" is spoken of in all the Hindu Books, as also in the
Kabalistic works. The *Zohar* explains it as the "white hidden fire, in
the *Resha trivrah*" (the White Head), whose Will causes the fiery fluid
to flow in 370 currents in every direction of the universe. It is
identical with the "Serpent that runs with 370 leaps" of the *Siphrah
Dzenioota*, which, when the "Perfect Man," the Metatron, *is raised*,
*i.e.*, when the *divine* man indwells in the *animal* man, it, the
Serpent, becomes *three spirits*, that is to say, is Atma-Buddhi-Manas,
in our theosophical phraseology. (Vide Part II. in Vol. II., ยงยง 3, "The
Many Meanings of the War in Heaven.")

Spirit, then, or Cosmic Ideation, and Cosmic Substance -- one of whose
*principles* is Ether -- are *one*, and include the ELEMENTS, in the
sense St. Paul attaches to them. These Elements are the veiled Synthesis
standing for Dhyan Chohans, Devas, Sephiroth, Amshaspends, Archangels,
etc., etc. The Ether of science -- the *Ilus* of Berosus, or the
*Protyle* of Chemistry -- constitutes, so to speak, the *rude* material
(relatively) out of which the above-named "Builders," following the plan
traced out for them eternally in the DIVINE THOUGHT, fashion the systems
in the Cosmos. They are "myths," we are told. "No more so than Ether and
the Atoms," we answer. The two latter are *absolute* necessities of
physical science; the "Builders" are as absolute a necessity of
metaphysics. We are twitted with: "You *never saw them.*" We ask the
materialists: "Have you ever seen Ether, *or your Atoms*, or, again,
your FORCE?" Moreover, one of the greatest Western Evolutionists of our
modern day, the coadjutor of Darwin, Mr. A. R. Wallace, when discussing
the inadequacy of Natural Selection alone to account for the physical
form of Man, admits the guiding action of "higher intelligences" as a
"*necessary* part of the great laws which govern the material Universe"
("*Contributions to Theory of Natural Selection*")*.*

These "higher intelligences" are the Dhyan Chohans of the *Occultists.*

Indeed, there are few Myths in any religious system worthy of the name,
but have an *historical* as well as a *scientific* foundation. "Myths,"
justly observes Pococke, "are now proved to be fables, *just in
proportion as we misunderstand* them; *truths*, in proportion as *they
were once understood.*"

The one prevailing, most distinct idea -- found in all ancient teaching,

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 340 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

with reference to Cosmic Evolution and the first "creation" of our Globe
with all its products, organic and *inorganic* (strange word for an
Occultist to use) -- is that the whole Kosmos has sprung from the DIVINE
THOUGHT. This thought impregnates matter, which is co-eternal with the
ONE REALITY; and all that lives and breathes evolves from the emanations
of the ONE *Immutable* -- Parabrahm = Mulaprakriti, the eternal
one-root. The former of these is, so to say, the aspect of the central
point turned inward into regions quite inaccessible to human intellect,
and is absolute abstraction; whereas, in its aspect as *Mulaprakriti* --
the eternal root of all, -- it gives one some hazy comprehension at
least of the Mystery of Being.

> "Therefore, it was taught in the *inner* temples that this visible
> universe of spirit and matter is but the concrete image of the ideal
> abstraction; it was built on the model of the first DIVINE IDEA. Thus
> our universe existed from Eternity in a latent state. The soul
> animating this purely spiritual universe is the central sun, the
> highest deity itself. It was not the *One* who built the concrete form
> of the idea, but the first-begotten; and as it was constructed on the
> geometrical figure of the dodecahedron,\* the first-begotten 'was
> pleased to employ twelve thousand years in its creation.' The latter
> number is expressed in the Tyrrhenian cosmogony,\*\* which shows man
> created in the sixth millennium. This agrees with the Egyptian theory
> of 6,000 'years'\*\*\* and with the Hebrew computation. But it is the
> exoteric form of it. The *secret* computation explains that the
> 'twelve thousand and the 6,000 years' are YEARS OF **B**RAHMA -- one
> *day* of Brahma being equal to 4,320,000,000 years.
> Sanchoniathon\*\*\*\* in his *Cosmogony*, declares that when the wind
> (spirit) became enamoured of its own principles (the chaos), an
> intimate union took place, which connection was called *pothos*, and
> from this sprang the seed of all. And the chaos knew not its own
> production, for it was *senseless;* but from its embrace with the wind
> was generated Mot, or the ilus (mud).\*\*\*\*\* From this proceeded
> the spores of creation and the generation of the universe.

> "Zeus-Zen (aether), and Chthonia (the chaotic earth) and Metis (the
> water), his wives; Osiris and Isis-Latona -- the former god also
> representing ether -- the first emanation of the Supreme Deity, Amun,
> the primeval source of light; the goddess earth and water again;
> Mithras,\*\*\*\*\*\* the rock-born god, the symbol of the male
> mundane-fire, or the personified primordial light, and Mithra, the
> fire-goddess, at once his mother and his wife: the pure element of
> fire (the active or male principle) regarded as light and heat, in
> conjunction with earth and water, or matter (female, or passive,
> elements of Cosmical generation)

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* Plato: "Timaeus."

\*\* "Suidas" v. Tyrrhenia."

\*\*\* The reader will understand that by "years" is meant "ages," not
mere periods of thirteen lunar months each.

\*\*\*\* See the Greek translation by Philo Byblius.

\*\*\*\*\* Cory: "Ancient Fragment."

\*\*\*\*\*\* Mithras was regarded among the Persians as the *Theos
ekpetros* -- god of the rock.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 341 ONE TREE OF KNOWLEDGE.

> Mithras is the son of Bordj, the Persian mundane mountain,\* from
> which he flashed out as a radiant ray of light. Brahma, the fire-god,
> and his prolific consort; and the Hindu Agni, the refulgent deity from
> whose body issue a thousand streams of glory and *seven* tongues of
> flame, and in whose honour certain Brahmans preserve to this day a
> *perpetual* fire; Siva, personated by the mundane mountain of the
> Hindus, the *Meru*: these terrific fire-gods, who are said in the
> legend to have descended from heaven, like the Jewish Jehovah, in a
> *pillar of fire*, and a dozen other Archaic double-sexed deities, all
> loudly proclaim their hidden meaning. And what could these dual myths
> mean but the psychochemical principle of primordial creation? The
> *first Evolution* in its triple manifestation of spirit, force and
> matter; the divine *correllation* at its starting point, allegorized
> as the marriage of *Fire* and water, products of electrifying spirit,
> union of the male active principle with the female passive element,
> which become the parents of their tellurian child, cosmic matter, the
> *prima materia*, whose soul is AEther, and whose shadow is the ASTRAL
> LIGHT!" (**I**SIS **U**NVEILED).

The fragments of the systems that have now reached us are rejected as
absurd fables. Nevertheless, occult Science -- having survived even the
great Flood that submersed the antediluvian giants and with them their
very memory, save in the Secret Doctrine, the Bible and other Scriptures
-- still holds the Key to all the world problems.

Let us apply that Key to the rare fragments of long-forgotten
cosmogonies and try by their scattered parts to re-establish the once
Universal Cosmogony of the Secret Doctrine. The Key fits them all. No
one can study ancient philosophies seriously without perceiving that the
striking similitude of conception between all -- in their exoteric form
very often, in their hidden spirit invariably -- is the result of no
mere coincidence, but of a concurrent design: and that there was, during
the youth of mankind, one languages, one knowledge, one universal
religion, when there were no churches, no creeds or sects, but when
every man was a priest unto himself. And, if it is shown that already in
those ages which are shut out from our sight by the exuberant growth of
tradition, human religious thought developed in uniform sympathy in
every portion of the globe; then, it becomes evident that, born under
whatever latitude, in the cold North or the burning South, in the East
or West, that thought was inspired by the same revelations, and man was
nurtured under the protecting shadow of the same TREE OF KNOWLEDGE.

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* Bordj is called a fire-mountain -- a volcano ; therefore it contains
fire, rock, earth and water: the male, or active and the female, or
passive, elements. The myth is suggestive.

--------------

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next Chapter](sd1-2-04)

[Contents](sd1-0-co.htm#contents)
