##### *The Secret Doctrine* by H. P. Blavatsky -- Vol. 1

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 213 THE CREATIVE POWERS.

#### STANZA VII.

1\. **B**EHOLD THE BEGINNING OF SENTIENT FORMLESS LIFE (*a*).

**F**IRST, THE DIVINE (*vehicle*) (*b*), THE ONE FROM THE MOTHER-SPIRIT
(*Atman*)*;* THEN THE **S**PIRITUAL -- (*Atma-Buddhi*,
*Spirit-soul*)*\** (*c*); (*again*) THE THREE FROM THE ONE (*d*), THE
FOUR FROM THE ONE (*e*), AND THE FIVE (f), FROM WHICH THE THREE, THE
FIVE AND THE SEVEN (*g*) -- THESE ARE THE THREE-FOLD AND THE FOUR-FOLD
DOWNWARD; THE "MIND-BORN SONS OF THE FIRST **L**ORD (*Avalokiteswara*)
THE **S**HINING **S**EVEN (*the* "*Builders*")*.*\*\* **I**T IS THEY WHO
ARE THOU, ME, HIM, **O** **L**ANOO; THEY WHO WATCH OVER THEE AND THY
MOTHER, **B**HUMI (*the* *Earth*)*.*

(*a*) The hierarchy of Creative Powers is divided into seven (or 4 and
3) esoteric, within the twelve great Orders, recorded in the twelve
signs of the Zodiac; the seven of the manifesting scale being connected,
moreover, with the Seven Planets. All this is subdivided into numberless
groups of divine Spiritual, semi-Spiritual, and ethereal Beings.

The Chief Hierarchies among these are hinted at in the great Quaternary,
or the "four bodies and the three faculties" of Brahma exoterically, and
the Panchasyam, the five Brahmas, or the five Dhyani-Buddhas in the
Buddhist system.

The highest group is composed of the divine Flames, so-called, also
spoken of as the "Fiery Lions" and the "Lions of Life," whose
esotericism is securely hidden in the Zodiacal sign of Leo. It is the
*nucleole* of the superior divine World (see *Commentary* in first pages
of Addendum). They are the formless Fiery Breaths, identical in one
aspect with the upper Sephirothal **T**RIAD, which is placed by the
Kabalists in the "Archetypal World."

The same hierarchy, with the same numbers, is found in the Japanese
system, in the "Beginnings" as taught by both the Shinto and the
Buddhist sects. In this system, Anthropogenesis precedes Cosmogenesis,
as the Divine merges into the human, and creates --

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* This relates to the Cosmic principles.

\*\* The seven creative Rishis now connected with the constellation of
the Great Bear

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 214 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

midway in its descent into matter -- the visible Universe. The legendary
personages -- remarks reverentially Omoie -- "having to be understood as
the stereotyped embodiment of the higher (secret) doctrine, and its
sublime truths." To state it at full length, however, would occupy too
much of our space, but a few words on this old system cannot be out of
place. The following is a short synopsis of this Anthropo-Cosmogenesis,
and it shows how closely the most separated notions echoed one and the
same Archaic teaching.

When all was as yet Chaos (*Kon-ton*) three spiritual Beings appeared on
the stage of future creation: (1) *Ame no ani naka nushi no Kami*,
"Divine Monarch of the Central Heaven"; (2) *Taka mi onosubi no Kami*,
"Exalted, imperial Divine offspring of Heaven and the Earth"; and (3)
*Kamu mi musubi no Kami*, "Offspring of the Gods," simply.

These were without form or substance (our *arupa* triad), as neither the
celestial nor the terrestrial substance had yet differentiated, "nor had
the essence of things been formed."

In the Zohar -- which, as now arranged and re-edited by Moses de Leon,
with the help of Syrian and Chaldean Christian Gnostics in the XIIth
century, and corrected and revised still later by many Christian hands,
is only a little less exoteric than the Bible itself -- this divine
"Vehicle" no longer appears as it does in the "Chaldean Book of
Numbers." True enough, Ain-Soph, the **A**BSOLUTE **E**NDLESS
**N**O-THING, uses also the form of the **O**NE, the manifested
"Heavenly man" (the FIRST CAUSE) as its chariot (*Mercabah*, in Hebrew;
*Vahan*, in Sanskrit) or vehicle to descend into, and manifest through,
in the phenomenal world. But the Kabalists neither make it plain how the
**A**BSOLUTE can use anything, or exercise any attribute whatever,
since, as the Absolute, it is devoid of attributes; nor do they explain
that in reality it is the First Cause (Plato's *Logos*) the original and
eternal IDEA, that manifests through Adam Kadmon, the *Second* Logos, so
to speak. In the "Book of Numbers" it is explained that **E**N (or
*Ain*, Aior) is the only self-existent, whereas its "Depth" (*Bythos* or
*Buthon* of the Gnostics, called *Propator*) is only periodical. The
latter is Brahm as differentiated from Brahma or Parabrahm. It is the
Depth, the Source of Light, or Propator, which is the *unmanifested*
Logos or the abstract *Idea*, and not Ain-Soph, *whose ray* uses
Adam-Kadmon or the *manifested* Logos (the objective Universe) "male and
female" -- as a chariot through which to manifest. But in the Zohar we
read the following incongruity: "*Senior*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 215 ONE PARENT FLAME, COUNTLESS FLAMES.

*occultatus est et absconditus; Microprosopus manifestus est*, *et non
manifestus.*" (*Rosenroth; Liber Mysterii*, IV*.*, 1.) This is a
fallacy, since *Microprosopus* or the *microcosm*, can only exist during
its manifestations, and is destroyed during the Maha-Pralayas.
Rosenroth's Kabala is no guide, but very often a puzzle.

(*b*) As in the Japanese system, in the Egyptian, and every old
cosmogony -- at this divine FLAME, The "One," are lit the three
descending groups. Having their potential being in the higher group,
they now become distinct and separate Entities. These are called the
"Virgins of Life," the "Great Illusion," etc., etc., and collectively
the "Six-pointed Star." The latter is the symbol, in almost every
religion, of the *Logos* as the first emanation. It is that of Vishnu in
India (the *Chakra*, or wheel), and the glyph of the Tetragrammaton, the
"He of the four letters" or -- metaphorically -- "the limbs of
Microprosopos" in the Kabala, which are ten and six respectively. The
later Kabalists however, especially the Christian mystics, have played
sad havoc with this magnificent symbol.\* For the "*ten* limbs" of the
Heavenly Man are the ten Sephiroth; but the first Heavenly Man is the
unmanifested Spirit of the Universe, and ought never to be degraded into
Microprosopus -- the lesser Face or Countenance, the prototype of man on
the terrestrial plane.\*\* Of this, however, later on. The six-pointed
Star refers to the six Forces or Powers of Nature, the six planes,
principles, etc., etc., all synthesized by the seventh, or the central
point in the Star. All these, the upper and lower hierarchies included,
emanate from the "Heavenly or Celestial Virgin,"\*\*\* the great mother
in all religions, the Androgyne, the

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* Indeed, the Microprosopus -- who is, philosophically speaking, quite
distinct from the unmanifested eternal Logos "one with the Father," --
has been finally brought, by centuries of incessant efforts, of
sophistry and paradoxes, to be considered as one with Jehovah, or the
ONE living God (!), whereas Jehovah is no better than Binah, a female
Sephiroth. This fact cannot be too frequently impressed upon the reader.

\*\* The Microprosopus is, as just said, the Logos manifested, and of
such there are many.

\*\*\* Sephira is the Crown, KETHER, in the abstract principle only, as
a mathematical *x* (the unknown quantity). On the plane of
differentiated nature she is the female counterpart of Adam Kadmon --
the first Androgyne. The Kabala teaches that the word "*Fiat Lux*"
(*Genesis* ch. i.) referred to the formation and evolution of the
Sephiroth, and not to light as opposed to darkness. Rabbi Simeon says:
"Oh com- \[\[Footnote continued on next page\]\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 216 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

Sephira-Adam-Kadmon. In its *Unity*, primordial light is the seventh, or
highest, principle, *Daivi-prakriti*, the light of the unmanifested
Logos. But in its differentiation it becomes *Fohat*, or the "Seven
Sons." The former is symbolised by the Central point in the
double-Triangle; the latter by the hexagon itself, or the "six limbs" of
the Microprosopus the Seventh being Malkuth, the "Bride" of the
Christian Kabalists, or our Earth. Hence the expressions:

"*The first after the* '*One*' *is divine Fire; the second*, *Fire and
AEther; the third is composed of Fire*, *AEther and Water; the fourth of
Fire*, *AEther*, *Water*, *and Air.*"*\* The One is not concerned with
Man-bearing globes*, *but with the inner invisible Spheres.* "*The*
'*First-Born*' *are the* **L**IFE, *the heart and pulse of the Universe;
the Second are its* **M**IND *or Consciousness*,"*\*\**

as said in the Commentary.

(*c*) The second Order of Celestial Beings, those of Fire and AEther
(corresponding to Spirit and Soul, or the Atma-Buddhi) whose names are
legion, are still formless, but more definitely "substantial." They are
the first differentiation in the Secondary Evolution or "Creation" -- a
misleading word. As the name shows, they are the prototypes of the
incarnating Jivas or Monads, and are composed of the Fiery Spirit of
Life. It is through these that passes, like a pure solar beam, the ray
which is furnished by them with its future vehicle, the Divine Soul,
Buddhi. These are directly concerned with the Hosts of the higher world
of *our* system. From these twofold *Units* emanate the *threefold.*

In the cosmogony of Japan, when, out of the chaotic mass, an egglike
nucleus appears, having within itself the germ and potency of all the
universal as well as of all terrestrial life, it is the "three-fold"
just named, which differentiates. "The male aethereal" (*Yo*) principle

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\[\[Footnote continued from previous page\]\] panions, companions, man
as an emanation was both man and woman, Adam Kadmon verily, and this is
the sense of the words 'Let there be Light, and it was Light.' And this
is the two-fold man." (*Auszuge aus dem Zohar*, pp. 13-15.)

\* See next footnote. These elements of Fire, Air, etc., are not our
compound elements.

\*\* This "Consciousness" has no relation to our consciousness. The
consciousness of the "One manifested," if not absolute, is still
unconditioned. Mahat (the Universal Mind) is the first production of the
Brahma-Creator, but also of the Pradhana (undifferentiated matter).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 217 TEACHINGS CONTRASTED.

ascends and the female grosser or more material principle (*In*) is
precipitated into the Universe of substance, when a separation occurs
between the celestial and the terrestrial. From this the female, the
mother, the first rudimentary objective being is born. It is ethereal,
without form or sex, and yet it is from this and the mother that the
Seven Divine Spirits are born, from whom will emanate *the seven
creations*, just as in the Codex Nazaraeus from Karabtanos and the
Mother *Spiritus* the seven *evilly disposed* (material) spirits are
born. It would be too long to give here the Japanese names, but once
translated they stand in this order: --

(1.) The "Invisible Celibate," which is the creative logos of the
noncreating "father," or the creative potentiality of the latter made
manifest.

(2.) "The Spirit (or the God) of the rayless depths" (of Chaos); which
becomes differentiated matter, or the world-stuff; also the mineral
realm.

(3.) "The Spirit of the Vegetable Kingdom," of the "Abundant
Vegetation."

(4.) This one is of dual nature, being at the same time "The Spirit of
the Earth" and "the Spirit of the Sands," the former containing the
potentiality of the male element, the latter that of the female element,
the two forming a combined nature.

These two were ONE; yet unconscious of being two.

In this duality were contained (*a*) the male, dark and muscular Being,
*Isu no gai no Kami;* and (*b*) *Eku gai no Kami*, the female, fair and
weaker or more delicate Being. Then, the: --

(5th and 6th.) Spirits who were androgynous or dual-sexed, and, finally:
--

(7.) The *Seventh* Spirit, the last emanated from the "mother," appears
as the first divine human form distinctly male and female. It was the
seventh creation, as in the Puranas, wherein man is the seventh creation
of Brahma.

These, *Tsanagi-Tsanami*, descended into the Universe by the celestial
Bridge (the milky way), and "*Tsanagi*, perceiving far below a chaotic
mass of cloud and water, thrust his jewelled spear into the depths, and
dry land appeared." Then the two separated to explore *Onokoro*, the
newly-created island-world; etc., etc. (*Omoie*)*.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 218 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

Such are the Japanese exoteric fables, the rind that conceals the kernel
of the same one truth of the Secret Doctrine. Turning back to the
esoteric explanations in every cosmogony: --

(*d*) The *Third* order corresponds to the *Atma-Buddhi-Manas:* Spirit,
Soul and Intellect, and is called the "Triads."

(*e*) The *Fourth* are substantial Entities. This is the highest group
among the *Rupas* (Atomic Forms\*). It is the nursery of the human,
conscious, spiritual Souls. They are called the "Imperishable Jivas,"
and constitute, through the order below their own, the first group of
the first septenary\*\* host -- the great mystery of human conscious and

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* It is worthy of notice that, while rejecting as a superstition of
Occultism, and religion too, the theory of substantial and invisible
Beings called Angels, Elementals, etc. -- without, of course, having
ever looked into the philosophy of these incorporeal Entities, or
thought over them -- modern chemistry, owing to observation and
discovery, should have unconsciously been forced to adopt and recognize
the same ratio of progression and order in the evolution of chemical
atoms as Occultism does, both for its Dhyanis and Atoms -- analogy being
its first law. As seen above, the very first group of the Rupa Angels is
quaternary, an element being added to each in descending order. So are
the atoms, adopting the phraseology of chemistry, monatomic, diatomic,
and tetratomic, progressing downwards. Let it be remembered that Fire,
Water, and Air, or the "Elements of primary Creation" so-called, are not
the compound Elements they are on Earth, but noumenal homogeneous
Elements -- the Spirits thereof. Then follow the septenary groups or
hosts. Placed on parallel lines in a diagram with Atoms, the Natures of
those Beings would be seen to correspond in their downward scale of
progression to composite elements in a mathematically identical manner,
as to analogy. This refers, of course, only to diagrams made by the
Occultists; for were the scale of Angelic Beings to be placed on a
parallel line with the scale of the chemical atoms of Science -- from
the hypothetical Helium down to Uranium -- they would of course be found
to differ. For these have, as correspondents on the Astral plane, only
the four lowest orders -- the higher three principles in the atom, or
rather molecule or chemical element, being perceptible only to the
initiated Dangma's eye. But then, if Chemistry desired to find itself on
the right path, it would have to correct its tabular arrangement by that
of the Occultists -- which it may refuse to do. In Esoteric Philosophy,
every physical particle corresponds to and depends on its higher
*noumenon* -- the Being to whose essence it belongs; and above as below,
the Spiritual evolves from the Divine, the psycho-mental from the
Spiritual -- tainted from its lower plane by the astral -- the whole
animate and (seemingly) inanimate Nature evolving on parallel lines, and
drawing its attributes from above as well as from below.

\*\* The number seven does not imply only seven Entities, but seven
groups or Hosts, as explained before. The highest group, the Asuras born
in Brahma's first body -- \[\[Footnote continued on next page\]\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 219 THE HIERARCHIES OF SPIRITS.

intellectual Being. For the latter are the field wherein lies concealed
*in its privation* the germ *that will fall into generation.* That germ
will become the spiritual potency in the physical cell that guides the
development of the embryo, and which is the cause of the hereditary
transmission of faculties and all the inherent qualities in man. The
Darwinian theory, however, of the transmission of acquired faculties, is
neither taught nor accepted in Occultism. Evolution, in it, proceeds on
quite other lines; the physical, according to esoteric teaching,
evolving gradually from the spiritual, mental, and psychic. This inner
soul of the physical cell -- this "spiritual plasm" that dominates the
germinal plasm -- is the key that must open one day the gates of the
terra incognita of the Biologist, now called the dark mystery of
Embryology. (*See text and note infra.*)

(*f*) The Fifth group is a very mysterious one, as it is connected with
the Microcosmic Pentagon, the five-pointed star representing man. In
India and Egypt these Dhyanis were connected with the Crocodile, and
their abode is in Capricornus. These are convertible terms in Indian
astrology, as this (tenth) sign of the Zodiac is called *Makara*,
loosely translated "crocodile." The word itself is occultly interpreted
in various ways, as will be shown further on. In Egypt the defunct man
-- whose symbol is the pentagram or the five-pointed star, the points of
which represent the limbs of a man -- was shown emblematically
transformed into a crocodile: Sebakh or Sevekh "or seventh," as Mr.
Gerald Massey says, showing it as having been the type of intelligence,
is a dragon in reality, not a crocodile. He is the "Dragon of Wisdom" or
Manas, the "Human Soul," Mind, the Intelligent principle, called in our
esoteric philosophy the "Fifth" principle.

Says the defunct "Osirified" in ch. lxxxviii., "Book of the Dead," or
the *Ritual*, under the glyph of a mummiform god with a crocodile's
head: --

\(1\) "I am the god (crocodile) presiding at the fear . . . at the
arrival of his Soul among men. I am the god-crocodile brought for
destruction" (an allusion to the destruction of divine spiritual purity

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\[\[Footnote continued from previous page\]\] which turned into "Night"
-- are septenary, *i.e.*, divided like the Pitris into seven classes,
three of which are arupa (bodiless) and four with bodies. (See Vishnu
Purana, Book I.) They are in fact more truly our *Pitris* (ancestors)
than the Pitris who projected the first physical men. (See Book II.)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 220 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

when man acquires the knowledge of good and evil; also to the "fallen"
gods, or angels of every theogony).

\(2\) "I am the fish of the great Horus (as *Mankara* is the
"crocodile," the vehicle of Varuna). I am merged in Sekten."

This last sentence gives the corroboration of, and repeats the doctrine
of, esoteric Buddhism, for it alludes directly to the fifth principle
(Manas), or the most spiritual part of its essence rather, which merges
into, is absorbed by, and made one with Atma-Buddhi after the death of
man. For Se-khen is the residence or *loka* of the god Khem
(Horus-Osiris, or Father and Son), hence the "Devachan" of Atma-Buddhi.
In the Ritual of the Dead the defunct is shown entering into Sekhem with
Horus-Thot and "emerging from it as pure spirit" (lxiv., 29). Thus the
defunct says (v. 130): "I see the forms of (myself, as various) men
transforming eternally . . . I know this (chapter). He who knows it . .
. takes all kinds of living forms." . . .

And in verse 35, addressing in magic formula that which is called, in
Egyptian esotericism, the "ancestral heart," or the re-incarnating
principle, the permanent **E**GO, the defunct says: --

"Oh my heart, my ancestral heart necessary for my transformations, . . .
. . . do not separate thyself from me before the guardian of the Scales.
Thou art my personality within my breast, divine companion *watching
over my fleshes* (bodies). . . . . . ."

It is in Sekhem that lies concealed "the Mysterious Face," or the real
man concealed under the false personality, the triple-crocodile of
Egypt, the symbol of the higher Trinity or human Triad, *Atma*, *Buddhi*
and *Manas.\** In all the ancient papyri the crocodile is called *Sebek*
(Seventh), while the water is the fifth principle esoterically; and, as
already stated, Mr. Gerald Massey shows that the crocodile was "the
Seventh Soul, the supreme one of seven -- the Seer unseen." Even
exoterically *Sekhem* is the residence of the god Khem, and Khem is
Horus avenging the death of his father Osiris, hence punishing the Sins
of man when he becomes a disembodied Soul. Thus the defunct

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* One of the explanations of the real though hidden meaning of this
Egyptian religious glyph is easy. The crocodile is the first to await
and meet the devouring fires of the morning sun, and very soon came to
personify the solar heat. When the sun arose, it was like the arrival on
earth and among men "of the divine soul which informs the Gods." Hence
the strange symbolism. The mummy donned the head of a crocodile to show
that it was a soul arriving from the earth.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 221 CORRELATION OF BEINGS.

"Osirified" became the god Khem, who "gleans the field of *Aanroo*,"
*i.e.*, he gleans either his reward or punishment, as that field is the
celestial locality (Devachan) where the defunct is given *wheat*, the
food of divine justice. The fifth group of the celestial Beings is
supposed to contain in itself the dual attributes of both the spiritual
and physical aspects of the Universe; the two poles, so to say, of Mahat
the Universal Intelligence, and the dual nature of man, the spiritual
and the physical. Hence its number Five, multiplied and made into ten,
connecting it with *Makara*, the 10th sign of Zodiac.

(*g*) The sixth and seventh groups partake of the lower qualities of the
Quaternary. They are conscious, ethereal Entities, as invisible as
Ether, which are shot out like the boughs of a tree from the first
central group of the four, and shoot out in their turn numberless side
groups, the lower of which are the Nature-Spirits, or Elementals of
countless kinds and varieties; from the formless and unsubstantial --
the ideal THOUGHTS of their creators -- down to the Atomic, though, to
human perception, invisible organisms. The latter are considered as the
"Spirits of Atoms" for they are the first remove (backwards) from the
physical Atom -- sentient, if not intelligent creatures. They are all
subject to Karma, and have to work it out through every cycle. For, as
the doctrine teaches, there are no such privileged beings in the
universe, whether in our or in other systems, in the outer or the inner
worlds,\* as the angels of the Western Religion and the Judean. A Dhyan
Chohan has to become one; he cannot be born or appear suddenly on the
plane of life as a full-blown angel. The Celestial Hierarchy of the
present Manvantara will find itself transferred in the next cycle of
life into higher, superior worlds, and will make room for a new
hierarchy, composed of the elect ones of our mankind. Being is an
endless cycle within the one absolute eternity, wherein move numberless
inner cycles finite and conditioned. Gods, created as such, would evince
no personal merit in being gods. Such a class of beings, perfect only by
virtue of the special immaculate nature inherent in them, in the face of
suffering and struggling humanity, and even of the lower creation, would
be the

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* A world when called "a higher world" is not higher by reason of its
location, but because it is superior in quality or essence. Yet such a
world is generally understood by the profane as "Heaven," and located
above our heads.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 222 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

symbol of an eternal injustice quite Satanic in character, an ever
present crime. It is an anomaly and an impossibility in Nature.
Therefore the "Four" and the "Three" have to incarnate as all other
beings have. This sixth group, moreover, remains almost inseparable from
man, who draws from it all but his highest and lowest principles, or his
spirit and body, the five middle human principles being the very essence
of those Dhyanis.\* Alone, the Divine Ray (the Atman) proceeds directly
from the One. When asked how that can be? How is it possible to conceive
that those "gods," or angels, can be at the same time their own
emanations and their personal selves? Is it in the same sense in the
material world, where the son is (in one way) his father, being his
blood, the bone of his bone and the flesh of his flesh? To this the
teachers answer "Verily it is so." But one has to go deep into the
mystery of BEING before one can fully comprehend this truth.

-------

#### STANZA VII. -- *Continued.*

2\. **T**HE ONE RAY MULTIPLIES THE SMALLER RAYS. **L**IFE PRECEDES FORM,
AND LIFE SURVIVES THE LAST ATOM (*of Form*, *Sthula-sarira*, *external
body*)*.* **T**HROUGH THE COUNTLESS RAYS THE LIFE-RAY, THE ONE, LIKE A
THREAD THROUGH MANY BEADS (*pearls*) (*a*)*.*

(*a*) This sloka expresses the conception -- a purely Vedantic one, as
already explained elsewhere -- of a life-thread, *Sutratma*, running
through successive generations. How, then, can this be explained? By
resorting to a simile, to a familiar illustration, though necessarily
imperfect, as all our available analogies must be. Before resorting to
it, however, I would ask whether it seems *unnatural*, least of all
"supernatural," to any one of us, when we consider that process known as
the growth and development of a foetus into a healthy baby weighing
several pounds evolves from what? From the segmentation of an
infinitesimally small ovum and a spermatozoon; and afterwards we see
that baby develop into a six-foot man! This refers to the atomic and
physical

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* Paracelsus calls them the *Flagae;* the Christians, the "Guardian
Angels;" the Occultist, the "Ancestors, the Pitris;" they are the
*sixfold* Dhyan Chohans, having the six spiritual Elements in the
composition of their bodies -- in fact, men, minus the physical body.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 223 THE MYSTERY OF BEING.

expansion from the microscopically small into something very large, from
the -- to the naked eye -- unseen, into the visible and objective.
Science has provided for all this; and, I dare say, her theories,
embryological, biological, and physiological, are correct enough so far
as exact observation of the material goes. Nevertheless, the two chief
difficulties of the science of embryology -- namely, what are the forces
at work in the formation of the foetus, and the *cause* of "hereditary
transmission" of likeness, physical, moral or mental -- have never been
properly answered; nor will they ever be solved till the day when
scientists condescend to accept the Occult theories.\* But if this
physical pheno-

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* The materialists and the evolutionists of the Darwinian school would
be ill-advised to accept the newly worked-out theories of Professor
Weissmann, the author of *Beitrage zur Descendenzlehre*, with regard to
one of the two mysteries of Embryology, as above specified, which he
seems to have solved -- as he thinks. For, when it is solved, Science
will have stepped over into the domain of the truly occult, and stepped
for ever out of the realm of transformation, as taught by Darwin. The
two are irreconcileable, from the standpoint of materialism. Regarded
from that of the Occultists, it solves all these mysteries. Those who
are not acquainted with the new discovery of Professor Weissman -- at
one time a fervent Darwinist -- ought to hasten to repair the
deficiency. The German Embryologist-philosopher shows -- thus stepping
over the heads of the Greek Hippocrates and Aristotle, right back into
the teachings of the old Aryans -- one infinitesimal cell, out of
millions of others at work in the formation of an organism, determining
alone and unaided, by means of constant segmentation and multiplication,
the correct image of the future man (or animal) in its physical, mental,
and psychic characteristics. It is that cell which impresses on the face
and form of the new individual the features of the parents or of some
distant ancestor; it is that cell again which transmits to him the
intellectual and mental idiosyncracies of his sires, and so on. This
Plasm is the immortal portion of our bodies -- simply through the
process of successive assimilations. Darwin's theory, viewing the
embryological cell as an essence or the extract from all other cells, is
set aside; it is incapable of accounting for hereditary transmission.
There are but two ways of explaining the mystery of heredity; either the
substance of the germinal cell is endowed with the faculty of crossing
the whole cycle of transformations that lead to the construction of a
separate organism and then to the reproduction of identical germinal
cells; or, *those germinal cells do not have their genesis at all in the
body of the individual*, *but proceed directly from the ancestral
germinal cell passed from father to son through long generations.* It is
the latter hypothesis that Weissmann accepted and has worked upon; and
it is to this cell that he traces the immortal portion of man. So far,
so good; and when this almost correct theory is accepted, how will
Biologists explain the first appearance of this everlasting cell? Unless
man "grew" like the "immortal Topsy," and was not born at all, but fell
from the clouds, how was that embryological cell born in him?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 224 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

menon astonishes no one, except in so far as it puzzles the
Embryologists, why should our intellectual and inner growth, the
evolution of the human-spiritual to the Divine-Spiritual, be regarded
as, or seem, more impossible than the other? Now to the simile.

Complete the physical plasm, mentioned in the last foot-note, the
"Germinal Cell" of man with all its material potentialities, with the
"spiritual plasm," so to say, or the fluid that contains the five lower
principles of the six-principled Dhyan -- and you have the secret, if
you are spiritual enough to understand it.

"When the seed of the animal man is cast into the soil of the animal
woman, that seed cannot germinate unless it has been fructified by the
five virtues (the fluid of, or the emanation from the principles) of the
six-fold Heavenly man. Wherefore the Microcosm is represented as a
Pentagon, within the Hexagon Star, the "Macrocosm."
("\[\[*Anthropos*\]\],") a work on Occult Embryology, Book I.). Then:
"The functions of *Jiva* on this Earth are of a five-fold character. In
the mineral atom it is connected with the lowest principles of the
Spirits of the Earth (the six-fold Dhyanis); in the vegetable particle,
with their second -- the *Prana* (life); in the animal, with all these
plus the third and the fourth; in man, the germ must receive the
fruition of all the five. Otherwise he will be born no higher than an
animal"; namely, a congenital idiot. Thus in man alone the Jiva is
complete. As to his seventh principle, it is but one of the Beams of the
Universal Sun. Each rational creature receives only the temporary loan
of that which has to return to its source; while his physical body is
shaped by the lowest terrestrial lives, through physical, chemical, and
physiological evolution. "The Blessed Ones have nought to do with the
purgations of matter." (Kabala, Chaldean Book of Numbers).

It comes to this: Mankind in its first prototypal, shadowy form, is the
offspring of the Elohim of Life (or Pitris); in its qualitative and
physical aspect it is the direct progeny of the "Ancestors," the lowest
Dhyanis, or Spirits of the Earth; for its moral, psychic, and spiritual
nature, it is indebted to a group of divine Beings, the name and
characteristics of which will be given in Book II. Collectively, men are
the handiwork of hosts of various spirits; distributively, the
tabernacles of those hosts; and occasionally and singly, the vehicles of
some of them. In our present all-material Fifth Race, the earthly Spirit
of the

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 225 SPIRIT FALLING INTO MATTER.

Fourth is still strong in us; but we are approaching the time when the
pendulum of evolution will direct its swing decidedly upwards, bringing
Humanity back on a parallel line with the primitive third Root-Race in
Spirituality. During its childhood, mankind was composed wholly of that
Angelic Host, who were the indwelling Spirits that animated the
monstrous and gigantic tabernacles of clay of the Fourth Race built by
(as they are now also) and composed of countless myriads of lives.\*
This sentence will be explained later on in the present Commentary. The
"tabernacles" have improved in texture and symmetry of form, growing and
developing with the globe that bore them; but the physical improvement
took place at the expense of the spiritual inner man and nature. The
three middle principles in earth and man became with every race more
material; the Soul stepping back to make room for the physical
intellect; the essence of elements becoming the material and composite
elements now known.

Man is not, nor could he ever be, the complete product of the "Lord
God"; but he *is* the child of the *Elohim*, so arbitrarily changed into
the singular masculine gender. The first Dhyanis, commissioned to
"create" man in their image, could only throw off their shadows, like a
delicate model for the Nature Spirits of matter to work upon. (See Book
II.) Man is, beyond any doubt, formed physically out of the dust of the
Earth, but his creators and fashioners were many. Nor can it be said
that the "Lord God breathed into his nostrils the breath of life,"
unless that God is identified with the "**O**NE **L**IFE," Omnipresent
though invisible, and unless the same operation is attributed to "God"
on behalf of every *living Soul* -- or *Nephesch*, which is the *vital*
Soul, not the divine Spirit or *Ruach*, which ensures to man alone a
divine degree of immortality, that no animal, as such, could ever attain
in this cycle of incarnation. It is the inadequate distinctions made by
the Jews, and now by our Western metaphysicians, who, not knowing of,
and being unable to understand, hence to accept, more than a triune man
-- Spirit, Soul,

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* Science, dimly perceiving the truth, may find Bacteria and other
infinitesimals in the human body, and see in them but occasional and
abnormal visitors to which diseases are attributed. Occultism -- which
discerns a life in every atom and molecule, whether in a mineral or
human body, in air, fire or water -- affirms that our whole body is
built of such lives, the smallest bacteria under the microscope being to
them in comparative size like an elephant to the tiniest infusoria.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 226 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

Body -- thus confuse the "breath of life" with immortal Spirit.\* This
applies also directly to the Protestant theologians, who, in translating
verse 8 of Ch. III. in the Fourth Gospel, have entirely perverted the
meaning. Indeed the verse is made to say "The *wind* bloweth where it
listeth," instead of "the *Spirit* goeth where it willeth," as in the
original and also in the translation of the Greek Eastern Church.

Thus the philosophy of psychic, spiritual, and mental relations with
man's physical functions is in almost inextricable confusion. Neither
the old Aryan, nor the Egyptian psychology are now properly understood.
Nor can they be assimilated without accepting the esoteric septenary,
or, at any rate, the Vedantic quinquepartite division of the human inner
principles. Failing which, it will be for ever impossible to understand
the metaphysical and purely psychic and even physiological relations
between the Dhyan-Chohans, or Angels, on the one plane, and humanity on
the other. No Eastern (Aryan) esoteric works are so far published, but
we possess the Egyptian papyri which speak clearly

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* The learned and very philosophical author of "New Aspects of Life"
would impress upon his reader that the *Nephesh chaiah* (living soul),
according to the Hebrews, "proceeded from, or was produced by, the
infusion of the Spirit or Breath of Life into the quickening body of
man, and was to supersede and take the place of that spirit in the thus
constituted self, so that the spirit passed into, was lost sight of, and
disappeared in the living Soul." The human body, he thinks, ought to be
viewed as a matrix in which, and from which, the Soul (which he seems to
place higher than the spirit) is developed -- considered *functionally*
and from the standpoint of activity, the Soul stands undeniably higher
in this finite and conditioned world of Maya -- the Soul, he says, "is
ultimately produced from the animated body of man." Thus the author
identifies "Spirit" (Atma) simply with "the breath of life." The Eastern
Occultists will demur to this statement, for it is based on the
erroneous conception that *Prana* and *Atma* or *Jivatma* are one and
the same thing. The author supports the argument by showing that with
the ancient Hebrews, Greeks and even Latins, *Ruach*, *Pneuma* and
*Spiritus* -- with the Jews undeniably, and with the Greeks and Romans
very probably -- meant Wind; the Greek word *Anemos* (wind) and the
Latin *Anima* "Soul" having a suspicious relation.

This is very far fetched. A legitimate battle-field for deciding this
question is hardly to be found, since Mr. Pratt seems to be a practical,
matter-of-fact metaphysician, a kind of Kabalist-Positivist, and the
Eastern metaphysicians, especially the Vedantins, are all Idealists. The
Occultists are also of the extreme esoteric Vedantin school, and they
call the One Life (Parabrahm), the Great Breath and the Whirlwind; but
they disconnect the seventh principle entirely from matter or any
relation to, or connection with it.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 227 THE EGYPTIAN SYSTEM.

of the seven principles or the "Seven Souls of Man."\* The Book of the
Dead gives a complete list of the "transformations" that every defunct
undergoes, while divesting himself, one by one, of all those principles
-- materialised for the sake of clearness into ethereal entities or
bodies. We must, moreover, remind those who try to prove that the
ancient Egyptians knew nothing of and did not teach Reincarnation, that
the "Soul" (the *Ego* or *Self*) of the defunct is said to be living in
Eternity: it is immortal, "co-eval with, and disappearing with the Solar
boat," *i.e.*, for the cycle of necessity. This "Soul" *emerges from the
Tiaou* (the realm *of the cause of life*) and joins the living on Earth
*by* *day*, to return to *Tiaou* every night. This expresses the
periodical existences of the Ego. (Book of the Dead, cvxliii.)

The *shadow*, the astral form, is annihilated, "devoured by the Uraeus"
(cxlix., 51), the *Manes* will be annihilated; the two twins (the 4th
and 5th principles) will be scattered; but the Soul-bird, "the divine
Swallow -- and the Uraeus of Flame" (Manas and Atma-Buddhi) will live in
the eternity, for they are their mother's husbands.\*\*

Like alone produces like. The Earth gives Man his body, the gods
(Dhyanis) his five inner principles, the psychic Shadow, of which those
gods are often the animating principle. **S**PIRIT (Atman) is one -- and
indiscrete. It is not in the *Tiaou.*

For what is the *Tiaou?* The frequent allusion to it in the "Book of the
Dead" contains a mystery. *Tiaou* is the path of the Night Sun, the
inferior hemisphere, or the infernal region of the Egyptians, placed by
them on the *concealed side of the moon.* The human being, in their

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

*\* Vide* in Part II., Book II., "The Seven Souls of Man," the divisions
made respectively by Messrs. Gerald Massey and Franz Lambert.

\*\* Another suggestive analogy between the Aryan or Brahmanical and the
Egyptian esotericism. The former call the Pitris "the lunar ancestors"
of men; and the Egyptians made of the Moon-God, Taht-Esmun, the first
human ancestor. This "moon-god" "expressed the Seven nature-powers that
were prior to himself, and were summed up in him as his seven souls, of
which he was the manifestor as the eighth one (hence the eighth sphere).
The seven rays of the Chaldean Heptakis or Iao, on the Gnostic stones
indicate the same septenary of souls." . . . "The first form of the
mystical SEVEN was seen to be figured in heaven, by the seven large
stars of the Great Bear, the constellation assigned by the Egyptians to
the Mother of Time, and of the seven elemental powers." (See *The Seven
Souls*, etc.) As well known to every Hindu, this same constellation
represents in India the Seven Rishis, and as such is called *Riksha*,
and *Chitra-Sikhandinas.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 228 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

esotericism, came out from the moon (a triple mystery -- astronomical,
physiological, and psychical at once); he crossed the whole cycle of
existence and then returned to his birth-place before issuing from it
again. Thus the defunct is shown arriving in the West, receiving his
judgment before Osiris, resurrecting as the god Horus, and circling
round the sidereal heavens, which is an allegorical assimilation to Ra,
the Sun; then having crossed the *Noot* (the celestial abyss), returning
once more to Tiaou: an assimilation to Osiris, who, as the God of life
and reproduction, inhabits the moon. Plutarch (Isis and Osiris, ch.
xliii.) shows the Egyptians celebrating a festival called "The Ingress
of Osiris into the moon." In chapter xli. life is promised after death;
and the renovation of life is placed under the patronage of
Osiris-Lunus, because the moon was the symbol of life-renewals or
reincarnations, owing to its growth, waning, dying, and reappearance
every month. In the *Dankmoe*, (iv. 5) it is said: -- "Oh, Osiris-Lunus!
That renews to thee thy renewal." And Safekh says to Seti I. (Mariette's
Abydos, plate 51), "Thou renewest thyself as the god Lunus when a babe."
It is still better explained in a Louvre papyrus (P. Pierret, "Etudes
Egyptologiques"): "Couplings and conceptions abound when he
(Osiris-Lunus) is seen in heaven on that day." Says Osiris: "Oh, sole
radiant beam of the moon! I issue from the circulating multitudes (of
stars) . . . . . . Open me the Tiaou, for Osiris N. I will issue by day
to do what I have to do amongst the living" ("Book of the Dead," ch.
ii.), -- *i.e.*, to produce conceptions.

Osiris was "God manifest in generation," because the ancients knew, far
better than the moderns, the real occult influences of the lunar body
upon the mysteries of conception.\* Later on, when the moon became
connected with female goddesses\*\* -- with Diana, Isis, Artemis,

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* In the oldest systems we find the Moon always male. Thus Soma is,
with the Hindus, a kind of sidereal Don Juan, a "King," and the father,
albeit illegitimate, of Buddha -- Wisdom, which relates to Occult
Knowledge, a wisdom gathered through a thorough acquaintance with lunar
mysteries including those of sexual generation. (See "Holy of Holies.")

\*\* If instead of being taught in Sunday Schools useless lessons from
the Bible, the armies of the ragged and the poor were taught Astrology
-- so far, at any rate, as the occult properties of the Moon and its
hidden influences on generation are concerned, then there would be
little need to fear increase of the population nor to resort to the
questionable literature of the Malthusians for its arrest. For it is the
Moon and her \[\[Footnote continued on next page\]\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 229 MANY STREAMS, BUT ONE SOURCE.

Juno, etc., that connection was due to a thorough knowledge of
physiology and female nature, physical as much as psychic. But,
primarily, the Sun and Moon were the only visible and, so to say,
*tangible* \[by their effects\] psychic and physiological deities -- the
Father and the Son, while Space and air in general, or that expanse of
Heaven called Noot by the Egyptians, was the concealed Spirit or Breath
of the two. These "Father and Son" were interchangeable in their
functions and worked harmoniously together in their effects upon
terrestrial nature and humanity; hence they were regarded as ONE, though
TWO in personified Entities. They were both males, and both had their
distinct and also collaborative work in the causative generation of
Humanity. So much from the astronomical and cosmic standpoints viewed
and expressed in symbolical language -- which became in our last races
theological and dogmatic. But behind this veil of Cosmic and
Astrological symbols, there were the Occult mysteries of Anthropography
and the primeval genesis of man. And in this, no knowledge of symbols --
or even the key to the *post-diluvian* symbolical language of the Jews
-- will, or can help, save only with reference to that which was laid
down in national scriptures for exoteric uses; the sum of which, however
cleverly veiled, was only the smallest portion of the real primitive
history of each people, often relating, moreover, -- as in the Hebrew
Scriptures -- merely to the terrestrial human, not divine life of that
nation. That psychic and spiritual element belonged to MYSTERY and
INITIATION. There were things never recorded in scrolls, but, as in
Central Asia, on rocks and in subterranean crypts.

Nevertheless, there was a time when the whole world was "of one lip and
of one knowledge," and Man knew more of his origin than he does now, and
thus knew that the Sun and Moon, however large a part they do play in
the constitution, growth and development of the human body, were not the
direct causative agents of his appearance on Earth;

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\[\[Footnote continued from previous page\]\] conjunctions that regulate
conceptions, and every astrologer in India knows it. During the previous
and the present races, at least at the beginning of this one, those who
indulged in marital relations during certain lunar phases that made
those relations sterile were regarded as sorcerers and sinners. But even
now those sins of old, based on the Occult knowledge and the abuse of
it, would appear preferable to the crimes of to-day, which are
perpetrated because of the complete ignorance of, and disbelief in all
such occult influences.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 230 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

these agents being, in truth, the living and intelligent Powers which
the Occultists call Dhyan Chohans.

As to this, a very learned admirer of the Jewish Esotericism tells us
that "the Kabala says expressly that Elohim is a '*general
abstraction*'*;* what we call in mathematics 'a constant co-efficient'
or a 'general function' entering into all construction, not particular;
that is, by the general ratio 1 to 31415, (the astro-Dhyanic and)
Elohistic figures." To this the Eastern Occultist replies: Quite so, it
is an abstraction to our physical senses. To our spiritual perceptions,
however, and to our inner spiritual eye, the Elohim or Dhyanis are no
more an abstraction than our soul and spirit are to us. Reject the one
and you reject the other -- since that which is the *surviving Entity in
us* is partly the direct emanation from, and partly *those celestial
Entities themselves.* One thing is sure; the Jews were perfectly
acquainted with sorcery and various maleficent forces; but, with the
exception of some of their great prophets and seers like Daniel and
Ezekiel (Enoch belonging to a far distant race and not to any nation but
to all, as a generic character), they knew little of, nor would they
deal with, the real divine Occultism, their national character being
averse to anything which had no direct bearing upon their own ethnical,
tribal, and individual benefits -- witness their own prophets, and the
curses thundered by them against the "stiff-necked race." But even the
Kabala plainly shows the direct relation between the Sephiroth, or
Elohim, and men.

Therefore, when it is proved to us that the Kabalistic identification of
Jehovah with Binah, a female Sephiroth, has still another, a sub-occult
meaning in it, then and then only the Occultist will be ready to pass
the palm of perfection to the Kabalist. Until then, it is asserted that,
as Jehovah is in the abstract sense of a "one living God," a single
number, a metaphysical figment, and a reality only when put in his
proper place as an emanation and a Sephiroth -- we have a right to
maintain that the Zohar (as witnessed by the **B**OOK OF **N**UMBERS, at
any rate), gave out originally, before the Christian Kabalists had
disfigured it, and still gives out the same doctrine that we do; *i.e.*,
it makes Man emanate, not from one Celestial **M**AN, but from a
Septenary group of Celestial men or Angels, just as in "Pymander, the
Thought Divine."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 231 THE DIFFERENTIATION OF THE "ONE."

#### STANZA VII. -- *Continued.*

\(3\) **W**HEN THE ONE BECOMES TWO -- THE "THREE-FOLD" APPEARS (*a*).
**T**HE THREE ARE (*linked into*) ONE; AND IT IS OUR THREAD, **O**
**L**ANOO, THE HEART OF THE MAN-PLANT, CALLED **S**APTAPARNA (*b*).

(*a*) "When the ONE becomes two, the three-fold appears": to wit, when
the One Eternal drops its reflection into the region of Manifestation,
that reflection, "the Ray," differentiates the "Water of Space"; or, in
the words of the "Book of the Dead"; "Chaos ceases, through the
effulgence of the Ray of Primordial light dissipating total darkness by
the help of the great magic power of the WORD of the (Central) Sun."
Chaos becomes male-female, and Water, incubated through Light, and the
"three-fold being issues as its First-born." "Osiris-Ptah (or RA)
creates his own limbs (like Brahma) by creating the gods destined to
personify his phases" during the Cycle (xvii., 4). The Egyptian Ra,
issuing from the DEEP, is the Divine Universal Soul in its manifested
aspect, and so is Narayana, the Purusha, "*concealed in Akasa and
present in Ether.*"

This is the metaphysical explanation, and refers to the very beginning
of Evolution, or, as we should rather say, of Theogony. The meaning of
the Stanza when explained from another standpoint in its reference to
the mystery of man and his origin, is still more difficult to
comprehend. In order to form a clear conception of what is meant by the
One becoming two, and then being transformed into the "three-fold," the
student has to make himself thoroughly acquainted with what we call
"Rounds." If he refers to "Esoteric Buddhism" -- the first attempt to
sketch out an approximate outline of archaic Cosmogony -- he will find
that by a "Round" is meant the serial evolution of nascent material
nature, of the seven globes of our chain\* with their mineral,

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* Several inimical critics are anxious to prove that no seven
principles of man nor septenary constitution of our chain were taught in
our earlier volume, "Isis Unveiled." Though in that work the doctrine
could only be hinted at, there are many passages, nevertheless, in which
the septenary constitution of both man and chain is openly mentioned.
Speaking of the Elohim in Vol. II., page 420, it is said: "They remain
over the seventh heaven (or spiritual world), for it is they who,
according to the Kabalists, formed in succession the six material
worlds, or rather, attempts at worlds that preceded our own, which, they
say, is the seventh." Our globe is, of course, upon the diagram
representing the "chain," the seventh and the lowest; though,
\[\[Footnote continued on next page\]\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 232 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

vegetable, and animal kingdoms (man being there included in the latter
and standing at the head of it) during the whole period of a life-cycle.
The latter would be called by the Brahmins "a Day of Brahma." It is, in
short, one revolution of the "Wheel" (our planetary chain), which is
composed of seven globes (or seven separate "Wheels," in another sense
this time). When evolution has run downward into matter, from planet A
to planet G, or Z, as the Western students call it, it is one Round. In
the middle of the Fourth revolution, which is our present "Round":
"Evolution has reached its acme of physical development, crowned its
work with the perfect physical man, and, from this point, begins its
work spirit-ward." All this needs little repetition, as it is well
explained in "Esoteric Buddhism." That which was hardly touched upon,
and of which the little that was said has misled many, is the origin of
man, and it is upon this that a little more light may now be thrown,
just enough to make the Stanza more comprehensible, as the process will
be fully explained only in its legitimate place, in Book II.

Now every "Round" (on the descending scale) is but a repetition in a
more concrete form of the Round which preceded it, as every globe --
down to our fourth sphere (the actual earth) -- is a grosser and more
material copy of the more shadowy sphere which precedes it in their
successive order, on the three higher planes. (See diagram in Stanza VI.
Comm. 6). On its way upwards on the ascending arc, Evolution
spiritualises and etherealises, so to speak, the general nature of all,
bringing it on to a level with the plane on which the twin globe on the
opposite side is placed; the result being, that when the seventh globe
is reached (in whatever Round) the nature of everything that is evolving
returns to the condition it was in at its starting point -- plus, every
time, a new and superior degree in the states of consciousness. Thus it
becomes clear that the "origin of man," so-called, on this our present

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\[\[Footnote continued from previous page\]\] as the evolution on these
globes is cyclic, it is the fourth in descending the arc of matter. And
again, on page 367, Vol. II., it is written: "In the Egyptian notions,
*as in those of all other faiths founded on philosophy*, man was not
merely . . . an union of soul and body; he was a trinity when spirit was
added to it; and besides that doctrine made him consist of body, astral
form, or shadow, the animal soul, the higher soul, and terrestrial
intelligence and a sixth principle, etc., etc. -- the seventh --
**S**PIRIT." So clearly are these principles mentioned, that even in the
*Index*, one finds on page 683: -- \\"Six principles of man" -- the
seventh being the synthesis of the six, and *not a principle* but a ray
of the Absolute **A**LL -- in strict truth.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 233 WHAT INCARNATES IN ANIMAL MAN.

Round, or life-cycle on this planet, must occupy the same place in the
same order -- save details based on local conditions and time -- as in
the preceding Round. Again, it must be explained and remembered that, as
the work of each Round is said to be apportioned to a different group of
so-called "Creators" or "Architects," so is that of every globe; *i.e.*,
it is under the supervision and guidance of special "Builders" and
"Watchers" -- the various Dhyan-Chohans.

The group of the hierarchy which is commissioned to "create"\* men is a
special group, then; yet it evolved shadowy man in this cycle just as a
higher and still more spiritual group evolved him in the Third Round.
But as it is the Sixth -- on the downward scale of Spirituality -- the
last and seventh being the terrestrial Spirits (elementals) which
gradually form, build, and condense his physical body -- this Sixth
group evolves no more than the future man's shadowy form, a filmy,
hardly visible transparent copy of themselves. It becomes the task of
the fifth Hierarchy -- the mysterious beings that preside over the
constellation Capricornus, Makara, or "Crocodile" in India as in Egypt
-- to inform the empty and ethereal animal form and make of it the
Rational Man. This is one of those subjects upon which very little may
be said to the general public. It is a MYSTERY, truly, but only to him
who is prepared to reject the existence of intellectual and conscious
spiritual Beings in the Universe, limiting full Consciousness to man
alone, and that only as a "function of the Brain." Many are those among
the Spiritual Entities, who have incarnated bodily in man, since the
beginning of his appearance, and who, for all that, still exist as
independently as they did before, in the infinitudes of Space. . . .

To put it more clearly: the invisible Entity may be bodily present on
earth without abandoning, however, its status and functions in the
supersensuous regions. If this needs explanation, we can do no better
than remind the reader of like cases in Spiritualism, though such cases
are very rare, at least as regards the nature of the Entity
incarnating,\*\*

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* Creation is an incorrect word to use, as no religion, not even the
sect of the Visishta Adwaitees in India -- one which anthropomorphises
even Parabrahmam -- believes in creation out of *nihil* as Christians
and Jews do, but in evolution out of preexisting materials.

\*\* The so-called "Spirits" that may occasionally possess themselves of
the bodies of mediums are not the Monads or Higher Principles of
disembodied personalities. Such a "Spirit" can only be either an
Elementary, or -- a Nirmanakaya.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 234 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

or taking temporary possession of a medium. Just as certain persons --
men and women, reverting to parallel cases among living persons --
whether by virtue of a peculiar organization, or through the power of
acquired mystic knowledge, can be seen in their "double" in one place,
while the body is many miles away; so the same thing can occur in the
case of superior Beings.

Man, philosophically considered, is, in his outward form, simply an
animal, hardly more perfect than his pithecoid-like ancestor of the
third round. He is a living body, not a living being, since the
realisation of existence, the "Ego-Sum," necessitates
self-consciousness, and an animal can only have direct consciousness, or
instinct. This was so well understood by the Ancients that the Kabalist
even made of soul and body two lives, independent of each other.\* The
soul, whose body vehicle is the Astral, ethero-substantial envelope,
could die and man be still living on earth -- *i.e.*, the soul could
free itself from and quit the tabernacle for various reasons -- such as
insanity, spiritual and physical depravity, etc.\*\* Therefore, that
which living men (Initiates)

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* On p. 340-351 (Genesis of the Soul) in the "*New Aspects of Life*,"
the Author states the Kabalistic teaching: "They held that,
functionally, Spirit and Matter of corresponding opacity and density
tended to coalesce; and that the resultant created Spirits, in the
disembodied state, were constituted on a scale in which the differing
opacities and transparencies of Elemental or uncreated Spirit were
reproduced. And that these Spirits in the disembodied state attracted,
appropriated, digested and assimilated Elemental Spirit and Elemental
Matter whose condition was conformed to their own." "They therefore
taught that there was a wide difference in the condition of created
Spirits; and that in the intimate association between the Spirit-world
and the world of Matter, the more opaque Spirits in the disembodied
state were drawn towards the more dense parts of the material world, and
therefore tended towards the centre of the Earth, where they found the
conditions most suited to their state; while the more transparent
Spirits passed into the surrounding aura of the planet, the most
rarified finding their home in its satellite."

This relates exclusively to our Elementary Spirits, and has naught to do
with either the Planetary, Sidereal, Cosmic or Inter-Etheric Intelligent
Forces or "Angels" as they are termed by the Roman Church. The Jewish
Kabalists, especially the practical Occultists who dealt with ceremonial
magic, busied themselves solely with the spirits of the Planets and the
"Elementals" so-called. Therefore this covers only a portion of the
Esoteric Teaching.

\*\* The possibility of the "Soul" (*i.e.*, the eternal Spiritual Ego)
dwelling in the unseen worlds, while its body goes on living on Earth,
is a pre-eminently occult doctrine, especially in Chinese and Buddhist
philosophy. See "Isis Unveiled," vol. i., \[\[Footnote continued on next
page\]\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 235 DII SUNT DEMONES INVERSI.

can do, the Dhyanis, who have no physical body to hamper them, can do
still better. This was the belief of the Antediluvians, and it is fast
becoming that of modern intellectual society, in Spiritualism, besides
the Greek and Roman Churches, which teach the ubiquity of their angels.
The Zoroastrians regarded their Amshaspends as dual entities (Ferouers),
applying this duality -- in esoteric philosophy, at any rate -- to all
the spiritual and invisible denizens of the numberless worlds in space
which are visible to our eye. In a note of Damascius (sixth century) on
the Chaldean oracles, we have a triple evidence of the universality of
this doctrine, for he says: "In these oracles the seven Cosmocratores of
the world, ('The World-Pillars,') mentioned likewise by St. Paul, are
double -- one set being commissioned to rule the superior worlds the
spiritual and the sidereal, and the other to guide and watch over the
worlds of matter." Such is also the opinion of Jamblichus, who makes an
evident distinction between the archangels and the "Archontes." (See "De
Mysteriis," sec. ii., ch. 3.) The above may be applied, of course, to
the distinction made between the degrees or orders of spiritual beings,
and it is in this sense that the Roman Catholic Church tries to
interpret and teach the difference; for while the archangels are in her
teaching divine and holy, their doubles are denounced by her as
devils.\* But the word "ferouer" is not to be understood in this sense,
for it means simply the reverse or the opposite side of some attribute
or quality. Thus when the Occultist says that the "Demon is the lining
of God" (evil, the reverse of the medal), he does not mean two separate

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\[\[Footnote continued from previous page\]\] p. 602, for an
illustration. Many are the *Soulless* men among us, for the occurrence
is found to take place in wicked materialists as well as in persons "who
advance in holiness and never turn back." (See ibid and also "Isis,"
vol. ii., p. 369.)

\* This identity between the Spirit and its material "double" (in man it
is the reverse) explains still better the confusion, alluded to already
in this work, made in the names and individualities, as well as the
numbers, of the Rishis and the Prajapatis; especially between those of
the Satyayuga and the Mahabharatan period. It also throws additional
light on what the Secret Doctrine teaches with regard to the Root and
the Seed Manus (see Book ii. "On the primitive Manus of humanity"). Not
only those progenitors of our mankind, but every human being, we are
taught, has its prototype in the Spiritual Spheres; which prototype is
the highest essence of his seventh principle. Thus the seven Manus
become 14, the Root Manu being the Prime Cause, and the "Seed-Manu" its
effect; and when the latter reach from Satyayuga (the first stage) to
the heroic period, these Manus or Rishis become 21 in number.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 236 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

actualities, but the two aspects or facets of the same Unity. Now the
best man living would appear, side by side with an Archangel -- as
described in Theology -- a fiend. Hence a certain reason to depreciate a
lower "double," immersed far deeper in matter than its original. But
there is still as little cause to regard them as devils, and this is
precisely what the Roman Catholics maintain against all reason and
logic.

(*b*) The concluding sentence of this sloka shows how archaic is the
belief and the doctrine that man is seven-fold in his constitution. The
thread of being which animates man and passes through all his
personalities, or rebirths on this Earth (an allusion to Sutratma), the
thread on which moreover all his "Spirits" are strung -- is spun from
the essence of the "threefold," the "fourfold" and the "fivefold"; which
contain all the preceding. *Panchasikha*, agreeably to Bhagavata Purana
(V. XX. 25-28), is one of the seven *Kumaras* who go to Sveta-Dvipa to
worship Vishnu. We shall see further on, what connection there is
between the "celibate" and chaste sons of Brahma, who refuse "to
multiply," and terrestrial mortals. Meanwhile it is evident that "the
Man-Plant," Saptaparna, thus refers to the seven principles, and man is
compared to the seven-leaved plant of this name\* so sacred among
Buddhists.

For further details as to Saptaparna and the importance of the number
seven in occultism, as well as in symbology, the reader is referred to
Part II., Book II., on Symbolism: Sections on "*Saptaparna*," "The
Septenary in the Vedas," etc. etc.

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* The Egyptian allegory in the "Book of the Dead" already mentioned,
the hymn that relates to the reward "of the Soul," is as suggestive of
our Septenary Doctrine as it is poetical. The deceased is allotted a
piece of land in the field of Aanroo, wherein the Manes, the deified
shades of the dead, glean, as the harvest they have sown by their
actions in life, the corn seven cubits high, which grows in a territory
divided into 14 and 7 portions. This corn is the food on which they live
and prosper, or that will kill them, in Amenti, the realm of which the
Aanroo field is a domain. For, as said in the hymn, (see chap. xxxii. 9)
the deceased is either destroyed therein, or becomes pure spirit for the
Eternity, in consequence of the "Seven times seventy-seven lives" passed
or to be passed on Earth. The idea of the corn reaped as the "fruit of
our actions" is very graphic.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 237 THE IMMORTAL ROOT.

#### STANZA VII. -- *Continued.*

4\. **I**T IS THE ROOT THAT NEVER DIES, THE THREE-TONGUED FLAME OF THE
FOUR WICKS\* (*a*) . . . **T**HE WICKS ARE THE SPARKS, THAT DRAW FROM
THE THREE-TONGUED FLAME (*their upper triad*) SHOT OUT BY THE SEVEN,
THEIR FLAME; THE BEAMS AND SPARKS OF ONE MOON REFLECTED IN THE RUNNING
WAVES OF ALL THE RIVERS OF THE EARTH ("*Bhumi*," *or* "*Prithivi*")\*\*
(*b*)*.*

(*a*) The "Three-tongued flame" that never dies is the immortal
spiritual triad -- the Atma-Buddhi and Manas -- the fruition of the
latter assimilated by the first two after every terrestrial life. The
"four wicks" that go out and are extinguished, are the four lower
principles, including the body.

"I am the three-wicked Flame and my wicks are immortal," says the
defunct. "I enter into the domain of Sekhem (the God whose arm sows the
seed of action produced by the disembodied soul) and I enter the region
of the Flames who have destroyed their adversaries," *i.e.*, got rid of
the sin-creating "four wicks." (See chap. i., vii., "Book of the Dead,"
and the "Mysteries of Ro-stan.")

(*b*) Just as milliards of bright sparks dance on the waters of an ocean
above which one and the same moon is shining, so our evanescent
personalities -- the illusive envelopes of the immortal MONAD-EGO --
twinkle and dance on the waves of Maya. They last and appear, as the
thousands of sparks produced by the moon-beams, only so long as the
Queen of the Night radiates her lustre on the running waters of life:
the period of a Manvantara; and then they disappear, the beams --
symbols of our eternal Spiritual Egos -- alone surviving, re-merged in,
and being, as they were before, one with the Mother-Source.

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* The three-tongued flame of the four wicks corresponds to the four
unities and the three Binaries of the Sephirothal tree (see Commentary
on Stanza VI.).

\*\* Useless to repeat again that the terms given here are Sanskrit
translations; for the original terms, unknown and unheard of in Europe,
would only puzzle the reader more, and serve no useful purpose.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next Section](sd1-1-12)

[Contents](sd1-0-co.htm#contents)
