##### *\`The Secret Doctrine* by H. P. Blavatsky -- Vol. 1

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 86 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

#### STANZA IV.

COMMENTARY.

1\. **L**ISTEN, YE **S**ONS OF THE **E**ARTH, TO YOUR INSTRUCTORS -- THE
**S**ONS OF THE **F**IRE (*a*). **L**EARN THERE IS NEITHER FIRST NOR
LAST; FOR ALL IS ONE NUMBER, ISSUED FROM NO NUMBER (*b*).

(*a*) These terms, the "Sons of the Fire," the "Sons of the Fire-Mist,"
and the like, require explanation. They are connected with a great
primordial and universal mystery, and it is not easy to make it clear.
There is a passage in the *Bhagavatgita* (ch. viii.) wherein Krishna,
speaking symbolically and *esoterically*, says: "I will state the times
(conditions) . . . at which devotees departing (from this life) do so
never to return (be reborn), or to return (to incarnate again). The
Fire, the Flame, the day, the bright (lucky) fortnight, the six months
of the Northern solstice, departing (dying) in these, those who know the
Brahman (Yogis) go to the Brahman. Smoke, night, the dark (unlucky)
fortnight, the six months of the Southern solstice, (dying) in these,
the devotee goes to the lunar light (or mansion the astral light also)
and returns (is reborn). These two paths, bright and dark, are said to
be eternal in this world (or great kalpa, 'Age'). By the one a man goes
never to come back, by the other he returns." Now these names, "Fire,"
"Flame," "Day," the "bright fortnight," etc., as "Smoke," "Night," and
so on, leading only to the end of the lunar path are incomprehensible
without a knowledge of Esotericism. These are *all names of various
deities* which preside over the Cosmo-psychic Powers. We often speak of
the Hierarchy of "Flames" (see Book II.) of the "Sons of Fire," etc.
Sankaracharya the greatest of the Esoteric masters of India, says that
*fire* means a deity which presides over Time (kala). The able
translator of Bhagavatgita, Kashinath Trimbak Telang, **M.A**., of
Bombay, confesses he has "no clear notion of the meaning of these
verses" (p. 81, footnote). It seems quite clear, on the contrary, to him
who knows the occult doctrine. With these verses the mystic sense of the
solar and lunar symbols are connected: the Pitris are *lunar* deities
and our ancestors, because they *created the physical man.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 87 THE SEVEN MYSTIC SENSES.

The Agnishwatha, the Kumara (the seven mystic sages), are solar deities,
though the former are Pitris also; and these are the "fashioners of the
*Inner* Man." (See Book II.) They are: --

"The Sons of Fire" -- because they are the first Beings (in the Secret
Doctrine they are called "Minds"), evolved from Primordial Fire. "The
Lord is a consuming Fire" (Deuteronomy iv. 24); "The Lord (Christos)
shall be revealed with his mighty angels in flaming fire" (2 Thessal. i.
7, 8). The Holy Ghost descended on the Apostles like "cloven tongues of
fire," (Acts ii. v. 3); Vishnu will return on *Kalki*, the White Horse,
as the last Avatar amid fire and flames; and *Sosiosh* will be brought
down equally on a White Horse in a "tornado of fire." "And I saw heaven
open and behold a white horse, and he that sat upon him . . . . is
called the Word of God," (Rev. xix. 13) amid flaming Fire. Fire is
AEther in its purest form, and hence is not regarded as matter, but it
is the unity of Aether -- the second manifested deity -- in its
universality. But there are two "Fires" and a distinction is made
between them in the Occult teachings. The first, or the purely *Formless
and invisible* Fire concealed in the *Central Spiritual Sun*, is spoken
of as "triple" (metaphysically); while the Fire of the manifested Kosmos
is Septenary, throughout both the Universe and our Solar System. "The
fire or knowledge burns up all action on the plane of illusion," says
the commentary. "Therefore, those who have acquired it and are
emancipated, are called 'Fires.' " Speaking of the *seven* senses
symbolised as *Hotris,* priests, the Brahmana says in *Anugita*: "Thus
these *seven* (senses, smell and taste, and colour, and sound, etc.,
etc.) are the causes of emancipation;" and the commentator adds: "It is
from these seven from which the Self is to be emancipated. 'I' (am here
devoid of qualities) must mean the Self, not the Brahmana who speaks."
("*Sacred Books of the East*," ed. by Max Muller, Vol. VIII., 278.)

(*b*) The expression "All is One Number, issued from No Number" relates
again to that universal and philosophical tenet just explained in Stanza
III. (Comm. 4). That which is absolute is of course No Number; but in
its later significance it has an application in Space as in Time. It
means that not only every increment of time is part of a larger
increment, up to the most indefinitely prolonged duration conceivable by
the human intellect, but also that no manifested thing can

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 88 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

be thought of except as part of a larger whole: the total aggregate
being the One manifested Universe that issues from the unmanifested or
Absolute -- called Non-Being or "No-Number," to distinguish it from
**B**EING or "the One Number."

-------

#### STANZA IV. -- *Continued.*

\(2\) **L**EARN WHAT WE, WHO DESCEND FROM THE **P**RIMORDIAL **S**EVEN,
WE, WHO ARE BORN FROM THE **P**RIMORDIAL **F**LAME, HAVE LEARNED FROM
OUR **F**ATHERS (*a*).

(***a***) This is explained in Book II., and this name, "Primordial
Flame," corroborates what is said in the first paragraph of the
preceding commentary on Stanza IV.

The distinction between the "Primordial" and the subsequent seven
Builders is this: The former are the Ray and direct emanation of the
first "Sacred Four," the *Tetraktis,* that is, the eternally
Self-Existent One (Eternal *in Essence* note well, not in manifestation,
and distinct from the universal ONE). Latent, during Pralaya, and
active, during Manvantara, the "Primordial" proceed from "Father-Mother"
(Spirit-Hyle, or *Ilus*); whereas the other manifested Quaternary and
the Seven proceed from the Mother alone. It is the latter who is the
immaculate Virgin-Mother, who is overshadowed, not impregnated, by the
Universal MYSTERY -- when she emerges from her state of Laya or
undifferentiated condition. In reality, they are, of course, all one;
but their aspects on the various planes of being are different. (See
Part II., "Theogony of the Creative Gods.")

The first "Primordial" are the highest Beings on the Scale of Existence.
They are the Archangels of Christianity, those who refuse -- as Michael
did in the latter system, and as did the eldest "Mind-born sons" of
Brahma (Veddhas) -- to create or rather to multiply.

-------

#### STANZA IV. -- *Continued.*

3\. **F**ROM THE EFFULGENCY OF LIGHT -- THE RAY OF THE EVER-DARKNESS --
SPRUNG IN SPACE THE RE-AWAKENED ENERGIES (*Dhyan Chohans*): THE ONE FROM
THE EGG, THE SIX AND THE FIVE (*a*); THEN THE THREE, THE ONE,

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 89 THE VEHICLE OF THE UNIVERSE.

THE FOUR, THE ONE, THE FIVE -- THE TWICE SEVEN, THE SUM TOTAL (*b*). AND
THESE ARE: THE ESSENCES, THE FLAMES, THE ELEMENTS, THE BUILDERS, THE
NUMBERS, THE ARUPA (*formless*)*,* THE RUPA (*with bodies*), AND THE
FORCE OR DIVINE MAN -- THE SUM TOTAL. **A**ND FROM THE DIVINE MAN
EMANATED THE FORMS, THE SPARKS, THE SACRED ANIMALS, AND THE MESSENGERS
OF THE SACRED FATHERS (*the Pitris*) WITHIN THE HOLY FOUR.\*

(*a*) This relates to the sacred Science of the Numerals: so sacred,
indeed, and so important in the study of Occultism that the subject can
hardly be skimmed, even in such a large work as the present. It is on
the Hierarchies and correct numbers of these Beings invisible (to us)
except upon very rare occasions, that the mystery of the whole Universe
is built. The *Kumaras*, for instance, are called the "Four" though in
reality seven in number, because Sanaka, Sananda, Sanatana and
Sanat-Kumara are the chief Vaidhatra (their patronymic name), as they
spring from the "four-fold mystery." To make the whole clearer we have
to turn for our illustrations to tenets more familiar to some of our
readers, namely, the Brahminical.

According to Manu, Hiranyagarbha is Brahma *the first male* formed by
the undiscernible Causeless CAUSE in a "Golden Egg resplendent as the
Sun," as states the Hindu Classical Dictionary. "Hiranyagarbha" means
the golden, or rather the "Effulgent Womb" or Egg. The meaning tallies
awkwardly with the epithet of "male." Surely the esoteric meaning of the
sentence is clear enough. In the Rig Veda it is said: -- "**T**HAT, the
one Lord of all beings . . . . the one animating principle of gods and
man," arose, in the beginning, in the Golden Womb, Hiranyagarbha --
which is the Mundane Egg or sphere of our Universe. That Being is surely
androgynous, and the allegory of Brahma separating into two and
recreating in one of his halves (the female Vach) himself as Viraj, is a
proof of it.

"The One from the Egg, the Six and the Five," give the number 1065, the
value of the first-born (later on the male and female Brahma-Prajapati),
who answers to the numbers 7, and 14, and 21 respectively. The Prajapati
are, like the Sephiroth, only seven, including the

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* The 4, represented in the Occult numerals by the Tetraktis, the
Sacred or Perfect Square, is a Sacred Number with the mystics of every
nation and race. It has one and the same significance in Brahmanism,
Buddhism, the Kabala and in the Egyptian, Chaldean and other numerical
systems.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 90 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

synthetic Sephira of the triad from which they spring. Thus from
Hiranyagarbha or Prajapati, the *triune* (primeval Vedic Trimurti, Agni,
Vayu, and Surya), emanate the other seven, or again ten, if we separate
the first three which exist in one, and one in three, all, moreover,
being comprehended within that one "supreme" Parama, called Guhya or "
secret," and Sarvatma, the "Super-Soul." "The seven Lords of Being lie
concealed in Sarvatma like thoughts in one brain." So are the Sephiroth.
It is either seven when counting from the upper Triad headed by Kether,
or ten -- exoterically. In the Mahabharata the Prajapati are 21 in
number, or ten, six, and five (1065), thrice seven.\*

(*b*) "The Three, the One, the Four, the One, the Five" (in their
totality -- twice seven) represent 31415 -- the numerical hierarchy of
the Dhyan-Chohans of various orders, and of the inner or circumscribed
world.\*\* When placed on the boundary of the great circle of "Pass not"
(see Stanza V.), called also the Dhyanipasa, the "rope of the Angels,"
the "rope" that hedges off the phenomenal from the noumenal Kosmos, (not
falling within the range of our present objective consciousness); this
number, when not enlarged by permutation and expansion, is ever 31415
anagrammatically and Kabalistically, being both the number of the circle
and the mystic Svastica, the twice seven once more; for whatever way the
two sets of figures are counted, when added separately, one figure after
another, whether crossways, from right or from left, they will always
yield fourteen. Mathematically they represent the well-known
calculation, namely, that the ratio of the diameter to the circumference
of a circle is as 1 to 3.1415, or the value of the (pi), as this ratio
is called -- the symbol being always used in

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* In the Kabala the same numbers are a value of Jehovah, viz., 1065,
since the numerical values of the three letters which compose his name
-- Jod, Vau and twice He -- are respectively 10 ( ![](sd1-78c.gif)), 6 (
![](sd1-90.gif)) and 5 ( ![](sd1-78d.gif)); or again thrice seven, 21.
"Ten is the Mother of the Soul, for Life and Light are therein united,"
says Hermes. "For number one is born of the Spirit and the number ten
from matter (chaos, feminine); the unity has made the ten, the ten the
unity" (*Book of the Keys*)*.* By the means of the Temura, the
anagrammatical method of the Kabala, and the knowledge of 1065 (21), a
universal science may be obtained regarding Kosmos and its mysteries"
(Rabbi Yogel). The Rabbis regard the numbers 10, 6, and 5 as the most
sacred of all.

\*\* The reader may be told that an American Kabalist has now discovered
the same number for the Elohim. It came to the Jews from Chaldaea. See
"Hebrew Metrology" in the Masonic Review, July, 1885, McMillan Lodge,
No. 141.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 91 THE IMMACULATE CONCEPTIONS.

mathematical formulae to express it. This set of figures must have the
same meaning, since the 1 : 314,159, and then again 1 : 3 : 1,415,927
are worked out in the secret calculations to express the various cycles
and ages of the "first born," or 311,040,000,000,000 with fractions, and
yield the same 13,415 by a process we are not concerned with at present.
And it may be shown that Mr. Ralston Skinner, author of *The Source of
Measures*, reads the Hebrew word Alhim in the same number values, by
omitting, as said, the ciphers and by permutation -- 13,514: since
![](sd1-78b.gif) (a) is 1 : ![](sd1-91a.gif) (l) is 3 (or 30);
![](sd1-78d.gif) (h) is 5; ![](sd1-78c.gif) (i) 1 for 10; and
![](sd1-91b.gif) (m) is 4 (40), and anagrammatically -- 31,415 as
explained by him.

Thus, while in the metaphysical world, the circle with the one central
Point in it has no number, and is called Anupadaka (parentless and
numberless) -- viz., it can fall under no calculation, -- in the
manifested world the mundane Egg or Circle is circumscribed within the
groups called the Line, the Triangle, the Pentacle, the second Line and
the Cube (or 13514); and when the Point having generated a Line, thus
becomes a diameter which stands for the androgynous Logos, then the
figures become 31415, or a triangle, a line, a cube, the second line,
and a pentacle. "When the Son separates from the Mother he becomes the
Father," the diameter standing for Nature, or the feminine principle.
Therefore it is said: "In the world of being, the one Point fructifies
the Line -- the Virgin Matrix of Kosmos (the egg-shaped zero) -- and the
immaculate Mother gives birth to the form that combines all forms."
Prajapati is called the first procreating male, and "his Mother's
husband."\* This gives the key-note to all the later divine sons from
immaculate mothers. It is greatly corroborated by the significant fact
that Anna (the name of the Mother of the Virgin Mary) now represented by
the Roman Catholic church as having given birth to her daughter in an
immaculate way ("Mary conceived without sin"), is derived from the
Chaldean Ana, heaven, or Astral Light, Anima Mundi; whence Anaitia,
Devi-durga, the wife of Siva, is also called Annapurna,

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* We find the same expression in Egypt. Mout signifies, for one thing,
"Mother," and shows the character assigned to her in the triad of that
country. "She was no less the mother than the wife of Ammon, one of the
principle titles of the god being "the husband of his mother." The
goddess Mout, or Mut, is addressed as "our lady," the "queen of Heaven"
and of "the Earth," thus "sharing these titles with the other mother
goddesses, Isis, Hathor, etc." (Maspero).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 92 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

and Kanya, the Virgin; "Uma-Kanya" being her esoteric name, and meaning
the "Virgin of light," Astral Light in one of its multitudinous aspects.

(*c*) The Devas, Pitris, Rishis; the Suras and the Asuras; the Daityas
and Adityas; the Danavas and Gandharvas, etc., etc., have all their
synonyms in our Secret Doctrine, as well as in the Kabala and the Hebrew
Angelology; but it is useless to give their ancient names, as it would
only create confusion. Many of these may be also found now, even in the
Christian hierarchy of divine and celestial powers. All those Thrones
and Dominions, Virtues and Principalities, Cherubs, Seraphs and demons,
the various denizens of the Sidereal World, are the modern copies of
archaic prototypes. The very symbolism in their names, when
transliterated and arranged in Greek and Latin, are sufficient to show
it, as will be proved in several cases further on.

The "Sacred Animals" are found in the Bible as well as in the Kabala,
and they have their meaning (a very profound one, too) on the page of
the origins of Life. In the Sepher Jezirah it is stated that "God
engraved in the Holy Four the throne of his glory, the Ophanim (Wheels
or the World-Spheres), the Seraphim,\* the Sacred Animals, and the
ministering angels, and from these three (the Air, Water, and Fire or
Ether) he formed his habitation." Thus was the world made "through three
Seraphim -- Sepher, Saphar, and Sipur," or "through Number, Numbers, and
Numbered." With the astronomical key these "Sacred Animals" become the
signs of the Zodiac.

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* This is the literal translation from the IXth and Xth Sections: "Ten
numbers without what? One: the spirit of the living God . . . . who
liveth in eternities! Voice and Spirit and Word, and this is the Holy
Spirit. Two: Spirit out of Spirit. He designed and hewed therewith
twenty-two letters of foundation, three Mothers and seven double and
Twelve single, and one spirit out of them. Three: Water out of spirit;
he designed and hewed with them the barren and the void, mud and earth.
He designed them as a flowerbed, hewed them as a wall, covered them as a
paving. Four: Fire out of water. He designed and hewed therewith the
throne of glory and the wheels, and the seraphim and the holy animals
and the ministering angels, and of the three He founded his dwelling, as
it is said, He makes his angels spirits and his servants fiery flames!"
Which words "founded his dwelling" show clearly that in the Kabala, as
in India, the Deity was considered as the Universe, and was not, in his
origin, the extra-cosmic God he is now.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 93 THE POTENCY OF SPEECH AND SOUND.

#### STANZA IV. -- *Continued.*

4\. **T**HIS WAS THE **A**RMY OF THE **V**OICE -- THE **D**IVINE
**S**EPTENARY. **T**HE SPARKS OF THE SEVEN ARE SUBJECT TO, AND THE
SERVANTS OF, THE FIRST, SECOND, THIRD, FOURTH, FIFTH, SIXTH, AND THE
SEVENTH OF THE SEVEN (*a*). THESE ("*sparks*") ARE CALLED SPHERES,
TRIANGLES, CUBES, LINES, AND MODELLERS; FOR THUS STANDS THE **E**TERNAL
**N**IDANA -- THE **O**I-**H**A-**H**OU (*the Permutation of Oeaohoo*)
(*b*)*.\**

(*a*) This Sloka gives again a brief analysis of the Hierarchies of the
Dhyan Chohans, called Devas (gods) in India, or the conscious
intelligent powers in Nature. To this Hierarchy correspond the actual
types into which humanity may be divided; for humanity, as a whole, is
in reality a materialized though as yet imperfect expression thereof.
The "army of the Voice" is a term closely connected with the mystery of
Sound and Speech, as an effect and corollary of the cause -- Divine
Thought. As beautifully expressed by P. Christian, the learned author of
"The History of Magic" and of "L'Homme Rouge des Tuileries," the word
spoken by, as well as the name of, every individual largely determine
his future fate. Why? Because --

> -- "When our Soul (mind) creates or evokes a thought, the
> representative sign of that thought is self-engraved upon the astral
> fluid, which is the receptacle and, so to say, the mirror of all the
> manifestations of being.

> "The sign expresses the thing: the thing is the (hidden or occult)
> virtue of the sign.

> "To pronounce a word is to evoke a thought, and make it present: the
> magnetic potency of the human speech is the commencement of every
> manifestation in the Occult World. To utter a Name is not only to
> define a Being (an Entity), but to place it under and condemn it
> through the emission of the Word (Verbum), to the influence of one or
> more Occult potencies. Things are, for every one of us, that which it
> (the Word) makes them while naming them. The Word (Verbum) or the
> speech of every man is, quite unconsciously to himself, a BLESSING or
> a CURSE; this is why our present ignorance about the properties or
> attributes of the IDEA as well as about the attributes and properties
> of MATTER, is often fatal to us.

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* The literal signification of the word is, among the Eastern
Occultists of the North, a circular wind, whirlwind; but in this
instance, it is a term to denote the ceaseless and eternal Cosmic
Motion; or rather the Force that moves it, which Force is tacitly
accepted as the Deity but never named. It is the eternal *Karana*, the
ever-acting Cause.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 94 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

> "Yes, names (and words) are either BENEFICENT or MALEFICENT; they are,
> in a certain sense, either venomous or health-giving, according to the
> hidden influences attached by Supreme Wisdom to their elements, that
> is to say, to the LETTERS which compose them, and the NUMBERS
> correlative to these letters."

This is strictly true as an esoteric teaching accepted by all the
Eastern Schools of Occultism. In the Sanskrit, as also in the Hebrew and
all other alphabets, every letter has its occult meaning and its
rationale; it is a cause and an effect of a preceding cause and a
combination of these very often produces the most magical effect. The
vowels, especially, contain the most occult and formidable potencies.
The Mantras (esoterically, magical rather than religious) are chanted by
the Brahmins and so are the Vedas and other Scriptures.

The "Army of the Voice," is the prototype of the "Host of the Logos," or
the "WORD" of the Sepher Jezirah, called in the Secret Doctrine "the One
Number issued from No-Number" -- the One Eternal Principle. The esoteric
theogony begins with the One, manifested, therefore not eternal in its
presence and being, if eternal in its essence; the number of the numbers
and numbered -- the latter proceeding from the Voice, the feminine Vach,
Satarupa "of the hundred forms," or Nature. It is from this number 10,
or creative nature, the Mother (the occult cypher, or "nought," ever
procreating and multiplying in union with the Unit "I," one, or the
Spirit of Life), that the whole Universe proceeded.

In the *Anugita* a conversation is given (ch. vi., 15) between a
Brahmana and his wife, on the origin of Speech and its occult
properties.\* The wife asks how Speech came into existence, and which
was prior to the other, Speech or Mind. The Brahmana tells her that the
Apana (*inspirational breath*) becoming lord, changes that intelligence,
which does not understand Speech or Words, into the state of Apana, and
thus opens the mind. Thereupon he tells her a story, a dialogue between
Speech and Mind. "Both went to the Self of Being (*i.e.*, to the
individual Higher Self, as Nilakantha thinks, to Prajapati, according to
the commentator Arjuna Misra), and asked him to destroy their doubts and
decide which of them preceded and was superior to the

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* *Anugita* forms part of the Asvamedha Parvan of the "Mahabharata."
The translator of the Bhagavatgita, edited by Max Muller, regards it as
a continuation of the Bhagavatgita. Its original is one of the oldest
*Upanishads.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 95 SPEECH AND MIND.

other. To this the lord said: 'Mind is Superior.' But Speech answered
the Self of Being, by saying: 'I verily yield (you) your desires,'
meaning that by speech he acquired what he desired. Thereupon again, the
Self told her that there are two minds, the 'movable' and the
'immovable.' 'The immovable is with me,' he said, 'the movable is in
your dominion' (*i.e.* of Speech) on the plane of matter. To that you
are superior. But inasmuch, O beautiful one, as you came personally to
speak to me (in the way you did, *i.e.* proudly), therefore, O,
Sarasvati! you shall never speak after (hard) exhalation." "The goddess
Speech" (Sarasvati, a later form or aspect of Vach, the goddess also of
secret learning or Esoteric Wisdom), "verily, dwelt always between the
Prana and the Apana. But O noble one! going with the Apana wind (vital
air), though impelled, without the Prana (expirational breath), she ran
up to Prajapati (Brahma), saying, 'Be pleased, O venerable sir!' Then
the Prana appeared again, nourishing Speech. And, therefore, Speech
never speaks after (hard or inspirational) exhalation. It is always
noisy or noiseless. Of these two, the noiseless is the superior to the
noisy (Speech) . . . . The (speech) which is produced in the body by
means of the Prana, and which then goes (is transformed) into Apana, and
then becoming assimilated with the Udana (physical organs of Speech) . .
. then finally dwells in the Samana ('at the navel in the form of sound,
as the material cause of all words,' says Arjuna Misra). So Speech
formerly spoke. Hence the mind is distinguished by reason of its being
immovable, and the Goddess (Speech) by reason of her being movable."

This allegory is at the root of the Occult law, which prescribes silence
upon the knowledge of certain secret and invisible things perceptible
only to the spiritual mind (the 6th sense), and which cannot be
expressed by "noisy" or uttered speech. This chapter of *Anugita*
explains, says Arjuna Misra, Pranayama, or regulation of the breath in
Yoga practices. This mode, however, without the previous acquisition of,
or at least full understanding of the two higher senses, of which there
are seven, as will be shown, pertains rather to the lower Yoga. The
*Hatha* so called was and still is discountenanced by the Arhats. It is
injurious to the health and alone can never develop into Raj Yoga. This
story is quoted to show how inseparably connected are, in the
metaphysics of old, intelligent beings, or rather "Intelligences," with
every sense or

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 96 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

function whether physical or mental. The Occult claim that there are
seven senses in man, as in nature, as there are seven states of
consciousness, is corroborated in the same work, chapter vii., on
Pratyahara (the restraint and regulation of the senses, Pranayama being
that of the "vital winds" or breath). The Brahmana speaks in it "of the
institution of the seven sacrificial Priests (Hotris). He says: "The
nose and the eyes, and the tongue, and the skin and the ear as the fifth
(or smell, sight, taste, touch and hearing), mind and understanding are
the seven sacrificial priests separately stationed"; and which "dwelling
in a minute space (still) do not perceive each other" on this sensuous
plane, none of them except mind. For mind says: "The nose smells not
without me, the eye does not take in colour, etc., etc. I am the eternal
chief among all elements (*i.e.*, senses). Without me, the senses never
shine, like an empty dwelling, or like fires the flames of which are
extinct. Without me, all beings, like fuel half dried and half moist,
fail to apprehend qualities or objects even with the senses exerting
themselves."\*

This, of course, with regard only to *mind on the sensuous plane.*
Spiritual mind (the upper portion or aspect of the *impersonal* MANAS)
takes no cognisance of the senses in physical man. How well the ancients
were acquainted with the correlation of forces and all the recently
discovered phenomena of mental and physical faculties and functions,
with many more mysteries also -- may be found in reading chapters vii.
and viii. of this (in philosophy and mystic learning) priceless work.
See the quarrel of the senses about their respective superiority and
their taking the Brahman, the lord of all creatures, for their arbiter.
"You are all greatest and not greatest," or superior to objects, as A.
Misra says, none being independent of the other. "You are all possessed
of one another's qualities. All are greatest in their own spheres and
all support one another. There is one unmoving (life-wind or breath, the
'*Yoga inhalation,*' so called, which is the breath of the *One* or
Higher **S**ELF). That is the (or my) own Self, accumulated in numerous
(forms)."

This Breath, Voice, Self or "Wind" (*pneuma?*) is the Synthesis of the
Seven Senses, *noumenally* all minor deities and esoterically -- the
*septenary* and the "Army of the **V**OICE."

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* This shows the modern metaphysicians, added to all past and present
Haegels, Berkeleys, Schopenhauers, Hartmanns, Herbert Spencers, and even
the modern Hylo-Idealists to boot, no better than the pale copyists of
hoary antiquity.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 97 NATURE, THE PERPETUAL MOTION.

(*b*) Next we see Cosmic matter scattering and forming itself into
elements; grouped into the mystic four within the fifth element --
Ether, the lining of Akasa, the Anima Mundi or Mother of Kosmos. "Dots,
Lines, Triangles, Cubes, Circles" and finally "Spheres" -- why or how?
Because, says the Commentary, such is the first law of Nature, and
because Nature geometrizes universally in all her manifestations. There
is an inherent law -- not only in the primordial, but also in the
manifested matter of our phenomenal plane -- by which Nature correlates
her geometrical forms, and later, also, her compound elements; and in
which there is no place for accident or chance. It is a fundamental law
in Occultism, that there is no rest or cessation of motion in Nature.\*
That which seems rest is only the change of one form into another; the
change of substance going hand in hand with that of form -- as we are
taught in Occult physics, which thus seem to have anticipated the
discovery of the "Conservation of matter" by a considerable time. Says
the ancient Commentary\*\* to Stanza IV.: --

"*The Mother is the fiery Fish of Life. She scatters her spawn and the
Breath* (*Motion*) *heats and quickens it. The grains* (*of spawn*) *are
soon attracted to each other and form the curds in the Ocean* (*of
Space*)*. The larger lumps coalesce and receive new spawn -- in fiery
dots, triangles and cubes, which ripen, and at the appointed time some
of the lumps detach themselves and assume spheroidal form, a process
which they effect only when not interfered with by the others. After
which, law No.* \* \* \* *comes into operation. Motion* (*the Breath*)
*becomes the whirlwind and sets them into rotation.*"*\*\*\**

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* It is the knowledge of this law that permits and helps the Arhat to
perform his *Siddhis,* or various phenomena, such as disintegration of
matter, the transport of objects from one place to another.

\*\* These are ancient Commentaries attached with modern Glossaries to
the Stanzas, as the Commentaries in their symbolical language are
usually as difficult to understand as the Stanzas themselves.

\*\*\* In a polemical scientific work, "*The Modern Genesis*," the
author, the Rev. W. B. Slaughter, criticising the position assumed by
the astronomers, asks: -- "It is to be regretted that the advocates of
this (nebular) theory have not entered more largely into the discussion
of it (the beginning of rotation). No one condescends to give us the
*rationale* of it. How does the process of cooling and contracting the
mass impart to it a rotatory motion?" The question is amply treated in
the Addendum. It is not materialistic science that can ever solve it.
"Motion is eternal in the unmanifested, and periodical in the manifest,"
says an Occult teaching. It is "when heat caused \[\[Footnote continued
on next page\]\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 98 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

#### STANZA IV. -- *Continued.*

5\. . . . . . WHICH IS: ----

"**D**ARKNESS," THE **B**OUNDLESS OR THE **N**O-**N**UMBER,
**A**DI-**N**IDANA **S**VABHAVAT: THE ![](sd1-4a.jpg) (*for x*, *unknown
quantity*)*:*

**I.** **T**HE **A**DI-**S**ANAT, THE **N**UMBER, FOR HE IS **O**NE
(*a*).

**II. T**HE **V**OICE OF THE **W**ORD, **S**VABHAVAT, THE **N**UMBERS,
FOR HE IS **O**NE AND **N**INE.\*

**III.** **T**HE "**F**ORMLESS **S**QUARE." (*Arupa.*) (*b*)*.*

**A**ND THESE THREE ENCLOSED WITHIN THE ![](sd1-4a.jpg) (*boundless
circle*), ARE THE SACRED FOUR, AND THE TEN ARE THE **A**RUPA
(*subjective*, *formless*) **U**NIVERSE (*c*); THEN COME THE "**S**ONS,"
THE SEVEN **F**IGHTERS, THE **O**NE, THE EIGHTH LEFT OUT, AND HIS
**B**REATH WHICH IS THE **L**IGHT-**M**AKER (*Bhaskara*) (*d*).

(*a*) "Adi-Sanat," translated literally is the First or "primeval"
ancient, which name identifies the Kabalistic "Ancient of Days" and the
"Holy Aged" (Sephira and Adam Kadmon) with Brahma the Creator, called
also *Sanat* among his other names and titles.

Svabhavat is the mystic Essence, the plastic root of physical Nature --
"Numbers" when manifested; the Number, in its Unity of Substance, on the
highest plane. The name is of Buddhist use and a Synonym for the
four-fold Anima Mundi, the Kabalistic "Archetypal World," from whence
proceed the "Creative, Formative, and the

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\[\[Footnote continued from previous page\]\] by the descent of FLAME
into primordial matter causes its particles to move, which motion
becomes Whirlwind." A drop of liquid assumes a spheroidal form owing to
its atoms moving around themselves in their ultimate, unresolvable, and
noumenal essence; unresolvable for physical science, at any rate.

\* Which makes ten, or the perfect number applied to the "Creator," the
name given to the totality of the Creators blended by the Monotheists
into One, as the "Elohim," Adam Kadmon or Sephira -- the Crown -- are
the androgyne synthesis of the 10 Sephiroth, who stand for the symbol of
the manifested Universe in the popularised Kabala. The esoteric
Kabalists, however, following the Eastern Occultists, divide the upper
Sephirothal triangle from the rest (or Sephira, Chochmah and Binah),
which leaves seven Sephiroth. As for Svabhavat, the Orientalists explain
the term as meaning the Universal plastic matter diffused through Space,
with, perhaps, half an eye to the Ether of Science. But the Occultists
identify it with "FATHER-MOTHER" on the mystic plane. (Vide supra.)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 99 THE OGDOAD AND HEPTAD.

Material Worlds"; the Scintillae or Sparks, -- the various other worlds
contained in the last three. The Worlds are all subject to Rulers or
Regents -- Rishis and Pitris with the Hindus, Angels with the Jews and
Christians, Gods, with the Ancients in general.

(*b*) ![](sd1-4a.jpg) This means that the "Boundless Circle" (Zero)
becomes a figure or number, only when one of the nine figures precedes
it, and thus manifests its value and potency, the Word or Logos in union
with VOICE and Spirit\* (the expression and source of Consciousness)
standing for the nine figures and thus forming, with the Cypher, the
Decade which contains in itself all the Universe. The triad forms within
the circle the Tetraktis or Sacred Four, the Square within the Circle
being the most potent of all the magical figures.

(*c*) The "One Rejected" is the Sun of our system. The exoteric version
may be found in the oldest Sanskrit Scriptures. In the Rig Veda, Aditi,
"The Boundless" or infinite Space, translated by Mr. Max Muller, "the
visible infinite, visible by the naked eye (!!); the endless expanse
beyond the Earth, beyond the clouds, beyond the sky," is the equivalent
of "Mother-Space" coeval with "Darkness." She is very properly called
"The Mother of the Gods," **D**EVA-**M**ATRI, as it is from her Cosmic
matrix that all the heavenly bodies of our system were born -- Sun and
Planets. Thus she is described, allegorically, in this wise: "Eight Sons
were born from the body of Aditi; she approached the gods with seven,
but cast away the eighth, Martanda," our sun. The seven sons called the
Aditya are, cosmically or astronomically, the seven planets; and the Sun
being excluded from their number shows plainly that the Hindus may have
known, and in fact knew of a seventh planet, without calling it
Uranus.\*\* But esoterically and theologically,

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* "In union with the Spirit and the Voice," referring to the Abstract
Thought and concrete Voice, or the manifestation thereof, the effect of
the Cause. Adam Kadmon or Tetragrammaton is the Logos in the Kabala;
therefore this triad answers in the latter to the highest triangle of
Kether, Chochmah and Binah, the last a female potency and at the same
time the male Jehovah, as partaking of the nature of Chochmah, or the
male Wisdom.

\*\* The Secret Doctrine teaches that the Sun is a central Star and not
a planet. Yet the Ancients knew of and worshipped seven great gods,
excluding the Sun and Earth. Which was that "Mystery God" they set
apart? Of course not Uranus, discovered only by Herschel in 1781. But
could it not be known by another name? Says the \[\[Footnote continued
on next page\]\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 100 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

so to say, the Adityas are, in their primitive most ancient meanings,
the eight, and the twelve great gods of the Hindu Pantheon. "The Seven
allow the mortals to see their dwellings, but show themselves only to
the Arhats," says an old proverb, "their dwellings" standing here for
planets. The ancient Commentary gives an allegory and explains it: --

"*Eight houses were built by Mother. Eight houses for her Eight Divine
sons; four large and four small ones. Eight brilliant suns, according to
their age and merits. Bal-ilu* (*Martanda*) *was not satisfied, though
his house was the largest. He began* (*to work*) *as the huge elephants
do. He breathed* (*drew in*) *into his stomach the vital airs of his
brothers. He sought to devour them. The larger four were far away; far,
on the margin of their kingdom.\* They were not robbed* (*affected*)*,
and laughed. Do your worst, Sir, you cannot reach us, they said. But the
smaller wept. They complained to the Mother. She exiled Bal-i-lu to the
centre of her Kingdom, from whence he could not move.* (*Since then*)
*he* (*only*) *watches and threatens. He pursues them, turning slowly
around himself, they turning swiftly from him, and he following from
afar the direction in which his brothers move on the path that encircles
their houses.\*\* From that day he feeds on the sweat of the Mother*'*s
body. He fills himself with her breath and refuse. Therefore, she
rejected him.*"

Thus the "rejected Son" being our Sun, evidently, as shown above, the
"Sun-Sons" refer not only to our planets but to the heavenly bodies in
general. Himself only a reflection of the Central Spiritual Sun, *Surya*
is the prototype of all those bodies that evolved after him. In the
Vedas he is called *Loka-Chakshuh,* "the Eye of the World" (our

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\[\[Footnote continued from previous page\]\] author of "Maconnerie
Occulte": -- "Occult Sciences having discovered through astronomical
calculations that the number of the planets must be seven, the ancients
were led to introduce the Sun into the scale of the celestial harmonies,
and make him occupy the vacant place. Thus, every time they perceived an
influence that pertained to none of the six planets known, they
attributed it to the Sun. The error only seems important, but was not so
in practical results, if the ancient astrologers replaced Uranus by the
Sun, which is a central Star relatively motionless, turning only on its
axis and regulating time and measure; and which cannot be turned aside
from its true functions." . . . . . . The nomenclature of the days of
the week is thus faulty. "The Sun-Day ought to be Uranus-day (Urani
dies, Urandi)," adds the learned writer, Ragon.

\* Planetary System.

\*\* "The Sun rotates on his axis always in the same direction in which
the planets revolve in their respective orbits," astronomy teaches us.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 101 FIRE, THE GREAT SYMBOL OF DEITY.

planetary world), and he is one of the three chief deities. He is called
indifferently the Son of *Dyaus* and of *Aditi,* because no distinction
is made with reference to, or scope allowed for, the esoteric meaning.
Thus he is depicted as drawn by seven horses, and by one horse with
seven heads; the former referring to his seven planets, the latter to
their one common origin from the One Cosmic Element. This "One Element"
is called figuratively "**F**IRE." The Vedas (Aitareya-Brahmana of Haug
also; p. i) teach "that the fire verily is all the deities." (Narada in
Anugita).

The meaning of the allegory is plain, for we have both the Dzyan
Commentary and modern science to explain it, though the two differ in
more than one particular. The Occult Doctrine rejects the hypothesis
born out of the Nebular Theory, that the (seven) great planets have
evolved from the Sun's central mass, not of this our visible Sun, at any
rate. The first condensation of Cosmic matter of course took place about
a central nucleus, its parent Sun; but our sun, it is taught, merely
detached itself earlier than all the others, as the rotating mass
contracted, and is their elder, bigger brother therefore, not their
father. The eight Adityas, "the gods," are all formed from the eternal
substance (Cometary matter\* -- the Mother) or the "World-Stuff " which
is both the fifth and the sixth COSMIC Principle, the Upadhi or basis of
the Universal Soul, just as in man, the Microcosm, Manas\*\* is the
Upadhi of Buddhi.\*\*\*

(*d*) There is a whole poem on the pregenetic battles fought by the
growing planets before the final formation of Kosmos, thus accounting
for the seemingly disturbed position of the systems of several planets,
the plane of the satellites of some (of Neptune and Uranus, for
instance, of which the ancients knew nothing, it is said) being tilted
over, thus giving them an appearance of retrograde motion. These planets
are called the warriors, the Architects, and are accepted by the

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* This Essence of Cometary matter, Occult Science teaches, is totally
different from any of the chemical or physical characteristics with
which modern science is acquainted. It is homogeneous in its primitive
form beyond the Solar Systems, and differentiates entirely once it
crosses the boundaries of our Earth's region, vitiated by the
atmospheres of the planets and the already compound matter of the
interplanetary stuff, heterogeneous only in our manifested world.

\*\* Manas -- the Mind-Principle, or the human Soul.

\*\*\* Buddhi -- the divine Soul.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 102 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

Roman Church as the leaders of the heavenly Hosts, thus showing the same
traditions. Having evolved from Cosmic Space, and before the final
formation of the primaries and the annulation of the planetary nebula,
the Sun, we are taught, drew into the depths of its mass all the Cosmic
vitality he could, threatening to engulf his weaker "brothers" before
the law of attraction and repulsion was finally adjusted; after which he
began feeding on "The Mother's refuse and sweat"; in other words, on
those portions of Ether (the "breath of the Universal Soul") of the
existence and constitution of which science is as yet absolutely
ignorant. A theory of this kind having been propounded by Sir William
Grove (see "*Correlation of the Physical Forces*," 1843, p. 81; and
"*Address to the British Association*, 1866"), who theorized that the
systems "are gradually changing by atmospheric additions or
subtractions, or by accretions and diminutions arising from nebular
substances" . . . and again that "the Sun may condense gaseous matter as
it travels in Space and so heat may be produced" -- the archaic teaching
seems scientific enough, even in this age.\* Mr. W. Mattieu Williams
suggested that the diffused matter or Ether which is the recipient of
the heat radiations of the Universe is thereby drawn into the depths of
the solar mass. Expelling thence the previously condensed and thermally
exhausted Ether, it becomes compressed and gives up its heat, to be in
turn itself driven out in a rarified and cooled state, to absorb a fresh
supply of heat, which he supposes to be in this way taken up by the
Ether, and again concentrated and redistributed by the Suns of the
Universe.\*\*

This is about as close an approximation to the Occult teachings as
Science ever imagined; for Occultism explains it by "the dead breath"
given back by Martanda and his feeding on the "sweat and refuse" of
"Mother Space." What could affect Neptune,\*\*\* Saturn and Jupiter,

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* Very similar ideas in Mr. W. Mattieu Williams' "*The Fuel of the
Sun*;" in Dr. C. William Siemens' "*On* *the Conservation of Solar
Energy*" (Nature, **XXV**., p. 440-444, March 9, 1882); and also in Dr.
P. Martin Duncan's "*Address of the President of the Geological
Society*," London, May, 1877.

\*\* See "*Comparative Geology*," by Alexander Winchell, **LL.D**., p.
56.

\*\*\* When we speak of Neptune it is not as an Occultist but as a
European. The true Eastern Occultist will maintain that, whereas there
are many yet undiscovered planets in our system, Neptune does not belong
to it, his apparent connection with our sun and the influence of the
latter upon Neptune notwithstanding. This connection is *mayavic*,
imaginary, they say.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 103 THE STELLAR "SONS OF LIGHT."

but little, would have killed such comparatively small "Houses" as
Mercury, Venus and Mars. As Uranus was not known before the end of the
eighteenth century, the name of the fourth planet mentioned in the
allegory must remain to us, so far, a mystery.

The "Breath" of all the "seven" is said to be Bhaskara (light-making),
because they (the planets) were all comets and suns in their origin.
They evolve into Manvantaric life from primaeval Chaos (now the noumenon
of irresolvable nebulae) by aggregation and accumulation of the primary
differentiations of the eternal matter, according to the beautiful
expression in the Commentary, "Thus the Sons of Light clothed themselves
in the fabric of Darkness." They are called allegorically "the Heavenly
Snails," on account of their (to us) formless INTELLIGENCES inhabiting
unseen their starry and planetary homes, and, so to speak, carrying them
as the snails do along with themselves in their revolution. The doctrine
of a common origin for all the heavenly bodies and planets, was, as we
see, inculcated by the Archaic astronomers, before Kepler, Newton,
Leibnitz, Kant, Herschel and Laplace. Heat (the Breath), attraction and
repulsion -- the three great factors of Motion -- are the conditions
under which all the members of all this primitive family are born,
developed, and die, to be reborn after a "Night of Brahma," during which
eternal matter relapses periodically into its primary undifferentiated
state. The most attenuated gases can give no idea of its nature to the
modern physicist. Centres of Forces at first, the invisible sparks of
primordial atoms differentiate into molecules, and become Suns --
passing gradually into objectivity gaseous, radiant, cosmic, the one
"Whirlwind" (or motion) finally giving the impulse to the form, and the
initial motion, regulated and sustained by the never-resting Breaths --
the Dhyan Chohans.

-------

#### STANZA IV. -- *Continued.*

6\. . . . . **T**HEN THE **S**ECOND **S**EVEN, WHO ARE THE **L**IPIKA,
PRODUCED BY THE THREE (*Word, Voice, and Spirit*)*.* **T**HE REJECTED
**S**ON IS **O**NE, THE "**S**ON-**S**UNS" ARE COUNTLESS.

The *Lipi-ka*, from the word *lipi*, "writing," means literally the

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 104 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

"Scribes."\* Mystically, these Divine Beings are connected with Karma,
the Law of Retribution, for they are the Recorders or Annalists who
impress on the (to us) invisible tablets of the Astral Light, "the great
picture-gallery of eternity" -- a faithful record of every act, and even
thought, of man, of all that was, is, or ever will be, in the phenomenal
Universe. As said in "*Isis*," this divine and unseen canvas is the
**B**OOK OF **L**IFE. As it is the Lipika who project into objectivity
from the passive Universal Mind the ideal plan of the universe, upon
which the "Builders" reconstruct the Kosmos after every Pralaya, it is
they who stand parallel to the Seven Angels of the Presence, whom the
Christians recognise in the Seven "Planetary Spirits" or the "Spirits of
the Stars;" for thus it is they who are the direct amanuenses of the
Eternal Ideation -- or, as called by Plato, the "Divine Thought." The
Eternal Record is no fantastic dream, for we meet with the same records
in the world of gross matter. "A shadow never falls upon a wall without
leaving thereupon a permanent trace which might be made visible by
resorting to proper processes," says Dr. Draper. . . . "The portraits of
our friends or landscape-views may be hidden on the sensitive surface
from the eye, but they are ready to make their appearance as soon as
proper developers are resorted to. A spectre is concealed on a silver or
a glassy surface, until, by our necromancy, we make it come forth into
the visible world. Upon the walls of our most private apartments, where
we think the eye of intrusion is altogether shut out, and our retirement
can never be profaned, there exist the vestiges of all our acts,
silhouettes of whatever we have done."\*\* Drs. Jevons and Babbage
believe that every thought, displacing the particles of the brain and
setting them in motion, scatters them throughout the Universe, and they
think that "each particle of the existing matter must be a register of
all that has happened." (Principles of Science, Vol. II. p. 455.) Thus
the ancient doctrine has begun to acquire rights of citizenship in the
speculations of the scientific world.

The forty "Assessors" who stand in the region of *Amenti* as the
accusers of the Soul before *Osiris*, belong to the same class of
deities as the Lipika, and might stand paralleled, were not the Egyptian
gods so

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\*These are the four "Immortals" which are mentioned in *Atharva Veda*
as the "Watchers" or Guardians of the four quarters of the sky (see ch.
lxxvi., 1-4, *et seq.*)*.*

*\**\* "Conflict between Religion and Science." -- Draper, pp. 132 and
133.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 105 THE DIVINE RECORDERS.

little understood in their esoteric meaning. The Hindu *Chitra-Gupta*
who reads out the account of every Soul's life from his register, called
Agra-Sandhani; the "Assessors" who read theirs from the heart of the
defunct, which becomes an open book before (whether) Yama, Minos,
Osiris, or Karma -- are all so many copies of, and variants from the
Lipika, and their Astral Records. Nevertheless, the Lipi-ka are not
deities connected with Death, but with Life Eternal.

Connected as the Lipika are with the destiny of every man and the birth
of every child, whose life is already traced in the Astral Light not
fatalistically, but only because the future, like the PAST, is ever
alive in the PRESENT -- they may also be said to exercise an influence
on the Science of Horoscopy. We must admit the truth of the latter
whether we will or not. For, as observed by one of the modern adepts of
Astrology, "Now that photography has revealed to us the chemical
influence of the Sidereal system, by fixing on the sensitized plate of
the apparatus milliards of stars and planets that had hitherto baffled
the efforts of the most powerful telescopes to discover them, it becomes
easier to understand how our solar system can, at the birth of a child,
influence his brain -- virgin of any impression -- in a definite manner
and according to the presence on the zenith of such or another zodiacal
constellation."\*

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\*\* Les Mysteres de l'Horoscope, p. XI.

---------------------

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next Section](sd1-1-06)

[Contents](sd1-0-co.htm#contents)
