##### The Secret Doctrine by H. P. Blavatsky -- Vol. 1

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 634 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

\[\[This page continued from [previous section](sd1-3-15)\]\]

#### XVI. CYCLIC EVOLUTION AND KARMA.

**I**T is the Spiritual evolution of the *inner*, immortal man that
forms the fundamental tenet in the Occult Sciences. To realize even
distantly such a process, the student has to believe (*a*) in the ONE
Universal Life, independent of matter (or what Science regards as
matter); and (*b*) in the individual intelligences that animate the
various manifestations of this Principle. Mr. Huxley does not believe in
"Vital Force," others do. Dr. J. H. Hutchinson Sterling's work
"Concerning Protoplasm" has made no small havoc of this dogmatic
negation. Professor Beale's decision is also in favour of a Vital
Principle; and Dr. B. W. Richardson's lectures on the "Nervous Ether,"
have been sufficiently quoted from. Thus, opinions are divided.

The ONE LIFE is closely related to *the one* law which governs the World
of Being -- **K**ARMA. Exoterically, this is simply and literally
"action," or rather an "effect-producing cause." Esoterically it is
quite a different thing in its far-fetching moral effects. It is the
unerring **L**AW OF **R**ETRIBUTION. To say to those ignorant of the
real significance, characteristics and awful importance of this eternal
immutable law, that no theological definition of a personal deity can
give an idea of this impersonal, yet ever present and active Principle,
is to speak in vain. Nor can it be called Providence. For Providence,
with the Theists (the Christian Protestants, at any rate), rejoices in a
personal male gender, while with the Roman Catholics it is a female
potency, "Divine Providence tempers His blessings to secure their better
effects," Wogan tells us. Indeed "He" tempers them, which Karma -- a
sexless principle -- does not.

Throughout the first two Parts, it was shown that, at the first flutter

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 635 THE ROOTS AND CAUSES.

of renascent life, Svabhavat, "the mutable radiance of the Immutable
Darkness unconscious in Eternity," passes, at every new rebirth of
Kosmos, from an inactive state into one of intense activity; that it
differentiates, and then begins its work through that differentiation.
This work is **K**ARMA.

The Cycles are also subservient to the effects produced by this
activity. "The one Cosmic atom becomes seven atoms on the plane of
matter, and each is transformed into a centre of energy; that same atom
becomes seven rays on the plane of spirit, and the seven creative forces
of nature, radiating from the root-essence . . . . follow, one the
right, the other the left path, separate till the end of the Kalpa, and
yet are in close embrace. What unites them? **K**ARMA." The atoms
emanated from the Central Point emanate in their turn new centres of
energy, which, under the potential breath of *Fohat*, begin their work
from within without, and multiply other minor centres. These, in the
course of evolution and involution, form in their turn the roots or
developing causes of new effects, from worlds and "man-bearing" globes,
down to the genera, species, and classes of all the *seven* kingdoms\*
(of which *we know only four*)*.* For "the blessed workers have received
the *Thyan*-*kam*, in the eternity" (Book of "The Aphorisms of
*Tson*-*ka*-*pa*")*.*

"Thyan-kam" is the power or knowledge of guiding the impulses of cosmic
energy in the right direction.

The true Buddhist, recognising no "personal god," nor any "Father" and
"*Creator* of Heaven and Earth," still believes in an *absolute
consciousness*, "Adi-Buddhi"; and the Buddhist philosopher *knows* that
there are Planetary Spirits, the "Dhyan Chohans." But though he admits
of "spiritual lives," yet, as they are temporary in eternity, even they,
according to his philosophy, are "the *maya* of the *day*," the
*illusion* of a "day of Brahma," a short manvantara of 4,320,000,000
years. The "Yin-Sin" is not for the speculations of men, for the Lord
Buddha has strongly prohibited all such inquiry. If the Dhyan Chohans
and all the invisible Beings -- the *Seven* Centres and their direct
Emanations, the *minor* centres of Energy -- are the direct reflex of
the **O**NE Light, yet men are far removed from these, since the whole
of the *visible* Kosmos consists of "*self*-*produced* beings, the
creatures of *Karma.*" Thus regarding a personal God "as only a gigantic
shadow thrown upon the void of space by the imagination of ignorant
men,"\*\* they teach that only "two things are (objectively) eternal,
namely *Akasa* and *Nirvana*"; and that these are ONE in reality, and
but a *maya* when divided. "Buddhists deny creation and cannot conceive
of a *Creator.*" "Everything has come out of Akasa (or Svabhavat

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* Vide Stanza **VI**. (Book I.) and Commentary.

\*\* *Buddhist Catechism*, by H. S. Olcott, President of the
Theosophical Society.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 636 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

on our earth) in obedience to a law of motion inherent in it, and after
a certain existence passes away. Nothing ever came out of nothing."
(*Buddhist Catechism.*)

If a Vedantic Brahmin of the Adwaita Sect, when asked whether he
believes in the existence of God, is always likely to answer, as
Jacolliot was answered -- "I am myself 'God';" a Buddhist (a Sinhalese
especially) would simply laugh, and say in reply, "There is no God; no
Creation." Yet the root philosophy of both Adwaita and Buddhist scholars
is *identical*, and both have the same respect for animal life, for both
believe that every creature on earth, however small and humble, "is an
immortal portion of the immortal matter" -- for matter with them has
quite another significance than it has with either Christian or
materialist -- and that every creature is subject to Karma.

The answer of the Brahmin is one which would suggest itself to every
ancient philosopher, Kabalist, and Gnostic of the early days. It
contains the very spirit of the Delphic and Kabalistic commandments, for
esoteric philosophy solved, ages ago, the problem of what man *was*,
*is*, and *will be;* of man's origin, life-cycle -- interminable in its
duration of successive incarnations or rebirths -- and finally of his
absorption into the source from which he started.

But it is not physical Science that we can ever ask to read man for us,
as the riddle of the Past, or that of the Future; since no philosopher
is able to tell us even what man is, as he is known both to physiology
and psychology. In doubt whether man was "a god or beast," he is now
connected with the latter and derived from an animal. No doubt that the
care of analyzing and classifying the human being as a *terrestrial
animal* may be left to Science, which occultists -- of all men -- regard
with veneration and respect. They recognize its ground and the wonderful
work done by it, the progress achieved in physiology, and even -- to a
degree -- in biology. But man's *inner*, spiritual, psychic, or even
moral, nature cannot be left to the tender mercies of an ingrained
materialism; for not even the higher psychological philosophy of the
West is able, in its present incompleteness and tendency towards a
decided agnosticism, to do justice to the inner; especially to his
higher capacities and perceptions, and those states of consciousness,
across the road to which such authorities as Mill draw a strong line,
saying "So far, and no farther shalt thou go."

No Occultist would deny that man -- no less than the elephant and the
microbe, the crocodile and the lizard, the blade of grass or the crystal
-- is, in his physical formation, the simple product of the evolutionary
forces of nature through a numberless series of transformations; but he
puts the case differently.

It is not against zoological and anthropological discoveries, based on

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 637 THE SWING OF KARMA.

the fossils of man and animal, that every mystic and believer in a
divine soul inwardly revolts, but only against the uncalled-for
conclusions built on preconceived theories and made to fit in with
certain prejudices. Their premises may or may not be always true; and as
some of these theories live but a short life, the deductions therefrom
must ever be one-sided with materialistic evolutionists. Yet it is on
the strength of such very ephemeral authority, that most of the men of
science frequently receive undue honours where they deserve them the
least.\*

To make the working of Karma, in the periodical renovations of the
Universe, more evident and intelligible to the student when he arrives
at the origin and evolution of man, he has now to examine with us the
esoteric bearing of the Karmic Cycles upon Universal Ethics. The
question is, do those mysterious divisions of time, called Yugas and
Kalpas by the Hindus, and so very graphically -- \[\[*Kuklos*\]\] --
"cycle," ring or circle, by the Greeks, have any bearing upon, or any
direct connection with, human life? Even exoteric philosophy explains
that these perpetual circles of time are ever returning on themselves,
periodically, and

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* We refer those who would regard the statement as an impertinence or
*irreverence* against accepted Science, to Mr. James Hutchinson
Stirling's work concerning "Protoplasm," which is a defence of a *vital*
Principle *versus* the Molecularists -- Huxley, Tyndall, Vogt, and Co.
-- and request them to examine whether it is true or not to say that the
scientific premises may not be always correct, but that they are
accepted, nevertheless, to fill up a gap or a hole in some beloved
materialistic hobby. Speaking of protoplasm and the organs of man, as
"viewed by Mr. Huxley," the author says: "Probably then, in regard to
any continuity in protoplasm of power, of form, or of substance, we have
seen *lacunae* enow. Nay, Mr. Huxley himself can be adduced in evidence
on the same side. *Not rarely do we find in his essay admissions* of
PROBABILITY, *where it is* CERTAINTY *that is alone in place.* He says,
for example: 'It is more than probable that *when* the vegetable world
is thoroughly explored we *shall* find all plants in possession of the
same powers.' When *a conclusion is decidedly announced*, it is rather
disappointing to be told, as here, that *the premisses are still to
collect*' *(!!)* . . . . . Again, here is a passage in which he is seen
to cut his own '*basis*' from beneath his own feet. After telling us
that all forms of protoplasm consist of carbon, hydrogen, oxygen and
nitrogen 'in very complex union,' he continues: 'To this complex
combination, *the nature of which has never been determined with
exactness (!!)*, the name of *protein* has been applied.' This, plainly,
is an identification, on Mr. Huxley's own part, of protoplasm and
protein; and what is said of one, being necessarily true of the other,
it follows that he admits the nature of protoplasm never to have been
determined with exactness, and that even in his eyes the *lis* is still
*sub judice.* This admission is strengthened by the words, too, 'If we
use this term -- *protein* -- with such *caution* as may properly arise
out of our *comparative ignorance* of the things for which it stands . .
. etc., etc. (p. 33 and 34, in reply to Mr. Huxley in "Yeast").

This is the eminent Huxley, the king of physiology and biology, who is
proven playing at blind man's buff with *premisses* and *facts.* What
may not the "smaller fry" of science do after this!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 638 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

intelligently in Space and Eternity. There are "Cycles of matter"\* and
there are "Cycles of Spiritual evolution." Racial, national, and
individual cycles. May not esoteric speculation allow us a still deeper
insight into the workings of these?

This idea is beautifully expressed in a very clever scientific work: --

> "The possibility of rising to a comprehension of a system of
> co-ordination so far outreaching in time and space all reach of human
> observations, is a circumstance which signalizes the power of man to
> transcend the limitations of changing and inconsistent matter, and
> assert his superiority over all unstable and perishable forms of
> being. *There is a method in the succession of events*, and in the
> relation of co-existent things, which the mind of man seizes hold of;
> and by means of this as a clue, he runs back or forward over aeons of
> material history of which human experience can never testify. Events
> germinate and unfold. They have a past which is connected with their
> present, and we feel a well-justified confidence that a future is
> appointed which will be similarly connected with the present and the
> past. This continuity and unity of history repeat themselves before
> our eyes in all conceivable stages of progress. The phenomena furnish
> us the grounds for the generalization of two laws which are truly
> *principles of scientific divination*, by which alone the human mind
> penetrates the sealed records of the past and the unopened pages of
> the future. The first of these is the law of evolution, or, to phrase
> it for our purpose, *the law of correlated successiveness or organized
> history in the individual*, illustrated in the changing phases of
> every single maturing system of results. . . . These thoughts summon
> into our immediate presence the measureless past and the measureless
> future of material history. They seem almost to open vistas through
> infinity, and to endow the human intellect with an existence and a
> vision exempt from the limitations of time and space and finite
> causation, and lift it up toward a sublime apprehension of the Supreme
> Intelligence whose dwelling place is Eternity." ("World-Life," p. 535
> and 548.)

According to the teachings, Maya, or the illusive appearance of the
marshalling of events and actions on this earth, changes, varying with
nations and places. But the chief features of one's life are always in
accordance with the "Constellation" one is born under, or, we should
say, with the characteristics of its animating principle or the deity
that presides over it, whether we call it a *Dhyan Chohan*, as in Asia,
or an Archangel, as with the Greek and Latin churches. In ancient
Symbolism it was always the **S**UN (though the Spiritual, not the
visible, Sun was meant), that was supposed to send forth the chief
Saviours and Avatars. Hence the connecting link between the Buddhas, the
Avatars, and so many other incarnations of the highest **S**EVEN. The
closer the approach to one's *Prototype*, "in Heaven," the better for
the mortal whose personality was chosen, by his own *personal* deity
(the seventh principle), as its terrestrial abode. For, with every
effort of will toward purification and unity

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* "The Cycles of Matter," a name given by Professor Winchell to an
Essay of his written in 1860.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 639 THE NETWORK OF DESTINY.

with that "Self-god," one of the lower rays breaks and the spiritual
entity of man is drawn higher and ever higher to the ray that supersedes
the first, until, from ray to ray, the inner man is drawn into the one
and highest beam of the Parent-**S**UN. Thus, "the events of humanity
*do* run coordinately with the number forms," since the single units of
that humanity proceed one and all from the same source -- the *central*
and its *shadow*, the visible **S**UN. For the equinoxes and solstices,
the periods and various phases of the Solar course, astronomically and
numerically expressed, are only the concrete symbols of the eternally
living verity, though they do seem *abstract ideas* to uninitiated
mortals. And this explains the extraordinary numerical coincidences with
geometrical relations, as shown by several authors.

Yes; "our destiny *is* written in the stars!" Only, the closer the union
between the mortal reflection MAN and his celestial PROTOTYPE, the less
dangerous the external conditions and subsequent reincarnations -- which
neither Buddhas nor Christs can escape. This is not superstition, least
of all is it *Fatalism.* The latter implies a blind course of some still
blinder power, and man is a free agent during his stay on earth. He
cannot escape his *ruling* Destiny, but he has the choice of two paths
that lead him in that direction, and he can reach the goal of misery --
if such is decreed to him, either in the snowy white robes of the
Martyr, or in the soiled garments of a volunteer in the iniquitous
course; for, there are *external and internal conditions* which affect
the determination of our will upon our actions, and it is in our power
to follow either of the two. Those who believe in *Karma* have to
believe in *destiny*, which, from birth to death, every man is weaving
thread by thread around himself, as a spider does his cobweb; and this
destiny is guided either by the heavenly voice of the invisible
*prototype* outside of us, or by our more intimate *astral*, or inner
man, who is but too often the evil genius of the embodied entity called
man. Both these lead on the outward man, but one of them must prevail;
and from the very beginning of the invisible affray the stern and
implacable *law of compensation* steps in and takes its course,
faithfully following the fluctuations. When the last strand is woven,
and man is seemingly enwrapped in the net-work of his own doing, then he
finds himself completely under the empire of this *self*-*made* destiny.
It then either fixes him like the inert shell against the immovable
rock, or carries him away like a feather in a whirlwind raised by his
own actions, and this is -- **K**ARMA.

A materialist, treating upon the periodical creations of our globe, has
expressed it in one sentence. "The whole *past* of the Earth is nothing
but an unfolded *present.*" This was Buchner, who little suspected that
he was repeating an axiom of the Occultists. It is quite true also, as
Burmeister (quoted in "*Force and matter*") remarks, that

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 640 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

"the historical investigation of the development of the Earth has proved
that *now and then* rest upon the same base; that the past has been
developed in the same manner as the present rolls on; and that the
Forces which were in action ever remained the same."

The "Forces" -- their *noumena* rather -- are the same, of course;
therefore, the phenomenal Forces must be the same also. But how can any
one feel so sure that the attributes of matter have not altered under
the hand of Protean Evolution? How can any materialist assert with such
confidence, as is done by Rossmassler, that "this eternal conformity in
the essence of phenomena renders it certain that fire and water
possessed *at all times* the same powers and ever will possess them?"
Who are they "that darken counsel with words without knowledge," and
where were the Huxleys and Buchners when the foundations of the earth
were laid by the great Law? It is a fundamental principle of the Occult
philosophy, this same homogeneity of matter and immutability of natural
laws, which are so much insisted upon by materialism; but that unity
rests upon the inseparability of Spirit from matter, and, if the two are
once divorced, the whole Kosmos would fall back into chaos and
non-being. Therefore, it is absolutely *false*, and but an additional
demonstration of the great conceit of our age, to assert (as men of
science do) that all the great geological changes and terrible
convulsions have been produced *by* *ordinary and known physical
forces.* For these forces were but the tools and final means for the
accomplishment of certain purposes, acting periodically, and apparently
mechanically, through an inward impulse mixed up with, but beyond their
material nature. There is a purpose in every important act of Nature,
whose acts are all cyclic and periodical. But spiritual Forces having
been usually confused with the purely physical, the former are denied
by, and therefore, have to remain unknown to Science, because left
unexamined.\*

> "The history of the World begins with its general aim," says Hegel;
> "the realization of the Idea of Spirit -- only in an *implicit* form
> (*an sich*), that is, as Nature; a hidden, most profoundly hidden
> unconscious instinct, and the whole process of History . . . is
> directed to rendering this unconscious impulse a conscious one. Thus
> appearing in the form of merely natural existence, natural will --
> that which has been called the subjective side -- physical craving,
> instinct, passion, private interest, as also opinion and subjective
> conception -- spontaneously present themselves at the very
> commencement. *This vast congeries of volitions*, *interests and
> activities constitute the instruments and means of the* WORLD

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* Men of science will say: We deny, because nothing of the kind has
ever come within the scope of our experience. But, as argued by Charles
Richet, the physiologist: "So be it, but have you at least demonstrated
the contrary? . . . Do not, at any rate, deny *a priori.* Actual Science
*is not sufficiently advanced to give you such right.*" ("La suggestion
mentale et le calcul des probabilites.")

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 641 CYCLIC WHEELS WITHIN WHEELS.

> SPIRIT *for attaining its object;* bringing it to consciousness and
> realising it. And this aim is none other than finding itself -- coming
> to itself -- and contemplating itself in concrete actuality. But that
> those manifestations of vitality on the part of individuals and
> peoples, in which they seek and satisfy their own purposes, are at the
> same time *the means and instruments of a higher power*, *of a higher
> and broader purpose of which they know nothing* -- which they realise
> unconsciously -- might be made a matter of question; rather has been
> questioned . . . on this point I announced my view at the very outset,
> and asserted our hypothesis . . . and our belief *that Reason governs
> the World and has consequently governed its history.* In relation to
> this independently universal and substantial existence -- all else is
> subordinate, subservient to it, and the means for its development."\*

No metaphysician or theosophist could demur to these truths, which are
all embodied in esoteric teachings. There *is* a predestination in the
geological life of our globe, as in the history, past and future, of
races and nations. This is closely connected with what we call *Karma*
and Western Pantheists, "Nemesis" and "Cycles." The law of evolution is
now carrying us along the ascending arc of *our* cycle, *when the
effects will be once more re*-*merged into*, and re-become the (now
neutralized) causes, and all things affected by the former will have
regained their original harmony. This will be the cycle of our special
"Round," a moment in the duration of the great cycle, or the *Mahayuga.*

The fine philosophical remarks of Hegel are found to have their
application in the teachings of Occult Science, which shows nature ever
acting with a given purpose, whose results are always dual. This was
stated in our first Occult volumes, in *Isis Unveiled*, p. 268, Vol.
II., in the following words: --

> As our planet revolves once every year around the sun, and at the same
> time turns once in every twenty-four hours upon its own axis, thus
> traversing minor circles within a larger one, so is the work of the
> smaller cyclic periods accomplished and recommenced, within the Great
> Saros.

> The revolution of the physical world, according to the ancient
> doctrine, is attended by a like revolution in the world of intellect
> -- the spiritual evolution of the world proceeding in cycles, like the
> physical one.

> Thus we see in history a regular alternation of ebb and flow in the
> tide of human progress. The great kingdoms and empires of the world,
> after reaching the culmination of their greatness, descend again, in
> accordance with the same law by which they ascended; till, having
> reached the lowest point, humanity reasserts itself and mounts up once
> more, the height of its attainment being, by this law of ascending
> progression by cycles, somewhat higher than the point from which it
> had before descended.

But these cycles -- wheels within wheels, so comprehensively and
ingeniously symbolized by the various Manus and Rishis in India, and by
the Kabiri in the West\*\* -- *do not affect all mankind at one and the
same*

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* "On World History" in "Philosophy of History," p. 26. (Sibree's Eng.
Transl.).

\*\* This symbolism does not prevent these now seemingly mythic
personages from \[\[Footnote continued on next page\]\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 642 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

*time* -- as explained in the *Racial division of Cycles* (*See
sub*-*section* 6.) Hence, as we see, the difficulty of comprehending,
and discriminating between them, with regard to their physical and
spiritual effects, without having thoroughly mastered their relations
with, and action upon the respective positions of nations and races, in
their destiny and evolution. This system cannot be comprehended if the
spiritual action of these periods -- *pre*-*ordained*, so to say, by
Karmic law --is separated from their physical course. The calculations
of the best astrologers would fail, or at any rate remain imperfect,
unless this dual action is thoroughly taken into consideration and dealt
with upon these lines. And this mastery can be achieved only through
INITIATION.

The Grand Cycle includes the progress of mankind from the appearance of
primordial man of ethereal form. It runs through the inner cycles of his
(man's) progressive evolution from the ethereal down to the
semi-ethereal and purely physical: down to the redemption of man from
his *coat of skin* and matter, after which it continues running its
course downward and then upward again, to meet at the culmination of a
Round, when the manvantaric "Serpent swallows its tail" and seven minor
cycles are passed. These are the great Racial Cycles which affect
equally all the nations and tribes included in that special Race; but
there are minor and national as well as tribal cycles within those,
which run independently of each other. They are called in the Eastern
esotericism the *Karmic* cycles. In the West, since Pagan Wisdom has
been repudiated as having grown from and been developed by the dark
powers supposed to be at constant war and in opposition to the little
tribal Jehovah -- the full and awful significance of the Greek
**N**EMESIS (or Karma) has been entirely forgotten. Otherwise Christians
would have better realized the profound truth that Nemesis is without
attributes; that while the dreaded goddess is absolute and immutable as
a Principle, it is we ourselves -- nations and individuals -- who propel
her to action and give the impulse to its direction.
**K**ARMA-**N**EMESIS is the creator of nations and mortals, but once
created, it is they who make of her either a fury or a rewarding Angel.
Yea --

> "Wise are they who worship Nemesis"\*

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\[\[Footnote continued from previous page\]\] having ruled the earth
once upon a time under the human form of actual living, though truly
divine and god-like man. The opinion of Colonel Vallancey (and also of
Count de Gobelin) that the *names of the Kabiri appear to be all
allegorical*, and to have signified no more (?) than an almanac of the
vicissitudes of the seasons -- calculated for the operations of
agriculture" (*Collect. de Reb. Hibern.*, No. 13, *Praef.* Sect. 5) is
as absurd as his assertion that OEon, Kronos, Saturn and Dagon are all
one, namely, the "patriarch Adam." The Kabiri were the instructors of
mankind in agriculture, because they were the *regents* over the seasons
and Cosmic cycles. Hence it was they who regulated, as planetary Spirits
or "Angels" (messengers), the *mysteries* of the *art* of agriculture.

\* Who *dread* Karma-Nemesis would be better.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 643 KARMA-NEMESIS.

-- as the *chorus* tells Prometheus. And as unwise they, who believe
that the goddess may be propitiated by whatever sacrifices and prayers,
or have her wheel diverted from the path it has once taken. "The triform
Fates and ever mindful Furies" are her attributes only on earth, and
begotten by ourselves. There is no return from the paths she cycles
over; yet those paths are of our own making, for it is we, collectively
or individually, who prepare them. Karma-Nemesis is the synonym of
**P**ROVIDENCE, minus *design*, goodness, and every other *finite*
attribute and qualification, so unphilosophically attributed to the
latter. An Occultist or a philosopher will not speak of the goodness or
cruelty of Providence; but, identifying it with Karma-Nemesis, he will
teach that nevertheless it guards the good and watches over them in
this, as in future lives; and that it punishes the evil-doer -- aye,
even to his seventh rebirth. So long, in short, as the effect of his
having thrown into perturbation even the smallest atom in the Infinite
World of harmony, has not been finally readjusted. For the only decree
of Karma -- an eternal and immutable decree -- is absolute Harmony in
the world of matter as it is in the world of Spirit. It is not,
therefore, Karma that rewards or punishes, but it is we, who reward or
punish ourselves according to whether we work with, through and along
with nature, abiding by the laws on which that Harmony depends, or --
break them.

Nor would the ways of Karma be inscrutable were men to work in union and
harmony, instead of disunion and strife. For our ignorance of those ways
-- which one portion of mankind calls the ways of Providence, dark and
intricate; while another sees in them the action of blind Fatalism; and
a third, simple chance, with neither gods nor devils to guide them --
would surely disappear, if we would but attribute all these to their
correct cause. With right knowledge, or at any rate with a confident
conviction that our neighbours will no more work to hurt us than we
would think of harming them, the two-thirds of the World's evil would
vanish into thin air. Were no man to hurt his brother, Karma-Nemesis
would have neither cause to work for, nor weapons to act through. It is
the constant presence in our midst of every element of strife and
opposition, and the division of races, nations, tribes, societies and
individuals into Cains and Abels, wolves and lambs, that is the chief
cause of the "ways of Providence." We cut these numerous windings in our
destinies daily with our own hands, while we imagine that we are
pursuing a track on the royal high road of respectability and duty, and
then complain of those ways being so intricate and so dark. We stand
bewildered before the mystery of our own making, and the riddles of life
that *we will not* solve, and then accuse the great Sphinx of devouring
us. But verily there is not an accident in our lives,

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 644 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

not a misshapen day, or a misfortune, that could not be traced back to
our own doings in this or in another life. If one breaks the laws of
Harmony, or, as a theosophical writer expresses it, "the laws of life,"
one must be prepared to fall into the chaos one has oneself produced.
For, according to the same writer, "the only conclusion one can come to
is that these laws of life are their own avengers; and consequently that
every avenging Angel is only a typified representation of their
re-action."

Therefore, if any one is helpless before these immutable laws, it is not
ourselves, the artificers of our destinies, but rather those angels, the
guardians of harmony. Karma-Nemesis is no more than the (spiritual)
dynamical effect of causes produced and forces awakened into activity by
our own actions. It is a law of occult dynamics that "a given amount of
energy expended on the spiritual or astral plane is productive of far
greater results than the same amount expended on the physical objective
plane of existence."

This state will last till man's spiritual intuitions are fully opened,
which will not happen before we fairly cast off our thick coats of
matter; until we begin acting from *within*, instead of ever following
impulses from *without;* namely, those produced by our physical senses
and gross selfish body. Until then the only palliative to the evils of
life is union and harmony -- a Brotherhood IN ACTU, and *altruism* not
simply in name. The suppression of one single bad *cause* will suppress
not one, but a variety of bad effects. And if a Brotherhood or even a
number of Brotherhoods may not be able to prevent nations from
occasionally cutting each other's throats -- still unity in thought and
action, and philosophical research into the mysteries of being, will
always prevent some, while trying to comprehend that which has hitherto
remained to them a riddle, from creating additional causes in a world
already so full of woe and evil. Knowledge of Karma gives the conviction
that if --

> ". . . . virtue in distress, and vice in triumph  
> Make atheists of mankind,"\*

it is only because that mankind has ever shut its eyes to the great
truth that man is himself his own saviour as his own destroyer. That he
need not accuse Heaven and the gods, Fates and Providence, of the
apparent injustice that reigns in the midst of humanity. But let him
rather remember and repeat this bit of Grecian wisdom, which warns man
to forbear accusing *That* which --

> . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
> "Just, though mysterious, leads us on unerring  
> Through ways unmark'd from guilt to punishment . . ."

-- which are now the ways and the high road on which move onward the
great European nations. The Western Aryans had, every nation

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* Dryden.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 645 ANCIENT AND MODERN PROPHECIES.

and tribe, like their Eastern brethren of the Fifth Race, their Golden
and their Iron ages, their period of comparative irresponsibility, or
the Satya age of purity, while now, several of them have reached their
Iron Age, the *Kali-Yuga*, an age **B**LACK WITH **H**ORRORS. . . . .

It is true, on the other hand, that the exoteric cycles of every nation
have been correctly made to be derived from, and depend on, sidereal
motions. The latter are inseparably blended with the destinies of
nations and men. But in their purely physical sense, Europe knows of no
other cycles than the astronomical, and makes its computations
accordingly. Nor will it hear of any other than *imaginary* circles or
circuits in the starry heavens that gird them --

> "With centric and eccentric scribbled o'er  
> Cycle and epicycle, orb in orb . . ."

But with the pagans, with whom, as Coleridge has it -- ". . . . . Time,
cyclical time, was their abstraction of the Deity . ." that "Deity"
manifesting co-ordinately with, and only through Karma, and being that
KARMA-NEMESIS itself, the cycles meant something more than a mere
succession of events, or a periodical space of time of more or less
prolonged duration. For they were generally marked with recurrences of a
more varied and intellectual character than are exhibited in the
periodical return of seasons or of certain constellations. Modern wisdom
is satisfied with astronomical computations and prophecies based on
unerring mathematical laws. Ancient Wisdom added to the cold shell of
astronomy the vivifying elements of its soul and spirit -- ASTROLOGY.
And, as the sidereal motions *do* regulate and determine other events on
Earth -- besides potatoes and the periodical disease of that useful
vegetable -- (a statement which, not being amenable to scientific
explanation, is merely derided, while accepted) -- those events have to
be allowed to find themselves predetermined by even simple astronomical
computations. Believers in astrology will understand our meaning,
sceptics will laugh at the belief and mock the idea. Thus they shut
their eyes, ostrich-like, to their own fate. . . . . . .\*

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* Not all, however, for there are men of Science awakening to truth.
This is what we read: "Whatever way we turn our eyes we encounter a
mystery . . . . all in Nature for us is *the unknown*. . . Yet they are
numerous, those superficial minds for whom nothing can be produced by
natural forces outside of facts observed long ago, consecrated in books
and grouped more or less skilfully with the help of theories whose
ephemeral duration ought, by this time, to have demonstrated their
insufficiency, . . . . I do not pretend *to contest the possibility of
invisible Beings*, *of a nature different from ours and susceptible of
moving matter to action.* Profound philosophers have admitted it in all
epochs as a consequence of the great law of continuity which rules the
Universe. That intellectual life, which we see starting in some way from
non-being (*neant*) and gradually reaching man, can it stop abruptly at
man to reappear only in the infinite, in the sovereign regulator of the
world? This is little probable." Therefore . . "I \[\[Footnote continued
on next page\]\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 646 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

This because their little *historical* period, so called, allows them no
margin for comparison. Sidereal heaven is before them; and though their
spiritual vision is still unopened and the atmospheric dust of
terrestrial origin seals their sight and chains it to the limits of
physical systems, still they do not fail to perceive the movements and
note the behaviour of meteors and comets. They record the periodical
advents of those wanderers and "flaming messengers," and prophesy, in
consequence, earthquakes, meteoric showers, the apparition of certain
stars, comets, etc., etc. Are they soothsayers for all that? No, they
are learned astronomers.

Why, then, should occultists and astrologers, as learned, be
disbelieved, when they prophesy the return of some cyclic event on the
same mathematical principle? Why should the claim that they *know it* be
ridiculed? Their forefathers and predecessors, having recorded the
recurrence of such events in their time and day, throughout a period
embracing hundreds of thousands of years, the conjunction of the same
constellations must necessarily produce, if not quite the same, at any
rate, similar effects. Are the prophecies derided, because of the claim
of the hundreds of thousands of years of observation, and the millions
of years of the human races? In its turn modern Science is laughed at
for its far more modest geological and anthropological figures, by those
who hold to Biblical chronology. Thus Karma adjusts even human laughter
at the mutual expense of sects, learned societies, and individuals. Yet
in the prognostication of *such* future events, at any rate, all
foretold on the authority of cyclic recurrences, there is no psychic
phenomenon involved. It is neither *prevision*, *nor prophecy;* no more
than is the signalling of a comet or star, several years before its
appearance. It is simply knowledge and mathematically correct
computations which enable the **W**ISE **M**EN OF THE **E**AST to
foretell, for instance, that England is on the eve of such or another
catastrophe; France, nearing such a point of her cycle, and Europe in
general threatened with, or rather, on the eve of, a cataclysm, which
her own cycle of racial *Karma has led her* to. The reliability of the
information depends, of course, on the acceptation or rejection of the
claim for a tremendous period of historical observation. Eastern
Initiates maintain that they have preserved records of the racial
development and of events of universal import ever since the beginning
of the Fourth Race -- that which preceded being traditional. Moreover,
those who believe in Seership and Occult

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\[\[Footnote continued from previous page\]\] no more deny the existence
of Spirits than I deny soul while trying to explain certain facts
without their hypothesis . . ." "The Non-Defined Forces," Historical and
Experimental Researches, p. 3. The above is written by A. de Rochas, a
well-known man of science in France, his work being one of the signs of
the time. (Paris: Masson, Boulevard St. Germain, 1887.)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 1, Page\]\] 647 ASTROLOGY A SCIENCE.

powers will have no difficulty in crediting the general character, at
least, of the information given, even if traditional, once the latter is
checked and corrected by the corroboration of clairvoyance and esoteric
knowledge. But in the present case no such metaphysical belief is
claimed as our chief dependence, but a proof is given on what, to every
Occultist, is quite scientific evidence -- the records preserved through
the *Zodiac* for incalculable ages.

It is now amply proved that even horoscopes and judiciary astrology are
not quite based on a fiction, and that stars and constellations,
consequently, have an occult and mysterious influence on, and connection
with, individuals. And if with the latter, why not with nations, races,
and mankind in bulk? This, again, is a claim made on the authority of
the Zodiacal records. We shall examine then, if you please, how far the
Zodiac was known to the ancients, and how far it is forgotten by the
moderns.

-------

<span id="DDE_LINK19">\[\[This page continued in next section\]\]</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next Section](sd1-3-17)

[Contents](sd1-0-co.htm#contents)
