##### The Secret Doctrine by H. P. Blavatsky -- Vol. 2

------------------------------------------------------------------------

\[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 131 THE SWAN AND THE EGG.

#### STANZA VI. THE EVOLUTION OF THE "SWEAT-BORN."

-------

> §§ (22) The evolution of the three races continued. (23) The second
> race creates the Third and perishes.

---------------------

22\. **T**HEN THE **S**ECOND EVOLVED THE **S**WEAT-**B**ORN, THE
**T**HIRD (*Race*)*.* **T**HE SWEAT GREW, ITS DROPS GREW, AND THE DROPS
BECAME HARD AND ROUND. **T**HE **S**UN WARMED IT; THE **M**OON COOLED
AND SHAPED IT; THE **W**IND FED IT UNTIL ITS RIPENESS. **T**HE WHITE
SWAN FROM THE STARRY VAULT (*the Moon*), OVERSHADOWED THE BIG DROP.
**T**HE EGG OF THE FUTURE RACE, THE **M**AN-**S**WAN (*Hamsa*) OF THE
LATER **T**HIRD (*a*). **F**IRST **M**ALE-**F**EMALE, THEN **M**AN AND
**W**OMAN (*b*).

(*a*) The text of the Stanza clearly implies that the human embryo was
nourished *ab extra* by Cosmic forces, and that the "Father-Mother"
furnished apparently the germ that ripened: in all probability a
"sweat-born egg," to be hatched out, in some mysterious way,
disconnected from the "double" parent. It is comparatively easy to
conceive of an oviparous humanity, since even now man is, in one sense,
"egg-born." Magendie, moreover, in his *Precis Elementaire de
Physiologie,* citing "a case where the umbilical cord was ruptured and
perfectly cicatrized," yet the infant was born alive, pertinently asks,
"How was the circulation carried on in this organ?" On the next page he
says: "Nothing is at present known respecting the use of digestion in
the foetus;" and respecting its nutrition, propounds this query: "What,
then, can we say of the nutrition of the foetus? Physiological works
contain only *vague conjectures* on this point." "Ah, but," the sceptic
may urge, "Magendie's book belongs to the last generation, and Science
has since made such strides that his stigma of ignorance can no longer
be fixed upon the profession." Indeed; then let us turn to a very great
authority upon Physiology, viz., Sir M. Foster (*Text-Book of
Physiology,* third edition, 1879, p. 623); and to the disadvantage of
modern Science we shall find him saying, "Concerning the rise and
development of the functional activities of the embryo, our knowledge is
almost a blank. We know scarcely anything about the various steps by
which the primary fundamental qualities of the protoplasm of the ovum
are differentiated into the complex phenomena which we have attempted in

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 132 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

this book to explain." The students of Trin. Coll. Cantab. will now
kindly draw a veil before the statue of Hygeia and bandage the eyes of
the busts of Galen and Hippocrates, lest they look reproachfully at
their degenerate descendants. One further fact we must note. Sir M.
Foster is discreetly silent about the case of the ruptured umbilical
cord cited by his great French *confrere.*

This is a very curious statement as explained in the Commentaries. To
make it clear: The First Race having created the Second by "budding," as
just explained, the Second Race gives birth to the Third -- which itself
is separated into three distinct divisions, consisting of men
differently procreated. The first two of these are produced by an
oviparous method, presumably unknown to modern Natural History. While
the early sub-races of the Third Humanity procreated their species by a
kind of exudation of moisture or vital fluid, the drops of which
coalescing formed an oviform ball -- or shall we say egg? -- which
served as an extraneous vehicle for the generation therein of a *foetus*
and child, the mode of procreation by the later races changed, in its
results at all events. The little ones of the earlier races were
entirely sexless -- shapeless even for all one knows\*; but those of the
later races were born androgynous. It is in the Third Race that the
separation of sexes occurred. From being previously a-sexual, Humanity
became distinctly hermaphrodite or bi-sexual; and finally the
man-bearing eggs began to give birth, gradually and almost imperceptibly
in their evolutionary development, first, to Beings in which one sex
predominated over the other, and, finally, to distinct men and women.
And now let us search for corroboration of these statements in the
religious legends of East and West. Let us take the "Egg-born Race"
first. Think of Kasyapa, the Vedic sage, and the most prolific of
creators. He was the son of Marichi, Brahma's mind-born son; and he is
made to become the father of the *Nagas,* or Serpents, among other
beings. Exoterically, the *Nagas* are semi-divine beings which have a
human face and the tail of a serpent. Yet there was a race of *Nagas,*
said to be a thousand in number only, born or rather sprung from Kadra,
Kasyapa's wife, for *the purpose of peopling Patala,* which is
undeniably America, as will be shown; and there was a NAGA-Dwipa, one of
the seven divisions of Bharata-Varsha, India, inhabited by a people
bearing the same name, who are allowed, even by some Orientalists, to be
*historical,* and to have left many a trace behind them to this day.

Now the point most insisted upon at present is that, whatever origin be
claimed for man, his evolution took place in this order: (1) Sexless, as
all the earlier forms are; (2) then, by a natural transition, he became,

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* See the "Timaeus."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 133 BI-SEXUAL REPRODUCTION.

"a solitary hermaphrodite," a bi-sexual being; and (3) finally separated
and became what he is now. Science teaches us that all the primitive
forms, though sexless, "still retained the power of undergoing the
processes of A-Sexual multiplication;" why, then, should man be excluded
from that law of Nature? Bi-sexual reproduction is an evolution, a
specialized and perfected form on the scale of matter of the fissiparous
act of reproduction. Occult teachings are pre-eminently panspermic, and
the early history of humanity is hidden only "from ordinary mortals;"
nor is the history of the primitive Races buried from the Initiates in
the tomb of time, as it is for profane science. Therefore, supported on
the one hand by that science which shows to us progressive development
and an internal cause for every external modification, as a law in
Nature; and, on the other hand, by an implicit faith in the wisdom -- we
may say pansophia even -- of the universal traditions gathered and
preserved by the Initiates, who have perfected them into an almost
faultless system -- thus supported, we venture to state the doctrine
clearly.

In an able article, written some fifteen years ago, our learned and
respected friend Prof. Alex. Wilder, of New York, shows the absolute
logic and necessity of believing "The Primeval Race Double-Sexed," and
gives a number of scientific reasons for it.\* He argues firstly, "that
a large part of the vegetable creation exhibits the phenomenon of
bisexuality . . . the Linnaean classification enumerating thus almost
all plants. This is the case in the superior families of the vegetable
kingdoms as much as in the lower forms, from the Hemp to the Lombardy
Poplar and Ailanthus. In the animal kingdom, in insect life, the moth
generates a worm, as in the *Mysteries* the great secret was expressed:
"*Taurus Draconem genuit, et Taurum Draco.*" The coral-producing family,
which, according to Agassiz, 'has spent many hundreds of thousands of
years, during the present geological period, in building out the
peninsula of Florida . . . . produce their offspring from themselves
like the buds and ramifications in a tree.' Bees are somewhat in the
same line . . . . The Aphides or plant lice keep house like Amazons, and
*virgin parents* perpetuate the Race for ten successive generations."

What say the old sages, the philosopher-teachers of antiquity.
Aristophanes speaks thus on the subject in Plato's "*Banquet*": "Our
nature of old was not the same as it is now. It was *androgynous,* the
form and name partaking of, and being common to both the male and
female. . . . Their bodies were round, and the manner of their running

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* See Extracts from that Essay in "*The Theosophist,*" of February,
1883.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 134 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

circular.\* They were terrible in force and strength and had prodigious
ambition. Hence Zeus *divided each of them into two,* making them
weaker; Apollo, under his direction, closed up the skin."

Meshia and Meshiane were but a single individual with the old Persians.
"They also taught that man was the product of the tree of life, growing
in androgynous pairs, till they were separated at a subsequent
modification of the human form.\*\*"

In the *Toleduth* (generation) of Adam, the verse "God created (*bara,*
brought forth) man in his image, in the image of God created he him,
male and female created he them," if read esoterically will yield the
true sense, viz.: "The *Elohim* (Gods) brought forth from themselves (by
modification) man in their image . . . . created they *him* (collective
humanity, or *Adam*), male and female created *he* (collective deity)
them."\*\*\* This will show the esoteric point. The *sexless* Race was
their first production, a modification *of* and *from* themselves, the
pure spiritual existences; and this was Adam *solus.* Thence came the
*second* Race: Adam-Eve or *Jod-Heva,* inactive androgynes; and finally
the *Third,* or the "*Separating* Hermaphrodite," Cain and Abel, who
produce the Fourth, Seth-Enos, etc. It is that Third, the last
semi-spiritual *race*, which was also the last vehicle of the divine and
innate Wisdom, ingenerate in the Enochs, the Seers of that Mankind. The
*Fourth,* which had tasted from the fruit of the Tree of Good and Evil
-- Wisdom united already to earthy, and therefore *impure,* intelligence
\*\*\*\* had consequently to acquire that Wisdom by initiation and great
struggle. And the union of Wisdom and Intelligence, the former *ruling*
the latter, is called in the Hermetic books "the God possessing the
double fecundity of the two sexes." Mystically Jesus was held to be
man-woman. See also in the *Orphic hymns,* sung during the Mysteries, we
find:

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* Compare Ezekiel's vision (chap. i) of the four divine beings who "had
the likeness of a man" and yet had the appearance of a wheel, "when they
went they went upon their four sides . . . . for the spirit of the
living creature was in the wheel."

\*\* See Prof. Wilder's Essay "*The Primeval Race Double-Sexed.*"

\*\*\* Eugibinus, a Christian, and the Rabbis Samuel, Manasseh ben
Israel, and Maimonides taught that "Adam had *two* faces and *one*
person, and from the beginning he was both male and female -- male on
one side and female on the other (like Manu's Brahma), but afterwards
the parts were separated." The one hundred and thirty-ninth Psalm of
David recited by Rabbi Jeremiah ben Eliazar is evidence of this. "Thou
hast *fashioned* me behind and before," not *beset* as in the Bible,
which is absurd and meaningless, and this shows, as Prof. Wilder thinks,
"that the primeval form of mankind was androgynous."

\*\*\*\* See the union of *Chochmah,* Wisdom, with *Binah*,
Intelligence, or Jehovah, the *Demiurge,* called *Understanding* in the
*Proverbs of Solomon, ch. vii.* Unto men *Wisdom* (divine occult Wisdom)
crieth: "Oh, ye simple, understand Wisdom; and ye *fools, be of an
understanding heart.*" It is *spirit* and *matter*, the *nous* and the
*psyche;* of the latter of which St. James says that it is "earthly,
sensual, and devilish."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 135 THE VIRGIN THIRD RACE.

"Zeus is a male, Zeus is an immortal maid." The Egyptian Ammon was the
goddess Neith, in his other half. Jupiter has female breasts, Venus is
bearded in some of her statues, and Ila, the goddess, is also Su-Dyumna,
the god, as Vaivasvata's progeny.

"The name *Adam,*" says Professor A. Wilder, "or man, itself implies
this double form of existence. It is identical with *Athamas,* or
*Thomas* (Tamil *Tam*), which is rendered by the Greek *Didumos,* a
twin; if, therefore, the first woman was formed subsequently to the
first man, she must, as a logical necessity, be 'taken out of man' . . .
and the *side* which the *Elohim* had taken from man, 'made he a woman'
(*Gen. ii.*). The Hebrew word here used is *Tzala,* which bears the
translation we have given. It is easy to trace the legend in Berosus,
who says that *Thalatth* (the *Omoroca,* or Lady of Urka) was the
beginning of creation. She was also Melita, the queen of the Moon. . . .
The two twin births of *Genesis,* that of Cain and Abel, and of Esau and
Jacob, shadow the same idea. *The name 'Hebel' is the same as Eve,* and
its characteristic seems to be feminine," continues the author. "Unto
thee shall be his desire," said the Lord God to Cain, "and thou shalt
rule over him." The same language had been uttered to Eve: "Thy desire
shall be to thy husband, and he shall rule over thee." . . .

Thus the pristine bi-sexual unity of the human *Third* Root-Race is an
axiom in the Secret Doctrine. Its virgin individuals were raised to
"Gods," because that Race represented their "divine Dynasty." The
moderns are satisfied with worshipping the male heroes of the Fourth
Race, who created gods after their own sexual image, whereas the gods of
primeval mankind were "male and female."

As stated in Book I, the humanities developed coordinately, and on
parallel lines with the four Elements, every new Race being
physiologically adapted to meet the additional element. Our Fifth Race
is rapidly approaching the Fifth Element -- call it interstellar ether,
if you will -- which has more to do, however, with psychology than with
physics. We men have learned to live in every climate, whether frigid or
tropical, but the first two Races had nought to do with climate, nor
were they subservient to any temperature or change therein. And thus, we
are taught, men lived down to the close of the Third Root-Race, when
eternal spring reigned over the whole globe, such as is now enjoyed by
the inhabitants of Jupiter; a "world," says M. Flammarion, "which is not
subject like our own to the vicissitudes of seasons nor to abrupt
alternations of temperature, but which is enriched with all the
treasures of eternal spring." (*"Pluralite des Mondes,*" p. 69.) Those
astronomers who maintain that Jupiter is in a molten condition, in our
sense of the term, are invited to settle their dispute with this learned
French

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 136 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

Astronomer.\* It must, however, be always borne in mind that the
"eternal spring" referred to is only a condition *cognised as such by
the Jovians.* It is not "spring" *as we know it.* In this reservation is
to be found the reconciliation between the two theories here cited. Both
embrace *partial* truths.

It is thus a universal tradition that mankind has evolved gradually into
its present shape from an almost transparent condition of texture, and
neither by miracle nor by sexual intercourse. Moreover, this is in full
accord with the ancient philosophies; from those of Egypt and India with
their Divine Dynasties down to that of Plato. And all these universal
beliefs must be classed with the "presentiments" and "obstinate
conceptions," some of them ineradicable, in popular faiths. Such
beliefs, as remarked by Louis Figuier, are "frequently the outcome of
the wisdom and observation of an infinite number of generations of men."
For, "*a tradition which has an uniform and universal existence,*

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* An hypothesis evolved in 1881 by Mr. Mattieu Williams seems to have
impressed Astronomers but little. Says the author of "*The Fuel of the
Sun*," in *Knowledge,* Dec. 23, 1881: "Applying now the researches of
Dr. Andrews to the conditions of Solar existence . . . I conclude that
the Sun has *no nucleus,* either solid, liquid, or gaseous, but is
composed of dissociated matter in the critical state, surrounded, first,
by a flaming envelope, due to the recombination of the dissociated
matter, and outside of this, by another envelope of vapours due to this
combination."

This is a novel theory to be added to other hypotheses, *all scientific
and orthodox.* The meaning of the "*critical* state" is explained by Mr.
M. Williams in the same journal (Dec. 9, 1881), in an article on
"Solids, Liquids, and Gases." Speaking of an experiment by Dr. Andrews
on carbonic acid, the scientist says that "when 88 \[\[degrees\]\] is
reached, the boundary between liquid and gas vanished; *liquid and gas
have blended into one mysterious intermediate fluid; an indefinite
fluctuating something is there filling the whole of the tube -- an
etherealised liquid or a visible gas.* Hold a red-hot poker between your
eye and the light; you will see an upflowing wave of movement of what
appears like liquid air. The appearance of the *hybrid* fluid in the
tube resembles this, but is sensibly denser, and evidently stands
between the liquid and gaseous states of matter, as pitch or treacle
stands between solid and liquid."

The *temperature at which this occurs has been named by Dr. Andrews the*
"*critical temperature*"; here the gaseous and the liquid states are
"*continuous,*" and it is probable that *all other substances capable of
existing* in both states have their own particular critical
temperatures.

Speculating further upon this "critical" state, Mr. Mattieu Williams
emits some quite *occult* theories about Jupiter and other planets. He
says: "*Our* *notions of solids, liquids, and gases are derived from our
experiences of the state of matter here upon this Earth. Could we be
removed to another planet, they would be curiously changed.* On Mercury
water would rank as one of the condensible gases; on Mars, as a fusible
solid; but what on Jupiter?"

"Recent observations justify us in regarding this as a miniature sun,
with an external envelope of cloudy matter, apparently of
partially-condensed water, but red-hot, or probably still hotter within.
His vaporous atmosphere is evidently of enormous depth, and the force of
gravitation being on his visible outer surface two-and-a-half
\[\[Footnote continued on next page\]\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 137 EGYPTIAN BELIEF.

*has all the weight of scientific testimony.*"*\** And there is more
than one such tradition in the Puranic allegories, as has been shown.
Moreover, the doctrine that the first Race of mankind was formed out of
the *chhayas* (astral images) of the Pitris, is fully corroborated in
the *Zohar.* "In the *Tzalam* (shadow image) of Elohim (the Pitris), was
made Adam (man). (Cremona, Ed. iii., 76*a*; Brody, Ed. iii., 159*a*;
"Qabbalah," Isaac Myer, p. 420.)

It has been repeatedly urged as an objection that, however high the
degree of metaphysical thought in ancient India, yet the old Egyptians
had nothing but crass idolatry and zoolatry to boast of; Hermes, as
alleged, being the work of mystic Greeks who lived in Egypt. To this,
one answer can be given -- a direct proof that the Egyptians believed in
the Secret Doctrine is, that it was taught to them at Initiation. Let
the objectors open the "*Eclogae Physicae et Ethicae*" of *Stobaeus,*
the Greek compiler of ancient fragments, who lived in the fifth century,
**A.D**. The following is a transcription by him of an old Hermetic
fragment, showing the Egyptian theory of the Soul. Translated word for
word, it says: --

"From one Soul, that of ALL**,** spring all the Souls, which spread
themselves as if purposely distributed through the world. These souls
undergo many transformations; those which are already creeping creatures
turn into aquatic animals; from these aquatic animals are derived land
animals; and from the latter the birds. From the beings who live aloft
in the air (heaven) men are born. On reaching that

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\[\[Footnote continued from previous page\]\] times greater than that on
our Earth's surface, the atmospheric pressure, in descending below this
visible surface, must soon reach that at which the vapour of water would
be brought to its critical condition. Therefore we may infer that *the
oceans of Jupiter are neither of frozen, liquid, nor gaseous water, but
are oceans or atmospheres of critical water. If any fish or birds swim
or fly therein, they must be very critically organized.*"

As the whole mass of Jupiter is 300 times greater than that of the
Earth, and its compressing energy towards the centre proportional to
this, its materials, if similar to those of the Earth, and no hotter,
would be considerably more dense, and the whole planet would have a
higher specific gravity; but we know by the movement of its satellites
that, instead of this, its specific gravity is less than a fourth of
that of the Earth. This justifies the conclusion that it is intensely
hot; for even hydrogen, if cold, would become denser than Jupiter under
such pressure.

"As all elementary substances may exist as solids, liquids, or gases,
or, critically, according to the conditions of temperature and pressure,
I am justified in hypothetically concluding that *Jupiter is neither a
solid, a liquid, nor a gaseous planet, but a critical planet, or an orb
composed internally of associated elements in the critical state, and
surrounded by a dense atmosphere of their vapours* and those of some of
their compounds such as water. The same reasoning applies to Saturn and
other large and rarified planets."

It is gratifying to see how *scientific imagination* approaches every
year more closely to the borderland of our occult teachings.

*\** "*The Day After Death,*" p. 23.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 138 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

status of men, the Souls receive the principle of (conscious)
immortality, become Spirits, then pass into the choir of gods."

--------

23\. **T**HE **S**ELF-**B**ORN WERE THE **C**HHAYAS, THE SHADOWS FROM
THE BODIES OF THE SONS OF TWILIGHT. **N**EITHER WATER NOR FIRE COULD
DESTROY THEM. **T**HEIR SONS WERE (*so destroyed*) (*a*).

(*a*) This verse cannot be understood without the help of the
Commentaries. It means that the First Root-Race, the "Shadows" of the
Progenitors, could not be injured, or destroyed by death. Being so
ethereal and so little human in constitution, they could not be affected
by any element -- flood or fire. But their "Sons," the Second Root-Race,
could be and were so destroyed. As the "progenitors" merged wholly in
their own astral bodies, which were their progeny; so that progeny was
absorbed in its descendants, the "Sweat-born." These were the second
Humanity -- composed of the most heterogeneous gigantic semi-human
monsters -- the first attempts of material nature at building human
bodies. The ever-blooming lands of the Second Continent (Greenland,
among others) were transformed, in order, from Edens with their eternal
spring, into hyperborean Hades. This transformation was due to the
displacement of the great waters of the globe, to oceans changing their
beds; and the bulk of the Second Race perished in this first great throe
of the evolution and consolidation of the globe during the human period.
Of such great cataclysms there have already been four.\* And we may
expect a fifth for ourselves in due course of time.

-------

**A** **F**EW **W**ORDS ABOUT "**D**ELUGES" AND "**N**OAHS."

The accounts in the various Puranas about our Progenitors are as
contradictory *in their details* as everything else. Thus while, *in the
Rig Veda,* Ida (or Ila) is called the Instructress of Vaivasvata Manu,
Sayana makes of her a goddess presiding over the Earth, and the
Sathapatha Brahmana shows her to be the Manu's daughter, an *offering of
his sacrifice,* and, later on, his (Vaivasvata's) *wife, by whom he
begat the race of Manus.* In the Puranas, again, she is Vaivasvata's
daughter, yet the wife of Budha (Wisdom), the illegitimate son of the
Moon (Soma) and the planet Jupiter's (*Brihhaspati's*) wife, Tara. All
this, which seems a jumble to the profane, is full of philosophical
meaning to the Occultist. On the very face of the narrative a secret and
sacred meaning is per-

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\*The first occurred when what is now the North Pole was separated from
the later Continents.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 139 WHAT THE FLOOD MEANS.

ceivable, all the details, however, being so purposely mixed up that the
experienced eye of an Initiate alone can follow them and place the
events in their proper order.

The story as told in the "Mahabharata" strikes the key-note, and yet it
needs to be explained by the secret sense contained in the Bhagavad
Gita. It is the *prologue to the drama* of our (Fifth) Humanity. While
Vaivasvata was engaged in devotion on the river bank, a fish craves his
protection from a bigger fish. He saves and places it in a jar, where,
growing larger and larger, it communicates to him the news of the
forthcoming deluge. It is the well-known "Matsya Avatar," the first
Avatar of Vishnu, the *Dagon\** of the Chaldean Xisuthrus, and many
other things besides. The story is too well known to need repetition.
Vishnu orders a ship to be built, in which Manu is said to be saved
along with the seven Rishis, the latter, however, being absent from
other texts. Here the seven Rishis stand for the *seven Races,* the
seven principles, and various other things; for there is again a double
mystery involved in this manifold allegory.

We have said elsewhere that the great Flood had several meanings, and
that it referred, as also does the FALL, to both spiritual and physical,
cosmic and terrestrial, events: as above, so it is below. The ship or
ark -- *navis* -- in short, being the symbol of the female generative
principle, is typified in the heavens by the Moon, and on Earth by the
Womb: both being the vessels and bearers of the seeds of life and being,
which the sun, or Vishnu, the male principle, vivifies and
fructifies.\*\* The First Cosmic Flood refers to primordial creation, or
the formation of Heaven and the Earths; in which case Chaos and the
great Deep stand for the "Flood," and the Moon for the "Mother," from
whom proceed all the life-germs.\*\*\* But the terrestrial Deluge and

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* We must remember that at the head of all the Babylonian gods were
*Ea,* Anu, and the primeval Bel; and that *Ea,* the first, was the God
of Wisdom, the great "God of Light" and of the DEEP, and that he was
identified with Oannes, or the Biblical Dagon -- the man-fish who rose
out of the Persian Gulf.

\*\* See Part. II. § "*The Holy of Holies*."

\*\*\* It is far later on that the Moon became a male god; with the
Hindus it was Soma, with the Chaldeans Nannak or Nannar, and Sin, the
son of Mulil, the older Bel. The "Akkadians" called him the "Lord of
Ghosts"; and he was the god of Nipoor (Niffer) in northern Babylonia. It
is Mulil who caused the waters of the Flood to fall from heaven on
Earth, for which Xisuthrus would not allow him to approach his altar. As
the modern Assyriologists have now ascertained, it is the northern
Nipoor which is the centre whence Chaldean (black) magic spread; and
Eridu (the Southern) which was the primitive seat of the worship of the
culture god, the god of divine wisdom -- the Sun-God being the supreme
deity everywhere. With the Jews, the Moon is connected with Israel's
Jehovah and his seed, because Ur was the chief seat of the worship of
the Moon-god, and because Abraham is said to have come from Ur, when
from A-bra(h)m, he becomes Abraham.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 140 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

its story has also its dual application. In one case it has reference to
that mystery when mankind was saved from utter destruction, by the
mortal woman being made the receptacle of the human seed at the end of
the Third Race,\* and in the other to the real and historical Atlantean
submersion. In both cases the "Host" -- or the Manu which saved the
*seed --* is called Vaivasvata Manu. Hence the diversity between the
Puranic and other versions; while in the Sathapatha Brahmana, Vaivasvata
produces a daughter and begets from her the race of Manu; which is a
reference to the first human *Manushyas,* who had to create women by
will (*Kriyasakti*), before they were naturally born from the
hermaphrodites as an independent sex, and who were, therefore, regarded
as their creator's *daughters.* The Puranic accounts make of her (*Ida*
or *Ila*) the wife of Budha (Wisdom), the latter version referring to
the events of the Atlantean flood, when Vaivasvata, the great Sage on
Earth, saved the Fifth Root-race from being destroyed along with the
remnants of the Fourth.

This is shown very clearly in the *Bhagavad Gita,* where Krishna is made
to say: --

"The Seven great Rishis, the *four preceding Manus,* partaking of my
essence, were born from my mind: from them sprung (were born) the human
races and the world." (*Chapter X., verse* 6).

Here the four preceding "Manus," out of the seven, are the four
Races\*\* which have already lived, since Krishna belongs to the Fifth
Race, his death having inaugurated the Kali Yuga. Thus Vaivasvata

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* When Narada, the virgin-ascetic, threatened to put an end to the
human race by preventing Daksha's sons from procreating it.

\*\* This is corroborated by a learned Brahmin. In his most excellent
lectures on the Bhagavad Gita (*see "Theosophist," April,* 1887, *p.*
444) the lecturer says: "There is a peculiarity to which I must call
your attention. He (Krishna) speaks here of four Manus. Why does he
speak of four? We are now in the seventh Manvantara, that of Vaivasvata.
If he is speaking of the past Manus, he ought to speak of six, but he
only mentions four. In some commentaries an attempt has been made to
interpret this in a peculiar manner. The word 'Chatvaraha' is separated
from the word 'Manavaha,' and is made to refer to Sanaka, Sanandana,
Sanatkumara, and Sanatsujata, who are also included among the mind-born
sons of Prajapati. But this interpretation will lead to a most absurd
conclusion, and make the sentence contradict itself. The persons alluded
to in the text have a qualifying clause in the sentence. It is well
known that Sanaka and the other three refused to create, though the
other sons had consented to do so; therefore, in speaking of those
persons from whom humanity has sprung into existence, it would be absurd
to include those four also in the list. The passage must be interpreted
without splitting the compound into two nouns. The number of Manus will
then be four, and the statement would then contradict the Puranic
account, though it would be in harmony with the occult theory. You will
recollect that it is stated (in Occultism) that we are now in the Fifth
Root-Race. Each Root-Race is considered as the *Santhathi* of a
particular Manu. Now, the Fourth Race has passed, or, in other words,
there have been four past Manus. . . . . "

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 141 VARIOUS DELUGES.

Manu, the son of Surya (the Sun), and the saviour of our Race, is
connected with the *Seed of Life,* both physically and spiritually. But,
at present, while speaking of all, we have to concern ourselves only
with the first two.

The "Deluge" is undeniably an *universal tradition.* "Glacial periods"
were numerous, and so were the "Deluges," for various reasons. Stockwell
and Croll enumerate some half dozen Glacial Periods and subsequent
Deluges -- the earliest of all being dated by them 850,000, and the last
about 100,000, years ago.\* But which was *our* Deluge? Assuredly the
former, the one which to this date remains recorded in the traditions of
all the peoples, from the remotest antiquity; the one that finally swept
away the last peninsulas of Atlantis, beginning with Ruta and Daitya and
ending with the (comparatively) small island mentioned by Plato. This is
shown by the agreement of certain details in all the legends. It was the
last of its gigantic character. The little deluge, the traces of which
Baron Bunsen found in Central Asia, and which he places at about 10,000
years **B.C.**, had nothing to do with either the semi-universal Deluge,
or Noah's flood -- the latter being a purely mythical rendering of old
traditions -- nor even with the submersion of the last Atlantean island;
at least, only a moral connection.

Our Fifth Race (the non-initiated portions), hearing of many deluges,
confused them, and now know of but one. This one altered the whole
aspect of the globe in its interchange and shifting of land and sea.

We may compare the traditions of the Peruvians: -- "The Incas, *seven*
in number, have repeopled the Earth after the deluge," they say *(Coste*
I, *IV., p.* 19); Humboldt mentions the Mexican version of the same
legend, but confuses somewhat the details of the still-preserved legend
concerning the American Noah. Nevertheless, the eminent Naturalist
mentions *twice seven* companions and the *divine bird* which preceded
the boat of the Aztecs, and thus makes fifteen elect instead of the
seven and the fourteen. This was written probably under some involuntary
reminiscence of Moses, who is said to have mentioned fifteen grandsons
of Noah, who escaped with their grandsire. Then again Xisuthrus, the
Chaldean Noah, is saved and translated *alive* to heaven -- like Enoch
-- with the seven gods, the *Kabirim,* or the seven divine Titans; again
the Chinese *Yao* has *seven* figures which sail with him and which he
will *animate* when he lands, and use for "human seed." Osiris, when he
enters the ark, or solar boat, takes *seven* Rays with him, etc., etc.

Sanchoniathon makes the *Aletae* or Titans (the Kabirim) contemporary

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* "*Smithsonian Contributions to Knowledge,*" xviii*.;* "*American
Journal of Science,*" III., xi., 456; and Croll's *"Climate and Time.*"
Lemuria was not submerged by a flood, but was destroyed by volcanic
action, and afterwards sank.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 142 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

with Agruerus, the great Phoenician god (whom Faber sought to identify
with Noah\*); further, it is suspected that the name of "Titan" is
derived from *Tit-Ain* -- "the fountains of the chaotic abyss"\*\*
(Tit-Theus, or Tityus is "the *divine deluge*"); and thus the Titans,
who are *seven,* are shown to be connected with the Flood and the seven
Rishis saved by Vaivasvata Manu.\*\*\*

They are the sons of Kronos (Time) and Rhea (the Earth); and as
Agruerus, Saturn and Sydyk are one and the same personage, and as the
seven Kabiri are said to be the sons of Sydyk or Kronos-Saturn, the
Kabiri and Titans are identical. For once the pious Faber was right in
his conclusions when he wrote: "I have no doubt of the seven Titans and
Kabiri being the same as the seven Rishis of the Hindu *mythology*
(?)*,* who are said to have escaped in a boat along with Manu, the head
(?) of the family."

But he is less fortunate in his speculations when he adds "The Hindoos,
in their *wild* legends have *variously perverted the history of the
Noachidae* (? !), yet it is remarkable that they seem to have
religiously adhered to the number seven."\*\*\*\* Hence Captain (Col.)
Wilford very judiciously observes: that "Perhaps the seven Manus, the
seven Brahmadicas and the seven Rishis are the same, and make only seven
individual persons.\*\*\*\*\* The seven Brahmadicas were Prajapatis, or
lords 'of the prajas or creatures.' From them mankind was born, and they
are probably the same with the seven Manus. . . . These seven grand
ancestors of the human race were created for the purpose of replenishing
the Earth with inhabitants." (*Asiatic Researches, Vol. V. p.* 246); and
Faber adds that: "the mutual resemblance of the Kabirs, the Titans, the
Rishis, and the Noetic family, is too striking to be the effect of mere
accident."\*\*\*\*\*\*

Faber was led into this mistake, and subsequently built his entire
theory concerning the Kabiri, on the fact that the name of the
scriptural

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* Agruerus is *Kronos,* or Saturn, and the prototype of the Israelitish
Jehovah. As connected with *Argha,* the Moon or Ark of salvation, Noah
is mythologically one with Saturn. But then this cannot relate to the
terrestrial flood. (*But see Faber's "Kabiri," Vol. I, pp.* 35, 43,
*and* 45.)

\*\* See *ibid.,* Vol. II., p. 240.

\*\*\* Sanchoniathon says that the Titans were the sons of Kronos, and
seven in number; and he calls them fire-worshippers, Aletae (sons of
Agni?), and diluvians. Al-ait is the god of fire.

\*\*\*\* Of which *seven,* let us remark, the Aryans, and not the
Semites, were the originators, while the Jews got that number from the
Chaldeans.

\*\*\*\*\* Seven individual sons of God, or Pitars and Pitris; also in
this case the sons of Kronos or Saturn (*Kala* "time") and *Arkites,*
like the Kabiri and Titans, as their name *--* "*lunar* ancestors" --
shows, the Moon being the Ark, or *Argha,* on the watery abyss of space.

\*\*\*\*\*\* *See* "*Kabiri,*" Vol. I., p. 131.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 143 THE ARKITE SYMBOLS.

Japhet is on the list of the Titans contained in a verse of the Orphic
hymns. According to Orpheus the names of the seven "Arkite" Titans (whom
Faber refuses to identify with the *impious* Titans, their descendants)
were Koeus, Kroeus, Phorcys, Kronos, Oceanus, Hyperion, and *Iapetus:*
--

> \[\[*Koion te, Kroion te melan, Phorkun te krataion,  
> Kai Kronon, Okeanon d, 'Huperioa te Iapeponet.*\]\]  
> *--* (*Orph. apud Proclum. In Tim. lib. v. p.* 295.

But why could not the Babylonian Ezra have adopted the name of *Iapetos*
for one of Noah's sons? The Kabiri, who are the Titans, are also called
Manes and their mother Mania, according to Arnobius. (*Adversum Gentes,
lib. III., p.* 124.) The Hindus can therefore claim with far more reason
that the Manes mean their Manus, and that Mania is the *female* Manu.
(See *Ramayana*.) Mania is Ila or Ida, the wife and daughter of
Vaivasvata Manu, from whom "he begat the race of Manus." Like *Rhea,*
the mother of the Titans, she is the Earth (Sayana making her the
goddess of the Earth), and she is but the second edition and repetition
of Vach. Both *Ida* and *Vach* are turned into males and females; Ida
becoming Sudyumna, and Vach, "the female Viraj," turning into a woman in
order to punish the Gandharvas; one version referring to cosmic and
divine theogony, the other to the later period. The *Manes* and Mania of
Arnobius are names of Indian origin, appropriated by the Greeks and
Latins and disfigured by them.

Thus it is no accident, but the result of one archaic doctrine common to
all, of which the Israelites, through Ezra, the author of the modernised
Mosaic books, were the latest adapters. So unceremonious were they with
other people's property, that Berosus (*Antiquitates Libyae,* I, *fol.*
8), shows that *Titea --* of whom Diodorus makes the mother of the
Titans or *Diluvians* (*See Bibl. lib. III. p.* 170) -- was the *wife of
Noah.* For this Faber calls him the "*pseudo-Berosus,*" yet accepts the
information in order to register one proof more that the pagans have
borrowed all their gods from the Jews, by transforming patriarchal
material. According to our humble opinion, this is one of the best
proofs possible of exactly the reverse. It shows as clearly as facts can
show, that it is the Biblical *pseudo*-personages which are all borrowed
from pagan myths, if myths they must be. It shows, at any rate, that
Berosus was well aware of the source of *Genesis,* and that it bore the
same cosmic astronomical character as the allegories of Isis-Osiris, and
the Ark, and other older "Arkite" symbols. For, Berosus says that "Titea
magna" was afterwards called *Aretia,\** and worshipped with the Earth;
and this

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\*Aretia is the female form of Artes (Egyptian Mars). Thence the
Chaldean (and now Hebrew) word ![](sd2-143.gif) (*Aretz*) "Earth." The
author of *"Beitrage zur Kenntniss" (Art. under "Artes" Mars*) *quotes:
"Addit Cedrenus* (*Salem I.*, 3): *Stella Martis ab* \[\[Footnote
continued on next page\]\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 144 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

identifies "Titea," Noah's consort, with *Rhea,* the mother of the
Titans, and with *Ida -*- both being goddesses who preside over the
Earth, and the mothers of the Manus and Manes (or Tit-an-Kabiri). And
"Titea-Aretia" was worshipped as *Horchia,* says the same Berosus, and
this is a title of Vesta, goddess of the Earth. "*Sicanus deificavit
Aretiam, et nominavit eam lingua Janigena Horchiam.*" (*Ibid. lib. V.
fol.* 64.)

Scarce an ancient poet of historic or prehistoric days who failed to
mention the sinking of the two continents -- often called isles -- in
one form or another. Hence the destruction, besides Atlantis, of the
Phlegyae. (See Pausanias and Nonus, who both tell how:

> "From its deep-rooted base the Phlegyan isle  
> Stern Neptune shook, and plunged beneath the waves  
> Its impious inhabitants. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ."  
> *-- Dionysius lib xviii. p.* 319).

Faber felt convinced that the "insulae Phlegyae" were Atlantis. But all
such allegories are more or less distorted echoes of the Hindu tradition
about that great Cataclysm, which befell the Fourth, really human,
though gigantic, Race, the one which preceded the Aryan. Yet, as just
said, like all other legends, that of "the Deluge has more than one
meaning. It refers in Theogony, to *pre-cosmic transformations,* to
*spiritual correlations --* however absurd the term may sound to a
scientific ear -- and also to subsequent Cosmogony; to the great FLOOD
of WATERS (matter) in CHAOS, awakened and fructified by those
Spirit-Rays which were swamped by, and *perished* in, the mysterious
differentiation -- a pre-cosmic mystery, the Prologue to the drama of
Being. Anu, Bel, and Noah preceded Adam Kadmon, Adam the Red, and Noah;
just as Brahma, Vishnu, and Siva preceded Vaivasvata and the rest." (See
"*Isis Unveiled.,*" Vol*.* II., pp. 420 *et seq.,* where one or two of
the seven meanings are hinted at.)

All this goes to show that the *semi*-universal deluge known to geology
(first glacial period) must have occurred just at the time allotted to
it by the Secret Doctrine: namely, 200,000 years (in round numbers)
after the commencement of our FIFTH RACE, or about the time assigned by
Messrs. Croll and Stockwell for the first glacial period: *i.e.*, about
850,000 years ago. Thus, as the latter disturbance is attributed by
geologists and astronomers to "an extreme eccentricity of the Earth's

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\[\[Footnote continued from previous page\]\] *Egyptiis vocatur Ertosi
(plantare, generare). Significat autem hoc omnis generis procreationem
et vivificationem, omnisque substantiae et materiae naturam et vim
ordinantem atque procreantem.*" It is Earth as "source of being"; or, as
explained by the author of "The Source of Measures," Arts is the same in
*Hebrew* and *Egyptian,* and both combine the primeval idea of *Earth as
source;* precisely as in the Hebrew itself, under another form, *Adam*
and *Madim,* (Mars) are the same, and combine the idea of Earth with
Adam under the form of *H-Adam-H.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 145 THE JEWISH NOAH AND THE CHALDEAN NUAH.

orbit," and as the Secret Doctrine attributes it to the same source, but
with the addition of another factor, the shifting of the Earth's axis --
a proof of which may be found in the *Book of Enoch,\** if the veiled
language of the Puranas is not understood -- all this should tend to
show that the ancients knew something of the "modern discoveries" of
Science. Enoch, when speaking of "the great inclination of the Earth,"
which "is in travail," is quite significant and clear.

Is not this evident? Nuah is Noah, *floating* on the waters in his ark;
the latter being the emblem of the Argha, or Moon, the feminine
principle; Noah is the "spirit" falling into matter. We find him, as
soon as he descends upon the Earth, planting a vineyard, drinking of the
wine, and getting drunk on it, *i.e.,* the pure spirit becomes
intoxicated as soon as it is finally imprisoned in matter. The seventh
chapter of *Genesis* is only another version of the First. Thus, while
the latter reads: "and darkness was upon the face of the deep. And the
spirit of God moved upon the face of the waters," in ch. 7 it is said "
. . . and the waters prevailed . . . and the ark went (with Noah, the
spirit) upon the face of the waters." Thus Noah, if identical with the
Chaldean Nuah, is the spirit vivifying *matter,* which latter is Chaos,
represented by the **D**EEP, or the Waters of the Flood. In the
Babylonian legend (the pre-cosmical blended with the terrestrial event)
it is Ishtar (Astaroth or Venus, the lunar goddess) who is shut up in
the ark and sends out "a *dove* in search of dry land." ("*Isis
Unveiled*" *Vol.* II, *pp.* 423 *and* 424)*.*

George Smith notes in the "*Tablets*," first the creation of the moon,
and then that of the sun: "Its beauty and perfection are extolled, and
the regularity of its orbit, which led to its being considered the type
of a judge and the regulator of the world." If this story related simply
to a cosmogonical cataclysm -- even were this latter universal -- why
should the goddess Ishtar or Astoreth, the Moon, speak of the *creation
of the sun* after the deluge? The waters might have reached as high as
the mountain of *Nizir* (Chaldean version), or Jebel Djudi (the deluge
mountains of the Arabian legend), or yet Ararat (of the Biblical
narrative), and even the Himalaya (of the Hindu tradition), and yet not
reach the sun: the Bible itself stopped short of such a miracle! It is
evident that the deluge of the people who first recorded it had another
meaning, less problematical and far more philosophical than that of an
*universal* deluge, of which there are no geological traces whatever.

As all such Cataclysms are periodical and cyclical, and as Manu
Vaivasvata figures as a *generic* character, under various circumstances
and events (*vide infra: "The Seven Manus of Humanity*"), there seems to
be no

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* Chap. lxiv., Sect. xi.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 146 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

serious objection to the supposition that the first "great flood" had an
allegorical, as well as a cosmic meaning, and that it happened at the
end of the Satya Yuga, the "age of Truth," when the *Second* Root Race,
"The Manu with bones," made its primeval appearance as "the
Sweat-Born."\*

The Second Flood -- the so-called "universal" -- which affected the
Fourth Root Race (now conveniently regarded by theology as "the accursed
race of giants," the **C**AINITES, and "the sons of Ham") is that flood
which was first perceived by geology. If one carefully compares the
accounts in the various legends of the Chaldees and other exoteric works
of the nations, it will be found that all of them agree with the
orthodox narratives given in the Brahmanical books. And it may be
perceived that while, in the first account, "there is no God or mortal
yet on Earth," when Manu Vaivasvata lands on the Himavan; in the second,
the Seven Rishis are allowed to keep him company: thus showing that
whereas some accounts refer to the sidereal and cosmic **F**LOOD before
the so-called creation, the others treat, one of the Great Flood of
Matter on Earth, and the other of a real watery deluge. In the
*Satapatha Brahmana,* Manu finds that "the Flood had swept away all
living creatures, and he alone was left" -- *i.e., the seed of life*
alone remained from the previous dissolution of the *Universe,* or
*Mahapralaya,* after a "Day of Brahma"; and the *Mahabharata* refers
simply to the geological cataclysm which swept away nearly all the
Fourth Race to make room for the Fifth. Therefore is Vaivasvata Manu
shown under three distinct attributes in our esoteric Cosmogony:\*\*
(*a*) as the "Root-Manu"

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* All such expressions are explained in the "*Anthropogenesis*" of this
Book, and elsewhere.

\*\* One has to remember that, in the Hindu philosophy, every
differentiated unit is such only through the cycles of Maya, being one
in its essence with the Supreme or One Spirit. Hence arises the seeming
confusion and contradiction in the various Puranas, and at times in the
same Purana, about the same individual. Vishnu -- as the many-formed
Brahma, and as Brahma (neuter) -- is one, and yet he is said to be all
the 28 Vyasas (*Vishnu Purana*)*.* "In every Dvapara (third) age,
*Vishnu, in the person of Vyasa,* divides the Veda, which is one, into
four and many portions. Twenty-eight times have the Vedas been arranged
by the great Rishis in the Vaivasvata Manvantara, in the Dvapara Yuga .
. . and, consequently, twenty-eight Vyasas have passed away . . . they
who were all *in the form of Veda-Vyasas,* who were the Vyasas of their
respective eras. . . . " (*Book III., Ch*. III.) "This world is Brahma
in Brahma, from Brahma . . . nothing further to be known." Then, again .
. . "There were in the First Manvantara seven celebrated sons of
Vasishta, who in the *Third* Manvantara, were sons of Brahma (*i.e*.,
Rishis), the illustrious progeny of Urja." This is plain: the Humanity
of the First Manvantara is that of the seventh and of all the
intermediate ones. The mankind of the First Root-Race is the mankind of
the *second, third, fourth, fifth*, etc. To the last it forms a cyclic
and constant reincarnation of the Monads belonging to the Dhyan Chohans
of our Planetary chain.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 147 AGREEMENT OF DATES.

on Globe A in the First Round; (*b*) as the "*seed* of life" on Globe D
in the Fourth Round; and (*c*) as the "Seed of Man" at the beginning of
every Root-Race -- in our Fifth Race especially. The very commencement
of the latter witnesses, during the Dvapara Yuga,\* the destruction of
the accursed sorcerers; "of that island (Plato speaking only of its last
island) beyond the Pillars of Hercules, in the Atlantic Ocean, from
which there was an easy transition to other islands in the neighbourhood
of another *large Continent*" (America). It is this "Atlantic" land
which was connected with the "*White Island,*" and this White Island was
Ruta; but it was not the Atala and the *"White Devil*" of Colonel
Wilford (*see "Asiatic Researches," Vol. VIII., p.* 280), as already
shown. It may well be remarked here that the Dvapara Yuga lasts 864,000
years, according to the Sanskrit texts; and that, if the *Kali Yuga*
began only about 5,000 years ago, that it is just 869,000 since that
destruction took place. Again, these figures are not very widely
different from those given by the geologists, who place their "glacial
period" 850,000 years ago.

Then "a woman was produced who came to Manu and declared *herself his
daughter, with whom he lived and begat the offspring of Manu*." This
refers to the physiological transformation of sexes during the Third
Root-Race. And the allegory is too transparently clear to need much
explanation. Of course, as already remarked, in the separation of sexes
an androgyne being was supposed to divide his body into two halves (as
in the case of Brahma and Vach, and even of Adam and Eve), and thus the
female is, in a certain sense, his daughter, just as he will be her son,
"the flesh of his (and her) flesh and the bone of his (and her) bone."
Let it be also well remembered that not one of our Orientalists have yet
learned to discern in those "contradictions and amazing nonsense," as
some call the Puranas, that a reference to a Yuga may mean a Round, a
Root-Race, and often a *Sub-Race,* as well as form a page torn out of
pre-cosmic theogony. This double and triple meaning is proved by various
references to one and the same individual apparently, under an identical
name, while it refers, in fact, to events divided by entire Kalpas. A
good instance is that of Ila. She is first represented as one thing and
then as another. In the exoteric legends it is said that Manu
Vaivasvata, desiring to create sons, instituted a sacrifice to Mitra and
Varuna; but, through a mistake of the officiating

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* The Dvapara Yuga differs for each Race. All races have their own
cycles, which fact causes a great difference. For instance, the Fourth
Sub-Race of the Atlanteans was in its Kali-Yug, when destroyed, whereas
the Fifth was in its Satya or *Krita* Yuga. The Aryan Race is now in its
Kali Yuga, and will continue to be in it for 427,000 years longer, while
various "family Races," called the Semitic, Hamitic, etc., are in their
own special cycles. The forthcoming 6th Sub Race -- which may begin very
soon -- will be in its Satya (golden) age while we reap the fruit of our
iniquity in our Kali Yuga.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 148 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

Brahman, a daughter only was obtained -- Ila. Then, "through the favour
of the gods," her *sex is changed* and she becomes a man, *Su-dyumna.*
Then she is again turned into a woman, and so on; the fable adding that
Siva and his consort were pleased that "she would be male one month and
female another." This has a direct reference to the Third Root-Race,
whose men were androgynes. But some very learned Orientalists think
(*see* "*Hindu Classical Dictionary*") and have declared that "Ila was
primarily food, nourishment, or a libation of milk; thence a stream of
praise, personified as the goddess of speech." The "profane" are not
told, however, the reason why "a libation of milk," or "a stream of
praise," should be *male* and *female* by turn: unless, indeed there is
some "internal evidence" which the occultists fail to perceive.

In their most mystical meanings, the union of Swayambhuva Manu with
Vach-Sata-Rupa, his own daughter (this being the first "euhemerization"
of the dual principle of which Vaivasvata Manu and Ila are a secondary
and a third form), stands in Cosmic symbolism as the Root-life, the germ
from which spring all the Solar Systems, the worlds, angels and the
gods. For, as says Vishnu: --

> "From Manu all creation, gods, Asuras, man must be produced,  
> By him the world must be created, that which moves and moveth not. . .
> . ."

But we may find worse opponents than even the Western Scientists and
Orientalists. If, on the question of figures, Brahmins may agree with
our teaching, we are not so sure that some of them, orthodox
conservatives, may not raise objections to the modes of procreation
attributed to their *Pitar Devatas.* We shall be called upon to produce
the works from which we quote, while they will be invited by us to read
their own Puranas a little more carefully and with an eye to the
esoteric meaning. And then, we repeat again, they will find, under the
veil of more or less transparent allegories, every statement made herein
corroborated by their own works. One or two instances have already been
given as regards the appearance of the Second Race, which is called the
"Sweat-Born." This allegory is regarded as a fairy-tale, and yet it
conceals a psycho-physiological phenomenon, and one of the greatest
mysteries of Nature.

But in view of the chronological statements made herein, it is natural
to ask: --

#### **C**OULD **M**EN **E**XIST 18,000,000 **Y**EARS **A**GO?

To this Occultism answers in the affirmative, notwithstanding all
scientific objectors. Moreover, this duration covers only the
Vaivasvata-Manu *Man, i.e.,* the male and female entity already
separated into

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 149 HOW OLD IS HUMANITY?

distinct sexes. The two and a half Races that preceded that event may
have lived 300,000,000 years ago for all that science can tell. For the
geological and physical difficulties in the way of the theory could not
exist for the *primeval, ethereal* man of the Occult teachings. *The
whole issue of the quarrel between the profane and the esoteric sciences
depends upon the belief in, and demonstration of, the existence of an
astral body within the physical,* the former independent of the latter.
Paul d'Assier, the Positivist, seems to have proven the fact pretty
plainly,\* not to speak of the accumulated testimony of the ages, and
that of the modern spiritualists and mystics. It will be found difficult
to reject this fact in our age of proofs, tests, and ocular
demonstrations.

The Secret Doctrine maintains that, notwithstanding the general
cataclysms and disturbances of our globe, which -- owing to its being
the period of its greatest physical development, for the Fourth Round is
the middle-point of the life allotted to it -- were far more terrible
and intense than during any of the three preceding Rounds (the cycles of
its earlier psychic and spiritual life and of its semi-ethereal
conditions) physical Humanity has existed upon it for the last
18,000,000 years.\*\* This period was preceded by 300,000,000 years of
the mineral and vegetable development. To this, all those who refuse to
accept the theory of a "boneless," purely ethereal, man, will object.
Science, which knows only of *physical* organisms, will feel indignant;
and materialistic theology still more so. The first will object on
logical and reasonable grounds, based on the preconception that all
animate organisms have always existed on the same plane of materiality
in all the ages; the last on a tissue of most absurd fictions. The
ridiculous claim usually brought forward by theologians, is based on the
virtual assumption that mankind (read Christians) on this planet have
the honour of being the only human beings in the whole Kosmos, who dwell
on a globe, and that they are consequently, the best of their
kind.\*\*\*

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* "*Posthumous Humanity*" *-*- translated by H. S. Olcott, London,
1887.

\*\* Professor Newcomb says: "The heat evolved by contraction would last
only 18,000,000 years" ("*Popular Astronomy,*" *p.* 500)*;* but "a
temperature permitting the existence of water could not be reached
earlier than 10,000,000 years ago" (*Winchell's "World-Life," p.* 356).
But Sir W. Thomson says that the whole age of the incrustation of the
Earth is 18,000,000 years, though, this year, he has again altered his
opinion and allows only 15,000,000 years as the age of the Sun. As will
be shown in the Addenda, the divergence of scientific opinions is so
great that no reliance can ever be placed upon *scientific* speculation.

\*\*\* The essay on "*The Plurality of Worlds*" (1853) -- an anonymous
work, yet well known to have been the production of Dr. Whewell -- is a
good proof of this. No Christian ought to believe in either the
plurality of worlds or the geological age of the globe, argues the
Author; because, if it is asserted that this world is only one among the
many of its kind, which are all the work of God, as it is itself; that
all are the seat \[\[Footnote continued on next page\]\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 150 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

The Occultists, who believe firmly in the teachings of the
mother-philosophy, repel the objections of both theologians and
scientists. They maintain, on their side, that, during those periods
when there must have been insufferable heat, even at the two poles,
successive floods, upheaval of the valleys and constant shifting of the
great waters and seas, none of these circumstances could form an
impediment to human life and organization, such *as is assigned by them
to the early mankind.* Neither the heterogeneity of ambient regions,
full of deleterious gases, nor the perils of a crust hardly
consolidated, could prevent the First and Second Races from making their
appearance even during the Carboniferous, or the Silurian age itself.

Thus the *Monads* destined to animate future Races were ready for the
new transformation. They had passed their phases of immetalization, of
plant and animal life, from the lowest to the highest, and were waiting
for their human, more intelligent form. Yet, what could the plastic
modellers do but follow the laws of evolutionary Nature? Could they, as
claimed by the Biblical dead-letter, form "Lord-God"-like, or as
Pygmalion in the Greek allegory, Adam-Galatea out of volcanic dust, and
breathe a *living soul* into Man? No: because the soul was already
there, latent in its *Monad,* and needed but a *coating.* Pygmalion, who
fails to *animate his statue,* and Bahak-Zivo of the Nazarean Gnostics,
who fails to construct "a human soul in the creature," are, as
conceptions, far more philosophical and scientific than Adam, taken in
the dead-letter sense, or the Biblical Elohim-Creators. Esoteric
philosophy, which teaches spontaneous generation -- after the Sishta and
Prajapati have thrown the seed of life on the Earth -- shows the lower
angels able to *construct physical* man only, even with the help of
Nature, after having evolved the ethereal form out of themselves, and
leaving the physical form to evolve gradually from its ethereal, or what
would now be called, *protoplasmic* model.

This will again be objected to: "Spontaneous Generation" is an exploded
theory, we shall be told. Pasteur's experiments disposed of it twenty
years ago, and Professor Tyndall is against it. Well, suppose he is? He
ought to know that, should spontaneous generation

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\[\[Footnote continued from previous page\]\] of life, all the realm and
dwelling of intelligent creatures endowed with will, subject to law and
capable of free-will; then, it would become extravagant to think that
our world should have been the subject of God's favours and His special
interference, of His communications and His *personal visit*. . . . . .
. Can the Earth presume to be considered the centre of the moral and
religious Universe, he asks, if it has not the slightest distinction to
rely upon in the physical Universe? Is it not as absurd to uphold such
an assertion (of the plurality of inhabited worlds), as it would be
to-day to uphold the old hypothesis of Ptolemy, who placed Earth in the
centre of our system? . . . The above is quoted from memory, yet *almost
textually.* The author fails to see that he is bursting his own
soap-bubble with such a defence.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 151 SPONTANEOUS GENERATION.

be indeed proven impossible in our present world-period and actual
conditions -- which the Occultists deny -- still it would be no
demonstration that it could not have taken place under different cosmic
conditions, not only in the seas of the Laurentian period, but even on
the then convulsed Earth. It would be interesting to know how Science
could ever account for the appearance of species and life on Earth,
especially of *Man,* once that she rejects both the Biblical teachings
and spontaneous generation. Pasteur's observations, however, are far
from being perfect or proven. Blanchard and Dr. Lutaud reject their
importance and show that they have none. The question is so far left
*sub judice,* as well as that other one "when, at what period, life
appeared on the Earth?" As to the idea that Haeckel's Moneron -- a pinch
of salt! -- has solved the problem of the origin of life, it is simply
absurd. Those materialists, who feel inclined to pooh-pooh the theory of
the "Self-existent," the "Self-born heavenly man," represented as an
ethereal, astral man, must excuse even a tyro in Occultism laughing, in
his turn, at some speculations of modern thought. After proving most
learnedly that the primitive speck of *protoplasm* (moneron) is neither
animal nor plant, but both, and that it *has no ancestors* among either
of these, since it is that moneron which serves as a point of departure
for all organized existence, we are finally told that *the Monera are
their own ancestors.* This may be very scientific, but it is very
metaphysical also; too much so, even for the Occultist.

If spontaneous generation has changed its methods now, owing perhaps to
accumulated material on hand, so as to almost escape detection, it was
in full swing in the genesis of terrestrial life. Even the simple
physical form and the evolution of species show how Nature proceeds. The
scale-bound, gigantic sauria, the winged pterodactyl, the Megalosaurus,
and the hundred-feet long Iguanodon of the later period, are the
transformations of the earliest representatives of the animal kingdom
found in the sediments of the primary epoch. There was a time when all
those above enumerated "antediluvian" monsters appeared as filamentoid
infusoria without shell or crust, with neither nerves, muscles, organs
nor sex, and reproduced their kind by gemmation: as do microscopical
animals also, the architects and builders of our mountain ranges,
agreeably to the teachings of science. Why not man in this case? Why
should he not have followed the same law in his growth, *i.e.*, gradual
condensation? Every unprejudiced person would prefer to believe that
primeval humanity had at first an ethereal -- or, if so preferred, a
huge filamentoid, jelly-like form, evolved by gods or natural "forces,"
which grew, condensed throughout millions of ages, and became gigantic
in its physical impulse and tendency, until it settled into the huge,
physical form of the Fourth Race Man, -- rather

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 152 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

than believe him created of the dust of the Earth (*literally*), or from
some unknown anthropoid ancestor.

Nor does our esoteric theory clash with scientific data, except on first
appearance, as Dr. A. Wilson, **F.R.S**., says, in a letter to
"*Knowledge,*" (*Dec.* 23*,* 1881). "Evolution -- rather Nature, in the
light of evolution -- has only been studied for some *twenty-five years
or so.* That is, of course, a mere fractional space in the history of
human thought." And just because of that we do not lose all hope that
materialistic science will amend its ways, and will gradually accept the
esoteric teachings -- if even at first divorced from their (to science)
too metaphysical elements.

Has the last word on the subject of human evolution yet been said? "Each
. . . . answer to the great Question (Man's Real Place in Nature),
invariably asserted by the followers of its propounder, if not by
himself, to be *complete and final,* remains in high authority and
esteem, *it may* *be* *for one century,* it may be for twenty," writes
Prof. Huxley; "but, as invariably, time proves each reply to have been a
*mere approximation* *to the truth -- tolerable chiefly on account of
the ignorance of those by* *whom it was accepted, and wholly intolerable
when tested by the larger knowledge of their successors*"! ! Will this
eminent Darwinian admit the possibility of his *pithecoid ancestry*
being assignable to the list of "wholly intolerable beliefs," in the
"larger knowledge" of Occultists? *But whence the savage?* Mere "rising
to the civilized state" does not account for the evolution of form.

In the same letter, "The Evolution of Man," Dr. Wilson makes other
strange confessions. Thus, he observes, in answer to the queries put to
"*Knowledge*" by "G. M.": --

" 'Has evolution effected any change in man? If so, what change? If not,
why not?' . . . If we refuse to admit (as science does) that man was
created a perfect being, and then became degraded, there exists only
another supposition -- that of evolution. If man has arisen from a
savage to a civilized state, that surely is evolution. *We do not yet
know, because such knowledge is difficult to acquire, if the human frame
is subject to the same influences as those of lower animals.* But there
is little doubt that elevation from savagery to civilized life means and
implies 'evolution,' and that of considerable extent. Mentally, man's
evolution cannot be doubted; the ever-widening sphere of thought has
sprung from small and rude beginnings, like language itself. But man's
ways of life, his power of adaptation to his surroundings, and countless
other circumstances, have made the facts and course of his 'evolution'
very difficult to trace."

This very difficulty ought to make the Evolutionists more cautious in
their affirmations. But why is evolution *impossible,* if "man was
created a perfect being, and then became degraded?" At best it can only
apply

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 153 ARISTOTLE DENIED HELIOCENTRICISM.

to the *outward, physical man.* As remarked in "*Isis Unveiled,*"
Darwin's evolution begins at the middle point, instead of commencing for
man, as for everything else, from the universals. The Aristotle-Baconian
method may have its advantages, but it has undeniably already
demonstrated its defects. Pythagoras and Plato, who proceeded from the
Universals downwards, are now shown more learned, in the light of modern
science, than was Aristotle. For he opposed and denounced the idea of
the revolution of the earth and even of its rotundity. "Almost all
those," he wrote, "who affirm that they have studied heaven in its
uniformity, claim that the earth is in the centre, but the philosophers
of the Italian School, otherwise called the Pythagoreans, teach entirely
the contrary. . . ." Because (*a*) the Pythagoreans were Initiates, and
(*b*) they followed the deductive method. Whereas, Aristotle, the father
of the inductive system, complained of those who taught that "the centre
of our system was occupied by the Sun, and the earth was only a star,
which by a rotatory motion around the same centre, produces night and
day" (*Vide De Caelo,* Book II., c. 13.) The same with regard to man.
The theory taught in the Secret Doctrine, and now expounded, is the only
one, which can -- without falling into the absurdity of a "miraculous"
man created out of the dust of the Earth, or the still greater fallacy
of man evolving from a pinch of lime-salt, (the ex-protoplasmic moneron)
-- account for his appearance on Earth.

*Analogy* is the guiding law in Nature, the only true Ariadne's thread
that can lead us, through the inextricable paths of her domain, toward
her primal and final mysteries. Nature, as a creative potency, is
infinite, and no generation of physical scientists can ever boast of
having exhausted the list of her ways and methods, however uniform the
laws upon which she proceeds. If we can conceive of a ball of Fire-mist
becoming gradually -- as it rolls through aeons of time in the
interstellar spaces -- a planet, a self-luminous globe, to settle into a
*man-bearing* world or Earth, thus having passed from a soft plastic
body into a rock-bound globe; and if we see on it everything evolving
from the non-nucleated jelly-speck that becomes the sarcode\* of the
*moneron,* then passes from its *protistic* state\*\* into the form of
an animal, to grow into a gigantic reptilian monster of the Mesozoic
times; then dwindles again into the (comparatively) dwarfish crocodile,
now confined solely to tropical

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* Or what is more generally known as *Protoplasm.* This substance
received its name of "*Sarcode*" from Prof. Dujardin Beaumetz far
earlier.

\*\* The Monera are indeed *Protista.* They are neither animals "nor
plants," writes Haeckel; " . . . the whole body of the Moneron
represents nothing more than a single thoroughly homogeneous particle of
albumen in a firmly adhesive condition." ("*Journal of Microscopical
Science,*" *Jan.,* 1869, *p*. 28.)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 154 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

regions, and the universally common lizard\* -- how can man alone escape
the general law? "There were giants on earth in those days," says
*Genesis,* repeating the statement of all the other Eastern Scriptures;
and the *Titans* are founded on anthropological and physiological fact.

And, as the hard-shelled crustacean was once upon a time a jelly-speck,
"a thoroughly homogeneous particle of albumen in a firmly adhesive
condition," so was the outward covering of primitive man, his early
"coat of skin," *plus* an immortal spiritual monad, and a psychic
temporary form and body within that shell. The modern, hard, muscular
man almost impervious to any climate, was, perhaps, some 25,000,000
years ago, just what the Haeckelian Moneron is, strictly "an organism
without organs," an entirely homogeneous substance with a structureless
albumen body within, and a human form only outwardly.

No man of science has the right, in this century, to find the figures of
the Brahmins preposterous in the question of Chronology; for their own
calculations often exceed by far the claims made by esoteric science.
This may easily be shown.

Helmholtz calculated that the cooling of our Earth from a temperature of
2,000 \[\[degrees\]\] to 200' Cent. must have occupied a period of no
less than 350,000,000 years. Western science (including geology) seems
generally to allow our globe an age of about 500,000,000 years
altogether. Sir W. Thomson, however, limits the appearance of the
earliest vegetable life to 100,000,000 years ago -- a statement
respectfully contradicted by the archaic records. Speculations,
furthermore, vary daily in the domains of science. Meanwhile, some
geologists are very much opposed to such limitation. "Volger . . . .
calculates, that the time requisite for the deposit of the strata known
to us must at least have amounted to 648 millions of years . . . . "
Both time and space are infinite and eternal. "The Earth, as a material
existence, is indeed infinite; the changes only which it has undergone
can be determined by finite periods of time" (*Burmeister*)*.* "We must
therefore assume that the starry heaven is not merely in space, what no
astronomer doubts, but also in time, without beginning or end; that it
never was created, and is imperishable." (See *Czolbe*)*.\*\**

Czolbe repeats exactly what the Occultists say. But the Aryan
Occultists, we may be told, knew nothing of these later speculations.
"They were even ignorant of the globular form of our earth."

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* Behold the *Iguanodon* of the Mesozoic ages -- the monster 100 feet
long -- now transformed into the small Iguana lizard of South America.
Popular traditions about *giants* in days of old, and their mention in
every mythology, including the Bible, may some day be shown to be
founded on fact. In nature, the logic of analogy alone ought to make us
accept these *traditions* as scientific verities.

*\*\** "*Force and Matter*"; by L. Buchner, edited by J. F. Collingwood,
**F.R.S.L**., p. 61.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 155 THE SOLAR SYSTEM IN THE PURANAS.

(Coleman.) To this the Vishnu Purana contains a reply, which has forced
certain Orientalists to open their eyes very widely.

. . . "The Sun is stationed, for all time, in the middle of the day, and
over against midnight, in all the *Dwipas* (continents), Maitreya! But
the rising and the setting of the *Sun* being perpetually *opposite to
each other --* and in the same way, all the cardinal points, and so the
cross-points, Maitreya; people speak of the rising of the Sun where they
see it; and where the Sun disappears, there, to them, is his setting. Of
the Sun, which is always in *one and the same place,* there is neither
setting nor rising, for what is called rising and *setting* are only the
seeing and the *not* seeing the Sun." (*Vishnu Purana, Book IL, ch.
viii.*)

To this Fitzedward Hall remarks, "The Heliocentricism taught in this
passage is remarkable. It is contradicted, however, a little further
on." Contradicted *purposely,* because it was a secret temple-teaching.
Martin Haug remarked the same teaching in another passage. It is useless
to calumniate the Aryans any longer.

To return to the Chronology of the geologists and anthropologists. We
are afraid Science has no reasonable grounds on which she could oppose
the views of the Occultists in this direction. Except that "of man, the
highest organic being of creation, not a trace was found in the primary
strata; only in the uppermost, the so-called alluvial layer," is all
that can be urged, so far. That man was *not the last member in the
mammalian family,* but the first in *this Round,* is something that
science will be forced to acknowledge one day. A similar view also has
already been mooted in France on very high authority.

That man can be shown to have lived in the mid-Tertiary period, and in a
geological age *when there did not yet exist one single specimen of the
now known species of mammals,* is a statement that science *cannot* deny
and which has now been proven by de Quatrefages.\* But even supposing
his existence in the Eocene period is not yet demonstrated, what period
of time has elapsed since the Cretaceous period? We are aware of the
fact that only the boldest geologists dare to place man further back
than the Miocene age. But how long, we ask, is the duration of those
ages and periods since the Mesozoic time? On this, after a good deal of
speculation and wrangling, science is silent, the greatest authorities
upon the subject being compelled to answer to the question: "We do not
know." This ought to show that the men of science are no greater
authorities in this matter than are the profane. If, according to Prof.
Huxley, "the time represented by the coal formation would be six
millions of years,\*\* how many more millions would be required to cover

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* "*Introduction a l'Etude des Races Humaines*."

\*\* "*Modern Science and Modern Thought*," by S. Laing, p. 32.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 156 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

the time from the Jurassic period, or the middle of the so-called
"Reptilian" age (when the Third Race appeared), up to the Miocene, when
the bulk of the Fourth Race was submerged?\*

The writer is well aware that those specialists, whose computations of
the ages of the globe and man are the most liberal, always had the shyer
majority against them. But this proves very little, since the majority
rarely, if ever, turns out to be right in the long run. Harvey stood
alone for many years. The advocates for crossing the Atlantic with
steamers were in danger of ending their days in a lunatic asylum. Mesmer
is classed to this day (in the Encyclopaedias) along with Cagliostro,
and St. Germain, as a charlatan and impostor. And now that Messrs.
Charcot and Richet have vindicated Mesmer's claims, and that "Mesmerism"
under its new name of Hypnotism -- a false nose on a very old face -- is
accepted by science, it does not strengthen one's respect for that
majority, when one sees the ease and unconcern with which its members
treat of "Hypnotism," "Telepathic Impacts," and its other phenomena.
They speak of it, in short, as if they had believed in it since the days
of Solomon, and had never called its votaries, only a few years ago,
"lunatics and impostors!"\*\*

The same revulsion of thought is in store for the long period of years,
claimed by esoteric philosophy as the age of sexual and physiological
mankind. Therefore even the Stanza which says: --

"The mind-born, the boneless, gave being to the will-born with bones";
adding that this took place in the middle of the *Third* Race 18,000,000
years ago -- has yet a chance of being accepted by future scientists.

As far as **XIX**th century thought is concerned, we shall be told, even
by some personal friends who are imbued with an abnormal respect for the
shifting conclusions of science, that such a statement is absurd. How
much more improbable will appear our further assertion, to the effect
that the antiquity of the *First* Race dates back millions of years
beyond this again. For, although the exact figures are withheld, and it
is out of the question to refer the incipient evolution of the primeval
Divine

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* "*Esoteric Buddhism,*" p. 70.

\*\* The same fate is in store for spiritualistic phenomena and all the
other psychological manifestations of the *inner* Man. Since the days of
Hume, whose researches culminated in a nihilistic idealism, Psychology
has gradually shifted its position to one of crass *materialism*. Hume
is regarded as a psychologist, and yet he denied *a priori* the
possibility of phenomena in which millions now believe, including many
men of science. The Hylo-idealists of to-day are rank
*Annihilationists.* The schools of Spencer and Bain are respectively
positivist and materialist, and not metaphysical at all. It is
*psychism* and not *psychology;* it reminds one as little of the
Vedantic teaching as the pessimism of Schopenhauer and von Hartmann
recalls the esoteric philosophy, the heart and soul of true Buddhism.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 157 THE SLEIGHT-OF-HAND OF SCIENCE.

Races with *certainty* to either the early Secondary, or the Primary
ages of geology, one thing is clear: that the figures 18,000,000 of
years, which embrace the duration of *sexual, physical,* man, have to be
enormously increased if the whole process of spiritual, astral and
physical development is taken into account. Many geologists, indeed,
consider that the duration of the Quaternary and Tertiary Ages demands
the concession of such an estimate; and it is quite certain that no
terrestrial conditions whatever negative the hypothesis of an Eocene
Man, if evidence for his reality is forthcoming. Occultists, who
maintain that the above date carries us far back into the secondary or
"Reptilian" age, may refer to M. de Quatrefages in support of the
possible existence of man in that remote antiquity. But with regard to
the earliest Root-Races the case is very different. If the thick
agglomeration of vapours, charged with carbonic acid, that escaped from
the soil or was held in suspension in the atmosphere since the
commencement of sedimentation, offered a fatal obstacle to the life of
human organisms as now known, how, it will be asked, could the primeval
men have existed? This consideration is, in reality, out of court. Such
terrestrial conditions as were then operative had no touch with the
plane on which the evolution of the *ethereal astral* races proceeded.
Only in relatively recent geological periods, has the spiral course of
cyclic law swept mankind into the lowest grade of physical evolution --
the plane of gross material causation. In those early ages, *astral*
evolution was alone in progress, and the two planes, the astral and the
physical,\* though developing on parallel lines, had no direct point of
contact with one another. It is obvious that a shadow-like *ethereal*
man is related by virtue of his organization -- if such it can be called
-- only to that plane from which the substance of his *Upadhi* is
derived.

There are things, perhaps, that may have escaped the *far-seeing --* but
not *all-seeing --* eyes of our modern naturalists; yet it is Nature
herself who undertakes to furnish the missing links. Agnostic
speculative thinkers have to choose between the version given by the
Secret Doctrine of the East, and the hopelessly materialistic Darwinian
and Biblical accounts of the origin of man; between no soul and no
spiritual evolution, and the Occult doctrine which repudiates "Special
creation" and the "Evolutionist" Anthropogenesis equally.

Again, to take up the question of "Spontaneous generation"; life -- as
science shows -- has not always reigned on this terrestrial plane.

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* It must be noted that, though the astral and physical planes of
matter ran parallel with one another even in the earliest geological
ages, yet they were not in the same phases of manifestation in which
they are *now.* The Earth did not reach its present *grade of density*
till 18,000,000 years ago. Since then *both* the physical and astral
planes have become grosser.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 158 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

There was a time when even the Haeckelian Moneron -- that simple globule
of Protoplasm -- had not yet appeared at the bottom of the seas. Whence
came the *Impulse* which caused the molecules of Carbon, Nitrogen,
Oxygen, etc., to group themselves into the *Urschleim* of Oken, that
organic "slime," now christened protoplasm. What were the prototypes of
the Monera? They, at least, could not have fallen in meteorites from
other globes already formed, Sir W. Thomson's wild theory to this
effect, notwithstanding. And if *they have* so fallen; if our Earth got
its supply of life-germs from other planets; who, or *what,* had carried
them into those planets? Here, again, unless the Occult teaching is
accepted, we are compelled once more to face a *miracle;* to accept the
theory of a *personal, anthropomorphic Creator,* the attributes and
definitions of whom, as formulated by the Monotheists, clash as much
with philosophy and logic, as they degrade the ideal of an infinite
Universal deity, before whose incomprehensible awful grandeur the
highest human intellect feels dwarfed. Let not the modern philosopher,
while arbitrarily placing himself on the highest pinnacle of human
intellectuality hitherto evolved, show himself spiritually and
intuitionally so far below the conceptions of even the ancient Greeks,
themselves on a far lower level, in these respects, than the
philosophers of Eastern Aryan antiquity. Hylozoism, when philosophically
understood, is the highest aspect of Pantheism. It is the only possible
escape from idiotic atheism based on lethal materiality, and the still
more idiotic anthropomorphic conceptions of the monotheists; between
which two it stands on its own entirely neutral ground. Hylozoism
*demands* absolute Divine Thought, which would *pervade* the numberless
active, creating Forces, or "Creators"; which *entities* are moved by,
and have their being in, from, and through that Divine Thought; the
latter, nevertheless, having no more personal concern in them or *their*
creations, than the Sun has in the sun-flower and its seeds, or in
vegetation in general. Such active "Creators" are known to exist and are
believed in, because perceived and sensed by the *inner* man in the
Occultist. Thus the latter says that an ABSOLUTE Deity, having to be
unconditioned and unrelated, cannot be thought of at the same time as an
active, creating, one living god, without immediate degradation of the
ideal.\* A Deity that manifests in *Space* and *Time -*- these two being
simply the forms of THAT which is the Absolute ALL -- can be but a
fractional part of the

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* The conception and definition of the *Absolute* by Cardinal Cusa may
satisfy only the Western mind, prisoned, so unconsciously to itself, and
entirely degenerated by long centuries of scholastic and theological
sophistry. But this "Recent philosophy of the Absolute," traced by Sir
W. Hamilton to Cusa, would never satisfy the more acutely metaphysical
mind of the Hindu Vedantin.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 159 OCEANS OF CARBONIC ACID?

whole. And since that "all" cannot be divided in its absoluteness,
therefore that *sensed* creator (we say *Creators*) can be at best but
the mere *aspect* thereof. To use the same metaphor -- inadequate to
express the full idea, yet well adapted to the case in hand -- these
creators are like the numerous rays of the solar orb, which remains
unconscious of, and unconcerned in, the work; while its mediating
agents, the rays, become the instrumental media every spring -- the
Manvantaric dawn of the Earth -- in fructifying and awakening the
dormant vitality inherent in Nature and its differentiated matter. This
was so well understood in antiquity, that even the moderately religious
Aristotle remarked that such work of direct creation would be quite
*unbecoming* to God -- \[\[*aprepes toi theo*\]\]. Plato and other
philosophers taught the same: deity cannot set its own hand to creation,
-- \[\[*autournein hapanta*\]\]. This Cudworth calls "Hylozoism." As old
Zeno is credited by Laertius with having said, "Nature is a habit moved
from itself, according to seminal principles; perfecting and containing
those several things which in determinate times are produced from it,
and acting agreeably to that from which it was secreted."\*

Let us return to our subject, pausing to think over it. Indeed, if there
was vegetable life during those periods that could feed on the then
deleterious elements; and if there was even animal life whose aquatic
organization could be developed, notwithstanding the supposed scarcity
of Oxygen, why could there not be human life also, in its incipient
physical form, *i.e*., in a race of beings adapted for that geological
period and its surroundings? Besides, science confesses that it knows
nothing of the real length of "geological periods."

But the chief question before us is, whether it is quite certain that,
from the time of that which is called the "Azoic" age, there ever was
such an atmosphere as that hypothesised by the Naturalists. Not all the
physicists agree with this idea. Were the writer anxious to corroborate
the teachings of the Secret Doctrine by exact science, it would be easy
to show, on the admission of more than one physicist, that the
atmosphere has changed little, if at all, since the first condensation
of the oceans -- *i.e.,* since the Laurentian period, the *Pyrolithic*
age. Such, at any rate, is the opinion of Blanchard, S. Meunier, and
even of Bischof -- as the experiments of the latter scientist with
basalts have shown. For were we to take the word of the majority of
scientists as to the quantity of deadly gases, and of elements entirely
saturated with carbon and nitrogen, in which the vegetable and animal
kingdoms are shown to have lived, thriven, and developed, then one would
have to come to the curious conclusion that there were, in those days,
oceans

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\*Cudworth's "*Intellectual System,*" I. p. 328.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 160 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

of *liquid carbonic acid,* instead of water. With such an element, it
becomes doubtful whether the Ganoids, or even the Primitive Trilobites
themselves could live in the oceans of the primary age -- let alone in
those of the Silurian, as shown by Blanchard.

The conditions that were necessary for the earliest race of mankind,
however, require no elements, whether simple or compound. That which was
stated at the beginning is maintained. The spiritual ethereal Entity
which lived in Spaces unknown to Earth, before the first sidereal
"jelly-speck" evolved in the ocean of crude Cosmic Matter, -- billions
and trillions of years before our globular speck in infinity, called
Earth, came into being and generated the *Moneron* in its drops, called
Oceans -- needed no "elements." The "Manu with soft bones" could well
dispense with calcic phosphate, as he had no bones, save in a figurative
sense. And while even the Monera, however homogeneous their organism,
still required physical conditions of life that would help them toward
further evolution, the being which became primitive Man and the "Father
of man," after evolving on planes of existence undreamt of by science,
could well remain impervious to any state of atmospheric conditions
around him. The primitive ancestor, in Brasseur de Bourbourg's
"*Popul-Vuh,*" who -- in the Mexican legends -- could act and live with
equal ease under ground and water as upon the Earth, answers only to the
Second and early Third Races in our texts. And if the three kingdoms of
Nature were so different in *pre*-diluvian ages, why should not man have
been composed of materials and combinations of atoms now entirely
unknown to physical science? The plants and animals now known, in almost
numberless varieties and species, have all developed, according to
scientific hypotheses, from primitive and far fewer organic forms. Why
should not the same have occurred in the case of man, the elements, and
the rest? "Universal Genesis starts from the one, breaks into three,
then five, and finally culminates into seven, to return into four,
three, and one." (Commentary.)

For additional proofs consult Part **II**. of this Volume, "The
Septenary in Nature."

-------

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next Section](sd2-1-08)

[Contents](sd2-0-co.htm#contents)
