##### The Secret Doctrine by H. P. Blavatsky -- Vol. 2

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 251 ANSWERS TO OBJECTIONS.

<span id="DDE_LINK24">\[\[This page continued from</span> [previous
section](sd2-1-13)\]\]

**A**RCHAIC **T**EACHINGS IN THE **P**URANAS AND **G**ENESIS.  
**P**HYSICAL **E**VOLUTION.

The writer cannot give *too much* proof that the system of Cosmogony and
Anthropogony as described actually existed, that its records *are*
preserved, and that it is found mirrored even in the modern versions of
ancient Scriptures.

The Puranas on the one hand, and the Jewish Scriptures on the other, are
based on the same scheme of evolution, which, read esoterically and
expressed in modern language, would be found to be quite as scientific
as much of what now passes current as the final word of recent
discovery. The only difference between the two schemes is, that

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 252 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

the Puranas, giving as much, and perhaps more attention to the causes
than to the effects, allude to the pre-Cosmic and pre-Genetic periods
rather than to those of so-called Creation, whereas the Bible, saying
only a few words of the former period, plunges forthwith into material
genesis, and, while nearly skipping the *pre-Adamic* races, proceeds
with its allegories concerning the Fifth Race.

Now, whatever the onslaught made on the Order of creation in *Genesis,*
and its dead letter account certainly lends itself admirably to
criticism,\* he who reads the Hindu Puranas -- its allegorical
exaggerations notwithstanding -- will find them quite in accordance with
physical Science.

Even what appears to be the, on the face of it, perfectly nonsensical
allegory of Brahma assuming the form of a Boar to rescue the Earth from
under the waters, finds in the Secret Commentaries a perfectly
scientific explanation, relating as it does to the many risings and
sinkings, and the constant alternation of water and land from the
earliest to the latest geological periods of our globe; for Science
teaches us now that nine-tenths of the stratified formations of the
earth's crust have been gradually constructed beneath water, at the
bottom of the seas. The ancient Aryans are credited with having known
nothing whatever of natural history, geology, and so on. The Jewish race
is, on the other hand, proclaimed even by its severest critic, an
uncompromising opponent of the Bible, (See "Modern Science and Modern
Thought," p. 337), to have the merit of having conceived the idea of
monotheism "earlier, and retained it more firmly, than any of the *less
philosophical and more immoral religions* (*!* !) of the ancient world."
Only, while we find in Biblical esotericism physiological sexual
mysteries symbolised, and very little

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* Mr. Gladstone's unfortunate attempt to reconcile the Genetic account
with science (see *Nineteenth Century,* "Dawn of Creation" and the
"Proem to Genesis," 1886) has brought upon him the Jovian thunderbolt
hurled by Mr. Huxley. The dead-letter account warranted no such attempt;
and his fourfold order, or division of animated creation, has turned
into the stone which, instead of killing the fly on the sleeping
friend's brow, killed the man instead. Mr. Gladstone killed *Genesis*
for ever. But this does not prove that there is no esotericism in the
latter. The fact that the Jews and all the Christians, the modern as
well as the early sects, have accepted the narrative *literally* for two
thousand years, shows only their ignorance; and shows the great
ingenuity and constructive ability of the initiated Rabbis, who have
built the two accounts -- *the Elohistic* and the *Jehovistic --*
esoterically, and have purposely confused the meaning by the vowelless
glyphs or word-signs in the original text. The six days -- *yom --* of
creation do mean six periods of evolution, and the seventh that of
culmination of perfection (not of rest), and refer to the seven Rounds
and the seven Races with a *distinct* "creation" in each; though the use
of the words *boker,* dawn or morning, and *crib*, evening twilight --
which have esoterically the same meaning as *sandhya,* twilight, in
Sanskrit -- have led to a charge of the most crass ignorance of the
order of evolution.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 253 MR. GLADSTONE KILLS GENESIS.

more (something for which *very little real philosophy is requisite*)*,*
in the *Puranas* one may find the most scientific and philosophical
"dawn of creation," which, if impartially analyzed and rendered into
plain language from its fairy tale-like allegories, would show that
modern zoology, geology, astronomy, and nearly all the branches of
modern knowledge, have been anticipated in the ancient Science, and were
known to the philosophers in their general features, if not in such
detail as at present!

Puranic astronomy, with all its deliberate concealment and confusion for
the purpose of leading the profane off the real track, was shown even by
Bentley to be a real science; and those who are versed in the mysteries
of Hindu astronomical treatises, will prove that the modern theories of
the progressive condensation of nebulae, nebulous stars and suns, with
the most minute details about the cyclic progress of asterisms -- far
more correct than Europeans have even now -- for chronological and other
purposes, were known in India to perfection.

If we turn to geology and zoology we find the same. What are all the
myths and endless genealogies of the seven Prajapati, and their sons,
the seven Rishis or Manus, and of their wives, sons and progeny, but a
vast detailed account of the progressive development and evolution of
animal creation, one species after the other? Were the highly
philosophical and metaphysical Aryans -- the authors of the most perfect
philosophical systems of transcendental psychology, of Codes of Ethics,
and such a grammar as Panini's, of the Sankhya and Vedanta systems, and
a moral code (Buddhism), proclaimed by Max Muller the most perfect on
earth -- such fools, or children, as to lose their time in writing
*fairy-tales*; such tales as the Puranas now seem to be in the eyes of
those who have not the remotest idea of their secret meaning? What is
the *fable,* the genealogy and origin of Kasyapa, with his twelve wives,
by whom he had a numerous and diversified progeny of *nagas* (serpents),
reptiles, birds, and all kinds of living things, and who was thus the
*father* of all kinds of animals, but a *veiled* record of the order of
evolution in *this* round? So far, we do not see that any Orientalist
ever had the remotest conception of the truths concealed under the
allegories and personifications. "The Satapatha Brahmana," says one,
"gives *a not very intelligible* account of Kasyapa's origin. . . . He
was the son of Marichi, the Son of Brahma, the father of Vivasvat, the
father of Manu, the progenitor of mankind. . . . Having assumed the form
of a tortoise, Prajapati created offspring. That which he created he
made *akarot,* hence the word *kurma* (tortoise). Kasyapa means
tortoise; hence men say: 'All creatures are descendants of Kasyapa,'
etc., etc. (*Hindu Class. Dict.*)

He was all this; he was also the father of *Garuda,* the bird, the "King

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 254 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

of the feathered tribe," who descends *from,* and is of one stock *with
the reptiles,* the nagas; and who becomes their mortal enemy
*subsequently* as *he is also a cycle, a period of time, when in the
course of evolution the birds which developed from reptiles in their*
"*struggle for life,*" *--* "*survival of the fittest,*" *etc., etc.,
turned in preference on those they issued from, to devour them,* --
perhaps prompted by natural law, in order to make room for other and
more perfect species. (*Vide* Part **II**., "Symbolism.")

In that admirable epitome of "Modern Science and Modern Thought," a
lesson in natural history is offered to Mr. Gladstone, showing the utter
variance with it of the Bible. The author remarks that Geology,
commencing with --

> " . . . the earliest known fossil, the Eozoon Canadense of the
> Laurentian, continued in a chain, every link of which is firmly
> welded, through the Silurian, with its abundance of molluscous,
> crustacean, and vermiform life and first indication of fishes; the
> Devonian, with its predominance of fish and first appearance of
> reptiles; the Mesozoic with its batrachians (or frog family); the
> Secondary formations, in which reptiles of the sea, land and air
> preponderated, and the first humble forms of vertebrate land animals
> began to appear; and finally, the Tertiary, in which mammalian life
> has become abundant, and type succeeding to type and species to
> species, are gradually differentiated and specialized, through the
> Eocene, Miocene, and Pliocene periods, until we arrive at the Glacial
> and Pre-historic periods, and at positive proof of the existence of
> man."

The same order, *plus* the description of animals unknown to modern
science, is found in the commentaries on the Puranas in general, and in
the Book of Dzyan -- especially. The only difference, a grave one, no
doubt, -- as implying a spiritual and divine nature of man independent
of his physical body in this illusionary world, in which the *false
personality* and its cerebral basis alone is known to orthodox
psychology -- is as follows. Having been in all the so-called "Seven
creations," allegorizing the seven evolutionary changes, or the
*sub-races,* we may call them, *of the First Root-race of Mankind --*
MAN was on earth in this Round from the beginning. Having passed through
all the kingdoms of nature in the previous *three* Rounds,\* his
*physical* frame -- one adapted to the thermal conditions of those early
periods -- was ready to receive the *divine Pilgrim* at the first dawn
of human life, *i.e.,* 18,000,000 years ago. It is only at the

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* "Follow the law of analogy" -- the Masters teach. *Atma-Buddhi* is
dual and *Manas* is triple; inasmuch as the former has two aspects, and
the latter three, *i.e*., as a principle *per se,* which gravitates, in
its higher aspect, to Atma-Buddhi, and follows, in its lower nature,
Kama, the seat of terrestrial and animal desires and passions. Now
compare the evolution of the Races, the First and the Second of which
are of the nature of Atma-Buddhi, their passive Spiritual progeny, and
the Third Root-Race shows three distinct divisions or aspects
physiologically and psychically; the earliest, sinless; the middle
portions awakening to intelligence; and the third and last decidedly
*animal:* *i.e.,* Manas succumbs to the temptations of Kama.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 255 FROM WORM TO MAN.

mid-point of the 3rd Root Race that man was endowed with *Manas.* Once
united, the *two* and then the *three* made one; for though the lower
animals, from the amoeba to man, received *their* monads, in which all
the higher qualities are potential, all have to remain dormant till each
reaches its human form, before which stage *manas* (mind) has no
development in them.\* In the animals every principle is paralysed, and
in a foetus-like state, save the second (vital) and the third (the
astral), and the rudiments of the fourth (*Kama,* which is desire,
instinct) whose intensity and development varies and changes with the
species. To the materialist wedded to the Darwinian theory, this will
read like a fairy-tale, a mystification; to the believer in the inner,
spiritual man, the statement will have nothing unnatural in it.

Now the writer is certain to meet what will be termed insuperable
objections. We shall be told that the line of embryology, the gradual
development of every individual life, and the progress of what is known
to take place in the order of progressive stages of specialization --
that all this is opposed to the idea of man preceding mammals. Man
begins as the humblest and most primitive vermiform creature, "from the
primitive speck of protoplasm and the nucleated cell in which all life
originates," and "is developed through stages undistinguishable from
those of fish, reptile and mammal, until the cell finally attains the
highly specialized development of *the quadrumanous,* and *last of all,
of the human type.*" (Laing, 335.)

This is perfectly scientific, and we have nothing against *that*; for
all this relates to the *shell* of man -- his body, which in its growth
is subject, of course, like every other (once called) morphological
unit, to such metamorphoses. It is not those who teach the
transformation of the mineral atom through crystallization -- which is
the same function, and bears the same relation to its *inorganic*
(*so-called*) *upadhi* (or basis) as the formation of *cells* to their
organic nuclei, through plant, insect and animal into man -- it is not
they who will reject this theory, as it will finally lead to the
recognition of a Universal Deity in nature, ever-present and as ever
invisible, and unknowable, and of *intra*-Cosmic gods, who all were
men.\*\*

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* "Men are made *complete* only during their third, toward the fourth
cycle (race). They are made 'gods' for good and evil, and responsible
only when the two arcs meet (after 31/2 rounds towards the *fifth*
Race). They are made so by the *Nirmanakaya* (spiritual or astral
remains) of the Rudra-Kumaras, '*cursed* to be reborn on earth again;
meaning -- *doomed in their natural turn* *to reincarnation* in the
higher ascending arc of the terrestrial cycle.' (*Commentary IX.*)

\*\* The whole trouble is this: neither physiologists nor pathologists
*will* recognize that the cell-germinating substance (the
*cytoblastema*) and the mother-lye from which crystals originate, are
one and the same essence, save in differentiation for purposes.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 256 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

But we would ask, what does science and its exact and now axiomatic
discoveries prove against *our* Occult theory? Those who believe in the
law of Evolution and gradual progressive development from a cell (which
from a *vital* has become a morphological cell, until it awoke as
protoplasm pure and simple) -- these can surely never limit their belief
to one line of evolution. The types of life are innumerable; and the
progress of evolution, moreover, does not go at the same rate in every
kind of species. The constitution of primordial matter in the Silurian
age -- we mean "primordial" *matter* of science -- is the same in every
essential particular, save its degree of present grossness, as the
primordial *living* matter of to-day. Nor do we find that which ought to
be found, if the now orthodox theory of Evolution were *quite* correct,
namely, a constant, ever-flowing progress in every species of being.
Instead of that, what does one see? While the intermediate groups of
animal being all tend toward a higher type, and while specializations,
now of one type and now of another, develop through the geological ages,
change forms, assume new shapes, appear and disappear with a
kaleidoscopic rapidity in the description of paleontologists from one
period to another, the two solitary exceptions to the general rule are
those at the two opposite poles of life and type, namely -- **M**AN *and
the lower genera of being!*

"Certain well-marked forms of living beings have existed through
enormous epochs, surviving not only the changes of physical conditions,
*but persisting comparatively unaltered,* while other forms of life have
appeared and disappeared. Such forms may be termed 'persistent types' of
life; and examples of them are abundant enough in both the animal and
the vegetable worlds" (Huxley, "Proceed. of Roy. Inst.," vol. iii., p.
151).

Nevertheless, we are not given any good reason why Darwin links together
reptiles, birds, amphibians, fishes, mollusca, etc., etc., as off-shoots
of a moneric ancestry. Nor are we told whether reptiles, for instance,
are direct descendants of the amphibian, the latter of fishes, and
fishes of lower forms -- which they certainly are. For the Monads have
passed through all these forms of being up to man, on every planet, in
the Three *preceding* Rounds; every Round, as well as every subsequent
Globe, from A to G, having been, and still having to be the arena of the
same evolution, only repeated each time on a more solid material basis.
Therefore the question: -- "What relation is there between the Third
Round astral prototypes and ordinary physical development in the course
of the origination of pre-mammalian organic species?" -- is easily
answered. One is the shadowy prototype of the other, the preliminary,
hardly defined, and evanescent sketch on the canvas, of objects, which
are destined to receive the final and vivid

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 257 THE CONTRADICTIONS OF SCIENCE.

form under the brush of the painter. The fish evolved into an amphibian
-- a frog -- in the *shadows* of ponds, and man passed through all his
metamorphoses on this Globe in the Third Round as he did in this, his
Fourth Cycle. The Third Round types contributed to the formation of the
types in this one. On strict analogy, the cycle of Seven Rounds in their
work of the gradual formation of man through every kingdom of Nature,
are repeated on a microscopical scale in the first seven months of
gestation of a future human being. Let the student think over and work
out this analogy. As the seven months' old unborn baby, though quite
ready, yet needs two months more in which to acquire strength and
consolidate; so man, having perfected his evolution during seven Rounds,
remains two periods more in the womb of mother-Nature before he is born,
or rather reborn a Dhyani, still more perfect than he was before he
launched forth as a Monad on the newly built chain of worlds. Let the
student ponder over this mystery, and then he will easily convince
himself that, as there are also physical links between many classes, so
there are precise domains wherein the astral merges into physical
evolution. Of this Science breathes not one word. Man has evolved with
and from the monkey, it says. But now see the contradiction.

Huxley proceeds to point out plants, ferns, club mosses, some of them
generically identical with those now living, which are met with in the
carboniferous epoch, for: -- "The cone of the oolitic *Araucaria* is
hardly distinguishable from that of existing species. . . . .
Subkingdoms of animals yield the same instances. The *globigerina* of
the Atlantic soundings is identical with the cretaceous species of the
same genus . . . the tabulate corals of the Silurian epoch are
wonderfully like the millepores of our own seas. . . . *The arachnida,*
the highest group of which, the scorpions, is represented in the coal by
a genus differing only from its living congeners only in . . . the
eyes," etc., etc.; all of which may be closed with Dr. Carpenter's
authoritative statement about the *Foraminifera.* "There is no
evidence," he says, "of any fundamental modification or advance in the
Foraminiferous type from the palaeozoic period to the present time. . .
. The Forminiferous Fauna of our own series probably present a greater
range of variety than existed at any previous period; but *there is no
indication of any tendency to elevation towards a higher type.*"
("Introduction to the study of the Forminifera," p. xi.)

Now, if there is no indication of change in the Forminifera, a
*protozoon* of the lowest type of life, mouthless and eyeless, except
its greater variety now than before, man, who is on the uppermost rung
of the ladder of being, indicates still less change, as we have seen;
the skeleton of his Palaeolithic ancestor being even found

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 258 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

superior in some respects to his present frame. Where is, then, the
claimed uniformity of law, the *absolute rule* for one species shading
off into another, and, by insensible gradations, into higher types? We
see Sir William Thomson admitting as much as 400,000,000 of years in the
earth's history, since the surface of the globe became sufficiently cool
to permit of the presence of living things;" and during that enormous
lapse of time in the Oolitic period alone, the so-called "age of
reptiles," we find a most extraordinary variety and abundance of Saurian
forms, the Amphibian type reaching *its highest developments.* We learn
of Ichthyosauri and Plesiosauri in the lakes and rivers, and of winged
crocodiles or lizards flying in the air. After which, in the Tertiary
period "we find the Mammalian type exhibiting remarkable divergences
from previously existing forms . . . . Mastodons, Megatheriums, and
other unwieldy denizens of the ancient forests and plains; and
subsequently," are notified of -*-* "*the gradual modification of one of
the ramifications* of the Quadrumanous order, *into those beings from
whom primeval man himself may claim to have been evolved.*" ("The
Beginnings of Life.")

He *may*; but no one, except materialists, can see why he should; as
there is not the slightest necessity for it, nor is such an evolution
warranted by facts, for those most interested in the proofs thereof
confess their utter failure to find one single fact to support their
theory. There is no need for the numberless types of life to represent
the members of one progressive series. They are "the products of various
and different evolutional divergences, taking place now in one direction
and now in another." Therefore it is far more justifiable to say that
the monkey evolved into the Quadrumanous order, than that primeval man,
who has *remained stationary in his human specialization ever since his
fossil is found in the oldest strata,* and of whom no variety is found
save in colour and facial type -- has developed from a common ancestor
together with the ape.

That man originates like other animals in a cell and develops "through
stages undistinguishable from those of fish, reptile, and mammal until
the cell attains the highly specialized development of the quadrumanous
and *at last the human type,*" is an Occult axiom thousands of years
old. The Kabalistic axiom: "A stone becomes a plant; a plant a beast; a
beast a man; a man a God," holds good throughout the ages. Haeckel, in
his *Shopfungsgeschichte,* shows a double drawing representing two
embryos -- that of a dog six weeks old, and that of a man, eight weeks.
The two, except the slight difference in the head, larger and wider
about the brain in the man, are

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* "*Trans.* of Geolog. Soc. of Glasgow," vol. iii. Very strangely,
however, he has just changed his opinion. The sun, he says, is only
15,000,000 old.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 259 IDENTITY OF HUMAN AND ANIMAL EMBRYOS.

undistinguishable. "In fact, we may say that every human being passes
through the stage of fish and reptile before arriving at that of mammal
and finally of man. If we take him up at the more advanced stage where
the embryo has already passed the reptilian form . . . for a
considerable time, the line of development remains the same as that of
other mammalia. The rudimentary limbs are exactly similar, the five
fingers and toes develop in the same way, and the resemblance after the
first four weeks' growth *between the embryo of a man and a dog is such
that it is scarcely possible to distinguish them.* Even at the age of
eight weeks the embryo man is an animal with a tail hardly to be
distinguished from an embryo puppy" ("Modern Science," etc., p. 171).

Why, then, not make man and dog evolve from a common ancestor, or from a
reptile -- *a Naga,* instead of coupling man with the quadrumana? This
would be just as logical as the other, and more so. The shape and the
stages of the human embryo have not changed since historical times, and
these metamorphoses were known to AEsculapius and Hippocrates as well as
to Mr. Huxley. Therefore, since the Kabalists had remarked it since
prehistoric times, it is no new discovery. In "Isis," Vol. I., 389, it
is noticed and half explained.

As the embryo of man has no more of the ape in it than of any other
mammal, but *contains in itself the totality of the kingdoms of nature,*
and since it seems to be "a persistent type" of life, far more so than
even the Foraminifera, it seems as illogical to make him evolve from the
ape as it would be to trace his origin to the frog or the dog. Both
Occult and Eastern philosophies believe in evolution, which Manu and
Kapila\* give with far more clearness than any scientist does at
present. No need to repeat that which was fully debated in *Isis
Unveiled,* as the reader may find all these arguments and the
description of the basis on which all the Eastern doctrines of Evolution
rested, in our earlier books.\*\* But no Occultist can accept the
unreasonable proposition that all the now existing forms, "from the
structureless Amoeba to man," are the direct lineal descendants of
organisms which lived millions and millions of years before the birth of
man, in the pre-Silurian epochs, in the sea or land-

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* Hence the philosophy in the allegory of the 7, 10, and finally 21
Prajapati, Rishis, Munis, etc., who all are made the *fathers* of
various things and beings. The order of the seven classes or orders of
plants, animals, and even inanimate things, given at random in the
Puranas, is found in several commentaries in the correct rotation. Thus,
Prithu is the father of the Earth. He *milks her,* and makes her bear
every kind of grain and vegetable, all enumerated and specified. Kasyapa
is the father of all the reptiles, snakes, demons, etc., etc.

\*\* See Vol. I. 152, *et seq.,* about the tree of evolution -- The
"Mundane Tree."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 260 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

mud. The Occultists believe in an *inherent law* of progressive
*development.\** Mr. Darwin never did, and says so himself.

On page 145 of the "Origin of Species" we find him stating that, since
*there can be no advantage* "to the infusorian animalcule or an
intestinal worm . . . to become highly organized," therefore, "natural
selection," *not including necessarily progressive development --*
leaves the animalcule and the worm (the "persistent types") quiet.

There does not appear much *uniform* law in such behaviour of Nature;
and it looks more like the discriminative action of some *Super*-Natural
selection; perhaps, that aspect of *Karma,* which Eastern Occultists
would call the "Law of Retardation," may have something to do with it.

But there is every reason to doubt whether Mr. Darwin himself ever gave
such an importance to *his* law -- as is given to it now by his
atheistic followers. The knowledge of the various living forms in the
geological periods that have gone by is very meagre. The reasons given
for this by Dr. Bastian are very suggestive: (1) On account of the
imperfect manner in which the several forms may be represented in the
strata pertaining to the period; (2) on account of the extremely limited
nature of the explorations which have been made in these imperfectly
representative strata; and (3) because so many parts of the record are
absolutely inaccessible to us -- nearly all beneath the Silurian system
having been blotted out by time, whilst those two-thirds of the earth's
surface in which the remaining strata are to be found are now covered
over by seas. Hence Mr. Darwin says himself: --

"For my part, following out Lyell's metaphor, I look at the geological
record as a history of the world imperfectly kept, and written in a
changing dialect; *of this history we possess the last volume alone,*
relating only to two or three countries. Of this volume, *only here and
there a short chapter has been preserved,* and of each page *only here
and there a few lines.*"

It is not on such meagre data, certainly, that the last word of Science
can be said. Nor is it on any ground of human pride or unreasonable
belief in man's representing even here on earth -- (in *our* period,
perhaps) -- the highest type of life, that Occultism denies that all the
preceding forms of human life belonged to types lower than our own, for
it is not so. But simply because the "missing link," such as to prove
the existing theory undeniably, will never be found by palaeontologists.
Believing as we do that man has evolved from, and passed through,
(during the preceding Rounds) the lowest forms of every life, vegetable
and animal, on earth, there is nothing very degrading in the idea of
having the orangoutang as an ancestor of our physical form. Quite the
reverse; as it

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* Checked and modified, however, by the *Law of Retardation,* which
imposes a restriction on the advance of all species when a Higher Type
makes its appearance.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 261 NATURE IS UNIFORM.

would forward the Occult doctrine with regard to the final evolution of
everything in terrestrial nature into man, most irresistibly. One may
even enquire how it is that biologists and anthropologists, having once
firmly accepted the theory of the descent of man from the ape -- how it
is that they have hitherto left untouched the future evolution of the
existing apes into man? This is only a logical sequence of the first
theory, unless Science would make of man a privileged being, and his
evolution a *non*-precedent in nature, quite a *special* and unique
case. And that is what all this leads physical Science to. The reason,
however, why the Occultists reject the Darwinian, and especially the
Haeckelian, hypothesis is because it is the ape which is, in sober
truth, a special and unique instance, not man. The pithecoid is *an
accidental creation,* a forced growth, the result of an unnatural
process.

The occult doctrine, is, we think, more logical. It teaches a cyclic,
never varying law in nature, the latter having no personal, "special
design," but acting on a uniform plan that prevails through the whole
manvantaric period and deals with the land worm as it deals with man.
Neither the one nor the other have sought to come into being, hence both
are under the same evolutionary law, and both have to progress according
to Karmic law. Both have started from the same neutral centre of Life
and both have to re-merge into it at the consummation of the cycle.

It is not denied that in the preceding Round man *was* a gigantic
apelike creature; and when we say "man" we ought perhaps to say, the
rough mould that was developing for the use of man in this Round only --
the middle, or the transition point of which we have hardly reached. Nor
was man what he is now during the first two and a half Root-races. That
point he reached, as said before, only 18,000,000 years ago, during the
secondary period, as we claim.

Till then he was, according to tradition and Occult teaching, "a god on
earth who had fallen into matter," or generation. This may or may not be
accepted, since the Secret Doctrine does not impose itself as an
infallible dogma; and since, whether its prehistoric records are
accepted or rejected, it has nothing to do with the question of the
*actual* man and his inner nature, the Fall mentioned above having left
no original sin on Humanity. But all this has been sufficiently dealt
with.

Furthermore, we are taught that the transformations through which man
passed on the descending arc -- which is centrifugal for spirit and
centripetal for matter -- and those he prepares to go through,
henceforward, on his ascending path, which will reverse the direction of
the two forces -- viz., matter will become centrifugal and spirit
centripetal -- that all such transformations *are next in store for the
anthropoid ape also,* all those, at any rate, who have reached the
remove next to man in this

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 262 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

Round -- and these will all be men in the Fifth Round, as present men
inhabited ape-like forms in the Third, the preceding Round.

Behold, then, in the modern denizens of the great forests of Sumatra the
degraded and *dwarfed* examples -- "blurred copies," as Mr. Huxley has
it -- of ourselves, as we (the majority of mankind) were in the earliest
sub-races of the Fourth Root-race during the period of what is called
the "Fall into generation." The ape we know is not the product of
natural evolution but an *accident,* a cross-breed between an animal
being, or form, and man. As has been shown in the present volume
(anthropogenesis), it is the speechless animal that first started sexual
connection, having been the first to separate into males and females.
Nor was it intended by Nature that man should follow the bestial example
-- as shown by the comparatively painless procreation of their species
by the animals, and the terrible suffering and danger of the same in the
woman. The Ape is, indeed, as remarked in *Isis Unveiled* (Vol. **II**
278) "a transformation of species most directly connected with that of
the human family -- *a hybrid branch engrafted on their own stock before
the final perfection of the latter*" -- or man. The apes are millions of
years later than the speaking human being, and are the latest
contemporaries of our Fifth Race. Thus, it is most important to remember
that the *Egos* of the apes are entities compelled by their Karma to
incarnate in the animal forms, which resulted from the bestiality of the
*latest* Third and the earliest Fourth Race men. They are entities who
had already reached the "human stage" before this Round. Consequently,
they form an exception to the general rule. The numberless traditions
about Satyrs are no fables, but represent an extinct race of animal men.
The animal "Eves" were their foremothers, and the human "Adams" their
forefathers; *hence the Kabalistic allegory of Lilith or Lilatu,* Adam's
*first* wife, whom the Talmud describes as a *charming* woman, *with
long wavy hair, i.e.-*- a female hairy animal of a character now
unknown, still a female animal, who in the Kabalistic and Talmudic
allegories is called the female reflection of Samael, Samael-Lilith, or
man-animal united, a being called *Hayo Bischat,* the Beast or Evil
Beast (*Zohar*)*.* It is from this unnatural union that the present apes
descended. The latter are truly "speechless men," and will become
speaking animals (or men of a lower order) in the Fifth Round, while the
adepts of a certain school hope that some of the Egos of the apes of a
higher intelligence will reappear at the close of the Sixth Root-race.
What their form will be is of secondary consideration. The form means
nothing. Species and genera of the flora, fauna, and the highest animal,
its crown -- man, change and vary according to the environments and
climatic variations, not only with every Round, but every Root-Race
likewise, as well as after every geological

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 263 MILLIONS OF YEARS HENCE.

cataclysm that puts an end to, or produces a turning point in the
latter. In the Sixth Root-Race the fossils of the Orang, the Gorilla and
the Chimpanzee will be those of extinct quadrumanous mammals; and new
forms -- though fewer and ever wider apart as ages pass on and the close
of the Manvantara approaches -- will develop from the "cast off" types
of the human races as they revert once again to astral, out of the mire
of physical, life. There were none before man, and they will be extinct
before the Seventh Race develops. Karma will lead on the monads of the
unprogressed men of our race and lodge them in the newly evolved human
frames of the thus physiologically regenerated baboon. (But see Part
III., *Addenda*.)

This will take place, of course, millions of years hence. But the
picture of this cyclic precession of all that lives and breathes now on
earth, of each species in its turn, is a true one, and needs no "special
creation" or miraculous formation of man, beast, and plant *ex nihilo.*

This is how Occult Science explains the absence of any link between ape
and man, and shows the former evolving from the latter.<span
id="DDE_LINK19"></span>

<span id="DDE_LINK25">-------</span>

\[\[This page continued in next section\]\] <span
id="DDE_LINK20"></span><span id="DDE_LINK21"></span><span
id="DDE_LINK22"></span><span id="DDE_LINK23"></span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next Section](sd2-1-15)

[Contents](sd2-0-co.htm#contents)
