##### *The Secret Doctrine* by H. P. Blavatsky -- Vol. 2

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 563 THE SEVEN THUNDERS.

### ยง XXIII.

#### THE UPANISHADS IN GNOSTIC LITERATURE.

We are reminded in King's "Gnostics" that the Greek language has but one
word for *vowel* and voice; and this has led the uninitiated to many
erroneous interpretations. On the simple knowledge, however, of that
well-known fact a comparison may be attempted, and a flood of light
thrown upon several mystic meanings. Thus the words, so often used in
the Upanishads and the Puranas, "Sound" and "Speech," may be collated
with the Gnostic "Vowels" and the "Voices" of the Thunders and Angels in
"Revelation." The same will be found in *Pistis Sophia,* and other
ancient Fragments and MSS. This was remarked even by the matter-of-fact
author of "The Gnostics and their Remains."

Through Hippolytus, an early Church Father, we learn what Marcus -- a
Pythagorean rather than a Christian Gnostic, and a Kabalist most
certainly -- had received in mystic revelation. It is said that "Marcus
had it revealed unto him that 'the *seven heavens'\** . . . . sounded
each one vowel, which, all combined together, formed a complete
doxology"; in clearer words: "the *Sound* whereof being carried down
(from these seven heavens) to earth, became the creator and parent of
all things that be on earth." (See "Hippolytus," vi., 48, and King's
*Gnostics,* p. 200.) Translated from the Occult phraseology into still
plainer language this would read: "The Sevenfold LOGOS having
differentiated into seven *Logoi,* or creative potencies (vowels) these
(the second logos, or "Sound") created all on Earth.

Assuredly one who is acquainted with Gnostic literature can hardly help
seeing in St. John's *Apocalypse,* a work of the same school of thought.
For we find John saying (chap. x. 3, 4), "Seven thunders uttered their
voices . . . and I was about to write . . . (but) I heard a voice from
heaven saying unto me, 'Seal up those things which the seven thunders
uttered, and write them not.' " The same injunction is given to Marcus,
the same to all other *semi* and *full* Initiates. Yet the sameness of
equivalent expressions used, and of the underlying ideas, always betrays
a portion of the mysteries. We must always seek for more than one
meaning in every mystery allegorically revealed, especially in those in
which the number seven and its multiplication seven by seven, or
forty-nine, appear. Now when the Rabbi Jesus is requested (in *Pistis*

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\*The "Heavens" are identical with "Angels," as already stated.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 564 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

*Sophia*) by his disciples to reveal to them, "the mysteries of the
Light of thy (*his*) *Father"* (*i.e.*, of the higher SELF enlightened
by Initiation and Divine knowledge), Jesus answers: "Do ye seek after
these mysteries? No mystery is more excellent than they which shall
bring your souls unto the Light of Lights, unto the place of Truth and
Goodness, unto the place where there is neither male nor female, neither
form in that place but Light, everlasting, not to be uttered. Nothing
therefore is more excellent than the mysteries which ye seek after,
*saving* *only* THE MYSTERY *of the seven vowels and their* FORTY AND
NINE POWERS, and their numbers thereof; and no name is more excellent
*than* *all these vowels."* "The Seven Fathers and the Forty-nine Sons
blaze in DARKNESS, but they are the LIFE and LIGHT and the continuation
thereof through the Great Age" -- says the Commentary speaking of the
"Fires."

Now it becomes evident that, in every esoteric interpretation of
exoteric beliefs expressed in allegorical forms, there was the same
underlying idea -- the basic number seven, the compound of *three and*
*four,* preceded by the divine THREE (![](sd1-113.jpg)) making the
perfect number ten.

Also, these numbers applied equally to divisions of time, to cosmography
metaphysical and physical, as well as to man and everything else in
visible nature. Thus these *Seven* vowels with their *forty-nine* powers
are identical with the *three* and the *Seven* Fires of the Hindus and
their forty-nine fires; identical with the numerical mysteries of the
Persian Simorgh; identical with those of the Jewish Kabalists. The
latter, dwarfing the numbers (their mode of *blinds*)*,* made the
duration of each successive *renewal* (what we call in esoteric parlance
*Round*) of the seven renewals of the globe only of 7,000 years, instead
of, as is more likely, 7,000,000,000, and assigned to the total duration
of the universe 49,000 years only. (Compare ยง "Chronology of the
Brahmins.")

Now, the Secret Doctrine furnishes a key which reveals to us on
indisputable grounds of comparative analogy that *Garuda,* the
allegorical and monstrous half-man and half-bird, -- the *Vahan* or
vehicle on which Vishnu (who is Kala, "time") is shown to ride -- is the
origin of all other such allegories. He is the Indian *phoenix,* the
emblem of cyclic and periodical time, the "man-lion" *Singha,* of whose
representations the so-called "gnostic gems" are so full.\* "Over the
seven rays of the lion's crown, and corresponding to their points,
stand, in many cases, the seven vowels of the Greek alphabet \[Gk
char\], testifying to the Seven Heavens." This is the *Solar* lion and
the emblem of the Solar cycle, as

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\*As confessed by King, the great authority on Gnostic antiquities,
these gnostic gems are not the work of the Gnostics, but belong to
*pre-christian* periods, and are the work of *magicians* (p. 241).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 565 WHEN TIME BE NO LONGER.

Garuda\* is that of the great cycle, the *"Maha-Kalpa"* co-eternal with
Vishnu, and also, of course, the emblem of the Sun, and Solar cycle.
This is shown by the details of the allegory. At his birth, Garuda is
mistaken for *Agni,* the God of Fire, on account of his (Garuda's)
*"dazzling splendour,"* and called thereupon *Gaganeswara,* "lord of the
sky." Again, his being represented as Osiris, and by many heads of
allegorical monsters on the *Abraxas* (gnostic) gems, with the head and
beak of an eagle or a hawk (solar birds), denotes Garuda's solar and
cyclic character. His Son is *Jatabu,* the cycle of 60,000 years. As
well remarked by C. W. King: -- "Whatever the primary meaning (of the
gem with the solar lion and vowels) it was probably imported in its
present shape from **I**NDIA, *that* *true fountain head of gnostic
iconography"* (*Gnostics,* p. 218).

The mysteries of the seven gnostic vowels, uttered by the thunders of
St. John, can be unriddled only by the primeval and original Occultism
of Aryavarta, brought into India by the primeval Brahmins, who had been
*initiated in Central Asia.* And this is the Occultism we study and try
to explain, as much as is possible in these pages. Our doctrine of seven
Races and Seven Rounds of life and evolution around our terrestrial
chain of spheres, may be found even in *Revelation.*\*\* When the seven
"thunders," or "sounds," or "vowels" -- one meaning out of the seven for
each such vowel relating directly to our own Earth and its seven
Root-Races in each Round -- "had uttered their voices" -- but forbidden
the Seer to write them, and made him "seal up those things" -- what did
the Angel "standing upon the sea and upon the earth" do? He lifted his
hand to heaven "and sware by him that liveth for ever and ever . . . .
that there *should be time no longer."* "But in the days of the voice of
the *seventh* *angel* when he shall begin to sound, the Mystery of God
(of the Cycle) should be finished" (x. 7), which means, in theosophic
phraseology, that when the Seventh Round is completed, then *Time* will
cease. "There shall be time no longer" very naturally, since *pralaya*
shall set in and there will remain no one on earth to keep a division of
time, during that periodical dissolution and arrest of conscious life.

Dr. Kenealy and others believed this doctrine of the Rabbins (their
calculations of cyclic seven and forty-nine) to have been brought by

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* The lack of intuition in Orientalists and *antiquarians* past and
present, is remarkable. Thus, Wilson, the translator of *Vishnu Purana,*
declares in his *Preface* that in the *Garuda Purana* he found "no
account of the birth of Garuda." Considering that an account of
"Creation" in general is given therein, and that Garuda is co-eternal
with Vishnu, the *Maha Kalpa,* or Great Life-CycIe, beginning with and
ending with the *manifesting* Vishnu, what other account of Garuda's
birth could be expected !

*\*\* Vide Revelation* xvii., verses 2 and 10; and *Leviticus* xxiii.,
verses 15 to 18; the first passage speaking of the "Seven Kings," of
whom *five* have gone; and the second about the "Seven Sabbaths," etc.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 566 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

them from Chaldea. This is more than likely. But the Babylonians, who
had all those cycles and taught them only at their great initiatory
mysteries of astrological magic, got their wisdom and learning from
India. It is not difficult, therefore, to recognize in them our own
esoteric doctrine. In their secret computations, the Japanese have the
same figures in their cycles. As to the Brahmins, their Puranas and
Upanishads are a good proof of it. The latter have passed entirely into
Gnostic literature; and a Brahmin needs only to read *Pistis Sophia\*
to* recognize his forefathers' property, even to the phraseology and
similes used. Compare: in *Pistis Sophia* the disciple says to Jesus:
"Rabbi, reveal unto us the Mysteries of the Light (*i.e.*, the *"Fire*
of Knowledge or Enlightenment") . . . forasmuch as we have heard thee
saying that *there is another baptism of smoke,* and another baptism of
the Spirit of Holy Light," *i.e.*, the Spirit of FIRE. "I baptize you
with water, but . . . . he shall baptize you with the Holy Ghost and
with fire," says John of Jesus (Matt. iii. 2); meaning this
esoterically. The real significance of this statement is very profound.
It means that he, John, a non-initiated ascetic, can impart to his
disciples no greater wisdom than the mysteries connected with the plane
of matter (water being a symbol of it). His *gnosis* was that of
exoteric and ritualistic dogma, of dead-letter orthodoxy; \*\* while the
wisdom which Jesus, an Initiate of the higher mysteries, would reveal to
them, was of a higher character, for it was the "**F**IRE" Wisdom of the
true gnosis or the *real spiritual* enlightment. One was **F**IRE, the
other the **S**MOKE. For Moses, the *fire* on Mount Sinai, and the
spiritual wisdom imparted; for the multitudes of the "people" below, for
the profane, Mount Sinai in (*through*) smoke*, i.e.*, the exoteric
husks of orthodox or *sectarian ritualism.*

Now, having the above in view, read the dialogue between the sages
Narada and Davamata in the *Anugita,* the antiquity and importance of
which MS. (an episode from the Mahabharata) one can learn in the "Sacred
Books of the East," edited by Prof. Max Muller.\*\* Narada is discussing
upon the breaths or the "life-winds," as they are called in

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

*\*Pistis Sophia* is an extremely important document, a genuine
*Evangel* of the Gnostics, ascribed at random to Valentinus, but much
more probably a pre-Christian work in its original. It was discovered in
a Coptic MS. by Schwartze, in the British Museum, quite accidentally,
and translated by him into Latin; after which text and (Latin) version
were published by Petermann in the year 1853. In the text itself the
authorship of this Book is ascribed to Philip the Apostle, whom Jesus
bids to sit down and write the revelation. It is genuine and ought to be
as canonical as any other gospel. Unfortunately it remains to this day
untranslated.

\*\* In the Cycle of Initiation, which was very long, water represented
the first and lower steps toward purification, while trials connected
with *fire* came last. Water could regenerate the body of matter; FIRE
alone, that of the *inner* Spiritual man.

\*\*\* See *Introduction* by Kashinath Trimbak Telang, M.A.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 567 TRUTH BETWEEN TWO CONTRASTS.

the clumsy translations of such words as *Prana, Apana,* etc., whose
full esoteric meaning and application to individual functions can hardly
be rendered in English. He says of this Science that "it is the teaching
of the Veda *that the fire verily is all the deities,* and knowledge of
it arises among Brahmans, being accompanied by intelligence." By "fire,"
says the Commentator, he means the **S**ELF. By "intelligence," the
Occultist says, Narada means neither "discussion" nor "argumentation,"
as Aruna Misra believes, but "intelligence" truly, or *the adaptation*
*of the fire of Wisdom to Exoteric Ritualism for the profane.* This is
the chief concern of the Brahmans (who were the first to set the example
to other nations who thus anthropomorphized and carnalized the grandest
metaphysical truths). Narada makes it plain and is made to say: "The
*smoke* of that fire, which is of excellent glory, appears in the shape
of darkness" (verily so!); "its ashes (are) passion; and goodness is
that in connection with it in which the offering is thrown": *i.e.*,
that faculty in the disciple which apprehends the subtle truth (the
flame) which escapes heavenward, while the objective sacrifice remains
as a proof and *evidence of piety* only to the profane. For what can
Narada mean in teaching that "those who understand the sacrifice
understand the Samana and the Vyana as the *principal* (offering)"; and
"the Prana and Apana, but portions of the offering . . . and between
them *is the fire* . . . . that is the excellent seat of the Udana as
understood by Brahmanas. As to that which is distinct from these pairs,
hear me speak about that. Day and night are a pair, between them is the
fire. . . That *which exists and that which does not exist* are a pair,
between them is the fire, etc.," and after every such contrast Narada
adds "That is the excellent seat of the Udana as understood by
Brahmanas."

Now many people do not know the full meaning of such terms as Samana and
Vyana, Prana and Apana, explained as being "life-winds" (we say
"principles and their respective faculties and senses"), being offered
up to Udana, the *soi-disant* principal "life wind," (?) said to act at
all the joints. Therefore the reader, who is ignorant that the word
"fire" means in these allegories both the "Self" and the higher divine
knowledge, will understand nothing in this; and will therefore entirely
miss the point of our argument, as its translators and even its editor
the great Oxford Sanskritist, Max Muller, has missed the true meaning of
Narada's words. Exoterically, all this enumeration of "life winds"
means, of course, *approximately,* that which is surmised in the
foot-notes; namely, "The sense appears to be this . . . . worldly life
is due to the operations of the life-winds which are attached to the
**S**ELF, and lead to its manifestations as individual souls (?). Of
these the Samana and Vyana are controlled and held under check by

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 568 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

the Prana and Apana. . . . The latter two are held in check and
controlled by the Udana, which thus controls all. And the control of
this, which is the control of all five . . . . leads to the Supreme
Self" (p. 259, *Anugita, "Sacred Books of the East,"* Vol. VIII.)

The above is given as an explanation of the text, which records the
words of the Brahmana, who narrates how he reached the ultimate Wisdom
of Yogism, and had reached all knowledge in this wise. Saying that he
had "perceived by means of the **S**ELF the seat abiding in the
**S**ELF," where dwells the Brahman free from all; and explaining that
that indestructible principle was entirely *beyond the perception of
senses* (*i.e.,* of the five "life-winds"), he adds that "in the midst
of an these (life-winds) which move about in the body and swallow up one
another, blazes the Vaisvanara *fire sevenfold."* This "Fire," according
to Nilakantha's Commentary, is identical with the "I," the SELF, which
is the goal of the ascetic (Vaisvanara being a word often used for the
*Self*)*.* Then the Brahmana goes on to enumerate that which is meant by
the word "Sevenfold," and says, "The nose (or smell), the tongue
(taste), the eye, and the skin, and the ear as the fifth, the mind, and
the understanding, these are the seven tongues of the blaze of
Vaisvanara,\*. . . . . those are the seven (kinds of) fuel for me,\*\*.
. . . . these are the *seven* *great officiating priests."*

These seven priests are accepted by Arjuna Misra in the sense of meaning
"the soul distinguished as so many (souls, or principles) with reference
to these several powers"; and, finally, the translator seems to accept
the explanation, and reluctantly admits that "they may mean" this;
though he himself takes the sense to mean "the powers of hearing, etc.
(the physical senses, in short) which are presided over by the several
deities." (*Vide loc. cit.,* p. 259, f.n. 6.)

But whatever it may mean, whether in scientific or orthodox
interpretations, this passage on page 259 explains Narada's statements
on page 276, and shows them referring to exoteric and esoteric methods
and contrasting them. Thus the Samana and the Vyana, though subject to
the Prana and the Apana, and all the four to Udana in the matter of
acquiring the Pranayama (of the Hatha-Yogi, chiefly, or the "lower" form
of the Yoga) are yet referred to as the principal offering, for, as
rightly argued by the commentator, their "operations are more
practically important for vitality"; *i.e.,* they are the grossest, and
are offered in the sacrifice, to disappear, so to speak, in the quality
of darkness of that fire or its SMOKE (mere exoteric ritualistic form).
But

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\*In the astronomical and cosmical key, Vaisvanara is Agni, son of the
Sun, or Viswanaras, but in the psycho-metaphysical symbolism it is the
**S**ELF, in the sense of non-separateness, *i.e.*, both divine and
human.

\*\*Here the speaker personifies the said divine **S**ELF.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 569 THE DIVINE SELF'S WISDOM.

Prana and Apana, though shown as subordinate (because less gross or more
purified), have the FIRE between them: the Self and the secret knowledge
possessed by that Self. So for the good and evil, and for "that which
exists and that which does not exist"; all these "pairs"\* have fire
between them, *i.e.*, esoteric knowledge, the Wisdom of the divine SELF.
Let those who are satisfied with the *Smoke* of the **F**IRE remain
wherein they are, that is to say within the Egyptian darkness of
theological fictions and dead-letter interpretations.

The above is written only for the Western students of Occultism and
Theosophy. The writer presumes to explain these things neither to the
Hindus, who have their own Gurus; nor to the Orientalists, who think
they know more than all the Gurus and Rishis, past and present, put
together. These rather lengthy quotations and examples cited are
necessary, if even to point out to the student the works he has to study
so as to derive benefit and learning from comparison. Let him read
*Pistis Sophia* in the light of the Bhagavatgita, the Anugita and
others; and then the statement made by Jesus in the Gnostic Gospel will
become clear, and the dead letter blinds disappear at once. Read this
and compare with the explanation from the Hindu scriptures just given. .
. . "And no name is more excellent than all these (seven) vowels. A name
wherein be contained all names, all Lights, and all (the fortynine)
powers, knowing it, if a man quits this body of matter\*\* no *Smoke*
(*i.e.*, no theological delusion),\*\*\* no darkness, nor Ruler of the
Sphere (no *personal* genius or planetary spirit called God), or of Fate
(*karma*) shall

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* Compare with these "pairs of opposites," in the *Anugita*, the
"pairs" of AEons, in the elaborate system of Valentinus, the most
learned and profound master of Gnosis. As the "pairs of opposites," male
and female, are all derived from *Akasa* (undeveloped and developed,
differentiated and undifferentiated, or **S**ELF or Prajapati), so are
the Valentinian "pairs" of male and female AEons shown to emanate from
Bythos, the pre-existing *eternal* Depth, and in their secondary
emanation from Ampsiu-Ouraan (or sempiternal Depth and Silence), the
second Logos. In the esoteric emanation there are seven chief "pairs of
opposites"; and so also in the Valentinian system there were fourteen,
or twice seven. Epiphanius, copying incorrectly, "copied one pair twice
over," Mr. C. W. King thinks, "and thus adds one pair to the proper
fifteen." ("The Gnostics," etc., pp. 263-4.) Here King falls into the
opposite error: the pairs of AEons are not 15 (a blind) but 14, as the
*first* AEon is *that* from which others emanate, Depth and Silence
being the first and only emanation from Bythos. As Hippolytus shows:
"The AEons of Valentinus are confessedly the *Six Radicals* of Simon
(Magus)," with the *seventh*, Fire, at their head. And these are: Mind,
Intelligence, Voice, Name, Reason and Thought subordinate to FIRE, the
higher self, or precisely the "Seven Winds" or the "Seven Priests" of
Anugita.

\*\* Not necessarily at death only, but during *Samadhi* or mystic
trance.

\*\*\* All the words and sentences between parenthetical marks, are the
writer's. This is translated directly from the Latin MS. of the British
Museum. King's translation in the *Gnostics* conforms too much to the
gnosticism as explained by the Church-Fathers.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 570 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

be able to hold back the soul that knoweth that name. . . If he shall
utter that (Name) unto the fire, the darkness shall flee away. . . And
if he shall utter that name unto . . . all their Powers, nay, even unto
Barbelo,\* *the Invisible God,* and the triple-powered Gods, so soon as
he shall have uttered that name in those places, they shall all be
shaken and thrown one upon the other, so that they shall be ready to
melt, perish and disappear, and shall cry aloud, 'O, Light of all Lights
that art in the Boundless Light, remember us also and purify us!' "

It is easy to see who this Light and Name are: the light of Initiation
and the name of the "Fire-Self," which is no name, no action, but a
Spiritual, ever-living Power, higher even than the "Invisible God," as
this Power is **I**TSELF.

But if the able and learned author of the "Gnostics and their Remains"
has not sufficiently allowed for the Spirit of allegory and mysticism in
the fragments translated and quoted by him, in the above named work,
from *Pistis Sophia --* other Orientalists have done far worse. Having
neither his intuitional perception of the Indian origin of the Gnostic
Wisdom still more than of their "gems," most of them, beginning with
Wilson and ending with the dogmatic Weber, have made most extraordinary
blunders with regard to almost every symbol. Sir M. Monier Williams and
others show a very decided contempt for the "Esoteric Buddhists" as
theosophists are now called; yet no Student of Occult philosophy has
ever mistaken a cycle for a living personage and *vice versa,* as was
very often the case with our learned Orientalists. An instance or two
may illustrate the statement more graphically. Let us choose the best
known.

In the Ramayana, Garuda is called "the maternal uncle of Sagara's 60,000
sons"; and Ansumat, Sagara's grandson, "the nephew of the 60,000 uncles"
reduced to ashes by the look of Kapila, "the Purushottama" (or infinite
Spirit), who caused Sagara's horse for the Aswamedha sacrifice to
disappear. Again, Garuda's son\*\* -- Garuda being himself the
*Maha-Kalpa* or great cycle -- Jatayu, the king of the feathered tribe,
when on the point of being slain by Ravana who carries off Sita -- says,
speaking of himself:

"It is 60,000 years O King, that I am born," after which *turning his*
*back on the Sun --* he dies.

Jatayu is, of course, the cycle of 60,000 years within the great cycle
of GARUDA; hence he is represented as his son, or nephew, *ad libitum,*

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\*Barbelo is one of the three "Invisible Gods," and, as C. W. King
believes, includes "the Divine Mother of the Saviour," or rather Sophia
Achamoth (*Vide* cap. 359).

\*\* In other *Puranas* Jatayu is the son of Aruna, Garuda's brother,
both the Sons of Kasyapa. But all this is external allegory.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 571 THE ANTIQUITY OF THE KAPILAS.

since the whole meaning rests in his being placed on the line of
Garuda's descendants. Then, again, there is Diti -- the Mother of the
Maruts -- whose descendants and progeny belonged to the posterity of
Hiranyaksha, "whose number was 77 crores (or 770 millions) of men." (See
*Padma Purana.*) All such narratives are pronounced *meaningless
fictions* and absurdities. But -- Truth is the daughter of Time, verily;
and time will show.

Meanwhile, what could be easier than an attempt, at least, to verify
Puranic chronology? There are many Kapilas; but the Kapila who slew King
Sagara's progeny -- 60,000 men strong -- was undeniably Kapila, the
founder of the Sankhya philosophy, since it is so stated in the Puranas;
although one of them flatly denies the imputation without explaining its
esoteric meaning. It is the Bhagavata Purana (IX. viii., 12 and 13),
which says that "the report that the sons of the King were reduced to
ashes *by the mere glance of the sage* is not true." "For," as it
argues, "how can the quality of darkness, the product of anger, exist in
a sage whose goodness was the essence that purified the world -- the
earth's dust, as it were, attributed to Heavens! How should mental
perturbation distract that sage, identified with the Supreme Spirit, and
who has steered here (on earth) that solid vessel of the Sankhya
(philosophy), with the help of which he who desires to obtain liberation
crosses the dreaded ocean of existence, that path to death?"

The Purana is in duty bound to speak as it does. It has a dogma to
promulgate and a policy to carry out -- that of great secrecy with
regard to mystical *divine* truths divulged for countless ages only at
initiation. It is not in the Puranas, therefore, that we have to look
for an explanation of the mystery connected with various transcendental
states of being. That the story is an allegory is seen upon its very
face: the 60,000 *Sons,* brutal, vicious, and impious, are the
personification of the *human passions* that a "mere glance of the sage"
-- the SELF who represents the highest state of purity that can be
reached on earthreduces to ashes. But it has also other significations
-- cyclic and chronological meanings, -- a method of marking the periods
when certain sages flourished, found also in other Puranas.

Now it is as well ascertained as any tradition can be, that it was at
Hardwar (or *Gangadwara,* the "door or gate of the Ganges") at the foot
of the Himalayas, that Kapila sat in meditation for a number of years.
Not far from the Sewalik range, the "pass of Hardwar" is called to this
day "Kapila's Pass"; and the place, "Kapilasthen," by the ascetics. It
is there that *Ganga* (Ganges) emerging from its mountainous gorge,
begins its course over the sultry plains of India. And it is as clearly
ascertained by geological survey that the tradition which claims that
the

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 572 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

ocean ages ago washed the base of the Himalayas -- is not entirely
without foundation, for there are traces left of this.

The Sankhya philosophy may have been *brought down* and taught by the
first, and written out by the *last* Kapila.

Now *Sagara* is the name of the Ocean, and even of the Bay of Bengal, at
the mouth of the Ganges, to this day in India (*Vide* Wilson's Vishnu
Purana, Vol. III. p. 309). Have geologists ever calculated the number of
millenniums it has taken the sea to recede to where it is now, from
Hardwar, 1,024 feet above the level of the sea at present? If they did,
those Orientalists who show Kapila flourishing from the 1st to the 9th
cent. A.D., might change their opinions, if only for one of two very
good reasons: the true number of years elapsed since Kapila's day is in
the Puranas unmistakably, though the translators fail to see it. And
secondly -- the Kapila of the Satya, and the Kapila of the Kali-Yugas
*may be one* *and the same* INDIVIDUALITY, *without being the same*
PERSONALITY.

Kapila, besides being the name of a personage, of the once living Sage
and the author of Sankhya philosophy, is also the generic name of the
Kumaras, the celestial ascetics and virgins; therefore the very fact of
Bhagavata Purana calling *that* Kapila -- which it showed just before as
a *portion of Vishnu --* the author of Sankhya philosophy, ought to have
warned the reader of a *blind* containing an esoteric meaning. Whether
the Son of Vitatha, as Harivansa shows him to be, or of anyone else, the
author of Sankhya cannot be the same as the Sage of the SatyaYuga -- at
the very beginning of the Manvantara, when Vishnu is shown *in the form
of Kapila, "imparting to all creatures true Wisdom";* for this relates
to that primordial period when "the Sons of God" taught to the just
created men the arts and sciences, which have been cultivated and
preserved since then in the sanctuaries by the Initiates. There are
several well-known Kapilas in the Puranas. First the primeval sage, then
Kapila, one of the three "Secret" Kumaras; and Kapila, son of Kasyapa
and Kadru -- the "many-headed Serpent," (See *Vayu Purana* placing him
on the list of the forty renowned sons of Kasyapa), besides Kapila, the
great sage and philosopher of the Kali Yuga. Being an Initiate, "a
Serpent of Wisdom," a Naga, the latter was purposely blended with the
Kapilas of the former ages.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next Section](sd2-2-11)

[Contents](sd2-0-co.htm#contents)
