##### The Secret Doctrine by H. P. Blavatsky -- Vol. 2

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 277 THE GIANTS.

**A**RE **G**IANTS A **F**ICTION?

Here, again, we come into collision with Science. The latter denies, so
far, that man has ever been much larger than the average of the tall and
powerful men one meets with occasionally now. Dr. Henry Gregor denounces
such traditions as resting upon ill-digested facts. Instances of
mistaken judgments are brought forward. Thus, in 1613, in a locality
called from time immemorial the "Field of Giants" in the Lower Dauphine
(France, four miles from St. Romans) enormous bones were found deeply
buried in the sandy soil. They were attributed to human remains, and
even to Teutobochus, the Teuton chief slain by Marius. But Cuvier's
later research proved them to be the fossil remains of the *Dinotherium
giganteum* of the family of tapirs, 18 feet long. Ancient buildings are
pointed to as an evidence that our earliest ancestors were not much
larger than we are, the entrance doors being of no larger size then than
they are now. The tallest man of antiquity *known to us* was the Roman
Emperor Maximus, we are told, whose height was only seven and a half
feet. Nevertheless, in our modern day we see every year men taller than
this. The Hungarian who exhibited himself in the London Pavilion was
nearly 9 feet high. In America a giant was shown 9 1/2 feet tall; the
Montenegrin Danilo was 8 feet 7 inches. In Russia and Germany one often
sees men in the lower classes above 7 feet. And as the ape-theorists are
told by Mr. Darwin that the species of animals which result from cross
breeding "always betray *a tendency to revert to the* *original type,*"
they ought to apply the same law to men. Had there been no giants as a
rule in ancient days, there would be none now.

All this applies only to the historic period. And if the skeletons of
the prehistoric ages have failed so far (which is positively denied) to
prove undeniably in the opinion of science the claim here advanced, it
is but a question of time. Moreover, as already stated, human stature is
little changed since the last racial cycle. The Giants of old are all
buried under the Oceans, and hundreds of thousands of years of constant
friction by water would reduce to dust and pulverize a brazen, far more
a human skeleton. But whence the testimony of well-known classical
writers, of philosophers and men who, otherwise, never had the
reputation for lying? Let us bear in mind, furthermore, that before the
year 1847, when Boucher de Perthes forced it upon the attention of
Science, almost nothing was known of fossil man, for archaeology
complacently ignored his existence. Of Giants who were "in the earth in
those days" of old, the Bible alone had spoken to the wise men of the
West, the Zodiac being the solitary witness called upon to corroborate
the statement in the persons of Atlas or Orion, whose mighty shoulders
are said to support the world.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 278 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

Nevertheless, even the "Giants" have not been left without their
witnesses, and one may as well examine both sides of the question. The
three Sciences -- Geological, Sidereal and Scriptural (the latter in its
Universal character) -- may furnish us with the needed proofs. To begin
with geology; it has already confessed that the older the excavated
skeletons, the larger, taller and the more powerful their structure.
This is already a certain proof in hand. "All those bones" writes
Frederic de Rougemont -- who, though believing too piously in Noah's ark
and the Bible, is none the less a Scientific witness -- "all those
skeletons found in the Departments of the Gard, in Austria, Liege, etc.,
etc. . . those skulls which remind all of the negro type. . . and which
by reason of that type might be mistaken for animals, have all belonged
to men *of very high stature*" *.* . *.* ("*Histoire de la Terre,*" *p.*
154) The same is repeated by Lartet, an authority, who attributes a
*tall stature* to those who were submerged in the deluge (not
necessarily "Noah's") and a smaller stature to the races which lived
subsequently.

As for the evidence furnished by ancient writers, we need not stop at
that of Tertullian, who assures us that in his day a number of giants
were found at Carthage -- for, before his testimony can be accepted, his
own identity\* and actual existence would have to be proven. But we may
turn to the scientific journals of 1858, which spoke of *a sarcophagus
of giants* found that year on the site of that same city. As to the
ancient pagan writers -- we have the evidence of Philostratus, who
speaks of a giant skeleton twenty-two cubits long, as well as of another
of twelve cubits, seen by himself at Sigeus. This skeleton may perhaps
not have belonged, as believed by Protesilaus, to the giant killed by
Apollo at the siege of Troy; nevertheless, it was that of a giant, as
well as that other one discovered by Messecrates of Stire, at Lemnos --
"horrible to behold," according to Philostratus (*Heroica, p.* 35)*.* Is
it possible that prejudice would carry Science so far as to class *all*
these men as either fools or *liars?*

Pliny speaks of a giant in whom he thought he recognised Orion, the son
of Ephialtes (*Nat. Hist., vol. VII, ch. xvi.*)*.* Plutarch declares
that Sertorius saw the tomb of Antaeus, the giant; and Pausanias vouches
for the actual existence of the tombs of Asterius and of Geryon, or
Hillus, son of Hercules -- all giants, Titans and mighty men. Finally
the Abbe Pegues (*cited in de Mirville*'*s Pneumatologie*) affirms in
his curious work on "*The Volcanoes of Greece*" that "in the
neighbourhood of the volcanoes of the isle of Thera, giants with
enormous skulls were found laid out under colossal stones, the erection
of which must have necessi-

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* There are critics who, finding no evidence about the existence of
Tertullian save in the writings of Eusebius "the veracious," are
inclined to doubt it.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 279 CHRISTENDOM IS IDOLATROUS.

tated everywhere the use of titanic powers, and which tradition
associates in all countries with the ideas about giants, volcanoes and
magic." (*Page* 48.)

In the same work above cited of the Abbe Pegues, the author wonders why
in Bible and tradition the *Gibborim,* (Giants, the mighty ones) the
*Rephaim,* or the spectres (*Phantoms*), the *Nephilim,* or the fallen
ones *--* (*irruentes*) *--* are shown "as if identical, though they are
all *men*, since the Bible calls them the primitive and the mighty ones"
-- e.g., Nimrod. The "Doctrine" explains the secret. These names, which
belong by right only to the four preceding races and the earliest
beginning of the Fifth, allude very clearly to the first two *Phantom*
(astral) races; to the *fallen one --* the Third; and to the race of the
Atlantean Giants -- the Fourth, after which "men began to decrease in
stature."

Bossuet (*Elevations p.* 56) sees the cause of subsequent universal
idolatry in the "original sin." "Ye shall be as gods," says the serpent
of *Genesis* to Eve, thus laying the first germ of the worship of
*false* *divinities.* Hence, he thinks, came idolatry, or the cult and
adoration of *images,* of anthropomorphized or human figures. But, if it
is the latter that idolatry is made to rest upon, then the two Churches,
the Greek and the Latin especially, are as idolatrous and pagan as any
other religion.\* It is only in the Fourth Race that men, who had lost
all right to be considered divine, resorted to body worship, in other
words to phallicism. Till then, they had been truly gods, as pure and as
divine as their progenitors, and the expression of the allegorical
serpent does not, as sufficiently shown in the preceding pages, refer at
all to the physiological fall of men, but to their acquiring the
knowledge of good and evil, which knowledge comes to them *prior* to
their fall. It must not be forgotten that it is only after his forced
expulsion from Eden that "Adam knew Eve his wife" (*Genesis iv.*)*.* It
is not, however, by the dead-letter of the Hebrew Bible that we shall
check the tenets of the *Secret Doctrine*; but point out, rather, the
great similarities between the two in their esoteric meaning.

It is only after his defection from the Neo-Platonists, that Clement

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* And that, notwithstanding the formal prohibition at the great Church
Council of Elyrus in **A.D.** 303, when it was declared that "the form
of God, which is immaterial and invisible, shall not be limited by
figure or shape." In 692, the council of Constantinople had similarly
prohibited "to paint or represent Jesus *as a lamb*," as also "to bow
the knee in praying, as it is the act of idolatry." But the council of
Nicaea (787) brought this idolatry back, while that of Rome (883)
excommunicated John, the Patriarch of Constantinople, for his showing
himself a declared enemy of image worship.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 280 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

of Alexandria began to translate *gigantes* by *serpentes,* explaining
that "Serpents and Giants signify *Demons.*" (*Genesis, chapter v.*)*\**

We may be told that, before we draw parallels between our tenets and
those of the Bible, we have to show better evidence of the existence of
the giants of the Fourth Race than the reference to them found in
Genesis. We answer, that the proofs we give are more satisfactory, at
any rate they belong to a more literary and scientific evidence, than
those of Noah's Deluge will ever be. Even the historical works of China
are full of such reminiscences about the Fourth Race. In *Shoo-King*
(4th part, chap. **XXVII**, p. 291), anyone can read in the French
translation, "When the Mao-tse" ("that antediluvian and perverted race,"
explains the Annotator, "which had retired in the days of old to the
rocky caves, and the descendants of whom are said to be still found in
the neighbourhood of Canton"),\*\*

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* Treating of the Chinese Dragon and the literature of China, Mr. Ch.
Gould writes in his "*Mythical Monsters*" on p. 212: -- "Its
mythologies, histories, religions, popular stories and proverbs, all
teem with references to a mysterious being *who has a physical* *nature
and spiritual attributes.* Gifted with an accepted form, which he has
the supernatural power of casting off for the assumption of others, he
has the power of influencing the weather, producing droughts or
fertilizing rains at pleasure, of raising tempests and allaying them.
Volumes could be compiled from the scattered legends which everywhere
abound relating to this subject. . . . "

This "mysterious being" is the *mythical* Dragon, *i.e.*, the symbol of
the *historical,* actual Adept, the master and professor of occult
sciences of old. It is stated already elsewhere, that the great
"magicians" of the Fourth and Fifth Races were generally called the
"Serpents" and the "Dragons" after their progenitors. All these belonged
to the hierarchy of the so-called "Fiery Dragons of Wisdom," the Dhyan
Chohans, answering to the Agnishwatta Pitris, the Maruts and Rudras
generally, as the issue of Rudra their father, identified with the god
of fire. More is said in the text. Now Clement, an initiated
Neo-Platonist, knew, of course, the origin of the word "Dragon," and why
the initiated Adepts were so-called, as he knew the secret of
*Agathodaemon,* the Christ, the seven-vowelled Serpent of the Gnostics.
He knew that the dogma of his new faith required the transformation of
all the *rivals* of Jehovah, the angels supposed to have rebelled
against that Elohim as the Titan-Prometheus rebelled against Zeus, the
usurper of his father's kingdom; and that "Dragon" was the mystic
appellation of the "Sons of Wisdom"; from this knowledge came his
definition, as cruel as it was arbitrary, "Serpents and Giants signify
*Demons,*" *i.e.,* not "Spirits," but *Devils,* in Church parlance.

\*\* "What would you say to our affirmation that the Chinese -- I speak
of the inland, the true Chinaman, not of the hybrid mixture between the
Fourth and Fifth Races now occupying the throne, the aborigines who
belong in their unallied nationality wholly to the highest and last
branch of the Fourth Race -- reached their highest civilization when the
Fifth had hardly appeared in Asia" (*Esoteric Buddhism,* p. 67). And
this handful of the inland Chinese are all of a very high stature. Could
the most ancient **MSS.** in the Lolo language (that of the aborigines
of China) be got at and translated correctly, many a priceless piece of
evidence would be found. But they are as rare as their language is
unintelligible. So far, one or two European archaeologists only have
been able to procure such priceless works.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 281 THE SEVEN VIRGIN-YOUTHS.

"*according to our ancient documents,* had, owing to the beguilements of
*Tchy-Yeoo,* troubled all the earth, it became full of brigands. . . .
." The Lord Chang-ty (a king of the *divine* dynasty) saw that his
people had lost the last vestiges of virtue. Then he commanded Tehong
and Lhy (two lower Dhyan Chohans) to cut away every communication
between heaven and earth. Since then, there was no more *going up and*
*down!*"*\*\**

"Going up and down" means an untrammelled communication and intercourse
between the two worlds. Not being in a position to give out a full and
detailed history of the Third and Fourth Races, as many isolated facts
concerning them as are permitted must be now collated together;
especially those corroborated by direct as well as by inferential
evidence found in ancient literature and history. As the "coats of skin"
of men thickened, and they fell more and more into physical sin, the
intercourse between physical and ethereal *divine* man was stopped. The
veil of matter between the two planes became too dense for even the
inner man to penetrate. The mysteries of Heaven and Earth, revealed to
the Third Race by their celestial teachers in the days of their purity,
became a great focus of light, the rays from which became necessarily
weakened as they were diffused and shed upon an uncongenial, because too
material soil. With the masses they degenerated into Sorcery, taking
later on the shape of exoteric religions, of idolatry full of
superstitions, and man-, or hero-worship. Alone a handful of primitive
men -- in whom the spark of divine Wisdom burnt bright, and only
strengthened in its intensity as it got dimmer and dimmer with every age
in those who turned it to bad purposes -- remained the elect custodians
of the Mysteries revealed to mankind by the divine Teachers. There were
those among them, who remained in their *Kumaric* condition from the
beginning; and tradition whispers, what the secret teachings affirm,
namely, that these Elect were the germ of a Hierarchy *which never died
since that period: -*-

"*The inner man of the first \** \* *\* only changes his body from time*
*to time*; *he is ever the same, knowing neither rest nor Nirvana,
spurning* *Devachan and remaining constantly on Earth for the salvation
of* *mankind*. . . . . ." "*Out of the seven virgin-men* (Kumara\*\*)
*four sacrificed themselves for the sins of the world and the
instruction of*

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* Remember the same statement in the Book of Enoch, as also the ladder
seen by Jacob in his dream. The "two worlds" mean of course the "two
*planes* of Consciousness and Being." A seer can commune with beings of
a higher plane than the earth, without quitting his arm-chair.

\*\* *Vide supra* the *Commentary* on the Four Races -- and on the "Sons
of Will and Yoga," the immaculate progeny of the Androgynous Third Race.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 282 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

*the ignorant, to remain till the end of the present Manvantara. Though*
*unseen, they are ever present. When people say of one of them,* "*He
is* *dead*"; *behold, he is alive and under another form. These are the
Head,* *the Heart, the Soul, and the Seed of undying knowledge*
(Gnyana). *Thou shalt never speak, O Lanoo, of these great ones* (Maha .
. *.*) *before* *a multitude, mentioning them by their names. The wise
alone will* *understand.*" *. . .* \* (Catechism of the inner Schools.)

It is these sacred "Four" who have been allegorized and symbolized in
the "*Linga Purana,*" which states that Vamadeva (Siva) as Kumara is
reborn in each Kalpa (*Race* in this instance), as four youths -- four,
white; four, red; four, yellow; and four, dark or brown. Let us remember
that Siva is pre-eminently and chiefly an ascetic, the patron of all
Yogis and Adepts, and the allegory will become quite comprehensible. It
is the spirit of Divine Wisdom and chaste asceticism itself which
incarnates in these Elect. It is only after *getting married* and being
dragged by the gods from his terrible ascetic life, that Rudra becomes
Siva, a god, and not one of a very virtuous or merciful type, in the
Hindu Pantheon. Higher than the "Four" is only **O**NE on Earth as in
Heavens -- that still more mysterious and solitary Being described in
Book I.

We have now to examine the nature of the "Sons of the Flame" and of
"Dark Wisdom," as well as the *pros* and *cons* of the Satanic
assumption.

Such broken sentences as could be made out from the fragments on the
tile, which George Smith calls "the Curse after the Fall" (see p. 81 of
his "Chaldean Account of Genesis"), are of course allegorical; yet they
corroborate that which is taught of the true nature of the *fall of the
angels* in our Books. Thus, it is said in line 12 that the "Lord of the
earth his name called out, the father Elu" (Elohim), and pronounced his
curse, which "The God Hea heard, and his liver was angry, because *his*
man (Angelic man) had corrupted his purity (14 *and* 15)," for which Hea
expresses the desire that " '*Wisdom and knowledge*' hostilely may they
injure him (man)."

The latter sentence points to the direct connection of the Chaldean with
the Genetic account. While Hea tries to bring to nought the wisdom and
knowledge gained by man, through his newly-acquired intellectual and
conscious capacity of creating in his turn (thus taking the monopoly of
creation out of the hands of God (the Gods)), the Elohim do the same in
the third chapter of *Genesis.* Therefore the Elohim sent him out of
Eden.

But this was of no avail. For the spirit of divine Wisdom being

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* In the Kabala the pronunciation of the four-lettered *ineffable* name
is "a most secret arcanum" --- "a secret of secrets."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 283 THE SERPENT OF ETERNITY.

upon and *in* man -- verily the Serpent of Eternity and all Knowledge,
that *Manasic* spirit, which made him learn the secret of *creation* on
the Kriyasaktic, and of procreation on the earthly planes -- led him as
naturally to discover his way to immortality, notwithstanding the
jealousy of all the Gods.

The early Atlanto-Lemurians are charged with taking unto themselves
(divine incarnations) wives of a lower race, namely, the race of the
hitherto mindless men. Every ancient Scripture has the same, more or
less disfigured legend. Primarily, the angelic *Fall*, which has
transformed the "first-born" of God into the Asuras, or into the Ahriman
and Typhon of the "pagans" (*i.e*., if the accounts given in the Book of
Enoch,\* and in Hermes, in Puranas and Bible are taken literally), when
read esoterically means simply this: --

Sentences such as: "In his (Satan's) ambition he raises his hand against
the Sanctuary of the God of Heaven" etc., ought to read: "Prompted by
the law of eternal evolution and Karma, the angel incarnated on earth in
man; and as his Wisdom and Knowledge are still divine, although his body
is earthly, he is (allegorically) accused of divulging the mysteries of
Heaven." He combines and uses the two for purposes of human, instead of
super-human, procreation. Henceforth, "man will *beget,* not
*create.*"*\*\** But as, by so doing, he has to use

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* Returning once more to the most important subject in the archaic
Cosmogony, it may be said that even in the Norse legends, in the Sacred
Scrolls of the goddess Saga, we find Loki, the brother by blood of Odin
(as Typhon, Ahriman, and others are brothers of Osiris and Ormazd),
becoming evil only later, when he has mixed too long with humanity. Like
all other fire or light gods -- fire burning and destroying as well as
warming and giving life -- he ended by being accepted in the destructive
sense of "fire." The name *Loki,* we learn ("*Asgard and the Gods,*"
*p.* 250)*,* has been derived from the old word "liechan," to enlighten.
It has, therefore, the same origin as the Latin "*lux*, light." Hence
*Loki* is identical with Lucifer (light-bringer). This title, given to
the Prince of Darkness, is very suggestive and is a *vindication* in
itself against theological slander. But *Loki* is still more closely
related to Prometheus, as he is shown chained to a sharp rock, while
Lucifer, identified with Satan, was chained down in hell; a
circumstance, however, which prevented neither of them from acting in
all freedom on Earth, if we accept the theological paradox in its
fulness. *Loki* is a beneficent, generous and powerful god in the
beginning of times, and the principle of good, not of evil, in early
Scandinavian theogony.

\*\* The Greek mythos just alluded to a few pages back, namely the
mutilation of *Uranos* by his son *Kronos* in the Greek theogony, is an
allusion to this theft by the Son of the Earth and Heavens of the
*divine creative fire.* If *Uranos,* the personification of the
celestial Powers, has to stop creating (he is made impotent by *Kronos,*
the god *in time*) so, in the Egyptian Cosmogony it is Thot, the god of
Wisdom, who regulates this fight between Horus and Set, the latter being
served by the former as Uranos is by Kronos (*see* "*Book of the Dead*"
*ch. XVII. V.* 26). In the Babylonian account it is the god Zu, who
strips "the father of the gods" of *umsimi --* the ideal creative organ
not the *crown* (!) as G. Smith thought (see pp. 115 and 116 Chaldean
Account). For, in the fragment K. 3454 (British Museum) it is said very
clearly, that Zu having stripped the "venerable \[\[Footnote continued
on next page\]\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 284 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

his weak body as the means of procreation, that body will pay the
penalty for this wisdom, carried from heaven down to the earth; hence
the corruption of physical purity will become a temporary curse.

The mediaeval Kabalists knew this well, since one of them did not fear
to write: "The Kabala was first taught by God himself to a select
Company of Angels who formed a theosophic school in Paradise. After the
**F**ALL the Angels most *graciously communicated this heavenly doctrine
to the disobedient child of Earth,* to furnish the protoplasts with the
means of returning to their pristine nobility and felicity" (*Quoted by*
*Christian Ginsburg from the Kabala*)*.* This shows how the event -- of
the Sons of God, marrying and imparting the divine Secrets of Heaven to
the daughters of men -- allegorically told by Enoch and in the sixth
chapter of Genesis was interpreted by the Christian Kabalists. The whole
of this period may be regarded as the *pre-human* period, that of divine
man, or as *plastic* Protestant theology now has it -- the *pre*-adamite
period. But even Genesis begins its *real* history (*chap.* vi.) by the
*giants* of "those days" and the "Sons of god" marrying and teaching
their wives -- the daughters of man.

This period is the one described in the Puranas; and relating as it does
to days lost in archaic ages, hence pre-historic, how can any
anthropologist feel certain whether the mankind of that period was or
was not as he knows it now? The whole *personnel* of the Brahmanas and
Puranas -- the Rishis, Prajapatis, Manus, their wives and progeny --
belong to that pre-human period. All these are the *Seed* of Humanity,
so to speak. It is around these "Sons of God," the "Mind born" astral
children of Brahma, that our physical frames have grown and developed to
what they are now. For, the Puranic histories of all those men are those
of our Monads, in their various and numberless incarnations on this and
other spheres, events perceived by the "Siva eye" of the ancient Seers,
(the "third eye" of our Stanzas) and described allegorically. Later on,
they were disfigured for Sectarian purposes; mutilated, but still left
with a considerable ground-work of truth in them. Nor is the philosophy
less profound in such allegories for being so thickly veiled by the
overgrowth of fancy.

But with the Fourth Race we reach the purely human period. Those who
were hitherto semi-divine Beings, self-imprisoned in bodies which were
human only in appearance, became physiologically changed and took unto
themselves wives who were entirely human and fair to look

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\[\[Footnote continued from previous page\]\] of Heaven" of his
*desire,* he carried away the *umsimi* of the gods, and burnt thereby
the *teroti* (the power) of all the other gods, thus "governing the
*seed* of all the angels" (15). As the *umsimi* was *on the seat* of
Bel, it could hardly be the "crown." A fourth version is in the Bible.
Ham is the Chaldean Zu, and both are cursed for the same allegorically
described crime.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 285 THE TIBETAN LILITH.

at, but in whom *lower, more material,* though sidereal, beings had
incarnated. These beings in female forms (Lilith is the prototype of
these in the Jewish traditions) are called in the esoteric accounts
"Khado" (Dakini, in Sanskrit). Allegorical legends call the chief of
these Liliths, *Sangye Khado,* (Buddha Dakini, in Sanskrit); all are
credited with the art of "walking in the air," and the greatest
*kindness* *to mortals*; but *no mind --* only animal instinct.\*

(*c*) This is the beginning of a worship which, ages later, was doomed
to degenerate into phallicism and sexual worship. It began by the
worship of the human body -- that "miracle of miracles," as an English
author calls it -- and ended by that of its respective sexes. The
worshippers were giants in stature; but they were giants in knowledge
and learning, though it came to them more easily than it does to the men
of our modern times. Their Science was innate in them. The
Lemuro-Atlantean had no need of discovering and fixing in his memory
that which his informing **P**RINCIPLE *knew* at the moment of its
incarnation. Time alone, and the ever-growing obtuseness of the matter
in which the *Principles* had clothed themselves, could, the one, weaken
the memory of their pre-natal knowledge, the other, blunt and even
extinguish every spark of the spiritual and divine in them. Therefore
had they, from the first, fallen victims to their animal natures and
bred "monsters" -- *i.e.*, men of distinct varieties from themselves.

Speaking of the Giants, Creuzer describes them well in saying that:--

> "Those children of Heaven and Earth were endowed at their birth by the
> *Sovereign Powers,* the authors of their being, with extraordinary
> faculties both moral and physical. They *commanded the Elements, knew
> the secrets of* *heaven and the earth, of the sea and the whole world,
> and read futurity in* the stars. . . . It seems, indeed, as though one
> has to deal, when reading of them, *not with men as we are* but with
> Spirits of the Elements sprung from the bosom of Nature and having
> full sway over her. . . . All these beings *are* *marked with a
> character* of MAGIC and SORCERY. . . . "

And so they were, those (now) legendary heroes of the pre-historic,
still, once really existing races. Creuzer was wise in his generation,
for he did not charge with deliberate deceit, or dullness and
superstition, an endless series of recognized philosophers, who mention
these races and assert that, even in their own time, they saw their
fossils. There were sceptics in days of old -- no fewer and as great as
they are now. But even a Lucian, a Democritus and an Epicurus yielded to
the evidence of *facts* and showed the discriminative capacity of really

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* These are the beings whose legendary existence has served as a
ground-work upon which to build the rabbinical Lilith, and what the
believers in the Bible would term the antediluvian women, and the
Kabalists the pre-Adamite races. They are no fiction -- this is certain,
however fantastic the exuberance of later growth.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 286 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

great intellects, which can distinguish fiction from fact, and truth
from exaggeration and fraud. Ancient writers were no more fools than our
modern wise men are; for, as well remarked by the author of some
"*Notes* *on Aristotle*'*s Psychology in Relation to Modern Thought*"
(*in Mind*)*:*--

> "The common division of history into ancient and modern is . . . .
> misleading. The Greeks in the 4th century, **B.C**. were in many
> respects moderns especially, we may add, in their scepticism. They
> were not very likely to accept *fables* so easily . . . . ."

Yet the "Lemurians" and the Atlanteans, "those children of Heaven and
Earth," were indeed marked with a character of SORCERY; for the Esoteric
doctrine charges them precisely with that, which, if believed, would put
an end to the difficulties of science with regard to the origin of man,
or rather, his anatomical similarities to the *Anthropoid Ape.* It
accuses them of having committed the (*to us*) abominable crime of
breeding with so-called "animals," and thus producing a truly pithecoid
species, now extinct. Of course, as in the question of spontaneous
generation -- in which Esoteric Science believes, and which it teaches
-- the possibility of such a cross-breed between man and an animal of
any kind will be denied. But apart from the consideration that in those
early days, as already remarked, neither the human Atlantean giants, nor
yet the "animals," were the physiologically perfect men and mammalians
that are now known to us, the modern notions upon this subject -- those
of the physiologists included -- are too uncertain and fluctuating to
permit them an absolute denial *a priori* of such a fact.

A careful perusal of the Commentaries would make one think that the
Being that the new "*incarnate*" bred with, was called an "animal," not
because he was no human being, but rather because he was so dissimilar
physically and mentally to the more perfect races, which had developed
physiologically at an earlier period. Remember Stanza **VII.** and what
is said in its first verse (24th): -- that when the "Sons of Wisdom"
came to incarnate the first time, some of them incarnated fully, others
projected into the forms only *a spark,* while some of the shadows were
left over from being *filled* and perfected, till the Fourth Race. Those
races, then, which "remained destitute of knowledge," or those again
which were left "mindless," remained as they were, even after the
natural separation of the sexes. It is these who committed the first
cross-breeding, so to speak, and bred monsters; and it is from the
descendants of these that the Atlanteans chose their wives. Adam and Eve
were supposed, with Cain and Abel, to be the only *human* family on
Earth. Yet we see Cain going to the land of Nod and taking there a wife.
Evidently one race only was supposed perfect enough to be called human;
and, even in our own day, while the Singhalese

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 287 THE RACES OF MEN NOT ALL HUMAN.

regard the Veddhas of their jungles as *speaking animals* and no more,
some British people believe firmly, in their arrogance, that every other
human family -- especially the dark Indians -- is an *inferior* race.
Moreover there are naturalists who have sincerely considered the problem
whether some savage tribes -- like the Bushmen for instance -- can be
regarded as *men* at all. The Commentary says, in describing that
species (or race) of animals "fair to look at" as a biped: -- "*Having*
*human shape, but having the lower extremities, from the waist down,*
*covered with hair.*" Hence the race of the *satyrs,* perhaps.

If men existed two million years ago, they must have been -- just as the
animals were -- quite different physically and anatomically from what
they have become; and they were nearer then to the type of pure
mammalian animal than they are now. Anyhow, we learn that the animal
world breeds strictly *inter se, i.e.,* in accordance with genus and
species -- only since the appearance *on this earth* of the Atlantean
race. As demonstrated by the author of that able work, "*Modern Science
and* *Modern Thought,*" this idea of the refusal to breed with another
species, or that sterility is the only result of such breeding, "appears
to be a *prima facie* deduction rather than an absolute law" even now.
He shows that "different species, do, in fact, often breed together, as
may be seen in the familiar instance of the horse and ass. It is true
that in this case the mule is sterile. . . . but this rule is not
universal, and recently one new hybrid race, that of the leporine, or
hare-rabbit, has been created which is perfectly fertile." The progeny
of wolf and dog is also instanced, as that of several other domestic
animals (p. 101); "like foxes and dogs again, and the modern Swiss
cattle shown by Rutimeyer as descended from three distinct species of
fossil-oxen, the *Bos primigenius,* *Bos longifrons and Bos frontosus.*"
*Yet some of those species, as the ape* *family, which so clearly
resembles man in physical structure,* contain, we are told, "numerous
branches, which graduate into one another, but the extremes of which
differ more widely than man does from the highest of the ape series" --
the gorilla and chimpanzee, for instance (see *Addenda*)*.*

Thus Mr. Darwin's remark -- or shall we say the remark of Linnaeus? *--
natura non facit saltum,* is not only corroborated by Esoteric Science
but would -- were there any chance of the real doctrine being accepted
by any others than its direct votaries -- reconcile in more than one
way, if not entirely, the modern Evolution theory with facts, as also
with the absolute failure of the Anthropologists to meet with the
"missing link" in our Fourth Round geological formations.

We will show elsewhere that, however unconsciously to itself, modern
Science pleads our case upon its own admissions, and that de Quatrefages
is perfectly right, when he suggests in his last work, that it is far
more likely that the anthropoid ape should be discovered to be

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 288 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

*the descendant of man,* than that these two types should have a common,
fantastic and nowhere-to-be-found ancestor. Thus the wisdom of the
compilers of the old Stanzas is vindicated by at least one eminent man
of Science, and the Occultist prefers to believe as he ever did that --

"*Man was the first and highest* (mammalian) *animal that appeared in*
*this* (Fourth Round) *creation. Then came still huger animals*; *and
last* *of all the dumb man who walks on all fours.*" For, *"the
Rakshasas* (giant-demons) *and Daityas* (*Titans*) *of the* "*White
Dwipa*" (continent) *spoiled his* (the dumb man's) *Sires.*"
(Commentary.)

Furthermore, as we see, there are anthropologists who have traced man
back to an epoch which goes far to break down the apparent barrier that
exists between the chronologies of modern science and the Archaic
Doctrine. It is true that English scientists generally have declined to
commit themselves to the sanction of the hypothesis of even a Tertiary
Man. They, each and all, measure the antiquity of Homo primigenius by
their own lights and prejudices. Huxley, indeed, ventures to speculate
on a possible Pliocene or Miocene Man. Prof. Seeman and Mr. Grant Allen
have relegated his advent to the Eocene, but, speaking generally,
English scientists consider that we cannot safely go beyond the
quaternary. Unfortunately, the facts do not accommodate the too cautious
reserve of these latter. The French school of anthropology, basing their
views on the discoveries of l'Abbe Bourgeois, Capellini, and others, has
accepted, almost without exception, the doctrine that the traces of our
ancestors are certainly to be found in the Miocene, while M. de
Quatrefages now inclines to postulate a Secondary-Age Man. Further on we
shall compare such estimates with the figures given in the Brahminical
exoteric books which approximate to the esoteric teaching.

(*d*) . . . . *Then,* "*the third eye acted no longer,*" says the
Stanza, because MAN had sunk too deep into the mire of matter.

What is the meaning of this strange and weird statement in Verse 42,
concerning the "third eye of the Third Race which had died and acted no
longer"?

A few more occult teachings must now be given with reference to this
point as well as some others. The history of the Third and Fourth Races
must be amplified, in order that it may throw some more light on the
development of our present humanity; and show how the faculties, called
into activity by occult training, restore man to the position he
previously occupied in reference to spiritual perception and
consciousness. But the phenomenon of the third Eye has to be first
explained.

-------

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next Section](sd2-1-17)

[Contents](sd2-0-co.htm#contents)
