##### *The Secret Doctrine* by H. P. Blavatsky -- Vol. 2

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 742 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

### ยง VI.

#### GIANTS, CIVILIZATIONS, AND SUBMERGED CONTINENTS TRACED IN HISTORY.

**W**HEN statements such as are comprised in the above heading are
brought forward, the writer is, of course, expected to furnish
*historical* instead of *legendary* evidence in support of such claims.
Is this possible? Yes; for evidence of this nature is plentiful, and has
simply to be collected and brought together to become overwhelming in
the eyes of the unprejudiced.

Once the sagacious student gets hold of the guiding thread he may find
it out for himself. We give *facts* and show land-marks: let the
wayfarer follow them. *What is given here is amply sufficient for* THIS
*Century.*

In a letter to Voltaire, Bailly finds it quite natural that the
sympathies of the "grand old invalid of Ferney" should be attracted to
the "representatives of knowledge and wisdom, the Brahmans of India." He
then adds a curious statement. "But," he says, "your Brahmans are very
young in comparison with their ancient instructors."\*

Bailly, who knew nought of the esoteric teachings, nor of Lemuria,
believed, nevertheless, unreservedly in the lost Atlantis, and also in
several pre-historic and civilized nations which had disappeared without
leaving any undeniable trace. He had studied the ancient classics and
*traditions* extensively, and he saw that the arts and sciences known to
those we now call the "ancients," were "not the achievements of any of
*the now or even then existing* nations, nor of any of the historical
peoples of Asia." And that, notwithstanding the learning of the Hindoos,
their undeniable priority in the antiquity of their race had to be
referred to a people or a race still more ancient and more learned than
were even the Brahmans themselves.\*\*

Voltaire, the greatest sceptic of his day, the materialist *par
excellence,* shared Bailly's belief. He thought it quite *likely* "*that
long before the empires of China and India, there had been nations
cultured, learned, and powerful, which a deluge of barbarians
overpowered and thus replunged into their primitive state of ignorance
and savagery, or what they call the state of pure nature.*" ("*Lettres
sur l*'*Atlantide,*" *p.* 15)*.\*\*\**

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -----------------------------------------------

\* *Lettres sur l*'*Atlantide.*

*\*\* Histoire de l*'*Astronomie Ancienne,* p. 25, *et seq.*

\*\*\* This conjecture is but a half-guess. There were such "deluges of
barbarians" in the Fifth Race. With regard to the Fourth, it was a *bond
fide* deluge of water which swept it away. Neither Voltaire nor Bailly,
however, knew anything of the Secret Doctrine of the East.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 743 A MYSTERIOUS NATION.

That which with Voltaire was the shrewd conjecture of a great intellect,
was with Bailly "a question of historical facts." For "I make *great
case of ancient traditions* preserved through a long series of
generations," he wrote. (*Ibid.*) It *was* possible, he thought, that a
*foreign* nation should, after instructing another nation, so disappear
that it should leave no traces behind. When asked how it could have
happened that this ancient, or rather archaic, nation should not have
left at least some recollection in the human mind, he answered that Time
was a pitiless devourer of facts and events. But, the history of the
Past was never entirely lost, for the Sages of old Egypt had preserved
it, and "it is so preserved to this day elsewhere." "You do not know
which was the best and most handsome generation of men which has ever
lived on this earth," said the priests of Sais to Solon, according to
Plato. "Only a weak seed of it, of which you (Greeks) are the
descendants,\* is all that remains." "Their books," they added,
"preserved the records of a great nation, which emerging from the
Atlantic sea had invaded Europe and Asia (*Timaeus*)*.* The Greeks were
but the dwarfed and weak remnant of that once glorious nation. . .
."\*\*

What was this nation? The secret doctrine teaches that it was the
latest, seventh sub-race of the Atlanteans, already swallowed up in one
of the early sub-races of the Aryan stock, one that had been gradually
spreading over the continent and islands of Europe, as soon as they had
begun to emerge from the seas. Descending from the high plateaux of
Asia, where the two Races had sought refuge in the days of the agony of
Atlantis, it had been slowly settling and colonizing the freshly emerged
lands. The emigrant sub-race had rapidly increased and multiplied on
that virgin soil; had divided into many families, which in their turn
divided into nations. Egypt and Greece, the Phoenicians, and the
Northern stocks, had thus proceeded from that one sub-race. Thousands of
years later, other races -- the remnants of the Atlanteans -- "yellow
and red, brown and black," began to invade the new continent. There were
wars in which the new comers were defeated; and they fled, some to
Africa, others to remote countries. Some of these lands became in course
of time -- owing to new geological convulsions -- islands. Being thus
forcibly

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* For a full discussion of the relations between the *old* Greeks and
Romans, and the Atlantean colonists, cf. "Five Years of Theosophy."

\*\* The story about Atlantis and all the traditions thereon were told,
as all know, by Plato in his "*Timaeus and Critias.*" Plato, when a
child, had it from his grand-sire Critias, aged ninety, who in his youth
had been told of it by Solon, his father Dropidas' friend -- Solon, one
of the *Grecian Seven Sages.* No more reliable source could be found, we
believe.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 744 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

separated from the continents, the result was that the undeveloped
tribes and families of the Atlantean stock fell gradually into a still
more abject and savage condition.

Did not the Spaniards in the Cibola expeditions *meet with* WHITE savage
chiefs; and has not the presence of African negro types in Europe in the
pre-historic ages been now ascertained? It is this presence of a type
associated with that of the negro, and also with that of the Mongolian,
which is the stumbling-block of anthropology. The individual who lived
at an incalculably distant period at La Naulette, in Belgium (*Vide* Dr.
Carter Blake's paper "*On the Naudette Jaw,*" *Anthrop. Review,* Sept.,
1867), is an example. "The caves on the banks of the Lesse, in
South-Eastern Belgium," says this Anthropologist, "afford evidence of
what is, perhaps, the lowest man, as shown by the Naulette jaw. Such
man, however, had amulets of stone, perforated for the purpose of
ornament; these are made of a psammite now found in the basin of the
Gironde."

Thus Belgian man was extremely ancient. That man who was antecedent to
the great flood of waters -- which covered the highlands of Belgium with
a deposit of *lehm* or upland gravel 30 metres above the level of the
present rivers -- must have combined the characters of the Turanian and
the negro. The Canstadt, or La Naulette, man, may have been black, and
had nothing to do with the Aryan type whose remains are contemporary
with those of the cave bear at Engis. The denizens of the Aquitaine
bone-caves belong to a far later period of history, and may not be as
ancient as the former.

If the statement is objected to on the ground that Science does not deny
the presence of man on earth from an enormous antiquity, though that
antiquity cannot be determined, since that presence is conditioned by
the duration of geological periods, the age of which is not ascertained;
if it is argued that the Scientists object most decidedly to the claim
that man preceded the animals, for instance; or that civilization dates
from the earliest Eocene period, or, again, that there have ever existed
giants, three-eyed and four-armed and four-legged men, androgynes, etc.,
then the objectors are asked in their turn, "How do you know? What proof
have you besides your personal hypotheses, each of which may be upset
any day by new discoveries?" And these future discoveries are sure to
prove that, whatever this earlier type of man known to Anthropologists
was in complexion, he was in no respect *apish.* The Canstadt man, the
Engis man alike possessed essentially human attributes. (*Vide* de
Quatrefages and Hamy. "*Cranes des Races Humaines.*") People have looked
for the missing link at the wrong end of the chain; and the Neander
valley man has long since been dismissed to the "limbo of all hasty
blunders" (*Ibid.*). Disraeli divided man into the associates of the

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 745 REMARKABLE "COINCIDENCES."

apes and the angels. Reasons are given in the text in favour of an
"angelic theory," -- as Christians would say -- at least as applicable
to some of the races of men. At all events, if man exists only since the
Miocene period, even then, humanity as a whole could not be composed of
the abject savages of the Palaeolithic age, as they are now represented
by the Scientists. All they say is mere arbitrary speculative
guess-work, invented by them to answer to and fit in with their own
fanciful theories.

We speak of events hundreds of thousands years old, nay, even millions
-- if man dates from the geological periods\* -- not of any of those
events which happened during the few thousand years of the pre-historic
margin allowed by timid and ever-cautious history. Yet there are men of
science who are almost of our way of thinking. From the brave confession
of the Abbe Brasseur de Bourbourg, who says that: -- "Traditions, whose
traces recur in Mexico, in Central America, in Peru, and in Bolivia,
suggest the idea that man existed in these different countries at the
time of the gigantic upheaval of the Andes, and that he has retained the
memory of it" -- down to the latest palaeontologists and
anthropologists, the majority of scientific men is in favour of just
such an antiquity. *Apropos* of Peru, has any satisfactory attempt been
made to determine the ethnological affinities and characteristics of the
race which reared those *Cyclopean* erections, the ruins of which
display the relics of a great civilization? At Cuelap, for instance,
such are found, consisting "of a wall of wrought stones, 3,600 feet
long, 560 broad, and 150 feet high, constituting a solid mass with a
level summit. On this mass was another, 600 feet long, 500 broad, and
150 feet high, making an aggregate height of 300 feet. In it were rooms
and cells." (*Cf.,* the mass of evidence collected by Donnelly to prove
the *Peruvian colony* an offshoot of the Atlanteans.) A most suggestive
fact is the *startling resemblance between the architecture of these
colossal buildings and that of the archaic European nations.* Mr.
Fergusson regards the analogies between the ruins of "Inca" civilization
and the Cyclopean remains of the Pelasgians in Italy and Greece as a
coincidence "the most remarkable in the history of architecture." "It is
difficult to resist the conclusion that there may be some relation
between them." The "relation" is simply explained by the derivation of
the stocks,

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* Haeckel's "Man-ape" of the *Miocene* period is the dream of a
monomaniac, which de Quatrefages (see his "*Human Species,*" *pp.*
105-113) has cleverly disposed of. It is not clear why the world should
accept the lucubrations of a psychophobic materialist, (to accept whose
theory necessitates the acceptance *on faith* of various animals unknown
to Science or Nature -- like the Sozura, for instance, that amphibian
which has never existed anywhere outside Haeckel's imagination), rather
than the traditions of antiquity.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 746 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

who devised these erections, from a common centre in an Atlantic
continent. The acceptance of the latter can alone assist us to approach
a solution of this and similar problems in almost every branch of modern
science.

Dr. Lartet, treating upon the subject, settles the question by declaring
that: -- "The truth, so long contested, of the co-existence of man with
the great extinct species (*Elephas primigenius, Rhinoceros
tichorrhinus, Hyaena spelaea, Ursus spelaeus, etc., etc.*)*,* appears to
me to be henceforth unassailable and definitely conquered by science."
("*Cavernes de Perigord,*" *p.* 35.)

It is shown elsewhere that such is also de Quatrefages' opinion. "Man
has in all probability seen Miocene times\* and consequently the entire
Pliocene epoch," he says, and there are reasons for believing that "his
traces will be found further back still, . . . ." he adds ("*The* *Human
Species,*" p*.* 152.)

Egypt is far older than Europe as now traced on the map. Atlanto-Aryan
tribes began to settle on it, when the British Islands\*\* and France
were not even in existence. It is well known that "the tongue of the
AEgyptian Sea," or the Delta of lower Egypt, became firm land very
gradually, and followed the highlands of Abyssinia; unlike the latter,
which arose suddenly, comparatively speaking, it was very slowly formed,
through long ages, from successive layers of sea slime and mud,
deposited annually by the soil brought down by a large river, the
present Nile. Yet even the Delta as a firm and fertile land, has been
inhabited for more than 100,000 years. Later tribes, with still more
Aryan blood in them than their predecessors, arrived from the East, and
*conquered* it from a people whose very name is lost to posterity,
except in Secret works. It is this natural barrier of slime, which
sucked in slowly and surely every boat that approached these
inhospitable shores, that was, till within a few thousand of years
**B.C**., the best safeguard of the later Egyptians, who had managed to
reach it through Arabia, Abyssinia, and Nubia, led on by Manu Vina in
the day of Visvamitra. (*See in* "*Isis Unveiled,*" vol. 1, p. 627, what
Kulluka Bhatta says.)

So evident does the antiquity of man become with every day that even the
Church is preparing an *honourable* surrender and retreat. The learned
Abbe Fabre, professor at the Sorbonne, has categorically declared

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* The ingenious author of "Atlantis, the Ante-diluvian World," in
discussing the origin of various Grecian and Roman institutions,
expresses his conviction that "the *roots of the institutions of to-day
reach back to the Miocene Age.*" Ay, and further yet, as already stated.

\*\* As we know them, however. For not only does Geology prove that the
British islands have been *four times submerged and re-elevated,* but
that the straits between them and Europe were dry land at a remote
former epoch.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 747 THE SEVEN SABBATHS.

that pre-historic palaeontology and archaeology may, without any harm to
the Scriptures, discover in the tertiary beds . . . . . the traces of
*pre-adamite* man as much as they like. "Since it disregards all
creations *anterior to the last deluge* but one, (that which produced
the diluvium, according to the Abbe), Bible revelation leaves us free to
admit the existence of man in the grey diluvium, in Pliocene, and even
Eocene strata. On the other hand, however, geologists *are not all
agreed in regarding the men who inhabited the globe in these primitive
ages as our ancestors*.\*

The day when the Church will find that its only salvation lies in the
*occult* interpretation of the Bible, may not be so far off as some
imagine. Already many an abbe and ecclesiastic has become an ardent
Kabalist, and as many appear publicly in the arena, breaking a lance
with Theosophists and Occultists in support of the metaphysical
interpretation of the Bible. But they commence, unfortunately for them,
from the wrong end. They are advised, before they begin to speculate
upon the *metaphysical* in their Scriptures, to study and master that
which relates to the purely *physical -- e.g.,* its geological and
ethnological hints. For such allusions to the Septenary constitution of
the Earth and Man, to the seven Rounds and Races, abound in the New as
in the Old Testaments, and are as visible as the sun in the heavens to
him who reads both symbolically. What do the laws in chapter xxiii., v.
15, of *Leviticus* apply to? What is the philosophy of reason for all
such *hebdomadic* offerings and symbolical calculations as: "ye shall
count . . . . from the morrow after the Sabbath . . . . that ye brought
the sheaf of the wave offering; *seven Sabbaths shall be completed*"
(15), "And ye shall offer with the bread seven lambs without blemish"
(18), etc. etc. We shall be contradicted, no doubt, when we say that all
these "wave" and "peace" offerings were in commemoration of the *Seven*
"Sabbaths" of the mysteries, which Sabbaths are seven pralayas, between
seven manvantaras, or what we call *Rounds --* for "Sabbath" *is* an
elastic word, meaning a period of Rest of whatever nature, as explained
elsewhere (Part **II**, "*Sections on the Septenary.*") And if this is
not sufficiently conclusive, then we may turn to the verse which follows
(16), and which adds, "even unto the morrow after the seventh Sabbath
shall ye number fifty days" (forty-nine, 7 x 7, stages of activity, and
forty-nine stages *of rest,* on the seven globes of the chain, and then

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

*\** "*Les origines de la terre et de l*'*homme,*" *p.* 454. To this,
Professor N. Joly, of Toulouse, who quotes the Abbe in his "*Man before
Metals,*" expresses the hope that M. Fabre will permit him "to differ
from him on this last point," p. 186. So do the Occultists; for though
they claim a vast difference in the physiology and outward appearance of
the five races so far evolved, still they maintain that the present
human species has descended from one and the same primitive stock,
evolved from the "divine men" -- our common ancestors and progenitors.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 748 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

comes the *rest* of Sabbath, the *fiftieth*); after which "ye shall
offer *a new meat offering* unto the Lord," *i.e.*, ye shall make an
offering of your flesh or "coats of skin," and, divesting yourselves of
your bodies, ye shall remain pure spirits. This law of offering,
degraded and materialized with ages, was an institution that dated from
the earliest Atlanteans; it came to the Hebrews *via* the "Chaldees,"
who were the "wise men" of a *caste,* not of a nation, a community of
great adepts come from their "Serpent-holes," and who had settled in
Babylonia ages before. And if this interpretation from *Leviticus* (full
of the disfigured laws of Manu) is found too far-fetched, then turn to
*Revelation.* Whatever interpretation profane mystics may give to the
famous Chapter xvii., with its riddle of the woman in purple and
scarlet; whether Protestants nod at the Roman Catholics, when reading
"**M**YSTERY, **B**ABYLON THE **G**REAT, THE **M**OTHER OF **H**ARLOTS
AND **A**BOMINATIONS OF THE **E**ARTH," or Roman Catholics glare at the
Protestants, the Occultists pronounce, in their impartiality, that these
words have applied from the first *to all and every exoteric*
Churchianity, that which was the "ceremonial magic" of old, with its
terrible effects, and is now the harmless (because distorted) farce of
ritualistic worship. The "mystery" of the woman and of the beast, are
the symbols of soul-killing Churchianity and of **S**UPERSTITION. "The
beast that was, and is not, and yet is." "And here is the Mind which
hath wisdom. The seven heads are seven mountains (seven continents and
seven races) on which the woman sitteth," the symbol of all the
exoteric, barbarous, idolatrous faiths which have covered that symbol
"with the blood of the saints and the blood of the martyrs" who
protested and do protest. "And there are *seven Kings* (seven races);
five are fallen (our fifth race included), and one is (the fifth
continues), and the other (the *sixth* and the *seventh* races) is not
yet come. . . . And when he (the race "King") cometh, he must continue a
short space" (v. 10). There are many such Apocalyptic allusions, but the
student has to find them out for himself. These five Kings were
mentioned before.

If the Bible combines with archaeology and geology to show that human
civilization has passed through three more or less distinct stages, in
Europe at least; and if man, both in America and Europe, as much as in
Asia, dates from geological epochs -- why should not the statements of
the Secret Doctrine be taken into consideration? Is it more
philosophical or logical and scientific too, to *disbelieve,* with Mr.
Albert Gaudry, in Miocene man, while believing that the famous Thenay
flints\* "were carved by the *Dryopithecus monkey*"; or, with the
Occultist, that the anthro-

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* "The flints of Thenay bear unmistakable trace of the work of human
hands." (*G.* *de Mortillet,* "*Promenades au Musee de St. Germain,*"
*p.* 76.)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 749 THE APE LATER THAN MAN.

pomorphous monkey came ages after man? For if it is once conceded, and
even scientifically demonstrated, that "there was not in the middle of
the Miocene epoch a single species of mammal identical with species now
extant" (Albert Gaudry "*Les Enchainements du monde animal dans les
temps geologiques*" *p.* 240); and that man was then just as he is now;
only taller, and more athletic than we are,\* -- then where is the
difficulty? That they could hardly be the descendants of monkeys, which
are themselves not traced before the Miocene epoch,\*\* is, on the other
hand, testified to by several eminent naturalists.

> "Thus, in the savage of quaternary ages who had to fight against the
> mammoth with stone weapons, we find all those craniological characters
> generally considered as the sign of great intellectual development"
> (*de Quatrefages,* "*The Human Species,* p. 312.)

Unless man emerged spontaneously, endowed with all his intellect and
wisdom, from his brainless catarrhine ancestor, he could not have
acquired such brain within the limits of the Miocene period, if we are
to believe the learned Abbe Bourgeois (*Vide infra,* footnote\*\*).

As to the matter of giants, though the tallest man hitherto found in
Europe among fossils is the "Mentone man" (6 ft. 8 in.), others may yet
be excavated. Nilsson, quoted by Lubbock, states that "in a tomb of the
neolithic age . . . . a skeleton of extraordinary size was found in
1807," and that it was attributed to a king of Scotland, Albus McGaldus.

And if in our own day we occasionally find men and women from 7 ft. to
even 9 ft. and 11 ft. high, this only proves -- on the law of atavism,
or the reappearance of ancestral features of character -- that there was
a time when 9 ft. and 10 ft. was the average height of humanity, even in
our latest Indo-European race.

But as the subject was sufficiently treated elsewhere, we may pass on to
the Lemurians and the Atlanteans, and see what the old Greeks knew of
these early races and what the moderns know now.

The great nation mentioned by the Egyptian priests, from which descended
the forefathers of the Greeks of the age of Troy, and which, as averred,
had been destroyed by the Atlantic race, was then, as we see, assuredly
no race of Palaeolithic *savages.* Nevertheless, already in the days of
Plato, with the exception of priests and Initiates, no one seems

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* Speaking of the reindeer hunters of Perigord, Joly says of them that
"they were of *great height,* athletic, with a strongly built skeleton .
. ." etc. ("*Man before Metals,*" *p.* 353)*.*

\*\* "On the shores of the lake of Beauce," says the Abbe Bourgeois,
"man lived in the midst of a fauna which completely disappeared
(*Aceratherium, Tapir, Mastodon*)*. With the fluviatile sands of
Orleanais came the anthropomorphous monkey* (pliopithecus antiquus);
therefore, later than man." (*See Comptes Rendus of the* "*Prehistoric
Congress*" *of* 1867 *at Paris.*)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 750 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

to have preserved any distinct recollection of the preceding races. The
earliest Egyptians had been separated from the latest Atlanteans for
ages upon ages; they were themselves descended from an *alien* race, and
had settled in Egypt some 400,000 years before,\* but their Initiates
had preserved *all the records.* Even so late as the time of Herodotus,
they had still in their possession the statues of 341 kings who had
reigned over their little Atlanto-Aryan Sub-race (*Vide* about the
latter "*Esoteric Buddhism,*" *p.* 66, Fifth Edition.) If one allows
only twenty years as an average figure for the reign of each King, the
duration of the Egyptian Empire has to be pushed back, from the day of
Herodotus, about 17,000 years.

Bunsen allowed the great Pyramid an antiquity of 20,000 years. More
modern archaeologists will not give it more than 5,000, or at the utmost
6,000 years; and generously concede to Thebes with its hundred gates,
7,000 years from the date of its foundation. And yet there are records
which show Egyptian priests -- Initiates -- journeying in a
North-Westerly direction, *by land, via* what became later the Straits
of Gibraltar; turning North and travelling through the future Phoenician
settlements of Southern Gaul; then still further North, until reaching
Carnac (Morbihan) they turned to the West again and arrived, *still
travelling by land,* on the North-Western promontory of the New
Continent.\*\*

What was the object of their long journey? And how far back must we
place the date of such visits? The archaic records show the Initiates of
the Second Sub-race of the Aryan family moving from one land to the
other for the purpose of supervising the building of *menhirs* and
dolmens, of colossal Zodiacs in stone, and places of sepulchre to serve
as receptables for the ashes of generations to come. When was it? The
fact of their crossing from France to Great Britain *by land* may give
an idea of the date when such a journey could have been performed on
*terra firma.*

\[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* "In making soundings in the stony soil of the Nile Valley two baked
bricks were discovered, one at the depth of 20, the other at 25 yards.
If we estimate the thickness of the annual deposit formed by the river
at 8 inches per century (more careful calculations have shown no more
than from three to five per century), we must assign to the first of
these bricks 12,000 years, and to the second 14,000 years. By means of
analogous calculations, Burmeister supposes 72,000 years to have elapsed
since the first appearance of man on the soil of Egypt, and Draper
attributes to the European man, who witnessed the last glacial epoch, an
antiquity of more than 250,000 years." ("*Man* *before Metals,*" p.
183.) Egyptian Zodiacs show more than 75,000 years of observation! (*See
further.*) Note well also that Burmeister speaks only of the Delta
population.

\*\* Or on what are now the British Islands, which were not yet detached
from the main continent in those days. "The ancient inhabitant of
Picardy could pass into Great Britain without crossing the Channel. The
British Isles were united to Gaul by an isthmus which has since been
submerged." ("*Man before Metals,*" p. 184.)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 751 DARWINIANS REJECT THE TRUTH.

It was --

> "When the level of the Baltic and of the North Sea was 400 feet higher
> than it is now; when the valley of the Somme was not hollowed to the
> depth it has now attained; when Sicily was joined to Africa, Barbary
> to Spain," when "Carthage, the Pyramids of Egypt, the palaces of Uxmal
> and Palenque were not in existence, and the bold navigators of Tyre
> and Sidon, who at a later date were to undertake their perilous
> voyages along the coasts of Africa, were yet unborn. What we know with
> *certainty is that European man was contemporaneous with* the extinct
> species of the quaternary epoch . . . . that he witnessed the upheaval
> of the Alps\* and the extension of the glaciers, in a word that he
> lived for thousands of years before the dawn of the remotest
> *historical* traditions . . . . It is even possible that man was the
> contemporary of extinct mammalia of species yet more ancient . . . .
> of the *Elephas meridionalis of* the sands of St. Prest . . . and the
> *Elephas antiquus,* assumed to be prior to the *elephas primigenius,*
> since their bones are found in company with carved flints in several
> English caves, associated with those of the *Rhinoceros hemitaechus*
> and even of the *Machairodus latidens,* which is of still earlier date
> . . . . M. E. Lartet is of opinion that there is nothing really
> impossible in the existence of man as early as the Tertiary
> period."\*\*

If "there is nothing impossible" scientifically in the idea, and it may
be admitted that man lived already as early as the Tertiary period, then
it is just as well to remind the reader that Mr. Croll places the
beginning of that period 2,500,000 years back (See Croll's "*Climate and
Time*"); but there was a time when he assigned to it 15,000,000 years.

And if all this may be said of *European man,* how great is the
antiquity of the Lemuro-Atlantean and of the Atlanto-Aryan man? Every
educated person who follows the progress of Science, knows how all
vestiges of man during the Tertiary period are received. The calumnies
that were poured on Desnoyers in 1863, when he made known to the
Institute of France that he had made a discovery "in the undisturbed
pliocene sands of St. Prest near Chartres, proving the co-existence of
man and *the Elephas meridionalis*" *--* were equal to the occasion. The
later discovery (in 1867) by the Abbe Bourgeois, that man lived in the
Miocene epoch, and the reception it was given at the Pre-historic Con-

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* He witnessed and remembered it too, as "the final disappearance of
the largest continent of Atlantis was an event coincident with the
elevation of the Alps," a master writes (*See Esoteric Buddhism p*. 70).
*Pari passu,* as one portion of the dry land of our hemisphere
disappeared, some land of the new continent emerged from the seas. It is
on this colossal cataclysm, which lasted during a period of 150,000
years, that traditions of all the "Deluges" are built, the Jews building
their version on an event which took place later in "Poseidonis."

\*\* The Antiquity of the Human Race in "Men before Metals," by M. Joly,
Professor at the Science Faculty of Toulouse, p. 184.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 752 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

gress held at Brussels in 1872, proves that the average man of Science
will never see *but that which he wants to see.\**

The modern archeologist, though speculating *ad infinitum* upon the
dolmens and their builders, knows, in fact, nothing of them or their
origin. Yet, these weird, and often colossal monuments of unhewn stones
-- which consist generally of four or seven gigantic blocks placed
together -- are strewn over Asia, Europe, America, and Africa, in groups
or rows. Stones of enormous size are found placed horizontally and
variously upon two, three, four, and as in Poitou, upon six and seven
blocks. People name them "devil's altars," druidic stones, and giant
tombs. The stones of Carnac in the Morbihan, Brittany -- nearly a mile
in length and numbering 11,000 ranged in eleven rows -- are twin sisters
of those at Stonehenge. The Conical *menhir* of Loch-Maria-ker in
Morbihan, measures twenty yards in length and nearly two yards across.
The Menhir of Champ Dolent (near St. Malo) rises thirty feet above the
ground, and is fifteen feet in depth below. Such dolmens and prehistoric
monuments are met with in almost every latitude. They are found in the
Mediterranean basin; in Denmark (among the local *tumuli* from
twenty-seven to thirty-five feet in height); in Shetland, and in Sweden,
where they are called *ganggriften* (or tombs with corridors); in
Germany, where they are known as the giant tombs (Hunengraben); in Spain
(see the dolmen of *Antiguera* near Malaga), and Africa; in Palestine
and Algeria; in Sardinia (see the *Nuraghi* and *Sepolture dei giganti,*
or tombs of giants); in Malabar, in India, where they are called the
tombs of the *Daityas* (giants) and of the *Rakshasas,* the men-demons
of *Lanka*; in Russia and Siberia, where they are known as the
*Koorgan*; in Peru and Bolivia, where they are termed the *chulpas* or
burial places, etc., etc., etc.

There is no country from which they are absent. Who built them? Why are
they all connected with Serpents and Dragons, with Alligators and
Crocodiles? Because remains of "palaeolithic man" were, it is thought,
found in some of them, and because in the funeral mounds of America
bodies of later races were discovered with the usual paraphernalia of
bone necklaces, weapons, stone and copper urns, etc., hence they are
declared ancient *tombs.* But surely the two famous mounds -- one in the
Mississippi valley and the other in Ohio -- known respectively as "the
Alligator Mound" and "the Great Serpent

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* The scientific "jury" disagreed, as usual; while de Quatrefages, de
Mortillet, Worsaae, Engelhardt, Waldemar, Schmidt, Capellini, Hamy, and
Cartailhac, saw upon the flints the traces of human handiwork,
Steenstrup, Virchow and Desor refused to do so. Still the majority, if
we except some English Scientists, are for Bourgeois.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 753 STILL MORE ASTOUNDING CONTRADICTIONS.

Mound," were never meant for tombs\* (*Vide infra*)*.* Yet one is told
authoritatively that the Mounds, and the Mound or Dolmen Builders, are
all "Pelasgic" in Europe, antecedent to the Incas, in America, yet of
"not extremely distant times." They are built by "*no* race of Dolmen
Builders," which *never existed* (opinion of De Mortillet, Bastian, and
Westropp) save in the earlier archeological fancy. Finally Virchow's
opinion of the giant tombs of Germany is now accepted as an axiom: --
"The tombs alone are gigantic, and not the bones they contain" -- says
that German biologist; and archaeology has but to bow and submit to the
decision.\*\*

That no gigantic skeletons have been hitherto found in the "tombs" is
yet no reason to say there never were the remains of giants in them.
*Cremation was universal* till a comparatively recent period -- some 80,
or 100,000 years ago. The real giants, moreover, were nearly all drowned
with Atlantis. Nevertheless, the classics, as shown elsewhere, often
speak of giant skeletons still excavated in their day. Besides this,
human fossils may be counted on the fingers, as yet. No skeleton ever
yet found is older than between 50, or 60,000 years,\*\*\* and man's
size was reduced from 15 to 10 or 12 feet, ever since the third sub-race
of the Aryan stock, which sub-race -- born and developed in Europe and
Asia Minor under new climates and conditions -- had become European.
Since then, as said, it has steadily been decreasing. It is truer
therefore to say, that the tombs alone are archaic, and not necessarily
the bodies of men occasionally found in them; and that those tombs,
since they are gigantic, must have contained giants,\*\*\*\* or rather
the ashes of generations of giants.

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* We take the following description from a scientific work. "The first
of these animals (the alligator) designed with considerable skill, is no
less than 250 ft. long. . . . . The interior is formed of a heap of
stones, over which the form has been moulded in fine stiff clay. The
great serpent is represented with open mouth, in the act of swallowing
an egg of which the diameter is 100 ft. in the thickest part; the body
of the animal is wound in graceful curves and the tail is rolled into a
spiral. The entire length of the animal is 1,100 ft. This work is unique
. . . . and there is nothing on the old continent which offers any
analogy to it." Except its symbolism, however, of the Serpent -- the
cycle of Time -- swallowing Kosmos, the egg.

\*\* It might be better, perhaps, for FACT had we more *Specialists* in
Science and fewer "authorities" on universal questions. One never heard
that Humboldt gave authoritative and final decisions in the matter of
*polypi,* or the nature of an excrescence.

\*\*\* 57,000 years is the date assigned by Dr. Dowler to the remains of
the human skeleton, found buried beneath four ancient forests at New
Orleans on the banks of the Mississippi river.

\*\*\*\* Murray says of the Mediterranean barbarians that they marvelled
at the prowess of the *Atlanteans.* "Their *physical strength was
extraordinary* (witness indeed their cyclopean buildings), the earth
shaking sometimes under their tread. Whatever they did, was done
speedily. . . . . . They *were wise* and communicated their wisdom to
men" (*Mythology* p. 4).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

\[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 754 THE SECRET DOCTRINE

Nor were all such cyclopean structures intended for sepulchres. It is
with the so-called Druidical remains, such as Carnac in Brittany and
Stonehenge in Great Britain, that the travelling Initiates above alluded
to had to do. And these gigantic monuments are all symbolic records of
the World's history. They are *not* Druidical, but *universal.* Nor did
the Druids build them, for they were only the heirs to the cyclopean
lore left to them by generations of mighty builders and -- "magicians,"
both good and bad.

It will always be a subject of regret that history, rejecting *a priori*
the actual existence of giants, has preserved us so little of the
records of antiquity concerning them. Yet in nearly every mythology --
which after all *is* ancient history -- the giants play an important
part. In the old Norse mythology, the giants, Skrymir and his brethren,
against whom the sons of the gods fought, were potent factors in the
histories of deities and men. The modern exegesis, that makes these
giants to be the brethren of the dwarfs, and reduces the combats of the
gods to the history of the development of the Aryan race, will only
receive credence amongst the believers in the Aryan theory, as expounded
by Max Muller. Granting that the Turanian races were typified by the
dwarfs (Dwergar), and that a dark, round-headed, and dwarfish race was
driven northward by the fair-faced Scandinavians, or AEsir, the gods
being like unto men, there still exists neither in history nor any other
scientific work any anthropological proof whatever of the existence in
time or space of a race of giants. Yet that such exist, relatively and
*de facto* side by side with dwarfs, Schweinfurth can testify. The
*Nyam-Nyam* of Africa are regular dwarfs, while their next neighbours
(several tribes of comparatively fair-complexioned Africans) are giants
when confronted with the Nyam-Nyams, and very tall even among Europeans,
for their women are all above 6 1/2 feet high. (*Vide* Schweinfurth's
latest works.)

In Cornwall and in ancient Britain the traditions of these giants are,
on the other hand, excessively common; they are said to live even down
to the time of King Arthur. All this shows that giants lived to a later
date amongst the Celtic than among the Teutonic peoples.

If we turn to the New World, we have traditions of a race of giants at
Tarija on the eastern slopes of the Andes and in Ecuador, who combated
gods and men. These old beliefs, which term certain localities "*Los
campos de los gigantes*" *--* "the fields of giants," are always
concomitant with the existence of pliocene mammalia and the occurrence
of pliocene raised beaches. "All the giants are not under Mount Ossa,"
and it would be poor anthropology indeed that would restrict the
traditions of giants to Greek and Bible mythologies. Slavonian
countries, Russia especially, teem with legends about the *bogaterey*
(mighty giants)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 755 RACES OF GIANTS.

of old; and their folklore, most of which has served for the foundation
of national histories, their oldest songs, and their most archaic
traditions, speak of the giants of old. Thus we may safely reject the
modern theory that would make of the Titans mere symbols standing for
cosmic forces. They were real living men, whether twenty or only twelve
feet high. Even the Homeric heroes, who, of course, belonged to a far
more recent period in the history of the races, appear to have wielded
weapons of a size and weight beyond the strength of the strongest men of
modern times.

> "Not twice ten men the mighty bulk could raise,  
> Such men as live in these degenerate days."

If the fossil footprints from Carson, Indiana, **U.S.A.**, are human,
they indicate gigantic men. Of their genuineness there can remain no
doubt. It is to be deplored that the modem and *scientific* evidence for
gigantic men should rest on footprints alone. Over and over again, the
skeletons of hypothetical giants have been identified with those of
elephants and mastodons. But all such blunders before the days of
geology, and even the traveller's tales of Sir John Mandeville, who says
that *he saw giants 56 feet high,* in India, only show that belief in
the existence of giants has never, at any time, died out of the thoughts
of men.

That which is known and accepted is, that several races of gigantic men
have existed and left distinct traces. In the journal of the
Anthropological Institute (Vol. 1871, art. by Dr. C. Carter Blake) such
a race is shown as having existed at Palmyra and possibly in Midian,
exhibiting cranial forms quite different from those of the Jews. It is
not improbable that another such race existed in Samaria, and that the
mysterious people who built the stone circles in Galilee, hewed
neolithic flints in the Jordan valley and preserved an ancient Semitic
language quite distinct from the square Hebrew character -- was of a
very large stature. The English translations of the Bible can never be
relied upon, even in their modern *revised* forms. They tell us of the
*Nephilim* translating the word by "giants," and further adding that
they were "hairy" men, probably the large and powerful prototypes of the
later satyrs so eloquently described by the patristic fancy; some of the
Church Fathers assuring their admirers and followers that they had
themselves seen these "Satyrs" -- some alive, others pickled and
preserved. The word "giants" being once adopted as a synonym of
*Nephilim,* the commentators have since identified them with the sons of
Anak. The filibusters who seized on the Promised Land, found a
pre-existing population far exceeding their own in stature, and called
it a race of giants. But the races of really gigantic men had
disappeared ages before the birth of Moses. This tall people existed in
Canaan, and

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 756 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

even in Bashan, and may have had representatives in the Nabatheans of
Midian. They were of far greater stature than the undersized Jews. Four
thousand years ago their cranial conformation and large stature
separated them from the children of Heber. Forty thousand years ago
their ancestors may have been of still more gigantic size, and four
hundred thousand years earlier *they must have been* in proportion to
men in our days as the Brobdingnagians were to the Lilliputians. The
Atlanteans of the middle period were called the Great Dragons, and the
first symbol of their tribal deities, when the "gods" and the Divine
Dynasties had forsaken them, was that of a giant Serpent.

The mystery veiling the origin and the religion of the Druids, is as
great as that of their supposed fanes is to the modern Symbologist, but
not to the initiated Occultists. Their priests were the descendants of
the last Atlanteans, and what is known of them is sufficient to allow
the inference that they were eastern priests akin to the Chaldeans and
Indians, though little more. It may be inferred that they symbolized
their deity as the Hindus do their Vishnu, as the Egyptians did their
*Mystery God,* and as the builders of the Ohio Great-Serpent mound
worshipped theirs -- namely under the form of the "mighty Serpent," the
emblem of the eternal deity **T**IME (the Hindu Kala). Pliny called them
the "Magi of the Gauls and Britons." But they were more than that. The
author of "*Indian Antiquities*" finds much affinity between the Druids
and the Brahmins of India. Dr. Borlase points to a close analogy between
them and the Magi of Persia\*; others will see an identity between them
and the Orphic priesthood of Thrace: simply because they were connected,
in their esoteric teachings, with the universal Wisdom Religion, and
thus presented affinities with the exoteric worship of all.

Like the Hindus, the Greeks and Romans (we speak of the Initiates), the
Chaldees and the Egyptians, the Druids believed in the doctrine of a
succession of worlds, as also in that of seven "creations" (of new
continents) and transformations of the face of the earth, and in a
seven-fold night and day for each earth or globe (*See* "*Esoteric
Buddhism*")*.* Wherever the Serpent with the egg is found, there this
tenet was surely present. Their *Dracontia* are a proof of it. This
belief was so universal that, if we seek for it in the esotericism of
various religions, we shall discover it in all. We shall find it among
the Aryan Hindus and Mazdeans, the Greeks, the Latins, and even among
the old Jews and early Christians, whose modern stocks

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* But the Magi of Persia were never Persians -- not even Chaldeans.
They came from a far-off land, the Orientalists being of opinion that
the said land was Media. This may be so, but from what part of Media? To
this we receive no answer.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 757 PAGANISM AND CHRISTIANITY AGREE.

hardly comprehend now that which they read in their Scriptures. See what
Seneca says in *Epistle* 9, and Quaest. Nat. **III**., c., ult.: "The
world being melted and having re-entered the bosom of Jupiter, this god
continues for some time to remain absorbed in himself and *concealed,*
wholly immersed in contemplation. After which a new world springs from
him. . . . An innocent race of men and animals are produced anew . . .
etc." Then again when speaking of periodical mundane dissolution
involving universal death, he (Seneca) says that "when the laws of
nature shall be buried in ruin, and the last day of the world shall
come, *the southern pole shall crush,* as it falls, all the regions of
Africa, and the North pole shall overwhelm all the countries beneath its
axis. *The affrighted sun shall be deprived of its light*; the palace of
heaven falling to decay *shall produce at once both* life and death, and
some kind of dissolution shall equally seize upon all deities, who thus
shall return into their original chaos" (*Quoted in* "*Book of God,*"
*p.* 160.)

One might imagine oneself reading the Puranic account by Parasara of the
great Pralaya. It is nearly the same thing, idea for idea. Has
Christianity nothing of the kind? It has, we say. Let the reader open
any English Bible and read chapter iii. of the *Second* Epistle of
Peter, from verse iii. till the xivth, and he will find there the same
ideas. . . . "There shall come in the last days scoffers . . . saying,
'where is the promise of his coming? . . . . Since the fathers fell
asleep all things continue as they were from the beginning of creation.'
For, they are ignorant . . . . that by the word of God the heavens were
of old, and *the earth standing out of the water and in the water*:
*whereby the world that then was, being overflowed with water,*
perished. But the heavens and the earth *that are now,* are reserved
unto the fire . . . . wherein the heavens . . . . shall be dissolved,
and the elements shall melt with fervent heat . . . . we nevertheless
look for *new* *heavens and new earth, etc., etc.*" If the interpreters
chose to see in this a reference to creation, the deluge, and the
promised coming of Christ, when they will live in a new Jerusalem in
heaven, this is no fault of "Peter." What the writer of the Epistles
meant was the destruction of this Fifth Race of ours by subterranean
fires and inundations, and the appearance of new continents for the
Sixth Root-Race. For the writers of these Epistles were all learned in
symbology if not in the sciences.

It was mentioned elsewhere that the belief in the septenary constitution
of our "chain" was the oldest tenet of the early Iranians, who got it
from the first Zarathustra. It is time to prove it to those Parsis who
have lost the key to the meaning of their Scriptures. In the Avesta the
earth is considered septempartite and tripartite at one and the same
time. This is regarded by Dr. Geiger, as an *incongruity,* for the
following reasons, which he calls discrepancies: the Avesta speaks

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 758 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

of the three-thirds of the earth because the Rig-Veda mentions "three
earths." . . . . "Three strata or layers, one lying above the other, are
said to be meant by this."\* But he is quite mistaken, as are all
exoteric profane translators. The Avesta has not borrowed the idea from
the *Rig-Veda,* but simply repeats the esoteric teaching. The "three
strata or layers" do not refer to our globe alone, but to three layers
of the globes of our terrestrial chain -- two by two, on each plane, one
on the descending, the other on the ascending arc. Thus, with reference
to the six spheres or globes above our earth, the seventh and the
fourth, it is *septempartite,* while with regard to the planes over our
plane -- it is *tripartite.* This meaning is carried out and
corroborated by the text in the Avesta and Vendidad, and even by the
speculations -- a most laborious and unsatisfactory guess-work -- of the
translators and commentators. It thus follows that the division of the
"earth," or rather the earth's chain, into seven *Karshvars* is not in
contradiction with the three "zones," if this word is read "planes." As
Geiger remarks, this septenary division is very old -- the oldest of all
-- since the Gathas already speak of the "septempartite earth." (*Bumi
haptaiti, Yasna,* xxxii., 3.) For, "according to the Parsee Scriptures,
the *seven Karshvars are to be considered as completely disconnected
parts of the earth,*" which they surely are. For, "between them *there
flows the Ocean,* so that it is impossible, as stated in several
passages, to pass from one Karshvar to another."\*\* The "Ocean" is
*space,* of course, for the latter was called "Waters of Space" before
it was known as Ether. Moreover, the word *Karshvar* is consistently
rendered by *Dwipa,* and especially *Qaniratha* by Jambudwipa
("Neriosengh, the translator of the Yasna.")\*\*\* But this fact is not
taken into account by the Orientalists, and therefore we find even such
a learned Zoroastrian and Parsi by birth as the translator of Dr.
Geiger's work passing unnoticed and without a word of comment sundry
remarks of the former on the "incongruities" of this kind abounding in
the Mazdean Scriptures. One of such "incongruities" and "coincidences"
concerns the similarity of the Zoroastrian with the Indian tenet with
regard to the seven *Dwipas* (islands, or continents, rather) as met
with in the *Puranas,* namely: "The Dwipas form concentric rings, which,
separated by the ocean, surround Jambu Dvipa, which is situated in the
centre" (p. 130, vol. I.), and, "according to the Iranian view, the
*Karshvar Qaniratha* is likewise situated in the centre of the rest . .
. . each of them (the other six *Karshvars*) is a

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* p. 129, "Civilization of the Eastern Iranians in Ancient Times."

\*\* *Cf., e.g.,* Vol. I., 4, of the Pahlavi Translation; Bdh. xxi.,
2-3.

\*\*\* Footnote by Darab Dastur Peshotan Sanjana, **B.A.**, the
translator of Dr. Wilhelm Geiger's work on the "Civilization of the
Eastern Iranians."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 759 THE MAZDEAN VIEW OF THE SEVEN EARTHS.

peculiar individual space, and so they group themselves round (*above*)
Qaniratha" (*Ibid.* p. 131). Now *Qaniratha* is not, as believed by
Geiger and his translator, "the country inhabited by the Iranian
tribes," and the other names do not mean "the adjacent territories of
foreign nations in the North, South, West, and East" (p. 132), but our
globe or Earth. For that which is meant by the sentence which follows
the last quoted, namely, that "two *Vorubarshti* and *Voru-Zarshti* lie
in the North; two, *Vidadhafshu* and *Tradadhafshu,* in the South;
*Savahi* and *Arzahi* in the East and West," is simply the very graphic
and accurate description of the "chain" of our planet, the Earth,
represented in the book of Dzyan (11) thus:

![](sd2-759.gif)

The Mazdean names given above have only to be replaced by those used in
the Secret Doctrine to become an orthodox tenet. The "Earth" (our
World), therefore, *is* "tripartite," because the chain of the worlds is
situated on three different *planes* above our globe; and it is
*septempartite* because of the seven globes or spheres which compose the
chain. Hence the further meaning given in Vendidad **XIX**. 39, showing
that "*Qaniratha* alone is combined with *imat,* 'this' (earth), while
all other *Karshvares* are combined with the word '*avat*,' 'that' or
*those --* upper earths." Nothing could be plainer.

The same may be said of the modern comprehension of all other ancient
beliefs.

The Druids understood the meaning of the Sun in Taurus, therefore, when,
while all the fires were extinguished on the 1st of November, their
sacred and inextinguishable fires alone remained to illumine the
horizon, like those of the Magi and the modern Zoroastrians. And like
the early Fifth Race and later Chaldees, the Greeks, and again like the
Christians, who do the same to this day, without suspecting the real
meaning, they greeted the Morning Star -- the beautiful Venus-Lucifer.\*

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* Dr. Kenealy quotes, in his "Book of God," Vallancey, who says "I had
not been a week landed in Ireland from Gibraltar, where I had studied
Hebrew and Chaldaic under Jews of various countries, when I heard a
peasant girl say to boor standing by her "*Teach an Maddin Nag*" (Behold
the morning star), pointing to the planet Venus, the *Maddena Nag of*
the Chaldeans."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 760 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

Strabo speaks of an island near to Britannia, "where Ceres and
Persephone were worshipped with the same rites as in Samothrace (lib.
iv.) and this island was Sacred Ierna," where a perpetual fire was lit.
The Druids believed in the rebirth of man, not as Lucian explains: "that
the same *spirit* shall animate a new body, not here, but in a different
world," but in a series of re-incarnations in this same world; for as
Diodorus says, they declared that the souls of men, after determinate
periods, would pass into other bodies.\*

These tenets came to the Fifth Race Aryans from their predecessors of
the Fourth Race, the Atlanteans. They had piously preserved the
teachings, which told them how their parent Root-Race, becoming with
every generation more arrogant, owing to the acquisition of superhuman
powers, had been gradually gliding toward its end. Those records
reminded them of the giant intellect of the preceding races as well as
of their giant size. One finds the repetition of those records in every
age of history, in almost every old fragment which has descended to us
from antiquity.

AElian preserved an extract from Theophrastus written during the days of
Alexander the Great. It is a dialogue between Midas, the Phrygian, and
Silenus. The former is told of a continent that had existed in times of
old, so immense, that Asia, Europe and Africa seemed like poor islands
compared with it. *It was the last to produce* animals and plants of
gigantic magnitudes. There, said Silenus, men grew to double the size of
the tallest man in his (the narrator's) time, and they lived to twice as
old an age. They had wealthy cities with temples, and one of such
(cities) held more than a million of inhabitants in it, gold and silver
being found there in great abundance. . . .

Grote's suggestion that Atlantis was but a myth arisen from a mirage --
clouds on a dazzling sky taking the appearance of islands on a golden
sea -- is too disingenuous to be even noticed.

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* There was a time when the whole world, the totality of mankind, had
one religion, and when they were of "one lip." "All the religions of the
Earth were at first One and emanated from *one* centre," says Faber very
truly.

<span id="DDE_LINK28">\[\[This page continued in next section\]\]</span>
<span id="DDE_LINK29"></span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next Section](sd2-3-08)

[Contents](sd2-0-co.htm#contents)
