##### *The Secret Doctrine* by H. P. Blavatsky -- Vol. 2

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 656 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

### ยง II. THE ANCESTORS MANKIND IS OFFERED BY SCIENCE.

---------------------

> "The question of questions for mankind -- the problem which underlies
> all others, and is more deeply interesting than any other -- is the
> ascertainment of the place which man occupies in Nature, and of his
> relations to the Universe of things." -- **H**UXLEY.

---------------------

**T**HE world stands divided this day, and hesitates between *divine*
progenitors *--* be they Adam and Eve or the lunar Pitris *--* and
*Bathybius Haeckelii,* the gelatinous hermit of the briny deep. Having
explained the occult theory, it may now be compared with that of the
modem Materialism. The reader is invited to choose between the two after
having judged them on their respective merits.

We may derive some consolation for the rejection of our divine
ancestors, in finding that the Haeckelian speculations receive no better
treatment at the hands of strictly *exact* Science than do our own.
Haeckel's *phylogenesis* is no less laughed at by the foes of his
fantastic evolution, by other and greater Scientists, than our primeval
races will be. As du Bois-Reymond puts it, we may believe him easily
when he says that "ancestral trees of our race sketched in the
'Schopfungs-geschichte' are of about as much value as are the pedigrees
of the Homeric heroes in the eyes of the historical critic."

This settled, everyone will see that one hypothesis is as good as
another. And as we find that German naturalist (Haeckel) himself
confessing that neither geology (in its history of the past) nor the
ancestral history of organisms will ever "rise to the position of a real
exact Science,"\* a large margin is thus left to Occult Science to make
its annotations and lodge its protests. The world is left to choose
between the teachings of Paracelsus, the "Father of Modern Chemistry,"
and those of Haeckel, the Father of the mythical *Sozura.* We demand no
more.

Without presuming to take part in the quarrel of such very learned
naturalists as du Bois-Reymond and Haeckel *a propos* of our blood
relationship to "those ancestors (of ours) which have led up from the
unicellular classes, Vermes, Acrania, Pisces, Amphibia, Reptilia to the
Aves" *--* one may put in a few words, a question or two, for the
information of our readers. Availing ourselves of the opportunity, and
bearing

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* "Pedigree of Man." *--* "*The Proofs of Evolution,*" *p.* 273.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 657 AN UNVERIFIED CHARGE AGAINST THE ANCIENTS.

in mind Darwin's theories of natural selection, etc., we would ask
Science -- with regard to the origin of the human and animal species --
which theory of evolution of the two herewith described is the more
scientific, or the more *unscientific,* if so preferred.

(1). Is it that of an Evolution which starts from the beginning with
sexual propagation?

(2)*.* Or that teaching which shows the gradual development of organs;
their solidification, and the procreation of each species, at first by
simple easy separation from one into two or even several individuals.
Then follows a fresh development *--* the first step to a species of
separate distinct sexes *--* the hermaphrodite condition; then again, a
kind of Parthenogenesis, "virginal reproduction," when the egg-cells are
formed within the body, issuing from it in atomic emanations and
becoming matured outside of it; until, finally, after a definite
separation into sexes, the human beings begin procreating through sexual
connection?

Of these two, the former "theory," -- rather, a "*revealed* fact" -- is
enunciated by all the *exoteric* Bibles (except the Puranas),
preeminently by the Jewish Cosmogony. The last one, is that which is
taught by the Occult philosophy, as explained all along.

An answer is found to our question in a volume just published by Mr. S.
Laing -- the best lay exponent of Modern Science.\* In chapter viii. of
his latest work, "A Modern Zoroastrian," the author begins by twitting
"all ancient religions and philosophies" for "assuming a male and female
principle for their gods." At first sight, he says "the distinction of
sex appears as fundamental as that of plant and animal." . . . . "The
Spirit of god brooding over Chaos and producing the world," he goes on
to complain, "is only a later edition, revised according to monotheistic
ideas, of the far older Chaldean legend which describes the creation of
Kosmos out of Chaos by the co-operations of great gods, male and female
. . " Thus, in the orthodox Christian creed we are taught to repeat
"begotten, not made," a phrase which is absolute nonsense, an instance
of using words like counterfeit notes, which have no solid value of an
idea behind them. For "begotten" is a very definite term which "implies
the conjunction of two opposite sexes to produce a new individual."

However we may agree with the learned author as to the inadvisability of
using wrong words, and the terrible anthropomorphic and *phallic*
element in the old Scriptures *--* especially in the orthodox Christian
Bible -- nevertheless, there may be two extenuating circumstances in the
case. Firstly, all these "ancient philosophies" and "modern

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* Author of "Modern Science and Modern Thought."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 658 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

religions" are *--* as sufficiently shown in these two volumes *--* an
exoteric veil thrown over the face of esoteric truth; and -- as the
direct result of this *--* they are allegorical, *i.e.*, mythological in
form; but still they are immensely more philosophical in essence than
any of the new *scientific* theories, so-called. Secondly, from the
Orphic theogony down to Ezra's last remodelling of the Pentateuch, every
old Scripture having in its origin borrowed its facts from the East, it
has been subjected to constant alterations by friend and foe, until of
the original version there remained but the name, a dead shell from
which the Spirit had been gradually eliminated.

This alone ought to show that no religious work now extant can be
understood without the help of the Archaic wisdom, the primitive
foundation on which they were all built.

But to return to the direct answer expected from Science to *our* direct
question. It is given by the same author, when, following his train of
thought on the unscientific euhemerization of the powers of Nature in
ancient creeds, he pronounces a condemnatory verdict upon them in the
following terms: --

"Science, however, makes sad havoc with this impression *of sexual
generation being the original and only mode of reproduction,\** and the
microscope and dissecting knife of the naturalist introduce us to new
and altogether unsuspected (?) worlds of life. . . ."

So little "*unsuspected,*" indeed, that the *original a*-sexual "modes
of reproduction" must have been known *--* to the ancient Hindus, at any
rate -- Mr. Laing's assertion to the contrary, notwithstanding. In view
of the statement in the Vishnu Purana, quoted by us elsewhere, that
Daksha "established sexual intercourse as the means of multiplication,"
only after a series of other "modes," which are all enumerated therein,
(*Vol. II., p.* 12*, Wilson*'*s Transl.*)*,* it becomes difficult to
deny the fact. This assertion, moreover, is found, note well, in an
EXOTERIC work. Then, Mr. S. Laing goes on to tell us that: --

. . . . "By far the larger proportion of living forms, in number . . . .
have come into existence, *without the aid of sexual* propagation." He
then instances Haeckel's monera . . . . "*multiplying by
self-division.*" The next stage the author shows in the nucleated cell,
"which does exactly the same thing." The following stage is that in
"which the organism does not divide into two equal parts, but a *small
portion of it swells out* . . . . *and finally parts company* and starts
on separate existence, which grows to the size of the parent by its
inherent faculty of manufacturing fresh protoplasm from surrounding
inorganic materials."\*\*

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* Vide Part I. of this volume, page 183, Stanza **VIII**.

\*\* In this, as shown in Part I., Modern Science was again anticipated,
far beyond its own speculations in this direction, by *Archaic* Science.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 659 VARIOUS MODES OF REPRODUCTION.

This is followed by a many-celled organism which is formed by
"*germ-buds reduced to spores, or single cells, which are emitted from
the parent*". . . . when "we are at the threshold of that system of
sexual propagation, which has (now) become the rule in all the higher
families of animals" . . . . It is when an "organism, having advantages
in the struggle for life, established itself permanently" . . . . that
special organs developed to meet the altered condition . . . . . when a
distinction "would be firmly established of a female organ or ovary
containing the egg or primitive cell from which the new being was to be
developed." . . . . "This is confirmed by a study of embryology, *which
shows that in the* HUMAN and higher animal species *the distinction of
sex is not developed* until a considerable progress has been made in the
growth of the embryo . . . . " In the great majority of plants, and in
some lower families of animals . . . the male and female organs are
developed within the same being . . . . . a hermaphrodite. Moreover, in
the "virginal reproduction -- germ-cells apparently similar in all
respects to egg-cells, develop themselves into new individuals *without
any fructifying element,*" etc., etc. (pp. 103-107).

Of all which we are as perfectly well aware as of this *--* that the
above was never applied by the very learned English popularizer of
Huxleyo-Haeckelian theories to the genus *homo.* He limits this to
specks of protoplasm, plants, bees, snails, and so on. But if he would
be true to the theory of descent, he must be as true to ontogenesis, in
which the fundamental biogenetic law, we are told, runs as follows: "the
development of the embryo (ontogeny) is a condensed and abbreviated
repetition *of the evolution of the race* (phylogeny). This repetition
is the more complete, the more the true original order of evolution
(palingenesis) has been retained by continual heredity. On the other
hand, this repetition is the less complete, the more by varying
adaptations the later spurious development (caenogenesis) has obtained."
(*Anthrop. 3rd edition, p.* 11.)

This shows to us that every living creature and thing on earth,
including man, evolved from *one common primal form.* Physical man must
have passed through the same stages of the evolutionary process in the
various modes of procreation as other animals have: he must have
*divided* himself; then, hermaphrodite, have given birth
*parthenogenetically* (on the immaculate principle) to his young ones;
the next stage would be the *oviparous --* at first "without any
fructifying element," then "with the help of the fertilitary spore"; and
only after the final and definite evolution of both sexes, would he
become a distinct "male and female," when reproduction through sexual
union would grow into universal law. So far, all this is scientifically
proven. There remains but one thing to be ascertained: the plain and
comprehensively described

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 660 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

processes of such *ante*-sexual reproduction. This is done in the Occult
books, a slight outline of which was attempted by the writer in Part I.
of this Volume.

Either this, or *--* man is a distinct being. Occult philosophy may call
him that, because of his distinctly *dual* nature. Science cannot do so,
once that it rejects every interference save *mechanical laws, and*
admits of no principle outside matter. The former *--* the archaic
Science --allows the human physical frame to have passed through every
form, from the lowest to the very highest, its present one, or from the
simple to the complex *--* to use the accepted terms. But it claims that
in this cycle (the fourth), the frame having already existed among the
types and models of nature from the preceding Rounds *--* that it was
quite ready for man from the beginning of *this Round.\** The Monad had
but to step into the astral body of the progenitors, in order that the
work of physical consolidation should begin around the shadowy
prototype.\*\*

What would Science say to this? It would answer, of course, that as man
appeared on earth as the latest of the mammalians, he had no need, no
more than those mammals, to pass through the primitive stages of
procreation as above described. His mode of procreation was already
established on Earth when he appeared. In this case, we may reply: since
to this day not the remotest sign of a link between man and the animal
has yet been found, then (if the Occultist doctrine is to be repudiated)
he must have sprung *miraculously* in nature, like a fully armed Minerva
from Jupiter's brain. And in such case the Bible is right, along with
other national "revelations." Hence the scientific scorn, so freely
lavished by the author of "A Modern

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* Theosophists will remember that, according to Occult teaching, Cyclic
pralayas so-called are but *obscurations,* during which periods Nature,
*i.e.*, everything visible and *invisible* on a resting planet *--*
remains *in statu quo.* Nature rests and slumbers, no work of
destruction going on on the globe even if no active work is done. All
forms, as well as their astral types, remain as they were at the last
moment of its activity. The "night" of a planet has hardly any twilight
preceding it. It is caught like a huge mammoth by an avalanche, and
remains slumbering and frozen till the next dawn of its new day *--* a
very short one indeed in comparison to the "Day of Brahma."

\*\* This will be pooh-poohed, because it will not be understood by our
modern men of science; but every Occultist and theosophist will easily
realize the process. There *can be no objective* form on Earth (nor in
the Universe either), without its astral prototype being first formed in
Space. From Phidias down to the humblest workman in the ceramic art *--*
a sculptor has had to create first of all a model in his mind, then
sketch it in one and two dimensional lines, and then only can he
reproduce it in a three dimensional or objective figure. And if human
mind is a living demonstration of such successive stages in the process
of evolution -- how can it be otherwise when **N**ATURE'S **M**IND and
creative powers are concerned?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 661 WHERE ARE THE "MISSING LINKS"?

Zoroastrian" upon ancient philosophies and *exoteric* creeds, becomes
premature and uncalled for. Nor would the sudden discovery of a
"missing-link" -- like fossil mend matters at all. For neither one such
solitary specimen nor the *scientific conclusions* thereupon, could
insure its being the long-sought-for relic, *i.e.*, that of an
undeveloped, still a once *speaking* MAN. Something more would be
required as a final proof (*vide infra, Note*)*.* Besides which, even
*Genesis* takes up man, her Adam of dust, only where the Secret Doctrine
leaves her "Sons of God and Wisdom" and picks up the physical man of the
**T**HIRD Race. Eve is *not* "begotten," but is extracted out of Adam on
the manner of "Amoeba, A," contracting in the middle and splitting into
Amoeba B *--* by division. (*See* p*.* 103, in "*The Modern
Zoroastrian.*") Nor has human speech developed from the various animal
sounds.

Haeckel's theory that "speech arose gradually from a few simple, crude
animal sounds . . . ." as such "speech still remains amongst a few races
of lower rank" (*Darwinian theory in* "*Pedigree of Man,*" p. 22) is
altogether unsound, as argued by Professor Max Muller, among others. He
contends that no plausible explanation has yet been given as to how the
"roots" of language came into existence. A *human* brain is necessary
for *human* speech. And figures relating to the size of the respective
brains of man and ape show how deep is the gulf which separates the two.
Vogt says that the brain of the largest ape, the gorilla, measures no
more than 30.51 cubic inches; while the average brains of the
flat-headed Australian natives -- the lowest now in the human races --
amount to 99.35 cubic inches! Figures are awkward witnesses and cannot
lie. Therefore, as truly observed by Dr. F. Pfaff, whose premises are as
sound and correct as his biblical conclusions are silly: *--* "The brain
of the apes most like man, does not amount to quite a third of the brain
of the lowest races *of men*: *it is not half the size of the brain of a
new-born child.*" ("*The Age and Origin of Man.*") From the foregoing it
is thus very easy to perceive that in order to prove the
Huxley-Haeckelian theories of the descent of man, it is not *one,* but a
great number of "*missing links*" -- a true ladder of progressive
evolutionary steps *--* that would have to be first found and then
presented by Science to thinking and reasoning humanity, before it would
abandon belief in gods and the immortal Soul for the worship of
Quadrumanic ancestors. Mere myths are now greeted as "axiomatic truths."
Even Alfred Russel Wallace maintains with Haeckel that primitive man was
a speechless ape-creature. To this Joly answers: *--* "Man never was, in
my opinion, this *pithecanthropus alalus* whose portrait Haeckel has
drawn *as if he had seen and known him,* whose *singular* and
*completely hypothetical* genealogy he has even given, from the mere
mass of living protoplasm to the man endowed with speech and a
civilization analo-

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 662 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

gous to that of the Australians and Papuans." ("Man before Metals," p.
320*,* N. Joly. *Inter. Scient. Series.*)

Haeckel, among other things, often comes into direct conflict with the
Science of languages. In the course of his attack on Evolutionism (1873,
"Mr. Darwin's Philosophy of Language"), Prof. Max Muller stigmatized the
Darwinian theory as "vulnerable at the beginning and at the end." The
fact is, that only the partial truth of many of the *secondary* "laws"
of Darwinism is beyond question -- M. de Quatrefages evidently accepting
"Natural Selection," the "struggle for existence" and transformation
within species, as proven not once and for ever, but *pro. tem.* But it
may not be amiss, perhaps, to condense the linguistic case against the
"Ape ancestor" theory: --

Languages have their phases of growth, etc., like all else in nature. It
is almost certain that the great linguistic families pass through three
stages.

\(1\) All words are roots and merely placed in juxtaposition (Radical
languages).

\(2\) One root defines the other, and becomes merely a determinative
element (Agglutinative).

\(3\) The determinative element (the determinating meaning of which has
long lapsed) unites into a whole with the formative element (Inflected).

The problem then is: Whence these ROOTS? Max Muller argues that the
existence of these *ready-made materials of speech* is a proof that man
cannot be the crown of a long organic series. This *potentiality of
forming roots* is the great crux which materialists almost invariably
avoid.

Von Hartmann explains it as a manifestation of the "Unconscious," and
admits its cogency *versus* mechanical Atheism. Hartmann is a fair
representative of the Metaphysician and Idealist of the present age.

The argument has never been met by the non-pantheistic Evolutionists. To
say with Schmidt: "Forsooth are we to halt before the origin of
language?" is an avowal of dogmatism and of speedy defeat. (Cf. his
"*Doctrine of Descent and Darwinism,*" p. 304.)

We respect those men of science who, wise in their generation, say:
"Prehistoric Past being utterly beyond our powers of direct observation,
we are too honest, too devoted to the truth -- or what we regard as
truth *--* to speculate upon the unknown, giving out our unproven
theories along with facts absolutely established in modern Science." . .
. . "The borderland of (metaphysical) knowledge is best left to time,
which is the best test as to truth" (*A Modern Zoroastrian, p.* 136).

This is a wise and an honest sentence in the mouth of a materialist. But
when a Haeckel, after just saying that "*historical* events of

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 663 PROOFS OF OUR "NOBLE DESCENT."

past time . . " having "occurred many *millions of years ago,\** . . .
are for ever removed from direct observation," and that neither geology
nor phylogeny\*\* can or will "rise to the position of a real *exact*
science," then *insists* on the development of *all* organisms *--*
"from the lowest vertebrate to the highest, from Amphioxus to man" -- we
ask for a weightier proof than he can give. Mere "*empirical* sources of
knowledge," so extolled by the author of "*Anthropogeny*" *-*- when he
has to be satisfied with the qualification for his own views *--* are
not competent to settle problems lying beyond their domain; nor is it
the province of exact science to place any reliance on them.\*\*\* If
"empirical" *--* and Haeckel declares so himself repeatedly *--* then
they are no better, nor any more reliable, in the sight of *exact*
research, when extended into the remote past, than our Occult teachings
of the East, both having to be placed on quite the same level. Nor are
his *phylogenetic and palingenetic* speculations treated in any better
way by the real scientists, than are our cyclic repetitions of the
evolution of the Great in the minor races, and the original order of
evolutions. For the province of exact, real Science, materialistic
though it be, is to carefully avoid anything like guess-work,
speculation which *cannot be* verified; in short, all *suppressio veri*
and all *suggestio falsi.* The business of the man of exact Science is
to observe, each in his chosen department, the phenomena of nature; to
record, tabulate, compare and classify the facts, down to the smallest
minutiae which *are presented to the observation of the senses with the
help of all the exquisite mechanism that modern invention supplies, not
by the aid of metaphysical flights of fancy.* All that he has a
legitimate right to do, is to correct by the assistance of physical
instruments the

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* It thus appears that in its anxiety to prove our noble descent from
the catarrhine "baboon," Haeckel's school has pushed the times of
pre-historic man millions of years back. (*See* "*Pedigree of Man,*" p.
273.) Occultists, render thanks to science for such corroboration of our
claims!

\*\* This seems a poor compliment to pay Geology, which is not a
speculative but as exact a science as astronomy -- save, perhaps its too
risky chronological speculations. It is mainly a "Descriptive" as
opposed to an "Abstract" Science.

\*\*\* Such newly-coined words as "*perigenesis of plastids*,"
"plastidule Souls" (!), and others less comely, invented by Haeckel, may
be very learned and correct in so far as they may express very
graphically the ideas in his own vivid fancy. As a *fact,* however, they
remain for his less imaginative colleagues painfully *caenogenetic* --
to use his own terminology; *i.e.*, for *true* Science they are
*spurious* speculations so long as they are derived from "empirical
sources." Therefore, when he seeks to prove that "the origin of man from
other mammals, and most directly from the catarrhine ape, is a
*deductive law* that follows necessarily from *the inductive* law of the
theory of descent" ("*Anthropogeny,*" p. 392) -- his no less learned
foes (du Bois-Reymond -- for one) have a right to see in this sentence a
*mere jugglery of words*; a "*testimonium paupertatis* of natural
science" *--* as he himself complains, calling them, in return,
*ignoramuses* (see "Pedigree of Man," Notes).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 664 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

defects or illusions of his own coarser vision, auditory powers, and
other senses. He has no right to trespass on the grounds of metaphysics
and psychology. His duty is to verify and to rectify all the facts that
*fall under his direct* observation; to profit by the experiences and
mistakes of the Past in endeavouring to trace the working of a certain
concatenation of cause and effects, which, but only by its constant and
unvarying repetition, may be called A **L**AW. This it is which a man of
science is expected to do, if he would become a teacher of men and
remain true to his original programme of natural or physical sciences.
Any side-way path from this royal road becomes *speculation.*

Instead of keeping to this, what does many a so-called man of science do
in these days? He rushes into the domains of pure metaphysics, while
deriding it. He delights in rash conclusions and calls it "a *deductive*
law from the *inductive* law" of a theory based upon and drawn out of
the depths of his own consciousness: that consciousness being perverted
by, and honeycombed with, one-sided materialism. He attempts to explain
the "origin" of things, which are yet embosomed only in his own
conceptions. He attacks spiritual beliefs and religious traditions
millenniums old, and denounces everything, save his own hobbies, as
superstition. He suggests theories of the Universe, a Cosmogony
developed by blind, mechanical forces of nature alone, far more
*miraculous* *and impossible* than even one based upon the assumption of
*fiat lux* out of *nihil -*- and tries to astonish the world by such a
wild theory; which, being known to emanate from a scientific brain, is
taken on *blind faith* as very scientific and the outcome of
**S**CIENCE.

Are those the opponents Occultism would dread? Most decidedly not. For
such theories are no better treated by *real* (not empirical) Science
than our own. Haeckel, hurt in his vanity by du Bois-Reymond, never
tires of complaining publicly of the latter's onslaught on his fantastic
theory of descent. Rhapsodizing on "the exceedingly rich storehouse of
empirical evidence," he calls those "recognised physiologists" who
oppose every speculation of his drawn from the said "storehouse" --
*ignorant* men. "If many men," he declares -- "and among them even some
scientists of repute -- hold that the whole of phylogeny is a castle in
the air, and genealogical trees (from monkeys?) are empty plays of
phantasy, they only in speaking thus demonstrate their ignorance of that
wealth of *empirical sources of knowledge* to which reference has
already been made" ("Pedigree of Man," p. 273).

We open Webster's Dictionary and read the definitions of the word
"empirical": "Depending upon experience or observation alone, *without
due regard to modern science and theory.*" This applies to the
Occultists, Spiritualists, Mystics, etc., etc. Again, "an *Empiric --*
One who confines himself to applying the results of his own
observations" (only)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 665 MR. HUXLEY APPLIES AN "EXTINGUISHER."

(which is Haeckel's case); "one *wanting Science* . . . . an ignorant
and unlicensed practitioner; a quack; a CHARLATAN."

No Occultist or "magician," has ever been treated to any worse epithets.
Yet the Occultist remains on his own metaphysical grounds, and does not
endeavour to rank *his knowledge,* the fruits of *his* personal
observation and experience, among the *exact* sciences of modern
learning. He keeps within his legitimate sphere, where he is master. But
what is one to think of a rank materialist, whose duty is clearly traced
before him, who uses such an expression as this: --

"The origin of man from other mammals, and most directly from the
catarrhine ape, *is a deductive law, that follows necessarily from the
inductive law of the* **T**HEORY OF **D**ESCENT." ("*Anthropogeny,*"
*p.* 392).

A "theory" is simply a hypothesis, a speculation, *and no law.* To say
otherwise is only one of the many liberties taken now-a-days by
scientists. They enunciate an absurdity, and then hide it behind the
shield of Science. Any deduction from theoretical speculation is no
better than *a speculation on a speculation.* Now Sir W. Hamilton has
already shown that the word theory is now used "in a very loose and
improper sense" . . . . "that it is convertible into *hypothesis,* and
*hypothesis* is commonly used as another term for *conjecture,* whereas
the terms 'theory' and 'theoretical' are properly used in opposition to
the term *practice* and *practical.*"

But modern Science puts an extinguisher on the latter statement, and
mocks at the idea. Materialistic philosophers and Idealists of Europe
and America may be agreed with the Evolutionists as to the physical
origin of man -- yet it will never become a general truth with the true
metaphysician, and the latter defies the materialists to make good their
arbitrary assumptions. That the ape-theory theme\* of Vogt and Darwin,
on which the Huxley-Haeckelians have composed of late such extraordinary
variations, is far less scientific -- because clashing with the
fundamental laws of that theme itself -- than ours can ever be

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* The *mental* barrier between man and ape, characterized by Huxley as
an "*enormous gap,* a distance *practically immeasurable*"! ! is,
indeed, in itself conclusive. Certainly it constitutes a standing puzzle
to the materialist, who relies on the frail reed of "natural selection."
The physiological differences between Man and the Apes are in reality
*--* despite a curious community of certain features *--* equally
striking. Says Dr. Schweinfurth, one of the most cautious and
experienced of naturalists: --

"In modern times there are no animals in creation that have attracted
more attention from the scientific student than the great quadrumana
(the anthropoids), bearing such a striking resemblance to the human form
as to have justified the epithet of anthropomorphic being conferred on
them. . . . But *all investigation at present only leads human*
*intelligence to a confession of its insufficiency*; and nowhere is
caution more to be advocated, *nowhere is premature judgment more to be
deprecated than in the attempt to bridge over the* MYSTERIOUS CHASM
*which separates man and beast.*" "*Heart of Africa*" i., 520.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 666 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

shown to be, is very easy of demonstration. Let the reader only turn to
the excellent work on "Human Species" by the great French naturalist de
Quatrefages, and our statement will at once be verified.

Moreover, between the esoteric teaching concerning the origin of man and
Darwin's speculations, no man, unless he is a rank materialist, will
hesitate. This is the description given by Mr. Darwin of "the earliest
ancestors of man."

"They were without doubt once covered with hair; both sexes having
beards; their ears were pointed and capable of movement; *and their
bodies were provided with a tail,* having the proper muscles. Their
limbs and bodies were acted on by many muscles which now only
occasionally reappear in man, but which are still normally present in
the quadrumana. . . . The foot, judging from the condition of the great
toe in the foetus, was then prehensile, and our progenitors, no doubt,
were *arboreal in their habits,* frequenting some warm forest-clad land,
and the males were provided with canine teeth which served as formidable
weapons. . . ."\*

Darwin connects him with the type of the tailed catarrhines, "and
consequently removes him a stage backward in the scale of evolution. The
English naturalist is not satisfied to take his stand upon the ground of
his own doctrines, and, like Haeckel, *on this point places himself in
direct variance with one of the fundamental laws* which constitute the
principal charm of Darwinism . . . " And then the learned French
naturalist proceeds to show how this fundamental law is broken. "In
fact," he says, "in the theory of Darwin, transmutations do not take
place, either by chance or in every direction. They are ruled by certain
laws which are due to the organization itself. If an organism is once
modified in a given direction, it can undergo secondary or tertiary
transmutations, but will still preserve the impress of the original. It
is the law of *permanent characterization, which alone* permits Darwin
to explain the filiation of groups, their characteristics, and their
numerous relations. It is by virtue of this law that *all* the
descendants of the first mollusc have been molluscs; *all* the
descendants of the first vertebrate have been vertebrates. It is clear
that this constitutes one of the foundations of the doctrine. . . . It
follows that two beings belonging to two distinct types can be referred
to *a common ancestor,* but the one cannot be the descendant of the
other"; (*p*. 106).

"Now man and ape present a very striking contrast in *respect to type.*
Their organs . . . correspond almost exactly term for term: but these

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* A ridiculous instance of evolutionist contradictions is afforded by
Schmidt ("*Doctrine of Descent and Darwinism,*" on page 292). He says,
"Man's kinship with the apes is *not impugned* by the *bestial strength*
of the teeth of the male orang or gorilla." Mr. Darwin, on the contrary,
endows this fabulous being with teeth used as weapons!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 667 A WALKER OR A CLIMBER.

organs are arranged after a very different plan. In man they are so
arranged that he is essentially a *walker,* while in apes they
necessitate his being a *climber*. . . . There is here an anatomical and
mechanical distinction. . . . A glance at the page where Huxley has
figured side by side a human skeleton and the skeletons of the most
highly developed apes is a sufficiently convincing proof."

The consequence of these facts, from the point of view of the logical
application of the law of *permanent characterizations,* is that man
cannot be descended from an ancestor who is already characterized as an
ape, any more than a catarrhine tailless ape can be descended from a
tailed catarrhine. A *walking animal* cannot be descended from a
*climbing* one.

"Vogt, in placing man among the *primates,* declares without hesitation
that *the lowest class of apes have passed the landmark* (the common
ancestor), from which the different types of this family have originated
and diverged." (This ancestor of the apes, occult science sees in the
lowest human group during the Atlantean period, as shown before.) . . .
"We must, then, place the origin of man beyond the last apes," goes on
de Quatrefages, thus corroborating our Doctrine, "if we would adhere to
one of the laws most emphatically necessary to the Darwinian theory. We
then come to the prosimiae of Haeckel, the loris, indris, etc. But those
animals also are climbers; we must go further, therefore, in search of
our first direct ancestor. But the genealogy by Haeckel brings us from
the latter to the marsupials. . . . From men to the Kangaroo the
distance is certainly great. Now neither living nor extinct fauna show
the intermediate types which ought to serve as landmarks. This
difficulty causes but slight embarrassment to Darwin.\* We know that he
considers the *want of information* upon similar questions *as a proof
in his favour.* Haeckel doubtless is as little embarrassed. He admits
the existence of an absolutely *theoretical pithecoid man.*"

"Thus, since it has been proved that, according to Darwinism itself, the
origin of man must be placed beyond the eighteenth stage, and since it
becomes, in consequence, *necessary* to fill up the gap between
marsupials and man, will Haeckel admit the existence *of four unknown
intermediate groups* instead of one?" asks de Quatrefages. "Will he
complete his genealogy in this manner? It is not for me to answer."
("*The Human Species,*" *p.* 107-108.)

But see Haeckel's famous genealogy, in "The Pedigree of Man," called by
him "Ancestral Series of Man." In the "Second Division"

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* According even to a *fellow-thinker,* Professor Schmidt, Darwin has
evolved "a certainly not flattering, and perhaps in *many points an
incorrect,* portrait of our presumptive ancestors in the dawn of
humanity." ("*Doctrine of Descent and Darwinism,*" p. 284.)

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 668 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

(Eighteenth Stage) he describes "Prosimiae, allied to the Loris
(Stenops) and Makis (Lemur) as without marsupial bones and cloaca, but
with *placenta.*" And now turn to de Quatrefages' "*The Human Species,*"
*pp.* 109, 110, and see his proofs, based on the latest discoveries, to
show that "the prosimiae of Haeckel have no *decidua* and a diffuse
placenta." They cannot be the ancestors of the apes even, let alone man,
according to a fundamental law of Darwin himself, as the great French
Naturalist shows. But this does not dismay the "animal theorists" in the
least, for self-contradiction and paradoxes are the very soul of modern
Darwinism. Witness -- Mr. Huxley. Having himself shown, with regard to
fossil man and the "missing link," that "neither in quaternary ages nor
at the present time *does any intermediary being fill the gap* which
separates man from the Troglodyte"; and that to "deny the existence of
this gap *would be as reprehensible as absurd,*" the great man of
Science denies his own words *in* *actu* by supporting with all the
weight of his scientific authority that *most* "absurd" of all theories
*--* the *descent of man from an ape!*

"This genealogy," says de Quatrefages, "*is wrong throughout,* and is
founded on a material error." Indeed, Haeckel bases his descent of man
on the 17th and 18th stages (*See Aveling*'*s* "*Pedigree of Man,*" *p.*
77), the marsupialia and prosimiae *--* (genus Haeckelii?). Applying the
latter term to the *Lemuridae --* hence making of them animals with a
*placenta -- he commits* a zoological blunder. For after having himself
divided mammals according to their anatomical differences into two
groups: the *indeciduata,* which have *no decidua* (or special membrane
uniting the placentae), and the *deciduata,* those who possess it: he
includes the *prosimiae* in the latter group. Now we have shown
elsewhere what other men of science had to say to this. As de
Quatrefages says, "The anatomical investigations of . . . Milne Edwards
and Grandidier upon these animals . . . place it beyond all doubt that
the prosimiae of Haeckel have no decidua and a diffuse placenta. They
are *indeciduata.* Far from any possibility of their being the ancestors
of the apes, according to the principles laid down by Haeckel himself,
*they cannot be regarded even as the ancestors of the zonoplacental
mammals* . . . and ought to be connected with the pachydermata, the
edentata, and the cetacea"; (*p*. 110). And yet Haeckel's inventions
pass off with some as *exact science!*

The above mistake, if indeed, one, is not even hinted at in Haeckel's
"Pedigree of Man," translated by Aveling. If the excuse may stand good
that at the time the famous "genealogies" were made, "the embryogenesis
of the prosimiae was not known," it is familiar now. We shall see
whether the next edition of Aveling's translation will have this
important error rectified, or if the 17th and 18th stages remain

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 669 A PITHECOID MAN WANTED.

as they are to blind the profane, as one of the *real* intermediate
links. But, as the French naturalist observes *--* "their (Darwin's and
Haeckel's) process is always the same, considering the *unknown* as a
proof in favour of their theory." (*Ibid.*)

It comes to this. Grant to man an immortal Spirit and Soul; endow the
whole animate and inanimate creation with the monadic principle
gradually evolving from the latent and passive into active and positive
polarity -- and Haeckel will not have a leg to stand upon, whatever his
admirers may say.

But there are important divergences even between Darwin and Haeckel.
While the former makes us proceed from the *tailed* catarrhine, Haeckel
traces our hypothetical ancestor to the *tailless* ape, though, at the
same time, he places him in a hypothetical "stage" immediately preceding
this: "*Menocerca with tails*" (19th stage).

Nevertheless, we have one thing in common with the Darwinian school: it
is the law of gradual and extremely slow evolution, embracing many
million years. The chief quarrel, it appears, is with regard to the
nature of the primitive "Ancestor." We shall be told that the Dhyan
Chohan, or the "progenitor" of Manu, is a hypothetical being unknown on
*the physical plane.* We reply that it was believed in by the whole of
antiquity, and by nine-tenths of the present humanity; whereas not only
is the *pithecoid man,* or "ape-man," a purely hypothetical creature of
Haeckel's creation, unknown and untraceable on this earth, but further
its genealogy *--* as invented by him *--* clashes with scientific facts
and all the known data of modern discovery in Zoology. It is simply
absurd, even as a fiction. As de Quatrefages demonstrates in a few
words, Haeckel "admits the existence of an *absolutely theoretical
pithecoid man*" *--* a hundred times more difficult to accept than any
Deva ancestor. And it is not the only instance in which he proceeds in a
similar manner in order to complete his genealogical table; and he
admits very *naively* his inventions himself. Does he not confess the
non-existence of his *sozura* (14th stage) -- a creature entirely
*unknown to science --* by confessing over his own signature, that *--*
"The proof of its existence arises from the necessity of an intermediate
type between the 13th and the 14th stages"!

If so, we might maintain with as much scientific right, that the proof
of the existence of our three ethereal races, and the three-eyed men of
the Third and Fourth Root-Races "arises also from the necessity of an
intermediate type" between the *animal* and the gods. What reason would
the Haeckelians have to protest in this special case?

Of course there is a ready answer: "Because we do not grant the presence
of the monadic essence." The manifestation of the Logos as individual
*consciousness* in the animal and human creation is not accepted

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 670 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

by exact science, nor does it cover the whole ground, of course. But the
failures of science and its arbitrary assumptions are far greater on the
whole than\* any "extravagant" esoteric doctrine can ever furnish. Even
thinkers of the school of Von Hartmann have become tainted with the
general epidemic. They accept the Darwinian Anthropology (more or less),
though they also postulate the individual Ego as a manifestation of the
Unconscious (the Western presentation of the Logos or Primeval Divine
Thought). They say the evolution of the physical man is from the animal,
but that mind in its various phases is altogether a thing apart from
material facts, though organism (as an *upadhi*) *is* necessary for ITS
manifestation.

-------

**P**LASTIDULAR **S**OULS, AND **C**ONSCIOUS **N**ERVE-CELLS.

But one can never see the end of such wonders with Haeckel and his
school, whom the Occultists and Theosophists have every right to
consider as materialistic tramps *trespassing* on private metaphysical
grounds. Not satisfied with the paternity of *Bathybius* (Haeckelii),
"plastidule souls,"\*\* and "atom-souls" are now invented by them, on
the basis of purely blind *mechanical* forces of matter. We are informed
that "the study of the evolution of soul-life shows that this has worked
its way up from the lower stages of the simple *cell-soul,* through an
astonishing series of gradual stages in evolution, up *to the soul of
man.*" ("*Present Position of Evolution,*" p. 266.)

"Astonishing" *--* truly, based as this wild speculation is on the
*Consciousness* of the "nerve cells." For as he tells us, "Little as we
are in a position, at the present time, to explain fully the nature of
consciousness,\*\*\* yet the comparative and genetic observation of it
clearly shows that it is only a higher and more complex *function of the
nerve cells.*" (Ibid, note 22.)

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* Of course the Esoteric system of Fourth Round Evolution is much more
complex than the paragraph and quotations referred to categorically
assert. It is practically a *reversal* -- both in embryological
inference and succession in time of species -- of the current Western
conception.

\*\* According to Haeckel, there are also *cell-souls*; "an inorganic
*molecular soul*" without, and a "plastidular soul with (or possessing)
memory". What are our esoteric teachings to this? The *divine and human*
soul of the seven principles in man must, of course, pale and give away
before such a stupendous revelation!

\*\*\* A valuable confession, this. Only it makes the attempt to trace
the *descent of* Consciousness in man as well as of his physical body
from *Bathybius Haeckelii* still more humorous and *empirical,* in the
sense of Webster's second definition.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 671 HAECKEL CREATES SOULS.

Mr. Herbert Spencer's song on Consciousness *--* is sung, it seems, and
may henceforth be safely stored up in the lumber room of obsolete
speculations. Where, however, do Haeckel's "complex functions" of *his*
scientific "nerve-cells" land him? Once more right into the Occult and
mystic teachings of the Kabala about the descent of souls as conscious
and unconscious atoms; among the Pythagorean MONAD and the *monads* of
Leibnitz *--* and the "gods, monads, and atoms" of our esoteric
teaching;\* into the *dead letter* of Occult teachings, left to the
*amateur* Kabalists and professors of ceremonial magic. For this is what
he says, while explaining his newly-coined terminology: --

"Plastidule-Souls; the plastidules or protoplasmic molecules, the
smallest, homogeneous parts of the protoplasm are, on our plastic
theory, to be regarded as the active factors of all life-functions. The
plastidular soul differs from the inorganic molecular soul *in that it*
*possesses memory.*" ("*Pedigree of Man,*" *Note, p.* 296.)

This he develops in his mirific lecture on the "*Perigenesis of the
Plastidule,* or the wave-motions of living particles." It is an
improvement on Darwin's theory of "Pangenesis," and a further approach,
a cautious move towards "magic." The former is a conjecture that certain
of the actual and identical atoms which had belonged to ancestral bodies
"are thus transmitted through their descendants for generation after
generation, so that we are literally 'flesh of the flesh' of the
primeval creature who has developed into man in the later . . . period"
-- explains the author of "The Modern Zoroastrian" (*in* "*Primitive
Polarities,*" etc.). The latter (Occultism) teaches that *--* (*a*) the
life-atoms of our (*Prana*) life-principle are never entirely lost when
a man dies. That the atoms best impregnated with the life-principle (an
independent, eternal, conscious factor) are partially transmitted from
father to son by heredity, and partially are drawn once more together
and become the animating principle of the new body in every new
incarnation of

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* Those who take the opposite view and look upon the existence of the
human soul, *--* "as a supernatural, a spiritual phenomenon, conditioned
by forces altogether different from *ordinary physical* forces," . . .
"mock," he thinks, "in consequence, all explanation that is simply
scientific." They have no right it seems, to assert that "psychology is,
in part, or in whole, a spiritual science, not a physical one." . . .
The new discovery by Haeckel (one taught for thousands of years in all
the Eastern religions, however), that the animals have souls, will, and
sensation, hence soul-functions, leads him to make of psychology the
science of the zoologists. The archaic teaching that the "Soul" (the
animal and human souls, or Kama and *Manas*) "has its developmental
history" -- is claimed by Haekel as his own discovery and innovation on
an "untrodden (?) path"! He (Haeckel) will work out the comparative
evolution of the soul in man and in other animals. . . . "The
comparative morphology of the soul-organs, and the comparative
physiology of the soul-functions, both founded on Evolution, thus become
the psychological (really materialistic) problem of the scientific man."
(*Cell-souls and* *Soul-cells,* p. 137, "*Pedigree of Man.*")

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 672 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

the Monads. Because (*b*), as the *individual* Soul is ever the same, so
are the atoms of the lower principles (body, its astral, or *life
double,* etc*.*)*,* drawn as they are by affinity and Karmic law always
to the same individuality in a series of various bodies, etc., etc.\*

To be just, and, to say the least, *logical,* our modern Haeckelians
ought to pass a resolution that henceforth the "Perigenesis of the
Plastidule," and like lectures, should be bound up with those on
"Esoteric Buddhism," and "The Seven Principles in Man." Thus the public
will have a chance, at any rate, of judging after comparison which of
the two teachings is the *most* or the *least* ABSURD, even from the
standpoint of *materialistic* and *exact* Science!

Now the Occultists, who trace every atom in the universe, whether an
aggregate or single, to One Unity, or Universal *Life*; who do not
recognize that anything in Nature can be *inorganic*; who know of no
such thing as *dead* matter -- the Occultists are consistent with their
doctrine of Spirit and Soul when speaking of *memory* in every atom, of
*will and sensation.* But what can a materialist mean by the
qualification? The law of *biogenesis,* in the sense applied to it by
the Haeckelians *--* "is the result of the ignorance on the part of the
man of science of *occult* physics." We know and speak of "life-atoms"
-- and of "sleeping-atoms" -- because we regard these two forms of
energy -- the kinetic and the potential -- as produced by one and the
same force or the ONE LIFE, and regard the latter as the source and
mover of all. But what *is it* that furnished with energy, and
especially with *memory,* the "plastidular souls" of Haeckel? The "wave
motion of living particles" becomes comprehensible on the theory of a
Spiritual ONE LIFE, of a universal Vital principle independent of *our*
matter, and manifesting as *atomic energy* only on *our* plane of
consciousness. It is that which, individualized in the human cycle, is
transmitted from father to son.

Now Haeckel, modifying Darwin's theory, suggests "most plausibly," as
the author of the "*Modern Zoroastrian*" thinks, "that not the identical
atoms, but their peculiar motions and mode of aggregation have been thus
transmitted" (by heredity).

If Haeckel, or any other Scientist, knew more than any of them does of
the nature of the atom, he would not have improved the occasion in this
way. For he only states, in a more *metaphysical language* than Darwin,
one and the same thing. The life-principle, or *life energy,*

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* (*See* "*Transmigration of the Life Atoms,*" "*Five years of
Theosophy,*" *p.* 533-539). The collective aggregation of these atoms
forms thus the *Anima Mundi* of our Solar system, the *soul* of our
little universe, each atom of which is of course a *soul,* a monad, a
little universe endowed with consciousness, hence with *memory* (*Vol.
I., Part III.,* "*Gods, Monads and Atoms.*")

------------------------------------------------------------------------

\[\[Vol. 2, Page 673\]\] THE MEANING OF SOUL WITH HAECKEL.

which is omnipresent, eternal, indestructible, is a *force* and a
PRINCIPLE as *noumenon,* atoms*, as phenomenon.* It is one and the same
thing, and cannot be considered as separate except in materialism.\*

Further, Haeckel enunciates concerning the Atom Souls that which, at
first sight, appears as occult as a Monad of Leibnitz. "The recent
contest as to the nature of atoms, which we must regard as in some form
or other the ultimate factors in all physical and chemical processes,"
he tells us -- "seems to be capable of the easiest settlement, by the
conception that these very minute masses possess, as centres of force,
*a persistent soul, that every atom has sensation* and the power of
movement."

He does not say a word concerning the fact that this is Leibnitz's
theory, and one pre-eminently occult. Nor does he understand the term
"Soul" as we do; for, with Haeckel it is simply, along with
consciousness, the production of the grey matter of the brain, a thing
which, as the "cell-soul, is as indissolubly bound up with the
protoplasmic body as is the *human soul with the brain and spinal
cord.*" (*Ibid.*) He rejects the conclusions of Kant, Herbert Spencer,
of du Bois-Reymond and Tyndall. The latter expresses the opinion of all
the great men of science, as of the greatest thinkers of this and the
past ages, in saying that "the passage from the physics of the brain *to
the corresponding facts of Consciousness is unthinkable.* Were our minds
and senses so . . . illuminated as to enable us to see and feel the very
molecules of the brain; were we capable of following all their motions,
all their groupings . . . electric discharges . . . we should be as far
as ever from the solution of the problem . . . *The chasm between the
two classes of Phenomena would still remain intellectually impassable.*"
But the complex function of the nerve-cells of the great German EMPIRIC,
or, in other words, his Consciousness, will not permit him to follow the
conclusions of the greatest thinkers of our globe. *He is greater than
they.* He asserts this, and *protests* against all. "No one has the
right

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* In "*The Transmigration of the Life-Atoms,*" we say, to explain
better a position which is but too often misunderstood: -- "It is
*omnipresent* . . . . though (on this plane of manifestation) often in a
dormant state *--* as in stone. The definition which states that when
this indestructible force is disconnected with one set of atoms
(*molecules ought* *to* have been said) it becomes immediately attracted
by others, does not imply that it entirely abandons the first set
(because the atoms themselves would then disappear), but only that it
transfers its *vis viva*, or life power *--* the energy of motion, to
another set. But because it manifests itself in the next set as what is
called Kinetic energy, it does not follow that the first set is deprived
of it altogether; for it is still in it, as potential energy or life
latent," etc., etc. Now what can Haeckel mean by his "not identical
atoms but their peculiar motion and mode of aggregation," if it is not
the same *Kinetic* energy we have been explaining? He must have read
Paracelsus and studied "Five Years of Theosophy," without properly
digesting the teachings, before evolving such theories.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 674 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

to hold that in the future *we* (Haeckel) shall not be able to pass
beyond those limits of our knowledge that to day seem impassable"; and
he quotes from Darwin's introduction to the "Descent of Man" these
words, which he modestly applies to his scientific opponents and
himself: "It is always those *who know little,* and not those who *know
much,* that positively affirm that this or that problem will never be
solved by Science."

The world may rest satisfied. That day is not far off when the "thrice
great" Haeckel will have shown (to his own satisfaction) that the
consciousness of Sir I. Newton was, physiologically speaking, but the
reflex action (or *minus* consciousness) caused by the *peri-genesis* of
the plastidules of our common ancestor and old friend, the *Moneron
Haeckelii.* The fact that the said "Bathybius" has been found out and
*exposed* as a pretender simulating the organic substance *it was not*;
and since, among the children of men, Lot's wife alone (and even this,
only after her disagreeable metamorphosis into a salt pillar) could
claim the pinch of salt *it is,* as her forefather -- will not dismay
him at all. He will go on asserting, as coolly as he has always done,
that it was no more than the peculiar mode and motion of the ghost of
the long-vanished atoms of our "Father Bathybius," which, transmitted
across aeons of time into the cell-tissue of the grey matter of the
brains of every great man, caused Sophocles and AEschylus, as well as
Shakespeare, to write their tragedies, Newton, his "Principia,"
Humboldt, his "Cosmos," etc. etc. It prompted Haeckel to invent
Graeco-Latin names three inches long, pretending to mean a good deal,
and meaning -- nothing.

Of course we are quite aware that the true, honest evolutionist agrees
with us; and that he is the first to say that not only is the geological
record imperfect, but that there are enormous gaps in the series of
hitherto discovered fossils, which can never be filled. He will tell us,
moreover, that "no evolutionist assumes that man is descended *from any
existing ape or any extinct ape either,*" but that man and apes
originated *probably* aeons back, in some common root stock. Still, as
de Quatrefages points out, he will claim as an evidence corroborating
his (the evolutionist's) claim, even this wealth of absent proofs,
saying that "all living forms have not been preserved in the fossil
series, the chances of preservation being few and far between," even
primitive man "burying or *burning* his dead" (A. Wilson). This is just
what we ourselves claim. It is just as *possible* that future should
have in store for us the discovery of the giant skeleton of an
Atlantean, 30ft. high, as the fossil of a pithecoid "missing link": only
the former is more *probable.*

-------

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next Section](sd2-3-03)

[Contents](sd2-0-co.htm#contents)
