##### fThe Secret Doctrine by H. P. Blavatsky -- Vol. 2

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 161 A SUGGESTIVE STANZA.

#### STANZA VII. FROM THE SEMI-DIVINE DOWN TO THE FIRST HUMAN RACES.

-------

> §§ (24) The higher creators reject in their pride the forms evolved by
> the "Sons of Yoga." (25) They will not incarnate in the early
> "Egg-born." . . (26) They select the later androgynes. (27) The first
> man endowed with mind.

---------------------

24\. **T**HE **S**ONS OF **W**ISDOM, THE **S**ONS OF **N**IGHT (*issued
from the body* *of Brahma when it became Night*), READY FOR RE-BIRTH,
CAME DOWN. **T**HEY SAW THE (*intellectually*) VILE FORMS OF THE FIRST
THIRD (*still senseless Race*) (*a*)*.* "**W**E CAN CHOOSE," SAID THE
**L**ORDS, "WE HAVE WISDOM." **S**OME ENTERED THE **C**HHAYAS. **S**OME
PROJECTED A SPARK. **S**OME DEFERRED TILL THE **F**OURTH (*Race*).
**F**ROM THEIR OWN ESSENCE THEY FILLED (*intensified*) THE **K**AMA
(*the vehicle of desire*)*.* **T**HOSE WHO RECEIVED BUT A SPARK REMAINED
DESTITUTE OF (*higher*) KNOWLEDGE. **T**HE SPARK BURNT LOW (*b*).
**T**HE **T**HIRD REMAINED MIND-LESS. **T**HEIR **J**IVAS (*Monads*)
WERE NOT READY. **T**HESE WERE SET APART AMONG THE **S**EVEN (*primitive
human species*). **T**HEY (*became* *the*) NARROW-HEADED. **T**HE THIRD
WERE READY. **I**N THESE SHALL WE DWELL, SAID THE **L**ORDS OF THE
**F**LAME AND OF THE **D**ARK **W**ISDOM (*c*).

This Stanza contains, in itself, the whole key to the mysteries of evil,
the so-called Fall of the angels, and the many problems that have
puzzled the brains of the philosophers from the time that the memory of
man began. It solves the secret of the subsequent inequalities of
intellectual capacity, of birth or social position, and gives a logical
explanation to the incomprehensible Karmic course throughout the aeons
which followed. The best explanation which can be given, in view of the
difficulties of the subject, shall now be attempted.

(*a*) Up to the Fourth Round, and even to the later part of the Third
Race in this Round, *Man --* if the ever-changing forms that clothed the
Monads during the first three Rounds and the first two and a half races
of the present one can be given that misleading name -- is, so far, only
an animal intellectually. It is only in the actual *midway* Round that
he develops in himself entirely the fourth principle as a fit vehicle
for the

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 162 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

fifth. But Manas will be relatively *fully* developed only in the
following Round, when it will have an opportunity of becoming entirely
divine until the end of the Rounds. As Christian Schoettgen says in
*Horae Hebraic,* etc., the first terrestrial Adam "had only the breath
of life," *Nephesh, but not the living Soul.*

(*b*) Here the *inferior* Races, of which there are still some analogues
left -- as the Australians (now fast dying out) and some African and
Oceanic tribes -- are meant. "*They were not ready*" signifies that the
*Karmic* development of these Monads had not yet fitted them to occupy
the forms of men destined for incarnation in higher intellectual Races.
But this is explained later on.

(*c*) *The Zohar* speaks of "Black Fire," which is *Absolute*
Light-Wisdom. To those who, prompted by old theological prejudice, may
say: "But the *Asuras* are the rebel Devas, the *opponents of the Gods
--* hence devils, and the spirits of Evil," it is answered: Esoteric
philosophy admits neither good nor evil *per se,* as existing
independently in nature. The cause for both is found, as regards the
Kosmos, in the necessity of contraries or contrasts, and with respect to
man, in his human nature, his ignorance and passions. There is no
*devil* or the utterly depraved, as there are no Angels absolutely
perfect, though there may be spirits of Light and of Darkness; thus
**L**UCIFER -- the spirit of Intellectual Enlightenment and Freedom of
Thought -- is metaphorically the guiding beacon, which helps man to find
his way through the rocks and sandbanks of Life, for Lucifer is the
**L**OGOS in his highest, and the "Adversary" in his lowest aspect --
both of which are reflected in our *Ego.* Lactantius, speaking of the
Nature of Christ, makes the **L**OGOS, the *Word, the first-born brother
of Satan,* the "*first of all creatures.*" (*Inst. div*. Book II., c.
viii., "Qabbalah," 116.)

The *Vishnu Purana* describes these primeval creatures (the
*Arvaksrota*) with *crooked* digestive canals: They were "endowed with
inward manifestations, but mutually in ignorance about *their kind and
nature.*" The twenty-eight kinds of *Badha,* or imperfections, do not
apply, as Wilson thought, to the animals now known and specified by
him,\* for these did not exist in those geological periods. This is
quite plain in the said work, in which the first created (on this globe)
are the "five-fold immovable creation," minerals and vegetables; then
come those fabulous animals, *Tiryaksrota,* (the monsters of the abyss
slain by the "Lords," see Stanzas **II.** and **III**.); then the
*Urdhwasrotas,* the happy celestial beings, which feed on ambrosia; then
lastly, the *Arvaksrotas,* human beings -- Brahma's

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* See Book I., chap. v., p. 71.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 163 CREATORS AND SUB-CREATORS.

seventh creation so-called. But these "creations," including the latter,
did not occur on this globe, wherever else they may have taken place. It
is not Brahma who creates things and men on this Earth, but the chief
and Lord of the Prajapati, the Lords of Being and terrestrial
Creation.\* Obeying the command of Brahma, Daksha (the synthesis, or the
aggregate, of the terrestrial creators and progenitors, Pitris included)
made superior and inferior (*vara* and *avara*) things "referring to
*putra*" progeny, and "*bipeds* and *quadrupeds,* and subsequently by
his will (the Sons of Will and Yoga) made females," *i.e*., separated
the androgynes. Here again, we have "bipeds" or men, created before the
"quadrupeds" as in the esoteric teachings. (*Vide supra and Stanza XII
as explained.*)

Since, in the exoteric accounts, the *Asuras* are the first beings
created from the "body of night," while the *Pitris* issue from that of
*Twilight*; the "gods" being placed by Parasara (*Vishnu Purana*)
between the two, and shown to evolve from the "body of the day," it is
easy to discover a determined purpose to veil the order of creation. Man
is the *Arvaksrota* coming from the "Body of the Dawn"; and elsewhere,
man is again referred to, when the creator of the world, Brahma, is
shown "creating fierce beings, denominated Bhutas and eaters of flesh,"
or as the text has it, "fiends frightful from being monkey-coloured and
carnivorous."\*\* Whereas the Rakshasas are generally translated by
"Evil Spirits" and "the enemies of the gods," which identifies them with
the *Asuras.* In the Ramayana, when Hanuman is reconnoitering the enemy
in Lanka, he finds there Rakshasas, some hideous, "while some were
beautiful to look upon," and, in *Vishnu Purana,* there is a direct
reference to their becoming the Saviours of "Humanity," or of Brahma.

The allegory is very ingenious. Great intellect and too much knowledge
are a two-edged weapon in life, and instruments for evil as well as for
good. When combined with Selfishness, they will make of the whole of
Humanity a footstool for the elevation of him who possesses them, and a
means for the attainment of his objects; while, applied to altruistic
humanitarian purposes, they may become the means of the salvation of
many. At all events, the absence of self-consciousness and intellect
will make of man an idiot, a brute in human form. Brahma is *Mahat --*
the universal Mind -- hence the too-selfish among the Rakshasas showing
the desire to become possessed of it all -- to "devour" Mahat. The
allegory is transparent.

At any rate, esoteric philosophy identifies the pre-Brahmanical

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* "*Vishnu Purana,*" Book I., chap. xv. of vol. 2.

\*\* *Ibid.,* Book I., chap. v.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 164 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

Asuras, Rudras,\* Rakshasas and all the "Adversaries" of the Gods in the
allegories, with the Egos, which, by incarnating in the still witless
man of the Third Race, made him *consciously* immortal. They are, then,
during the cycle of Incarnations, the true *dual Logos --* the
conflicting and two-faced divine Principle in Man. The Commentary that
follows, and the next Stanzas may, no doubt, throw more light on this
very difficult tenet, but the writer does not feel competent to give it
out fully. Of the succession of Races, however, they say: --

"*First come the SELF-EXISTENT on this Earth. They are the* '*Spiritual
Lives*' *projected by the absolute WILL and* *LAW, at the dawn of every
rebirth of the worlds. These LIVES are the divine* '*Sishta,*' (the
seed-Manus, or the Prajapati and the Pitris)."

From these proceed --

1\. *The First Race, the* "*Self-born,*" *which are the* (astral)
*shadows of their Progenitors.*\*\* *The body was devoid of all
understanding* (mind, intelligence, and will). *The inner being* (the
higher self or Monad), *though within the earthly frame, was unconnected
with it. The link, the Manas, was not there as yet.*

2\. *From the First* (race) *emanated the second, called the*
"*Sweat-born*"\*\*\* *and*

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* Whom Manu calls "our paternal grandfathers" (**III.**, 284). The
Rudras are the seven manifestations of Rudra-Siva, "the destroying god,"
and *also* the grand Yogi and ascetic.

\*\* See § II, §§ 1, Commentary.

\*\*\* To speak of *life* as having arisen, and of the human race as
having originated, in this *absurdly unscientific* way, in the face of
the modern Pedigrees of Man, is to court instantaneous annihilation. The
esoteric doctrine risks the danger, nevertheless, and even goes so far
as to ask the impartial reader to compare the above hypothesis (if it is
one) with Haeckel's theory -- now fast becoming an axiom with science --
which is quoted verbatim: --

". . . How did life, the living world of organisms, arise? And,
secondly, the special question: How did the human race originate? The
first of these two inquiries, that as to the first appearance of living
beings, can only be decided empirically (! !) by proof of the so-called
Archebiosis, or equivocal generation, or the spontaneous production of
organisms of the simplest conceivable kind. Such are the Monera
(Protogenes, Protamoeba, etc), exceedingly simple microscopic masses of
protoplasm without structure or organisation, which take in nutriment
and *reproduce themselves by division.* Such a Moneron as that
primordial organism *discovered* by the renowned English zoologist
Huxley, and named Bathybius Haeckelii, appears as a continuous thick
protoplasmic covering at the greatest depths of the ocean, between 3,000
and 30,000 feet. *It is true that the first appearance of such Monera
has not up to the present moment been actually observed*; but there is
nothing intrinsically improbable in such an evolution." (*The*
"*Pedigree of Man,*" *Aveling*'*s translation, p* 33.)

The Bathybius protoplasm having recently turned out to be no organic
substance at all, there remains little to be said. Nor, after reading
this, does one need to consume further time in refuting the further
assertion that . . . . "in that case man also \[\[Footnote continued on
next page\]\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 165 TO THE MONERON THE CREATOR.

*the* "*Boneless.*" *This is the Second Root-Race, endowed by the
preservers* (Rakshasas)\* *and the incarnating gods* (Asuras and the
Kumaras) *with the first primitive and weak spark* (the germ of
intelligence) . . *And from these in turn proceeds: -*-

3\. *The Third Root-Race, the* "*Two-fold*" (Androgynes). *The first
Races hereof are shells, till the last is* "*inhabited*" (i.e.,
informed) *by the Dhyanis.*

The Second Race, as stated above, being also sexless, evolved out of
itself, at its beginning, the Third Androgyne Race by an analogous, but
already more complicated process. As described in the *Commentary,* the
very earliest of that race were: --

"*The* '*Sons of Passive Yoga.\* They issued from the second Manushyas*

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\[\[Footnote continued from previous page\]\] has *beyond a doubt* (to
the minds of Haeckel and his like) arisen from the lower mammalia, apes
and the earlier simian creatures, the still earlier Marsupialia,
Amphibia, Pisces, by progressive transformations," all produced by "a
series of *natural forces working blindly*. . . . . . . . . *aim,
without design*" (*p.* 36).

The above-quoted passage bears its criticism on its own face. Science is
made to teach that which, up to the present time, "*has never been
actually observed.*" She is made to deny the phenomenon of an
*intelligent* nature and a vital force independent of form and matter,
and to find it more scientific to teach the miraculous performance of
"natural forces *working blindly without aim or design.*" If so, then we
are led to think that the *physico-mechanical* forces of the brains of
certain eminent Scientists are leading them on as blindly to sacrifice
logic and common sense on the altar of mutual admiration. Why should the
protoplasmic *Moneron* producing the first living creature through
*self-division* be held as a very scientific hypothesis, and an ethereal
*pre-human* race generating the primeval men in the same fashion be
tabooed as *unscientific* superstition? Or has materialism obtained a
sole monopoly in Science?

\* The *Rakshasas,* regarded in Indian popular theology as demons, are
called the "Preservers" beyond the Himalayas. This double and
contradictory meaning has its origin in a philosophical allegory, which
is variously rendered in the Puranas. It is stated that when Brahma
created the demons, Yakshas (from *Yaksh,* to eat) and the Rakshasas,
both of which kinds of demons, as soon as born, wished to devour their
creator, those among them that called out "Not so! oh, let him be saved
(preserved)" were named Rakshasas (*Vishnu Purana Book I. ch. v*.). The
*Bhagavata Purana* (*III,* 20, 19-21) renders the allegory differently.
Brahma transformed himself into night (or ignorance) invested with a
body, upon which the Yakshas and Rakshasas seized, exclaiming "Do not
spare it; devour it." Brahma then cried out, "Do not devour me, spare
me." This has an inner meaning of course. The "body of Night" is the
darkness of ignorance, and it is the darkness of silence and secrecy.
Now the Rakshasas are shown in almost every case to be Yogis, pious
Saddhus and Initiates, a rather unusual occupation for *demons.* The
meaning then is that while we have power to dispel the darkness of
ignorance, "*devour it,*" we have to preserve the sacred truth from
profanation. "Brahma is for the Brahmins alone," says that proud caste.
The moral of the *fable* is evident.

\*\* The gradual evolution of man in the Secret Doctrine shows that all
the later (to the profane the earliest) Races have their *physical*
origin in the early Fourth Race. But it is the sub-race, which preceded
the one that separated sexually, that is to be \[\[Footnote continued on
next page\]\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 166 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

(human race), *and became oviparous. The emanations that came out of
their bodies during the seasons of procreation were ovulary*; *the small
spheroidal nuclei developing into a large soft, egg-like vehicle,
gradually hardened, when, after a period of gestation, it broke and the
young human animal issued from it unaided, as the fowls do in our
race.*"

This must seem to the reader ludicrously absurd. Nevertheless, it is
strictly on the lines of evolutionary analogy, which science perceives
in the development of the living animal species. First the
*moneron-*like procreation by self-division (*vide Haeckel*); then,
after a few stages, the oviparous, as in the case of the reptiles, which
are followed by the birds; then, finally, the mammals with their
*ovoviviparous* modes of producing their young ones.

If the term *ovoviviparous* is applied to some fish and reptiles, which
hatch their eggs within their bodies, why should it not be applied to
female mammalians, including woman? The ovule, in which, after
impregnation, the development of the foetus takes place, is an egg.

At all events, this conception is more philosophical than that of Eve
with a suddenly created placenta giving birth to Cain, because of the
Apple, when even the marsupial, the earliest of mammals, *is not
placental* yet.

Moreover, the *progressive* order of the methods of reproduction, as
unveiled by science, is a brilliant confirmation of esoteric Ethnology.
It is only necessary to tabulate the data in order to prove our
assertion. (Cf. *especially Schmidt*'*s* "*Doctrine of Descent and
Darwinism,*" *p.* 39, *et. seq., and Laing*'*s* "*A Modern
Zoroastrian,*" *pp.* 102-111.)I

1\. *Fission: -*-

(*a*) As seen in the division of the homogeneous speck of protoplasm,
known as Moneron or Amoeba, into two.

\(b\) As seen in the division of the nucleated cell, in which the
cell-nucleus splits into two sub-nuclei, which either develop within the
original cell-wall or burst it, and multiply outside as independent
entities. (*Cf., the First Root-Race.*)

II\. *Budding: -*-

A small portion of the parent structure swells out at the surface and
finally parts company, growing to the size of the original organism;
*e.g.*, many vegetables, the sea-anemone, etc. (*Cf., the Second
Root-Race.*)\*

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\[\[Footnote continued from previous page\]\] regarded as the
*spiritual* ancestors of our present generations, and especially of the
Eastern Aryan Races. Weber's idea that the Indo-Germanic Race preceded
the Aryan *Vedic* Race is, to the Occultist, grotesque to the last
degree.

\* Every process of healing and cicatrization in the higher animal
groups -- even in the case of reproduction of mutilated limbs with the
Amphibians -- is effected by *fission* and *gemmation* of the elementary
morphological elements.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 167 MONADS AND ROUNDS.

III*. Spores:* --

A single cell thrown off by the parent organism, which develops into a
multicellular organism reproducing the features of the latter, *e.g*.,
bacteria and mosses.

IV*. Intermediate Hermaphroditism:* --

Male and female organs inhering in the same individual; *e.g*., the
majority of plants, worms, and snails, etc.; allied to budding. (Cf.
*Second and early Third Root-Races.*)

V. *True sexual union: -*-

(Cf. *later Third Root-Race.*)

We now come to an important point with regard to the double evolution of
the human race. The Sons of Wisdom, or the *spiritual* Dhyanis, had
become "intellectual" through their contact with matter, because they
had already reached, during previous cycles of incarnation, that degree
of intellect which enabled them to become independent and self-conscious
entities, *on this plane* of matter. They were reborn only by reason of
Karmic effects. They *entered* those who were "ready," and became the
Arhats, or *sages,* alluded to above. This needs explanation.

It does not mean that *Monads* entered forms in which other Monads
already were. They were "Essences," "Intelligences," and *conscious
spirits*; entities seeking to become still more conscious by uniting
with more developed matter. Their essence was too pure to be distinct
from the universal essence; but their "Egos," or *Manas* (since they are
called *Manasaputra,* born of "Mahat," or Brahma) had to pass through
earthly human experiences to become *all-wise,* and be able to start on
the returning ascending cycle. The *Monads* are not *discrete*
principles, limited or conditioned, but rays from that one universal
*absolute* Principle. The entrance into a dark room through the same
aperture of one ray of sunlight following another will not constitute
*two* rays, but one ray intensified. It is not in the course of natural
law that man should become a *perfect* septenary being, before the
seventh race in the seventh Round. Yet he has all these principles
latent in him from his birth. Nor is it part of the evolutionary law
that the Fifth principle (*Manas*), should receive its complete
development before the *Fifth* Round. All such prematurely developed
intellects (on the *spiritual* plane) in our Race are *abnormal*; they
are those whom we call the "Fifth-Rounders." Even in the coming seventh
Race, at the close of this Fourth Round, while our four lower principles
will be fully developed, that of *Manas* will be only proportionately
so. This limitation, however, refers solely to the spiritual
development. The intellectual, on the physical plane, was reached during
the Fourth Root-Race. Thus, those who were "half ready," who received
"but a spark," constitute the average humanity which has to acquire its
intellectuality during the present Manvantaric evolution,

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 168 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

after which they will be ready in the next for the full reception of the
"Sons of Wisdom." While those which "were not ready" at all, the latest
Monads, which had hardly evolved from their last transitional and lower
animal forms at the close of the Third Round, remained the
"narrow-brained" of the Stanza. This explains the otherwise
unaccountable degrees of intellectuality among the various races of men
-- the savage Bushman and the European -- even now. Those tribes of
savages, whose reasoning powers are very little above the level of the
animals, are not the unjustly disinherited, or the *unfavoured,* as some
may think -- nothing of the kind. They are simply those *latest
arrivals* among the human Monads, which *were* *not ready:* which have
to evolve during the present Round, as on the three remaining globes
(hence on four different planes of being) so as to arrive at the level
of the average class when they reach the Fifth Round. One remark may
prove useful, as food for thought to the student in this connection. The
MONADS of the lowest specimens of humanity (the "narrow-brained"\*
savage South-Sea Islander, the African, the Australian) *had no Karma to
work out when first born as men, as their more favoured brethren in
intelligence had.* The former are spinning out Karma only now; the
latter are burdened with past, present, and future Karma. In this
respect the poor savage is more fortunate than the greatest genius of
*civilised countries.*

Let us pause before giving any more such strange teachings. Let us try
and find out how far any ancient Scriptures, and even Science, permit
the possibility of, or even distinctly corroborate, such wild notions as
are found in our Anthropogenesis.

Recapitulating that which has been said we find: -- That the Secret
Doctrine claims for man, (1) a polygenetic origin. (2) A variety of
modes of procreation before humanity fell into the ordinary method of
generation. (3) That the evolution of animals -- of the mammalians at
any rate -- follows that of man instead of preceding it. And this is
diametrically opposed to the now generally accepted theories of
evolution and the descent of man from an animal ancestor.

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* The term here means neither the dolicho-cephalic nor the
brachyo-cephalic, nor yet skulls of a smaller volume, but simply brains
devoid of intellect generally. The theory which would judge of the
intellectual capacity of a man according to his cranial capacity, seems
absurdly illogical to one who has studied the subject. The skulls of the
stone period, as well as those of African Races (Bushmen included) show
that the first are above rather than below the average of the brain
capacity of the modern man, and the skulls of the last are on the whole
(as in the case of Papuans and Polynesians generally) larger by one
cubic inch than that of the average Frenchman. Again, the cranial
capacity of the Parisian of to-day represents an average of 1437 cubic
centimetres compared to 1523 of the Auvergnat.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 169 MONOGENISM OR POLYGENISM.

Let us, by giving to Caesar what is Caesar's, examine, first of all, the
chances for the polygenetic theory among the men of science.

Now the majority of the Darwinian evolutionists incline to a polygenetic
explanation of the origin of Races. On this particular question,
however, scientists are, as in many other cases, at sixes and sevens;
they agree to disagree.

"Does man descend from one *single couple* or from *several groups --*
monogenism or polygenism? As far as one can venture to pronounce on what
in the absence of witnesses (?) will never be known (?), the second
hypothesis is far the most probable."\* Abel Hovelacque, in his "Science
of Language," comes to a similar conclusion, arguing from the evidence
available to a linguistic enquirer.

In an address delivered before the British Association, Professor W. H.
Flower remarked on this question: --

"The view which appears best to accord with what is now known of the
characters and distribution of the races of man . . . . is a
modification of the monogenistic hypothesis (!). Without entering into
the difficult question of the method of man's first appearance upon the
world, we must assume for it a vast antiquity, at all events as measured
by any historical standard. *If we had any approach to a complete
palaeontological record, the history of Man could be re-constructed, but
nothing of the kind is forthcoming.*"

Such an admission must be regarded as fatal to the dogmatism of the
physical Evolutionists, and as opening a wide margin to occult
speculations. The opponents of the Darwinian theory were, and still
remain, polygenists. Such "intellectual giants" as John Crawford and
James Hunt discussed the problem and favoured polygenesis, and in their
day there was a far stronger feeling in favour of than against this
theory. It is only in 1864 that Darwinians began to be wedded to the
theory of unity, of which Messrs. Huxley and Lubbock became the first
*coryphai.*

As regards that other question, of the priority of man to the animals in
the order of evolution, the answer is as promptly given. If man is
really the Microcosm of the Macrocosm, then the teaching has nothing so
very impossible in it, and is but logical. For, man becomes that
Macrocosm for the three lower kingdoms under him. Arguing from a
physical standpoint, all the lower kingdoms, save the mineral -- which
is light itself, crystallised and immetallised -- from plants to the
creatures which preceded the first mammalians, all have been
consolidated in their physical structures by means of the "cast-off
dust" of those minerals, and *the refuse of the human matter, whether
from living or* *dead*

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* A. Lefevre, "Philosophy," p. 498.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 170 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

*bodies, on which they fed and which gave them their outer bodies.* In
his turn, man grew more physical, by re-absorbing into his system that
which he had given out, and which became transformed in the living
animal crucibles through which it had passed, owing to Nature's
alchemical transmutations. There were animals in those days of which our
modern naturalists have never dreamed; and the stronger became physical
material man, the giants of those times, the more powerful were his
emanations. Once that Androgyne "humanity" separated into sexes,
transformed by Nature into child-bearing engines, it ceased to procreate
its like through drops of vital energy oozing out of the body. But while
man was still ignorant of his procreative powers on the human plane,
(before his Fall, as a believer in Adam would say,) all this vital
energy, scattered far and wide from him, was used by Nature for the
production of the first mammal-animal forms. Evolution is *an eternal
cycle of becoming,* we are taught; and nature never leaves an atom
unused. Moreover, from the beginning of the Round, all in Nature tends
to become Man. All the impulses of the dual, centripetal and centrifugal
Force are directed towards one point -- **M**AN. The progress in the
succession of beings, says Agassiz, "consists in an increasing
similarity of the living fauna, and, among the vertebrates, especially,
in the increasing resemblance to man. Man is the end towards which all
*animal* creation has tended from the first appearance of the first
palaeozoic fishes."\*

Just so; but "the palaeozoic fishes" being at the lower curve of the arc
of the evolution of *forms,* this Round began with astral man, the
*reflection of the Dhyan Chohans, called the* "*Builders.*" Man *is the
alpha and the omega of objective creation.* As said in "*Isis
Unveiled,*" "all things had their origin in spirit -- evolution having
originally begun from above and proceeding downwards, instead of the
reverse, as taught in the Darwinian theory."\*\* Therefore, the tendency
spoken of by the eminent naturalist above quoted, is one inherent in
every atom. Only, were one to apply it to both sides of the evolution,
the observations made would greatly interfere with the modern theory,
which has now almost become (Darwinian) law.

But in citing the passage from Agassiz' work with approval, it must not
be understood that the occultists are making *any concession* to the
theory, which derives man from the animal kingdom. The fact that in this
Round he preceded the mammalia is obviously not impugned by the
consideration that the latter (mammalia) follow in the wake of man.

-------

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* "*Principles of Zoology,*" p. 206.

\*\* Vol. I, p. 154.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 171 A SUGGESTIVE EXPLANATION.

25\. **H**OW DID THE **M**ANASA, THE **S**ONS OF **W**ISDOM ACT?
**T**HEY REJECTED THE **S**ELF-BORN, (*the boneless*)*.* **T**HEY ARE
NOT READY. **T**HEY SPURNED THE (*First*) **S**WEAT-**B**ORN.\* **T**HEY
ARE NOT QUITE READY. **T**HEY WOULD NOT ENTER THE (*First*)
EGG-BORN.\*\*

To a Theist or a Christian this verse would suggest a rather theological
idea: that of the Fall of the Angels through Pride. In the Secret
Doctrine, however, the reasons for the refusal to incarnate in
*half-ready* physical bodies seem to be more connected with
physiological than metaphysical reasons. Not all the organisms were
sufficiently ready. The incarnating powers chose the ripest fruits and
spurned the rest.\*\*\*

By a curious coincidence, when selecting a familiar name for the
continent on which the first androgynes, the Third Root-Race, separated,
the writer chose, on geographical considerations, that of "Lemuria,"
invented by Mr. P. L. Sclater. It is only later, that reading Haeckel's
"Pedigree of Man," it was found that the German "Animalist" had chosen
the name for his late continent. He traces, properly enough, the centre
of human evolution to "Lemuria," but with a slight scientific variation.
Speaking of it as that "cradle of mankind," he pictures the gradual
transformation of the anthropoid mammal into the primeval savage!! Vogt,
again, holds that in America Man sprang from a branch of the platyrrhine
apes, *independently* of the origination of the African and Asian
root-stocks from the old world catarrhinians. Anthropologists are, as
usual, at loggerheads on this question, as on many others. We shall
examine this claim in the light of esoteric philosophy in Stanza
**VIII**. Meanwhile, let us give a few moments of attention to the
various consecutive modes of procreation according to the laws of
Evolution.

Let us begin by the mode of reproduction of the later sub-races of the
Third human race, by those who found themselves endowed with the *sacred
fire* from the spark of higher and then independent Beings, who were the
psychic and spiritual parents of Man, as the lower *Pitar Devata* (the
*Pitris*) were the progenitors of his physical body. That Third and holy
Race consisted of men who, at their zenith, were described

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* This is explained in the section which follows this series of Stanzas
in the allegory from the Puranas concerning Kandu, the holy sage, and
Pramlocha, the nymph alleged to have hypnotised him, (Vide § II,
Commentary after St.I.), a suggestive allegory, scientifically, as the
drops of perspiration, which she exuded, are the symbols of the spores
of science (*Vide infra*).

\*\* This will be explained as we proceed. This unwillingness to fashion
men, or create, is symbolized in the Puranas by Daksha having to deal
with his opponent Narada, the "strife-making ascetic."

\*\*\* *Vide* Verse 24.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 172 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

as, "towering giants of godly strength and beauty, and the depositories
of all the mysteries of Heaven and Earth." Have they likewise *fallen,*
if, then, incarnation was the *Fall?*

Of this presently. The only thing now to be noted of these is, that the
chief gods and heroes of the Fourth and Fifth Races, as of later
antiquity, are the *deified images of these men of the Third.* The days
of their physiological purity, and those of their so-called Fall, have
equally survived in the hearts and memories of their descendants. Hence,
the dual nature shown in those gods, both virtue and sin being exalted
to their highest degree, in the biographies composed by posterity. They
were the *pre-Adamite* and the divine Races, with which even theology,
in whose sight they are all "the accursed Cainite Races," now begins to
busy itself.

But the action of "spiritual progenitors" of that Race has first to be
disposed of. A very difficult and abstruse point has to be explained
with regard to Stanzas 26 and 27. These say: --

-------

26\. **W**HEN THE **S**WEAT-BORN PRODUCED THE **E**GG-BORN, THE
**T**WO-FOLD (*androgyne Third Race*\*), THE **M**IGHTY, THE
**P**OWERFUL WITH **B**ONES, THE **L**ORDS OF **W**ISDOM SAID: "**N**OW
SHALL WE CREATE" (*a*).

Why "now" -- and not earlier? This the following sloka explains.

-------

27*.* (*Then*) THE **T**HIRD (*race*) BECAME THE VAHAN (*vehicle*) *OF*
THE **L**ORDS OF **W**ISDOM. **I**T CREATED **S**ONS OF "**W**ILL AND
**Y**OGA," BY **K**RIYASAKTI (*b*), IT CREATED THEM, THE **H**OLY
**F**ATHERS, **A**NCESTORS OF THE **A**RHATS. . . .

(*a*) How did they *create,* since the "Lords of Wisdom" are identical
with the Hindu Devas, who refuse "to create"? Clearly they are the

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* The evolutionist Professor Schmidt alludes to "the fact of the
separation of sexes, as to the derivation of which from species *once
hermaphrodite* all (the believers in creation naturally excepted) are
assuredly of one accord." Such indeed is the incontestable evidence
drawn from the presence of rudimentary organs. (*Cf., his* "*Doctrine of
Descent and Darwinism,*" p. 159.) Apart from such palpable traces of a
primeval hermaphroditism, the fact may be noted that, as Laing writes,
"a study of embryology. . . . shows that in the *human higher animal*
species the distinction of sex is not developed until a *considerable
progress* has been made in the growth of the embryo." ("*A Modern
Zoroastrian,*" p.106.) The Law of Retardation -- operative alike in the
case of human races, animal species, etc., when a higher type has once
been evolved -- still preserves hermaphroditism as the reproductive
method of the majority of plants and many lower animals.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 173 THE SONS OF KRIYASAKTI.

*Kumaras* of the Hindu Pantheon and Puranas, those elder sons of Brahma,
"Sanandana and the other sons of *Vedhas,*" who, previously created by
him "without desire or passion, remained chaste, full of holy wisdom and
undesirous of progeny?"\*

The power, by which they first created, is just that which has since
caused them to be degraded from their high status to the position of
evil spirits, of Satan and his Host, created in their turn by the
unclean fancy of exoteric creeds. It was by *Kriyasakti,* that
mysterious and divine power latent in the will of every man, and which,
if not called to life, quickened and developed by Yogi-training, remains
dormant in 999,999 men out of a million, and gets atrophied. This power
is explained in the "Twelve Signs of the Zodiac,"\*\* as follows: --

(*b*) "*Kriyasakti --* the mysterious *power of thought* which enables
it to produce external, perceptible, phenomenal results by its own
inherent energy. The ancients held that any idea will manifest itself
*externally,* if one's attention (and Will) is deeply concentrated upon
it; similarly, an intense volition will be followed by the desired
result. A Yogi generally performs his wonders by means of Itchasakti
(Will-power) and Kriyasakti."

The Third Race had thus created the so-called **S**ONS OF **W**ILL AND
**Y**OGA, or the "ancestors" (the *spiritual* forefathers) of all the
subsequent and present Arhats, or Mahatmas, in a truly *immaculate* way.
They were indeed *created,* not *begotten,* as were their brethren of
the Fourth Race, who were generated sexually after the separation of
sexes, the *Fall of Man.* For creation is but the result of will acting
on phenomenal matter, the calling forth out of it the primordial divine
*Light* and eternal *Life.* They were the "holy seed-grain" of the
future Saviours of Humanity.

Here we have to make again a break, in order to explain certain
difficult points, of which there are so many. It is almost impossible to
avoid such interruptions. For explanations and a philosophical account
of the nature of those beings, which are now viewed as the "Evil" and
rebellious Spirits, the creators by Kriyasakti, the reader is referred
to the chapters on "The Fallen Angels" and "The Mystic Dragons," in Part
**II**. of this Volume.

The order of the evolution of the human Races stands thus in the Fifth
Book of the Commentaries, and was already given: --

*The First men were Chhayas* (1) ; *the second, the* "*Sweat-born*"
(2)*, the Third,* "*Egg-born,*" *and the holy Fathers born by the power
of Kriyasakti* (3); *the Fourth were the children of the Padmapani*
(Chenresi) (4).

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* See "*Vishnu Purana,*" Book I., ch. 7, para. 1.

\*\* See "*Five Years of Theosophy,*" p. 777.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 174 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

Of course such primeval modes of procreation -- by the evolution of
one's image, through drops of perspiration, after that by Yoga, and then
by what people will regard as magic (Kriyasakti) -- are doomed
beforehand to be regarded as fairy-tales. Nevertheless, beginning with
the first and ending with the last, there is really nothing miraculous
in them, nor anything which could not be shown natural. This must be
proven.

1*. Chhaya-birth,* or that primeval mode of *sexless* procreation, the
first Race having *oozed out,* so to say, from the bodies of the Pitris,
is hinted at in a Cosmic allegory in the Puranas.\* It is the beautiful
allegory and story of Sanjna, the daughter of Viswakarman -- married to
the Sun, who, "unable to endure the fervours of her lord," gave him her
*chhaya* (shadow, image, or *astral* body), while she herself repaired
to the jungle to perform religious devotions, or *Tapas.* The Sun,
supposing the "chhaya" to be his wife begat by her children, like Adam
with Lilith -- an *ethereal shadow* also, as in the legend, though an
actual living female monster millions of years ago.

But, perhaps, this instance proves little except the exuberant fancy of
the Puranic authors. We have another proof ready. If the materialised
forms, which are sometimes seen oozing out of the bodies of certain
mediums could, instead of vanishing, be fixed and made solid -- the
*creation* of the first Race would become quite comprehensible. This
kind of procreation cannot fail to be suggestive to the student. Neither
the mystery nor the *impossibility* of such a mode is certainly any
greater -- while it is far more comprehensible to the mind of the true
metaphysical thinker - than the mystery of the conception of the foetus,
its gestation and birth as a child, as we now know it.

Now to the curious and little understood corroboration in the Puranas
about the "Sweat-born."

2\. Kandu is a sage and a Yogi, eminent in holy wisdom and pious
austerities, which, finally, awaken the jealousy of the gods, who are
represented in the Hindu Scriptures as being in never-ending strife with
the ascetics. Indra, the "King of the Gods,"\*\* finally sends one of
his female Apsarasas to tempt the sage. This is no worse than Jehovah
sending Sarah, Abraham's wife, to tempt Pharaoh; but in truth it is
those gods (and god), who are ever trying to disturb ascetics and thus
make them lose the fruit of their austerities, who ought to be regarded
as "tempting demons," instead of applying the term to the Rudras,
Kumaras, and Asuras, whose great sanctity and chastity seem a standing
reproach to the Don Juanic gods of the Pantheon. But it is

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* *Vide* "*Vishnu-Purana,*" Book **III**., chap. 2.

\*\* In the oldest **MS.** of "*Vishnu-Purana*" in the possession of an
Initiate in Southern India, the god is not Indra, but Kama, the god of
love and desire. See text further on.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 175 A SAINT -- HYPNOTISED.

the reverse that we find in all the Puranic allegories, and not without
good esoteric reason.

The king of the gods (or Indra) sends a beautiful Apsarasas (nymph)
named Pramlocha to seduce Kandu and disturb his penance. She succeeds in
her unholy purpose and "907 years six months and three days"\* spent in
her company seem to the sage as one day. When this psychological or
hypnotic state ends, the Muni curses bitterly the creature who seduced
him, thus disturbing his devotions. "Depart, begone!" he cries, "vile
bundle of illusions!" . . . And Pramlocha, terrified, flies away,
*wiping the perspiration from her body* with the leaves of the trees as
she passes through the air. She went from tree to tree, and as, with the
dusky shoots that crowned their summits, she dried her limbs, the child
she had conceived by the Rishi came forth from the pores of her skin in
drops of perspiration. The trees received the living dews; and the winds
collected them into one mass. "This," said Soma (the Moon), "I matured
by my rays; and gradually it increased in size, till the exhalation that
had rested on the tree tops became the lovely girl named Marisha."\*\*

Now Kandu stands here for the *First Race.* He is a son of the Pitris,
hence one *devoid of mind,* which is hinted at by his being unable to
discern a period of nearly one thousand years from one day; therefore he
is shown to be so easily deluded and blinded. Here is a variant of the
allegory in *Genesis,* of Adam, born an image of clay, into which the
"Lord-god" breathes the *breath of life* but not of intellect and
discrimination, which are developed only after he had tasted of the
fruit of the Tree of Knowledge; in other words when he has acquired the
first development of Mind, and had implanted in him *Manas,* whose
terrestrial aspect is of the Earth earthy, though its highest faculties
connect it with Spirit and the *divine Soul.* Pramlocha is the Hindu
Lilith of the Aryan Adam; and Marisha, the daughter born of the
perspiration from her pores, is the "sweat-born," and stands as a symbol
for the Second Race of Mankind.

As remarked in the foot note (*vide supra*) it is not Indra, who now
figures in the Puranas, but Kamadeva, the god of love and desire, who
sends Pramlocha on Earth. Logic, besides the esoteric doctrine, shows
that it must be so. For Kama is the king and lord of the Apsarasas, of
whom Pramlocha is one; and, therefore, when Kandu, in cursing her,

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* These are the exoteric figures given in a purposely reversed and
distorted way, being the figure of the duration of the cycle between the
first and second human race. All Orientalists to the contrary, there is
not a word in any of the Puranas that has not a special esoteric
meaning.

\*\* "*Vishnu Purana,*" Book I., ch. 15. Cf. also Vivien's temptation of
Merlin (Tennyson), the same legend in Irish tradition.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 176 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

exclaims "Thou hast performed the office assigned by the monarch of the
gods, go!" he must mean by that monarch Kama and not Indra, to whom the
Apsarasas are not subservient. For Kama, again, is in the Rig Veda (*x*.
129) the personification of that feeling which leads and propels to
creation. He was the *first movement* that stirred the **O**NE, after
its manifestation from the purely abstract principle, to create, "Desire
first arose in It, which was the *primal germ of mind*; and which sages,
searching with their intellect, have discovered to be the bond which
connects Entity with Non-Entity." A hymn in the *Atharva Veda* exalts
Kama into a supreme God and Creator, and says: "Kama was born the first.
Him, neither gods nor fathers (Pitara) nor men have equalled." . . . .
The Atharva Veda identifies him with *Agni*, but makes him superior to
that god. The *Taittariya Brahmana* makes him allegorically the son of
Dharma (moral religious duty, piety and justice) and of Sraddha (faith).
Elsewhere Kama is born from the heart of Brahma; therefore he is
*Atma-Bhu* "Self-Existent," and *Aja,* the "unborn." His sending
Promlocha has a deep philosophical meaning; sent by Indra -- the
narrative has none. As Eros was connected in early Greek mythology with
the world's creation, and only afterwards became the sexual Cupid, so
was Kama in his original Vedic character, (Harivansa making him a son of
Lakshmi, who is Venus). The allegory, as said, shows the psychic element
developing the physiological, before the birth of *Daksha, the
progenitor of real physical men,* made to be born from Marisha and
before whose time living beings and men were procreated "by the will, by
sight, by touch and by Yoga," as will be shown.

This, then, is the allegory built on the mode of procreation of the
*Second* or the "Sweat-born." The same for the *Third Race* in its final
development.

Marisha, through the exertions of Soma, the Moon, is taken to wife by
the *Prachetasas,* the production of the "Mind-born" sons of Brahma
also\*, from whom they beget the Patriarch Daksha, a son of Brahma

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* The text has: -- "From Brahma were born mind-engendered progeny, with
forms and faculties derived from his corporeal nature, *embodied
spirits* produced from the limbs (*gatra*) of *Dhimat* (all-wise deity).
These beings were the abode of the three qualities of *deva-sarga*
(divine creation, which, as the five-fold creation, is *devoid of
clearness of perception, without reflection,* dull of nature). But as
they *did not multiply themselves,* Brahma created "other mind-born sons
like himself," namely, the Brahma-rishis, or the Prajapati (ten and
seven). Sanandana and the other sons of Vedhas (Brahma) were previously
created, but, as shown elsewhere, they were "*without desire or
passion,* inspired with holy wisdom, estranged from the universe and
undesirous of progeny" (*Book I, ch.* 7). These Sanandana and other
Kumaras are then the Gods, who after refusing to "create progeny" are
forced to incarnate in senseless men. The reader must pardon unavoidable
repetitions in view of the great number of the facts given.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 177 SWEAT-BORN AND ANDROGYNES.

also, in a former *Kalpa* or life, explain and add the Puranas, in order
to mislead, yet speaking the truth.

(3.) The early Third Race, then, is formed from drops of "sweat," which,
after many a transformation, grow into human bodies. This is not more
difficult to imagine or realise than the growth of the foetus from an
imperceptible germ, which foetus develops into a child, and then into a
strong, heavy man. But this race again changes its mode of procreation
according to the Commentaries. It is said to have emanated a *vis
formativa,* which changed the drops of perspiration into greater drops,
which grew, expanded, and became ovoid bodies -- huge eggs. In these the
human foetus gestated for several years. In the Puranas, Marisha, the
daughter of Kandu, the sage, becomes the wife of the *Prachetasas* and
the mother of Daksha. Now Daksha is the father of the first *human-like*
progenitors, having been born in this way. He is mentioned later on. The
evolution of man, the microcosm, is analogous to that of the Universe,
the macrocosm. His evolution stands between that of the latter and that
of the animal, for which man, in his turn, is a macrocosm.

Then the race becomes: --

(4.) The androgyne, or hermaphrodite. This process of men-bearing
explains, perhaps, why Aristophanes\* describes the nature of the old
race as *androgynous,* the form of every individual being rounded,
"having the back and sides as *in a circle,*" whose "manner of running
was circular . . . . terrible in force and strength and with prodigious
ambition." Therefore, to make them weaker, "Zeus divided them (in the
Third Root-Race) into two, and Apollo (the Sun), under his direction,
closed up the skin." The Madagascans (the island belonged to Lemuria)
have a tradition about the first man, who lived at first without eating,
and, having indulged in food, a swelling appeared in his leg; this
bursting, there emerged from it a female, who became the mother of their
race. Truly . . . "We have our sciences of *Heterogenesis* and
*Parthenogenesis,* showing that the field is yet open. . . . . The
polyps . . . . produce their offspring from themselves, like the buds
and ramifications of a tree. . . . " Why not the primitive *human*
polyp? The very interesting polyp *Stauridium* passes alternately from
gemmation into the sex method of reproduction. Curiously enough, though
it grows merely as a polyp on a stalk, it produces gemmules, which
ultimately develop into a sea-nettle or *Medusa.* The Medusa is utterly
dissimilar to its parent-organism, the Stauridium. It also reproduces
itself differently, by sexual method, and from the resulting eggs
*Stauridia* once more put in

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* See Plato's "*Banquet.*"

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 178 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

an appearance. This striking fact may assist many to understand that a
form may be evolved -- as in the *sexual* Lemurians from *Hermaphrodite*
parentage -- quite unlike its immediate progenitors. It is, moreover,
unquestionable that in the case of *human* incarnations the law of
Karma, racial or individual, overrides the subordinate tendencies of
"Heredity," its servant.

The meaning of the last sentence in the above-quoted Commentary on
Stanza 27, namely, that the Fourth Race were the children of Padmapani,
may find its explanation in a certain letter from the Inspirer of
"*Esoteric Buddhism*" quoted on p. 68. "The majority of mankind belongs
to the seventh sub-race of the Fourth Root-Race -- the above-mentioned
Chinamen and their off-shoots and branchlets. (Malayans, Mongolians,
Tibetans, Hungarians, Finns, and even the Esquimaux are all remnants of
this last offshoot.)"

Padmapani, or Avalokiteswara in Sanskrit, is, in Tibetan, Chenresi. Now,
Avalokiteswara is the great *Logos* in its higher aspect and in the
divine regions. But in the manifested planes, he is, like Daksha, the
progenitor (in a spiritual sense) of men. Padmapani-Avalokiteswara is
called *esoterically* Bhodhisatva (or Dhyan Chohan) *Chenresi Vanchug,*
"the powerful and all-seeing." He is considered now as the greatest
protector of Asia in general, and of Tibet in particular. In order to
guide the Tibetans and Lamas in holiness, and preserve the great Arhats
in the world, this heavenly Being is credited with manifesting himself
from age to age in human form. A popular legend has it that whenever
faith begins to die out in the world, Padmapani Chenresi, the
"lotus-bearer," emits a brilliant ray of light, and forthwith incarnates
himself in one of the two great Lamas -- the Dalai and Teschu Lamas;
finally, it is believed that he will incarnate as "the most perfect
Buddha" in Tibet, instead of in India, where his predecessors, the great
Rishis and Manus had appeared in the beginning of our Race, but now
appear no longer. Even the exoteric appearance of Dhyani Chenresi is
suggestive of the esoteric teaching. He is evidently, like Daksha, the
synthesis of all the preceding Races and the progenitor of all the
*human* Races after the Third, the first complete one, and thus is
represented as the *culmination of the four primeval* races in his
*eleven-faced* form. It is a column built in four rows, each series
having three faces or heads of different complexions: the three faces
for each race being typical of its three fundamental physiological
transformations. The first is white (moon-coloured); the second is
yellow; the third, red-brown; the fourth, in which are only two faces --
the third face being left a blank -- (a reference to the untimely end of
the Atlanteans) is brown-black. Padmapani (Daksha) is seated on the
column, and forms the apex. In this reference

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 179 THE BIRTH-DAYS OF THE DHYANIS.

compare Stanza 39. The Dhyan Chohan is represented with four arms,
another allusion to the four races. For while two are folded, the third
hand holds a lotus (*Padmapani,* "the lotus-bearer"), this flower
symbolizing generation, and the fourth holds a serpent, emblem of the
Wisdom in his power. On his neck is a rosary, and on his head the sign
of water ![](sd2-179.gif) -- matter, deluge -- while on his brow rests
the third eye (Siva's eye, that of spiritual insight). His name is
"Protector" (of Tibet), "Saviour of Humanity." On other occasions when
he has only two arms, he is Chenresi, the Dhyani and Bhodisatva,
*Chakna-padmakarpo,* "he who holds a lotus." His other name is Chantong,
"he of the 1,000 eyes," when he is endowed with a thousand arms and
hands, on the palm of each of which is represented an eye of Wisdom,
these arms radiating from his body like a forest of rays. Another of his
names is Lokapati and Lokanatha (Sanskrit) "Lord of the World"; and
Jigtengonpo (Tibetan), "Protector and Saviour against evil" of any kind.

Padmapani, however, is the "lotus-bearer" symbolically only for the
profane; esoterically, it means the supporter of the Kalpas, the last of
which, the present Maha-Kalpa (the Varaha), is called Padma, and
represents one half of the life of Brahma. Though a minor Kalpa, it is
called Maha, "great," because it comprises the age in which Brahma
sprang from a lotus. Theoretically, the Kalpas are infinite, but
practically they are divided and sub-divided in Space and Time, each
division -- down to the smallest -- having its own Dhyani as patron or
regent. Padmapani (Avalokiteshwara) becomes, in China, in his female
aspect, Kwan-yin, "who assumes any form, at pleasure, in order to save
mankind." The knowledge of the astrological aspect of the constellations
on the respective "birth-days" of these Dhyanis -- Amitabha (the O-mi-to
Fo, of China), included: *e.g.*, on the 19th day of the second month, on
the 17th day of the eleventh month, and on the 7th day of the third
month, etc., etc. -- gives the Occultist the greatest facilities for
performing what are called "magic" feats. The future of an individual is
seen, with all its coming events marshalled in order, in a *magic*
mirror placed under the ray of certain constellations. But -- beware of
the reverse of the medal, **S**ORCERY.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next Section](sd2-1-09)

[Contents](sd2-0-co.htm#contents)
