##### The Secret Doctrine by H. P. Blavatsky -- Vol. 2

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 191 THE CAUSE OF DEGENERATION.

#### STANZA IX. THE FINAL EVOLUTION OF MAN.

-------

> §§ (33) The creators repent. (34) They atone for their neglect. (35)
> Men become endowed with minds. (36) The fourth race develops perfect
> speech. (37) Every androgynous unit is separated and becomes bisexual.

---------------------

33\. **S**EEING WHICH (*the sin committed with the animals*), THE
**L**HAS (*the spirits, the* "*Sons of Wisdom*") WHO HAD NOT BUILT MEN
(*who had refused to create*), WEPT, SAYING: --

-------

34\. "**T**HE **A**MANASA (*the* '*mindless*') HAVE DEFILED OUR FUTURE
ABODES (*a*). **T**HIS IS **K**ARMA. **L**ET US DWELL IN THE OTHERS.
**L**ET US TEACH THEM BETTER, LEST WORSE SHOULD HAPPEN." **T**HEY DID. .
. .

-------

35\. **T**HEN ALL BECAME ENDOWED WITH **M**ANAS (*minds*)*.* **T**HEY
SAW THE SIN OF THE MINDLESS.

But they had already *separated* before the ray of divine reason had
enlightened the dark region of their hitherto slumbering minds, and had
*sinned.* That is to say, they had committed evil unconsciously, by
producing an effect which was unnatural. Yet, like the other six
primitive brother or fellow races, even so this seventh, henceforth
degenerated race, which will have to bide its time for its final
development on account of the *sin* committed, -- even this race will
*find itself on the last day* on one of the seven paths. For "the wise\*
guard the home of nature's order, they assume excellent forms in
secret."\*\* But we must see whether the "animals" tampered with, were
of the same kind as those known to zoology.

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* This verse in the Veda (*X.* 5-6), "The seven wise ones (rays of
wisdom, Dhyanis) fashion seven paths (or lines as also *Races* in
another sense). To one of these may the distressed mortal come" -- which
is interpreted solely from the astronomical and cosmic aspect -- is one
of the most pregnant in occult meaning. The "paths" may mean lines
(*maryadah*)*,* but they are primarily beams of light falling on the
paths leading to wisdom. (See *Rig Veda* **IV**. 5-13.) It means "ways"
or paths. They are, in short, the seven Rays which fall free from the
macrocosmic centre, the seven principles in the metaphysical, the seven
Races in the physical sense. All depends upon the key used.

\*\* "*Rig Veda,*" X. 10, 5, 2.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 192 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

(*a*) The "Fall" occurred, according to the testimony of ancient Wisdom
and the old records, as soon as Daksha (the reincarnated Creator of men
and things in the early Third Race) disappeared to make room for that
portion of mankind which had "separated." This is how the Commentary
explains the details that preceded the "Fall": --

"*In the initial period of man*'*s Fourth evolution, the human kingdom
branched off in several and various directions. The outward shape of its
first specimens was not uniform, for the vehicles* (the egg-like,
external shells, in which the future fully physical man gestated) *were
often tampered with, before they hardened, by huge animals, of species
now unknown, and which belonged to the tentative efforts of Nature. The
result was that intermediate races of monsters, half animals, half men,
were produced. But as they were failures, they were not allowed to
breathe long and live, though the intrinsically paramount power of
psychic over physical nature being yet very weak, and hardly
established, the* '*Egg-Born*' *Sons had taken several of their females
unto themselves as mates, and bred other human monsters. Later, animal
species and human races becoming gradually equilibrized, they separated
and mated no longer. Man created no* *more -- he begot. But he also
begot animals, as well as* *men in* *days of old. Therefore the Sages*
(*or wise men*)*, who speak of males who had no more* *will-begotten
offspring, but begat various animals along with Danavas* (giants) *on
females of other species -- animals being as* (*or in a manner of*)
*Sons putative to them*; *and they* (the human males) *refusing in time
to be regarded as* (putative) *fathers of dumb creatures* -- *spoke
truthfully and wisely. Upon seeing this* (state of things), *the kings
and Lords of the Last Races* (of the Third and the Fourth) *placed the
seal of prohibition upon the sinful intercourse. It interfered with
Karma*, *it developed new* (Karma)*.*\* *They* (the divine Kings)
*struck the culprits with sterility. They destroyed the Red and Blue
Races.*\*\*

In another we find: --

"*There were blue and red-faced animal-men even in later times*; *not
from actual intercourse* (between the human and animal species), *but by
descent.*"

And still another passage mentions: --

"*Red-haired, swarthy men going on all-fours, who bend and unbend*
(stand erect and fall on their hands again) *who speak as their
forefathers, and run on their hands as their giant fore-mothers.*"

Perchance in these specimens, Haeckelians might recognize, not the

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* It is next to impossible to translate verbally some of these old
Commentaries. We are often obliged to give the meaning only, and thus
retranslate the verbatim translations.

\*\* Rudra, as a Kumara, is *Lilalohita --* red and blue.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 193 THE BONELESS RACE.

*Homo primigenius,* but some of the lower tribes, such as some tribes of
the Australian savages. Nevertheless, even these are not descended from
the anthropoid apes, but from human fathers and semi-human mothers, or,
to speak more correctly, from human monsters -- those "failures"
mentioned in the first Commentary. The real anthropoids, Haeckel's
*Catarrhini* and *Platyrrhini,* came far later, in the closing times of
Atlantis. The orang-outang, the gorilla, the chimpanzee and cynocephalus
are the latest and purely physical evolutions from lower anthropoid
mammalians. They have a spark of the purely human essence in them; man
on the other hand, has not one drop of pithecoid\* blood in his veins.
Thus saith old Wisdom and universal tradition.

How was the separation of sexes effected? it is asked. Are we to believe
in the old Jewish fable of the rib of Adam yielding Eve? Even such
belief is more logical and reasonable than the descent of man from the
Quadrumana without any reservation; as the former hides an esoteric
truth under a fabulous version, while the latter conceals no deeper fact
than a desire to force upon mankind a materialistic fiction. The rib is
bone, and when we read in Genesis that Eve was made out of the rib, it
only means that the *Race with bones* was produced out of a previous
Race and Races, which were "boneless." This is an esoteric tenet spread
far and wide, as it is almost universal under its various forms. A
Tahitian tradition states that man was created out of *Araea,* "red

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* This, regardless of modern materialistic evolution, which speculates
in this wise: "The primitive human form, whence as we think all human
species sprang, has perished this long time." (This we deny; it has only
decreased in size and changed in texture.) "But many facts point to the
conclusion that it was hairy and dolichocephalic." (African races are
even *now* dolichocephalic in a great measure, but the palaeolithic
Neanderthal skull, the oldest we know of, is of a large size, and no
nearer to the capacity of the gorilla's cranium than that of any other
now-living man). "Let us, for the time being, call this hypothetical
species *Homo primigenius*. . . . This first species, or the Ape-man,
the ancestor of all the others, PROBABLY arose in the *tropical regions*
of the old world from ANTHROPOID APES." Asked for proofs, the
evolutionist, not the least daunted, replies: "Of these NO FOSSIL
REMAINS ARE AS YET KNOWN TO US, BUT THEY WERE *probably* AKIN TO THE
**G**ORILLA AND **O**RANG OF THE PRESENT DAY." And then the Papuan negro
is mentioned as the probable descendant in the first line (*Pedigree of
Man, p*. 80).

Haeckel holds fast to Lemuria, which with East Africa and South Asia
also, he mentions as the possible cradle of the primitive Ape-men; and
so do many geologists. Mr. A. R. Wallace admits its reality, though in a
rather modified sense, in his "*Geographical Distribution of Animals.*"
But let not Evolutionists speak so lightly of the comparative size of
the brains of man and the ape, for this is very *unscientific,*
especially when they pretend to see no difference between the two, or
very little at any rate. For Vogt himself showed that, while the highest
of the Apes, the gorilla, has a brain of only 30 to 51 cubic inches, the
brain of the lowest of the Australian aborigines amounts to 99.35 cubic
inches. The former is thus "not half of the size of the brain of a
new-born babe," says Pfaff.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 194 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

Earth." Taaroa, the creative power, the chief god, "put man to sleep for
long years, for several lives," which means racial periods, and is a
reference to his *mental sleep,* as shown elsewhere. During that time
the deity pulled an *Ivi* (bone) out of man and she became a woman.\*

Nevertheless, whatever the allegory may mean, even its exoteric meaning
necessitates a *divine* Builder of man -- "a Progenitor." Do we then
believe in such "supernatural" beings? We say, No. Occultism has never
believed in anything, whether animate or inanimate, *outside* nature.
Nor are we Cosmolators or Polytheists for believing in "Heavenly Man"
and divine men, for we have the accumulated testimony of the ages, with
its unvarying evidence on every essential point, to support us in this;
the Wisdom of the Ancients and UNIVERSAL tradition. We reject, however,
every groundless and baseless tradition, which, having outgrown strict
allegory and symbolism, has found acceptance in exoteric creeds. But
that which is preserved in *unanimous* traditions, only the wilfully
blind could reject. Hence we believe in races of beings other than our
own in far remote geological periods; in races of ethereal, following
*incorporeal,* "*Arupa,*" men, with form but no solid substance, giants
who preceded us pigmies; in dynasties of divine beings, those Kings and
Instructors of the Third Race in arts and sciences, compared with which
our little modern science stands less chance than elementary arithmetic
with geometry.

No, certainly not. We do not believe in the *supernatural* but only in
*the superhuman,* or rather *interhuman,* intelligences. One may easily
appreciate the feeling of reluctance that an educated person would have
to being classed with the superstitious and ignorant; and even realize
the great truth uttered by Renan when he says that: "The supernatural
has become like the original sin, a blemish that every one seems ashamed
of -- even those most religious persons who refuse in our day to accept
even a *minimum* of Bible miracles in all their crudeness, and who,
seeking to reduce them to the *minimum,* hide and conceal it in the
furthermost corners of the past."\*\*

But the "supernatural" of Renan belongs to dogma and its dead letter. It
has nought to do with its Spirit nor with the reality of facts in
Nature. If theology asks us to believe that four or five thousand years
ago men lived 900 years and more, that a portion of mankind, the enemies
of the people of Israel exclusively, was composed of giants

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* "*Polynesian Researches,*" Ellis. Vol.**II**., p. 38.

Missionaries seem to have pounced upon this name *Ivi* and made of it
*Eve*. But, as shown by Professor Max Muller, Eve is not the Hebrew name
but an European transformation of ![](sd2-194.gif), chavah, "life," or
mother of all living; "while the Tahitian *Ivi* and the Maori *Wheva*
meant bone and bone only." ("*False Analogies.*")

\*\* *Chaire d*'*Hebreu au college de France,* p. 20.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 195 THE HAIRY MEN OF CHINA.

and monsters, we decline to believe that such a thing existed in Nature
*5,000 years back.* For Nature never proceeds by jumps and starts, and
logic and common sense, besides geology, anthropology and ethnology,
have justly rebelled against such assertions. But if that same theology,
giving up her fantastic chronology, had claimed that men lived 969 years
-- the age of Methuselah -- five million years ago, we would have
nothing to say against the claim. For in those days the physical frame
of men was, compared to the present human body, as that of a
megalosaurus to a common lizard.

A naturalist suggests another difficulty. The human is the only species
which, however unequal in its races, can breed together. "There is no
question of selection between *human races,*" say the anti-Darwinists,
and no evolutionist can deny the argument -- one which very triumphantly
proves *specific unity.* How then can Occultism insist that a portion of
the Fourth Race humanity begot young ones from females of another, only
*semi-human,* if not quite an animal, race, the hybrids resulting from
which union not only bred freely but produced the ancestors of the
modern anthropoid apes? Esoteric science replies to this that it was in
the very beginnings of physical man. Since then, Nature has changed her
ways, and sterility is the only result of the crime of man's bestiality.
But we have to this day proofs of this. The Secret Doctrine teaches that
the *specific unity of mankind* is not without exceptions even now. For
there are, or rather still were a few years ago, descendants of these
half-animal tribes or races, both of remote Lemurian and
Lemuro-Atlantean origin. The world knows them as Tasmanians (now
extinct), Australians, Andaman Islanders, etc. The descent of the
Tasmanians can be almost proved by a fact, which struck Darwin a good
deal, without his being able to make anything of it. This fact deserves
notice.

Now de Quatrefages and other naturalists, who seek to prove Monogenesis
by the very fact of every race of mankind being capable of crossing with
every other, have left out of their calculations *exceptions*, which do
not in this case confirm the rule. Human crossing may have been a
general rule from the time of the separation of sexes, and yet that
other law may assert itself, viz., sterility between two human races,
just as between two animal species of various kinds, in those rare cases
when a European, condescending to see in a female of a savage tribe a
mate, happens to chose a member of such mixed tribes.\* Darwin notes
such

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* Of such semi-animal creatures, the sole remnants known to Ethnology
were the Tasmanians, a *portion* of the Australians and a mountain tribe
in China, the men and women of which are entirely covered with hair.
They were the last descendants in a *direct* line of the semi-animal
latter-day Lemurians referred to. There are, however, considerable
numbers of the mixed Lemuro-Atlantean peoples produced by various
\[\[Footnote continued on next page\]\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 196 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

a case in a Tasmanian tribe, whose women were suddenly struck with
sterility, *en masse,* some time after the arrival among them of the
European colonists. The great naturalist tried to explain this fact by
change of diet, food, conditions, etc., but finally gave up the solution
of the mystery. For the Occultist it is a very evident one. "Crossing,"
as it is called, of Europeans with Tasmanian women -- *i.e*., the
representatives of a race, whose progenitors were a "soulless"\* and
mindless monster and a real human, though still as mindless a man --
brought on sterility. This, not alone as a consequence of a
physiological law, but also as a decree of *Karmic* evolution in the
question of further survival of the abnormal race. In no one point of
the above is Science prepared to believe *as yet* -- but it will have to
in the long run. Esoteric philosophy, let us remember, only fills the
gaps made by science and corrects her false premises.

Yet, in this particular, geology and even botany and zoology support the
esoteric teachings. It has been suggested by many geologists that the
Australian native -- co-existing as he does with an *archaic fauna and
flora -*- must date back to an enormous antiquity. The whole environment
of this mysterious race, about whose origin ethnology is silent, is a
testimony to the truth of the esoteric position.

###### "It is a very curious fact," says Jukes,\*\* "that not only these marsupial animals (the mammals found in the Oxfordshire stone-field slates), but several of the shells -- as for instance, the *Trigonias* and even some of the plants found fossil in the Oolitic rocks -- much more nearly resemble those now living in Australia than the living forms of any other part of the globe. This might be explained on the supposition that, since the 0olitic (Jurassic) period, *less change has taken place in Australia than elsewhere,* and that the Australian flora and fauna consequently retain. Some-

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\[\[Footnote continued from previous page\]\] crossings with such
semi-human stocks -- *e.g.*, the wild men of Borneo, the Veddhas of
Ceylon, classed by Prof. Flower among Aryans (!), most of the remaining
Australians, Bushmen, Negritos, Andaman Islanders, etc.

The Australians of the Gulf of St. Vincent and the neighbourhood of
Adelaide are *very hairy,* and the brown down on the skin of boys of
five or six years of age assumes a *furry appearance.* They are,
however, degraded *men* -- not the closest approximation to the
"*pithecoid* man," as Haeckel so sweepingly affirms. Only a portion of
these men are a Lemurian relic. (Cf. "*Esoteric Buddhism,*" p*.*55.)

\* In calling the animal "Soulless," it is not depriving the beast, from
the humblest to the highest species, of a "soul," but only of a
conscious surviving *Ego-soul, i.e.,* that principle which survives
after a man, and reincarnates in a like man. The animal has an astral
body, that survives the physical form for a short period; but its
(animal) Monad does not re-incarnate in the same, but in a higher
species, and has no "Devachan" of course. It has the *seeds* of all the
human principles in itself, but they are *latent.*

\*\* "*Manual of Geology,*" p. 302.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 197 THE SEPARATION OF SEXES.

thing of the Oolitic type, *while it had been altogether supplanted and
replaced on the rest of the Globe.*" (! !)

Now why has less change taken place in Australia than elsewhere? Where
is the *raison d*'*etre* for such a "curse of retardation"? It is simply
because the nature of the environment develops *pari passu* with the
race concerned. Correspondences rule in every quarter. The survivors of
those later Lemurians, who escaped the destruction of their fellows when
the main continent was submerged, became the ancestors of a portion of
the present native tribes. Being a very low sub-race, begotten
originally of animals, of monsters, whose very fossils are now resting
miles under the sea floors, their stock has since existed in an
environment strongly subjected to the *law of retardation.* Australia is
one of the oldest lands now above the waters, and in the senile
decrepitude of old age, its "*virgin* soil" notwithstanding. It can
produce no new forms, unless helped by new and fresh races, and
artificial cultivation and breeding.

To return, however, once more to the history of the Third Race, the
"Sweat-Born," the "Egg-bearing," and the "Androgyne." Almost sexless, in
its early beginnings, it became bisexual or androgynous; very gradually
of course. The passage from the former to the latter transformation
required numberless generations, during which the simple cell that
issued from the earliest parent (the two in one), first developed into a
bisexual being; and then the cell, becoming a regular egg, gave forth a
unisexual creature. The Third-Race-mankind is the most mysterious of all
the hitherto developed five Races. The mystery of the "How" of the
generation of the distinct sexes must, of course, be very obscure here,
as it is the business of an embryologist and a specialist, the present
work giving only faint outlines of the process. But it is evident that
the units of the Third Race humanity began to separate in their
pre-natal shells, or eggs,\* and to issue out of them as distinct male
and female babes, ages after the appearance of its early progenitors.
And, as time rolled on its geological periods, the newly born sub-races
began to lose their natal capacities. Toward the end of the fourth
*sub-race,* the babe lost its faculty of walking as soon as liberated
from its shell, and by the end of the fifth, mankind was born under the
same conditions and by the same identical process as our historical
generations. This required, of course, millions of years. The

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* The "fables" and "myths" about Leda and Jupiter, and such like, could
never have sprung up in people's fancy, had not the allegory rested on a
fact in nature. Evolution, gradually transforming man into a mammal, did
in his case only what it did in that of other animals. But this does not
prevent man from having always stood at the head of the animal world and
other organic species, and from having preceded the former.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 198 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

reader has been made acquainted with the approximate figures, at least
of the exoteric calculations, in Stanza **II**.

We are approaching the turning-point of the evolution of the Races. Let
us see what occult philosophy says on the origin of language.

-------

36\. **T**HE **F**OURTH **R**ACE DEVELOPED **S**PEECH.

The Commentaries explain that the first Race -- the ethereal or astral
Sons of Yoga, also called "Self-born" -- was, in our sense, speechless,
as it was devoid of mind on our plane. The Second Race had a
"Sound-language," to wit, chant-like sounds composed of vowels alone.
The Third Race developed in the beginning a kind of language which was
only a slight improvement on the various sounds in Nature, on the cry of
gigantic insects and of the first animals, which, however, were hardly
nascent in the day of the "Sweat-born" (the *early* Third Race). In its
second half, when the "Sweat-born" gave birth to the "Egg-born," (the
*middle* Third Race); and when these, instead of "hatching out" (may the
reader pardon the rather ridiculous expression when applied to human
beings in our age) as androgynous beings, began to evolve into separate
males and females; and when the same law of evolution led them to
reproduce their kind sexually, an act which forced the creative gods,
compelled by Karmic law, to incarnate in *mindless* men; then only was
speech developed. But even then it was still no better than a tentative
effort. The whole human race was at that time of "one language and of
one lip." This did not prevent the last two Sub-Races of the Third
Race\* from building cities, and sowing far and wide the first seeds of
civilization under the guidance of their divine instructors,\*\* and
their own already awakened minds. Let the reader also bear in mind that,
as each of the seven races is divided into four ages -- the Golden,
Silver, Bronze, and Iron Age -- so is every smallest division of such
races.\*\*\* Speech then developed, according to occult teaching, in the
following order: --

I. Monosyllabic speech; that of the first approximately fully developed
human beings at the close of the Third Root-race, the "golden-coloured,"
yellow-complexioned men, after their separation into sexes, and the full

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* To avoid confusion, let the reader remember that the term Root-Race
applies to one of the seven great Races, sub-Race to one of its great
Branches, and Family-Race to one of the sub-divisions, which include
nations and large tribes.

\*\* In the Section on the Divine Dynasties, the nature of these
"Instructors" is explained.

\*\*\* *Vide* Section attached to the "Divisions into Yugas."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 199 PRIMEVAL LANGUAGE.

awakening of their minds. Before that, they communicated through what
would now be called "thought-transference," though, with the exception
of the Race called the "Sons of Will and Yoga" -- the first in whom the
"Sons of Wisdom" had incarnated -- thought was but very little developed
in nascent physical man, and never soared above a low terrestrial level.
Their physical bodies belonging to the Earth, their Monads remained on a
higher plane altogether. Language could not be well developed before the
full acquisition and development of their reasoning faculties. This
monosyllabic speech was the vowel parent, so to speak, of the
monosyllabic languages mixed with hard consonants, still in use amongst
the yellow races which are known to the anthropologist.\*

**II**. These linguistic characteristics developed into the
agglutinative languages. The latter were spoken by some Atlantean races,
while other parent stocks of the Fourth Race preserved the
mother-language. And as languages have their cyclic evolution, their
childhood, purity, growth, *fall into matter,* admixture with other
languages, maturity, decay and finally death,\*\* so the primitive
speech of the most civilized Atlantean races -- that language, which is
referred to as "Rakshasi Bhasa," in old Sanskrit works -- decayed and
almost died out. While the "cream" of the Fourth Race gravitated more
and more toward the apex of physical and intellectual evolution, thus
leaving as an heirloom to the nascent Fifth (the Aryan) Race the
inflectional, highly developed languages, the agglutinative decayed and
remained as a fragmentary fossil idiom, scattered now, and nearly
limited to the aboriginal tribes of America.

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* The present yellow races are the descendants, however, of the early
branches of the Fourth Race. Of the third, the only *pure and direct*
descendants are, as said above, a portion of the fallen and degenerated
Australians, whose far distant ancestors belonged to a division of the
seventh Sub-race of the Third. The rest are of mixed Lemuro-Atlantean
descent. They have since then entirely changed in stature and
intellectual capacities.

\*\* *Language* is certainly coeval with reason, and could never have
been developed before men became one with the informing principles in
them -- those who fructified and awoke to life the manasic element
dormant in primitive man. For, as Professor Max Muller tells us in his
"*Science of Thought,*" "Thought and language are identical." Yet to add
to this the reflection that *thoughts which are* *too deep for words, do
not really exist at all,* is rather risky, as thought impressed upon the
astral tablets exists in eternity whether expressed or not. Logos is
both reason and speech. But language, proceeding in cycles, is not
always adequate to express *spiritual* thoughts. Moreover, in one sense,
the Greek Logos is the equivalent of the Sanscrit Vach, "the immortal
(intellectual) ray of spirit." And the fact that Vach (as Devasena, an
*aspect* of Saraswati, the goddess of hidden Wisdom) is the spouse of
the eternal celibate Kumara, unveils a suggestive, though veiled,
reference to the *Kumaras,* those "who refused to create," but who were
compelled later on to complete *divine* Man by incarnating in him. All
this will be fully explained in the sections that follow.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 200 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

**III**. The inflectional speech -- the root of the Sanskrit, very
erroneously called "the elder sister" of the Greek, instead of its
mother -- was the first language (now the mystery tongue of the
Initiates, of the Fifth Race). At any rate, the "Semitic" languages are
the bastard descendants of the first phonetic corruptions of the eldest
children of the early Sanskrit. The occult doctrine admits of no such
divisions as the Aryan and the Semite, accepting even the Turanian with
ample reservations. The Semites, especially the Arabs, are later Aryans
-- degenerate in spirituality and perfected in materiality. To these
belong all the Jews and the Arabs. The former are a tribe descended from
the Tchandalas of India, the outcasts, many of them ex-Brahmins, who
sought refuge in Chaldea, in Scinde, and Aria (Iran), and were truly
born from their father A-bram (No Brahmin) some 8,000 years **B.C.** The
latter, the Arabs, are the descendants of those Aryans who would not go
into India at the time of the dispersion of nations, some of whom
remained on the borderlands thereof, in Afghanistan and Kabul,\* and
along the Oxus, while others penetrated into and invaded Arabia.

But this was when Africa had already been raised as a continent. We have
meanwhile to follow, as closely as limited space will permit, the
gradual evolution of the now truly human species. It is in the suddenly
arrested evolution of certain sub-races, and their forced and violent
diversion into the purely animal line by artificial cross-breeding,
truly analogous to the hybridization, which we have now learned to
utilize in the vegetable and animal kingdoms, that we have to look for
the origin of the anthropoids.

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* Ptolemy, speaking in his ninth table of the *Kabolitae* (Kabul
tribes), calls them \[\[*Aristophuloi\]\],* the aristocratic or *noble
tribes.* The Afghans call themselves *Ben-Issrael* (children of
Is(*sa*)rael), from *Issa,* "woman and also earth," Sons of Mother
Earth. But if you call an Afghan *Yahoudi* (*Jew*), he will kill you.
The subject is fully treated elsewhere. The names of the supposed twelve
tribes and the names of the real tribes, the same in number, of the
Afghans, are the same. The Afghans being far older (at any rate, their
Arabic stock) than the Israelites, no one need be surprised to find such
tribal names among them as *Youssoufzic,* "Sons of Joseph" in Punjcaure
and Boonere; the *Zablistanee* (Zebulon); Ben-manasseh (sons of
Manasseh) among the Khojar Tartars; Isaguri, or Issachar (now Ashnagor
in Afghanistan), etc., etc. The whole twelve names of the so-called
twelve tribes are names of the signs of the Zodiac, as is now well
proven. At any rate, the names of the oldest Arabic tribes,
re-transliterated, yield the names of the zodiacal signs and of the
mythical sons of Jacob likewise. Where are the traces of the Jewish
twelve tribes? Nowhere. But there is a trace, and a good one, that the
Jews have tried to deceive people with the help of those names. For, see
what happens *ages after the ten tribes* had wholly disappeared from
Babylon. Ptolemy Philadelphus, desiring to have the Hebrew Law
translated for him into Greek (the famous *Septuagint*), wrote to the
high priest of the Jews, Eleazar, to *send him six men from each of the
twelve tribes*; and the *seventy-two representatives* (of whom sixty
were ghosts apparently) came to the king in Egypt and translated the law
amid miracles and wonders. See Butler's "*Horae Biblicae,*" Josephus,
and Philo Judaeus.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### \[\[Vol. 2, Page\]\] 201 THE TRANSFORMATION OF THE EARTH.

In these red-haired and hair-covered monsters, the fruit of the
unnatural connection between men and animals, the "Lords of Wisdom" did
not incarnate, as we see. Thus by a long series of transformations due
to unnatural cross-breeding (unnatural "sexual selection"), originated
in due course of time the lowest specimens of humanity; while further
bestiality and the fruit of their first animal efforts of reproduction
begat a species which developed into mammalian apes ages later.\*

As to the separation of sexes, it did not occur suddenly, as one may
think. Nature proceeds slowly in whatever she does.

-------

37\. **T**HE **O**NE (*androgyne*) BECAME **T**WO; ALSO ALL THE LIVING
AND CREEPING THINGS, THAT WERE STILL ONE, GIANT-FISH, BIRDS, AND
SERPENTS WITH SHELL-HEADS (*a*).

This relates evidently to the so-called age of the amphibious reptiles,
during which ages science maintains that *no man existed!* But what
could the ancients know of antediluvian prehistoric animals and
monsters! Nevertheless, in Book **VI**. of the Commentaries is found a
passage which says, freely translated: --

"*When the Third separated and fell into sin by breeding men-animals,
these* (the animals) *became ferocious, and men and they mutually
destructive. Till then, there was no sin, no life taken. After* (the
separation) *the Satya* (Yuga) *was at an end. The eternal spring became
constant change and seasons succeeded. Cold forced men to build shelters
and devise clothing. Then man appealed to the superior Fathers* (the
higher gods or angels). *The Nirmanakaya of the Nagas, the wise Serpents
and Dragons of Light came, and the precursors of the Enlightened*
(Buddhas). *Divine Kings descended and taught men sciences and arts, for
man could live no longer in the first land* (Adi-Varsha, the Eden of the
first Races), *which had turned into a white frozen corpse.*"

The above is suggestive. We will see what can be inferred from this
brief statement. Some may incline to think that there is more in it than
is apparent at first sight.

-------

###### \[\[Footnote(s)\]\] -------------------------------------------------

\* The Commentary explains that the apes are the only species, among the
animals, which has gradually and with every generation and variety
tended more and more to return to the original type of its male
forefather -- the dark gigantic Lemurian and Atlantean.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next Section](sd2-1-11)

[Contents](sd2-0-co.htm#contents)
