[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe29193)  [Next](sbe29195) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1421228750/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Grihya Sutras, Part 1 (SBE29)*, by Hermann Oldenberg, \[1886\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### KA*ND*IKÂ 4.

1\. Now the building of the house.

2\. Let him have his house built on an auspicious day.

3 <span id="fr_887"></span>[3](#fn_886). Into the pits (in which the
posts shall be erected) he pours an oblation with (the words), 'To the
steady one, the earth-demon, svâhâ!'

4 <span id="fr_888"></span>[4](#fn_887). He erects the post.

'This navel of the world I set up, a stream of wealth, promoting wealth.
Here I erect a firm house; may it stand in peace, dropping ghee.

'Rich in horses and cows, rich in delight be set up, for the sake of
great happiness. To thee may the young calf cry, to thee the lowing
cows, the milk-cows.

'To thee (may) the young child (go), to thee the calf with its
companions, to thee the cup of Parisrut, to thee (may they go) with pots
of curds.

<span id="page_346">p. 346</span>

'The consort of Peace, the great one, beautifully attired—bestow on us,
O blessed one, wealth and manly power, which may be rich in horses and
cows, full of sap like a tree's leaf. May our wealth increase here,
clothing itself with prospering'—with (these four Mantras) he approaches
the four (posts).

5\. Having established the fire inside (the house), having made the
Brahman sit down towards the south, having placed a water-pot to the
north, and cooked a mess of sacrificial food, he goes out (of the
house), and standing near the door, he addresses the Brahman, 'Brahman,
I enter (the house)!'

6\. When the Brahman has given his consent, he enters with (the
formula), 'To right I advance, to luck I advance!'

7 <span id="fr_889"></span>[7](#fn_888). Having prepared Â*g*ya and
sacrificed two Â*g*ya oblations with (the two parts of the Mantra),
'Here is joy' (Vâ*g*. Sa*m*h. VIII, 51 a), he sacrifices other oblations
with (the verses):

\(a\) 'Vâstoshpati! Receive us (into thy protection); give us good
entering and drive away from us evil. For what we ask thee, with that
favour us: be a saviour to us, to men and animals. Svâhâ!

\(b\) 'Vâstoshpati! Be our furtherer; make our wealth increase in cows
and horses, O Indu (i.e. Soma). Free from decay may we dwell in thy
friendship; give us thy favour, as a father to his sons. Svâhâ!

\(c\) 'Vâstoshpati! Let us be in a fellowship with thee, which may be
valiant, joyful, and well proceeding. Protect our wishes when we rest
and

<span id="page_347">p. 347</span>

when we do our work. Protect us always, ye (gods), and give us welfare.
Svâhâ!

\(d\) 'Driving away calamity, Vâstoshpati, assuming all shapes, be a
kind friend to us. Svâhâ!

8\. He makes offerings of the mess of cooked food (with the following
Mantras):

(a <span id="fr_890"></span>[a](#fn_889)) Agni, Indra, B*ri*haspati, the
Vi*s*ve devâs I invoke, Sarasvatî and Vâ*g*î. Give me a dwelling-place,
ye vigorous ones. Svâhâ!

(b <span id="fr_891"></span>[b](#fn_890)) 'To all the divine hosts of
serpents, to the Himavat, the Sudar*s*ana (mountain), and the Vasus,
Rudras, Âdityas, Î*s*âna with his companions, to all these I apply. Give
me a dwelling-place, ye vigorous ones. Svâhâ!

\(c\) 'To forenoon and afternoon both together with noon, to evening and
midnight, to the goddess of dawn with her wide path, to all these I
apply. Give me a dwelling-place, ye vigorous ones. Svâhâ!

\(d\) 'To the Creator and the Changer, to Vi*s*vakarman, to the herbs
and trees, to all these I apply. Give me a dwelling-place, ye vigorous
ones. Svâhâ!

\(e\) 'To Dhât*ri* and Vidhât*ri*, and to the Lord of treasures together
with them, to all these I apply. Give me a dwelling-place, ye vigorous
ones. Svâhâ!

\(f\) 'As a lucky, a happy (place), give me this dwelling-place, Brahman
and Pra*g*âpati, and all deities. Svâhâ!'

9\. After he has partaken (of the sacrificial food), let him put into a
brass vessel the different things which he has brought together,
Udumbara leaves with strong liquor, green turf, cowdung, curds,

<span id="page_348">p. 348</span>

honey, ghee, Ku*s*a grass, and barley, and let him besprinkle the seats
and shrines (for the images of the gods).

10\. He touches (the wall and the posts) at their eastern juncture with
(the words), 'May luck and glory protect thee at thy eastern juncture.'

11\. He touches (them) at their southern juncture with (the words), 'May
sacrifice and sacrificial fee protect thee at thy southern juncture.'

12\. He touches (them) at their western juncture with (the words), 'May
food and the Brâhma*n*a protect thee at thy western juncture.'

13\. He touches (them) at their northern juncture with (the words), 'May
vigour and delight protect thee at thy northern juncture.'

14\. He then goes out (of the house) and worships the quarters (of the
horizon, the east) with (the formulas), 'May Ketâ (i.e. will?) and
Suketâ (i.e. good-will?) protect me from the east.

'Agni is Ketâ; the Sun is Suketâ: to them I apply; to them be adoration;
may they protect me from the east.'

15\. Then to the south: 'May that which protects and that which guards,
protect me from the south.

'The Day is that which protects; the Night is that which guards; to them
I apply; to them be adoration; may they protect me from the south.'

16\. Then to the west: 'May the shining one and the waking one protect
me from the west.

'Food is the shining one; Breath is the waking one; to them I apply; to
them be adoration; may they protect me from the west.'

17\. Then to the north: 'May the sleepless one and the not-slumbering
one protect me from the north.

<span id="page_349">p. 349</span>

'The Moon is the sleepless one; the Wind is the not-slumbering one; to
them I apply; to them be adoration; may they protect me from the north.'

18 <span id="fr_892"></span>[18](#fn_891). When (the house) is finished,
he enters it with (the formulas),

'Law, the chief post! Fortune, the pinnacle! Day and night, the two
door-boards!

'Indra's house is wealthy, protecting; that I enter with my children,
with my cattle, with everything that is mine.

'Hither is called the whole number (of relatives), the friends whose
coming is good. Thus (I enter) thee, O house. May our dwellings be full
of inviolable heroes from all sides!'

19\. Then (follows) feeding of the Brâhma*n*as.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_886"></span>[345:3](sbe29194.htm#fr_887) 4, 3.
Â*s*valâyana-G*ri*hya II, 8, 15.

<span id="fn_887"></span>[345:4](sbe29194.htm#fr_888) On gagadai*h* saha
(in the third verse) see my note on *S*âṅkhâyana-G*ri*hya III, 2, 9.

<span id="fn_888"></span>[346:7](sbe29194.htm#fr_889) Rig-veda VII, 54;
55, 1.

<span id="fn_889"></span>[347:a](sbe29194.htm#fr_890) 8 a. Vâ*g*î is, as
the name shows, the goddess of quick vigour. *G*ayarâma explains Vâ*g*î,
a name of Sîtâ, as a personification of food.

<span id="fn_890"></span>[347:b](sbe29194.htm#fr_891) Comp. Â*s*valâyana
II, I, 14. On *g*agada, comp. above, § 4.

<span id="fn_891"></span>[349:18](sbe29194.htm#fr_892) Comp.
*S*âṅkhâyana-G*ri*hya III, 3, 7 seq.; chap. 4, 10. The comparison of
Sâṅkhâyana shows that we have to divide saha pra*g*ayâ pa*s*ubhi*h*,
saha yan me ki*ñk*id asty, upahûta*h*, &c. Sâdhusa*m*v*ri*ta*h* (if the
reading is correct) seems to me to be the nom. plur. of
sâdhusa*m*v*ri*t. I understand this to be a Bahuvrîhi compound, in which
sa*m*v*ri*t means 'the approaching.' In Atharva-veda VII, 60, 4 we have
sakhâya*h* svâdusa*m*muda*h*. After *s*âle a verb meaning 'I enter,' or
something like that, has been lost.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: III, 5](sbe29195)
