[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe29221)  [Next](sbe29223) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1421228750/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Grihya Sutras, Part 1 (SBE29)*, by Hermann Oldenberg, \[1886\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### KHA*ND*A 5.

1 <span id="fr_1038"></span>[1-12](#fn_1037). On the ninth or tenth (of
the dark fortnight) the Anvash*t*akya (ceremony is performed).

2\. To the south-east (of the house) they partition off (a place with
mats or the like), and to the northern part of that (place) he should
carry a fire which has been kindled by attrition.

3\. Let him take one portion of rice, let him remove the husks once, and
let him cook it, stirring it up from right to left.

5, 1. navamî*m* da*s*amî*m* vânvash*t*akya*m*. 2. dakshi*n*apûrvabhâge
parivârya tatrottarârdhe mathitvâgni*m* pra*n*ayet. 3.
sak*ri*dg*ri*hîtân vrîhîn sak*ri*tphalîk*ri*tân prasavyam udâyuva*ñ*
*s*rapayed.

<span id="page_421">p. 421</span>

4\. And some flesh of that thigh (see above, chap. 4, 16).

5\. He should take it from the fire in a southern direction, and should
omit the second sprinkling (of Â*g*ya) on it.

6\. To the west of the fire he should dig, in the southern part (of the
place mentioned in Sûtra 2) three pits, four inches in depth and
breadth.

7\. He should carry the fire to the east of them.

8\. He should strew (Darbha-grass round the fire),

9\. And (into) the pits.

10\. Having spread out to the west of the fire a layer of
southward-pointed grass so that it is inclined towards the south, he
should put (a mat) on it.

11\. On that (grass) he should place the sacrificial implements, one by
one.

12\. Cutting off (the prescribed portions of the sacrificial food, and
putting those portions) into the brazen vessel he should sacrifice,
picking out (portions of the Havis) with the pot-ladle, with (the
formulas), 'Svâhâ to Soma Pit*ri*mat! Svâhâ to Agni Kavyavâhana!' (MB.
II. 3, 1, 2.)

13 <span id="fr_1039"></span>[13-31](#fn_1038). With his left hand he
should lay down a firebrand on the southern side of the pits (Sûtra 6),
with

4\. amushmâ*k* *k*a sakthno mâ*m*sam iti. 5. dakshi*n*odvâsya na
pratyabhighârayet. 6. pa*sk*âd agner dakshi*n*âs tisra*h* karshû*h*
khanyâ*k* *k*aturaṅgulam adhas tiryak *k*a. 7. tâsâ*m* purastâd agni*m*
pra*n*ayet. 8. st*rin*uyât. 9. karshû*s* *k*a. 10. pa*sk*âd agne
svastara*m* dakshi*n*âgrais t*rin*air dakshi*n*âprava*n*am âstîrya
b*ri*sîm upari nidadhyât. 11. tasminn ekaikam âharet. 12. ka*m*se
samavadâya meksha*n*enopaghâta*m* *g*uhuyât svâhâ Somâya pit*ri*mate
svâhâgnaye kavyavâhanâyeti. 13. savyenolmuka*m* dakshi*n*ata*h* karshûr
nidadhyâd apahatâ iti.

<span id="page_422">p. 422</span>

(the formula), '(The Asuras have been) driven away (MB. II, 3, 3).

14\. (He should perform the different rites) in the eastern pit for his
father,

15\. In the middle for his grandfather,

16\. In the last for his great-grandfather.

17\. Let him pour out vessels of water. from right to left, into the
pits, pronouncing the name of each one (of his ancestors), with (the
formula), 'N.N.! Wash thyself, and they who follow thee here, and they
whom thou followest. To thee Svadhâ!'

18\. In the same way he should put down the Pi*nd*as for them and should
murmur, 'Here, O Fathers, enjoy yourselves; show your manly vigour each
for his part' (MB. II, 3, 6).

19\. After he has spoken thus, he should turn to the north, doubling his
left arm, turning round from right to left.

20\. Holding his breath and fixing his thoughts on something good he
should, while turning back (in the same way), murmur: 'The Fathers have
enjoyed themselves; they have shown their manly vigour each for his
part' (MB. II, 3, 7).

21\. He should sprinkle collyrium on three Darbha—

14\. pûrvasyâ*m* karshvâ*m* pitur. 15. madhyamâyâ*m* pitâmahasyo. 16.
<sup>ऽ</sup>ttamâyâ*m* prapitâmahasyo. 17. <sup>ऽ</sup>dapâtrâ*n*y
apasalavi karshûshu ninayed ekaikasya nâmoktvâsâv avanenikshva ye
*k*âtra tvânu yâ*ms* *k*a tram anu tasmai te svâheti (correct,
svadheti). 18. tathaiva pi*nd*ân nidhâya *g*aped atra pitaro
mâdayadhva*m* yathâbhâgam âv*ri*shâyadhvam ity. 19. uktvodaṅṅ âvarteta
savya*m* bâhum upasa*m*h*ri*tya prasavyam âv*ri*tyo. 20.
<sup>ऽ</sup>patâmya kalyâ*n*a*m* dhyâyann abhiparyâvartamâno *g*aped
ainîmadanta pitaro yathâbhâgam âv*ri*shâyishateti. 21. tisro
darbhapi*ñg*ûlîr a*ñg*anena nigh*ri*shya karshûshu nidadhyâd
yathâpi*nd*a*m*.

<span id="page_423">p. 423</span>

blades, and should put them down into the pits in the same way as the
Pi*nd*as,

22\. And sesamum oil and perfumes.

23\. For the Pi*nd*as and the following offerings he should alter the
formula (Sûtra 17) accordingly.

24\. Now (follows) the deprecation.

25\. On the eastern pit he lays his hands, turning the inside of the
right hand upwards, with (the formula), 'Adoration to you, O Fathers,
for the sake of life! Adoration to you, O Fathers, for the sake of vital
breath!' (MB. II, 3, 8.)

26\. On the middle, turning the inside of the left hand upwards, with
(the formula), 'Adoration to you, O Fathers, for the sake of terror!
Adoration to you, O Fathers, for the sake of sap!' (MB. l.l.)

27\. On the western, turning the inside of the right hand upwards, with
(the formula), 'Adoration to you, O Fathers, for the sake of comfort
(svadhâ)! Adoration to you, O Fathers, for the sake of wrath!' (MB. II,
3, 9.)

28\. Joining his hands—

29\. (He should murmur the formula), 'Adoration to you' (MB. II, 3, 9).

30\. He should lay down threads into the pits in the same way as the
Pi*nd*as, with (the formula), 'This (garment) to you.'

22\. taila*m* surabhi *k*a. 23. pi*nd*aprabh*ri*ti yathârtham ûhed. 24.
atha nihnavana*m*. 25. pûrvasyâ*m* karshvâ*m* dakshi*n*ottânau pâ*n*î
k*ri*tvâ namo va*h* pitaro *g*îvâya namo va*h* pitara*s* *s*ûshâyeti.
26. savyottânau madhyamâyâ*m* namo va*h* pitaro ghorâya namo va*h*
pitaro rasâyeti. 27. dakshi*n*ottânau pa*sk*imâyâ*m* namo va*h* pitara
svadhâyai namo va*h* pitaro manyava ity. 28. a*ñg*ali*m* k*ri*tvâ 29.
namo va iti. 30. sûtratantûn karshûshu nidadhyâd yathâpi*nd*am etad va
ity.

<span id="page_424">p. 424</span>

31\. He should recite over the pits (the verse), 'Bringing strength'
(MB. II, 3, 13).

32\. The middle Pi*nd*a he should give to his wife to eat, if she is
desirous of a son, with (the verse), 'Give fruit.'

33\. With (the verse), '(*G*âtavedas) has been our messenger' (MB. II,
3, 15), he should throw the firebrand into the fire.

34\. They should take the sacrificial vessels back two by two.

35 <span id="fr_1040"></span>[35-39](#fn_1039). The same is the rite of
the Pi*nd*apit*ri*ya*gñ*a.

36\. Let him cook the Havis in the (sacred) domestic fire.

37\. From that fire (let him take the fire which) he carries forward
(see above, Sûtra 2).

38\. (Here is only) one pit.

39\. No layer of grass (Sûtra 10).

40 <span id="fr_1041"></span>[40](#fn_1040). Of the mess of cooked food
sacred to Indrâ*n*î he should sacrifice with (the verse), 'The
Ekâsh*t*akâ' (MB. II, 3, 19). He should sacrifice with (the verse), The
Ekâsh*t*akâ.'

End of the Third Pa*t*ala.

31\. ûr*g*a*m* vahantîr iti karshûr anumantrayeta. 32. madhyama*m*
pi*nd*a*m* putrakâmâ*m* prâ*s*ayed âdhattety. 33. abhûn no dûta ity
ulmukam agnau prakshiped. 34. dvandva*m* pâtrâ*n*y atihareyur. 35. esha
eva pi*nd*apit*ri*ya*gñ*akalpo. 36. g*ri*hye<sup>ऽ</sup>gnau havi*s*
*s*rapayet. 37. tata evâtipra*n*ayed. 38. ekâ karshûr. 39. na svastara.
40. Indrâ*n*yâ sthâlîpâkasyaikâsh*t*aketi *g*uhuyâd ekâsh*t*aketi
*g*uhuyât. t*ri*tîyapa*t*ala*h*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1037"></span>[420:1-12](sbe29222.htm#fr_1038) 5, 1-12 =
Gobhila IV, 2.

<span id="fn_1038"></span>[421:13-31](sbe29222.htm#fr_1039) 13-31 = IV,
3 (23 deest).

<span id="fn_1039"></span>[424:35-39](sbe29222.htm#fr_1040) 35-39 = IV,
4, 1 seqq.

<span id="fn_1040"></span>[424:40](sbe29222.htm#fr_1041) 40 = IV, 4, 32.
33.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: IV, 1](sbe29223)
