[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe29070)  [Next](sbe29072.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1421228750/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Grihya Sutras, Part 1 (SBE29)*, by Hermann Oldenberg, \[1886\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### KHA*ND*A 9.

1 <span id="fr_275"></span>[1](#fn_274.md). Having bathed,

2\. And having submerged himself at the time prescribed for the bath, he
satiates the deities:

<span id="page_121">p. 121</span>

3 <span id="fr_276"></span>[3](#fn_275.md). 'Agni may satiate himself; Vâyu
may satiate himself; Sûrya may satiate himself; Vish*n*u may satiate
himself; Pra*g*âpati may satiate himself; Virûpâksha may satiate
himself; Sahasrâksha may satiate himself; Soma, Brahman, the Vedas, the
gods, the *Ri*shis, and all the metres, the word Om, the word VASHA*T*,
the Mahâvyâh*ri*tis, the Sâvitrî, the sacrifices, heaven and earth, the
Nakshatras, the air, days and nights, the numbers, the twilights, the
oceans, the rivers, the mountains, fields, herbs, trees, Gandharvas and
Apsaras, the serpents, the birds, the Siddhas, the Sâdhyas, the Vipras,
the Yakshas, the Rakshas, the beings that have these (Rakshas, &c.) at
their end, may satiate themselves.

'I satiate the *S*ruti; I satiate the Sm*ri*ti; I satiate the firmness;
I satiate the delight; I satiate

<span id="page_122">p. 122</span>

the success; I satiate the thought; I satiate belief and insight, and
the memory, cows and Brâhma*n*as, movable and immovable things. All
beings may satiate themselves!'—so far with the sacrificial cord
suspended over the left shoulder.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_274"></span>[120:1](sbe29071.htm#fr_275.md) 9, 1. It is not
expressly stated in our text for what occasion the tarpa*n*a (i.e.
satiating of deities, *Ri*shis, &c. with water-offerings), which is
treated of in chap. 9-10, shall be prescribed. The comparison of
Baudhâyana II, 9 might perhaps lead us to believe that the ceremony in
question is to be performed whenever the sacrificer takes a bath. But
the two texts which are most closely connected with ours, the *S*âmbavya
and Â*s*valâyana G*ri*hyas, seem to point clearly to another conclusion.
The *S*âmbavya-sûtra transposes the rules about the tarpa*n*a to the
place which would correspond to Sûtra II, 7, 28 of our text. The passage
of the *S*âmbavya-sûtra runs thus: mûle ku*nd*a*m* k*ri*tvâ yathoktam
adbhi*h* parishi*ñk*aty athemâs (so the MS.) tarpayati Agni*h*
Pra*g*âpatir Virûpâksha*h*, &c. It ends: pitara*h* pitâmahâ*h*
prapitâmahâ*h* Paila*h* Kaho*l*a*h* Kaushîtaka*h* (sic) Kaho*l*âya
Kaushîtakaye svadhâstv iti pratipurusha*h* (sic) pit*rîm*s tarpayitvâ.
The last words are taken from the Sûtra IV, 6, 6 of our text. Thus there
can be no doubt that *S*âmbavya intended to prescribe the tarpa*n*a for
the conclusion of the <span id="page_121">p. 121</span> vedâdhyayana.
The same can be said of Â*s*valâyana, who also by the position which he
assigns to the tarpa*n*a sections (III, 4) brings it into a similar
connection with the vedâdhyayana (see Nârâya*n*a's commentary on Â*s*v.,
loc. cit.). We may also refer to the treatise about the study of the
Âra*n*yaka, which is appended to the *S*âṅkhâyana-G*ri*hya as its sixth
book; there the tarpa*n*a is mentioned quite in the same connection (VI,
6, 10 seq.). I believe, therefore, that in our text, chapters 9 and 10
have found their place here as a sort of supplementary addition to chap.
6, 6, just as in the first book the list of Nakshatras seems likewise
appended to the Sûtra I, 25, 5.

According to Nârâya*n*a, snâta*h* in the first Sûtra would refer to the
bath which forms part of the Samâvartana ceremony (see III, 1, 1), so
that it would be the G*ri*hastha, who has taken the Samâvartana bath, to
whom the following rules refer.

<span id="fn_275"></span>[121:3](sbe29071.htm#fr_276.md) Comp. the similar
lists of Â*s*valâyana, G*ri*hya III, 4; *S*âmbavya, quoted in my German
edition of *S*âṅkhâyana, p.153; and Baudhâyana II, 9 (S.B.E., vol. xiv,
pp. 252 seq.). The last seems to be the most modern.

It should be observed that the section of the list contained in this
Sûtra, as well as that given below, chap. 10, 3, is divided into <span
id="page_122">p. 122</span> two parts, in the first of which the name of
the being to be worshipped is given in the nominative case, with the
verb tripyatu, while in the second it stands in the accusative, with the
verb tarpayâmi. The first part of this section contains the names of
gods and of divine beings, such as the rivers, the mountains, &c.; in
the second part are found abstract qualities or notions, such as mati,
dhriti, *s*ruti. Similarly in chapter 10, 3 the Vedic poets, a few
ancient teachers, and wise women, such as Gârg or Sulabhâ, form the
first part of the list, and then follow, in the accusative case, the
names of such doctors as Sàükhâyana, Â*s*valâyana, Sâkalya. In
Â*s*valâyana's Sûtra of the first of our two sections only the first
part reoccurs, the second is omitted, while the second section is found
there in its entirety, with the same difference of names given in the
nominative and accusative cases. The conjectures, however, which I had
once based on this difference (see my German edition, pp. 152, 153) as
to the distinction of a more ancient part of the list, and of later
supplements, are perhaps too hazardous.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: IV, 10](sbe29072.md)
