[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe29206)  [Next](sbe29208.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1421228750/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Grihya Sutras, Part 1 (SBE29)*, by Hermann Oldenberg, \[1886\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_369">p. 369</span>

# KHÂDIRA-G*RI*HYA-SÛTRA.

<span id="page_370">p. 370</span> <span id="page_371">p. 371</span>

#### INTRODUCTION

###### TO THE

# KHÂDIRA-G*RI*HYA-SÛTRA.

AMONG the Grantha MSS. collected by the late Dr. Burnell and now
belonging to the India Office Library, there are some MSS. (numbers
CLXXII and following of the Catalogue) of a G*ri*hya-sûtra hitherto
unpublished, which is ascribed to Khâdirâ*k*ârya. It belongs to the
Drâhyâya*n*a school of the Sâma-veda, which prevails in the south of the
Indian peninsula <span id="fr_963"></span>[1](#fn_962.md), and it is based
on the Gobhilîya-sûtra, from which it has taken the greater number of
its aphorisms, just as the Drâhyâya*n*a-*S*rauta-sûtra, as far as we can
judge at present, is nothing but a slightly altered redaction of
Lâ*t*yâyana <span id="fr_964"></span>[2](#fn_963.md). Like the
Gobhila-G*ri*hya it very seldom gives the Mantras in their full extent,
but quotes them only with their Pratîkas, and it is easy to identify
these quotations in the Mantrabrâhma*n*a (published at Calcutta, 1873),
which contains the texts prescribed by Gobhila for the G*ri*hya
ceremonies.

The Khâdira-G*ri*hya has evidently been composed with the intention of
abridging Gobhila's very detailed and somewhat lengthy treatise on the
domestic rites. Digressions, such as, for instance, that introduced by
the words tatraihad âhu*h*, Gobhila I, 2, 10-27, or such as Gobhila's
explication of the terms paur*n*amâsî and amâvâsyâ, I, 5, 7 seqq., or
most of the regulations concerning the *S*akvaryas, III, 3, or the
*S*lokas, IV, 7, are invariably left

<span id="page_372">p. 372</span>

out, and in the descriptions of the single ceremonies throughout the
principal points only are given, with the omission of all words and of
all matter that it seemed possible to dispense with. On the other hand,
the arrangement of the Sûtras has undergone frequent changes, in which
the compiler clearly shows his intention of grouping together, more
carefully than was done in the original text, the Sûtras which naturally
belong to each other. Of the Sûtras of the Khâdira-G*ri*hya which cannot
be identified in Gobhila, several are to be traced back to Lâ*t*yâyana,
or we should perhaps rather say, to Drâhyâya*n*a. Thus Khâd. I, 1, 14
mantrântam avyakta*m* parasyâdigraha*n*ena vidyât evidently corresponds
to Lâ*t*yâyana I, 1, 3, uttarâdi*h* pûrvântalaksha*n*am, and Khâd. I, 1,
24 avyâv*ri*tti*m* ya*gñ*âṅgair avya*v*âya*m* *k*e*kh*et is identical
with Lâ*t*y. I, 2, 15, avyavâyo<sup>ऽ</sup>vyâv*ri*tti*s* *k*a
yag*ñ*âṅgai*h*.

Upon the whole, though certainly the Khâdira-G*ri*hya does not contain
much matter which is not known to us from other sources, it
notwithstanding possesses a certain interest, since it shows by a very
clear example how a Sûtrakâra of the later time would remodel the work
of a more ancient author, trying to surpass him by a more correct
arrangement, and especially by what became more and more appreciated as
the chief accomplishment of Sûtra composition, the greatest possible
succinctness and economising of words. To an interpreter of Gobhila the
comparison of the Khâdira-G*ri*hya no doubt will suggest in many
instances a more correct understanding of his text than he would have
been likely to arrive at without that aid, and perhaps even readings of
Gobhila which seemed hitherto subject to no doubt, will have to give way
to readings supplied by the Grantha MSS. of the Khâdira-G*ri*hya. Thus,
Gobhila III, 8, 16, I do not hesitate to correct asa*m*svâdam, on the
authority of Khâd. III, 3, 13, into asa*m*khâdam or asa*m*khâdan <span
id="fr_965"></span>[1](#fn_964.md).

<span id="page_373">p. 373</span>

As the text of the Khâdira-G*ri*hya is very short and has not yet been
published, it has been printed at the foot of the page, together with
references to the parallel passages of Gobhila. For further explanations
of the single Sûtras, I refer to my translation of Gobhila which will
form part of the second volume of the G*ri*hya-sûtras, where I shall
also hope to give some extracts from Rudraskanda's commentary on the
Khâdira-G*ri*hya.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_962"></span>[371:1](sbe29207.htm#fr_963.md) See Dr. Burnell's
Catalogue, p. 56.

<span id="fn_963"></span>[371:2](sbe29207.htm#fr_964.md) Weber, Vorlesungen
über indische Literaturgeschichte (2nd edition), p. 87: 'Almost the
entire difference between this Sûtra and that of Lâ*t*yâyana lies in the
arrangement of the matter treated of, which is in itself very nearly the
same in both texts, and is expressed in the same words.' Comp.
Ananda*k*andra Vedântavâgî*s*a's Introduction to his edition of
Lâ*t*yâyana (in the Bibliotheca Indica), pp. 2, 3, and his statements on
Drâhyâya*n*a in the notes of that edition.

<span id="fn_964"></span>[372:1](sbe29207.htm#fr_965.md) Comp. Pâraskara
II, so, 15, and the quotations given by Böhtlingk-Roth s. v. sa*m*-khâd.
Forms derived from the two roots, khâd and svad, are frequently
interchanged in the MSS.; see the two articles in the Dictionary.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: I, 1](sbe29208.md)
