[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe29001)  [Next](sbe29003) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1421228750/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Grihya Sutras, Part 1 (SBE29)*, by Hermann Oldenberg, \[1886\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_1">p. 1</span>

# SÂṄKHÂYANA-G*RI*HYA-SÛTRA.

<span id="page_2">p. 2</span> <span id="page_3">p. 3</span>

### INTRODUCTION

###### TO THE

### SÂṄKHÂYANA-G*RI*HYA-SÛTRA.

THE G*ri*hya-sûtra ascribed to *S*âṅkhâyana, which has been edited and
translated into German by myself in the XVth volume of the Indische
Studien, is based on the first of the four Vedas, the Rig-veda in the
Bâshkala recension <span id="fr_0"></span>[1](#fn_0), and among the
Brâhma*n*a texts, on the Kaushîtaka. Its reputed author, whom we
ordinarily find called by his family name, *S*âṅkhâyana, had the proper
name Suya*gñ*a. This we may infer from the lists of Vedic teachers given
in different G*ri*hya texts where they describe the Tarpa*n*a ceremony.
Though in these lists the order of names varies very much, yet the two
names Suya*gñ*a and *S*âṅkhâyana are constantly placed side by side, so
that this fact alone would render it probable that they belonged to the
same person. Thus we read in the *S*âṅkhâyana-G*ri*hya IV, 10 = VI, 1:

Kahola*m* Kaushîtaki*m*, Mahâkaushîtaki*m*, Suya*gñ*a*m* *S*âṅkhâyanam,
Â*s*valâyanam, Aitareyam, Mahaitareyam.

Here we have grouped together the two Brâhma*n*a authors (with the
fictitious doubles, the great Kaushîtaki, the great Aitareya) and the
two corresponding Sûtra authors belonging to the two chief branches of
the Rig-veda literature; first comes one Brâhma*n*a author (for Kahola
Kaushîtaki is one person) with the Sûtra author connected with him, then
the second Sûtra author and the corresponding Brâhma*n*a teacher.

In the *S*âmbavya-G*ri*hya (Indische Studien, XV, 154) the corresponding
passage runs thus:

Gârgya- Gautama- *S*âkalya- Bâbhravya- Mâ*nd*attavya

<span id="page_4">p. 4</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> \[sic\]-
Mâ*nd*ûkeyâ*h* Suya*gñ*a- Sâ*m*khyâyana- *G*âtukar*n*yeyâ*h* \[sic\]
Pai*m*ga \[sic\]- *S*âmbavy’-Aitareyâ*h*.

The same G*ri*hya still more explicitly bears witness to the name of
Suya*gñ*a *S*âṅkhâyana, by adding at the end of the list, from which
these names are quoted the following words: Suya*gñ*a *S*âkhâyanas
\[sic\] t*ri*\[pya\]tu, i.e. 'May Suya*gñ*a *S*âṅkhâyana satiate himself
(with the water offering).'

In the Â*s*valâyana-G*ri*hya III, 4, we read:

Kahola*m* Kaushîtaka*m* Mahâkaushîtaka*m* Paiṅgya*m* Mahâpaiṅgya*m*
Suya*gñ*a*m* *S*âṅkhâyanam Aitareyam Mahaitareyam.

We may also quote here a Kârikâ given by Nârâya*n*a <span
id="fr_1"></span>[1](#fn_1) in his great commentary on the
*S*âṅkhâyana-G*ri*hya (I, 1, 10):

Atrâra*n*ipradâna*m* yad adhvaryu*h* kurute kva*k*it <span
id="fr_2"></span>[2](#fn_2)  
mata*m* tan na Suya*gñ*asya, mathita*m* so ’tra ne*kkh*ati.

It would perhaps be hazardous to claim for the author of this Kârikâ the
authority of an independent witness, for very likely he may have derived
his knowledge from the lists of teachers which we have quoted before.
But at all events the concordance of the three G*ri*hya texts furnishes
a proof which, I think, cannot be set aside by another testimony which
we must mention now. At the end of the Kaushîtaki-Âra*n*yaka (Adhyâya
15) we find a Va*ms*a or list of the teachers by whom the knowledge
contained in that Âra*n*yaka is supposed to have been handed down. The
opening words of this list run thus:

'Om! Now follows the Va*ms*a. Adoration to the Brahman! Adoration to the
teachers! We have learnt (this text) from Gu*n*âkhya *S*âṅkhâyana,
Gu*n*âkhya *S*âṅkhâyana from Kahola Kaushîtaki, Kahola Kaushîtaki from
Uddâlaka Âru*n*i, &c:

It is a very natural supposition that the author of this list intended
to begin with the name of the Doctor eponymus, if we may say so, of the
Sûtras of his school, and then to proceed to name the Doctor eponymus of
the Brâhma*n*as, and after him the more ancient teachers and

<span id="page_5">p. 5</span>

sages. But whether the author of this passage really supposed this
Gu*n*âkhya *S*âṅkhâyana to be the author of the *S*âṅkhâyana-sûtras, or
not, we shall be justified in following rather the unanimous statements
of the texts previously quoted, and in accepting in accordance with
them, as the full name of our Sûtrakâra, the name Suya*gñ*a
*S*âṅkhâyana.

The G*ri*hya-sûtra which has been here translated presupposes, as all
G*ri*hya-sûtras do, the existence of the *S*rauta-sûtra, with which it
is intimately connected and which is referred to in the G*ri*hya in
several instances <span id="fr_3"></span>[1](#fn_3).

Here the question arises whether the G*ri*hya-sûtra was composed by the
same author to whom the authorship of the *S*rauta-sûtra belongs, so
that the two texts form together, and would, in the conception of their
author, be intended to form, one great body of Sûtras, or, on the other
hand, whether the G*ri*hya-sûtra is a later addition to the
*S*rauta-sûtra. On this question I have ventured, in the preface to my
German edition of *S*âṅkhâyana <span id="fr_4"></span>[2](#fn_4), to
offer a few remarks which, however, I feel bound to say do not seem to
myself quite decisive. I there pointed out that the G*ri*hya-sûtra
contains a few aphorisms which we should rather expect would have found
their place in the *S*rauta-sûtra, if the two texts were composed by the
same author and on a common plan <span id="fr_5"></span>[3](#fn_5). But,
apart from the possibility that in a work of such considerable extent as
that collection of Sûtras would be, such trifling incongruences or
irregularities might very easily escape the attention even of a very
careful author, there is still another objection that may be urged
against the inference drawn by me from such passages. It can be
shown <span id="fr_6"></span>[4](#fn_6) that the G*ri*hya texts which we
possess are based to some extent on one common original, from which they
have taken verbatim, or nearly verbatim, a certain number of aphorisms.
Thus if we were to suppose that *S*âṅkhâyana,

<span id="page_6">p. 6</span>

or whosoever the author of this G*ri*hya-sûtra may have been, found the
aphorisms on which I once based my argument, in that original text, this
would explain the occurrence of those passages in a portion of the great
body of Sûtras different from that in which we should expect to meet
them. Now several of the passages in question recur identically in other
G*ri*hya texts, so that we may infer indeed that they are taken from
that lost original, and we have no means to judge whether the other
similar passages are not taken from it also. I believe, therefore, that
the opinion which I once pronounced regarding the relation in which the
two Sûtra texts stand to each other, cannot be vindicated, and that it
is better to leave that question unanswered until perhaps further
discoveries throw a new light on it.

For the reconstruction of the correct text of the *S*âṅkhâyana-G*ri*hya,
and occasionally also for its interpretation, it is of considerable
importance that we possess, besides the Devanâgarî MSS. of the text and
of the commentaries, a South Indian MS. written in the Grantha character
(MS. Whish 78 in the library of the Royal Asiatic Society, London) which
contains a G*ri*hya based on that of *S*âṅkhâyana and following it,
during the greater part of the work, nearly word for word <span
id="fr_7"></span>[1](#fn_7). It is designated in the MS., at the end of
the single Adhyâyas, as 'Kaushîtaka-G*ri*hya.' It therefore professes to
follow the teaching of the same Brâhma*n*a which is adhered to also by
the Sûtra school of *S*âṅkhâyana. A metrical commentary, which in the
MS. follows after the text, names in its opening *S*loka a teacher
*S*âmbavya as the author of this Sûtra. The *S*loka runs thus:

Natvâ Kaushîtakâ*k*ârya*m* *S*âmbavya*m* sûtrak*ri*ttamam  
g*ri*hya*m* tadîya*m* sa*m*kshipya vyâkhyâsye bahuvism*ri*tam.

('Having bowed to the most excellent author of Sûtras, to *S*âmbavya,
the Â*k*ârya belonging to the Kaushîtaka school, I shall compose a short
commentary on his G*ri*hya, which has been forgotten by many.')

The name of this *S*âmbavya does not occur among the

<span id="page_7">p. 7</span>

teachers enumerated in the description of the Tarpa*n*a ceremony,
neither in *S*âṅkhâyana IV, 10, nor in Â*s*valâyana III, 4; but in the
list of the *S*âmbavya-G*ri*hya itself it is found (see above, p. 4);
and besides it seems to me also to be mentioned in Â*s*valâyana-G*ri*hya
IV, 8, 24, in which passage it will scarcely be considered too bold to
conjecture *S*âmbavya instead of *S*â*m*vatya.

Though the MS. of the *S*âmbavya-G*ri*hya is very confused, and full of
blunders of all sorts, yet it deserves to be attentively studied by all
scholars who are accustomed to look, if not in theory yet in practice,
on the agreement of a few Vedic text MSS., or of a few Indian
commentaries, as if it had a claim to an unassailable authority to which
European Orientalists would have no right to deny their faith. In the
*S*âṅkhâyana-G*ri*hya a number of passages are found in which corrupt
readings or perverse explanations are supported by all the *S*âṅkhâyana
MSS. and by all the *S*âṅkhâyana commentaries, and if, by a rare and
fortunate chance, the *S*âmbavya Grantha MS., which is unaffected by the
blunders of the Devanâgarî MSS., had not been discovered in the south of
the peninsula, these readings and explanations would seem to rest on the
unanimous agreement of tradition. Perhaps it seems unnecessary to dwell
on this point, for very few Orientalists, if any, would be prepared to
assert that Indian tradition is infallible. But when looking over many
of the editions and translations of the Vedic texts; even such as have
been published in the last years, one finds plentiful occasion to
observe that in hundreds of passages tradition has been practically
treated, by scholars of very high merit, as if it had an authority not
very far removed from infallibility. A case like that of which we have
to speak here, in which a whole set of MSS., and occasionally also of
commentaries, can be tested by a MS. of a nearly related text, written
in a different character and in a distant part of India, will strengthen
our belief that we are right in judging for ourselves, even if that
judgment should oppose itself to such authorities as Nârâya*n*a or
Râma*k*andra or *G*ayarâma.

Perhaps it will not be out of place to add here, as an

<span id="page_8">p. 8</span>

illustration of these remarks, a few observations on one of the passages
in which the rejection of the traditional *S*âṅkhâyana reading, together
with the traditional *S*âṅkhâyana explanation, is confirmed by the
*S*âmbavya MS., though no doubt, even without the aid of that MS., we
ought to have formed the right conclusions for ourselves. At
*S*âṅkhâyana II, 4, 1. 2 the traditional reading is:

Mama vrate h*ri*daya*m* te dadhâmi mama *k*ittam anu *k*itta*m* to astu
\| mama vâ*k*am ekamanâ *g*ushasva B*ri*haspatish *t*vâ niyunaktu mahyam
iti \| kâmasya brahma*k*aryasyâsâv iti.

*S*âṅkhâyana is treating here of the Upanayana, or the initiation of the
student who is received by a teacher and intends to study the Veda with
him. The teacher on that occasion is to pronounce the Mantra which we
have just transcribed, and which translated into English would run thus:

'Under my will I take thy heart; after my mind shall thy mind follow; in
my word thou shalt rejoice with all thy heart; may B*ri*haspati join
thee to me.' 'Of the Brahma*k*arya of Kâma (or lust), N.N.!'

The MSS. give the end of the passage as we have printed it above,
kâmasya brahma*k*aryasyâsâv iti. This Nârâya*n*a explains in the
following way. Brahma*k*arya here means the observances which the
student has to keep through certain periods of time before the different
texts which he has to learn can be taught him. First comes the Sâvitrî
verse, for which he prepares himself by observing the sâvitra vrata;
this lasts either one year, or three days, or the Sâvitrî can also be
taught him immediately (see chap. 5, 1-3). Then follows the *s*ukriya
vrata, of three days, or twelve days, or one year, or any other period
of time according to the teacher's pleasure (chap. 11, 10); by this
vrata the student is enabled to study the main portion of the Veda.
Finally come the *s*âkvara, vrâtika, aupanishada observances, each of
which has to last one year, and which refer to the different parts of
the Âra*n*yaka (see chap. 11, 11 seq., and the sixth book). Now the
formula of which we treat here refers principally to the sâvitra

<span id="page_9">p. 9</span>

vrata. The teacher announces to the student how long he has to keep that
vrata. He says (Sûtra 1), 'May B*ri*haspati join thee to me (Sûtra 2)
for a brahma*k*arya (i.e. a vrata) of such and such (kâmasya) a time
(one year, three days, &c.); N.N.!' Kâma (the pleasure) would thus stand
here as an expletive which was to be replaced in each single case by the
indication of the real space of time that depended on the teacher's
pleasure ('. . . niyunaktu mahya*m* sâ*m*vatsarikasya trairâtrikasya
vânvakshikasya vâ sâvitrasya brahma*k*aryasyâmukâmuka*s*armann iti
vâkyasa*m*yogo *gñ*eya*h*'). The same should take place at the
corresponding forms of Upanayana which had to precede the entrance of
the student upon the *s*ukriya, *s*âkvara, &c. observances. This is the
explanation of Nârâya*n*a, with which Râma*k*andra and all the other
commentaries agree. It will scarcely be necessary to observe that the
singular use of k â ma, on which this traditional explanation rests, is
neither in accordance with the meaning of the word, nor supported by any
parallel texts. So, even before I had the opportunity of collating the
*S*âmbavya MS., I had no doubt that the system of the Vratas has nothing
at all to do with our Sûtra, and that its text should be made
intelligible by a slight alteration touching only the quantity of the a
in two syllables, by writing, Kâmasya brahma*k*âry asy asâv iti (thou
art the Brahma*k*ârin of Kâma, N.N.!), as we read in Â*s*valâyana I, 20,
8, kasya brahma*k*âryasi, prâ*n*asya brahma*k*âry asi. Afterwards I
found that the Grantha MS. of *S*âmbavya gives the very reading which I
had conjectured.

Passages like this are not very rare in the G*ri*hya-sûtras. In the
other Sûtras we are not in the same favourable position of possessing a
MS. which enables us, as the Grantha MS. of *S*âmbavya does, to test
their text.

We cannot conclude these introductory remarks without speaking of the
later additions tacked on at the end of the original body of the
*S*âṅkhâyana-G*ri*hya-sûtras <span id="fr_8"></span>[1](#fn_8). There
are unmistakable indications that the fifth and sixth books are later
additions. The fifth book is

<span id="page_10">p. 10</span>

designated as a pari*s*ish*t*a in a Kârikâ quoted by Nârâya*n*a:

pari*s*ish*t*âd âvasathye pârva*n*âtikrame *k*aru*h*  
Vai*s*vânarâyâgnaye *k*âgnaye <span id="fr_9"></span>[1](#fn_9)
tantumate tathâ.

('According to the Pari*s*ish*t*a, if one of the half-monthly sacrifices
has been omitted, a mess of rice should be offered on the sacred
domestic fire to Agni Vai*s*vânara and to Agni Tantumat.')

The passages of the Pari*s*ish*t*a here referred to are the two first
aphorisms of V, 4:

'Now if a half-monthly sacrifice has not been performed, one or the
other of them, then a mess of rice (is to be offered)—

'With (the words), "To Agni Vai*s*vânara svâhâ! To Agni Tantumat
svâhâ!'"

There are, besides, several passages in which Nârâya*n*a himself
mentions the fifth book under the designation of Pari*s*eshâdhyâya <span
id="fr_10"></span>[2](#fn_10). And even if we had not the authority of
the Kârikâ and of Nârâya*n*a, the contents alone of the fifth book would
raise our suspicion against its genuineness. The matter ordinarily
treated of in the G*ri*hya texts is brought to an end in Adhyâyas I-IV;
in the fifth book we find diverse supplementary additions on points
discussed before; rules, which no doubt would have been given at their
proper place, had the fifth book been composed at the same time, and by
the same author, as the preceding books <span
id="fr_11"></span>[3](#fn_11). Besides, we find different prâya*sk*itta
oblations treated of, and a description of two ceremonies which are
mentioned, as far as I know, in no other G*ri*hya-sûtra, but belong to
the rites frequently described in such works as Purâ*n*as,
Pari*s*ish*t*as, and later Dharma texts: the consecration of ponds or
wells (chap. 2), and the consecration of gardens (chap. 3).

There can thus be little doubt as to the secondary character of the
fifth book. And this alone suffices to

<span id="page_11">p. 11</span>

furnish an important argument in favour of the same view with regard to
the sixth book also. This view is furthermore supported by the opening
invocation in that book, addressed to Brahman and to a number of
mythological beings and Vedic sages and teachers. It is evident that by
such an invocation this book is characterised as a separate treatise,
presupposing of course the main body of the *S*âṅkhâyana-sûtras, but not
forming part of it in the same sense in which, for instance, the second
or the third Adhyâya does. The object of that treatise is the exposition
of the ritual connected with the study of the Rahasya texts. The sixth
book, composed no doubt by a later adherent of the *S*âṅkhâyana school,
returns, in fact, to, and enlarges on, matters that have already found
their proper place in the original G*ri*hya-sûtra at II, 12, and partly
also at IV, 7.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_0"></span>[3:1](sbe29002.htm#fr_0) See IV, 5, 9.

<span id="fn_1"></span>[4:1](sbe29002.htm#fr_1) Manuscr. Chambers 712
(Berlin Royal Library), fol. 12 b.

<span id="fn_2"></span>[4:2](sbe29002.htm#fr_2) Comp. Pâraskara-G*ri*hya
I, 2, 5: ara*n*ipradânam eke.

<span id="fn_3"></span>[5:1](sbe29002.htm#fr_3) See, for instance,
G*ri*hya I, 16, 1 (*S*rauta IV, 16, 2).

<span id="fn_4"></span>[5:2](sbe29002.htm#fr_4) Indische Studien, vol.
xv, pp. 11, 12.

<span id="fn_5"></span>[5:3](sbe29002.htm#fr_5) The Sûtras with
reference to which I made that observation are I, 8, 14; 14, 13-15; II,
15, 10. Comp. *S*rauta-sûtra II, 7, 12; IV, 21.

<span id="fn_6"></span>[5:4](sbe29002.htm#fr_6) I intend to give some
proofs of this in the General Introduction to the G*ri*hya-sûtras which
will be given in the second volume of these translations.

<span id="fn_7"></span>[6:1](sbe29002.htm#fr_7) Comp. the statements
given with regard to that text in my German edition of *S*âṅkhâyana,
Indische Studien, XV, 4 seq.

<span id="fn_8"></span>[9:1](sbe29002.htm#fr_8) Comp. the remarks in my
German edition of *S*âṅkhâyana, Ind. Studien. XV, 7.

<span id="fn_9"></span>[10:1](sbe29002.htm#fr_9) vâgnaye the MS.

<span id="fn_10"></span>[10:2](sbe29002.htm#fr_10) Nârâya*n*a on I, 9,
3; 10, 2.

<span id="fn_11"></span>[10:3](sbe29002.htm#fr_11) The Paddhati inserts
the paraphrase of several of these rules into the explanation of the
first Adhyâya.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: I, 1](sbe29003)
