[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe29002)  [Next](sbe29004) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1421228750/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Grihya Sutras, Part 1 (SBE29)*, by Hermann Oldenberg, \[1886\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_12">p. 12</span>

# *S*ÂṄKHÂYANA-G*RI*HYA-SÛTRA.

### ADHYÂYA I, KHA*ND*A <span id="fr_12"></span>[1](#fn_12).

1 <span id="fr_13"></span>[1](#fn_12). Now henceforth we shall declare
the Pâkaya*gñ*as.

2 <span id="fr_14"></span>[2](#fn_13). When (a pupil) is going to return
(from his teacher), let him keep that fire (as his domestic fire) on
which he has put the last piece of wood (as required by the regulations
for a student),

3\. Or (he should keep) his nuptial fire.

<span id="page_13">p. 13</span>

4\. Some declare (that the domestic fire should be kindled) at the time
of the division of the inheritance.

5 <span id="fr_15"></span>[5](#fn_14). Or that after the death of the
householder the eldest one himself (should kindle it).

6\. (It should be kindled) on the day of the new moon of the month of
Vai*s*âkha or on another (new moon day).

7\. Some say (that the fire should be kindled) according to the
(sacrificer's) wishes under the (corresponding) constellation.

8 <span id="fr_16"></span>[8](#fn_15). He should light his fire at one
of the following places, viz. in the house of a Vai*s*ya who is rich in

<span id="page_14">p. 14</span>

cattle, at a frying-pan, or (at the fire of) one who offers many
sacrifices.

9 <span id="fr_17"></span>[9-11](#fn_16). Some say that (the fire should
be fetched from one of the above-mentioned places) in the evening and in
the morning.

10\. The inauguration (of the fire) by an evening offering should be
learnt from the Adhvaryus, according to (my) teacher.

11\. In the morning he shall offer a full oblation with a verse sacred
to Vish*n*u, or silently.

12 <span id="fr_18"></span>[12](#fn_17). The time for setting it (i.e.
the domestic fire) in a blaze and for sacrificing on it has been
explained by (the rules given with regard to) the Agnihotra.

<span id="page_15">p. 15</span>

13 <span id="fr_19"></span>[13](#fn_18). And 'invested with the
sacrificial cord,' &c., all these rules, as far as they are applicable,
should be applied (here also) in consequence of the unity of the ritual.

14\. With regard to this they quote also (the following *S*loka):

15 <span id="fr_20"></span>[15](#fn_19). 'The kinds of Pâkaya*gñ*as, the
kinds of Havirya*gñ*as, and again the kinds of Soma sacrifices,

'Twenty-one by number, these are proclaimed to be the kinds of
sacrifice.'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_12"></span>[12:1](sbe29003.htm#fr_13) I, 1. The ceremonies
to be treated of are defined here as the Pâkaya*gñ*as (i.e. oblations of
cooked offerings) just as in the opening sentence of the
Pâraskara-G*ri*hya they are called g*ri*hyasthâlîpâkâs. This is indeed
the most characteristic form of offerings belonging to the domain of the
G*ri*hya ritual, though it would not be correct to state that the
G*ri*hya-sûtras treat exclusively of sacrificial ceremonies of this
kind.

<span id="fn_13"></span>[12:2](sbe29003.htm#fr_14) As to the duty of the
Vedic student of putting every day a piece of wood on the sacred fire of
his teacher, see below, II, 6, 8, and compare the
G*ri*hya-sa*m*graha-pari*s*ish*t*a II, 58. According to a Kârikâ given
by Nârâya*n*a, and the Karmapradîpa (I, 6, 13). the prescription of this
Sûtra regarding the time for the kindling of the sacred fire refers
exclusively to the case of vâgdâna (betrothal). Comp. also Dr.
Bloomfield's note on the G*ri*hya-sa*m*graha-pari*s*ish*t*a I, 76
(Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenländischen Gesellschaft, XXXV, 560). In
the Kârikâ it is stated that if the betrothed girl dies after the fire
has been kindled, but before the marriage, the sacrificer is not to
forsake his fire, but to marry another girl; if he cannot find a bride,
he should make the fire enter into himself according to the rules given
by *S*âṅkhâyana-G*ri*hya V, 1, and himself become uttarâ*s*ramin, i.e.
enter one of the two final Â*s*ramas.

<span id="fn_14"></span>[13:5](sbe29003.htm#fr_15) Nârâya*n*a: 'If the
fire has not been kindled at the time stated above, then, after the
householder . . . i.e. the father, even if he should not have performed
the âdhâna, or the elder brother has died, the eldest son (or the son
who after his elder brother's death has become the eldest), after he has
performed the Sapi*nd*îkara*n*a (for the dead father or brother; see
below, IV, 3, and the ninth chapter of the Pari*s*ish*t*a \[book V\]),
even if he has not divided the inheritance with his younger brothers (so
that the time stated in the fourth Sûtra would not have arrived), should
kindle the fire himself, i.e. without an officiating priest
(*ri*tvi*g*). . . . Or the Sûtra should be divided into two; prete vâ
g*ri*hapatau (or after the death of the householder), and svaya*m*
*g*yâyân (the eminent one himself), i.e. of Brâhma*n*as, Kshatriyas, and
Vai*s*yas a *g*yâyân, which means a most eminent person, a Brâhma*n*a,
performs the Pâkaya*gñ*as himself; for the two other castes the
Pâkaya*gñ*as have to be performed through an officiating priest: this is
the meaning of this svaya*m* (himself).' I have given this note of
Nârâya*n*a as a specimen of the entirely arbitrary and obviously
misleading explanations which are unfortunately so frequently found in
this author, as indeed in most of the other Sûtra commentators. As to
the true meaning of this svaya*m* I still adhere to the explanation
which I proposed in my German edition of the text (p. 118), that in case
no division of the inheritance takes place, the sacred fire should be
kindled on behalf of all the joint-proprietors, but that only the eldest
brother should act personally (svaya*m*).

<span id="fn_15"></span>[13:8](sbe29003.htm#fr_16) Or, 'at (the fire of)
a person rich in cattle, in the house of a Vai*s*ya,' &c.? The
commentators (see p. 118 of the German <span id="page_14">p. 14</span>
edition) differ as to whether in purupa*s*u-vi*t*kula one or two
alternatives are contained, and it is interesting to see that the Sûtra
authors themselves differed in this respect; Pâraskara (I, 2, 3), when
declaring from what place the fire should be fetched, speaks of the
house of a Vai*s*ya rich in cattle; Â*s*valâyana, on the contrary, who
in the G*ri*hya-sûtra does not expressly treat of the kindling of the
domestic fire, in the corresponding passage of the *S*rauta-sûtra (II,
2, 1), gives the rule that the dakshi*n*âgni is to be fetched from the
house of a Vai*s*ya or from a rich person.'

<span id="fn_16"></span>[14:9-11](sbe29003.htm#fr_17) 9-11. I now differ
from the opinion which I pronounced in my German edition with regard to
the relation in which these three Sûtras stand to each other. I think
they ought to be understood thus: 9. Some teachers say that the fetching
of the fire from its yoni, as taught in Sûtra 8, ought to be done twice;
in the evening, so that the fire, after the necessary rites have been
performed, goes out, and then again in the morning. 10. But my (the
author's) teacher (comp. as to a*k*âryâ*h*, Kâtyâyana's *S*rauta-sûtra
I, 3, 7; Professor Garbe's note on Vaitâna-sûtra 1, 3) is of opinion
that the fire should be fetched only once, and that with this fire the
ceremonies which are taught by the Adhvaryus are to be performed in the
evening (see, for instance, Kâty. IV, 7. 8, which passage is paraphrased
here by Nârâya*n*a). 11. In the morning (according to the same teacher,
not, as I once understood this passage, according to the eke referred to
in Sûtra 9), a full oblation is to be offered, &c.

<span id="fn_17"></span>[14:12](sbe29003.htm#fr_18) *S*rauta-sûtra II,
6, 2 seq.

<span id="fn_18"></span>[15:13](sbe29003.htm#fr_19) *S*rauta-sûtra I, 1,
6. 7: ya*gñ*opavîtî devakarmâ*n*i karoti, prâ*k*înâvîtî pitryâ*n*i, &c.
The unity of the ritual of course means the unity of the two great
domains of the *S*rauta and G*ri*hya ritual.

<span id="fn_19"></span>[15:15](sbe29003.htm#fr_20) With regard to the
twenty-one kinds of sacrifice compare, for instance, Gautama VIII,
18-20; Max Müller, Z*DMG*. IX, p. lxxiii; Weber, Indische Studien, X,
326. The seven kinds of Pâkaya*gñ*as are the Ash*t*akâ sacrifices (see
below, III, 12 seq.), the sacrifices offered at each Parvan (I, 3), the
*S*râddha (or funeral) sacrifices (IV, 1 seq.), the sacrifice of the
*S*râva*n*î full moon (IV, 19), of the Âgrahâya*n*î (IV, 17 seq.), of
the *K*aitrî (IV, 19), and of the Â*s*vayu*g*î (IV, 16). The seven Havis
sacrifices (belonging, as is the case also with the third division of
sacrifices, to the *S*rauta ritual) are the Agnyâdheya, the Agnihotra,
the sacrifices of the full and new moon, the Âgraya*n*a, the three
*K*âturmâsya sacrifices, the Nirû*dh*apa*s*ubandha, and the
Sautrâma*n*î. The seven kinds of Soma sacrifices (of which the more
ancient texts mention only three or four sa*m*sthâs, see Weber, Indische
Studien, IX, 1 20) are the Agnish*t*oma, the Atyagnish*t*oma, the
Ukthya, the Sho*d*a*s*in, the Atirâtra, the Aptoryâma.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: I, 2](sbe29004)
