[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sub Rosa](../index) 
[Rosicrucians](../../eso/ros/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](ptw03) 
[Next](ptw05) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1419140671/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*In the Pronaos of the Temple of Wisdom*, by Franz Hartmann, \[1890\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_14">p. 14</span>

### Chapter Two.

#### THE HERMETIC PHILOSOPHY.

Tria sunt mirabilia.   Deus et Homo.   Mather et Virgo.   Trinus et
Unus.

THERE is only one eternal truth and consequently only one divine wisdom.
If we wanted to trace the history of those in whom that wisdom became
manifest back to their origin, we would have to step out of time and
space and enter into eternity. We would have to go back to the first
days of creation, when "the spirit of God moved upon the waters," when
the "first initiator" (1) instructed a race of semi-spiritual beings,
constituted very differently from the human beings as we now know them
upon this planet. The externally reasoning historian speaks of the
wisdom-religion of the ages, as if it were some system invented by man
and evolved from the gradually unfolding speculative power of the
reasoning intellect; but the Occultist knows that divine wisdom is
eternal and always the same; all that differs is the form of its
manifestation, according to the capacity of the minds in which it seeks
for expression. A history of the doctrines of the Rosicrucians might,
therefore, begin with an exposition of the doctrine of the Vedas or the
ancient books of Egypt; but as these subjects have been extensively
treated in H. P. Blavatsky's "Secret Doctrine" and other books, we will
merely see in what shape the hermetic philosophy presented itself to the
minds of the neoplatonic philosophers.

#### NEOPLATONISTS.

##### AMMONIUS SACCAS.

Tilts philosopher, who lived about ago A.D., was the founder of the
*Neoplatonic School*. He was the son of Christian parents, and received
a [Christian](errata.htm#1) education, . but departed from this system
and became a "philosopher." He gained a living by carrying burdens for
pay, and yet he was one of the greatest philosophers of that age, and
well acquainted with the Platonic and Aristotelian philosophy. His
disciples were *Erennios*, *Origenes*, *Plotinus*, and *Longinus*.

##### PLOTINUS.

Plotinus was born at *Lykopolis* in Egypt in the year 205 A.D. He
received his education at *Alexandria*. He took part in the war of the
Emperor *Gordianus* in Persia, and went afterwards to Rome, where he
established his school of philosophy. Here he obtained great renown and
was respected by all. It is said that during the 26 years he lived in
Rome he did not have a single enemy. Even the Emperor *Gallienus*, one
of the greatest [villains](errata.htm#2), respected and honoured him.

Plotinus fell sick. As the physician *Eustachius* entered the room in
which Plotinus was dying, the latter exclaimed, joyfully, "I am now

<span id="page_15">p. 15</span>

going to unite the God that lives within myself with the God of the
Universe."

The mind of Plotinus was continually directed towards the Divine genius
who accompanied him,—his own higher self. He cared little about his
physical body, and having been asked about the day when the latter was
born, he refused to tell it, saying that such a trifling matter was of
too little importance to waste any words about.

Phenomenal existence was to him an error, a mistake, a low and
undesirable condition, union with the Divine principle the highest aim
of existence. He ate very little, took no meat, and lived a life of
chastity. *Porphyry*, another one of the disciples of Saccas, having
become envious of the renown of Plotinus, attempted to use black magic
against him, but without success; and finally said that the soul of
Plotinus was so strong that the most powerful Will directed against his
soul could not penetrate it, and rebounded upon the sender. Plotinus,
however, felt that magic influence, and expressed himself to that
effect.

According to the philosophy of Plotinus, God is the foundation of all
things. There is only one Substance; Matter and Form are merely
illusions, or shadows of the Spirit. God is eternal and everywhere. He
is pure light, a Unity, the basis of all existence and thought. The Mind
(νοῦς) is the image of this Unity; it is, so to say, the image created
by the Eternal by looking within itself. Thus the Mind is the product or
creation of God, and yet God itself, and receiving its power from the
latter. The Mind is the eternal activity of the Eternal. It is *Light*,
primordial and unchangeable. Thought and every thinkable object exists
within the mind. The world of Mind is the internal world; the external,
sensual world is the external expression of the former. Mind being a
Unity, and all beings and objects consisting of Mind substance, all are
fundamentally identical, but they differ in form.

The activity by which the inner world of Mind came into existence is an
interior power acting towards the centre. If an external world,
corresponding to the inner world, is to come into existence, there must
be another activity by which this internal activity is reversed, so as
to be directed towards the periphery. This centrifugal activity is the
*Soul*, a product or *reaction* of the centripetal activity of the Mind,
in other words a product of *Thought*, entering within itself.

There is a universal law according to which something real may produce
something approaching its own state of perfection, but not quite as
perfect as itself, and therefore the activity of the soul resembles the
activity of the mind, but is not as perfect as the latter.

The Soul, like the Mind, is living thought, but unlike the Mind, subject
to continual change. The soul, unlike the mind, does not see things
within her own self, but sees them in the mind. The activity of the soul
is directed outwardly, that of the mind inwardly; the perceptions of the
soul are not so clear as those of the mind. The soul,

<span id="page_16">p. 16</span>

like the mind, is a kind of light; but while the light of the mind is
self-luminous, that of the soul is a reflection of the former.

According to the eternal laws of order and harmony existing in the whole
organism of Nature, all souls become after a certain time separated from
the mind, or—to express it more correctly—the distance between the soul
and the centre of mind increases, and they assume a more material state.
Moving away from the Divine intelligence they enter the state of matter,
they descend into matter. At each step towards materialization their
forms become more dense and material, the souls in the air have an airy,
those upon the earth an earthly material form. The activity of the soul
produces other and secondary activities. Some of the latter have an
upward tendency, others follow lower attractions. The upward-tending
activities are Faith, Aspiration, Veneration, Sublimity, etc.; the
downward tendencies produce reasoning, speculations, sophistry, etc.;
the lowest activity of the soul is the purely vegetative power,
sensation, assimilation, instinct, etc.

The ultimate aim of the activity of Nature is the attainment of
self-knowledge. Whatever Nature produces in a visible form, has also a
[supersensual](errata.htm#3) form, giving shape to gross matter, so that
the form may become an object for recognition. Nature is nothing but a
living soul, she is the product of a higher, interior activity, the
Universal Mind. There is only one fundamental living power in Nature,
the power to *imagine;* there is only one result of the activity of this
power, *formation*, or perception of form, and the same process which
takes place in Nature, takes place in the nature of man.

All formations of matter are produced by the soul residing therein. All
forms are filled with an interior life, even if not manifested
outwardly. The Earth is like the wood of a tree, wherein life exists;
the stones resemble twigs which have been cut off from the tree. In the
stars, as well as in the Earth, is Divine Life and Reason.

The sensual world and each existence therein has an interior soul, and
this soul is all that is lasting about those forms; the external
appearance is nothing more than an appearance.

*The World of Intelligence*, is an unchangeable living Unity wherein
there is no separation by space or change in time. In that world exists
everything that is, but there is neither production nor destruction,
neither past nor future. It is not in space, and requires no space. If
we say the world of intelligence is everywhere, we mean to express the
idea that it is in its own being, and, therefore, within itself.

The world of Intelligence is the world of Spirit. There is a supreme
Intelligence, wherein are germinally (potentially) contained all objects
and all intellects, and there are as many individual intellects as can
possibly be contained in that world of intelligence. The same may be
said about the Soul. There is a supreme *Over-Soul*, and as many
individual souls as can be contained therein; and the latter stand in
the same relationship to the former as a species to the one class to
which it belongs. There are different kinds of species in a class, yet
all

<span id="page_17">p. 17</span>

originate in the latter. Each species has a character of its own.
Likewise, in the intellectual world there must be some certain qualities
to produce souls of various kinds, and the souls must be in possession
of various degrees of thought-power, else they would all be identical in
every detail.

There is nothing absolutely without Reason in Nature, although the
manifestations of the principle differ vastly in the various forms. Even
animals, which seem to be unreasonable, possess a reason which guides
their instincts. Everything that exists has its origin in Reason, and
there can be nothing absolutely unreasonable in Nature; but there are
innumerable modes in which Reason becomes manifest, because these
manifestations are modified by external and internal conditions and
circumstances. The inner, *spiritual* man is far more reasonable than
the external one. In the external world Reason manifests itself as
observation, logic and speculation; but in the world of intelligence
Reason is manifest in *direct perception of the truth*.

The aim of the internal action of reason is to produce an objective
form. As differentiation proceeds and the various powers unfold, they
continually lose some of their attributes, and the ultimate products are
less perfect than the original power; but the circumstances in which
they are placed give rise to the origin of new attributes, and thus a
step is made towards rising again into a higher state.

Thus the world of intelligence is a radiation from the fundamental
original centre, and the world which we perceive with our senses is a
product of the world of intelligence. The state of imperfection and
mutability of all things in the external world is caused by their
remoteness from the great centre. The Universe is a product of three
fundamental principles of existence; it is a great *living* being or
organism, in which all its constituent parts are intimately connected
together, and no part in that universe can act without causing a certain
reaction in all other, even distant parts because throughout the whole
there is only one soul, whose activity, manifesting itself in all parts,
constitutes the organism of the whole. All parts are connected together
by that universal power which constitutes the *One Life* in the
universe. All souls lead, so to say, amphibious existences. Sometimes
they are attracted more to the sensual plane and become interwoven with
the latter; at other times they follow the attraction of Reason, from
whence they originated, and may become united with it. *The soul
ultimately becomes divided*, the higher elements rise to the higher
planes, the lower ones sink still lower when they are no more held up by
their connection with the higher ones. Whenever the incarnation of a
human being takes place, the soul furnishes the mortal body with some of
her own substance, but she does not, as a whole, belong to the body; and
only that part of the soul which has become thoroughly amalgamated with
the body takes part in the pains and pleasures of the latter. Man's evil
desires come only from that part of his soul, which is thus mixed with
the body, and, therefore, the evil consequences

<span id="page_18">p. 18</span>

of man's evil actions befall merely the animal man—that is to say, his
living animal principle—but not the real man or the spirit, connected
with the higher elements of the soul. The more the soul is attracted to
the vulgar and low, the more grossly material will the organism with
which she clothes herself become. After death the gross substances must
be purified or destroyed, while the pure elements rise up to the source
from whence they came, until the time for a new incarnation in a form of
flesh has arrived. This process is repeated until the soul has attained
sufficient knowledge to become inaccessible to the attraction of that
which is low. In this sense man's terrestrial existence may well be
looked upon as being a punishment for harbouring evil desires and
inclinations. Intellectual labour is an activity belonging to a lower
state of existence, and is necessary because the original faculty of the
soul of directly perceiving the truth has been lost. If the soul desires
to obtain this faculty again, she must free herself from all
intellectual conceptions, and penetrate into the formless. If she
desires to reach up to the original inconceivable fountain of all, she
must leave her own conceptions behind, she must become free from all
sensual perceptions and intellectual speculations, free of thought and
speech, and live in a state of spiritual contemplation. That which is
beyond intellectual conception can be seen, but can neither be conceived
nor described in words. Seeing is better than believing, knowledge is
better than logis; spiritual knowledge is *one*, but human science is a
multiplicity, and has nothing to do with the eternal Unity, from which
all things take their origin.

It is of the utmost importance that men should be instructed about their
own nature, their origin, and their ultimate destiny; because an
intellectual person is not inclined to undertake a labour, unless he is
convinced about its usefulness. Spiritual perception is a power, which
cannot be imparted, but which must be gained by effort.

If a person does not know that such a power exists, or if he cannot
realize its usefulness, he will make no efforts to attain that state,
his mind will remain without illumination, and he will not be able to
see the truth. He may feel the existence of the truth, like a man may
feel love for an unknown ideal, of which he does not know whether or not
it exists; but he whose mind is illumined sees the object of his love,
the light which illumines the world. This light is present everywhere.
But it exists relatively only for those who are able to see, perceive,
feel, and embrace it, by reason of their own similarity to it. To make
the matter still more [comprehensible](errata.htm#4), let us say that if
the soul throws off her impediments and enters that state again in which
she originated from the Eternal, then will she be able to see and fed
the Eternal. If, after having received these instructions, a person is
too indolent to follow them, he will have no one to blame but himself if
he remains in darkness. Let all, therefore, try to tear themselves loose
from that which is low and sensual, and become united with the supreme
power of God.

<span id="page_19">p. 19</span>

If you desire to find the Supreme, you must free your thoughts of all
impressions coming from the external world, purify your mind of all
figures, forms, and shapes.

God is present in all, even in those who do not recognise Him; but men
flee from God, they step out of Him, or, to speak more correctly, out of
themselves. They cannot grasp Him before whom they are thus fleeing,
and, having lost themselves, they hunts after other gods. But if the
soul progresses on the road to perfection, begins to realize her own
higher state of existence, to know that the fountain of eternal life is
within herself, and that she, therefore, has no need to hunt after
external things, but can find all that is desirable in the divine
element within herself; if she begins to understand that in that God
within is her whole life and being, and that she must flee from the
realm of illusions to live and exist in Him, then will the time come
when she will be able to see Him, and to see herself as an ethereal
being, illumined by a super-terrestrial light. She will see herself even
as the pure Divine Light itself, as a God, radiant in beauty, but
becoming dark again as her light is rendered heavy if it approaches the
shadows of the material plane.

Why does not the soul remain in that state of light? Merely because she
has not yet freed herself fully from the attractions of matter. If she
has become entirely free of these attractions, she will remain in that
light, and know that she is one with it. In this state there is no
perceiver and no object of perception, there is merely perception, and
the soul is that which she perceives. She is, for the time being,
identified with the object of her perception, and, therefore, this state
is something beyond the intellectual comprehension of man.

Having been united and identical with it, the soul carries its image
within herself when she returns to herself. She then knows that during
the time of her union with the Eternal she was the Eternal itself, and
there was no difference between herself and the former. In herself there
was no motion, no sensation, no desire after anything else, neither was
there thought nor conception. She was exalted and  resting in her own
being, she was, so to say, rest itself, in a state surpassing all
conceptions of beauty or virtue. A soul entering into this sublime
state, in which there is no form and no image, cannot be supposed to
enter anything illusive. A soul which sinks into illusions degrades
herself, and enters the region of evil and darkness; but the exalted
soul enters into herself; she is then neither in a state of being nor of
non-being, but in one which is inconceivable and above all being.

##### MALCHUS PORPHYRIUS.

This philosopher was a disciple of *Plotinus*, and was born in
*Batanea*, in Syria, in the year 233 A.D. He died at Rome in the year
304 A.D. He says that only one single time during his life did he
succeed in obtaining his union with God, while his teacher Plotinus, was
four times blessed in this manner.

<span id="page_20">p. 20</span>

Porphyry says, in regard to the Soul:—The embodied soul is like a
traveller who has lived a long time among foreign nations, and has,
therefore, not only forgotten the costumes of his own country, but also
adopted those of the foreigners. When such a traveller returns from his
voyage, and desires to be welcomed by his friends and relatives, he
attempts to lay off his foreign manners, and to return again to his
former way of acting and thinking. Likewise the soul, while banished
from her celestial home, and being forced to inhabit a physical form,
acquires certain habits from the latter, and if she desires to return to
her former state, she must lay aside all she has adopted from her
terrestrial form. She must try to put off not merely the gross physical
mask in which she is dressed, but also her more interior envelopes, so
that she may enter, so to say, in a state of nudity into the realm of
bliss.

There are two poisonous sources from which man drinks oblivion of his
former condition, and which cause him to become forgetful of his future
destiny, namely sensual pain and sensual pleasure. By the action of
these two, but especially by the action of the latter, desires and
passions are created, and these attract the soul to matter and become
the cause of her corporification. Thus the soul is, so to say *nailed to
the body*, and the *ethereal vehicle* of the soul is rendered heavy and
dense. We should avoid everything which may excite sensuality, because
wherever sensuality is active, reason and pure intelligence cease their
activity. We should, therefore, never eat for the mere pleasure of
eating, but only eat as much as is necessary to nourish the body.
Superfluous, and especially animal food, strengthens the bonds which
bind the soul to matter, and withdraw her from the Divinity and from
divine things. The wise, being a priest of God, should seek to remain
free of all impurities while he is in the temple of Nature, and he
should never so far forget his dignity as to approach the Source of all
Life while he himself constitutes a grave for the dead bodies of
animals. He should select for his nutriment only the pure gifts of his
terrestrial mother. If we could avoid all kind of food, we should become
still more spiritual.

In regard to the difference existing between *corporeal* and
*incorporeal* things, Porphyry says:—"The Incorporeal governs the
Corporeal, and is, therefore, present everywhere, although not as space,
but in power. The corporeal existence of things cannot hinder the
Incorporeal from being present to such things as it desires to enter
into relation with. The Soul has therefore the power to extend her
activity to any locality she may desire. She is a power which has no
limits, and each part of her, being independent of special conditions,
can be present everywhere, provided she is pure and unadulterated with
matter. Things do not act upon each other merely by the contact of their
corporeal forms, but also at a distance, provided they have a soul,
because the higher elements of the soul are everywhere, and cannot be
enclosed in a body, like an animal in a cage, or a liquid in a bottle.
The universal

<span id="page_21">p. 21</span>

soul, being essentially one and identical with the infinite supreme
Spirit, may, by the infinite power of the latter, discover or produce
everything, and an individual soul may do the same thing if she is
purified and free from the body."

"The realm of the soul, being semi-material, has its inhabitants
possessing semi-material (astral) forms. Some of them are good, others
evil; some are kindly disposed towards man, others are malicious. Both
classes have ethereal but changeable bodies; the good ones are masters
of their bodies and desires, the evil ones are governed by the desires
of their bodies. They are all powers for good or for evil, divine,
animal, or diabolic invisible influences creating, by their interior
activity, passions, desires, vices, and virtues in the souls of beings.
The more evil they are, the more do their forms approach the corporeal
state. They then live on the exhalations of matter; they induce men to
murder and to kill animals, they enjoy the vapours arising from the
victims, and grow fat by absorbing the ethereal substances of the dying.
They are, therefore, always ready to incite men to wars and crimes, and
they collect in great crowds in places where men or animals are killed."

Porphyry ridicules the idea that gods, being wiser, more powerful, and
superior to man, could be coaxed, persuaded or forced to do the will of
man or conform to his desires. He repudiates the theory that
clairvoyance, prophecy, etc., were the results of the inspiration by
external gods, but says that they are a function of the Divine Spirit
within man; and that the exercise of this function becomes possible when
the soul is put into that condition which is necessary to exercise it.
"The consciousness of man may be centred within or beyond his physical
form; and according to conditions a man may be, so to say, out of
himself or within himself, or in a state in which he is neither wholly
without nor within, but enjoys both states at once." He also states that
there are many invisible beings, which may take all possible forms and
appear as gods, as men, or as demons, that they are fond of lying and
masquerading, and of pretending to be the souls of departed men.

It is said that Porphyry was several times during his prayers levitated
into the air, even to the height of ten yards or more, and that on such
occasions his body appeared to be surrounded by a golden light. "The
gods are everywhere, and he whose soul is filled with such a divine
influence to the exclusion of lower influences is, for the time being,
the god which that influence represents, possessing his attributes and
ideas. The nature of the union of the soul with God cannot be
intellectually conceived or expressed in words; he who accomplishes it
is identical with God, he is Divinity itself, and there is no difference
between him and the latter. The gods are not called down to us by our
prayers; but we rise up to them by our own holy aspirations and efforts;
we are connected with them by the all-embracing power of love."

<span id="page_22">p. 22</span>

##### JAMBLICHUS.

This philosopher was a disciple of Porphyry, and died about 333 A.D. He
says:

"If the soul rises up to the gods, she becomes god-like and able to know
the *above* and the *below;* she then obtains the power to heal
diseases, to make useful inventions, to institute wise laws. Man has no
intuitive power of his own; his intuition is the result of the
connection existing between his soul and the Divine Spirit; the stronger
this union grows, the greater will be his intuition, spiritual
knowledge. Not all the perceptions of the soul are of a divine
character; there are also many images which are the products of the
lower activity of the soul in her mixture with material elements. Divine
Nature, being the eternal fountain of Life, produces no deceptive
images; but if her activity is perverted, such deceptive images may
appear. If the mind of man is illumined by the Divine Light, the
ethereal vehicle of his soul becomes filled with light and shining."

##### PROCLUS.

Proclus lived at *Byzany*, 412-485. He was a hermetic philosopher and
mystic, having often prophetical visions and dreams. It is said that he
had the spiritual power of producing rain by his "prayer" and of
preventing earthquakes. He was very pious and self-denying, and on some
occasions his head seemed to be surrounded by a glory of light.

He says that the soul of man consists of many coats; some more dense,
and others of a more ethereal character, each one being a fundamental
principle, changeable only in regard to its form. "The soul can only
return to her divine state after having been purified of her earthly
desires. Her reason and free will must take part in the sufferings
belonging to the material state, until she attains knowledge and becomes
free from desires. For this purpose she clothes herself at certain
periods in a physical form (reincarnates as a human being), until she
has laid off her desires. The more the soul frees herself from her gross
external coats (principles) the higher can she rise."

##### HIEROCLES.

This philosopher says:—"The intelligent soul-substance received from the
*Demiurgos* (Logos) an inseparable immaterial body, and entered thus
into being. She is, therefore, neither corporeal nor incorporeal, but
comparable to the sun and the stars, which are the product of an
immaterial substance. This soul-body, which human beings as well as
"spirits" possess, is of a shining nature. The vehicle of the soul is
contained within the material body of man; it breathes Life into the
lifeless and soulless physical organism, and contains the harmony of the
latter. The *Life Principle* of man is the inner being which produces
the activity of Life in the organism. The inner man consists of an
intelligent substance and an immaterial (transcendentally material)
body. The visible material form is the production and

<span id="page_23">p. 23</span>

image of the interior man. The external form consists of the animal,
unintellectual, gross-material and ethereal bodies, a separation of
living substance and dead matter is effected, and thus man may render
himself capable of having intercourse with pure spirits.

During the year 529, the imperial bigot *Justinian* closed the schools
of Philosophy at *Athens*, and their last representatives, Isodorus,
Damascius, and *Simplicius* went to Persia. They expected to find in the
East freedom of thought, tolerance, and wisdom. It was said that
*Chosroes*, the King of Persia, was a philosopher, and they hoped to
obtain his protection. But they soon found that the philosophy of that
King was very superficial, and that he was a cruel, passionate, and
ignorant tyrant, varnished over with some superficial learning.
Disappointed, they returned to Greece.

This was the experience of the last of the Neoplatonic philosophers,
such as were publicly known, and a long obscuration of the sun of wisdom
took place, until a ray of light broke again through the clouds during
the 15th century.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter Three. Mediaeval Philosophers](ptw05)
