[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sub Rosa](../index) 
[Rosicrucians](../../eso/ros/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](ptw06) 
[Next](ptw08) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1419140671/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*In the Pronaos of the Temple of Wisdom*, by Franz Hartmann, \[1890\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_49">p. 49</span>

### Chapter Five

#### THE ROSICRUCIAN "ORDERS."

WHY is there so much perplexity about the mysterious order of the
Rosicrucians? Let us ask in return, Why is there so much perplexity
about that mysterious being called "Man"? The answer is that man is a
spiritual being, inhabiting the spiritual world, which he has never
entirely left; while the terrestrial personality in which he manifests
himself during his earthly life is an inhabitant of this planet. That
which the historian and the scientist know about man is merely that
which refers to his physical body; while nothing is known to them about
his real self. To imagine that such knowledge is true anthropology is
like imagining that we know all about a man if we once see the coat
which he wears. Likewise the true Rosicrucians, whether they still walk
upon the earth in a visible form, or whether they inhabit the astral
plane, are spiritual powers, such as are beyond the reach of examination
of the externally reasoning historian or scientist. They are people who,
as the Bible expresses it, "live upon the earth, but whose consciousness
is in heaven."

The vulgar sees only the external form, but not the spirit which is the
true inhabitant of that form. To discern the latter, the power of
spiritual discernment is required. The coat which a man wears does not
make the man; to pour water over a person does not make him a true
Christian, and to have one's name entered into the register of some
society calling itself "Rosicrucian," does not endow one with the rosy
and golden light of love and wisdom that comes from the unfoldment of
the "Rose" within the centre of one's soul.

But it is far easier to undergo some external ceremony than to die the
mystic death which is required for the purpose of passing through the
"Gates of Gold"; it is easier to profess a creed than to acquire true
knowledge; and for this reason we find during the Middle Ages not less
than at this present time many people who imagine that they could be
made into Rosicrucians and Adepts, by joining some society dealing with
mystical subjects.

In the beginning of the 17th century Germany was overrun, not only by
monks and nuns and religious fanatics of all kinds, but also by a great
many impostors and adventurers. There were pretended Alchemists,
Astrologers, Fortune-tellers, and there was a universal mania among the
people to pry into the secrets of Nature, and to enrich themselves by
alchemical processes, or, if need be, by the help of the devil. This
epidemic of superstition and folly seemed to require a strong remedy,
and as foolish people are not accessible to reasonable

<span id="page_50">p. 50</span>

arguments, it occurred to some sharp-witted mind to try the more caustic
remedy of sarcasm. There appeared in the year 1614 two pamphlets,
written by the same author, entitled, "*Universal and General
Reformation of the Whole Wide World*," and the "*Fama Fraternitatis; or,
Brotherhood of the Laudable Order of the R.C.* (Rosicrucians), *a
message to the Governments, nobles, and scientists of Europe*." This
book was out of print during the last century, and Frederic Nicolai, in
Berlin, had it reprinted in the year 1781, falsifying, however, its
date, inserting 1681 instead of the correct date, and "Regensburg"
instead of "Berlin." Another edition of the *Fama Fraternitatis*
appeared at Frankfurt-on-Maine in the year 1827, and to this was added
an additional part, entitled "*Confessio*."

These books, soon after they first appeared, made a great impression
upon the public mind, and were immediately translated into several
languages. The *Universal Reformation* is a satirical work. Its most
interesting contents are an account of the meeting of a supposed
Congress for the purpose of reforming the world. The story is as
follows:—At the time of the Emperor Justinian, *Apollo* takes a look at
the world, and finds it to be full of vices and wickedness. He therefore
makes up his mind to call together a meeting of all the wise and
virtuous men of the country to consult together how this evil might be
remedied. Unfortunately, among all of them there is none to be found who
is possessed of sufficient virtue and intelligence to give the desired
advice. [Apollo](errata.htm#9) therefore assembles the seven ancient
sages of Greece and three Romans, *Marcus*, *Cato*, and *Seneca*. A
young Italian philosopher, by the name of *Jacob Mazzonius*, is
appointed secretary. The congregation meets in the delphic Palatium; and
now follow the speeches which were held. The sages talk the most
egregious nonsense. *Thales*, for instance, advises that a window should
be inserted in the breast of every man, so that the people could look
into his heart. *Solon* has become a communist, and wants to divide out
all the public and private property, so that all should have equal
parts. *Bias* proposes to prohibit all intercourse between the people,
to destroy the bridges and to forbid using ships. *Cato* desires that
God should be asked to send another deluge, to destroy the whole
feminine sex and all males over 20 years of age; and to request Him to
invent a new and better method of procreation. All the sages dispute and
contradict each other, and finally it is resolved to cite the diseased
century and make it come into court, so that the patient may be closely
investigated. The century is brought in. It is an old man with a
healthy-looking face, but having a weak voice. They examine him, and
find that his face is painted, and a further investigation shows that
not a single part of his body is without some disease. The savants then
come to the conclusion that they cannot cure him; but they do not want
to adjourn without having it appear that they had done something very
useful and important, so they impose a new tax upon cabbage, carrots and
parsley. They publish the document with a great

<span id="page_51">p. 51</span>

deal of swagger and self-praise, and the delighted people jubilate and
applaud.

The meaning of this pamphlet, which was written for the purpose of
throwing ridicule upon a certain class of people who wanted to improve
the world at once and to show the absurdity and impossibility of such an
undertaking, was plain enough, and it seems incredible that its purpose
should have been misunderstood. That there were any people who took the
matter seriously shows the extreme ignorance and want of judgment of the
common people of those times, and forms an interesting episode for the
student of history and intellectual evolution. The other pamphlet which
accompanied the former is the celebrated *Fama Fraternitatis*. The
*Universal Reformation* threw ridicule upon the self-constituted
"world-reformers," and this second pamphlet now invites these would-be
reformers to meet, and it, at the same time, gives them some useful
hints as to what they might do to attain their object; advising them
that the only true method for improving the world is to begin by
improving themselves. This pamphlet being like the other one, a satire
upon the would-be reformers and so-called Rosicrucians, might, for all
that, have been written by a genuine Rosicrucian, for it contains true
Rosicrucian principles, such as are advocated by the Adepts. It shows
the insufficiency of the scientific and theological views of those
times. It ridicules the imbecility of the pretended Alchemists, who
imagined that by some *chemical* process they could transform lead into
gold; but in doing so it gives good advice, and under the mask of
divulging the laws and objects of some mysterious Rosicrucian Society,
it indicates certain rules and principles, which afterward formed the
basis of an organised society of investigators in Occultism, who adopted
the name *Rosicrucians*.

Added to this, *Fama Fraternitatis* is the story of the "pious,
spiritual, and highly-illuminated Father," Fr. R. C. *Christian
Rosencruetz*. It is said that he was a German nobleman, who had been
educated in a convent, and that long before the time of the Reformation
he had made a pilgrimage to the Holy Land in company with another
brother of this convent, and that while at Damascus they had been
initiated by some learned Arabs into the mysteries of the secret
science. After remaining three years at Damascus, they went to Fez, in
Africa, and there they obtained still more knowledge of magic, and of
the relations existing between the macrocosm and microcosm. After having
also travelled in Spain, he returned to Germany, where he founded a kind
of a convent called *Sanctus Spiritus*, and remained there writing his
secret science and continuing his studies. He then accepted as his
assistants, at first three, and afterwards four more monks from the same
convent in which he had been educated, and thus founded the first
society of the Rosicrucians. They then laid down the results of their
science in books, which are said to be still in existence, and in the
hands of some Rosicrucians. It is then said that 120 years after

<span id="page_52">p. 52</span>

his death, the entrance to his tomb was discovered. A staircase led into
a subterranean vault, at the door of which was written, *Post annos CXX.
patebo*. There was a light burning in the vault, which however, became
extinct as soon as it was approached. The vault had seven sides and
seven angles, each side being five feet wide and eight feet high. The
upper part represented the firmament, the floor the earth, and they were
laid out in triangles, while each side was divided into ten squares. In
the middle was an altar, bearing a brass plate, upon which were engraved
the letters, *A. C. R. C.*, and the words, *Hoc Universi Compendium
vivus mihi Sepulchrum feci*. In the midst were four figures surrounded
by the words, *Nequaquam Vacuum*. *Legis Jugum*. *Libertas Evangelii*.
*Du Gloria Intacta*. Below the altar was found the body of *Rosencreuz*,
intact, and without any signs of putrefaction. In his hand was a book of
parchment, with golden letters marked on the cover with a T
(Testamentum?), and at the end was written, *Ex Deo naximur. In Jesu
morimur. Per Spiritum Sanctum reviviscimus*." There were signed the
names of the brothers present at the funeral of the deceased.

In the year 1615, a new edition of these pamphlets appeared, to which
was added another one, entitled *Confessio;* or, "the Confession of the
Society and Brotherhood of the R. C.;" giving great promises about
future revelations, but ending with the advice to everybody that until
these revelations were made the people should continue to believe in the
Bible.

All these pamphlets had—as will be shown farther on—one and the same
author, and as the "*General Reformation*" was of an entirely satirical
character and a pure invention, having no more foundation, in fact, than
the *Don Quixote de la Mancha* of *Cervantes*, there is no reason
whatever why we should believe that the succeeding pamphlets should have
been meant seriously, and that the story of the returned knight,
*Christian Rosencreuz*, should have been anything more than an allegory.
Moreover, there is no indication of what became of the body of that
knight after it was once discovered, nor that the temple of the Holy
Ghost (Sanctus Spiritus) exists anywhere else but in the hearts of men.

The whole object of these pamphlets seems to have been to present great
truths to the ignorant, but to dish them up in a fictitious form,
appealing to the curiosity of the people, and to the prevailing craving
for a knowledge of the mysteries of Nature, which the majority of the
people of these times wanted to know for the purpose of obtaining
selfish and personal benefits.

The beauty of the doctrines which shone through these satirical writings
were so great and attractive that they excited universal attention; but
at the same time the craving of the majority of the people for the
mysterious was so great that it blinded their eyes, and rendered them
incapable of perceiving the true object of the writer, which was to
ridicule the pretensions of dogmatic science and theology, and to

<span id="page_53">p. 53</span>

draw the people up to a higher conception of true Christianity. The
belief in the existence of a real secret organization of Rosicrucians,
possessed of the secret how to make gold out of lead and iron, and of
prolonging life by means of taking some fluid in the shape of a
medicine, was universal; and quacks and pretenders of all kinds roamed
over the country and helped to spread the superstitions, often selling
worthless compounds for fabulous prices as being the "Elixir of Life;"
while others wasted their fortunes and became poor in making vain
efforts to transmute metals.

A flood of writings appeared, some attacking and some defending the
Rosicrucian Society, which was supposed to exist, but of which no one
knew anything. Some people, and even some of the well-informed ones,
believed in the existence of such a society; others denied it. But
neither one class nor the other could bring any positive proofs for
their beliefs. People are always willing to believe that which they
desire to be true, and everyone wanted to be admitted as a member of
that secret society, of which nobody was certain whether it existed at
all; and if anyone boasted of being a Rosicrucian, or succeeded in
creating the impression that he was one, he awed the ignorant, and was
regarded by them as a very favoured person, and in this way impostors
and adventurers often succeeded in preying upon the pockets of the rich.

Those who wanted to be taught magic and sorcery desired that a society
or school where they might learn such things should exist; and because
they desired it they believed in its existence. If no genuine
Rosicrucian could be found, one had to be invented. If the true
Rosicrucian society was not to be had, imitations of what was believed
to constitute a Rosicrucian society had to be organized. In this way
numerous societies were formed, calling themselves "Rosicrucians"; and
"Rosicrucianism" took various shapes.

One of the most important publications, and which is calculated to throw
light upon the mysterious subject of Rosicrucianism which still
perplexes the learned, is the *Chymical Marriage of Christian
Rosencreutz*, printed in 1616. This, again, was written to throw
ridicule upon the vain and self-conceited dogmatists, scientists, and
"gold-makers" of those times, while at the same time it contains high
and exalted truths, disguised in an allegorical form, but easily to be
perceived by the practical Occultist, *and by him only*. It can easily
be seen that the style and tendencies of this publication have a great
deal of resemblance to that of the *Fama Fraternitatis*. Now it has been
ascertained beyond any doubt that the author of the "Chemical Marriage"
was Johann Valentine Andreae, <span id="fr_7"></span>[\*](#fn_7) who
wrote it while a young

<span id="page_54">p. 54</span>

student in the years 1602 and 1603 in Tübingen. He acknowledges this in
the history which he gives of his life, and he adds that he intended to
give a true picture of the popular follies of that time. This renders it
extremely probable that he was also the author of the "General
Reformation," of the *Confessio*, and of the story of Christian
Rosencreutz, and this probability amounts to almost conviction if we
take into consideration the discovery made afterwards, that the "General
Reformation" is nothing else but a literal translation of a part of a
book from *Boccalini Ragguagli di Parmaso*. Andreae was a great admirer
of that author, and he also adopted his style in his *Mythologia
Christiana;* it is therefore plain that he also made the above-named
translation, and added it to his "Fama Fraternitatis." Both writings, in
fact, form a complement to each other. In the "General Reformation" the
political would-be-reformers are held up to ridicule, and in the "Fama"
the mystical dreamers, imaginary theosophists, pretended gold-makers,
and supposed discoverers of the universal panacea are castigated. There
can be no reasonable doubt that this was Andreae's object, and,
moreover, his intimate friend, Professor Besoldt, in Tübingen,
acknowledged it in saying that the character of both books was plain
enough, and that it was very strange that so many intelligent people had
been led by the nose to mistake their meaning. Andreae himself, without,
however, acknowledging himself to be their author, expressed himself to
the effect that the whole was a satire and a fable. In his "confession"
he says: (Sc.) *risisse semper Rosicrucianam fabulum et curiositatis
fraterculos fuisse in sectatum* <span id="fr_8"></span>[†](#fn_8) and in
his paper entitled "*Turris Babel, seu judiciorum de Fraternitatae
Rosaccae crucis chaos*," he speaks still more plainly upon this subject.
It seems to have been his object in this latter publication to help
those to become sober again who had become intoxicated by
misunderstanding the former publications, for he exclaims: "Listen, ye
mortals! In vain will ye wait for the arrival of that fraternity; the
comedy is over. The *fama* has played it in, the *fama* has played it
out," etc., etc. Still there were many who were not satisfied with this
explanation, and who believed that it had been Andreae's intention to
cause by his *fama*, a secret society of the scientists of his age to
come into existence; but Andreae was too wise to attempt such an
absurdity and to apply to the most *unreasonable* persons of his age to
form a *reasonable* society.

The question why he should have selected the name "Rosicrucian" for his
imaginary society is not difficult to answer: The *Cross* and the *Rose*
were favourite symbols among the Alchemists and Theosophists long before
anything of a "Rosicrucian Society" was known. Moreover, in his own coat
of arms, as in that of Luther, there was a cross and four roses, a
circumstance which probably led him to select that name.

<span id="page_55">p. 55</span>

There is, perhaps, very rarely a fable or work of fiction invented which
is not based upon some fact, however disconnected such facts may be with
the subject. A work, entitled *Sphinx Rosæa*, printed in 1618, makes it
appear very plausible that the writer of the *Fama Fraternitatis*, in
inventing the story of *Christian Rosencreutz* and his three brothers,
whose number was afterwards increased by four more, had certain
originals in his mind, which served as prototypes to construct his
story. The author of that *Sphinx* says that the idea of forming such a
society for the general reformation of mankind arose from the success of
Luther's Reformation; that the knight, Christian Rosencreutz, was, in
reality, no other person than a certain *Andreas von Carolstadt*, an
adventurer, who had travelled a great deal, but never been in Palestine.
He made himself so obnoxious to the clergy of his time, whom he desired
to reform, that they, after his death, put the following Epitaph upon
his grave:—*Carolstadius Pestis Ecclesiae venonissima, tandem a Diabolo
occisus est*. This means: "Here lies Carolstadt, who was a poisonous
plague to the Church until the devil killed him at last." The three
supposed associates of Rosencreutz were the friends of Carolstadt, the
reformer *Zwingli*, *Oecolompadius*, and *Bucerus*, and the four others,
who were supposed to have been added afterwards, were probably *Nicalaus
Palargus*, *Marcus Stubner*, *Martin Cellurius*, and, finally, *Thomas
Münster*, all of which persons were more or less known on account of
their desire to aid in reforming the Church.

As the people became infatuated with the idea of becoming Rosicrucians,
and no real society of Adepts could be found, they organized Rosicrucian
societies without any real Adepts, and thus a great many so-called
Rosicrucian societies came into existence. There was one such society
founded by *Christian Rose* in 1622, having head centres in the Hague,
Amsterdam, Nuremberg, Mantua, Venice, Hamburg, Dantzig and Erfurt. They
used to dress in black, and wore at their meetings blue ribbons with a
golden wreath and a rose. As a sign of recognition the brothers wore a
black silk cord in the top button hole. This ornament was given to the
neophytes after they had promised under oath to be strangled by such a
cord rather than reveal the secrets which they were supposed to possess.
They also had another sign, consisting of the "tonsure," such as is used
today by the Roman Catholic clergy, meaning a small round shaven spot on
the top of the head, originating probably from the custom of the
Buddhist priests, who shave their whole head. Hence many of them wore a
wig, in order not to be recognised as belonging to the brotherhood. They
led a very quiet life, and were devout peoples. On all high festivals,
very early at sunrise they would leave their residence, and go out
through the gate of the town facing the east. When another one of them
appeared, or when they met at other places, one would say: *Ave Frater!*
to which the other would answer, *Rosae et Aureae;* then the first one
said *Crucis*, then both together said: *Benedictus Deus* 

<span id="page_56">p. 56</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> *Dominus noster,
que nobis dedit Signum!* They also had for the sake of legitimation a
large document, to which the Imperator affixed the great seal. <span
id="fr_9"></span>[\*](#fn_9)

There was another "Rosicrucian society," formed at Paris in the year
166o by an apothecary named *Jacob Rose*. This society was dissolved in
1674, in consequence of the notorious case of wholesale poisoning by the
ill-reputed Marquise de Brinvillier.

Whether or not there ever were any real Adepts and genuine Alchemists
among the members of these Rosicrucian societies, we are, of course, not
in a position to affirm. We are satisfied to know that Adepts do exist
and that Alchemy is a fact; but whether they had anything to do with
these orders we do not know, nor do we care about it, as it is now of no
consequence whatever. All that we know for certain in regard to this
matter is, that there existed at that time persons in possession of an
extraordinary amount of occult knowledge, as is shown by the books they
have left; but whether these persons belonged or did not belong to any
organized society, is absolutely useless to know.

During the life of *Theophrastus Paracelsus*, he was the intellectual
centre to which Alchemists, Occultists, Mystics, Reformers and
Rosicrucians were attracted, but there is no indication that he was a
member of any society of men calling themselves "Rosicrucians." There
is, likewise, no indication that after the time of Paracelsus any
organized society of true Adepts, calling themselves "Rosicrucian
Society," ever existed. Some of the greatest minds of that age were
engaged in occult research, and were naturally attracted together by the
bonds of sympathy; but however much they may have been united in the
spirit (in the temple of the Holy Ghost), there is no indication that
they had an organized society on the external plane, nor would any
*real* Adepts need any other but spiritual signs of recognition.

A book printed in 1714, and written by *Sinecrus Renatus*, contains the
remarkable information that some years ago the Masters of the
Rosicrucians had gone to India, and that none of them at present
remained in Europe. This is not at all improbable; for the moral
atmosphere of Europe is at the present time not very congenial for
[spiritual](errata.htm#11) development, nor very inviting to those who,
while progressing on the Path of Light, are reincarnating in physical
forms.

As all researches after a real Rosicrucian society consisting of genuine
Adepts were naturally fruitless, the excitement caused by the *Fama
Fraternitatis* gradually ceased, and there was not much said or written
about them until between the years 1756 and 1768, when a new degree of
Freemasonry came into existence, called the "Rosicrucian Knights," or
the order of *Rose-croix*, or the *Knights of the Eagle and Pelican;*
but we should in vain search among these knights for any genuine Adept,
or even for anyone possessed of occult knowledge or

<span id="page_57">p. 57</span>

power; for as our modern churches have lost the key to the mysteries
which were once entrusted to their guardianship, and have degenerated
into places for social gatherings and religious pastime, so our modern
Masons have long ago lost the Word, and will not find it again unless
they dive below the surface of external ceremonies and seek for it in
their own hearts.

The most important books written during the time of the Rosicrucian
controversy were the following:—

*I. Books Written in Favour of the Rosicrucians:*

(Titles translated from the German.)

*Fama Fraternitatis*, or the discovery of the laudable Order of the Rosy
Cross.—*Anonym*., Frankfurt, 1615.

*Confessio*, or Confession of the Fraternity of the Rosy Cross.—Anonym.,
Frankfurt, 1615.

*Opinion* regarding the laudable Order of the Rosy Cross, by *Adam
Bruxius*, M.D., 1616.

Message to the Philosophical Fraternity of the Rosy Cross, by *Valentin
Tschirnessus*, Goerlitz.

*Thesaurus Fidei*, or warning to the novices of the Fraternity of the
Rosy Cross, 1619.

*Fons Gratiae*, by *Trenaeus Agnostus, C.W.*, 1619.

*Raptus Philosophicus*, or Philosophical Revelations for the Fraternity
of the R.C., 1619, by *Rhodophilus Stansophorus*.

*Silentium-Post Clamores*. An apology resp. Defence, by *R.M.F.*, 1617.

*Frater Crucis Rosacae*, or, What kind of people are the Rosicrucians?
By *M.A.O.F.W.*, 1617.

*Speculum Constantiae*. Appeal to new members of the R.C. Society, by
*Trenaeus Agnostus, C.W.*, 1618.

*Themis Aurea*. The Laws and Regulations of the laudable Fraternity of
the R.C., by *Michael Maier*, *Imp. Cons. Com. Ey. Ex.*, 1618.

*Tintinabulum Sapnorum*, or, The Discovery of the blessed Fraternity of
the Order of the R.C., by *Trenaeus Agnostus, C.W.*, 1619.

*Frater Non Frater*. Admonitions to the disciples of the R.C., 1619.

*Prodromus Rhodo-Stauroticus*. Directions for the practice of Alchemy,
1620.

*Colloquium Rhodo-Stauroticum*. A discourse regarding the Fraternity of
the R.C., 1621.

*Rosencreutz Ch.* Chemical Marriage, Anno 1459? (1781).

*II. Writings Inimical to the Rosicrucians*.

*Benevolent Advice* regarding the Fama and Confessio of the R.C., by
*And. Libavius M.D., P.C., Sae. Theolog. and Philosoph.*, 1616.

*Sphinx Rosæea*. Suspicions in regard to the mysteries of the R.C., by
*Christophorus Nigrimus Philomusus and Theologus*, 1618.

*The New Arabian and Moorish Fraternity*, by *Eusebius Christianus*, a
carrier of the wooden cross.

<span id="page_58">p. 58</span>

*Speculum Ambitionis*, or *A Mirror for Ambition*, in which may be seen
how the Devil has brought all sorts of new orders into existence. A
refutation of the doctrines of that new sect, called Rosicrucians, by
*Joh. Hintner*, 1620.

*Tomfoolery Discovered*, or, Christian Refutation of the so-called
Brothers of the Rosy Cross, showing that these people are not of God,
but of the Devil. A timely warning to all pious Christians. By *Joh.
Silvert Aegl*, 5657.

 

The more important modern books on Rosicrucianism are: *Semler's*
"Collections to the history of the Rosicrucians"; *Bouterwek's* "Origin
of the R.C."; *Murr*, "The true origin of Rosicrucians and Freemasons";
*Buhle*, "Origin and history of the R.C."; *Nicolai*, "Remarks about the
history of the Rosicrucians and Freemasons"; *Herder*, "An article in
the German *Mercury* of March, 1782, and reprinted in Herder's
*Philosophy and History*," vol. 55, p. 258; *Arnold*, "History of the
churches and heretics," part ii., lib. xvii., cap. 58; *Rossbach*, "Joh.
Valentin Andreae and his age," Berlin, 1859. There are numerous books on
Alchemy, Theosophy, and Occult Science which have been written by people
supposed to have been Rosicrucians; but they give no account of the
history of the latter. The most prominent are the works of *Theophrastus
Paracelsus*, *Jacob Boehme*, *Cornelius Agrippa of Nettesheim;* *Robert
Fludd's* "Summum Bonum"; *John Arndt*, "Silentium Dei," and "The true
Christendom"; *Simon Studion*, "Naometria"; *Trenaeus Philalethes*,
"Lumen de Lumina," and innumerable others, which may be drawn into this
category; but perhaps the most interesting of all is an illustrated work
which is now out of print, and has become very rare, and which is
entitled "*The Secret Symbols of the Rosicrucians of the Sixteenth and
Seventeenth Century*," <span id="fr_10"></span>[\*](#fn_10) and from
which a great deal of information contained in this present volume is
taken.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_7"></span>[53:\*](ptw07.htm#fr_7) *Dr. Johann*
[*Valentine*](errata.htm#10) *Andreae* was born Aug. 17, 1586, at
Herrenberg, in Wurtemberg, and died an abbot of Adelsberg, at Stuttgart,
June 27, 1654. He spoke several languages, was well versed in theology,
mathematics, history, and the natural sciences. He was of a noble mind,
anxious to do good, and an original character. Herder describes him as a
rose among the thorns.

<span id="fn_8"></span>[54:†](ptw07.htm#fr_8) Andreae's autobiography.
*Weismann*, hist. eccl. P. ii., p. 336.

<span id="fn_9"></span>[56:\*](ptw07.htm#fr_9) Extracted from the
"Sphinx." Vol. I., No. 1.

<span id="fn_10"></span>[58:\*](ptw07.htm#fr_10) This book has been
reprinted and published with the fac-similes of the plates by The Aries
Press, Chicago, Ill.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter Six. Pseudo-Rosicrucians—Impostors And Fools](ptw08)
