[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sub Rosa](../index.md) 
[Rosicrucians](../../eso/ros/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](ptw05.md) 
[Next](ptw07.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1419140671/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*In the Pronaos of the Temple of Wisdom*, by Franz Hartmann, \[1890\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_35">p. 35</span>

### Chapter Four.

#### AMONG THE "ADEPTS."

A BELIEF in the existence of persons endowed with abnormal or
extraordinary psychic faculties or magical powers, by which they can
produce wonderful effects, such as are not to be explained by the
commonly accepted theories of external science, is nothing new. The
Bible and the "Acta Sanctorum" are full of accounts of so-called
"miracles," a term which signifies something wonderful, but for all that
not anything contrary to the laws of nature. Such "wonders" are
performed by the power of the spiritually awakened will. The Yoga
philosophy gives a specification of these powers, and describes how they
may be acquired.

To those powers belongs the art of making oneself invisible; of leaving
one's body at will and returning to it again; of projecting one's soul
to a distant place; of prolonging physical life for a long period of
time; of transforming base metals into pure gold by alchemical means; of
creating subjective illusions which appear to the spectators as
objective realities, and of performing numerous other feats, such as
belong to the department of Magic, white or black.

There is sufficient evidence going to show that during the time of the
Middle Ages there were numerous people existing in whom such psychic
faculties had been more or less developed. It was a time during which
the imagination of the people as a whole was more active and more
directed toward the supersensual and metaphysical aspect of the world.
There was more of the true faith, and likewise more superstition to be
found than at present, and faith as well as fear are active powers,
capable to produce results on the astral plane. From the true faith, the
result of spiritual knowledge, spring the powers of the Adept; from fear
and superstition, the phenomena of obsession and sorcery. Persons in
possession of magic powers, and especially those who were supposed to
know the secrets of Alchemy, were called "Adepts," "Rosicrucians," or
"Philosophers," and the greatest of them were supposed to belong to some
secret and mysterious society, called "*the Brotherhood of the Golden
and Rosy Cross*."

If we allow a great deal of poetical liberty in the descriptions of the
members of this fabulous order, charging it to the fruitful imagination
of the writers living at the time of the "knights errant," nevertheless,
there remains a considerable amount of historical evidence going to show
that there were persons endowed with abnormal powers; although there is
no evidence whatever that they were united among themselves by any
external association or sect. Neither would such

<span id="page_36">p. 36</span>

a farce ever be necessary among those whose internal senses were opened,
and who would be drawn together by the ties of the spirit. Having the
power of interior perception, they would surely not need any external
passwords and signs. The true brothers of the Golden and Rosy Cross were
and still are a spiritual society, and therefore the effort made at that
time of finding a real and living, indisputably true Rosicrucian, were
as unavailing as was at a more recent period the effort made by a
certain London society of proving the existence of real and living
Adepts.

The Rosicrucians have been celebrated in prose and in verse; and their
virtues have been extolled by some, while others have denounced them as
impostors. Some writers describe them as beings of a superior character,
possessed of apparently supernatural knowledge and powers, as men of
noble appearance and exercising an invisible but irresistible influence
over all with whom they come into contact. They describe them as having
the power to read the hearts of men, and to cure the diseases of their
bodies by wonderful medicines, or merely by the touch of their hands.
They are loved by all and they love all; but their hearts are
invulnerable to sexual love. They never marry. They are sometimes
described as being of fabulous age, and still appearing in the full
vigour of manhood; as being great travellers and speaking the language
of each country where they temporarily reside, as fluently and correctly
as if it were their own native tongue; as possessing the power of
rendering themselves invisible, and again, as often appearing
unexpectedly, when their presence is most urgently needed. They are
possessed of immense treasures, and have the power to transmute base
metals into gold, and yet they despise riches and are contented to live
in poverty. They are the wisest of all men, and the knowledge of even
the most learned cannot be compared with what they know. They do nothing
whatever for the purpose of obtaining fame, for they are dear to
ambition; nevertheless their fame spreads wherever they appear. They are
universally honoured, but they seek not for honour, and prefer to remain
unnoticed. Palaces are at their disposal, but they prefer the hut of a
beggar. They are not proud of their personal attributes, but it is the
majesty of the divine principle manifesting itself in them, and shining
even through the material envelope called the physical body, which
surrounds them with an aura commanding the respect and veneration of all
who approach. The glory of supermundane light which shines through their
forms is so great that they may even appear luminous in darkness. <span
id="fr_5"></span>[\*](#fn_5.md)

<span id="page_37">p. 37</span>

The following is taken from a book entitled "*Hermippus Redivivus*,"
which we will abbreviate as much as possible,

The *Sieur Paul Lucas*, who, by the order of Louis XIV., travelled
through Greece and Africa in search of antiquities, says, "Being at
Broussa, we went to a little mosque. We were introduced into a cloister,
where we found four Dervishes, who invited us to their dinner. One of
these, who said that he was of the country of the Usbeks (a Tartar
tribe) appeared to me more learned than the rest; and *I verily believe
he spoke all the languages of the world*. After we had conversed for a
time in the Turkish language, he asked me whether I could speak Latin,
Spanish or Italian. We then spoke in [Italian](errata.htm#6.md); but he
noticed by my accent that this was not my mother tongue, and when I told
him that I was a native of France, he spoke to me in as good French as
if he had been brought up at Paris. I asked him how long he had stayed
in France, and he answered that he had never been there, but that he
desired to visit that country. This man was so learned that, judging
from his discourse, he seemed to have lived at least a century; but
according to his external appearance he was not more than thirty years
of age.

"He told us that he was one of seven friends who had wandered all over
the world with a view of perfecting their studies; that at parting they
always appointed another meeting at the end of twenty years in a certain
town, and that the first who came would wait for the rest. I perceived
that Broussa was the place appointed for their present meeting. There
were a few of them present already, and they seemed to converse with
each other with a freedom which spoke of old acquaintance rather than
merely accidental meeting. We spoke of religion, natural philosophy,
chemistry, alchemy and the Kabala. I told him that the latter, and
especially the notion of the 'Philosopher's Stone,' were considered by
modern savants as mere chimeras. He seemed to know all about it, and
answered: 'The true sage hears all things without being scandalized at
them; but though he may have so much politeness as not to shock any
ignorant person by his denial when they talk of such things; yet, let me
ask you whether you think that he is obliged to sink his understanding
to a level with vulgar minds because they are not able to raise their
thoughts to an

<span id="page_38">p. 38</span>

altitude equal to his? When I speak of a sage, I mean that kind of a man
to whom alone the title "philosopher" properly belongs. He has no sort
of tie to the world; he sees all things die and revive without concern;
he has more riches in his power than the greatest of kings, but he
tramples them under his feet, and this generous contempt sets him even
in the midst of indigence above the power of events.'

"I said: With all these fine maxims, the sage dies as well as other
people. What imports it, therefore, to me when I die, to have been
either a fool or a philosopher, if wisdom has no prerogative over folly,
and one is no more a shield against death than the other?'

"'Alas!' he answered, 'I see you are absolutely unacquainted with our
sublime science, and have never known true philosophy. Learn from me,
then, my friend, that such an one as I have described dies indeed, for
death is a debt which Nature enacts, and from which therefore no man can
be exempt; yet he dies not before his utmost time is fixed. But then you
must observe that this period approaches near a thousand years, and to
the end of that time a sage may live. He arrives at that end through the
knowledge he has of the true medicine. Thus he is able to ward off
whatever may impede the animal functions of his body or injure the
temperature of his nature; and is enabled to acquire the knowledge of
whatever comes within the cognizance of man.

"Aboriginal man knew the secrets of Nature by the use of his reason, but
it was this same reason which blotted his knowledge again from his mind,
for having attained this kind of natural knowledge, he began to mingle
with it his own notions and ideas. This created a confusion which was
the effect of a foolish curiosity, and he reduced thereby the work of
the Creator to a state of imperfection; and this is the error which the
true sage attempts to redress. The other animals act only by their
instinct, which they have preserved as they obtained it at first, and
they live as long now as they did when they first came into existence.
Man is a great deal more perfect than they; but has he still preserved
that prerogative which he had in the beginning, or has he not lost long
ago the glorious privilege of living a thousand years, which, with so
much care, he should have studied to preserve? This the true sages have
accomplished, and that you may no more be led into mistakes, let me,
assure you that this is what they call the Philosopher's Stone which is
not a chimerical science, but a real thing. It is, however, known to a
few only, and indeed it is impossible that it should be made known to
the most of mankind, whom avarice or debauchery destroys, or whom an
impetuous desire of life prematurely kills.'

"'Surprised at all I heard, I said: 'Would you, then, persuade me that
all who have possessed the Philosopher's Stone have likewise lived a
thousand years?' 'Without doubt,' answered he, gravely, 'for whenever a
mortal is favoured with that blessing, it depends entirely on his own
will whether he shall reach that age of a thousand years,

<span id="page_39">p. 39</span>

as in his state of innocence the first man might have done.'

"I took the liberty to mention the illustrious Flamel, who, I said, had
possessed the Philosopher's Stone, but was now dead as far as I knew. As
I mentioned that name, he smiled at my simplicity, and said with an air
of mirth: 'Do you really believe Flamel is dead? No, no, my friend, do
not deceive yourself, for Flamel is living still. It is not above three
years ago since I left him and his wife in the Indies, and he is one of
my best friends.' He was going to tell me how he made Flamel's
acquaintance, but stopping himself, he said: 'That is little to the
purpose. I will rather give you his true history with respect to which,
in your country, I daresay, you are not very well acquainted.'

"A little before the time of Flamel there was a Jew of our fraternity;
but as through his whole life he had a most ardent affection for his
family, he could not help desiring to see them after it once came to his
knowledge that they were settled in France. We foresaw the danger of his
voyage, and did all we could to persuade him not to undertake that
journey. We succeeded for a while in detaining him; but at last the
passion of seeing his family grew so strong upon him that he went. At
the time of his departure, he made us a solemn promise to return to us
as soon as it was possible. He arrived at Paris, and found there his
father's descendants in the highest esteem among the Jews. There was
also a Rabbi, who was a true philosopher at heart, and who had long been
in search of the great secret. Our friend did not hesitate to make
himself known to his relatives, he entered into friendly relations with
them, and gave them an abundance of light.

"'But as the matter requires a long time to prepare it, he put into
writing the whole process, and, to convince his nephew that he had not
told him falsehoods, he made the "projection" in his presence of some
ninety pounds of base metal, and turned it into pure gold. The Rabbi,
full of admiration, did all he could to persuade our brother to remain
with him, but in vain; for the latter had made up his mind not to break
the promise to return to us. When the Jew found this out, he changed his
affection into hatred, and his avarice stifling the admonitions of his
conscience, he resolved to extinguish one of the lights of the universe.
Dissembling his black design, he begged the sage to remain with him only
for a few days. He then executed his execrable purpose of murdering our
brother, and made himself master of his medicine.

"'Such horrible actions never remain very long unpunished. Some other
crimes he had committed came to light, the Jew was imprisoned,
convicted, and burned alive.

"'Soon after this a persecution of the Jews began in France. Flamel, who
was more reasonable than his enraged countrymen, and whose honesty was
known, became a friend of the Jews, and a Jewish merchant entrusted him
with all his books and papers, among which were those of the criminal
who had been burned alive, and also the book of our

<span id="page_40">p. 40</span>

brother; which had never been carefully examined by the merchant. When
Flamel examined that book, his curiosity became aroused by certain
figures contained therein, and he began to suspect that it contained
great secrets. He got the first leaf, which was written in Hebrew
translated, and from the little he learned from that, he became
convinced that his suspicion was well founded; but knowing also that
great caution was necessary, he took the following steps: He went into
Spain, and, as Jews were settled in many parts of that country, he
applied in every place to which he came to the most learned, and engaged
each of them to translate a leaf of the book. Having thus obtained a
translation of the whole, he returned to France. When he came home, he
undertook with his wife the prescribed labours, and in the progress of
time they arrived at the secret, by which they acquired immense riches,
which they employed in building public edifices, and in doing good to a
great many people.

"'Fame is often accompanied by great dangers; but a true sage knows how
to extricate himself from all kind of perils. Flamel saw that he was in
danger of being suspected to possess the Philosopher's Stone, a
suspicion which might have caused the loss of his liberty, if not that
of his life, and he thought of means to escape all danger. By his
advice, his wife pretended to be dangerously sick, and when it was
reported that she had died, she had already safely passed the frontier
of Switzerland. They buried in her place a wooden image in one of the
churches which he had founded. Some time afterwards he used the same
stratagem for himself and joined his wife. You know that there could
have been no great difficulty in doing this, since in every country, if
a man has sufficient money, physicians and priests are always at his
service, ready to say or do whatever he directs them. He moreover left a
last will and testament, directing that a pyramid should be erected to
his memory and that of his wife. Since that time both have led a
philosophic life, residing sometimes in one country and sometimes in
another. This, depend upon my word, is the true history of Flamel and
his wife.'"

The well-known fact that the Adepts and alchemists of the middle ages
were continually subject to persecutions, to imprisonment, punishment,
torture and death, is the cause that the names of only few of them
became publicly known. One reputed alchemist was the *Count de Saint
Germain*, who lived in 1770 at the Court of France. He appeared to be,
about forty years of age; some said he was ninety, he himself gave his
age as being 370 years. He possessed the art of making artificial
diamonds and precious stones, he was clairvoyant, could read people's
thoughts and foretell future events. He possessed an "album," in which
many of the most celebrated persons of the sixteenth and seventeenth
centuries had signed their names; he was able to write with both hands
at one and the same time, with each on different subjects.

A somewhat similar character was the Count Cagliostro, whose

<span id="page_41">p. 41</span>

physical form was born in Italy and received the name *Giuseppe
Balsamo*. The latter was incarcerated in the castle *San Angelo at
Rome*, and is believed to have died in one of its dungeons. The problem
of [Cagliostro](errata.htm#7.md) will not be solved by our historians until
they study the true nature of man in its normal and abnormal aspects,
when they may, perhaps, discover the fact that two personalities may
inhabit one physical organism, and that a man may, perhaps, be a
*Cagliostro* at one time and a *Balsamo* at another. <span
id="fr_6"></span>[\*](#fn_6.md)

I have carefully read the proceedings of the trial of the renowned
*Count Cagliostro* before the tribunal of the inquisition in Rome, and I
have found no proof whatever of his having been an impostor. To everyone
acquainted with even the elementary teachings of occultism, the
phenomena which occurred in his presence do not appear at all
unexplainable, or as having been the products of imposture; but what
appears wonderful is the illogical consequence and ignorance of the
witnesses for the prosecution, who admit the occurrence of phenomena in
his presence, which could not have been produced by his tricks, while in
the same breath they denounce him to be an impostor.

To arts of this kind belongs that of making pure gold or silver
artificially, of transforming base metals into nobler ones; of preparing
a *Universal Panacea* out of the principle of Life; of curing all
diseases; of preparing a lamp which, by the manner in which it burns,
indicates the state of health of an absent friend, with whom it is
sympathetically connected; of producing a similar sympathetic or
magnetic connection between a person and a jewel, a tree, or a mirror;
of producing a living miniature image of the world in a closed glass
globe; of causing the forms of vegetables or animals to reappear out of
their ashes after they have been burnt; of producing artificially man
(Homunculi) without the assistance of a female organism; of preparing a
fluid, which rises and falls within the bottle where it is contained,
according to the increasing or decreasing moon; of preparing a glass
wherein it will thunder, and lightning will appear, whenever the same
takes place in the air; of producing an inextinguishable

<span id="page_42">p. 42</span>

magic fire, an ever-burning lamp; a magic mirror, where events can be
seen taking place in any other part of the world; a *perpetuum mobile*,
whose rotation is caused by the rotation of the earth; a divining rod,
for finding water or minerals, or whatever one wishes to find; a magic
ring, which warns the wearer of any approaching danger, and reveals to
him many secrets; of causing love or hate at will; of making pearls,
diamonds, or any other jewels, which cannot be distinguished from
natural ones, or causing them to grow larger; of obtaining power over
the elemental spirits of Nature and causing them to render services; of
causing the astral spectres of dead persons to appear and talk and
answer questions, and many other similar feats, too numerous to mention.

We call that wonderful which is not within our experience, and the
causes of which we cannot explain; we are daily surrounded by marvels,
and witnessing the most marvellous phenomena, the causes of which we
cannot explain; but we do not look at them with a sceptical eye, nor are
we at ail surprised that they occur. On the contrary, we should be
extremely surprised if they once ceased to occur; this merely because we
are accustomed to see such things every day. We are surrounded by
phenomena of an occult and magic nature, and we live in a laboratory of
alchemy. We see how out of a hard little stone—kernel or seed—a germ
appears, and grows into a big tree, although we are sure that there was
no such tree in the kernel; and what would be still more astonishing if
it were not of daily occurrence, is that out of a certain kind of seed a
certain species of plant only will grow, and no other. We see how out of
an egg a living bird appears, and yet if we examine the same kind of egg
as long as it is fresh, and open it, we find therein nothing living, and
nothing that resembles a bird. We also know that the parent bird does
not put a bird into the egg after it is laid, for we may hatch out eggs
by artificial heat, and thus produce birds out of the egg, and there is
surely no bird in the heat. We see how out of a vegetable substance
animal substance can grow, for we feed our cattle on grass, hay, and
corn, and yet we are certain that there is no flesh in the grass or
corn. We see the ever-burning light of the sun spending its heat year
after year. We know of nobody who supplies him with fuel, and yet it
seems to have always the same temperature. We know that the globe
whereon we live revolves and flies with tremendous velocity through
space, and yet we do not feel it move, nor do we fall head foremost down
in the abyss of space when at night it turns the dark side away from the
sun; we see that the storm blows down houses and trees, and yet that
which does the damage is nothing but thin air; we see the body of water
of our rivers and lakes, and if we attempt to step on its surface we
sink; but a few weeks or months afterwards we may try it again and find
it as hard as rock, able to bear the weight of the skating crowd. There
are a thousand other similar marvels in Nature, too numerous to mention.

There are many stories told of the Adepts, and the wonderful things

<span id="page_43">p. 43</span>

they sometimes performed; how, in mid-winter, they caused beautiful
flowers to grow out of the floor of a room, or produced a shower of
roses in places where no roses were to be found; how some of them were
seen simultaneously in two different places speaking and acting in each;
how they sometimes were attended and served by "supernatural" beings
appearing in human forms; how they were sometimes able to read the
future, or see what was going on at a place hundreds of miles away from
them; how they could speak languages which they had never studied; knew
the contents of books which they had never read; could swallow poison
without being harmed; make themselves invisible and visible at will,
etc., etc. But the most interesting parts of our research, and at the
same time the most pertinent to our object in view, will be historical
accounts referring to their ability to make pure gold in an artificial
manner—or, to speak more correctly, to transmute other metals into gold,
and make gold grow. We shall therefore give a few abbreviated accounts
of such authenticated facts:—

1\. The following account is taken from the *acta* of the judicial
faculty of Leipzig, whose legal decision was given in August, 1715.
(Responsio Juridica Facultis Juridicæ Lipsiensis.) A few years ago a man
arrived late in the evening at the residence of the *Countess of
Erbach*, the castle of *Tankerstein*, and asked to be permitted to enter
it, and to hide there a few days, as he had accidentally killed a deer
belonging to the *Palatine* of *Palatia*, who was, therefore, pursuing
him to take his life, and he asked to be protected. The Countess at
first refused; but when she saw the man she was so much impressed with
his noble appearance that she consented, and the stranger was given a
room, where he stayed for a few days. After that he asked for an
interview with the Countess, and when admitted to her presence, he
expressed his thanks for the protection given to him, and offered that,
as a token of his gratitude, he would transmute her silver ware into
gold. The Countess at first could not believe that such a thing was
possible, but she at last consented to have an experiment made with a
silver tankard, which the stranger melted and transmuted into gold. She
thereupon sent this gold to the city and had it tested by a goldsmith,
who found it to be gold of the purest kind. She then permitted the
stranger to melt and transmute all her silver spoons, plates, dishes,
etc., into gold, which he did, and finally he took his leave and went
away, having received a comparatively small sum of money as a gift from
the Countess. Soon after this event, the husband of the Countess, who
seems to have been a spendthrift, and who had been away from home for
several years, serving as an officer in some foreign country, returned,
because he had heard that his wife had become suddenly rich. He claimed
half of the gold for himself, but the Countess refused to acknowledge
his claims. The case came, therefore, before the Court, and the husband
supported his claims by the fact that he was the lord of the territory
(Dominus territorii).

<span id="page_44">p. 44</span>

upon which the castle belonging to his wife was located, and that
according to the laws of the country all treasures found upon that land
were lawfully his. He therefore requested that the gold should be sold,
and from the proceeds new silver ware should be bought for the Countess,
and the surplus be given to him. The defendant claimed that artificially
produced gold could not come under the consideration of a law referring
to buried treasures, and that therefore the said law could not be
applied in her case; that, moreover, the silver had been transmuted into
gold for her own benefit, and not for that of another, and she begged
the Court to be permitted to remain in undisturbed possession of it. The
Court decided in her favour.

2\. Another authenticated case is that of an Adept by the name of
*Sehfeld*, who lived in *Rodaun*, a small place in the vicinity of
*Vienna*. He made gold out of tin and spent it freely. The proprietor of
the house where he resided, a man named *Friedrich*, gained the
confidence of the Adept, and told his family about the doings of
Sehfeld. The consequence was that soon rumours and gossip began to
spread. Sehfeld was accused of sorcery, and appealed for protection to
the Austrian Emperor, saying that he was engaged in making certain
chemical colours of which he possessed the secret. It is said that
Sehfeld paid 30,000 florins into the Imperial Treasury to obtain this
protection, which he enjoyed for several months. Friedrich and the
members of his family often were present when Sehfeld made gold, and
they say that after melting the tin, he sprinkled a small quantity of a
red powder upon the molten mass, when the latter began to foam and
exhibited all kinds of colours. After an hour or so it was allowed to
cool, and all the tin was then transmuted into pure gold. One day
Friedrich attempted to make the experiment himself. Having obtained some
of the red powder from Sehfeld, he melted the tin while Sehfeld was
absent, and sprinkled the powder upon it; but the latter had no effect
upon the tin and did not mix with it. After a while, Sehfeld entered the
room where the experiment was made, and as he entered the mass began to
foam and turned into gold. The security which he enjoyed did not last
long, for after a few months new rumours were put into circulation, the
envy, greed and jealousy of the neighbours were aroused, he was accused
of practising unlawful sciences, and he was arrested at night and
imprisoned in the fortress of *Temeswar*, where he remained over a year,
sternly refusing to tell his secret, and saying that no amount of
physical torture would be able to make him reveal it. The governor of
the fortress of *Temeswar*, *General Baron von Engelshofen*, was so much
charmed by the noble appearance and open character of Sehfeld, that he
went to Vienna and spoke to the Emperor about Sehfeld, declaring his
opinion that the latter was innocent. The Emperor soon afterwards, while
hunting boars in a forest near Rodan, sent for Friedrich, and received
from him a detailed account of his experiences with Sehfeld, and became
convinced

<span id="page_45">p. 45</span>

that the latter was not a [villain](errata.htm#8.md); but he would not
believe that he was able to make gold, and expressed his doubts to that
effect. Upon this, Friedrich, who was an honest man, exclaimed, "Oh!
your Majesty, if at this moment God were to come down from heaven, and
say, 'Friedrich, you are mistaken; Sehfeld cannot make gold!' I would
answer him, 'Dear God, it is nevertheless true that he can make it,
because I know it to be so.'" Upon this, the Emperor, struck with the
sincerity of the man, ordered that Sehfeld should be permitted to go
where he pleased, and make whatever experiments he choose; but that he
should not leave Austria, and should always be accompanied by two
trustworthy officers who should never permit him to go out of their
sight. Two of the best and most trustworthy officers belonging to noble
families were selected for that purpose. He made several little
excursions in their company; but not long afterwards Sehfeld and his two
guards disappeared and never returned, nor has any trace of them ever
been discovered. The historian adds that it is not probable that those
two rich and noble officers would have sacrificed their career and also
their reputation by thus deserting without having a sufficient cause or
inducement to do so. Researches made in the house of Friedrich seemed to
indicate that Sehfeld prepared his *red powder* out of some sky-blue
minerals, probably some sulphuret of copper.

3\. An apothecary at *Halle* made the acquaintance of a stranger, whom
he found to be in possession of some chemical secrets. Having been
invited to visit the stranger in his lodgings he went there, and after
having talked about Alchemy, the claims of which the apothecary denied,
the stranger showed him a certain *red powder*, and offered to give some
of it to the apothecary so that the latter could make an experiment
himself. With a very little spoon he took some of the powder out of the
box wherein it was contained, but the apothecary objected that such a
small quantity would not be sufficient to make the experiment. Upon this
the stranger threw the powder back into the box, wiped the spoon, to
which some of the powder adhered, on a piece of cotton, wrapped the
cotton in a paper, and gave it to the apothecary, telling him that even
this would be sufficient for that purpose. Having returned home, the
apothecary took a big silver spoon, melted it in a crucible, and threw
the cotton upon it. The molten metal began immediately to boil and to
foam, and to exhibit the most beautiful colours. After a while he took
the crucible from the fire and poured the metal into a mould. The next
morning he examined it and found that it was the purest gold, and there
were some ruby-red drops on the top, which seemed to have been the
surplus of the red powder which the metal had not absorbed. The
apothecary hurried immediately to the lodging of the Adept to tell him
of his success; but the latter had gone, and no one knew where he went.
A sum of money, more than sufficient to pay for his lodging, was found
upon the table in his room. The silver which the apothecary

<span id="page_46">p. 46</span>

employed in this experiment weighed 1¼ ounces, and the gold which he
gained weighed 1½ ounces, which he sold to a goldsmith for 36 *thalers*.
The gain in weight was, therefore, 20 per cent., which may be accounted
for by the fact that the specific gravity of gold is greater than that
of silver. Unfortunately, the *ruby-red pearls* on the surface of the
gold were lost during the excitement caused by the discovery that the
mass was actual gold, else they might have been used to transmute a far
greater quantity of silver into gold.

<span id="img_04600"></span>

[![](tn/04600.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/04600.jpg.md)

4\. During the reign of the *Emperor Leopold*, a monk of the Order of
St. Augustine, named *Wenzel Seiler*, found a certain red powder in his
convent, which proved to be the "*Red Lion*" of the Alchemists. By means
of this powder, Seiler transformed a quantity of tin into

<span id="page_47">p. 47</span>

gold in the presence of the Emperor and his Court. The Emperor ordered
that certain medals were to be made of this artificially produced gold,
and he divided them out among the noblemen of his Court. He also, as a
reward, gave to that monk the title of *Freiherr von Rheinburg*, and
appointed him as master of the Imperial mint in Bohemia. The medal, of
which one is now in the family of Count *Leopold Hoffmann*, in *Brieg*,
shows upon the top the bust of the Emperor Leopold, with the following
words:—"*Leopoldus Dei Gratia Romanorum Imperator semper Augustus
Germania Hungariæ et Bohemiæ Rex*." The reverse side is not stamped, but
there is engraved thereon a verse, saying:—

*Aus Wenzel Seilers Pulvers Mach  
Bin ich von Zinn zu Gold gemacht*.

5\. The most indisputable proof (if appearances can prove anything) of
the possibility of transmuting base metals into gold, may be seen by
everyone who visits Vienna; it being a medal preserved in the Imperial
treasury chamber, and it is stated that this medal, consisting
originally of silver, has been partly transformed into gold, by
alchemical means, by the same Wenzel Seiler who was afterwards made a
knight by the Emperor Leopold I. and given the title Wenzeslaus Ritter
von Reinburg.

The medal is of oval shape; its long diameter is 37, and the short one
40 centimetre. Its specific gravity is 193, and its weight 7,200.4
grammes. Its value is estimated to correspond to 2,055 Austrian ducats.

As indicated in the accompanying figure, about one-third of the upper
part is silver, and the remaining part gold. The two incisions were made
in 1883, for the purpose of examining the medal, to see whether it was
pure or merely gilded. The examination was made on request of Professor
A. Bauer, of Vienna.

One side of the medal shows the portraits of the ancestors of the
Emperor, up to King Pharamund, the other side has the following
inscription:—

Sacratissimo  
Potentissimo et invictissimo  
Romanorum imperatori  
Leopoldo I.  
Arcanorum naturæ scrutatori curiosmo  
Genuinum hoc veræ ac perfectæ  
Metamorphoseos metallicë  
specimen  
pro exiguo anniversarii diei nominalis  
mnemosyno  
cum omnigenæ prosperitatis voto  
humillima veneratione offert et dicat <span id="page_48">p. 48</span>  
Joannes Wenzeslaos de Reinburg  
numini majestatique eius  
devotissimus  
anno Christi MDCLXXVII. die festo  
S. Leopoldi  
ognomine pii olim marchionis Austriæ  
nunc autem patroni augustissimæ  
Domus austriacæ  
Benignissimi.

It seems, however, that there is nothing perfectly reliable in this
world of illusions, and it is therefore necessary to state that Wenzel
Seiler was afterwards regarded as an impostor, and sent back to his
monastery. Later on, however, the Emperor received him again into his
favour, and even paid his numerous debts, the existence of which is
quite incomprehensible if he actually had the power to make gold by
alchemical means.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_5"></span>[36:\*](ptw06.htm#fr_5.md) Before us is a paper,
printed in Leipzig, dated May 26th, 1761, which gives the latest news
from *Köln* (Cologne). It says: "The two prophets who have been
imprisoned in this place are still keeping the attention of our citizens
on the alert. The court has not yet decided what shall be done. It is
useless to chain them, because they possess the wonderful power of
bursting even the strongest chains, as if they were threads of linen,
and they have done so in the presence of many. They can even in the
darkest might see all objects <span id="page_37">p. 37</span> in their
prison, because there is *an unearthly light shining around their heads*
and coming out of their eyes, which illuminates their surroundings. They
seem to be young men, and yet they say that they were at Constantinople
in the year 1453, at the time of Mohamed II.; they say that they were
intimately acquainted with the last Christian emperor at that place,
Constantine Palaeologus, and they are in possession of letters written
by him and his wife and sister. They say that at the time when they were
at Constantinople they were already over 300 years of age. They speak
Persian and Chinese and other languages fluently; they live on nothing
but a little bread and water. They performed some wonderful cures in the
neighbouring villages before they were arrested; savage dogs and wild
animals appear to treat them with reverence; they seem to be well
acquainted with the books written by the ancient philosophers, and talk
about Pythagoras with great respect. We do not know what to think about
these men. Etc., etc."

<span id="fn_6"></span>[41:\*](ptw06.htm#fr_6.md) Whether or not the body
of a person may be inhabited simultaneously or alternatively by two
different individualities, may be a matter for doubt; but the phenomena
of obsession and hypnotism go to show that this is not impossible.
Cagliostro said that he was born in the East, and it is certain that he
had connections there; nevertheless, it was proved that he was born in
Italy, and that his name was Balsamo. This would, of course, convict him
at once among the ignorant of his times and among our writers of
encyclopedias as being an impostor. Nevertheless, a more definite
knowledge of the true constitution of man might explain the mystery.
That which is the fundamental reality in man; is the will. The phenomena
of so-called hypnotism show that the will of one person may be made to
act in another, and during the time that a person is obsessed by the
will of another, he is also under the influence of the memory of the
latter. Those acquainted with occult laws will not find it incredible
that the person of Balsamo was influenced and used by some eastern human
spirit, whose name was Cagliostro, and that during such times Balsamo
believed himself to be, and actually was, Cagliostro. Modern
spiritualism has a legion of similar facts.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter Five. The Rosicrucian “Orders.”](ptw07.md)
