[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sub Rosa](../index) 
[Rosicrucians](../../eso/ros/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](ptw09) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1419140671/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*In the Pronaos of the Temple of Wisdom*, by Franz Hartmann, \[1890\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_85">p. 85</span>

### Chapter Eight.

#### ALCHEMY.

Quæ sunt in superis hac inferioribus insunt; Quod monstrat coelum, id
terra frequenter habet. Ignis, Aqua et Fluitans, due sunt contraria;
Felix talia si jungis, sit tibi scire satis.

ALCHEMY is that science which results from a knowledge of God, Nature,
and Man. A perfect knowledge of either of them cannot be obtained
without the knowledge of the other two, for these three are one and
inseparable. Alchemy is not merely an intellectual, but a spiritual
science; because that which belongs to the spirit can only be
spiritually known. Nevertheless, it is a science dealing with material
things, for spirit and matter are only two opposite manifestations or
"poles" of the eternal one. Alchemy is an art, and as every art requires
an artist to exercise it, likewise this divine science and art can be
practised only by those who are in possession of the divine power
necessary for that purpose. It is true that the external manipulations
required for the production of certain alchemical preparations may, like
an ordinary chemical process, be taught to anybody capable of reasoning;
but the results which he would accomplish would be without life, for
only he in whom the true life has awakened can awaken it from its sleep
in the *prima materia*, and cause visible forms to grow from the Chaos
of nature.

Alchemy in its highest aspects deals with the spiritual regeneration of
man, and teaches how a god may be made out of a human being or, to
express it more correctly, how to establish the conditions necessary for
the development of divine powers in man, so that a human being may
become a god by the power of God, in the same sense as a seed becomes a
plant by the aid of the four elements, and the action of the invisible
fifth. Alchemy in its more material aspect teaches how minerals, metals,
plants, and animals, and men, may be generated, or made to grow from
their "seeds"; or, in other words, how that generation, which is
accomplished during long periods of time in the due course of the action
of natural laws, may be accomplished in a comparatively very short time,
if these natural laws are guided and supplied with material, by the
spiritual knowledge of man. There is no doubt in my mind that gold can
be made to grow by alchemical means; but it requires an Alchemist to
make the experiment succeed, and he who is attracted by the power of
gold will not obtain possession of the spiritual power necessary to
practise that art.

It is not the object of these pages to furnish proof to the sceptic that
Alchemy is a truth, nor to furnish arguments on the strength of which
the incredulous may become persuaded to believe in its possibility. To
believe in a thing of which one has no knowledge would be

<span id="page_86">p. 86</span>

of little benefit; but those who have some spiritual knowledge of
Alchemy, perhaps having studied it in some former incarnation, may
receive some benefit from a perusal of this chapter, as it may serve to
bring that which they already spiritually know to the understanding of
their mind. <span id="fr_13"></span>[\*](#fn_13)

It is a mistake to confound Alchemy with Chemistry. Modern Chemistry is
a science which deals merely with the external forms in which the
element of matter is manifesting itself. It never produces anything new.
We may mix and compound and decompose two or more chemical bodies an
unlimited number of times, and cause them to appear under various
different forms, but at the end we will have no augmentation of
substance, nor anything more than the combinations of the substances
that have been employed at the beginning. Alchemy does not mix or
compound anything, it causes that which already exists in a latent state
to become active and grow. Alchemy is, therefore, more comparable to
botany or agriculture than to Chemistry; and, in fact, the growth of a
plant, a tree, or an animal is an alchemical process going on in the
alchemical laboratory of nature, and performed by the great Alchemist,
the power of God acting in nature.

The nature of Alchemy is clearly explained by Johannes Tritheim, who
says:—

"God is an essential and hidden fire in all things, and especially in
man. That fire generates all things. It has generated them, and will
generate them in the future, and that which is generated is the true
divine light in all eternity. God is a fire; but no fire can burn, and
no light appear within nature without the addition of air to cause the
combustion, and likewise the Holy Spirit in you must act as a divine
'air' or breath, coming out of the divine fire and breathing upon the
fire within the soul, so that the light will appear, for the light must
be nourished by the fire, and this light is love and gladness and joy
within the eternal deity. This light is *Jesus*, having emanated from
eternity from *Jehovah*. He who has this light not within himself is in
the fire without light; but if the light is in him, then is the *Christ*
in him, and takes form in him, and such a person will know that light as
it exists in nature.

"All things such as we see are in their interior fire and light, wherein
is hidden the essence of the spirit. All things are a trinity of fire,
light, and air. In other words, '*Spirit*,' the 'father,' is a divine
superessential light; the 'son,' the light having become manifest; the
'holy spirit' a divine superessential air and motion. The fire resides
within the heart and sends its rays through the whole body of man,
causing it to live;

<span id="page_87">p. 87</span>

but no light is born from the fire without the presence of the spirit of
holiness."

To express this in other words we may say—All things are made of
*thought*, and exist in the universal mind (the *astral light*), and
within each is latent the *will*, by whose action they may become
developed and their powers unfolded. This takes place under favourable
circumstances by the slow and unconscious action of the universal will
acting in nature, and may be accomplished in a very short time by the
aid of the conscious will of the alchemist; but before the will of a
person can accomplish such wonders in external substances, his will must
first become self-conscious within itself; the light that shines from
the centre of his own heart, must become living and bright before it can
act upon those substances with which the Alchemist deals. He in whom
this divine light of the Christ (the *Atma*) has not awakened to life,
is virtually asleep in the spirit, and can act upon spiritual things no
more than a man can deal with material substances while he sleeps; but
this fact will hardly be acknowledged or comprehended by the superficial
scientist and rationalist, who imagine themselves to be fully awake, and
therefore the secrets of alchemy are an inexplicable mystery to them,
which can be disposed of in no other way than by being denied or laughed
away. Alchemy was known at the most ancient times. It was no secret to
the initiates among the ancient Brahmins and the Egyptians; and the
Bible, if read in the light of the *Cabala*, will be found to be the
description of an alchemical process. The Aleph ‏א‎ represent three
fiery flames, nevertheless, it is only one letter. In Magic it means
*AOH*, the Father, the one from which all the rest take their origin,
the Alpha and likewise the Omega, the beginning and also the end. As the
air causes the fire to burn and to emit a light, likewise the Holy
Spirit (without whose presence nothing can be accomplished) nourishing
the divine fire with the soul, causes the living light of the Christ to
become manifest. This is also indicated in the three first letters of
the word ‏פדאשיח‎, for the ‏פ‎ means "Ben," the son; the ‏א‎ AOH, the
father; and ‏ד‎ means "Ruach," or spirit. This, then, is a trinity of
father, son, and spirit, and its quality is indicated by the following
syllable ‏איח‎, indicating the true generation, for the ‏ש‎ is the
letter symbolizing the fire, and the ‏י‎ the light. The
[pronunciation](errata.htm#22) of the former is like the hissing of the
flame, but the latter issues mildly from the fire, as it is likewise
born mildly and humbly within the human soul while the ‏כ‎ symbolizes
the spirit and the power of the outspoken word.

The "*Song of Solomon*," in the *Old Testament*, is a description of the
processes of alchemy. In this Song the *Subjectum* is described in
*Cant*, *i*., 5; the *Lilium artis* in *C*. *ii*., 1; the *Preparation*
and *Purification* in *C*. *ii*., 4; the *Fire* in *C*. *ii*., 7, and
*C*. *iv*., 16; the *Putrefaction* in *C*. *iii*., 1; *Sublimation* and
*Distillation* in *C*. *iii*., 6; *Coagulation* and *Change* of
*Colours*, *C*. *v*., 9 to 14; *Fixation*, *C*. *ii*, 12, and *C*.
*viii*, 4;

<span id="page_88">p. 88</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> *Multiplication*,
*C*. *vi*., 7; *Augmentation* and *Projection*, *C*. *viii*. 8, etc.,
etc.

With all this it must not be supposed that the practice of Alchemy
consists merely in the exercise of the will and the imagination, or that
the products obtained are merely imaginary and intangible or invisible
to mortal eyes. On the contrary, no alchemical processes can be
accomplished without the presence of visible and tangible matter, as it
is so to say a spiritualizing of "matter." There is no transformation of
"matter" into "spirit," as some people believe, for each of the seven
principles of eternal nature is unchangeable, and remains for ever in
its own centre, in the same sense as darkness cannot be turned into
light, although a light may be kindled within the darkness, in
consequence of which the darkness will disappear. Likewise within each
material form there sleeps the divine spirit, the light, which may
become awakened to life and activity, and illuminate the body and cause
it to live and to grow. Of the qualities of the powers of that light, or
even of its existence, modern chemistry has no knowledge and no names to
describe it; but they are described under various names in the Bible,
and in the still older religious books of the East.

There is a visible substance and an invisible one; a tangible water and
one that is beyond the reach of perception by the physical senses; a
visible fire and an invisible magic fire; neither can either of these
accomplish anything without the other, for in the practice of Alchemy,
as in the regeneration of man, that which is above must be made to
penetrate that which is below, so that the lower may enterinto a higher
state of existence.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

#### THE "PRIMA MATERIA."

If we wish to know nature we must learn to know God, and God cannot he
known without a knowledge of one's own divine self. The spiritual
substance of which external visible nature is an imperfect expression
and manifestation, has been called "*Prima Materia*"; it is the material
for the formation of a new heaven and a new earth. It is like "water,"
or a "crystalline ocean," if compared with our grossly material earth,
it is at once fire, water, air, and earth, corporeal in its essence, and
nevertheless, incorporeal relatively to our physical forms.

In it as the "*Chaos*," are contained the germs, or seeds, or
"potencies" of all things that ever existed, and of all that ever will
exist in the future. It is the soul, or *corpus* of nature, and by means
of the *magic fire*, it may be extricated from all substances, and be
rendered corporeal and visible. It is a unity, and nevertheless a
trinity, according to its aspects as *Sulphur*, *Mercury*, and *Salt*.
These three are distinct qualities characterising the spirit of light,
and nevertheless they are nothing different from the essence of the
light, and this light is eternal nature, or the soul of the world.

This *primordial matter* contains the powers that go to form minerals
and metals, vegetables and animals, and everything that breathes; all

<span id="page_89">p. 89</span>

forms are hidden within its depths, and it is therefore, the true
principium or beginning of all things. It is the play and battle ground
for all the astral influences that come from the stars and the
birthplace of the beings that inhabit the astral plane, not less than of
those that are born into the (to us) visible world. It is the womb of
eternal nature from which everything that exists is born by the power of
the spirit acting within. From its fertile soil are produced good and
evil fruits, wholesome and noxious plants, harmless and poisonous
animals, for God is no distinguisher of persons, or favouring any
particular individual; each receives its share of life, and will,
according to its capacity to receive, and each becomes ultimately that
which its character destines it to be.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

#### THE "SPIRITUS UNIVERSALIS,"

*Without which no alchemical experiment will succeed*.

*Johannes Tritheim*, an [abbot](errata.htm#23) and alchemist, whose
writings are plainer and more comprehensible than any other alchemical
book, says:

All things have been made by the power of the divine word, which is the
divine spirit or breath that emanated from the divine fountain in the
beginning. This breath is the spirit or soul of the world, and is called
the "*spiritus* *mundi*." It was at first like air, and contracted into
a fog or nebular substance, and afterwards became "water" (*Akasa*).
This "water" was at first all spirit and life, because it was permeated
by and made alive by the spirit. It was dark in the depths; but through
the outspoken word the light became generated therein, and then the
darkness was illumined by the light, and the "soul of the world" (the
*astral light*) had its beginning. This spiritual light, which we call
"Nature," or the soul of the world, is a spiritual body, which, by means
of Alchemy, can be made tangible and visible; but as it exists in an
invisible state, therefore is it called "spirit."

"This is an universal and living fluid diffused throughout the All of
Nature, and which pervades all beings. It is the most subtle of all
substances, the most powerful on account of its inherent qualities,
penetrating all bodies, and causing the forms in which it is active to
live. By its action it frees the forms of all imperfections, and renders
the impure pure, the imperfect perfect, and causes that which is mortal
to become immortal by becoming fixed therein."

"This essence of spirit has emanated from the centre in the beginning,
and is incorporated into the substance of which the world is formed. It
is the *Salt of the Earth*, and without its presence the grass would not
grow, nor the fields be green; and the more this essence is condensed,
concentrated, and coagulated in the forms, the more enduring will they
become. This substance is the most subtle of all things, incorruptible,
unchangeable in its essence, pervading the infinity of space. The sun
and the planets are merely condensed states of this universal principle,
and they distribute their abundance from their

<span id="page_90">p. 90</span>

throbbing hearts, and send them into the forms of the lower worlds and
into all beings, acting through their own centres, and leading the forms
higher up on the road to perfection. The forms in which this living
principle becomes fixed become perfect and permanent, so that they will
neither rust nor decay, nor be changed on being exposed to the air;
neither can such forms be dissolved by water, nor be destroyed by fire,
nor eaten up by the elements of the earth.

"This spirit can be obtained in the same manner in which it is
communicated to the earth by the stars; and this takes place by means of
water, which serves as its vehicle. It is not the *Philosopher's Stone*,
but the latter may be prepared of it by causing that which is volatile
to become fixed.

"I admonish you to pay strict attention to the boiling of the water, and
not to allow your minds to be disturbed by things of minor importance.
Boil it slowly, and let it putrefy until it attains the proper colour,
for in the water of Life is contained the germ of wisdom. By the art of
boiling the water will become transformed into earth. This earth is to
be changed into a pure crystalline fluid, from which an excellent red
fire is produced; but this water and fire, grown together into one
essence, produces the great *Panacea*, composed of meekness and
strength: the *lamb* and the *lion* in one."

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

#### THE SECRET FIRE.

In H. P. Blavatsky's book "*The Voice of the Silence*," the secret fire
of the Alchemists is described as "*Kundalini*," the "serpentine," or
annular working power in the body of the ascetic. "It is an electric
fiery occult or *Fohatic* power, the great pristine force which
underlies all organic and inorganic matter"; and in another place the
author says: "It is an electro-spiritual force, a creative power which,
when aroused into action, can as easily kill as it can create."

This point is the reason why the secrets of Alchemy are rot divulged to
the curious, and why only those who have gained the power to control
their own self will be told how that power can be aroused in man.

In regard to this "secret fire," the Rosicrucians say:

The potentialities in nature are aroused by the action of the secret
fire, assisted by the elementary fire. The secret fire is invisible, and
is contained within all things. It is the most potential and powerful
fire, with which the external visible fire cannot be compared. It is the
fire with which Moses burned the golden calf, and that which Jeremiah
hid away, and which seventy years after was found by the knowing ones,
but which, by that time had become a thick water. (2 *Maccab*. I. and
II.)

Without the possession of this magic fire, no alchemical process can be
accomplished, and therefore it is recommended in the "Secret Symbols of
the Rosicrucians," that the student of Alchemy should above all seek for
the fire.

<span id="page_91">p. 91</span>

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

#### THE FOUR ALCHEMICAL RULES.

1\. *Follow Nature*.

It is useless to seek for the sun by the light of a candle.

2\. *First know; then act*.

Real knowledge exists in the triangle composed of *seeing*, *feeling*,
and *understanding*.

3\. *Use no vulgar processes*.

Use only one vessel, one fire, one instrument.

The door to success lies in the unity of will and purpose and the proper
adaptation of the means to the end. There are many roads leading to the
celestial centre. He who follows the chosen path may succeed, while he
who [attempts](errata.htm#24) to walk on many paths will be delayed.

4\. *Keep the fire constantly burning*.

If the molten metals are allowed to cool off before they are transformed
into higher ones, they will become hard again, and the whole process
will have to be recommenced from the beginning. Use the inextinguishable
lamp. Its light will not go out unless it is driven away by force.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

#### THE FIVE THINGS NECESSARY TO OBSERVE IN THE PRACTICE OF ALCHEMY.

1\. *To recognize the true* PRIMA MATERIA.

It is to be found everywhere; but if you do not find it in your own
house, you will find it nowhere. It is a living substance that can be
discovered only in places inhabited by man. It is the only substance
from which the *Philosopher's Stone* can be prepared, and without that
substance no genuine silver or gold can be made. In thirty pounds of
ordinary mercury, there is usually not more than one pound of the true
substance; and a hundred pounds of ordinary sulphur usually contain not
more than one pound of that which is useful. It can only be found above
the earth, but not below it. It is before everybody's eyes; no one can
live without it; everybody uses it; the poor usually possess more of it
than the rich; the ignorant esteem it highly, but the learned ones often
throw it away. The children play with it in the street, and yet it is
invisible. It can be perceived by the sense of feeling, but it cannot be
seen with the material eye.

2\. *Use for the preparation of the* PRIMA MATERIA *only the
rose-coloured blood of the Red Lion and the pure white gluten of the
Eagle*.

Let your Will be strong, but without anger, and your Thoughts be pure
from that which infects the lower strata of the earth's atmosphere. Let
the fire of the divine Will penetrate deeply within your soul, and
elevate your mind to the highest regions of thought.

3\. *Obtain the sacred Fire*.

It is not of man's making; it cannot be bought, but it is given for
nothing to those who deserve it.

4\. *Then follow Multiplication and Increase, for which purpose weight
and measure are necessary*.

<span id="page_92">p. 92</span>

Weigh all things with the scales of justice, and measure them by the
rule of reason.

5\. *The fifth is the Application, that is to say the Projection upon
the metals*.

This will be accomplished by nature without artificial aid.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

#### AXIOMATA HERMETICA.

1\. *Whatever may be accomplished by a simple method should not be
attempted by a complicated one*.

There is only one Truth, whose existence requires no proof, because it
is itself proof enough to those who are capable of perceiving it. Why
should we enter into complexness to seek for that which is simple? The
sages say: "*Ignis et Azoth tibi sufficiunt*." The body is already in
your possession. All that you require is the fire and the air.

2\. *No substance can be made perfect without long suffering*.

Great is the error of those who imagine that the Philosopher's Stone can
be hardened without being first dissolved; their time and labour is
wasted.

3\. *Nature must be aided by art whenever she is deficient in power*.

Art may be the handmaid of nature, but cannot supplant her mistress. Art
without nature is always unnatural. Nature without art is not always
perfect.

4\. *Nature cannot be amended except in her own self*.

The nature of a tree cannot be changed by trimming the branches or by
the addition of ornaments; it can be improved only by improving the soil
upon which it grows, or by grafting.

5\. *Nature enjoys, comprehends, and overcomes nature*.

There is no other actual knowledge than the knowledge of self. Every
being can only truly realize its own existence, but not that of any
element entirely foreign to it.

6\. *He who does not know motion does not know nature*.

Nature is the product of emotion. At the moment in which eternal motion
should cease, all nature would cease to exist. He who does not know the
motions that are taking place in his body is a stranger in his own
house.

7\. *Whatever produces the same effect as is produced by a compound is
similar to the latter*.

The One is greater than all the rest of the numbers, for from it an
infinite variety of mathematical magnitudes may be evolved, but no
change is possible without the all-pervading presence of the One, whose
qualities are manifest in its manifestations.

8\. *No one can pass from one extreme to another except through a
medium*.

An animal cannot become divine before it becomes human. That which is
unnatural must become natural before its nature can become spiritual.

<span id="page_93">p. 93</span>

9\. *Metals cannot be changed into other metals without having been
first reduced to prima materia*.

The self-will, opposed to the divine, must cease before the divine Will
can enter into the heart. We must become unsophisticated, like children;
before the word of wisdom can speak in our mind.

10\. *The unripe must be assisted by the ripe*.

Thus fermentation will be induced. The law of Induction rules in all
departments of nature.

11\. *In the Calcination the Corpus is not reduced, but augmented, in
quantity*.

True asceticism consists in giving up that which one does not want after
having received something better.

12\. *In Alchemy nothing can bear fruit without having first been
mortified*.

The light cannot shine through matter unless the matter has become
sufficiently refined to allow the passage of the rays.

13\. *That which kills produces life; that which causes death causes
resurrection; that which destroys creates*.

Nothing comes out of nothing. The creation of a new form is conditioned
by the destruction (transformation) of the old one.

14\. *Everything containing a seed may be augmented, but not without the
assistance of nature*.

It is only through the seed that the fruit bearing more seeds comes into
existence.

15\. *Each thing is multiplied and augmented by means of a male and
female principle*.

Matter produces nothing unless penetrated by power. Nature creates
nothing unless impregnated by Spirit. Thought remains unproductive
unless rendered active by Will.

16\. *The virtue of each seed is to unite itself with each thing
belonging to its own kingdom*.

Each thing in nature is attracted by its own nature represented in other
things. Colours and sounds of a similar nature form harmonious units,
substances that are related with each other can be combined, animals of
the same genus associate with each other, and spiritual powers unite
with their own kindred germs.

17\. *A pure womb gives birth to a pure fruit*.

Only in the innermost sanctuary of the soul will the mystery of the
spirit be revealed.

18\. *Fire and heat can only be produced by motion*.

Stagnation is death. The stone thrown into the water forms progressively
radiating circles, which are produced by motion. The soul that cannot be
moved cannot be elevated, and becomes petrified.

19\. *The whole method is begun and finished by only* ONE *method:* THE
BOILING.

The great *Arcanum* is a celestial spirit, descending from the sun, the
moon, and the stars, and which is brought into perfection in the

<span id="page_94">p. 94</span>

saturnine object by continuous boiling until it attains the state of
sublimation and power necessary to transform the base metals into gold.
This operation is performed by the *hermetic fire*. The separation of
the subtle from the gross must be done carefully, adding continually
water; for the more earthly the materials are, the more must they be
diluted and made to move. Continue this process until the separated soul
is reunited with the body.

20\. *The entire process is accomplished through nothing else but
Water*.

It is the same Water over which the Spirit of God moved in the
beginning, when darkness was upon the face of the deep.

21\. *Each thing comes from and out of that into which it will be
resolved again*.

That which is earthy comes from the earth; that which belongs to the
stars is obtained from the stars; that which is spiritual comes from the
Spirit, and returns to God.

22\. *Where the true principles are absent, the results will be
imperfect*.

Mere imitations cannot produce genuine results. Merely imaginary love,
wisdom, and power can only be effective in the realm of illusions.

23\. *Art begins where nature ceases to act*.

Art accomplishes by means of nature that which nature is unable to
accomplish if unaided by art.

24\. *The hermetic art is not attained by great variety of methods, the*
LAPIS *is only one*.

There is only one eternal, unchangeable truth. It may appear under many
different aspects; but in that case it is not the truth that changes: it
is we who change our modes of conceiving of it.

25\. *The substance of which the* ARCANUM *is prepared should be pure,
indestructible, and incombustible*.

It should be pure of grossly material elements, indestructible by doubt,
and incapable of being burned up in the fire of passion.

26\. *Do not seek for the seed of the* PHILOSOPHER'S STONE *in the
Elements*.

Only at the Centre of the fruit is that seed to be found.

27\. *The substance of the Philosopher's Stone is mercurial*.

Those that are wise are seeking for it in the mercury; the fool seeks to
create it out of his own empty brain.

28\. *The seed of the metals is in the metals, and the metals are born
of themselves*.

The growth of the metals is very slow; but it may be hastened by the
addition of Patience.

29\. *Use only perfect metals*.

Crude mercury, such as is usually found in European countries, is
perfectly useless for this work. Worldly wisdom is foolishness in the
eyes of the Lord.

30\. *That which is hard and thick must be made subtle and thin by
calcination*.

<span id="page_95">p. 95</span>

This is a very painful and tedious process, because it is necessary to
remove even the root of evil, and this causes the heart to bleed, and
tortured nature to cry out.

31\. *The foundation of this art is to reduce the* CORPORA *into*
ARGENTUM VIVUM.

This is the *Solutio Sulphuris Sapientium in Mercurio*. A science
without life is, a dead science; an intellect without spirituality is
only a false and borrowed light.

32\. *In the solution the solvent and the dissolved must remain
together*.

Fire and water must be made to combine. Thought and love must remain for
ever united.

33\. *If the seed is not treated by warmth and moisture, it will be
useless*.

Coldness contracts and dryness hardens the heart, but the fire of divine
love expands it, and the water of thought dissolves the residua.

34\. *The earth produces no fruit unless moistened repeatedly*.

No revelation takes place in the darkness except through the light.

35\. *The moistening takes place by water, with which it has the closest
affinity*.

The body itself is a product of thought, and has therefore the closest
affinity with the mind.

36\. *Everything dry naturally tends to attract the moisture which it
requires to become complete in its constitution*.

The One, from which all things are produced, is perfect; and therefore
all things contain within themselves the tendency and possibility for
perfection.

37\. *A seed is useless and impotent unless it is put in its appropriate
matrix*.

A soul cannot develop and progress without an appropriate body, because
it is the physical body that furnishes the material for its development.

38\. *Active heat produces in that which is moist blackness; in that
which is dry, whiteness; and in that which is white, a yellow colour*.

First comes mortification, then calcination, and afterwards the golden
glow produced by the light of the sacred fire illuminating the purified
soul.

39\. *The fire must be moderate, uninterrupted, slow, equal, moist,
warm, white, light, all-embracing, enclosed, penetrating, living,
inexhaustible, and the one used by nature*.

It is the fire that descends from heaven to bless all mankind.

40\. *All operations must take place in only one vessel and without
removing it from the fire*.

The substance used for the preparation of the Philosopher's Stone should
be collected only in one place and not be dispersed in many places. If
the gold has once lost its brightness, it is difficult to restore it.

41\. *The vessel should be well closed, so that the water may not run* 

<span id="page_96">p. 96</span>

*out of it, or the air escape; it ought to be hermetically sealed,
because if the spirit were to find a place to escape, the power would be
lost; and furthermore it should be well closed, so that nothing foreign
and impure can enter and become mixed with it*.

There should always be put at the door of the laboratory a sentinel with
a flaming sword to examine all visitors, and to reject those that are
not worthy to be admitted.

42\. *Do not open the vessel until the moistening is completed*.

If the vessel is prematurely opened, most of the labour is lost.

43\. *The more the Lapis is nursed and nourished, the more will it
increase*.

Divine wisdom is inexhaustible; the limitation exists only in the
capacity of the form to receive it.

 

 

THE END.

 

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_13"></span>[86:\*](ptw10.htm#fr_13) There are two kinds of
knowledge in man, namely, that which belongs to his spirit (*Budhi*),
and that which belongs to his mind (*Manas*). The former is, so to say,
the quintessence of what man has learned in previous incarnations; the
latter is that which he has learned in his present life. If he were to
succeed to rise up in his mind to the sphere of his spirit, to unite his
Budhi with his Manas; then would the mind share the knowledge which the
spirit possesses.

 
