[![](../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](bos004)  [Next](bos007) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span class="ad_bar"> <span class="google_search"> </span></span>

sacred-texts \|  Web \| *Powered by*
![Google](https://www.google.com/logos/Logo_25wht.gif)

<span class="google_ads"> </span>

*Sponsored Links:*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Internet Book of Shadows*, (Various Authors), \[1999\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# Consecration of Chalice, Athame or Other Tool

Before these assembled spirits I bring (name type of tool) to be
dedicated to the service of the Lady and Lord.

(*Pass tool three times through smoke of the incense.*)

By the power of air, be thou purified. Be thou dedicated to purity of
thought and to harmlessness that all intentions for which thou art used
may harm none and be for the good of all.

(*Pass tool three times through or over the flame of the fire candle.*)

By the power of fire, be thou purified. Be thou dedicated to purity of
desire and to harmlessness that all goals which thou doest help achieve
may harm none and be for the good of all.

(*Take a few drops of water and sprinkle or dab on instrument.*)

By the power of water, be thou purified. Be thou dedicated to purity of
emotion and to harmlessness that all that thou shalt be used in a spirit
of harmony, harming none and for the good of all.

(*Touch instrument to the stone or salt in north quarter*)

By the power of earth, be thou purified. Be thou dedicated to
steadfastness and purity of purpose, that my will be achieved without
wavering, with harm to none and for the good of all.

(*If this is a chalice, present it first to the Lady, then to the Lord,
if athame, reverse order. All other instruments use personal preference,
but it is courtesy to present them to Her first.*)

### PRESENTATION FOR CHALICE:

Lady Freya, Keeper of Femininity, bless this chalice. Let it be as Thy
cauldron, a vessel of productivity that it may be worthy to dispense Thy
bounty. Let it be used in Thy service and in the service of humanity.
Let it be so bound that no harm may come of it to any being, but let it
rather be an instrument of goodwill and understanding; of loving
harmony. To Thy sacred self I dedicate this vessel, (name of vessel),
that it and I may long be of service to Thee.

Lord Thor, companion to the Lady, champion of the Gods, bless this
chalice and keep watch over it. Guard the works which come forth from
it, that they ever be in the service of Thee and Thy Lady, that they be
of service to humankind, and that they abide by the laws of harmony. To
Thee I vow I shall use it for Her sacred purposes, and for no other.  

So mote it be.

### PRESENTATION FOR ATHAME:

Lord Thor, thunderer & hammer wielder, bless this athame. Let it be as
the spring rains which fall upon the Earth to cause Her to bring forth
Her bounty.

Let it quicken my hopes and dreams, yet keep them from causing harm. Let
it guide them in the harmony of the seasons, bringing forth only good
for all. Lord Thor, bless this athame, (name of athame), that it be used
ever in the worship and honor of the Gods.

Lady Freya, companion to the Thunderer, lover of the Gods, bless this
athame that it shall bring forth joy, and shall cause no pain nor
disharmony to any. I dedicate this athame (name athame), symbol of the
Defender and Rain Maker, to Thy service. May it ever bring Thee joy and
pride.  

So mote it be.

(*This ritual, with suitable changes, may be used to dedicate other
tools as well as these.*)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Samhain Ritual For Small Circle (L. A. Hussey)](bos007)
