[![](../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](bos016)  [Next](bos018) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span class="ad_bar"> <span class="google_search"> </span></span>

sacred-texts \|  Web \| *Powered by*
![Google](https://www.google.com/logos/Logo_25wht.gif)

<span class="google_ads"> </span>

*Sponsored Links:*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Internet Book of Shadows*, (Various Authors), \[1999\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# Circles, why use them?

#### Mel White

They say that the longest journey begins with a single step. So, too,
the exploration of Magickal studies begins with a single step. Though
the first step in a physical journey is often self-evident, the First
Step on a Magickal journey is often not quite so clear. While formally
organized groups often have a path of lessons to instruct newcomers, the
solitary or isolated student is often left standing in perplexity on
this broad plain of knowledge, wondering just where in the heck to
begin. And wondering, too, if it's "okay" to start just anywhere.

While it's true that studies can begin in any direction that attracts
you, the necessary first step must be learning to make psychic shields.
There are "Things of the Dark" out there. There are any number of
explanations for what these things might be -- ghosts, demons, or simply
uncontrolled urges of the subconscious mind. In truth, it doesn't matter
what they are. What does matter is that their effect is very real and
unless they are put under your control, they will drag you over the
borders of sanity into psychosis. You are most vulnerable to them while
you're in an "open" trance or meditative state. That's why the wise
practitioner always begins by taking steps to define exactly what will
be permitted through the portals of their "psychic shields" -- no matter
how simple the ritual. And this, in a nutshell, is what "protective
magic" is about.

There are a number of ways to do this. The most common is to begin by
drawing a circle (around a group or yourself) and invoking the one or
more protective powers. Generally, this is done by candlelight, in front
of an altar that holds certain magical objects. The circle may be
further "secured" and "cleared" by using salt, salt water, rum, incense,
or some other method. You may be wearing a special robe and will have
taken a bath (or performed a cleansing ritual) earlier. The powers that
protect you will be called on and *then* you will begin your ritual.

Is it psychological? Absolutely! Is there a reason why protection
rituals always take this form? Positively! Let's take a step back and
see what you're actually doing and how the process works -- from a
psychological standpoint -- and how to use this knowledge to help you
refine your circles to enhance your rituals.

Psychologists and psychics alike view the mind's structure as a
three-part entity: The Ego (that which you think of as yourself), the
Superego (the "higher self") and the Id (the child within). The Id is,
in a sense, a computer. Like most computers, it operates on the GIGO
(Garbage In, Garbage Out) principle. There's an old superstition: "As
you name something, so will it become." Tell yourself that you're very
unlucky and your Id will obligingly give you bad days by enhancing any
negatives in your environment. Tell yourself that you are clumsy, and
your Id-computer will obligingly arrange for you to break a leg while
stepping off the sidewalk. The bad news is that the Id can't make a
judgement as to whether or not this is a good idea. It only knows that
it's received these "instructions" and must carry them out. The good
news is that you can actually program/reprogram this portion of your
mind.

You begin programming this Internal Servant of yours by first drawing
its attention to what you want done and then explaining what you need
done in a simple and clear manner. Repeating the instructions in a chant
help fix the goals for the Id -- rhymed chants seem to be easier for it
to process. Each time you perform the ritual and repeat the chant, the
programming is strengthened. Never mind that your ego and superego
understand that you're going to program the child-like Id. It works just
the same.

To direct the Id's attention to the process, you first have to impress
it. Using special tools and clothing alert it that something unusual is
going on and that it must pay attention. Acquiring hard-to-obtain items,
drawing symbols, performing a symbolic sacrifice (donating money, say,
to a good cause) are all ways of reinforcing the Id's impression that
this ceremony is very special and that the result will be very powerful.
Organized, meaningful symbols, speak to your subconscious mind in ways
it understands, reinforcing the goals you have set.

Drawing the circle itself establishes boundaries within your environment
("The rest of the world can do what it likes Out There. All within this
circle is in *my* control!"). Purifying the circle and consecrating it
(sprinkling water which has been blessed and salt added) further enforce
your territory, defining the borders where you are "safe". Nothing can
enter this area except what you invite inside. You further tighten these
borders by calling on certain Powers.

You can call on any powers you like. Some use traditional Christian
images. Others call up deities from the religion they are most
comfortable with. And many people use the thought/image of a beam of
light that represents either God/Goddess (whichever one they like) *or*
the power of light and life and goodness in the Universe.

The number of powers called as guardians varies. You may choose to
invoke one powerful being to protect your circle. Or you might call on
the Universal Being/Light *and* four guardians (one for each quarter of
the compass). A third approach is to use a guardian for the four
quarters of the compass and no higher being. There is no "absolutely
correct" system; the correct system is the one that &lt;/&gt;you are
comfortable with.

Take time to choose the guardians of your circle carefully. You should
select guardians (gods or animals or some form of life) which have a
deeper meaning to you and whose qualities are in harmony with your
goals. For the new student, it's best to have all your Powers and
Guardians from the same belief system/religion/mythic universe so that
the symbols will be consistent and not confuse the Id.

You *can* use people -- saints, movie actors, figures from favorite
books as guardians. Do, however, pick someone who's dead or
non-existent. The dead can't argue with your interpretation of them,
whereas the living may be highly offended to be approached as
gods/guardians.

As your studies continue, you will find that your totems or guardians
change. This is to be expected; as you explore new realms in your
studies, you may find you need guardians who deal with very specific
areas to strengthen and guide you in these new fields.

But don't make the mistake of assuming that you'll become so powerful
that you will never need the protection of the psychic shielding circle
in some form. And don't assume that you will not need a circle for
"positive" magicks such as healing. Open is open -- and open is
vulnerable. And circles strengthen and protect you by defining what
psychological influences will be allowed to work with you.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Handfasting (Wedding)](bos018)
