[![](../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](bos032)  [Next](bos034) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span class="ad_bar"> <span class="google_search"> </span></span>

sacred-texts \|  Web \| *Powered by*
![Google](https://www.google.com/logos/Logo_25wht.gif)

<span class="google_ads"> </span>

*Sponsored Links:*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Internet Book of Shadows*, (Various Authors), \[1999\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# Casting the Circle

Set up: place a candle in each of the four cardinal directions. Lay the
rest of the tools on the altar cloth or near it. The altar can be on the
ground, a table, a rock or a stump. The altar should be in the center or
just north of center of the Circle. Light the six candles and the
incense, start the music and begin the ritual.

## The Ritual

Facing North, the High Priest and Priestess kneel in front of the altar
with him to her right. She puts the bowl of wateron the altar, places
the point of her athame in it and says:

She then puts down her athame and holds up the bowl of water in both
hands. The High Priest puts the bowl of salt on the altar, puts his
athame in the salt and says:

He then puts down his athame and pours the salt into the bowl of water
the High Priestess is holding. The High Priest then stands with the rest
of the Coven outside the Circle. The High Priestess then draws the
Circle with the sword, leaving a gap in the Northeast section. While
drawing the Circle, she should visualize the power flowing into the
Circle from off the end of the sword. She draws the Circle in a East to
North or deosil or clockwise direction. She says:

The High Priestess lays down the sword and admits the High Priest with a
kiss while spinning him deosil and whispers "Blessed Be". He then admits
a woman the same way. Alternate male/female/male. Then the High
Priestess finishes closing the Circle with the sword. She then names
three witches to help strengthen the Circle. The first witch carries the
bowl of consecrated water from East to East going deosil, sprinkling the
perimeter as she/he goes. They then sprinkle each member in turn. If the
witch is male, he sprinkles the High Priestess last who then sprinkles
him. If female she sprinkles the High Priest last, who then sprinkles
her. The bowl is replaced on the altar. The second witch takes the
incense burner around the perimeter and the third takes one of the altar
candles. While going around the perimeter, each person says:

All the Coven pick up their athames and face the East with the High
Priest and Priestess in front, him on her right. The High Priestess
says:

As she speaks she draws the Invoking Pentagram of Earth in the air with
her athame. The High Priest and the rest of the Coven copy her movements
with their athames. The High Priestess turns and faces the South and
repeats the summoning:

She does the same pentagram and then faces West and says:

She faces North with rest of the Coven and says:

The Circle is completed and sealed. If anyone needs to leave, a gate
must be made. Using the sword, draw out part of the Circle with a
widdershins or counterclockwise stroke. Immediately reseal it and then
repeat the opening and closing when the person returns.

-   Farrar, Janet and Stewart; "Eight Sabbats For Witches"; Robert Hale
    1983
-   Valiente, Doreen; "Witchcraft for Tomorrow"; Phoenix Publishing 1985

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Technology And The Craft](bos034)
