[![](../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](bos052)  [Next](bos054) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span class="ad_bar"> <span class="google_search"> </span></span>

sacred-texts \|  Web \| *Powered by*
![Google](https://www.google.com/logos/Logo_25wht.gif)

<span class="google_ads"> </span>

*Sponsored Links:*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Internet Book of Shadows*, (Various Authors), \[1999\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# Spring Equinox Ceremony

Preparations:

A wheel symbol stands on the altar; it may be anything that feels
suitable a cut-out disc painted yellow or gold and decorated with spring
flowers, a circular mirror, around brass tray. The High Priest's robe,
if any, and accessories should be symbolic of the Sun; any metal he
wears should be gold, gilt, brass or bronze. The altar, if indoors,
should be decorated with spring flowers particularly the yellow ones
such as daffodils, primroses, gorse or forsythia. One banquet should be
ready for handing to the Spring Queen, and a chaplet of flowers for her
crowning. The Spring Queen is one of the younger women in the Coven.

The cauldron is placed in the center of the circle, with an unlit candle
in it. If outside, and conditions permit, a bonfire is made ready to
light. A taper is placed ready on the altar for the Maiden to carry fire
to the High Priest.

A phallic wand is on the altar.

Half as many cords as there are people present are ready on the altar,
tied together at their center point in a single knot. If there is an odd
number of people, add one before dividing by two.

As part of the feasting and offering to the Gods, you can use
hard-boiled eggs with painted shells. These symbolize the World Egg,
laid by the Goddess and hatched by the heat of the Sun of the God.

The High Priest moves to stands in the East, and the High Priestess in
the West, facing each other over the unlit bonfire. The High Priestess
carries the phallic wand in her right hand. The rest of the Coven
distribute themselves around the rest of the perimeter of the Circle.

The High Priestess says:

The High Priestess holds the phallic wand on high and walks slowly
deosil around the bonfire or cauldron to stand in front of the High
Priest. She says:

The High Priestess presents the phallic wand the High Priest and then
steps to one side.

The High Priest holds up the wand in salute and replaces it on the
altar.

The Maiden lights the taper from one of the altar candles and presents
it to the High Priest. The Maiden then steps to one side.

The High Priest carries the taper to the bonfire and lights it. He gives
the taper back to the Maiden, who blows it out and replaces it on the
altar. She then picks up the cords and gives them to the High Priest.

The High Priestess arranges everyone around the fire, man facing woman
as far as possible. The High Priest hands out the ends of the cords in
accordance with her instructions, retaining on end of the final cord
himself and handing the other end of it to the High Priestess. If there
is an odd number of people, with more men then women, he holds on to two
cord ends himself, or if more women then men, the High Priestess does
the same. Either way, both of them must be linked with two members of
the opposite sex.

When everyone is holding a cord, they all pull the cords taut, with the
central knot above the fire. They then start circling deosil in the
Wheel dance, building up speed, always keeping the cords taut and the
knot over the fire. Any chant can be used that sounds good.

Then the Coven all sit in a circle round the fire. The High Priest
gathers up the cords, being careful not to let them get burned and
replaces them on the altar.

The High Priest names one of the women to be the Spring Queen and stands
her in front of the altar. He crowns her with the chaplet of flowers and
gives her the Five Fold Kiss.

The High Priest steps back and calls forward each man in turn to give
the Spring Queen the Five Fold Kiss. When the last man has done so, the
High Priest presents the Spring Queen with her bouquet.

Then, starting with the Spring Queen, everyone jumps over the fire,
singly or in couples, not forgetting to wish.

Farrar, Janet and Stewart; "Eight Sabbats For Witches"; Robert Hale 1983

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Smudging: How To Do It -- How Not To Do It (Michelle
Haas)](bos054)
