[![](../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](bos051)  [Next](bos053) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span class="ad_bar"> <span class="google_search"> </span></span>

sacred-texts \|  Web \| *Powered by*
![Google](https://www.google.com/logos/Logo_25wht.gif)

<span class="google_ads"> </span>

*Sponsored Links:*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Internet Book of Shadows*, (Various Authors), \[1999\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# The Death of Llew, a Seasonal Interpretation

#### by Mike Nichols

Not of father, nor of mother

Was my blood, was my body.  
I was spellbound by Gwydion,  
Prime enchanter of the Britons,  
When he formed me from nine blossoms.

In most Pagan cultures, the sun god is seen as split between two rival
personalities: the god of light and his twin, his 'weird', his 'other
self', the god of darkness. They are Gawain and the Green Knight, Gwyn
and Gwythyr, Llew and Goronwy, Lugh and Balor, Balan and Balin, the
Holly King and the Oak King, etc. Often they are depicted as fighting
seasonal battles for the favor of their goddess/lover, such as
Creiddylad or Blodeuwedd, who represents Nature.

The god of light is always born at the winter solstice, and his strength
waxes with the lengthening days, until the moment of his greatest power,
the summer solstice, the longest day. And, like a look in a mirror, his
'shadow self', the lord of darkness, is born at the summer solstice, and
his strength waxes with the lengthening nights until the moment of his
greatest power, the winter solstice, the longest night.

Indirect evidence supporting this mirror-birth pattern is strongest in
the Christianized form of the Pagan myth. Many writers, from Robert
Graves to Stewart Farrar, have repeatedly pointed out that Jesus was
identified with the Holly King, while John the Baptist was the Oak King.
That is why, 'of all the trees that are in the wood, the Holly tree
bears the crown.' If the birth of Jesus, the 'light of the world', is
celebrated at mid-winter, Christian folk tradition insists that John the
Oak King (the 'dark of the world'?) was born (rather than died) at
mid-summer.

It is at this point that I must diverge from the opinion of Robert
Graves and other writers who have followed him. Graves believes that at
midsummer, the Sun King is slain by his rival, the God of Darkness; just
as the God of Darkness is, in turn, slain by the God of Light at
midwinter. And yet, in Christian folk tradition (derived from the older
Pagan strain), it is births, not deaths, that are associated with the
solstices. For the feast of John the Baptist, this is all the more
conspicuous, as it breaks the rules regarding all other saints.

John is the *only* saint in the entire Catholic hagiography whose feast
day is a commemoration of his birth, rather than his death. A generation
ago, Catholic nuns were fond of explaining that a saint is commemorated
on the anniversary of his or her death because it was really a 'birth'
into the Kingdom of Heaven. But John the Baptist, the sole exception, is
emphatically commemorated on the anniversary of his birth into *this*
world. Although this makes no sense viewed from a Christian perspective,
it makes perfect poetic sense from the viewpoint of Pagan symbolism.
(John's earlier Pagan associations are treated in my essay on
Midsummer.)

So if births are associated with the solstices, when do the symbolic
deaths occur? When does Goronwy slay Llew and when does Llew, in his
turn, slay Goronwy? When does darkness conquer light or light conquer
darkness? Obviously (to me, at least), it must be at the two equinoxes.
At the autumnal equinox, the hours of light in the day are eclipsed by
the hours of darkness. At the vernal equinox, the process is reversed.
Also, the autumnal equinox, called 'Harvest Home', is already associated
with sacrifice, principally that of the spirit of grain or vegetation.
In this case, the god of light would be identical.

In Welsh mythology in particular, there is a startling vindication of
the seasonal placement of the sun god's death, the significance of which
occurred to me in a recent dream, and which I haven't seen elsewhere.
Llew is the Welsh god of light, and his name means 'lion'. (The lion is
often the symbol of a sun god.) He is betrayed by his 'virgin' wife
Blodeuwedd, into standing with one foot on the rim of a cauldron and the
other on the back of a goat. It is only in this way that Llew can be
killed, and Blodeuwedd's lover, Goronwy, Llew's dark self, is hiding
nearby with a spear at the ready. But as Llew is struck with it, he is
not killed. He is instead transformed into an eagle.

Putting this in the form of a Bardic riddle, it would go something like
this: Who can tell in what season the Lion (Llew), betrayed by the
Virgin (Blodeuwedd), poised on the Balance, is transformed into an
Eagle? My readers who are astrologers are probably already gasping in
recognition. The sequence is astrological and in proper order: Leo
(lion), Virgo (virgin), Libra (balance), and Scorpio (for which the
eagle is a well-known alternative symbol). Also, the remaining icons,
cauldron and goat, could arguably symbolize Cancer and Capricorn
(representing summer and winter), the signs beginning with the two
solstice points. So Llew is balanced between cauldron and goat, between
summer and winter, on the balance (Libra) point of the autumnal equinox,
with one foot on the summer solstice and one foot on the winter
solstice.

This, of course, is the answer to a related Bardic riddle. Repeatedly,
the 'Mabinogion' tells us that Llew must be standing with one foot on
the cauldron and one foot on the goat's back in order to be killed. But
nowhere does it tell us why. Why is this particular situation the ONLY
one in which Llew can be overcome? Because it represents the equinox
point. And the autumnal equinox is the only time of the entire year when
light (Llew) can be overcome by darkness (Goronwy).

It should now come as no surprise that, when it is time for Llew to kill
Goronwy in his turn, Llew insists that Goronwy stands where he once
stood while he (Llew) casts the spear. This is no mere vindictiveness on
Llew's part. For, although the 'Mabinogion' does not say so, it should
by now be obvious that this is the only time when Goronwy can be
overcome. Light can overcome darkness only at the equinox -- this time
the vernal equinox. (Curiously, even the Christian tradition retains
this association, albeit in a distorted form, by celebrating Jesus'
death near the time of the vernal equinox.)

The Welsh myth concludes with Gwydion pursuing the faithless Blodeuwedd
through the night sky, and a path of white flowers springs up in the
wake of her passing, which we today know as the Milky Way. When Gwydion
catches her, he transforms her into an owl, a fitting symbol of autumn,
just as her earlier association with flowers (she was made from them)
equates her with spring. Thus, while Llew and Goronwy represent summer
and winter, Blodeuwedd herself represents both spring and fall, as
patron goddess of flowers and owls, respectively.

Although it is far more speculative than the preceding material, a final
consideration would pursue this mirror-like life pattern of Llew and
Goronwy to its ultimate conclusion. Although Llew is struck with the
sunlight spear at the autumnal equinox, and so 'dies' as a human, it
takes a while before Gwydion discovers him in his eagle form. How long?
We may speculate 13 weeks, when the sun reaches the midpoint of the sign
(or form) of the eagle, Scorpio -- on Halloween. And if this is true, it
may be that Llew, the sun god, finally 'dies' to the upper world on
Halloween, and now passes through the gates of death, where he is
immediately crowned king of the underworld, the Lord of Misrule! (In
medieval tradition, the person proclaimed as 'Lord of Misrule' reigned
from Halloween to Old Christmas -- or, before the calender changes,
until the winter solstice.)

Meanwhile, Goronwy (with Blodeuwedd at his side) is crowned king in the
upper world, and occupies Llew's old throne, beginning on Halloween.
Thus, by winter solstice, Goronwy has reached his position of greatest
strength in *our* world, at the same moment that Llew, now sitting on
Goronwy's old throne, reaches his position of greatest strength in the
underworld. However, at the moment of the winter solstice, Llew is born
again, as a babe, (and as his own son!) into our world. And as Llew
later reaches manhood and dispatches Goronwy at the vernal equinox,
Goronwy will then ascend the underworld throne at Beltane, but will be
reborn into our world at midsummer, as a babe, later to defeat Llew all
over again. And so the cycle closes at last, resembling nothing so much
as an intricately woven, never-ending bit of Celtic knotwork.

So Midsummer (to me, at least) is a celebration of the sun god at his
zenith, a crowned king on his throne. He is at the height of his power
and still 1/4 of a year away from his ritual death at the hands of his
rival. However, at the very moment of his greatest strength, his dark
twin, the seed of his destruction, is born -- just as the days begin to
shorten. The spear and the cauldron have often been used as symbols for
this holiday and it should now be easy to see why. Sun gods are
virtually always associated with spears (even Jesus is pierced by one),
and the midsummer cauldron of Cancer is a symbol of the Goddess in her
fullness. If we have learned anything from this story from the fourth
branch of the 'Mabinogion', it is about the power of myth -- how it may
still instruct and guide us, many centuries after it has passed from
oral to written tradition. And in studying it, we have barely scratched
the surface.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Spring Equinox Ceremony (Farrar and Farrar)](bos053)
