[![](../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](bos041)  [Next](bos043) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span class="ad_bar"> <span class="google_search"> </span></span>

sacred-texts \|  Web \| *Powered by*
![Google](https://www.google.com/logos/Logo_25wht.gif)

<span class="google_ads"> </span>

*Sponsored Links:*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Internet Book of Shadows*, (Various Authors), \[1999\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# The following is an excerpt from "Witchcraft: The Old Religion"

#### by Dr. L. L. Martello.

## Questions and Answers.

Q. What is the best way for one who is interested in the Old Religion to
make contact with a genuine coven?

A. Subscribe to all of the Pagan and Witchcraft publications. It's
easier to get into a Pagan grove which often acts as a backdoor to the
Craft, since many are Wicca-oriented in their worship and rituals. Fill
out a Coven-Craft application form issued by WICA. To obtain yours,
enclose a self-addressed stamped envelope. WICA's address is Suite 1B,
153 West 80 Street; New York 10024.

Q. What are the major feast-days of Witches? Could you tell me more
about the origins of Halloween?

A. Most Anglo-American covens celebrate the following holy days. The
four major ones are Oimelc or Candlemas on February 2; May Eve, Beltane,
or Walpurgisnacht on April 30; Lammas on July 31 or August 1; and of
course Halloween or Samhain on October 31. The four minor Holy Days are
the two solstices: Yule, around December 22; and Midsummer, around June
21 or 22. The other two are the equinoxes: March 20-21 for spring and
the fall equinox on September 22 or 23. The following will help to give
you some idea of the origins of Halloween:

November Eve, All Hallows' Eve, the Gaelic fire festival of Samhain, now
generally called Halloween, represents the summer's end, when the Earth
Goddess turns over her reign to the Horned God of the Hunt, the
transition from life to death, from an agrarian time to one of hunting,
from summer to winter, from warmth to coldness, from light to darkness.
It has been Christianized into All Saints' Day, a time when the souls of
the departed wander the land and in some cases where the souls of the
living temporarily join their spirit brethren, a time for mediumship,
remembrance of departed loved ones, and celebration (as opposed to
mourning) of the dead. The Roman Goddess of fruits and seeds, Pomona,
was worshipped on this day. The stored fruits and seeds of the summer
were then opened for the celebrants. Apples and nuts were the main
fruits. This was also the autumn harvest festival of the Druids.

They believed in the transmigration of souls and taught that Saman, the
Lord of Death, summoned those wicked souls who were condemned to occupy
the bodies of animals in the preceding twelve months. The accused
believed that they could propitiate Saman by gifts and incantations,
thus lessening if not eliminating their sentences. This was also the
time when the Druids lit huge bonfires in honor of Baal, a custom
continued in Britain and Wales until recent times. In Ireland October 31
was called Oidhche Shamhna, or Vigil of Saman. In his Collectanea de
Rebus Hibernicis, Villancey says that in Ireland the peasants assembled
with clubs and sticks, "going from house to house, collecting money,
breadcake, butter, cheese, eggs, etc., for the feast, repeating verses
in honor of the solemnity, demanding preparations for the festival in
the name of St. Columb Kill, desiring them to lay aside the fatted calf
and to bring forth the black sheep. The good women are employed in
making the griddlecake and candles; these last are sent from house to
house in the vicinity, and are lighted up on the (Saman) next day,
before which they pray, or are supposed to pray, for the departed soul
of the donor. Every house abounds in the best viands they can afford:
apples and nuts are devoured in abundance; the nutshells are burnt, and
from the ashes many strange things are foretold; cabbages are torn up by
the root; hemp-seed is sown by the maidens, and they believe that if
they look back they will see the apparition of the man intended for
their future spouse; they hang a smock before the fire, on the close of
the feast, and sit up all night, concealed in the corner of the room,
convinced that his apparition will come down the chimney and turn the
smock; they throw a ball of yarn out of the window, and wind it on the
reel within, convinced that if they repeat the Pater Noster backwards,
and look at the ball of yarn without, they will then also see his sith
or apparition; they dip for apples in a tub of water, and endeavor to
bring one up in the mouth; they suspend a cord with a cross-stick, with
apples at one point, and candles lighted at the other, and endeavor to
catch the apple, while it is in a circular motion, in the mouth."

Vallancey concludes that these practices are the remnants of Druidism
and will never be eradicated while the name of Saman remains. In this
brief passage we will see the origins of many modern Halloween
practices, such a trick or treat, the Jack-o-Lantern, and apple bobbing.

In the island of Lewis the name Shamhna, or Saman, was called Shony. One
writer in disgust described "an ancient custom here to sacrifice to a
sea-god, called Shony, at Hallowtide." The supposed Christian
inhabitants would gather at the Church of St. Mulvay, each family
bringing provisions and malt which was brewed into ale. They chose one
of themselves to wander into the sea at night up to his waist. He then
poured out a cup of ale calling upon Shony to bless his people for the
coming year. "At his return," this writer says, "they all went to
church, where there was a candle burning upon the altar; and then
standing silent for a little time, one of them gave a signal, at which
the candle was put out, and immediately all of them went to the fields,
where they fell a-drinking ale, and spent the rest of the night in
dancing and singing. The ministers in Lewis told me they spent several
years before they could persuade the vulgar natives to abandon this
ridiculous piece of superstition."

The name Saman shows evidence of Druidism in the Irish. Another word,
the name of a drink, is "lambswool." It is made from bruising roasted
apples and mixing it with ale or milk. The Gentlemen's Magazine for May,
1784, says, "this is a constant ingredient at a merrymaking on Holy
Eve." Vallancey shrewdly traced its etymological origin when he said,
"The first day of November was dedicated to the angel presiding over
fruits, seeds, etc., and was therefore named La Mas Ubhal, that is, the
day of the apple fruit, and being pronounced Lamasool, the English have
corrupted the name to Lambs-wool." The angel referred to of course is
the Roman Goddess Pomona.

Q. Are these Holy Days the same throughout the world?

A. No. However, there are many universal similarities between all the
pagan religions. Names, dates and days vary according to national
origin. For instance, one of the Holy Days still celebrated by many
Italian and some Sicilian traditions is the Lupercalia, on February 15.
It has since been Christianized into St. Valentine's Day on Feb. 14. Let
me quote from the WICA Newsletter: Ancient Roman festival honoring
Lupercus, God of Fertility. It was called dies februatus meaning 'day of
expiation.' The Lupercal--'wolf's grotto'--a cave on the western slope
of Palatine Hill. Near it was the ficus ruminalis, the fig tree under
which Romulus and Remus were found and nursed by a she-wolf. The
Lupercai who celebrated this yearly festival were made up of the Fabian
who belonged to the Sabines and the Quintilian Lupercai, the Latins.
Later in honor to Julius Caesar, there was added the Julian Brotherhood.
They sacrificed a goat. Young neophytes were brought in. The High Priest
touched their foreheads with the bloody knife. Then another priest wiped
away the blood with wool dipped into milk. The feast began with the
celebrants clothed only in goat skins and carrying (really hiding)
thongs made from the same goat hides. They ran up and down the streets
of the city striking anyone who passed them. Women came forward to be
hit by the goat-thongs, believing it enhanced their own fertility. This
was also a symbolic purification of the land and of the persons touched.
This was on of the last Pagan rites to be given up before Christianity
completely dominated the country. It is still celebrated today but in
modern form, without the goat or any other kind of sacrifice, but all
wearing skins and goat horns in a special streghe ritual."

Q. What are some of the Christian holy days that are based upon or
borrowed from ancient Pagan Religions?

A. You'll find many of them discussed in this book. However, briefly,
here are some of them. December 25 in ancient times was the day
celebrated in honor of the sun, deified in such figures as Mithra,
Osiris, Horus, and Adonis. It was also the feast day of Bacchus,
Krishna, Sakia, and others. The legends of these Gods were the same as
those attributed to Jesus Christ by the early Church. Pope Julius I in
A.D. 337 made December 25 the official day to celebrate Jesus's birth,
following older traditions who honored their founders on that date. It
was also the ancient celebration of the winter solstice. There is
absolutely no record in the Bible or elsewhere of when Jesus Christ was
born. All of us are still paying tribute to the ancient Gods and
Goddesses by the names of our days of the week.

|           |          |           |           |         |             |
|-----------|----------|-----------|-----------|---------|-------------|
| English   | French   | Italian   | Spanish   | Planet  | Deity       |
| Sunday    | Dimanche | Domani    | Domingo   | Sun     | Mithra      |
| Monday    | Lundi    | Lunedi    | Lunes     | Moon    | Diana       |
| Tuesday   | Mardi    | Martedi   | Martes    | Mars    | Tiw         |
| Wednesday | Mercredi | Mercoledi | Miercoles | Mercury | Mercury     |
| Thursday  | Jeudi    | Giovedi   | Jueves    | Jupiter | Jove-Thor   |
| Friday    | Vendredi | Venerdi   | Viernes   | Venus   | Venus-Freya |
| Saturday  | Samedi   | Sabato    | Sabado    | Saturn  | Saturn      |

Two of the English names come from Old Saxon rather than Latin. Tiw's
Day became Tuesday in honor of the old Teutonic deity, Tiw or Tives.
Wednesday is named after the old Teutonic Norse God Wodan or Wotan. The
Saxon word for day is doeg. In olden times the days were called Jove's
Doeg (Thursday), Mercury's Doeg (Wednesday), Mar's &lt;sic&gt; Doef
&lt;sic&gt; (Tuesday), etc. Friday was the day when the ancients paid
tribute to Venus--the love day. When Christianity became dominant,
Friday was no longer considered lucky--Jesus was crucified on that day;
also, the uninhibited sexual rites dedicated to the love Goddess Venus
was considered a great "sin." Besides the days of our week our months
are also named after the ancient deities:

January: From Latin Januarius, honoring Janus, a Roman God. He presided
over the Gates of Heaven, which the Christians later assigned to St.
Peter. The Anglo-Saxons called it Aefter-Yule, and prior to that
Wolf-monat.

February: From Februus, another name for the God of purification Faunus,
thus fertility. The feast was held on February 15 (see Lupercalia) and
was called Februa.

March: After Mars, God of War. Anglo-Saxons called it Hraed-monat,
rugged month, or Hlyd-monat, stormy month. A stormy March was an omen of
poor crops. A dry March indicated a rich harvest.

April: From Latin aperio "to open," like buds. Anglo-Saxons called it
Easter-monat, in honor of the Teutonic Goddess of the same name. She
ruled spring and light. The Romans dedicated this month to Venus, often
referring to it as Mensis Veneris instead of Aprilis.

May: Named after Maia Majesta, ancient Roman Goddess of Spring.
Considered Vulcan's wife. Look up the folklore regarding the May Day
celebrations, bonfires, and other rites celebrated throughout Europe.

June: Named after the Roman Goddess Juno. Called Sear-monat by
Anglo-Saxons. Juno was Queen of Heaven and Guardian of Marriage and
ruled childbirth. June is still the most favored month for marriage
today.

July: Originally called Quintilus, the fifth month. Old Saxons called it
Maed-monat, "mead month" the time to gather honey for the drink called
mead.

August: Named after the Roman Emperor Augustus. Was once called
Sixtilis, the sixth month.

September: Named after the Latin number for seven, that being the month
in the old calender &lt;sic&gt;. Saxons called it Gerst-monat, barley
month, as this crop was usually gathered then.

October: From octo, the eighth month in the old calendar. Saxons named
it Wyn-monat, "wine month." This was harvest time, and Bacchus and
Dionysius and all the other ancient deities were honored. See Halloween
above.

November: From the ninth month in old Roman calendar. Saxons called it
Blot-monat, "blood month." This was when the cattle and sheep were
slaughtered for food and sacrifices.

December: Named after the tenth month in the old calendar. It was
consecrated to Saturn, and on December 17 the great feast of Saturnalia
began, lasting several days. It coincided with the winter solstice and
the Yule season. The Anglo-Saxons called it Yule-monat, "midwinter
month." It coincided with the winter solstice and the Yule season.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Wicca, Wicca, Who's Got the Wicca? (Hurn, RMPJ)](bos043)
