[![](../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](msg0002)  [Next](msg0004) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span class="ad_bar"> <span class="google_search"> </span></span>

sacred-texts \|  Web \| *Powered by*
![Google](https://www.google.com/logos/Logo_25wht.gif)

<span class="google_ads"> </span>

*Sponsored Links:*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Internet Book of Shadows*, (Various Authors), \[1999\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# Becoming a Witch

### by Morgaine

##### © Morgaine 2001.

*This article may be reproduced for non-commercial purposes, providing
that this original copyright notice stays in place at all times.*

I am often asked how one becomes a witch. Do you find someone who is a
witch and they make you one? Or are you a witch just by saying you are?
Can you make yourself a witch?

The process of becoming a witch doesn't happen overnight. It is a life
change, a new path upon the journey of your life. It takes
consideration, study and work. If you have previously followed a
mainstream religion, you may have things that take time to let go, and
new things that take time to absorb. I have heard many people say it is
often hard, coming from a life of Christianity, to feel comfortable
praying to the Goddess. All new things take time, but if you are serious
upon this path, you will find your way. The Gods call their own home to
them.

No matter how you have came about finding the Old Religion, here you
are. So where do you go? To the book store. For a novice, books are like
the air you breathe. You must have them, or access to them in some way.
If you cannot afford, or do not feel safe having books on the Craft, the
internet is the next best place.

In both books and on the internet you will find a wealth of knowledge
that will help guide you upon your new path. Of course, as with anything
else, there is good information and bad information. Avoid any kind of
book, or internet site, that speaks of controlling another person in any
way, harming them, doing love spells on a specific person, or tells you
to chant in latin, even though you have no idea what you are saying
(yes, I have seen sites like that). These books/sites will not fulfill
your need for knowledge in the Craft and will only serve to confuse you.

Once you have read a variety of books and feel called to this path, the
next step is to find a teacher. If you have access to a teacher, in my
opinion this is the best course of action. A teacher or a coven can
often be found if there is a new age book store in your community. Also,
the Witches Voice is a site that offers networking in every state. It
has grown extremely large over the past few years and is a valuable
resource in the Craft community. All of my coven members have found me
on the Witches Voice.

Having a mentor can offer so much to you when you are beginning. There
will be things you come across that you have a hard time understanding
and need clarification. If you have a teacher, they are just a phone
call or email away. If you do not, you must try to decifer things on
your own, and may not come to the correct end on them. If you do not
have a teacher, again, the internet is the next best place to look.

If you are only looking for a 'how to' on casting spells, then the Craft
is not for you. Witchcraft is a serious spiritual path, in which magick
is performed, but is secondary to the religion itself. I would suggest
you look to ceremonial magick for that.

A couple of things need to be said about beginning this path, in light
of recent attitudes about the Craft. Here lately it seems that you have
a people who, after reading a few books, feel as if they can call
themselves a master of the Art. They throw on a title like Lady/Lord, or
HP/s, add some black clothes, a pentacle the size of a hubcap, and they
are ready to go. This is not what the Craft is about. If you have spent
years following a particular path, have worked hard for the spiritual
lessons that have been presented to you, and through this have attained
the title and rank, then by all means use it. But think of how you would
feel if, after all that, you have a newbie with 6 months and 5 books
unde their belt walking about calling themselves Lady Starry Ski or Lord
Thunderbutt. It is very offensive. Just like your parents told you when
you were growing up (or maybe you still are) 'don't rush things, it will
all come to you in the end, and be sweeter for the waiting'. This is
true with the Craft. Using titles, putting on airs, and in general
acting high and mighty are not going to make you any more spiritual. And
that is what this path is about. What it will do is alienate you from
people whom you may actually want to meet and get to know!

All of this being said the way to become a witch is through study and
dedication. Gather all of the information you can. Find the best teacher
possible. Read whatever you can get your hands on. Go outside in nature
and commune with the Goddess and God. Listen to the trees and the wind
and the rush of the water, for this is the witch's world.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Self Dedication Explained by David Rankine and Sorita](msg0004)
