[![](../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](bow)  [Next](msg0008) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span class="ad_bar"> <span class="google_search"> </span></span>

sacred-texts \|  Web \| *Powered by*
![Google](https://www.google.com/logos/Logo_25wht.gif)

<span class="google_ads"> </span>

*Sponsored Links:*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Internet Book of Shadows*, (Various Authors), \[1999\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# Physics and the Basic Principle of Visualization Magick

## by Dan

### Introduction:

For starters, I would like to say a few things about myself to set the
record straight. I have a Masters degree in Quantum Field Theory, am
working on my PhD in the same, and am a practicing, if tyro, shaman. I
have read in several places that the best way to start in magick is to
read read read read, and I have noticed several articles using Physics
to explain magickal arguments. Unfortunately, many of these articles
either do not explain the Physics very well or are just plain wrong. I
am not disrespecting these people: after all, not everyone can be a
Physicist! I thought I would write a brief article to clear up a few
issues on the nature of probability in Physics as well as how
probability might play a role in magick.

The following article is essentially a short paper on the Metaphysics
behind what I call "visualization magick." I am not going to footnote:
all of the Physics arguments are well known and documented and can be
found in any introductory text on Quantum Mechanics. As for my magickal
arguments, well, they are as correct as I can make them. Naturally, I
accept responsibility for any errors contained in this article.

### The Nature of Investigation:

Most of the science done today is based on a problem solving technique
called the "Scientific Method." The Scientific Method is a
well-established way to start from the basic principles behind a problem
and develop an experimentally based explanation of a given phenomenon.
It has been used successfully for centuries. There is one problem with
this method, though: it can be very difficult to incorporate any newly
discovered facts that do not fit the structure of the current scientific
theory. This point has been raised repeatedly when scientists try to
discover the nature of ghosts, ESP, etc.

I think it is natural to take the viewpoint that any axiomatic
structure, such as the sciences, can only explain certain types of
phenomena. Other systems, such as magick, can explain other phenomena.
It is interesting that these different axiomatic structures can overlap:
they can explain the same types of phenomena, but they explain them in
different ways. One might call different axiomatic systems as
"paradigms," or "representations." Whatever you call them, it is
important not to mix the different systems, because the any term defined
in one representation are not likely to have the same meaning in
another. For example, anyone trying to explain a magickal phenomenon in
terms of Physics needs to be careful of how the word "energy" is used.
Energy in magick will not necessarily mean the same thing as it does in
Physics. (Incidentally, energy is not a well-defined concept in
Physics!)

In the remainder of this article I am going to discuss the Physics
representation known as the Copenhagen Interpretation of Quantum Physics
(CI) and, within that representation, provide an explain of
visualization magick.

### Schrodinger's Cat and Quantum Reality:

When most people think of Physics, they think of equations, math, and
all sorts of difficult problems. In actuality, Physics is based on very
simple arguments and can often be put in the form of puzzles that
illustrate the basic principles. For instance, Classical Physics can
usually be put into the form of some little guy (or person, for you
extreme liberalists) firing a cannon over a ravine. Classical Physics
describes what we see and touch in everyday life. We are familiar with
it and it is the representation that makes the most sense to us. Another
representation, which is more basic, is that of Quantum Reality.
Classical Reality is fully contained within Quantum Reality, but Quantum
Reality contains more phenomena, much of it things we do not see in
day-to-day life. Not really accepting Quantum Reality for what it is,
Erwin Schrodinger devised a thought experiment to show the odd nature of
what Quantum Physics implies. He was essentially trying to ridicule the
interpretation of the science he was helping to develop. The thought
experiment is known as "Schrodinger's Cat."

We start with building a switch device based on quantum principles. We
are going to take an atom of a radioactive material and place it inside
a detector. The detector sends a signal to a switch if the atom decays.
Now, all atoms decay eventually, and the amount of time it takes for
half the amount of a radioactive material to decay is called the
"half-life" of the material. So the chance our one atom will decay in
one half-life is 50%. Thus, after one half-life, our switch has an equal
chance of being "on" or "off." We now connect a vial of the deadliest
poison to the switch; if the switch is "off" then the poison vial is
closed, if the switch is "on" then the poison vial is open and any
creature in contact with the poison will die instantly. Now place the
quantum switch and vial of poison along side a cat in a sealed box. The
question is after one half-life has elapsed, is the cat alive or is it
dead?

Since there is a 50% chance that the atom has decayed in one half-life,
our "logical" answer must be that the cat has a 50% chance of being
alive or dead. No other answer in our (Classical Reality) experience
makes any sense. We cannot say with certainty if the cat is either alive
or dead.

However, we are asking a question that requires a specific answer. Is
the cat alive, or is it dead? Quantum Reality gives us a third, and
actually the only valid, answer to this problem. The cat is in a mixed
quantum state of both alive and dead as far as anyone outside the sealed
box is concerned. That is, the cat is only in a specific state of alive
or dead when someone called a "quantum observer" looks inside the box to
determine the state of the cat. This leads us to all sorts of
metaphysical problems about the cat as well as the problem of what
defines a quantum observer.

### The Copenhagen Interpretation of Quantum Reality:

The Quantum Reality representation of the result of the Schrodinger's
cat experiment does not make any sense as far as Classical Reality is
concerned. Nevertheless, it has good basis in Physics. Many of the top
Physicists of the time (around the 1930's I believe) met in Copenhagen
to discuss Quantum Mechanics. Several topics were on the board there and
eventually a consensus was made as to the nature of a quantum system: if
a system is not measured it exists in a superposition of all possible
quantum states. When the system is measured, it falls into one specific
state. (For you Physics buffs, this is the concept behind the Born
interpretation of the wave function.) This representation has become
known as the "Copenhagen Interpretation of Quantum Physics." (CI)
According to the CI, Schrodinger's cat is both alive and dead until
someone opens the box to look.

There is one other way to look at Quantum reality, but you pay a severe
price. The representation, called the "Many Worlds Theory," states that
every time a quantum level decision is made, the Universe splits into
two or more copies, one for each outcome of the decisions. The Many
Worlds interpretation of Schrodinger's cat states that the Universe
splits into two copies: one with a dead cat and the other with a live
cat. When we open the box we find out which Universe we are in.
Personally, I find this representation to be a bit ridiculous, but you
may feel free to choose which one you like the most. Both the Many
Worlds and the CI make exactly the same predictions and we cannot tell
which one is correct (if either!).

### The Double Slit Experiment:

The Schrodinger's Cat thought experiment does not really tell us
anything about the real world unless we can prove it. Obviously, we are
not going to learn anything from killing cats (and why would we want to
anyway?) so we need to turn to another experiment to give us some facts.
The Young's double slit experiment does just that and is almost as
simple as Schrodinger's Cat. First though we need to talk about light.

When Sir Isaac Newton was doing his experimentation on light he decided,
based on his experiments on reflection, refraction, and the sharpness of
shadows, that light was made of little particles, which he dubbed
"corpuscles." (We now call corpuscles photons.) Later on, interference
experiments (such as the Young double slit) showed that light was made
of waves, not particles. Was the great Sir Isaac wrong?? Not entirely.
In the early 1900s, a man named DeBroglie showed that electrons, which
are "obviously" particles, could be thought to have a wavelike
character. Eventually scientists realized that all subatomic particles
have both wave and particle properties...subatomic "particles" are
neither particles nor waves, but are something else which we have come
to call by the badly punned name of "wavicles." (If you are a John
Gribbon fan, as I am, then you may like to call subatomic particles
"slivey toves.") When we run an experiment that assumes light is a
particle, light behaves as if it were made of particles; when we run an
experiment that assumes light is a wave, light behaves as if it were a
wave.

Young's double slit experiment assumes light is going to behave as a
wave. We start with a monochromatic (single colored) light source and
pass it through a slit so that we obtain a set of equally spaced wave
fronts. We pass these wave fronts through a wall that has two tiny holes
in it, equally spaced from the center point. Beyond the wall is our
"detector:" essentially a TV that records the wave pattern striking the
screen. A diagram of the double slit experiment may be found in any
introductory Physics text, just look under the term "interference" in
the index.

When we turn the light source on, we see a pattern of light and dark
areas on the TV screen. This is the expected result since light is a
wave and the two slits create an interference pattern: the peaks and
troughs of the wave cancel out in different regions on the TV screen.
This is entirely due to the fact of those two little holes in the
wall...if there was only one tiny hole in the wall then we would only
see one point of light on the TV screen and no interference. The one
hole experiment is more like treating light as a particle rather than a
wave, and we get no interference from it since particles do not
interfere with themselves.

Now let us play with the experiment a bit. We are going to presume that
light is made of particles and install detectors in both holes in the
wall to see which hole the photon goes through. What kind of pattern do
we get on the TV screen now? According to Classical Reality it had
better be an interference pattern again. Nope. We get two little points
of light on the TV screen. Why? Because we are thinking of light as
particles we detected the particles, so they cannot interfere with each
other. Let's play with this again. We are going to take the original
double slit experiment and this time put the photon detector right in
front of the light source and then we are going to run the double slit
experiment only letting one photon through at a time. Obviously, we only
get a point of light on the TV screen each time a photon passes through.
However, let us record where each photon hits and run a bunch of single
photons through the experiment. What do we get on the TV screen? We
might expect to see two little points of light on the screen, but we do
not. We now get a full-fledged interference pattern! Remember, this is a
composite pattern made up of individual photons going through the
experiment, not a bunch of waves. This is truly weird.

There are only two ways to explain this last result, neither of them
comfortable. Consider a photon passing through hole \#1 as a photon in
state 1 and a photon going through hole \#2 as a photon in state 2. The
only way we can get an interference pattern is if we have something
going through BOTH holes at the same time. This implies that the photon
is traveling through the double slit apparatus in both states at the
same time. Remember we are not trying to detect which state the photon
is in as it goes through the holes, so the CI predicts that the photon
is in both states, just as the results say it must be. (We can make a
similar argument for the Many Worlds case as well). This is hard
experimental evidence for the CI and has not been contradicted in the
last 70 years or so. Just the opposite...other experiments have lent
validity to the CI. (By the way, this same experiment has been done with
electrons and, I believe, neutrons as well.)

### The Extreme Copenhagen Interpretation and Your Quantum Universe:

What follows is my personal interpretation of the Physics mentioned
above.

Let us go back to Schrodinger's Cat since it is the simpler experiment.
We need to discuss what makes a quantum observer again, because it is a
tricky point. A quantum observer is some nebulous thing that takes a
measurement of a system. What is it that creates the measurement
process? Presumably, we have two systems to consider: the first is the
actual experiment that we want to measure, and the second is the system
that does the measuring. Therefore, if we take the measurement process
to its most basic level, a measurement is the process by which the
experimental system "gives" information to the observer's system. This
information exchange is mediated by photons (or W, Z, gluons, etc.
Basically any boson you wish. That's another topic.) To make a long
story short, the observer gets information from the experiment by
absorbing a photon. This means that an electron can serve as a quantum
observer since a absorbing a photon will alter the electron's state. A
quantum observer does not actually need to have an intelligence to
function; it merely needs to respond to the experiment in some way.

So. Let us go back to Schrodinger's Cat. According to the scientist
running the experiment the cat is both alive and dead until the box is
opened. Say that he opens the box and knows the state of the cat. Now
look at the people in the next room who are waiting to hear from the
scientist in the room with the cat. According to them, the cat is STILL
in that odd alive and dead mixed state. We can go further and state that
the whole lab we ran the experiment in is in an undetermined state since
the scientist in the lab might take different actions depending on the
state of the cat. No one outside the lab can possibly know what is going
on in the lab. Now look at the people in the next room beyond that, etc.
What we have is a nested set of "Schrodinger's Cats." Until the
information is passed between different rooms, the set of rooms inside
exists in a mixed state.

We can take this argument to an (I feel logical) extreme. Since the
individual particles in our bodies act as quantum observers the only
pertinent information we have about the state of the Universe at large
is what we perceive through our senses. Therefore, anything that we do
not perceive through our senses exists in a mixed state similar to
Schrodinger's alive/dead cat: nothing exists in a definite state unless
we are sensing it. This is what I call the "Extreme Copenhagen
Interpretation." (ECI) What this implies, then, is that each of us
exists in our own personal universes and everything exterior to that
universe exists in an undetermined state until we sense it. Note: I am
going to ignore the question of other people existing...I will assume
other people exist and our knowledge of their reality comes from the
"interference" of these multiple universes. To give a quick example
consider the question: "If a tree falls in a forest and no one is around
to see it fall, does it make any noise?" The ECI states that since no
one was around, the tree is in a mixed state of existance/non-existance.
Furthermore it has fallen/not fallen, much less made any noise/silence.
Since the tree does not directly influence your universe, you cannot say
anything definite about it even existing, even though you may have seen
the tree an hour ago.

### The Basic Principle of Visualization Magick:

The ECI tells us that what we sense is what is contained in our
universe. In order to do magick we need (at least) one more principle.
When we do visualization magick, we actually feel what it is that we
visualize. The ECI says that what we feel makes up our reality.
Combining these two statements, we have what I call the "Basic Principle
of Visualization Magick." What we visualize becomes real in our
universe. This principle can be demonstrated by a simple spell, which I
call an "empowering" spell. First, enter a light meditative state. (This
first step may also be achieved by casting a circle.) Next visualize a
blanket of white fire surrounding you, starting at your feet and working
its way up to encompass your whole body. Hold this visualization until
you can actually feel the fire surrounding you, cleansing your spirit
and not letting any darkness penetrate your being. Now visualize your
hands held outward from your body and let a globe of white fire come
into being between your hands. Hold the globe there until you can feel
it. This globe of fire represents your inner strength and the longer you
hold it the more in touch with your strength you will be. The result of
this spell is that you will feel empowered and more able to cope with
the challenges of your life.

Is this magick, physics, or psychology? Remember, how we view our
universe depends on the representation we use. In this case, the
empowering spell may be viewed in any one of these representations.
Using the ECI to describe the spell what we are doing is literally
bringing up our inner strength as a concrete object and physically
contacting it. We know it is there because we can feel it, therefore
according to the ECI it has an actual existence. A similar argument
holds for essentially any magick that has its basis in visualization or
feelings.

The ECI explains how magick can affect our own universe, what about
someone else's? After all many witches (warlocks, sorcerers, etc.) will
claim that their magick affects other people, not just their own
universe. We can use visualization magick to show how this might work,
so there is not necessarily any conflict here. You (presumably) put some
clothes on today so anyone that sees you will see those clothes and all
of them will be able to describe the same set of clothing. You know you
are wearing a certain set of clothes, and your best friend came up to
you and mentioned something about the outfit, so you know she saw them.
Both of you agree on the set of clothes because both of your universes
came into contact, i.e. the two universes interfere because they both
contain quantum observers. Now, can your best friend say anything about
what you are wearing three hours after you parted? No, because you might
have changed clothes. (Or Heck, you might be skinny-dipping in the local
watering hole!) Once the universes are out of contact they no longer
interfere.

To continue the analogy, if you feel something in your universe then it
is real in your universe and thus, because your universe interferes with
other universes the effect may well be real in someone else's universe.
Say you know a spell to create a rainstorm. It will happen in your
universe. Whether or not it happens in someone else's universe depends
on the strength of the interference between your universe and theirs. I
would suppose that the strength of the interference depends on the
strength of your belief (and that of others) that you can make it rain.
Taking things at face value, I would say that it would take a
tremendously powerful mage to create an effect in someone else's
universe seeing how difficult it is to create a magickal effect in our
own universe. Note: I am aware the rain spell probably has nothing to do
with visualization magick. I am also aware that other magickal
principles could come into play here. Remember that I am using a
representation, the ECI, to explain an effect. The ECI is probably not a
good representation to discuss a rainmaking spell!

### Summary:

The way we explain an effect depends on the representation we use. The
rules for which a representation is a good representation to explain an
effect are not known, though we may certainly use common sense to guide
us. The CI is a well-established representation that is used in modern
day Physics. A logical extension to the CI is the ECI, which states that
we all live in our own individual universe and that the Universe is
composed of the interference of these personal universes. The ECI
provides a way for Physics to explain the phenomenon of visualization
magick by stating that what we feel is what is real in our universe.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Birthing Ritual Chant](msg0008)
