[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Swedenborg](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sd00)  [Next](sd02) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0766143007/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Spiritual Diary*, by Emanuel Swedenborg, \[1758\], tr. by Bush,
Smithson and Buss \[1883-9\] at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span class="margnote"><span id="1539.">1539.</span></span>

CONCERNING THE INHABITANTS OF THE EARTH MARS Spirits appeared in front
to the left, who were said to be from the earth Mars, and who declared
themselves to be holy; not that they were holy \[in themselves\], but
the Lord, who is the Only Good, is their holiness.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1540.">1540.</span></span>

As to the life of the inhabitants of that earth, I heard that they live
in societies, but not under governments, the societies being such that
they perceive immediately from the face, eyes, and speech, thus
externally, whether they are among true associates, whom they thus
recognize, and to whom they adjoin themselves, so as out of many to make
one. In this manner they know how to choose such companions for
themselves as are congenial in temper and thought, in which they are
very rarely deceived; they become friends forthwith; yet they feel no
aversion to others, as no such feeling as aversion or hatred exists
among them, but conjunction according to states of mind, and by means of
external things.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1541.">1541.</span></span>

So far as external mediums are concerned, knowledge \[of each other\] is
acquired from the face, especially the province about the eyes; and also
from their speech, which is distinguished from that of others by not
being sonorous like the speech of the inhabitants of our earth, but by
being a kind of tacit speech, formed by means of a more subtle
atmosphere, which is directed towards the mouth, and enters there, and
thus \[passes\] through the Eustachian tube. This tube, it appears, is
their organ of hearing. One of them spoke with me in this kind of
speech, that I might know something of its nature. It entered through
the lips, the fibers of which are disposed to a diverse receptivity, and
thus penetrated through the Fallopian tube, and thus upwards. It was
perspicuously perceived, and is much fuller and more perfect than a
language addressed to the ear, inasmuch as it conveys at once a greater
variety of ideas.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1542.">1542.</span></span>

(Their consociations \[or social gatherings\] are delightful, from the
interest taken in the things transpiring in their societies and those
also which occur in heaven. They moreover worship our Lord alone,
because He is the Very Good.)

<span class="margnote"><span id="1543.">1543.</span></span>

(They are also in an angelic or exceedingly great body, constituting
\[or representing\] that which is called thought; and they bear an
exceedingly strong resemblance to the Most Ancient Church, which is
described under the person of Adam, while abiding in its state of
beatitude.)

<span class="margnote"><span id="1544.">1544.</span></span>

Their societies are various, which is evident from the fact that every
member can be associated with his like, and thus through that earth is
constituted, as it were, a common angelic society of heavenly interiors,
with variety, and yet with discrimination, as they perceive the
interiors of their associates by means of their exteriors; consequently
not in the mode common to spirits and angels, to wit, through a sphere
of ideas, for as they form a judgment according to their perception, so
do souls and spirits from externals,

<span class="margnote"><span id="1545.">1545.</span></span>

(Their faces were seen by me, though they were themselves unwilling to
show them, but eventually the manifestation was made. The face, below
the nose, is black, not bearded, and yet black; the upper part is
yellowish, not unlike the hue of the men of our earth who are not wholly
white. This blackness, which extends towards the region of the ears, is
in the place of a beard, thus from a similar cause in nature, and of
equivalent representative import, as far as that part is concerned.)

<span class="margnote"><span id="1546.">1546.</span></span>

(They subsist upon different kinds of pulse, as also upon a certain
round fruit which springs up immediately from the ground, not to mention
the fruits of trees.)

<span class="margnote"><span id="1547.">1547.</span></span>

(They wear clothing also, but from what material they form their
garments, whether from wool, or from cotton, or from leaves, or from the
fibers of bark agglutinated by a certain species of gum, which they
affirm, they do not care to be explicit, saying it is a matter of no
consequence.)

<span class="margnote"><span id="1548.">1548.</span></span>

(Those among them who begin to cherish sinister thought thereby
dissociate themselves from the rest, who are unable to remain in their
society; consequently they are left to abide alone in rocky caverns,
uncared for by their former companions. There are, however, certain
societies which endeavor by various persuasives to work upon such
persons and compel them \[to return to a better state of mind\], but
still it is a species of dissociation; and so long as they do not become
satisfied as to their conversion, or whether having once lapsed they
will so remain, they do not openly speak of their condition. The sole
reason of this is because they have not a confirmed hope of their
repentance, of which they have no assurance from their actual conduct.)

<span class="margnote"><span id="1549.">1549.</span></span>

(((One of the inhabitants was represented to me as if with his face in
heaven, and his body on the earth. They constitute or represent,
therefore, that in man which is called thought.)))

<span class="margnote"><span id="1550.">1550.</span></span>

(They spoke of fires, saying that they know how to make fluid fires.
-1749, March 19.)

<span class="margnote"><span id="1550_1/2.">1550\_1/2.</span></span>

(One of the spirits of Mars who was with me, and who was a subject of
others, drew back the superior frontal part of my head towards the back
part, signifying thus the character of their thought, that it was not so
much of the cerebrum as of the \[cerebellum or\] will, implying,
however, that they act not from their own will, but from the fear of the
Lord. Accordingly this drawing back of the head, and indeed of the whole
body, took place. - 1748, September 25.)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1551-1600](sd02)
