[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Swedenborg](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sd01)  [Next](sd03.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0766143007/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Spiritual Diary*, by Emanuel Swedenborg, \[1758\], tr. by Bush,
Smithson and Buss \[1883-9\] at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Spiritual Diary

<span class="margnote"><span id="1551.">1551.</span></span>

CONCERNING THE SIGNIFICATION OF A PIT, AND OF THE DIFFERENCE BETWEEN THE
SPIRITUAL AND THE CELESTIAL MODE OF FELLOWSHIP. In order that I might
know the signification of Joseph's being cast into a pit \[puteus\]
\[:examine to see whether the reading be fovea:\], and thence drawn out
by the Israelites, and how it happened that none of them except Reuben
knew where he was \[I was instructed as follows\]. Examine how far these
things agree.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1552.">1552.</span></span>

Being in vision I spoke with spirits, of whom some said they wished to
have me in their company. Accordingly, after some little delay I was in
consort with genii or celestial spirits, and I then disappeared from the
spiritual with whom I had previously been. These, not knowing whither I
had withdrawn, sought me, saying that they knew not where I was. I was
in fact in company with the genii, and while in that state they \[the
spiritual\] seemed to disappear, although I was near by, and heard them
speaking, and seeking me.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1553.">1553.</span></span>

When I thus disappeared from sight, they supposed \[as is usual with
them\] that I had fallen into a pit, and when they sought me there they
let down a pole suspended crosswise from a rope, supposing that when
they withdrew it the person who was to be drawn up would be found
sitting upon the pole; but as there was no one seen in this case sitting
in that position, they said that he was not there, seeking solicitously
in the meantime to find where I was. They were then in their
representatives, which were like dreams, because not in the life of
fellowship with me.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1554.">1554.</span></span>

From the pit there issued, as it were, black spirits, and the pit was
filled with water to its mouth, it being to appearance like any other
pit on the earth.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1555.">1555.</span></span>

It hence appears that when anyone comes from the company of spirits to
that of genii, he seems to the spirits to have escaped: such is the
difference. I wished to say to them that I was near, but they could not
hear.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1556.">1556.</span></span>

The mode of acting of the genii when in company with others is soft,
gentle, and tacit, like the pulsations of the heart.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1557.">1557.</span></span>

Hence it may be inferred what was represented by Joseph's being let down
into the pit and drawn up again; for the things related in the Word
correspond to similar things which occur in heaven. - 1748, March 19.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1558.">1558.</span></span>

CONCERNING THE INFIDELITY OF CHRISTIANS. In the presence of many
spirits, and, as I think, of Mahomed also, I was thinking with myself,
that is, was tacitly saying to myself (:for my thought is a kind of
speech:), how wonderful it is that in the other life so few of those who
were called Christians inquire for the Lord, while others who were the
votaries and worshippers of men, nay, of devils, seek out the objects of
their earthly idolatry, and pay their homage even there; which is
evident from the case of those who inquire for Mahomed, for Abraham, for
Jacob, for Moses, or whoever else were the idols acknowledged. But I was
informed in reply that evil spirits and devils have a perception and
sensation of whatever is divine, regarding it with aversion and hatred,
and consequently striving against it both in the life of the body, and
after leaving the body, while in regard to what agrees with their
dominant state or is diabolical, the case is quite the reverse, which,
by the way, affords abundant evidence that the Lord is God and ruler of
the universe. - 1748, March 19. HOW IT IS THAT THE MINDS OF THE
INHABITANTS OF THIS WORLD ARE IN COMMUNION. ((((((This being in
communion results from what has been revealed respecting the inhabitants
of the earths of this system, namely, that those of the planet Venus and
of our earth are such as constitute or represent corporeal things and
the appetencies connected with them, thus also terrestrial and lower
worldly things; consequently they are those who rule the external
senses. In like manner the spirits of the earth Jupiter represent
rational ideas, for they live free from care, as it concerned those
things that pertain to the bodily senses. They are, so to speak, a sort
of ground in which things interior and inmost are sown, for without an
interior rational idea those things which are still more interior and
intimate are not inseminated. It is also a characteristic of ideas
originating in the outward senses, that they prompt to vocal
utterance.)))))) The spirits of the earth Saturn correspond to interior
sense, or reason; The spirits of the earth Mercury to knowledges; The
spirits of the earth Mars to thought.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1559.">1559.</span></span>

THAT MORE THINGS MAY BE COMPREHENDED IN A SPIRITUAL IDEA THAN IT IS
POSSIBLE TO BELIEVE. A spiritual idea is that by which a man, while he
lives as a spirit, and thus separated, as it were, from the body, acts
and thinks. That ideas of this kind are, as was said before, more full
and more perceptive of things, is evident from the fact, that by means
of a spiritual idea it can be known and perceived to the life how the
case is in regard to man's non-ability to think, much more to act of
himself anything that should not be sin, even while he intends good, as,
for instance, his own conversion and self-moved repentance, - how all
this may be done, and yet there may be sin, not only in the general act,
but in the minutest particulars, - all this, I say, may be set forth and
shown most vividly to a spiritual idea. This has been shown to me at
different times when I have supposed that I thought in this way and not
in that, because the one way was lawful, right, and best, and the other
not. Thus I supposed, but still I perceived that it was sin, because it
was from myself. Thus, for instance, when I would convert myself to the
Lord, and thus apply to myself any species of good, as the good of
faith, the good of obedience, the good of what is commended in the Word,
yet I still perceived that there was sin in the singular and most
singular items of the act, so that \[it was clear that\] there is
nothing in man but what is vile and polluted. Being inwardly moved, even
to a degree of indignation, at not being able to do anything of good,
the spirits also were in like manner indignantly affected, saying that
thus they did not know what good they could do, however much it might be
commanded.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1560.">1560.</span></span>

From this the conclusion evidently follows that there is nothing good in
man, but all good is of the Lord, and that man cannot arrogate to
himself aught of good, still less of faith; and yet that this itself is
a point of faith, and when recognized as such the ability is in some
measure granted; for when I thought from myself also that this was the
Lord's gift, and that I was to leave it to Him to work good within me,
\[I saw\] that this also was sin, because from myself. Wherefore
whichever way man turns himself from \[or of\] himself there is sin;
consequently all good is of the Lord. But inasmuch as this fact cannot
be perceived except by a spiritual idea separated from the body, I can
easily perceive how incredible it should appear to men. But that such is
actually the case I can affirm in the strongest manner. - 1748, March
20.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1561.">1561.</span></span>

As often, therefore, as man reflects within himself that he thinks good,
or does good, it comes from his proprium, thus from a certain self-love,
cupidity, and appetite. What he thus attributes to himself under these
promptings, there is sin in every particular of it. The good, therefore,
which is imparted by the Lord is wrought within him while he does not
reflect from himself upon it; that is, while man remains ignorant of it,
according to the Lord's Word, that man is regenerated, he himself being
unaware \[of the process\].

<span class="margnote"><span id="1562.">1562.</span></span>

CONCERNING A COMMON \[OR GENERAL\] IDEA INTO WHICH FLOWED THE DISTINCT
IDEAS OF OTHERS. Being in a common \[or general\] idea, which was, as it
were, the idea of all, without determination to anything definite, there
appeared to me \[an idea\] which I am unable to describe, inasmuch as it
is only in the spiritual world that such an idea can be perceived. It
may exist, indeed, with some men \[in this world\], but it is not
perceived. Into this idea there flowed the particular or singular ideas
of spirits, which I understood with considerable distinctness in
general, remaining myself meanwhile in a general idea. In this way
singular ideas from others would flow in, and I could understand them.
It was said to me that such is the idea of certain spirits. - 1748,
March 20. ((((Hence it may appear that general ideas are in themselves
distinct from singular ones, and yet the singular exist in the general,
though singulars do not know that they are in the general. This general
idea was not sufficiently determinate for singular things to apply
themselves to it.))))

<span class="margnote"><span id="1563.">1563.</span></span>

CONCERNING BODILY APPETITE. There are spirits who constitute what is
called appetite, even that of the body. These appetites are various, as
of eating, drinking, etc., since it is well known that man is prompted
by a certain craving to enjoy the luxury of baths, of fine clothing, and
the like.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1564.">1564.</span></span>

A certain spirit was so goaded by a longing for a linen under-garment,
that he said he could scarcely live if I did not put one upon him; and
when invested with it he had such a delight as nothing could surpass,
and prayed that he might be left to enjoy his pleasure undisturbed.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1565.">1565.</span></span>

As to sense, however, as of touch, he said he did not possess it, so
that while appetite pertains to spirits, sense or sensation belongs to
man. I asked him whether he had a sensation together with mine when I
touched the linen for which he so much longed. He said that he had no
sensation himself, but he perceived that I had.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1566.">1566.</span></span>

There are spirits, therefore, who are called appetites, with which some
are so inflamed that they can scarcely restrain themselves. Such spirits
are of manifold genus and species, for the objects of appetite are
innumerable, some of which are corporeal, or pertaining to the body,
while cupidities are of the mind. Such spirits are called appetites,
because they make man to crave, or excite his appetites, whence they
have their delights; but sensation is proper to the man only.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1567.">1567.</span></span>

Such spirits have derived that peculiarity from their life in the body,
inasmuch as they have cherished a craving desire for certain bodily
things.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1568.">1568.</span></span>

For the sake of distinction \[in the use of terms\], appetite, or to
crave, is predicated of the body; cupidity, or to covet, of the mind;
while earnest desire, or to desiderate, pertains to the interior or
rational mind. To be willing is of the still more interior mind; while
to be effected, though the term is often employed in other connections,
is properly to be understood only of the inmost. - 1748, March 20.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1569.">1569.</span></span>

\[OF THE\] SPIRITS WHICH CONSTITUTE THE PROVINCE OF THE SMALL CUTANEOUS
GLANDS. There are spirits who, while they wish to know anything, say
some that it is thus, others that it is thus, and so one after another,
and while they are speaking they observe whether what they say flows
freely, without any check or spiritual resistance, in which case they
take it for granted that their views are correct. This is a common
occurrence with certain classes of spirits, to wit, speaking as if they
knew, when yet the fact is not so, nor do they know how it is. Others,
again, do not take such positive ground, but observe, as was said,
whether there is any spiritual repugnance, and thus an obstruction in
the flow, from which they conjecture, and say that it is not so; for
while it flows freely they suppose that it is of course from heaven or
the Lord, inasmuch as there is nothing there which is contrarious, but
all is accordant.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1570.">1570.</span></span>

These are they who constitute the small cutaneous glands, of which there
is a twofold kind, one with sensation, another without. Those with
sensation are such as explore, from their own utterance and diction,
whether the thing is so, just as the little glands examine whether the
substances that come in contact with them are such as they may admit.
The others who are without sensation are such as deal in affirmation,
and supposing the case to be thus, and so do not scruple to assent with
a kind of audacity.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1571.">1571.</span></span>

There are such in the life of the body, persons who desire to know
everything, whether it concern them or not, as, for instance, what is
going on elsewhere, in societies, or among particular acquaintances,
which they are prompted to relate to others. They are thus \[a kind of
gossiping\] informers, of whom some doubtingly, others confidently,
throw out and scatter their reports. There are vast numbers, whole
cohorts, of such characters.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1572.">1572.</span></span>

Such is the nature of those who preside over the province and function
of the glands; and such is also the correspondence of their interiors
and exteriors with these organs.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1573.">1573.</span></span>

CONCERNING THOSE WHO ARE INORDINATELY DEVOTED TO DOMESTIC CARES. I saw a
kind of small habitation considerably low down under the left foot a
little in front, in which was a large chamber furnished with utensils,
which, however, I did not see. The chamber led into a long hall,
according to a common construction and through the hall there went a
woman of small stature and deformed person.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1574.">1574.</span></span>

Upon my inquiring the meaning of these things it was replied that such
as were excessively devoted to domestic cares in the life of the body
occupied this kind of habitations, and that they still remain engrossed
by their (wonted) cares. It was also said that they are, for the most
part, from the inferior classes of the people, consisting often of old
women, who, although these cares do not pertain to them, yet still
assume them, neglecting, like Martha, the better things, such as pertain
to faith.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1574_1/2.">1574\_1/2.</span></span>

They appear small from being in a low place, and deformed because such
\[is the effect of\] the cares.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1575.">1575.</span></span>

HOW REPRESENTATIONS DESCEND FROM THE HEAVENS. I saw a certain garden of
large extent and embellished with shaded walks, in which the trees, as I
was informed, were adorned with leaves, but without fruits. I inquired
how the spirits could produce these and similar representations which
are so frequent among them.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1576.">1576.</span></span>

I perceived that the angels of the interior heaven, while they are in
their ideas, and, as it were, in parables, have inserted into these
ideas corresponding objects or scenery, by which their ideas are aided.
These things, when they are conveyed down among spirits, are immediately
formed by them, according to their fantasies, into new representations
on a larger scale, retaining, however, the idea of the angelic society,
though modified by their own. Thus the \[original\] idea grows into a
representation.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1577.">1577.</span></span>

A similar process of growth or expansion takes place when an idea passes
from a more interior \[intimiori\] to a more exterior \[interius\]
heaven, <span id="fr_0"></span>[1577-1](#fn_0.md) although unconsciously to
the recipients, for in the exterior \[interiori\] heaven are certain
natural elements, to which their ideas adhere, and which govern their
form. In the heaven of spirits, or the spiritual world, the same things
become material, thus growing, as it were, from a soul into bodies; and
these bodies enlarge themselves according to the forms, qualities, and
states of the societies concerned.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1578.">1578.</span></span>

The same thing holds good of other representations also, as those, for
instance, which are of the animal kingdom, and those, too, which pertain
to terrestrial objects, as woods, fields, rivers, mountains, - of all
which the souls \[so to speak\] are to be sought in the interior,
intimate, and inmost sense. For from the celestial, which is the soul,
is formed the spiritual, from the spiritual the natural, from the
natural the material, of the threefold kingdom \[the mineral, vegetable,
and animal\].

<span class="margnote"><span id="1579.">1579.</span></span>

CONCERNING THOSE WHO FORECAST THE FUTURE, AND ARE SOLICITOUS RESPECTING
IT. While asleep there was presented to my view a wooden house with a
roof but without windows, in the third story of which were certain
persons who, when I would fain come to them bypassing over a bridge,
refused to admit me. Whereupon, being cast down, I attempted to climb
up, not by ropes, but by twisted threads, along certain small
interstices in the wall, which I used for the purpose of lifting myself
up that I might succeed in a second attempt to reach the third story,
though the attempt was attended with danger of falling. I still was not
able to ascend whither I wished. On awaking I heard that another also
was desirous of mounting to the same loft, concerning whom it was
repeatedly said, "Now he enters," to wit, by an entrance under the roof.
Those who dwelt there were unwilling to admit any one, and they were
moreover said to dwell upon the roofs.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1580.">1580.</span></span>

Upon my inquiring who these were \[or whom they represented\], it was
said that they were those who in their life-time were prone to
vaticinate concerning things to come, and again that those who are
anxious for the morrow, and do not trust to the Lord's providence, seem
to themselves to inhabit such houses, and indeed to dwell upon the
roofs, and also in a dark story under the roofs \[:mercka i
winden:\], <span id="fr_1"></span>[1580-1](#fn_1.md) while the house
appears to be constructed of wood, and without windows. In the place of
windows there are unclosed apertures, and those who would fain resemble
the inmates scale the walls in the manner described, viz. by means of
twisted threads or fascicles of such threads, and at the same time with
much peril.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1581.">1581.</span></span>

THAT FALSITIES HYPOTHETICALLY ASSUMED ARE SOMETIMES CONFIRMED TO SUCH A
DEGREE THAT THOSE WHO DO IT DO NOT KNOW WHAT THE TRUTH IS, AND THUS ARE
UNWILLING TO KNOW. Let one fact be taken for an example. Spirits partly
erring and partly malignant assumed a hypothetical position, viz. the
falsity that a spirit could enter into the body of a man, and thus live
corporeally. This they were prompted to affirm solely from the fact that
a spirit with man thinks that he is the man. But when I asserted that
such was not the case they were unwilling to pay any attention to the
reasons \[which I adduced\], for having once assumed in theory the
falsity, they were intent upon confirming it; when the fact is, that as
the spirit then thinks, apprehends, and wills in like manner with the
man, and the appropriate acts follow, the spirit therefore supposes that
he is the man. But this does not last long; it only holds in those
states \[of the parties\] which are analogous.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1582.">1582.</span></span>

Moreover, that a spirit should be able to pass into the body of another,
and live in that body, is at once absurd and impossible, for the
consequence would be that the form of one would be changed into that of
another, the interior substances of the man would be entirely emptied
out, and the substances of another applied, in their stead, to the
fibers and vessels, while at the same time all that which had contracted
a nature in the \[life of\] the body and been wrought into obedience to
its proper form, would be assumed.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1583.">1583.</span></span>

THAT THE QUALITIES OF SPIRITS CAN BE KNOWN AT ONCE BY THOSE WHO ARE
INTERIOR, OR WHO CONSTITUTE AN INTERNAL SENSE. ((((A certain spirit, who
would fain arrogate merit to himself from his acts and his doctrine in
the world, proceeding to a great distance in front, came to those who
constitute the internal sense or to the spirits of the earth Saturn, and
said that he was nothing, and that he was desirous of serving them. But
at his very first approach, they replied that \[they saw that\] he
wished to be great, and that they being small could not be with the
great, thus intimating how much he arrogated to himself.))))

<span class="margnote"><span id="1584.">1584.</span></span>

From this it is obvious that the quality of a spirit may at once
disclose itself to the \[above-mentioned\] internal sense. There is a
sphere, as it were, of spiritual effluvia which exhale, and produce a
perception of the life of one's mind. This sphere I recollect myself to
have perceived, and it has rarely, if ever, deceived me.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1585.">1585.</span></span>

((((Nor need this appear wonderful when a shrewd and, intelligent man is
aware from the face, speech, and actions of another of what quality he
is, whether stimulated or sincere, and many other things, which are
manifest to a man's internal sense. How much more perfect then must this
power be with spirits, whose faculty of perceiving things of this kind
so far transcends that of men, and with whom the quality of another
spirit is at once revealed even from his mute presence alone, and much
more from his speech. The manifestation which is from presence only I
have often perceived.))))

<span class="margnote"><span id="1586.">1586.</span></span>

The spirit was made to pass into another state, in which he could
reflect upon his life, and see himself as it were, in a glass, and he
then confessed that he beheld himself deformed, defiled, overflowing
with vilenesses, even to the point Of utter self-loathing. In this
manner spirits can be carried, as it were, out of themselves, or into
themselves, and thus made to know themselves. - 1748, March 20.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1587.">1587.</span></span>

THAT THE PRIVILEGE OF CONVERSING WITH SPIRITS AND ANGELS MIGHT BE COMMON
AND APPROPRIATE TO MAN. Man was so created that he might hold
interaction with spirits and angels, and thus heaven and earth be
conjoined. Such was the case in the Most Ancient Church, such in the
Ancient, and in the Primitive also there was a perception of the Holy
Spirit. Such was the case with the inhabitants of other earths,
concerning which I have spoken before; for man is man because he is a
spirit, with this only difference, that the spirit of man on the earth
is encompassed with a body on account of its functions in the world.
That heaven and earth are now separated, as respects our planet, arises
from the fact that the human race has here, in the process of time,
passed from internals to externals. - 1748, March 20.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1588.">1588.</span></span>

THAT CERTAIN ONES IN HEAVEN CALL THIS EARTH A PUTRID WELL. When
discoursing concerning a plurality of worlds, and \[suggesting\] that
the inhabitants of this earth were too few to constitute the universal
kingdom of the Lord, I perceived that this earth was called a well of
stagnant water.-1748, March 20.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1589.">1589.</span></span>

HE THAT IS LED BY THE LORD IS BLAMELESS. (A man although foul and
polluted with defilements, yet while led by the Lord is exempt from
blame; for whatever of truth and good he thinks, speaks, and acts is of
the Lord, and whatever of false and evil of the devil, for man then
knows that he does nothing of himself. - 1745, March 20.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1590.">1590.</span></span>

It may be inferred that while one is impelled by evil spirits to
thinking or doing evil, he then consents or is in concert with them, but
the Lord takes care to prevent his being associated with them in
perpetrating or thinking evils.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1591.">1591.</span></span>

He who is not led by the Lord not only acts in concert with evil
spirits, but he also excites evil spirits to act in that manner, because
he believes his cupidities and cogitations to be his own; but whoever is
led by the Lord, he is excited by evil spirits, and yet the Lord so acts
that he shall not consent. Such also is the faith of those who are led
by the Lord

<span class="margnote"><span id="1592.">1592.</span></span>

Evil spirits make no account whatever of such a man, and so speak of
him, nor do they know otherwise; they hold him as a kind of dead
instrument \[for effecting their purposes\], which they deduce from the
fact that they suppose themselves to be the man; on other related points
they are ignorant because they are not in true faith, for they believe
no otherwise than that life is the special prerogative \[proprium\] of a
spirit; and when this is affirmed, they suppose that the Lord is the
cause of evil, when yet this comes from their form, which is properly
theirs; but the form is merely organic, being in itself destitute of all
life, and merely fashioned that life might actuate it, - and because
forms are such, they cannot, although they would, think otherwise, for
faith is the gift of the Lord alone, consequently the perception which
is of faith.)

<span class="margnote"><span id="1593.">1593.</span></span>

THAT A SPIRIT WHEN TAKEN UP INTO HEAVEN IS TAKEN AWAY, AS IT WERE, FROM
\[OTHER\] SPIRITS. Distance, in the spiritual world, exists according to
interior states, as the more interior spirits are \[in comparison with
others\] the more distant they are; apparent distance is another thing.
When spirits are taken up into heaven they seemingly disappear
altogether from \[other\] spirits, although they are in fact present to
them, and lead them. I was, in my interiors, in some small degree in
heaven, which I perceived from the angelic choirs. And though I did not
understand these \[choral exercises\], yet I perceived that my interiors
were in heaven. I then heard spirits inquiring for me, and saying, "He
is not here," - being ignorant where I was. During this time they spoke
from material ideas, such as belong to the memory of material things
\[particularium\] thus vocally; and thus \[it was shown\] that I might
be intimately present, even in their speech, and yet they not know it.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1594.">1594.</span></span>

CONCERNING AN EXECRABLE RABBLE ROVING THROUGH HEAVEN. There is a throne
of spirits wandering through heaven, who know not whence they are,
though they say they are from the stars or the starry worlds. They come
flocking in troops and seek to seduce spirits, with some of whom they
succeed.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1595.">1595.</span></span>

They are not content with the things which they comprehend, or which are
adapted to their comprehension, but they are fain to penetrate the
deepest arcana, like some on the earths who are never satisfied to know
what faith, charity, and the fruits of faith are, and how men ought to
live; but they burn to penetrate divine mysteries, not the inmost, but
the supreme, namely, the nature of the union of the Son and His Father.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1596.">1596.</span></span>

This crowd is detestable, for they insinuate into the minds \[of
spirits\] such things as it is not allowable to write, lest offence
should thereby he ministered to the inconsiderate multitude, but they
are such as relate to the union between the Son and His Father, which
they make visible by impious representations, thus seeking to compass
divine things by a material sense.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1597.">1597.</span></span>

But being of such a quality, their motive in doing this is, that when
they have succeeded in seducing the man or spirit, they may be able to
say that he belongs to them; for while they are perverting his faith,
they know that they are alienating the man from the Lord; wherefore with
some, after having overcome them by persuasions, they assert a right to
them, and make themselves their lords.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1598.">1598.</span></span>

The mode of representation which they employ in effecting this seduction
is various; as, for instance, that they make their subjects pass under
their feet, from the back to the front part of the body, then taking
hold of them, turning them round, throwing them down upon their backs,
like captives to be stripped and spoiled, and then going away. Others,
however, adopt other modes.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1599.">1599.</span></span>

By means of representations addressed to the external senses, they show
how the Son and the Father conversed together in the manner of men, and
the like, which are abominable.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1600.">1600.</span></span>

They are accordingly such as endeavor to comprehend inmost and supreme
mysteries by their mere external power of apprehension.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_0"></span>[1577-1](sd02.htm#fr_0.md) It is important to remark
in reference to these terms that in this and many other passages of the
Diary \[now called Spiritual Experiences\], Swedenborg uses interior,
intimior, which, in order to be clearly intelligible to the English
reader, we are obliged to express by exterior and interior; inasmuch as
by the Latin interior, interius, he means that which is relatively or
comparatively exterior. - TR

<span id="fn_1"></span>[1580-1](sd02.htm#fr_1.md) These are Swedish words,
equivalent, according to Dr. Tafel, to a dark place in the ground, or
possibly to an attic story under the roof.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1601-1650](sd03.md)
