[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Swedenborg](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sd05)  [Next](sd07.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0766143007/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Spiritual Diary*, by Emanuel Swedenborg, \[1758\], tr. by Bush,
Smithson and Buss \[1883-9\] at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Spiritual Diary

<span class="margnote"><span id="1751.">1751.</span></span>

They also close up the internal chamber of the ear, so that one can
scarcely hear, which I manifestly perceived; nay, they oppress intervals
as if by a siege from without.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1752.">1752.</span></span>

CONCERNING VISIONS WHICH ARE ILLUSIONS. There are visions experienced by
certain persons on the earth who say and boast that they have seen many
\[wonderful\] sights; and they are also called seers \[visionarii\].
This kind of visions is such that when any object is presented, be it
what it may, certain spirits induce upon it such an appearance by
phantasies, that when a cloud for instance, or a certain lunar light is
seen by night, then spirits hold his mind, and thus his imagination, in
the representation of some particular thing, whether of an animal, or an
infant, or any monstrosity; and as long as his imagination is held in
things of this kind, he is persuaded that he actually sees such things.
In this way very many visions are bruited, which are nothing else than
illusions; but such thin often happen to those who indulge much in
phantasies, and who thus labor under an infirmity of mind, which renders
them credulous.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1753.">1753.</span></span>

That similar things exist also with spirits, inasmuch as they may be
induced by spirits from the man's imagination, I can testify from
abundant experience. It is in their power to represent buildings,
gardens, meadows, and similar amenities, and unless the reaction is
given them that such things are mere representations induced by others,
spirits would not know anything else than that they were realities, and
this they openly acknowledged.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1754.">1754.</span></span>

THAT THERE ARE THOSE WHO INSPIRE TERROR. ((There are some self-confident
spirits to whom it is permitted to induce terrors, and terrors of such a
nature that no one would believe that they could be inspired. Especially
it is permitted them to represent an arm apparently naked, and in
various positions, according to variety \[of circumstances and ends\].
Of such an arm it is a peculiarity, that it impresses upon a soul or a
spirit such a terror, that even those who were strangers to terror in
their lifetime have confessed that they have received from this source
an intimidation, which could not be expressed. The same object was once
shown to me, and I was smitten with like terror, which continued for
some time, for it seemed that it could have crushed the bones and the
marrow; yea, if permitted, it would, however incredible, have produced
that effect, because flowing from the world of spirits; still it is
true, for the phantasy of spirits is competent to do it. Terrors of this
kind are induced by spirits, who trust to themselves that there is
nothing which they cannot do; but as these things cannot well be
believed, they are to be prudently set forth, lest men should think
themselves listening to fables or trash.))

<span class="margnote"><span id="1755.">1755.</span></span>

The inhabitants of the world of spirits have peculiar skill in things of
this kind; and if it were permitted them to exercise such magical arts,
they could easily induce the minds of men to believe that they were
miracles, for these things have an effect upon material and corporeal
objects. Hence were the magical practices of the Egyptians; hence the
diabolical arts everywhere spoken of \[in the Word\]; hence false
miracles which are of the devil, and which were performed by the
Egyptian magicians. The same holds true of many other things, and
especially of those illusory visions just mentioned above.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1756.">1756.</span></span>

Unless a man be in faith towards the Lord, he is easily induced to
believe that such visions are from heaven, and the like, when yet they
are of the devil, for they cannot be distinguished from true visions and
true miracles, except by those who are led by the Lord; but at this day
such things are forbidden, for these rabbles \[of spirits\] are held in
bonds, and not permitted to rove beyond the limits which for certain
reasons are assigned them. - 1748, March 28.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1757.">1757.</span></span>

THAT INTELLECTUAL FAITH IS A MERE MATTER OF THE MEMORY. I spoke with
certain souls who, in the life of the body, supposed that they had
faith, or that an intellectual faith would save, or was of a saving
nature \[salvifica\], nor were they willing to recede from the theory
they had established to themselves, that faith alone saved, from which
it would follow that the quality of the life is of no consequence, as is
the opinion of many. It was given me to say to them that such a faith is
by no means saving, that it is not really faith, because the life shows
of what kind of faith they are possessed, and that such a faith is a
mere matter of the memory, producing nothing, whereas the life of faith
is love from the Lord. When I read the passage in Mark 12:28, where a
certain scribe inquires what is the first or chief commandment, \[I
asked them the same question,\] because the scribe believed the same
thing, but yet only intellectually, and not in his life, for it is said
that he tempted Jesus. It was then given them to perceive that such a
faith was a mere cognition, which is far from saving, unless it so works
as to cause a man to love his neighbor as himself.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1758.">1758.</span></span>

THAT THE LORD KNOWS AND DISPOSES ALL THINGS, EVEN THE MINUTEST
\[singularrissima\] IN THE UNIVERSAL HEAVEN AND IN ALL THE EARTHS.
((This may appear also from the case of the human body, in the viscera,
cavities, membranes of which, both within and without, there are
sensitive fibers in such abundance that nothing can come in contact with
them but they perceive it. That the same holds good in regard to the
stomach, the liver, and the lungs, is obvious. The fibers are
organically and variously formed, and by means of them the soul of man
knows and perceives whatever change takes place, and according to that
perception closes of everything and induces states adapted to restore
health to those parts which are out of order.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1759.">1759.</span></span>

Since such things occur in the animal body, and there is nothing which
does not come to the soul of the animal whence all things are
conveniently disposed in general and in particular, what shall we not
say of the Grand Man in heaven, and of those things which depend upon
heaven, since the Lord is the life of all, and every particular is
ordered as in the most perfect man. Wherefore the Lord is sole \[and
supreme\], because He alone is life, and thus all in all, perceiving,
disposing and ordering all and single things, so that they shall act
according to \[fixed\] laws, upon which depends the well-being and
conservation of all things in the universe. - 1748, March 28.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1760.">1760.</span></span>

It is a fact of common occurrence in the world of spirits that those who
are there are unable to believe that the Lord can know all and
everything in all and everything, even things the most minute which take
place in the universe, whether in heaven or in the world, or in all the
earths; for they, like men, view all things from a lower plane, because
from their natural mind, which is extremely limited, and to which
impossibilities are prone to suggest themselves. But when I often said
to them, and by suitable ideas represented, that it could be predicated
of the soul in the body that it did not know the things \[transpiring in
it\]; and if it did not know, it could not dispose all and everything in
its own body, and minister healing \[to diseased parts\], which the
learned ascribe to nature, but erroneously and perversely, inasmuch as
they are all from the Lord; and when also it was said that the will of
man alone could dispose, and, as it were, know what muscles and what
motive fibers should concur to anyone action, of which there are
thousands and myriads distributed everywhere over the body, and when by
this it was represented to them how the case is with the Lord who is the
God of the universe, and the only life; then they had nothing to say in
reply, for impossibilities yielded \[to such a view of the subject\]. -
1748, March 28.))

<span class="margnote"><span id="1761.">1761.</span></span>

CONCERNING SORES, AND FOUL TUBERCLES WHICH ARE NATURALLY PRODUCED UPON
THE PLEURA AND PERICARDIUM, OR WHAT KIND OF SPIRITS CONSTITUTE THEM.
((There are some in the world who pass their lives in a course of mere
artifices and lies; that is to say, that in order to attain the objects
at which they aim they make use of falsehoods, from which originate
evil; consequently they seek their ends through evil means. Thus it was
shown to me by a living experience that they employ the services of the
innocent for the purpose of persuading concerning those things which
they intend and desire to obtain; as also that by lying in various modes
they induce persons who are ignorant of their ends to say so and so,
from whence arise enmities and aversions, for they act covertly and take
various precautionary measures that those who serve them as tools should
not understand their scope. This was shown to me by a living experience.
They took for a subject a certain one who was of a genius unlike their
own, in order that they might thus effect persuasion through an innocent
medium; they then by means of mental induction and imitation brought
into play things that are familiar in the world of spirits, but which
this is not the place to describe; and all this in order that I might be
persuaded concerning the objects at which they aimed. In order that
there might be no suspicion as to the true source \[of their
machinations\], I may say, in a word, that they make use of evil means
that they may attain to whatever ends they propose. These means are
deceits, falsehoods, and artifices, from which very many evils spring
forth. Self-love or pride are the prompting causes of these
machinations, and those of this quality exercise similar arts in every
single thing which they intend.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1762.">1762.</span></span>

Such spirits are those vicious affections which are called sores and
foul tubercles, that break out upon the pleura and other membranes,
which, if they become irradicated, the disease spreads far and near so
as to \[vitiate and weaken\] the entire membrane, and thus gradually
draw the whole body to death.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1763.">1763.</span></span>

Souls of this vicious stamp, though they come into the world of spirits,
and have the power of insinuating themselves before their true quality
is made manifest, yet they are not tolerated \[there\], as they would
infect the crowd of spirits with their own vicious state. Wherefore they
first undergo this peculiar punishment, to wit: that a number of such
are made to rotate from left to right at the outset, in a plane orbit,
which presently in the course of circumrotation swells out, and
afterwards the swelling is depressed, so that the orbit becomes as it
were hollow, and the celerity is increased; while in the meantime and
during the circumrotation a process of exploration is going on, whether
they will persist in being such as they are. This circumrotation takes
place in the world of spirits above the head, a little in front, which
is administered to those who were of the character described; and
because they persisted they were rolled over and over, and projected to
the back under the occiput. There was, however, still another mode of
circumrotation in which the swelling or bulging out \[tuberositas\] was
quite prominent, and was turned by flexure into one, and that one was
again intervolved, thus rendering the revolving motion confused; in
fact, the orbit was inverted to a perpendicular, and the celerity at the
same time greatly increased: usque ut propter celeritatem, dum
appareret, ... ita ad imitamen talium tuberositatum, seu
apostematum. <span id="fr_6"></span>[1763-1](#fn_6.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="1763_1/2.">1763\_1/2.</span></span>

It was afterwards shown that all such lie as if dead, with their face
and belly downwards, and that they are subsequently let down into the
lower parts of the earth, that they may there pass their lives))
(((being thus detruded at once from the world of spirits and from the
body into those lower regions of the earth, where they are to lead a
most obscure kind of life apart from companions, being then in fact as
if dead.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1764.">1764.</span></span>

It was shown, moreover, how much of the truly human there is in such, by
means of a representation in which they were \[almost entirely\]
divested of a body, the portion that remained being exceedingly small,
as was represented by a miniature human figure, whereby was signified
how little of the human and of themselves they retain after that most
obscure life passed in their hell, which is in a deep place beneath the
right foot, a little in front.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1765.">1765.</span></span>

Wherefore let all such take heed to themselves, as in order to compass
the ends which they propose make use of means that disturb societies,
and cause enmities and hatreds between their members, and that too for
the sake of promoting their own selfish views. - 1748, March 28.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1766.">1766.</span></span>

These are rather to be called deadly imposthumes or abscesses wherever
they are seated, whether in the chest, in the pleura, in the
pericardium, in the mediastinum, or in the lungs.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1767.">1767.</span></span>

It was observed, also, that in their orbit-like circumrotation they
attempted to draw others within their whirl, to wit, the harmless and
the innocent, so that it gave them no concern whomsoever they might drag
into perdition, provided they seemed themselves to perish.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1768.">1768.</span></span>

I observed that they perceive as in an instant what is capable of being
perverted. They have their eyes intently fixed, and instantly lay hold
of, or violently seize at the first glance those things which favor them
either that they may pervert or vindicate, or assume as means; and that,
too, before I could have the least idea that they had noticed anything
pertaining to me; thus they are more acute than others, and are in the
life of their self-love.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1769.">1769.</span></span>

WHOSOEVER IS IN FAITH KNOWS AND PERCEIVES THAT HE DOES NOT LIVE FROM
HIMSELF. As relates to perception, see elsewhere; but knowledge teaches
the same thing, to wit, that man by no means lives from himself, as I
also today demonstrated to spirits by a universal idea; for since man is
a mere particle in the Grand Man, and there is nothing in the individual
man to which there is not something corresponding in the Grand Man, it
obviously follows that he lives not from himself but from the all and
singular things of the angels in heaven and in the world of spirits, who
excite the things which man thinks; and since all are merely organic
beings, and the Lord alone is life, it obviously follows that man lives
not from himself. Besides this \[it is shown\] by living experience,
that when they with whom a spirit is most intimately associated are
withdrawn, he is then, as it were, dead, and can neither think nor do
anything. - 1748 March 28.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1770.">1770.</span></span>

The exceeding fallacy of sense, involved in a man's thinking that he
lives from himself derives its origin from the love of self, which when
it reigns makes it impossible that there should be faith in the Lord,
though this alone, inasmuch as the Lord is alone, causes the knowledge
and perception of that fact. And in order that this might be more
clearly evinced to spirits - for the genuine angels know it and perceive
it very manifestly (to know is, as it were, without them, to perceive is
within them) - it was shown them by an experience which I scarcely dare
produce, as scarcely anyone would believe it; but inasmuch as it
occurred frequently, I would simply observe that when any spirit fixes
his attention upon the walking of a horse and speaks at the same time,
he is heard precisely as if the steps of the walking horse spoke - an
experience at which the spirits were sometimes indignant, while the
thought at the same time arose that the fallacy of sense in this case
was similar to that in man's supposing himself to live from himself. -
1748, March 28. To whatever sound spirits apply their attention and
direct their hearing and their imagination, whether to the strokes of
hammers or other things, the speech is heard as having a similar sound;
not that the speech is actually there, but such is the fallacy that it
cannot be known but that the sound does speak. CONCERNING THE LAW OF
NATURE \[jure naturae\]. (((((((The angels wonder that the learned on
this earth, as they call themselves, should dispute and wrangle
concerning the principles of natural law, and that many should derive
those principles from themselves, consequently from the love of self, of
kindred, and of their own possessions, and not, as does the universal
heaven, from the love of the Lord, and thus from love towards the
neighbor as towards one's self, when yet the Lord calls that principle
the primary of all precepts, not to say that everything in heaven, in
the world, and on the earth dictates the same thing.))))))) <span
id="fr_7"></span>[1770-1](#fn_7.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="1771.">1771.</span></span>

CONCERNING THOSE WHO ARE IN THE LOWER EARTH \[inferiorum terrra\].
(((((There are in the lower earth many mansions or many places where
those are detained who are undergoing preparation (concerning some of
this class see elsewhere). \[Their position is\] nearly under the left
foot, a little in front, and rising up to a very considerable altitude.
Many are held in a kind of obscurity, especially such as are in almost a
middle state between the life of the body and its sleep; and there they
think scarcely at all, barely remembering at times what they had done in
their lifetime from a rash and evil prompting, but still not so that
they are tormented by conscience on account of it; for those in that
region are not such as have done evil with a clear conscience and of set
purpose, but yet they have perpetrated evil, although it has been from
imprudence, ))))) for they might have known in the life of the body that
it was evil, as they were thus instructed from the Word of the Lord; but
the Word of the Lord, after their principles were firmly adopted, could
not penetrate, inasmuch as they persisted in the imprudence of their
life.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1772.">1772.</span></span>

(((Those who are in the lower earth are not indeed within the Grand Man,
but without, yet they live from the Lord's life.))) Concerning these it
was said that there are great numbers there, and that some are detained
there through long periods of time, even for ages, until they are
vastated. - 1748, March 29.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1773.">1773.</span></span>

The ancients seem to have alluded to this class of persons (:see whether
they are spoken of in the Word:) so long as they were not absorbed in
the love of self and of the things pertaining to that love. Of these
things the ancients had knowledge also who were without the Ancient
Church, but still from the Ancient Church, and they called them the
Lethean waters which were to be drunk; but yet there was no water there.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1774.">1774.</span></span>

Some of them perceive a tedium more or less according to their life in
the body, whether \[they had acted\] from imprudence or from set
purpose.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1775.">1775.</span></span>

CONCERNING THE IMPRESSION WITH SPIRITS THAT THEIR BODIES LIVE. The
spirits of this our earth have such an impression in regard to their
still living in the body as will scarcely be credited, and it is with
the utmost difficulty that they can be persuaded to the contrary. I
pointed out to them in various ways that that was a phantasy, so that
they at length acknowledged it, but they still fell back into similar
phantasies, wherefore their mind remains a long time after death in the
body \[so to speak\], which is also the cause that when spirits from the
earth Jupiter are present, who have an aversion to bodies, an extreme
uneasiness arises \[and is felt\] on both sides. - 1748, March 29.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1776.">1776.</span></span>

THAT SPIRITS JUDGE FROM MAN'S PERSUASION. In conversing with spirits, I
observed that they were persuaded concerning things of which they could
have no knowledge; this persuasion evidently arose from my being myself
persuaded concerning anything which I was demonstrating. This happened
very often, and in regard to a variety of subjects, even scientifics,
which they had not known, as also in a multitude of particular things;
from whence I was authorized to conclude, as I said to the spirits, that
they judged and affirmed from my persuasion. Consequently if I
demonstrated anything falsely, they would be persuaded concerning that
also, for in respect to material things they cannot judge from
themselves, though they still suppose that the knowledges which are in
my memory are theirs. Thus they possess a man, even to the degree of
being indignant when I said that they did not know themselves, but had
it from me.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1778.">1778.</span></span>

 <span id="fr_8"></span>[1778-1](#fn_8.md) ((((((Hence various things may
be concluded, as concerning Balaam, that if he had by imprecations
devoted the posterity of Jacob, certain spirits in the world of spirits
would have been so persuaded that they would have stirred up turbulent
hordes against that nation, and the evil would have endeavored to
pervert the good. The world of spirits before the Lord's Advent was of
this character, but after His Advent they were powerfully restrained in
this respect.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1779.">1779.</span></span>

Hence also it is given to conclude respecting interior persuasions from
the Lord, that men are persuaded in faith, and concerning the thing of
faith, from the Lord, and by no means from themselves. - 1748, March 29.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1780.">1780.</span></span>

In respect to things, however, which do not agree with the life of
spirits, the life which they have derived from their loves in the life
of the body, they cannot be persuaded except by the Lord alone while
being reformed. - 1748, March 29.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1781.">1781.</span></span>

CONCERNING THOSE WHO CONSTITUTE DEADLY ULCERS OF THE HEAD, OR WITHIN THE
CRANIUM. There are some of such a quality, that when they approach they
rush into the cranium, and thence into the spinal marrow, and intend and
attempt nothing else than to kill the man. Spirits of this character
flocked to me and rushed forth with into the spinal marrow, saying at
once, before they were at all provoked, that they would suck up the
marrow and whatever was vital; and when they attempted it in vain, they
still remained within the cranium, intent upon a variety of schemes,
which, however, were abortive. In such cases they intend the taking away
from the man all his intellectual faculty. I perceived them manifestly
in the cerebral chamber, and their attempts also from the pain thence
resulting. I spoke with them, and they were compelled to confess whence,
who, and of what quality they were.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1782.">1782.</span></span>

They stated that they dwelt in dark woods, and were there of deformed
aspect, having ferine faces and shaggy hair, and roaming about like wild
beasts. They are quite numerous, nor dare they attempt any such thing
towards their companions, to whom it is then permitted to treat them
cruelly almost at pleasure, from which they shrink in horror, and then
abstain from inflicting anything of the kind upon them. They also wander
about solitarily, and are thus held in bonds.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1783.">1783.</span></span>

It was told me they were such as had formerly \[in their lifetime\]
slaughtered whole armies, as is recorded in the Scripture histories,
having induced insanities upon them, for they rushed into the chambers
of their brain, and then inspired such terror that one slew another.
That they were able to strike such terror I was assured, but it is
seldom done at the present day. It is extremely rare that the bonds are
loosened to any of them at this day, and only takes place in the case of
someone who is of such a quality that it were better that he should be
permitted to perish as to his body than as to his soul, and in regard to
whom, unless he perished bodily in this manner, by means of insanity and
suicide, he could not well be prevented from perishing to eternity.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1784.">1784.</span></span>

These are those spirits who correspond to deadly ulcers of the head
within the cranium, of which the effect is similar.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1785.">1785.</span></span>

Others, their associates, appeared considerably elevated in front, and
they spoke and said that those who were within my cranium were their
subjects through whom they operated.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1786.">1786.</span></span>

While they live in woods but little of life is granted them, which life
was shown; such they said they had. - 1748, March 29.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1787.">1787.</span></span>

HOW THE LIFE IN THE BODY IS CONTINUED AFTER DEATH. There were certain
ones who had led a lascivious life in the body, and who being infected
themselves, had infected others also with their contagion and pest. Some
of them, as I had reason to suppose, came to me not long after their
decease, and ignorant that they were now in another life. I observed
that they wished to live here as they had done in their bodies. Their
life in the body was to inveigle wives and commit adultery without
conscience, enticing other men's wives into this crime whenever they
could accomplish it, and desiring the same thing now, inasmuch as they
knew not that they were in the other life.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1788.">1788.</span></span>

When I informed them that the case was not in this as in the other life,
they wondered at first that they were in the other life, but soon
forgetting this, they persisted \[in their evil promptings\], asking
where there were families, in order that they might continue their
machinations. I said to them that if they had no regard to spiritual
sins in matters of this kind, still they should not endeavor to sunder
the love of a wife by such allurements from that of her husband, as this
would be to act against spiritual order; but they paid no attention to
this, neither did they understand it. I moreover urged them to desist by
their fear of the laws and the punishment flowing therefrom, as it was
now palpably manifest that they desired to perpetrate such wrongs; but
for this they cared nothing. I then appealed to their regard for their
reputation, as their good name would in this way suffer, but neither did
they care for this, for their quality and what they cared for is at once
perceived by a spiritual idea. But when I intimated that the facts might
become known, and the domestics be employed to treat them with severity,
and even to punish them with sorer stripes than they now dreamt of -
this, and this only, seemed to strike them with dread. But forgetting
even this, they held on in their purposes, and their interior thoughts
were represented to me, which were most filthy; then the wiles which
they devised in their minds were declared, and these were of such a
character as to make it improper to reveal them to anyone. It thus
appears that their interiors are altogether laid open before spirits in
the other life, and still more before the angels, who know their
interior thoughts with the utmost exactness, while they are held after
death in a similar state, and even all the devices of their hearts, for
they were represented by them as to their quality, which was most foul.
In like manner \[they represented\] the quality of certain ones in the
life of the body who supposed adulteries and the like to be nothing
unlawful, when yet they so defile their spiritual life that the effects
cannot be removed without punishments quite severe. Concerning these it
was said to me that such in the married state afterwards conceive
aversions to their partners; differently from those who do not live in
such cupidity.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1789.">1789.</span></span>

As to their praying to the Lord, which was laid open to me to the life,
they seemed to have no doubts whatever in relation to those things which
they had learned from a teacher, but they had no other than a verbal or
literal sense of the prayer, showing that they were corporeal, and not
at all spiritual. - 1748, March 30.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1790.">1790.</span></span>

CONCERNING THE LORD'S PRAYER. When the Lord's Prayer, which comprehends
all celestial and spiritual things, is read, there may be infused into
each particular so many things, that heaven itself shall not be capable
of comprehending them, and that, too, according to the capacity and use
of everyone. The more internally and intimately anyone penetrates, the
more fully or abundantly the things of heaven are understood; by those
in lower states they are not comprehended, but are a kind of arcana to
them, some being comprehensible solely by an intellectual faith, and
some being ineffable: celestial ideas which all emanate from the Lord,
the lower they descend, or the lower the character of the men \[to whom
they come\], the more complete appears the closing up \[of the mind\],
till at length a certain hardness ensues in which there is little or
nothing besides the sense of the letter or the ideas of the words;
whence it was given to know, from the Lord's Prayer, what kind of souls
they had been in the life of the body, as to the doctrine of their
faith, inasmuch as it was granted to them to have their former sense
\[of these things\] when offering prayer. - 1748, April 1. Thus it is
that the idea expands upwardly or inwardly from corporeal things, and
indeed to indefinite extent in every degree, or in other words, through
indefinitely multiplied expansions in the interiors, and so in the more
interior parts, and in the inmosts.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1791.">1791.</span></span>

CONCERNING THOSE WHO CONSTITUTE THE NASAL MUCUS IN THE BRAIN. There is a
certain class of spirits, who, because they wish to domineer and alone
to govern man, excite among other spirits enmities, yea, quarrels even
to insanities, for those spirits whom they excite fight among themselves
like the bitterest enemies, and those also whom they know to be present.
I have witnessed such quarrels and wondered at them, and upon inquiring
into the matter was informed that such contests were excited by this
class of spirits because they wished to rule without competition.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1792.">1792.</span></span>

It was granted me to speak with them, when they immediately said that
they would rule and teach everything, and far more that any others; to
which I replied that such spirits were insanities, beginning, as they
did, from angry quarrels and the like. They spoke with me from a
superior to a middle altitude above the forehead. Their speech was such
that from the speech I could not judge of their minds, that they were of
such a quality, for they spoke rapidly, and as in somewhat of a stream.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1793.">1793.</span></span>

I was instructed that these are they who constitute the pituitary mucus
of the brain, which is wont to obstruct the sieve-like lamina \[or
plate\], making the brain to stagnate like a kind of excrementitious
ground, whence arise dullness and similar insanities. I was informed,
too, that a like class of men are those who make it a rule to cause
dissensions and enmities among all others, or who, as the saying is,
divide in order to rule, and that, too, without conscience, like many
politicians, thus placing prudence in the enmities, intestine strifes,
and hatreds which they can kindle among others. They are altogether
external men, because they obstruct, as was said, the nasal respiration,
so that it is determined through the mouth, and thus into the pharynx,
entirely contrary to the natural mode of respiration, which is through
the nostrils, by reason of the agreement of the brain and its animation
with external things; thus these persons break the communications
between interior and exterior things.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1794.">1794.</span></span>

When I perceived that they had not a particle of true faith, I spoke
with them, asking if they were aware that they were now in another life,
where they would live to eternity? and one of them, having his eye upon
certain others whom he perhaps wished to seduce, was reluctant to have
that said. I replied that in the world, while they lived there, they
might have been esteemed wise among the foolish, but that here they were
insane among the wise, which greatly displeased them. I continued saying
that the government of heaven consisted in mutual love one towards
another, whence arose the order and subordination of so many myriads,
while among such as themselves there were strifes and alienations,
inasmuch as such things as they had within them, these they produced
without them. They said they could not be otherwise; to which I replied,
that they had contracted this from their lives in the body, and that
they could not be \[or act\] otherwise while they believed and practiced
as they did. - 1748, March 30.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1795.">1795.</span></span>

CONCERNING THE MALEVOLENCE OF CERTAIN SPIRITS. The malevolence of
spirits consists not only in their inducing thoughts and speech upon
man, but also responses, so that the man knows no other than that he
responds; that is, that he gives a response in their favor, which has
oftentimes been proved to me by lively experience, and spirits have
iterated it again and again. They learn this by use, for they thus know
how to seduce men most easily, so as to act out the entire man, both in
speaking and in answering. At the same time, they inspire also such
cupidities as favor the response, so that the man can by no means know
but that he is the one \[who speaks and responds\], for while he is in
that cupidity he is in his life, and believes that it is he himself.
Such is the malignity of certain spirits, which I can affirm for certain
from experience, for they spoke with me for a long time, and I had much
to say with them on these points. - 1748, March 30.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1796.">1796.</span></span>

HOW THE NATURAL THINGS OF THE ANGELS ARE REPRESENTED BEFORE SPIRITS.
Those who are angels do not reflect upon the fact that they are clothed
with garments as do those spirits, or recent souls, who, in the life of
the body, delighted themselves greatly in beauty of dress. These in the
other life from phantasy, while they reflect, suppose themselves clothed
in like manner as in the life of the body, in which they took delight.
These ideas are so vivid with them, that when I said to them that they
were not clothed in garments in the other life, then all those who had
recently departed from life wondered, and could only be withdrawn with
difficulty from their phantasy. Nay, such was the phantasy of some, that
they supposed themselves to be able by touch to perceive that they were
clad in garments; but that phantasy is done away in time, and then comes
another idea, which is that of almost no garments at all, scarcely of
bodies, as they call them.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1797.">1797.</span></span>

Moreover, the angels of the interior heaven, while they are represented
to spirits, appear to them in comely garments, like virgins, their dress
being of white and black mixed and elegantly plaited, modest, and
handsomely fitted to the form. But the angels of the more interior
heaven are represented before the spirits in most beautiful garments,
adorned with various kinds of flowers, and shining in blue and red as
the prevailing colors, while the inmost angels appear naked as infants.
Those representations are made to spirits, and signify the quality of
the natural things of the angels, for such phantasies \[as those
mentioned above\] do not exist in the heavens, wherefore garments appear
to be laid aside at the entrance of heaven. From the garments and their
color it may be known whence such representations flow.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1798.">1798.</span></span>

CONCERNING THE PUNISHMENTS OF THOSE WHO REPRESENT STAGNANT HUMOURS IN
THE BRAIN. The humours which stagnate in the brain are mainly of a
threefold kind; the first, which is the most gross, is that which flows
under the dura mater, or between the meninges, and is forced through its
circuit, towards the laminam cribrosam (sieve-like membrane).

<span class="margnote"><span id="1799.">1799.</span></span>

Another kind is that which stagnates in the mammillary processes. This
is a humour collected from the interiors of the brain, or from within
its fibers, and is in like manner determined towards the laminam
cribrosam.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1800.">1800.</span></span>

The third kind is that which is collected in the lateral ventricles of
the brain, and is discharged through the infundibulum, and so on.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_6"></span>[1763-1](sd06.htm#fr_6.md) As the reader will
perceive, it is extremely difficult from the language employed to form a
definite idea of the nature of the punishment here intended to be
described. We confess to our entire inability to gather a clear
conception of what the writer intended to convey, more especially in the
closing sentence, which for that reason we had left untranslated. For
the sake of our Latin readers, and in the faint hope that a truer
version may be suggested, we subjoin the original: "Quare subeunt primo
eam poenam, nempe quod tales plures circumrotentur a sinistro in
dextrum, sicut orbita primum plana, quae mox in circumrotatione
extuberant, dein tuberositas ista deprimitur, ut cava fiat ista quasi
orbits, et sic augetur celeritas, ac interea in circumrotatione
exploratur, num persevenant tales esse; circumrotatio fit in spirituum
mundo supra caput antrorsum paulo, quod factum est iis, qui tales
fuerunt, et quia persistebant, circumvolvebantur et projiciebantur a
tergum sub occipitium; verum circumrotatio fiebat quoque alia,
tuberositas elevabatur satis alte, et flectebatur in unum et unus iste
iterum intervolvebatur, et sic erat confusa volutio; imo invertebatur
orbita ad perpendiculum, et celeriter quoque augebatur, usque ut propter
celeritatem, dum appareret, . . . ita ad imitamen talium tuberositatum,
seu apostematum."

<span id="fn_7"></span>[1770-1](sd06.htm#fr_7.md) This paragraph has no
number in the original, and was probably intended for number 1777. -
S.B.

<span id="fn_8"></span>[1778-1](sd06.htm#fr_8.md) Numbered as in the
original; see note at the end of 1770. - S.B.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1801-1850](sd07.md)
