[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Swedenborg](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sd11)  [Next](sd13) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0766143007/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Spiritual Diary*, by Emanuel Swedenborg, \[1758\], tr. by Bush,
Smithson and Buss \[1883-9\] at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Spiritual Diary

<span class="margnote"><span id="2051.">2051.</span></span>

THAT SPIRITS CAN ALSO PRODUCE ODORS. ((((It has sometimes happened that
spirits have produced odors, just as if the objects of the odors had
been present, concerning which, if I mistake not, I have frequently
spoken before. Today, while discoursing of flowers and lilies, they
produced a very perceptible odor of flowers and lilies, as to which,
however, it is only necessary to notice the fact. - 1748, May 22.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2052.">2052.</span></span>

THAT THOSE WHO ARE IN SOCIETY MUTUALLY KNOW OR RECOGNIZE EACH OTHER.
There was a certain society of spirits of whom I inquired whether they
knew that they were many, for one only spoke, as is usual, and he
replied that everyone recognized with great accuracy every other one,
whether it were from the speech, or from some other observable
peculiarity. - 1748, May 22.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2053.">2053.</span></span>

CONCERNING A CERTAIN ONE WHO WAS RAPT AND BORNE AWAY TO HEAVEN.
((((There was a certain spirit with me, and that not long after his
departure from the body, as might be concluded from the fact that he did
not know that he was in the other life; for no one can know that without
being gifted with reflection, as anyone may be satisfied from various
considerations. This person seemed to me to have been devoted, during
his life in the body, to studies; but farther than this I could not
speak particularly of him, notwithstanding I conversed with him for some
time; but he was suddenly caught up on high above me, which led me to
suppose that he was one of that class who in their lifetime had
cherished lofty aspirations; and then when he came to speak with spirits
as a spirit, being in this aspiring state of mind, he was suddenly
caught away, so that he could speak with them no more: whereupon they
wondered whither he would go, for he went into a society of celestial
spirits, and consequently out of the sight of mundane spirits. I felt
therefore authorized to conjecture that he was thus rapt on high, for
the reason that in his lifetime he had supposed that heaven itself was
supremely elevated, and not among the lowly or near the earth, and that
being led by this opinion, he appeared to be borne upwards, for
everyone's opinion follows and controls him. From the society of the
celestials he spoke with me, and said that he saw things high and
sublime, and so magnificent as to surpass the utmost power of the human
mind to conceive. - 1748, May 23.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2054.">2054.</span></span>

When he was there, I read in Deut. 1 respecting the Jewish people, how
they sent messengers to explore the land and what was in it, all which
were turned by the celestials into a spiritual sense, so that they
perceived nothing from the literal sense, but only from the spiritual.
The spirit in question then said to me that he knew nothing of what I
was reading, but that he heard wonderful things; for there was an
interior sense, namely, that by the mountains of the Amorites was
signified the world of evil spirits, through whom the way led to heaven,
and by the river of Eshkol, where there were fruits and clusters of
grapes, \[was signified\] the interior heaven. This, he said, was the
true sense of the words in that passage, and not the literal sense, of
which he could perceive nothing. From this we may judge how the sense of
the Lord's Word is elevated towards the interiors of the heavens, so
that nothing of the literal sense remains; which he acknowledged, saying
to me, with a clear voice, that the things which he saw were truly
magnificent. - 1748, May 23.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2055.">2055.</span></span>

It may hence appear by a living experience what life and glory pertains
to the Lord's Word, viewed solely in the internal sense. Some spirits in
the world of spirits, when they perceived that such was the glory of the
interior sense of the Lord's Word, began to repent that they had been
unwilling to believe in the existence of such a sense, although they had
scarcely been able to do it, saying that in the state in which they now
were they were ready to believe; apart from that state they could
neither understand nor perceive any of the things which this spirit saw
and heard, for he saw and heard, and perceived. Some who were unwilling
to believe, supposed or said that they were phantasies; but when it was
solemnly affirmed that he saw, heard, and perceived, what more could be
said? Those also who were elevated to that heaven, at length confessed
that they were anything but phantasies, for they perceived them as
realities, and with a perception vastly more exquisite than that of the
body.))))

<span class="margnote"><span id="2056.">2056.</span></span>

It may hence be known that the sense of the letter is far more
penetrative when the mind does not inhere in that sense, as the Lord
then flows in with an interior sense, which illuminates and makes
perspicuous the literal sense as to what it signifies; which is not the
case while the mind, as with critics, inheres in letters and words. -
1748, May 23.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2057.">2057.</span></span>

(In fact, from the interior heaven they not only saw my thoughts, but
also the things which I was about to think and to do, together with
their causes as far as it was given of the Lord, so that not even a
winking of the eye, or a step of the foot occurs, except it be previded
and provided of the Lord.)

<span class="margnote"><span id="2058.">2058.</span></span>

((((There were still others who were also raised up into heaven, and
especially one from among those whom I had known in their lifetime, who,
from utter amazement, was unable to describe its glory, saying with
emotions of pity that it was strange that men had not the least particle
of knowledge of these wonderful things. It was given them to look into
my thoughts and affections; and they said, and I also perceived that
they took cognizance of many more things in thoughts than anyone could
imagine, as also of causes, which man would attempt in vain to grasp,
and to which he does not attend, together with the sources from which
this and that proceeds, and other like things; as, moreover, in regard
to my present writing, how the things written are suggested, whether by
leave or by permission.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2059.">2059.</span></span>

CONCERNING A CERTAIN ONE WHO WAS RAPT AND BORNE AWAY TO HEAVEN. They
perceived also how the ideas of a man, that are mixed up with those that
are contrary and foreign, are to be entirely separated and
distinguished, for they recur in all their train of thought. And since
there are so many spirits, some excite one mixed idea, and some another,
whence confusion arises, which, however, is not so hurtful in corporeal
and natural things as in spiritual, where spiritual ideas are mixed up
and infected with foul, terrestrial, corporeal, and natural ones, as
this hinders the soul from being transferred into celestial societies;
for the societies at once perceive those things which they abominate,
and they are filled with abhorrence, inasmuch as there is a communion of
ideas among many, and whatever there is of a mixed nature in anyone
idea, though it may be thought to be concealed, yet it is manifestly
perceived, wherefore it cannot be otherwise than that it should be
removed from that society, and the pollution occasioned by it be
removed; for a most exquisite perception is given to the celestials of
all composites, which if they are not perceived in one state they are in
another, and the more manifestly, the nearer to the state which is
contrary to defiled ideas. In this way a soul may be admitted into
heaven, but only in certain states and among certain societies, with
numerous precautions effected by the ordering of spirits (1748, May 23);
which they who were raised into heaven acknowledged and in a voice that
indicated a full persuasion.)))) <span
id="fr_22"></span>[2059-1](#fn_22)

<span class="margnote"><span id="2060.">2060.</span></span>

 <span id="fr_23"></span>[2060-1](#fn_23) WHY A MAN OR A SPIRIT OUGHT TO
KNOW NOTHING FROM HIMSELF; AND THAT WHEN THAT IS THE CASE, HE THEN FIRST
BEGINS TO POSSESS WISDOM. It was said to spirits that he who knows
little, and, as it were, nothing from himself, begins then to be wise,
which is equivalent to the saying that he who is nothing is some thing,
or, as far as he is nothing he is more than nothing, because then first
the Lord is with him, and then first he becomes wise, for this wisdom is
not his own, but the Lord's; and so also in other things. The spirits
wondered why I said these things, to them, and they are now pondering
the matter in silence, when yet it is the truth, and it amounts to the
same as the saying, that the less anyone has from his own proprium, the
more he has from the Lord. - 1748, May 23.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2061.">2061.</span></span>

 <span id="fr_24"></span>[2061-1](#fn_24) (((((Certain spirits who had
been raised up to the interior heaven while I was reading Deut. 3 from
beginning to end, and while they understood the contents in a spiritual
sense, said at the close of my reading that there was not even a tittle
\[apex\] of it which did not contain a coherent, spiritual sense, so
that each single thing, even the most minute, was inspired, and that the
several words and names of persons signified things, altogether
according to the series of the Word, which was confirmed by the spirits,
and that so strongly that they said they were willing to testify it upon
oath, but this was not permitted. - 1748, May 23.))))

<span class="margnote"><span id="2062.">2062.</span></span>

THAT EACH AND ALL THINGS ARE REGULATED BY THE LORD, SO THAT THERE MAY BE
PRESENT IN EVERY IDEA AND AFFECTION INDEFINITE THINGS. (This morning it
was shown me manifestly that in every man's idea and slightest affection
\[affectiunculoe\] there are present indefinite things, yea, if it were
lawful to speak things above human belief that a similar state occurs in
the universal world of spirits. I was in a certain affection, and hence
in its idea, for some time almost continuously. Afterwards it was shown
me how many societies of spirits concurred in the idea of that
affection, which some would regard as a simple, yea, very simple idea,
for societies of spirits who proximately concurred, manifested
themselves by living speech, saying that they were the ones who willed
and urged this, and also from what cause and what end they so acted.
Thus did one society after another; and yet from the ideas of so many
societies springing from their cupidities, desires, and ends, one common
thought or idea existed with me. How many there were in each society I
could not discover; but four or five societies, if not more, manifested
themselves by open speech, and openly acknowledged that they were in the
cause \[of that idea\], and on account of what end \[it occurred\].

<span class="margnote"><span id="2063.">2063.</span></span>

From this and many other facts it is manifest that in a single idea
innumerable others concur, at which, indeed, those who could not receive
it were indignant, and thus admitted, as might thence be inferred, that
they cogitate nothing, but that it was others who concurred in their
thoughts.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2064.">2064.</span></span>

Hence it is also manifest that in one idea are innumerable varieties,
and in truth such as are opposites, and that innumerable varieties of
spirits are exhibited; that without such variety no one could subsist,
and that these varieties are directed, tempered, and inflected by the
Lord alone, on account of the end present to the Lord.)

<span class="margnote"><span id="2065.">2065.</span></span>

Wherefore unless the Lord ruled the universal heaven and universal
world, and produced those innumerable varieties, from which as mediates
arise ends, and from ends the first and last end, and then from divine
power disposed of them in each and all things, no one could by any means
subsist.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2066.">2066.</span></span>

Yea, hence it also follows that when the Lord disposes, the more men
spirits and angels there are who accord with His will and good pleasure,
so much the better as to mediates; for without mediates He can also
operate each and all things, but because He pities the human race He
produces it as a medium, and disposes so that all may be in Himself, and
everyone out of pity may enjoy heavenly gifts. 1748, May 24.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2067.">2067.</span></span>

WHAT DAMAGE IDEAS CAUSE WHEN PROFANE THINGS ARE MINGLED WITH THEM.
Since, therefore, there concur in every idea of man and spirit the ideas
of so many societies of the world of spirits and heaven, it follows, if
anything filthy or profane inheres in ideas, that clean things must be
polluted by unclean, or sacred by profane things, because simultaneously
present; they cannot but defile the purer societies, and occasion them
disgust and nausea; wherefore they cannot be in the societies of good
spirits, still less of the celestials, before the Lord has separated
these things, as when they are in societies He separates them.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2068.">2068.</span></span>

A slight experience only has also confirmed it. A vessel nothing but
earthen ware was praised by a certain one, and he caused that this
vessel previously \[considered?\] in my idea good, from persuasion
\[induced?\] should appear as a fair and desirable thing in the ideas of
spirits; and if from any cause I had contracted aught of defilement from
it, the contrary would occur. - 1748, May 24.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2069.">2069.</span></span>

It was also granted to fix the sight upon certain objects, and so
observe how many varieties of ideas there may be: which were obscurely
perceived to be innumerable, and that no one has a precisely similar
idea of an object, some being in one variety of the object, others in
another.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2070.">2070.</span></span>

As there are active powers, so also there are similar efforts
\[conatus\], for efforts \[conatus\] result from living powers, and
efforts \[conatus\] produce upon objects active powers, as may be
manifest from experience and the rules of human wisdom. - 1748, May 24.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2071.">2071.</span></span>

It was shown me by living experiences that the Lord, who alone is Power
or Life, maintains such an equilibrium between the efforts \[conatus\]
of all angels and spirits, in common and in the minutest particulars,
that not the slightest aberration may occur. The slightest error would
produce the greatest confusion in the sequel, as was shown by living
experiences. 1748, May 24.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2072.">2072.</span></span>

THAT IDEAS, WHATEVER THEIR QUALITY OR CONTENTS, ARE COMMUNICATED BY
SPIRITS AND ANGELS. From this single example it may also appear how it
is with ideas in which are falses or profane things. There was a certain
tract of garden, for which spirits inspired me with a certain horror, by
reason that they were not willing it should appear to the mind, and
indeed they then presented before me dire things, though the tract was a
beautiful one, planted with trees. This idea remained; and when I
represented in spiritual idea that garden tract two years afterward,
then did the spirits who are now about me begin to be filled with
horror, and, as it were, to suffer dire things, because those dire
phantasies which were formerly stirred up were again excited, and they
became so filled with horror as scarcely to endure it. Wherefore I
represented to them how the thing was, and that it was only the
illusions of evil spirits who induced these dire things. Being thus
instructed, they began to feel otherwise, and that horror departed.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2073.">2073.</span></span>

Hence it is manifest of what quality are the ideas of such as have
mingled the false with the true, and the profane with the sacred; for
whatsoever is in the idea is immediately evoked, as, for instance, the
profane in what is sacred; at which good spirits and angels are
horror-struck, as also the false in what is true: for the chief part of
such things as are in ideas are evoked, and evil spirits do defile them
still more, so that they appear so utterly abominable, that they fly the
view of such an idea: for to good spirits and angels is granted the
faculty of viewing single ideas as to their quality, and hence it is
given them to know of what quality is man or the soul. - 1748, May 25.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2074.">2074.</span></span>

Spirits who conceived a horror from the first representative idea of the
garden tract could scarcely throw off that horror till they were told
that should there have been any other such thing there presented as
being a certain unclean thing, still that no one could contract aught
unclean when possessed by another. As, for instance, the temple at
Jerusalem was sanctified so long as true worshippers came to it, though
it was profaned by idols. - 1748, May 25.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2075.">2075.</span></span>

CONCERNING THE MORE SUBTLE SPIRITS. There was a spirit who acted in a
more subtle manner than others, by entering good affections,
appropriating them to himself, and thus deceiving, which was natural to
him and to those who were with him in company; but never could his
subtlety avail aught. It was immediately discovered and perceived by
good spirits, much more by angels. He is now undergoing examination.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2076.">2076.</span></span>

Meanwhile he was supposing that as regards all wicked spirits, they by
themselves could effect any and everything, which he also admitted that
he had supposed; and when it was pointed out to him that he is one among
myriads of myriads who are ruled by the Lord, and that therefore he
could never effect anything, he began to think so and to repent.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2077.">2077.</span></span>

Then also there was discourse concerning reflection as that such spirits
are not in a state of reflection, because then they are led by their own
nature, and that should reflection be granted to them, that then unless
the Lord permitted there would be no reformation, because they would
then wish to act from their own strength, which would be to make
themselves worse, and to force themselves not to appear so, which is not
allowed. Other disadvantages also would ensue.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2078.">2078.</span></span>

After the examination of that spirit, it was said that he could not be
inclined to aught that was good, therefore that it was his innate nature
so to act; which must first be extirpated. To extirpate this would
require much time, for it is a subtle poison, which to him seems the
sweetest thing; wherefore he cannot desist, as is manifest from his
treacherously acting in, as it were, appropriating to himself the
delight of another. - 1748, May 25.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2079.">2079.</span></span>

It is a wonderful thing in such that immediately they seize and perceive
what delights another, for they penetrate these things quickly. With
others it is not so. It is said it is about two years since he departed
from the life of the body.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2079_1/2.">2079\_1/2.</span></span>

That more subtle spirit was a species of those who in the life of the
body are deceptive, and devise evil concerning all that they see
belonging to others. They cannot think aught but ill, and hardly ever
what is good \[concerning others\], and this from a certain innate
malice, especially from hatred, and that they insinuate themselves into
the pleasures or delights of others arises from this cause, that in the
life of the body they insinuate themselves and agree with and flatter
all by the countenance, gesture, and words, but inwardly cherish
specially such as thoughts arising from hatred. Hence that spirit
insinuated himself into all agreeable things, but did so on account of a
nature ruled by hatred, which was inwardly cherished. This in the other
life is not hidden, but becomes active and bursts forth. Such spirits
endeavor to destroy each and all of the pleasant things of another, and
to make out of their pleasant things unpleasant things, so that those
with whom are such may be deprived of their delight; for the external
countenance after death is removed, and the thought is present which is
perceived otherwise, than is the case in the life of the body.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2080.">2080.</span></span>

There are other species of this kind of hatred, for there are companies
of them; but, on the other hand, are other sorts, which it was not
granted me to observe. They were filled with hatred that any should
enjoy pleasantness which some attack more openly, others more secretly,
some by insinuation into the pleasant things, others by the destruction
of that which they hate.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2081.">2081.</span></span>

This spirit supposed himself adequate to all things; for they greatly
confide in themselves, and think themselves alone to be wise, inasmuch
as they despise others, as is apparent from their thinking ill of all
others, thus preferring themselves to all others; but this inwardly or
in thought, therefore they are, as it were, pests in the societies of
good spirits, and can hardly be tolerated in the societies of the
angels, in which everyone must from the heart or affection favor the
enjoyment of another, and increase it manifold, and deem himself less
than others, thus prefer himself less than others; consequently must not
hate anyone.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2082.">2082.</span></span>

Secret and inward hatred, or hatred in the thoughts, is much more
pernicious than the hatred which comes out, or bursts forth in hatred
\[odium\] or anger. This latter can more readily be removed; for secret
or internal hatred, or that of the thoughts, is also attended with this,
that in thought it penetrates such pleasant thoughts of spirits as are
interior, snatching them to itself, and immediately, and indeed in a
moment, destroying them. - 1748, May 27.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2083.">2083.</span></span>

CONCERNING A MORE RECONDITE REPRESENTATION OF SPIRITS. There were
displayed species of representation, such as cannot be described in
words nor received by human idea; for things are joined to such ideas as
are not expressible nor intelligible to man when awake, but only when he
is in a state of sleep or ecstasy, in which state they are perceived by
man fully as well as when awake; but when he comes into a state of
wakefulness, he does not at all know how to express these things,
namely, the ideas to which are connected things which are more easily of
comprehension. Such ideas were also shown me now, in a state verging
more towards sleep than wakefulness. The \[representations\] related to
dancing at marriage festivities, how far allowable or not, and the like,
but I could not understand the things. They were in a series and
connection \[nexus\]: that there was in them something of a celestial
arcanum, I do not doubt, for they are representations of spirits whilst
in such a state, and are derived from differences of angels. - 1748, May
27.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2084.">2084.</span></span>

THAT THERE IS OBSERVABLE A SORT OF REPUGNANCE AMONGST THOSE WHO LIVE ON
FOOD FOR WHICH THEY HAVE NOT A TASTE. It is known that infants love
milk, and that adults are unaccustomed thereto, so that some will not
indeed admit but that it does them harm; wherefore also it is a rule of
the physicians that milk is injurious in case of sickness. The reason
why it is hurtful, although it is the simplest diet, and above all
things free from harm, is that men accustom themselves to drinks for
which they have not a taste, especially to malt liquors, hence their
stomach and bowels grow accustomed thereto as well as the blood, which
therefore cannot bear a milk diet. When such persons are first
associated in the other life there is a sort of repugnance; for I
perceived manifestly the odor of ale from certain \[of them\] when I
drank milk. - 1748, May 26.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2085.">2085.</span></span>

THAT IN EVERY IDEA ARE INFINITE THINGS. This is sufficiently manifest
from spirits, of whom everyone has his own idea when anything is said.
The idea in itself is a certain general \[commune\] something, yea, a
most general vessel, of indefinite ideas. Wherefore there can never be
given as regards one and the same thing a similar idea, however simple
the idea appears. Thus the idea of the human form, mind \[animus\], and
mind \[meus\] appears indeed simple, but there can be therein as many
things as can be conceived, because it is in an infinite field. This can
be manifested by many facts.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2086.">2086.</span></span>

Hence it appears that there are indefinite varieties of souls and their
ideas, so that there never can be displayed one that is similar to
another, however very simple the idea appears hence their varieties are
arranged by the Lord in fitting forms that there may be no conflict, but
that they may harmonize in one consentaneous body. - 1748, May 26.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2087.">2087.</span></span>

CONCERNING THE SPHERE OF SPIRITS ROUND ABOUT MAN. It was manifestly
represented according to a spiritual idea, not only that there is, as it
were, a sphere of spirits round about man, and that man is one of those
who are in the sphere, but it appeared to me as if man was, as it were,
a certain solid point, around whom was that sphere; for while man is in
the body, then are his terrestrial parts represented by such a solid
point, like as terraqueous globes are surrounded by their atmospheric
spheres; but when his corporeal parts are laid aside, he becomes as one
of the spirits, and is in that sphere like as a spirit. That such a
sphere of spirits is diffused about, of greater or lesser extent; a
sphere of powers acting through spirits, or one of efforts \[conatus\],
was also manifestly shown to the spirits around me, who acknowledged and
perceived such an arrangement, and said that they plainly perceive it.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2088.">2088.</span></span>

Nevertheless there were some spirits who denied it, but it was perceived
by others that they said so out of malice, because they were unwilling
to acknowledge and see it, and that thus they spoke contrary to the
truth of the matter, which they also admitted, saying that they desired
to exercise unbounded license of speech and denial. This they derived
from the life of the body.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2089.">2089.</span></span>

But it was then represented that in the sphere surrounding the world,
that is, in the atmospheric sphere, it so happens that such things as do
not harmonize are dispelled, and thus the sphere by its own power
reduces everything to equilibrium: which is sufficiently evident from
turbulent atmospheres and waters, that they are by degrees brought to
serenity, and that this derives its cause from the spiritual spheres, as
do each and all natural and mundane things. That this might be shown,
all those spirits who did not harmonize, and contradicted the truth from
innate license, were expelled or ejected, so that that sphere was, by
their removal, made serene or purged, which they complained of, saying
that they were expelled. It was said to them how matters were
circumstanced, and that those who were not accordant in societies were
expelled, and this with indefinite variety, according to the state that
exists in the spheres. - 1748, May 26.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2090.">2090.</span></span>

WHAT IMPRESSION IS MADE UPON SPIRITS AND ANGELS BY HARMONIOUS SINGING
AND MUSIC. It happened twice or thrice that there was heard harmonious
singing, like as previously had been heard instrumental music, and with
that singing were the spirits so delighted, that they became as it were
spell-bound, the sweetness thereof penetrated their interiors. The same
was the case with angels. could perceive their enjoyment by a certain
sense. - 1748, May 26.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2091.">2091.</span></span>

HOW SPIRITS AND ANGELS ARE IN VARIOUS SOCIETIES. Spirits and angels
change societies according to all the Lord's good pleasure, therefore
from one society to another, so into thousands and myriads; all which
are suitable in this or that respect, and according to their desires;
and what is worthy of admiration is, that according to their affections,
therefore the variations of their desires. Societies are formed thus,
continually to their delight and joy; and that they then perceive
themselves to be in another delightful state, for their delights and
joys are according to their societies.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2092.">2092.</span></span>

In those societies it happens that because they are unanimous, and when
unanimous their felicities are increased and diminished, which are
circumstanced wholly according to societies, and the affections of
these, springing from other societies.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2093.">2093.</span></span>

The changes of societies are the changes of the state of them, and
spirits and angels are circumstanced in societies according to state of
affections, therefore according to mutual love and varieties of love,
which are indefinite and disposed by the Lord alone.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2094.">2094.</span></span>

I have compared changes of societies with changes of the faces of them,
for I have seen when angels render themselves visible, fully as in open
day, and indeed more clearly, that they can change faces, one after
another, and indeed according to every variety of affection; so that all
the varieties of an affection appear in order, there remaining only the
affection that is, as it were, proper or fitting, which still is
distinguishable among so many varieties and changes.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2095.">2095.</span></span>

Yea, it was also granted me to see the changes of faces, therefore of
affections from infancy to old age; and these changes were there
effected among the spirits so that I perceived how the affections of
infancy remain, or how they pass into others.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2096.">2096.</span></span>

Thus can an angel converse with all throughout the whole of heaven, with
indefinite joys and varieties of joys, which can never be lessened to
eternity, but that new varieties will occur, because they are
indefinite.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2097.">2097.</span></span>

CONCERNING THOSE WHO FROM CHRISTIANS HAVE BECOME JEWS. Such as are born
and educated Christians, and betake themselves to Judaism, either openly
or secretly with themselves, in another life becomes, as it were,
insane. Amongst spirits cannot be displayed such insane persons as exist
during the life of the body; but the insanity of those who are among the
spirits consists in this, that they are insane with such fancies
\[phantasies\] as occur with such as are regarded sane in the body. But
those who betake themselves to Judaism are like insane persons when they
come among other spirits; they are thrown into a similar state, and this
no matter whom the spirit that they strike against, seize and project
\[offendunt, arripiunt, et projiciunt\]; thus are they wholly like such
as are captivated in mind. Today I saw a certain one, from the anterior
part a little above in front, nevertheless at a distance, who so
conducted himself; nevertheless such are immediately expelled from the
societies and drowned \[demerguntur\]. He seemed to himself to seize
hold as it were of another spirit, and to turn him about. Whither the
drowned one went I do not as yet know. - 1748, May 27.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2098.">2098.</span></span>

THAT THE LORD SAVES MAN FROM MERCY SOLELY. It is plain from many things
that the Lord saves man from mercy solely; and that He does not demand
any praise and rendering of thanks for His Divine benefits is evident
from the state of souls, spirits, and angels, to whom is granted to
think, say, and do nothing unless the Lord permits or gives leave - of
themselves they can do nothing, and because those things which proceed
from themselves, or from what belongs to their nature, are evil; for
which no praise or thanksgiving should be made. If a spirit purposes to
give thanks, he can by no means do so unless from manifest permission
and leave; thus are those things of the Lord. But this was made more
manifest to me in spiritual idea, that the Lord never demands aught for
His Divine benefits from souls, spirits, and angels. - 1748, May 27.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2099.">2099.</span></span>

THAT MAN AND SPIRIT MUST NECESSARILY THINK AND SPEAK SUCH THINGS AS THE
LORD PERMITS AND ALLOWS. From manifold and daily experience now for
three years it is given me to know that man and spirit is compelled to
think and speak that which the Lord permits or allows; for whether I
willed or not, I must needs think and speak. It is similar with spirits
who are compelled to speak contrary to what they think, nor can they
possibly desist, for they are united into a society with others, and
thus carried away by a stream, as it were, of thinking and speaking:
concerning which thing the spirits complained, to wit, those who
supposed that of themselves they think and speak all things, and that
this is not the case was shown to them, as also to me, by living
experience. Moreover, when it is not made manifest, or when it is not
given to reflect upon it, everyone thinks, man, soul, and spirit, that
they speak of themselves; wherefore they are taught by such experience
that they may know that they are nothing, because they cannot think nor
speak of themselves, although they think so. Evil spirits,
notwithstanding they are instructed by such experience, their own and
others, as also that it is permitted them to compel other spirits to
speak with themselves, still are not willing to believe that it is so,
because it is repugnant to their self-love; for they desire to be
competent to perform, and effect each and everything from themselves. -
1748, May 27.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2100.">2100.</span></span>

Those to whom perception is granted by the Lord can know and be
acquainted with such as within a society and such as without a society
inflow into thoughts and speech, and indeed in an exquisite manner
according to the Lord's good pleasure. Whenever many concur in any
speech they know each other distinctly; but those to whom it is not
granted so to concur are not distinguished by each other, but each
supposes that he alone speaks; and when it is declared to him that he
did not solely speak, but did so in society with many, and that he was a
subject of their speaking, as if their instrument, he is indignant, and
to convince him the nearest spirits who concurred and spoke through him
have manifested themselves; then next when these same who manifested
themselves supposed that they spoke of themselves, others must needs
manifest themselves, such as were at first more remote, and acknowledged
that they spoke through them. Thus there is a certain series, and, as it
were, chain like as there is in the body of many powers and active
causes, concurring to a word, and to an action of the muscles. Similarly
is every man circumstanced; but I know that hardly anyone believes it,
when yet it is a truth, confirmed to me by manifold and daily
experience.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_22"></span>[2059-1](sd12.htm#fr_22)

<span id="fn_23"></span>[2060-1](sd12.htm#fr_23) Nos. 2060 and 2061 are
transposed, which seemed to be demanded by the asterisks affixed by
Swedenborg himself.

<span id="fn_24"></span>[2061-1](sd12.htm#fr_24) Nos. 2060 and 2061 are
transposed, which seemed to be demanded by the asterisks affixed by
Swedenborg himself.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2101-2150](sd13)
