[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Swedenborg](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sd14)  [Next](sd16) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0766143007/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Spiritual Diary*, by Emanuel Swedenborg, \[1758\], tr. by Bush,
Smithson and Buss \[1883-9\] at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Spiritual Diary

<span class="margnote"><span id="2201.">2201.</span></span>

CONCERNING EXPLORATION OF SOULS AND SPIRITS. With respect to their
exploration, it is often observed, when souls or spirits were left to
themselves, of what quality they were in the life of the body, and of
what quality if they spoke without fear of the law and society, almost
free from bond, they being ignorant that they are in society. Those who
are in the society, or others, do then follow closely upon his thought,
\[observing\] what quality he had possessed in life; and he speaks in
such a manner that \[his speech\] flows as if spontaneously. Thus they
became aware in a general manner \[ruditer\] that he is of such quality.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2202.">2202.</span></span>

It is also observed that when they became cognizant in any manner of any
one's disposition \[genius\] from whatever experience, that then they
knew better of what quality he is; for this is, as it were, innate
\[connatus\] \[with them\] to conclude one thing from another, and
because he is such in this, that it follows he is such in others. Thus
they lead the soul or spirit through various things, which accord with
the assumed judgment. Yet they are sometimes mistaken, because they
judge by corporeals and naturals solely, and do not know his interior
and more interior things, which are known to the Lord alone. - 1748,
June 5.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2203.">2203.</span></span>

THAT SPIRITS WHEN THEY MANIFEST THEMSELVES ARE WONT TO VARY THEIR FACES;
NEVERTHELESS STILL TO RETAIN THEIR OWN. (It has already been plainly
shown me that when spirits manifested themselves, whose faces I had been
able to see as plainly as man sees man, and this more frequently, they
sometimes varied their faces by changes \[mutations\] from one limit to
the other; but still the same generic face was retained, so that
continually shone forth the dominant affection with its variations. Thus
they were, as it were, faces of the whole affection of that species,
with its variations.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2204.">2204.</span></span>

The cause was already known to me how this could exist so fitly
\[concinne\], and in that order and series; but afterwards it was also
manifested to me by experience, to wit, that the society was such a one
as that therein were spirits or angels of a similar species of affection
with its varieties; wherefore the society thus manifested itself when
yet there was one who was, as it were, the center of the rest, to whom
the rest were referred in the order in which they were in the society.)

<span class="margnote"><span id="2205.">2205.</span></span>

By a more luminous \[clarior\] experience within me, it was sometimes
observed, when I looked at myself in the glass, and at the same time
spoke with spirits, that I would put on the faces of those who were then
with me in society, and of one \[society\] after another. Nevertheless
my face remained, but the changes \[mutationes\] seemed \[ex simili\] to
belong to theirs; which they recognized, so that they were indignant.
This was very similar to what occurs with the faces of spirits or
angels. They told me they recognized themselves. And yet they were not
in the same affection as myself, because he who is in faith in the Lord
is not \[the subject\] of a single affection, for he knows that it is
the characteristic of spirits and angels to inflow. Thus \[it happened\]
that the faces of others also inflowed. This happened several times, -
sometimes to their indignation, sometimes to their delight. They
perfectly recognized themselves. - 1748, June 5.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2206.">2206.</span></span>

CONCERNING WHAT RESTRAINS THE INDECENCIES \[turpitudines\] OF SPIRITS. I
have heard some spirits, whether recently come from the world I know
not, who, when they were among others, could not restrain themselves,
but would utter filthy and disgraceful language, so that nothing
affected them with shame: one would do this to a greater degree, another
to a less, for they are left to themselves, as previously said. They
were told that nothing touched them with shame, and that they did not
carry shame with them from the life of the body; for if they possessed
it, it would check such things. Meanwhile as they were without shame,
they could not be different. Wherefore such things as shame, fear,
horror, and the like, are produced \[in cutiuntur\] in them by
punishments; and when they return to such conduct, they are overwhelmed
with shame, or terror, or horror, so that they can be different; for
immediately such things are insinuated, and they refrain till at last
they lose the habit, and so may be present in modest societies. - 1748,
June 5.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2207.">2207.</span></span>

((((CONCERNING THE ANGELIC IDEA IN THE LORD'S PRAYER. Concerning the
angelic idea it was also observed, when the Lord's Prayer is prayed, and
it is prayed, Lead us not into temptation, and deliver us from evil,
that by a certain idea temptation and evil is rejected, to wit, in my
grosser idea it was rejected, as it were, to the back of the head, and
what remains is angelic, namely, the good of the Lord - concerning which
innumerable angelic ideas are formed, how good comes to man by
affliction, which still arises from man's evil, wherein is punishment;
and yet the good is the Lord's. Thus in some measure appears of what
quality is the idea of the rejection of evil, when yet it is general
\[rudis\], which I observed, because it was perceptible \[sensibilis\],
and had a certain quickness \[velocitus\], wherein was a sort of
indignation, that the evil of affliction or temptation should be thought
to come from the Lord. - 1748, June 6.))))

<span class="margnote"><span id="2208.">2208.</span></span>

THE ATTEMPT OF AN ANGEL TO ACT BY MEANS OF CORRESPONDENCES. A certain
angel, when I was walking in the way, attempted to see how those things
which belong to an angel inflowed into man's thought, and thus to
explore correspondences; but he did not succeed, save in a few things.
The reason was, as I perceived, that the thoughts of angels, though
richer than man's thought, were very few in comparison with the
correspondence excited; and further, that when they be omitted from his
own proprium, evil affections were excited; and also further, such as
were of the grosser sort, that when they excited such things out of
their own \[thoughts\], they also excited in the mind things that were
mixed; thence gave spirits a handle to excite more incongruous ideas. In
a word, the ideas of angels are most limited \[finitissimae\] nor can
they ever lead man. But so far as they act from proprium, they pervert.
- 1748, June 6.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2209.">2209.</span></span>

THAT IF MAN WERE IN ORDER, HE WOULD STILL ENJOY A CERTAIN SENSE, WHICH
THE BRUTES ENJOY. There is a certain sense which brutes enjoy, but not
man, namely, to know the way home, though at a distance, as may be known
of horses, dogs, bees, and many \[animals\]. Nor do they become
bewildered in thick woods like man, so that they not only know the way
home, but the bee even his own hive amongst many. This sense is common
to such as live according to order; this order has been impressed on
their souls. Such would also have been the case with man had he lived in
order. It was given me to experience it, not only by my being led home
when I was ignorant of the way, but at a place which I previously knew I
felt somewhat like knowing the vicinity in a wonderful mode, by an
internal \[power\], so that the vicinity affected me, and thus I knew
whose house it was. - 1748, June 6.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2210.">2210.</span></span>

THE ANGELIC SPEECH WITH MAN. Angels cannot speak with man, save through
intermediate spirits, for their speech comprises together more things
than can he expressed by words. Nevertheless it was granted to perceive
how it is circumstanced when they directly address man. There is, as it
were, a spiritual afflatus, not intelligible, except by means of the
affection wherewith I was affected. - 1748, June 6.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2211.">2211.</span></span>

IN WHAT MANNER THE REPRESENTATIONS AND THOUGHTS OF ANGELS ARE RELATED TO
MAN'S. I discoursed with angels, and this not by speech, concerning the
quality of angels, respecting their thoughts as related to man's
thoughts, to wit, that it is with the thoughts of angels as with the
small viscera of any little worm, that to man's eye scarcely appears but
as an obscure point, or something greater, so homogeneous \[uniforme\]
and simple it is, as if it were nothing more than a particle. Inasmuch
as it is with the thoughts of angels who see interiorly, as it is with
its viscera, which are nearly of such kind as those of a larger animal,
having its organs, stomach, cerebra, medullae, etc., out of which a
similar body is constituted, that is, from manifold members, the
thoughts of angels are so circumstanced as the interiors of such \[an
animal\]. Such is the relation of their ideas to man's ideas. From these
representatives flow the compound or particle, when yet they appear in
themselves dissimilar; yet are they such that thence flows such a
compound.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2212.">2212.</span></span>

Thus it is not easy for man to describe and explore the quality of
angels' thoughts, since they are, as it were, small viscera, which form
a body; which body can by comparison be likened to man's idea.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2213.">2213.</span></span>

For it is known that the interiors of an animal are entirely different
from the externals: from the externals no one can conclude that the
interiors are of such a quality, unless they should have been revealed
through optical sight; and then it appears that they are wholly
dissimilar, consisting indeed of cerebra, spinal medulla, lungs, heart,
or little hearts, stomach, liver, vessels devoted to generation, and of
other things, like as in the great animal, moreover of innumerable
fibers, vessels, tunics, ligaments, in order that they may operate with
unanimity. Thus they constitute a body, which is only the complex of
all, and appears under a simple form to the eye, which is ignorant that
it has such and so many components, yea, such components, that should
one be wanting it would be imperfect \[mancum\], and great defects would
abound in the compound.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2214.">2214.</span></span>

In like manner is it with the idea of the thoughts of angels, in
reference to the ideas of man's thoughts, for they consist of
components, whose quality can by no means be comprehended, unless the
Lord reveals it to him, like as no one can know what and of what quality
are the components of such a particle, which nevertheless in their
complex are a complete animalcule. Thus the idea of man is a complex of
such things, as he does not at all know, because they are dissimilar.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2215.">2215.</span></span>

That this comparison is a fit one may hence be made manifest, because in
every man's idea, even the least, is the whole man, according to the
state in which man then is, - thus, as it were, with all his members,
his viscera, or interiors. As is clearly manifest from this, that from
the mere speech of the soul or spirit may be known forthwith by the
angels, the Lord thinking worthy, of what quality is the man, of what
quality was his life in the body, and of what quality it is then,
respect being had to the state in which he is, according to the changes
of which he is varied, but not differently, as previously said, from the
changes of faces into many forms, while the fundamental face remains.
Concerning which I have previously treated.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2216.">2216.</span></span>

But the ideas or thoughts of angels, namely, \[those\] of the interior
heaven, do not extend themselves in reference to man's ideas and
thoughts farther than do the interiors of the said animalcule, namely,
to its integral parts, as with the viscera, which are numerous if all
the integral parts be reckoned, as with the glands, which are many, or
the more common compositions, as those which are within the integral
parts or within the viscera, as with the cerebrum, its spinal medullae,
the stomach, heart, and liver. They are not aware \[of this\], and yet
therein again occurs a new and spacious field of mysterious things, out
of which they are composed, so that if the liver be taken as an example,
then do innumerable things compose it, as the glandular congeries and
these are composed of lesser glands, besides the tubes, ducts, yea, very
many things. Such comparatively are the ideas of the more interior and
inmost angels.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2217.">2217.</span></span>

Hence it may be manifest how gross still are the ideas of the angels in
respect to the Lord's divine ideas, which inflow, and confer life and
the faculty of thought. These may be likened to the fibers and arteries
which are indefinite, for every composition thereof is only \[made up\]
of fibers and vessels that are still purer and inflow from the Lord.
These are the vital essences, to wit, those which flow through the
fibers and vessels.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2218.">2218.</span></span>

Organic parts belong to angels and spirits; but the vital principle that
flows through or in the fibers, and in and through the vessels, belongs
to the Lord, for they are only organic powers \[potentive\] without
life. Life is the Lord's alone.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2219.">2219.</span></span>

These things \[are written\] in presence of the angels, and approved by
the greatest part \[of them\]. Those approve who know that matters are
so with them; those who doubt that they are only organs \[organici\]
still hesitate a little.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2220.">2220.</span></span>

In truth, the faculty of thought may be compared to the faculty
\[possessed by\] the viscera, of acting according to composition; which
faculty does not belong to the fibers or vessels, but to the life in the
fibers and vessels. - 1748, June 6.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2221.">2221.</span></span>

THAT IT MAY BE EVIDENT MERELY FROM THE FACULTY OF REFLECTING, WHICH
BELONGS TO SPIRITS AND ANGELS, THAT THEY ARE ONLY ORGANIC POWERS. While
I was in discourse with angels it happened that it was thought about
reflection or attention to a thing, that it is only reflection which
causes spirits and angels to know that they are of such and such a
quality, are so and so circumstanced, and that it constitutes the
essence of thought; for without reflection is not given the life of
sense nor of thought: and when it happened to speak from objects of
reflection, and \[to say\] that it or reflection was not his who
reflects, but belongs to that which inflows, then it was given to
observe by a spiritual idea that we are only organic powers, and that
reflection is given by the Lord. From no other source can it come.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2222.">2222.</span></span>

Objects seem to inflow from elsewhere, especially into man's senses, but
to reflect upon objects, and to know what they are, and that they are of
such and such a quality; this \[comes\] from elsewhere, consequently
from the Lord, as may be proven from many internal faculties of man. -
1748, June 6.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2223.">2223.</span></span>

THAT SOME MEN ARE LED BY THE LORD MORE EASILY THAN OTHERS. It is known
that all are led by the Lord, but yet some more easily than others. All
may be led by the Lord to any thought, speech, and action whatever; but
inasmuch as many, yea, very many, are not in faith, consequently not in
order, it is more difficult to lead them in that respect, because the
Lord is unwilling to break them, therefore \[to compel them\] to think,
speak, and do what is contrary to their cupidities, wherein they place
their liberty; therefore they are allowed in these to think, speak, and
act, according thereto, so that they may be bended to good. But verily
such as are in faith, hence in the knowledge of the truths of faith, are
not broken, because they know and are affected with such things as are
of heaven, therefore their thoughts, speech, and actions, because they
are rather in spiritual order, are led more easily than others. - 1748,
June 6.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2224.">2224.</span></span>

This may be apparent merely from spirits and the different genera and
species of spirits, for they are therefore prepared that they may be led
more easily. It is apparent from angels because \[they are led\] still
more easily, so that in some it appears as if spontaneous, though it is
of the Lord alone. - 1748, June 6.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2225.">2225.</span></span>

THAT EACH AND ALL THINGS \[PROCEED\] FROM MERCY. Inasmuch as men,
spirits, and angels can effect nothing of themselves, but \[all things\]
are granted them by the Lord, they being merely organic powers, it was
granted me to see from spiritual idea, that all and each \[proceed\]
from mercy, inasmuch as those who are such that they cannot lead
themselves at all, although they think so, and of themselves are foolish
and insane, could not but have perished did not the Lord have compassion
on such as are foolish and insane. In spiritual idea (the fact can
better be seen) their case can appear better; they argue and think
\[putant\] from themselves, and yet their everything comes from the
Lord's permission or concession, and of themselves they are more stupid
and insane than infants who have never learned anything. - 1748, June 6.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2226.">2226.</span></span>

The mercy of the Lord is universal towards all and each, but yet is
greater towards the angels, because they are orphans and widows - they
have no other father nor husband than the Lord, for they do not trust in
themselves. - 1748, June 6.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2227.">2227.</span></span>

CONCERNING SPIRITUAL IDEAS (AS RELATED TO) AFFECTIONS. Spirits, \[and\]
especially angels, can know and perceive, not only, as before said, from
the speech \[loquelis\] of what quality (others) are, but especially
from affections apart from \[without\] speech, for they speak quite
frequently by affections alone and the variations thereof; for an idea
in itself is from its beginning, origin \[principio\], nothing but an
effect of affection, hence (is nothing but) a derivative affection
\[affectiuncula\]. Since it is the result of derived \[continuous\]
affections, therefore can they know therefrom, if the Lord think worthy,
not only what is their quality who display them, but also who they are,
and where is their place in the Grand Man \[maximo corpore\], as is
given me by the Lord to know from daily experience. - 1748, June 7.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2228.">2228.</span></span>

CONCERNING REFLECTION. ((((((I spoke with spirits concerning reflection,
that \[they have\] no life apart from reflection, in that their
intellectual life is perfected by, the Lord alone, through reflections
granted by the Lord, so that they can know what and of what quality
\[anything\] is, and so \[the fact\] is impressed on their memory that
they may be in the knowledge thereof. Further, that brutes have not such
reflection, wherefore they are not perfected, but remain in the state of
their own nature. Besides which they could be inspired with fear, but
this does not happen by an intellectual way. - 1748, June 7.))))))

<span class="margnote"><span id="2229.">2229.</span></span>

THAT SPIRITS FLY LIKE THE EAGLE, AS IS READ CONCERNING THE GENTILES.
When it was read in Deut. 28:49 that a nation \[gens\] flieth like an
eagle, I remembered occurrences which had often happened, to wit, that
spirits are made to appear \[sistantur\] in a moment, and thus fly as it
were, although they were afar off, and at the end of the earth, as is
read, for wherever they are in the world they are made to appear
immediately as present, yea, some of them very near \[proxime\] to the
ear, to the back, and within the body. So that they are present very
quickly and very near \[proxime\], no matter where they had lived in the
world, yea \[those\] who \[had lived\] in other worlds \[telluribus\],
for it is a fallacy of the senses \[sensus\] that \[they are\] near and
very near, as may be apparent from sight and hearing, as well as because
space is not in spirituals, and likewise time neither. Inasmuch as there
is no space to the eye between itself and the sun, which would appear as
if in the eye, did not obvious things manifest the truth \[id\] and the
knowledge that space intervenes, I \[therefore\] did sometimes discourse
with spirits about these things. They were willing to conclude the
presence from the appearance, and not readily to believe anything unless
it, as it were, appears, and yet there are indefinite fallacies of the
sense which must be shaken off else the truth can never come forth. -
1748, June 7.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2230.">2230.</span></span>

In like manner very many things in the Word of the Lord, and more than
anyone can credit, are spoken to the fallacy of man's senses, because
they supposed such things can happen \[ita putarunt\]. Therefore these
things are so spoken, because their persuasions and cupidities were not
to be broken, but bent; for to speak otherwise than man receives
\[apprehends\], is to sow seed in water; he immediately rejects \[it\],
hence it is (to him as) nothing; for instance, \[such expressions\] as
the Lord is stirred with fury \[wrath\] against any one, that He would
slay, that He does evil, that He rejoices to destroy them and to bring
them to nought, as in Deut. 28:63, are mere fallacies, because they
believed such to be the case \[crediderunt ita\]. \[And this occurs\]
because it is a truth that the Lord rules each and all things, and that
He is everything, therefore, because they were ignorant of the rest
which is indefinite, as that every universal truth contains indefinite
things, it is on this account spoken to their most general
\[communissimum\] senses. Such is the speech of good spirits with those
who recently arrive from the life of the body before these are
instructed. - 1748, June 7.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2231.">2231.</span></span>

CONCERNING THE EFFECT OF SINGING \[cantus\] ON SPIRITS. It was again
granted to know what effect singing has upon spirits, and indeed it was
still more interior than before, for their bodies were not soothed
\[mulciebantur for mulcebantur, I think\], but their ideas; this was
given me to see in spiritual idea, for the sweetness of the singing was
wonderfully joined into their ideas, and also into the ideas of such as
desired to resist, being at first indignant, but yet they submitted
\[succumbebant\], so that it diffused itself through their ideas
consequently into their thoughts, hence they were softened
\[molliebantur\] to such a degree that they glided, as it were, into a
trance \[ecstasis\], for silence and quiet ensued. They said, at first,
that they had never perceived such sweetness, and that they had not
believed such was granted. They seemed to me to have glided into a sweet
sleep \[sopor\], from which they have not yet awakened. Some who had
wakened said that they had been in celestial joy, like those who \[have
awakened\] from a very sweet dream. Such is the effect of singing when
the Lord allows it to be infused into spirits.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2232.">2232.</span></span>

When I remembered the previous effect of singing, I immediately
perceived a certain talking \[allocutionem\] \[going on\] among the
spirits, hence it could be concluded that the traces impressed on anyone
touch \[agant\] the roots of the matter or affection. - 1748, June 7.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2234.">2234.</span></span>

 <span id="fr_26"></span>[2234-1](#fn_26) THAT THE UNIVERSE IS GOVERNED
BY THE LORD WITH NO TROUBLE, BUT VERY EASILY. There were around me very
many spirits and angels, \[amounting\] perhaps to \[some\] thousands, to
whom it was shown to the living experience how easily the universe is
governed by the Lord. It was allowed to me to inflow into \[their\]
thoughts, and thus, as it were, govern them who were around and it was
\[effected\] merely by one thought with its variation each and all
things were disposed as if according to \[my\] nod, as well to confer
happiness on some as for other purposes, and to vary \[these things\]
according to what I thought: \[to bestow these things\] in like manner
on every spirit who was with me in society, also to spirits more removed
\[remote\] according to their manner. Hence we could know how easily
each and all things are ordered by the Lord, who is in the highest, yea,
in the inmost, more interior, and interior things. This could not be
confirmed by spirits and angels for some hesitate because so vast a
multitude hovers before their ideas \[in eorum ideis obversatur\], and
such a variety. The reply also is made them that they thus argue from
the inferior \[lower\] ideas of man, where it so appears; but that from
inmosts, as from centers, the whole circuit, as it were, is ruled very
easily and with no trouble. It is different with those who are stationed
\[constitute\] in the circumference \[peripheriis\], and who argue from
ideas which are in the circumference \[peripheriis\], to whom these
things appear more obscure the farther they are from the center. - 1748,
June 7.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2235.">2235.</span></span>

I perceived, also, how amongst thousands of spirits they were almost
arranged individually \[singuli\] according to the nod of the Lord; but
this was to me so subtle and impenetrable, to wit, the discriminations
or differences, that they could not be perceived unless in a very
general manner \[communissime\] by a certain sight.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2236.">2236.</span></span>

THAT IS WAS CLEARLY \[manifeste\] REVEALED TO THE SONS OF JACOB THAT
THERE IS A LIFE AFTER DEATH. I heard spirits speaking together \[inter
se\]. There was a certain one, to whom it was said that in the life of
the body they had obtained whatsoever they had desired, and they had
wanted nothing farther, and why should they now, also, claim privilege
in heaven? It was replied that it would have been proper \[oportuerit\],
also, to have revealed to them that there was a life after death. It was
then answered, if the life after death had been revealed, and these were
so prone to worship other gods, what would it have amounted to \[quid
inde\], therefore of what quality would their life have been on that
account \[inde\] ? - 1748, June 7. It was added, since they never would
have refrained, because they could not have refrained, inasmuch as they
desired to be the greatest and most opulent in the world, if they had
then also thought concerning the other life, what would it have amounted
to \[quid inde\], but that they must perish?

<span class="margnote"><span id="2237.">2237.</span></span>

IN THE WORLD OF SPIRITS THAT THEY ARE EXCITED ONE BY ANOTHER, ALMOST
LIKE AS ONE MAN IS BY ANOTHER. It was observed, when it was permitted
one \[a single\] spirit and his company to plot \[cogitare\] any evil or
baseness \[spurci\], that forthwith others, who are of like family, are
excited to whatsoever malice or baseness it may be. In this way, also,
are souls and spirits disclosed as to their quality; for when in a state
without reflection, wherein they are, as it were, left to themselves
alone, then are they straightway excited to like things, and are known
as to what place they are in, and of what quality they are.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2238.">2238.</span></span>

But it is not permitted spirits to do so but at certain times, for they
would thus speedily contaminate the world of spirits, because they are
so prone to flock together, that they flock together in a moment,
inasmuch as they act from nature, not from premeditation.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2239.">2239.</span></span>

From these and similar things it may be apparent that did not the Lord
rule the universe, the universal world of spirits would perish in a
moment, therefore \[also\] the human race; wherefore as soon as the
reins are loosened, or momentary license is granted, forthwith is it
also checked. This, also, was spoken \[said\] to the spirits, and they
cannot deny it, because the matter was so; and now, also, they confirm
it. - 1748, June 7.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2240.">2240.</span></span>

OF WHAT QUALITY ARE THEY, AND WHAT THEIR PUNISHMENT, WHO ARE WELL
ENDOWED WITH GENIUS, AND ONLY STUDY WHAT SERVES TO PERVERT MAN. In my
sleep I seemed to myself to be in a ship, with others, from which, when
I came out \[ascendi\] upon the land, I stood in a higher and higher
place upon a mountain facing \[spectantem\] the sea, and I saw that the
ship beneath was steered about \[circumagi\] by a pilot at pleasure
\[voluntario\]; and then, as if there were horses put before him, he
directed the ship in gyres and vortices, with the purpose that they
should perish who were in the ship. After such gyres he at last directed
the horses under the waters, so that it was submerged with those who
were therein. There was a man \[vir\], a virgin and infant in the ship,
concerning whom I then thought and pitied them, awhile.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2241.">2241.</span></span>

While I was in that sleep, and while they were submerged, of whom I saw
one slightly emerging form the waters, suddenly I waked. Some spirits
lamented that they should have been in the ship and been submerged. To
themselves they appear quite like those who emerge from the waters with
flowing hair, and surrounded with water, not knowing other than that
they would perish.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2242.">2242.</span></span>

Then appeared to me, in a wakeful vision that was very clear, a sort of
continuous ovarium, of numerous \[multiplicatis\] eggs, of a fiery red
color \[rubentivus flave\], cast forth \[evomuit\] by something \[quis\]
in a continued series, with rapidity, so many, and arranged in that
series, as cannot be described. These eggs, thus cast forth, and
wonderfully aggregated \[glomerata\] in series, signified that poison
which is called \[Etter\], thus the poison of dragons. These things
appeared to me in a waking vision.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2243.">2243.</span></span>

Afterwards I perceived and heard that that shipmaster \[nauclerus\], who
at pleasure \[voluntario\] steered about \[circumducebat\] the ship with
horses, in the deep, in order to submerge \[drown\] those who were
therein, was miserably distorted by many spirits, and so mangled, as to
all bodily parts, that scarcely anything cohered, This was done to the
reality \[actualiter\] to his great suffering \[dolor\], so that there
appeared to be nothing that was not all mangled \[laceratum\].

<span class="margnote"><span id="2244.">2244.</span></span>

A certain spirit said that he was such a one in their company as
dictates very many ingenious things, and produces phantasies, which
would delight them, because he was also able to produce visions in their
presence to amuse them, but yet would afterwards hurt them, and these
would be turned \[torquerentur\] into evil. A certain vision was also
represented by them to me; wherefore they were willing indeed to have
him amongst themselves, but as he was of such a character, they could
not endure \[him\].

<span class="margnote"><span id="2245.">2245.</span></span>

Hence it may be apparent what sort of punishment is inflicted upon such
as abuse the gift of genius and shrewdly moisten the eyes, to hurt
others, thus to destroy them, for by delectable phantasies he, as it
were, delights them, but under these wounds, hurts, and kills. - 1748,
June 8.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2246.">2246.</span></span>

For with such are very many things that are mingled with worldly
corporeal facetiae, as also pleasant \[jucundae\] corporeal ideas,
moreover witty things \[sales\], very hurtful to what is sincere
\[honesta\] and spiritual. The punishment thereof is that such things
shall be separated and dissevered, because if they were together-for
they do thus often rush together \[recurrunt\]-then they would destroy
societies-for those things are excited in the societies that are
artfully put together \[implexa\] by the acuteness of genius, in order
to hurt the neighbor. These things are seen at one glance by the angels.
-1748, June 8.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2247.">2247.</span></span>

WHAT REFLECTION IS. I spoke with spirits about reflection, \[to the
effect\] that because spirits, who lead man, are not endowed \[absque\]
with such a reflection as belongs to man, in the body, \[derived\]
through the senses, they cannot, therefore, see anything in the world,
as spirits do through mine: for as often as I was allowed to bestow upon
them reflection or attention, and this I plainly perceived by a
spiritual idea, then they said right away that they saw all and each of
such things, to which was directed the reflection given me and shared
with them. They said, almost as often, that they saw nothing before
\[that\] reflection was given them. This occurred quite frequently, so
that I can confirm it by manifold experience, \[namely\] that a spirit
sees nothing through the eyes of another man, and that souls and spirits
greatly wondered that they had, as it were, again entered the world
wholly as if they were then in their own bodies. This also, at that
time, do they attest.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2248.">2248.</span></span>

The discourse was then concerning reflection, and it was shown that it
was almost similar in man's case (to my own experience) when I was in a
place where a bell sounded every hour, and exercised no reflection
thereupon, or did not attend to the sound of the bell at such times I
never could be aware that it had sounded, nor indeed had heard it,
because without reflection \[concerning it\]. And this \[occurred\]
frequently \[so\] that I was astonished. It was also the same with the
sounds of larger bells, and likewise with all other objects. My
experience with one thing was different from what it was with another
\[apud unum aliter ac apud alium\], so that there was indefinite
variety, and this as much in reference to objects of hearing as those of
sight, smell, color, touch. So that as regards touch, without
reflection, there is no feeling \[non sentitur\] in this part, or in
that, but when attention is given \[attenditur\] immediately sensation
\[is perceived\], as now while I write that it is so with touch, and
press my pen, and \[find\] that it is so with it. In a word, it is the
same in indefinite things. From these things it may be concluded that a
spirit might, as it were, put on man, because \[he has\] not \[man's\]
reflection; therefore that he cannot see through the eyes of a man, nor
can reflection be given \[him\] except by the Lord alone. In like manner
\[that he cannot\] hear through the ears of man - for that spirits do
continually reflect I have perceived with manifest sense, and indeed
very often with pain \[dolore\] and a sense of compression and hard
attraction, etc.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2249.">2249.</span></span>

Further, reflection is given to man, soul, spirit, and angel, which they
are not aware of and do not observe. Such as they possess in a state of
peace and innocence, in corporeals, in a state of ignorance, and the
like, as also in \[their\] minutest \[particularissimis\] things, to
which they do not pay any attention \[ne hilum attendunt\] by which are
impressed what \[is suitable\] to them in the other life, and conduces
to their felicity. This reflection is interior, unknown to man, as is
the case with the interior memory, and with his regeneration. This
reflection is the gift of the Lord alone.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2250.">2250.</span></span>

THAT ALL THE PROPRIUM OF MAN IS HARD, CONSEQUENTLY OSSEOUS. It can also
be seen by a spiritual idea that the proprium of man, hence \[that\] of
spirits, is not only black \[for\] so it appears, but also hard;
wherefore also is it called osseous. The reason is, not only that man's
Proprium is but an organism \[organicum\], wherein since there is no
vital juice, spirit, and blood, it hardens and becomes, as it were,
osseous, but also because man can of himself \[do\] nothing. Wherefore
in himself he is viewed as it were osseous, wherein is not of vital
juice. Life, which belongs to the Lord, alone causes man to soften; and
the more spiritual and celestial life diffused through each and all the
things of man, without and within his structure and around the component
structures \[the more is this\] without, although it appears within.
Wherefore the less hard a man is, that is, the less he has from himself,
and the softer, as said, or more fluid, so much the more perfect \[is
he\], as may be apparent from the fibers, which in infants are very
soft, but in old men are becoming hard, as well as in the inmost fibers,
there is nothing but a fluid \[principle\], because it is the spiritual
principle which in compounds appears hard. - 1748, June 8.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_26"></span>[2234-1](sd15.htm#fr_26) Number 2233 is wanting
in the original.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2251-2300](sd16)
