[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Swedenborg](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sd21)  [Next](sd23) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0766143007/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Spiritual Diary*, by Emanuel Swedenborg, \[1758\], tr. by Bush,
Smithson and Buss \[1883-9\] at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Spiritual Diary

<span class="margnote"><span id="2551.">2551.</span></span>

Wherefore I spoke with them, as also at other times, to know what the
matter was. They said that it was they who were in the idea concerning
the birds, and that they were suddenly cast down on me. They imagined
that in the fall they would break \[their\] head and neck as they also
represented to me; they knew nothing else \[than\] that they would
certainly perish like a man when he falls from a lofty \[high\] house to
the earth. I also perceived this from the trembling of their fear, which
was communicated to me, so that I thence acknowledged the truth of their
words.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2552.">2552.</span></span>

When I inquired the cause, then was recalled into my memory the sleep
\[dream\] concerning the birds, and it was given to know that it has
been something in the heavens; that they have held some speech
concerning thoughts, which are signified by birds in the world of
spirits, concerning which there has been discourse, for such things
cannot happen in the world of spirits save through influx from heaven,
wherein there is no thinking of birds but of meditations and thoughts;
and I was instructed by those who were in the interior world of spirits,
who are communicators, that there has been discourse in heaven, in a
certain society, concerning the influx of the man's thoughts which
penetrate even into heaven, whether they inflow from man's thought into
heaven, when yet this would be contrary to order.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2553.">2553.</span></span>

That the thoughts of man should be able to inflow into the heaven of
angels, but \[that\] heaven \[inflows\] into \[man's\] thoughts, and
because it had appeared to them sometimes that my thoughts inflowed, as
it were, into heaven; therefore certain \[spirits\] concluded from the
appearance that such a thing exists; consequently, as they were in a
falsity, they could not be in the society of angels, but were rejected,
as it were, from their society (not by angels, but by themselves; such
is their casting down; falsity casts itself down, for no angel casts out
another). Since, therefore, they were so ejected on account of the
falsity of the influx of man's thoughts, hence the corresponding spirits
to whom the same things are represented in the shape of birds fell down
with such force and violence that they seemed to themselves \[as if\]
they should break \[their\] necks and heads.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2554.">2554.</span></span>

Afterwards it was given me to speak somewhat about the apparent influx
of my thoughts into heaven, that there is no influx from man into
heaven, for that which is in an inferior degree and of such grossness
can by no means penetrate an interior degree, therefore into prior
things, although it appears so; but that the cause of such appearance
is, that the Lord causes that there may be influx from heaven into
\[my\] thoughts, and that it is only an appearance that there is an
influx from my thoughts into heaven. But because the cause \[reason\]
cannot be displayed save by spiritual ideas, it was therefore shown them
in a few \[words\] how it is in causes; but this was the fact, and the
truth that the Lord inflows into human thoughts and thus is present in
inferior as in superior things; and when it pleases Him \[can inflow\]
through heaven into thoughts; and that in either case it can appear as
if the thoughts of man inflowed. That it is wholly contrary to order and
all reason that the inferior can inflow into the superior, or the
exterior into the interior, or, as the philosophers say, the posterior
into the prior, or the posterior into the purer. - 1748, July 7.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2555.">2555.</span></span>

Hence also it may be manifest what is understood by those words of the
Apocalypse (perhaps also elsewhere to be treated of) that an \[the\]
angel of light was cast to the earth with his crew, to wit, that when
they are in falsity, and falsity expels them from the society of angels,
that those who then correspond to them in the world of spirits seem to
themselves to be thus cast down with violence, and, as it were, with
danger to their lives.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2556.">2556.</span></span>

But whether the spirits corresponding to them have been of a similar
opinion I cannot know, for there are given many corresponding spirits,
and sometimes those who are not of a similar opinion: thus by their crew
\[turbo\] no other are understood than those who are in a similar
falsity in the world of spirits: for spirits were entirely ignorant that
they spoke \[were speaking\] in heaven, they were only in the
representative of the birds, and indeed with unpleasantness, as they now
say. - 1748, July 7. - Wherefore the corresponding \[spirits\] are not
of their crew, but are only those who are in a like falsity.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2557.">2557.</span></span>

THAT SPIRITS PERCEIVE VERY FULLY THE THOUGHTS OF MAN This may be
apparent from many things, but I will only \[give\] this for an example:
if I speak with them \[using\] only these words, it is so or so, or it
is thus or otherwise, without adding other words \[and\] the remainder
is only represented by idea or representation, they immediately perceive
every idea and thought; thus \[all those\] in the remainder from only a
few words \[expressed\]. The remainder \[is exhibited\] by ideas,
therefore those which are \[not expressed\] \[ubsque\] in words are
exhibited to them in \[by\] spiritual idea. Hence it may be manifest how
many things are in the Lord's Word and how full the ideas are when the
words \[expressed\] are so few, which \[words\] are wholly
unintelligible without ideas, and these are not patent to the eyes of
men.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2558.">2558.</span></span>

THAT WHATEVER IS DONE BY MEANS OF ART \[ARTIFICIALITER\] CLOSES THE WAY
TO INTERIORS. It was granted to see in spiritual idea that as soon
anyone wishes from himself to imitate that which is spiritual and
celestial and to do from himself what is styled \[the work\] of the
artist, or \[working\] by means of art, as the magicians did by means of
their sorceries, then immediately the interior way is closed, and in
externals or outermosts is only a dead principle \[mortuum\], which
nevertheless the artist or magician is not aware of; so also with others
who are not aware of interiors, or what \[quid, it should be, I think\]
is therein, then happens the like in externals, as when a man sees only
with the eye external things, such as pictures, which he values \[and\]
sometimes prefers to living things, which nevertheless are fairer in
interiors, and the more interior the fairer. - 1748, July 7. - Wherefore
when these things are beheld by those who are in interiors, they do not
appear otherwise than \[happens\] when \[the materials of\] pictures or
the lime of a house put together, and hence making a splendid
appearance, are viewed with the microscope, they then are only filthy.
It is different when they look into animals and vegetables.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2559.">2559.</span></span>

THAT SPIRITS IN LIKE MANNER AS MEN ARE IMMEDIATELY BORNE OF THEMSELVES
TO DO EVIL WHEN THE REIN IS RELAXED ON THEM. This in particular was
granted me to observe in the world of spirits, and was also given me to
experience, to wit, that as soon as they enjoy remission \[remittitur\]
they rush of themselves to ruin and destroy those who are around. They
are perpetually so kept in spiritual bonds as not to feel it, in order
that they may not be able to think, still less will, and do evil
according to their liking and nature. They are ignorant of such bonds,
because they are held in such a manner \[as not to feel it\]; therefore
they are supposed to be good of themselves. But it is sometimes shown by
experience that these bonds are remitted, and immediately they rush into
evil, and indeed to destroy the bystanders. Yea, for the sake of knowing
it, the power of remitting their bonds was, as it were, granted to me,
and immediately they rushed \[to destroy others\]; yea, so that
\[others\] complained that remission should be granted them.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2560.">2560.</span></span>

A similar thing occurred to me when \[my bonds\] were remitted, I also
immediately rushed into evil, so that there is nothing but evil in man's
disposition, and good and mercy \[belong\] to the Lord alone, who so
holds the universal heaven and world of spirits, as it were, bound, that
they are almost ignorant that they are evil, yea, suppose that good
\[proceeds\] from them, concerning which I have sometimes conversed with
them; they wish to claim good to themselves. In a similar manner is the
human race held, although \[men\] do not know it. Wherefore if the
spiritual bonds were remitted by the Lord, one would immediately rush
upon another, like wild beast upon wild beast. Concerning these bonds
very many things could be said, but the Lord thinking worthy \[I shall
see them\] elsewhere. - 1748, July 7.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2561.">2561.</span></span>

HOW INTERIOR THINGS IN HEAVEN ARE RELATED TO THOSE WHICH CAN REACH MAN'S
APPREHENSION. Interior things, or those which belong to the angels of
the interior heaven, are ineffable, and cannot reach the understanding
of man, yea, were they displayed, there would appear only a certain most
obscure \[principle\]. There can be no better comparison made than with
the fibers of the nerves in the animated body which wonderfully flow
from the cerebrum and medulla, ramify, frequently connect with each
other, are inserted in the ganglia, and are carried to the viscera, so
that it can scarce be known what is the nature of their connection; then
likewise the nervous fibers elsewhere, which form wonderful forms, as
may be viewed merely from looking at the nervous fibers in plates; still
from these thus ramified intertwined, mutually inflowing into
themselves, and again and again flowing out, distinct actions proceed,

<span class="margnote"><span id="2562.">2562.</span></span>

and yet still by fibrous media, mediate nexus, and such wonderful
influxes of fibers, to the eye's beholding, actions could never seem to
be able to exist so regularly from these, and yet there is not one which
does not have respect to its own mode in society with others, which
together constitute the unit of an action \[contributing\] with
inadequate variety in conjunction with others to societies of action.
Such an idea may be formed of interior ideas, or \[those\] of the angels
of the interior heaven, in relation to the interiors of the world of
spirits; from which those who can consider these things, and, as it
were, be somewhat made in similars, can conclude how inscrutable are
only interior things, let alone more interior things which inflow into
interiors. For one idea of the interior world of spirits may be compared
to one action \[composed\]) of indefinite forces and forms thus acting
and entering into the littlest action and so forth. - 1748, July 7.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2563.">2563.</span></span>

THAT TO HIM WHO HAS FAITH IN THE LORD THE LORD IS PRESENT AND LOOKS OUT
\[CONSULTS\] FOR HIM IN EACH AND ALL THINGS. Especially have I seen in
spiritual idea, and anyone can perceive it, that the Lord consults in
each and all things for him who has faith in the Lord and the insight of
faith, almost to such an extent that he has no care whatever, but
unconsciously \[nescius\] obtains everything that is necessary and
everything that is useful to \[for\] necessary things. All things then
succeed with him, and he is led to heavenly felicity: in so far as the
man trusts in himself so much the more remote is he from the Lord; thus
through reliance in his own prudence the man removes himself from the
Lord, because so far \[is he\] from faith. - 1748, July 8.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2564.">2564.</span></span>

What insight may effect in the other life no one can know but he who
lives in the other life; thus what \[is effected\] by the insight of
confidence and faith in the Lord.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2565.">2565.</span></span>

THAT INSANITY PREVAILS IN THE INTERIOR SPHERE OF THE WORLD OF SPIRITS.
See \[what has been\] previously \[mentioned\] that there is an interior
sphere of the world of spirits where \[there is\] a multitude of
spirits. Their speech has been long unintelligible to me, but now begins
to be somewhat plain. It is in that sphere where the intentions of men
or their ends reign, and is also the speech in the other life of those
who in the life of their body scarcely come into manifest thought, so
that \[such\] are within the manifest thought of man.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2566.">2566.</span></span>

When it was inquired why there is there such a multitude of insane
spirits, I perceived the answer that the human race at the present day
does not regard any other use, hence no other end, than self; they only
acquire and scrape together moneys, silver and gold, merely to grow
rich, and indeed for the sake of their own life, never on account of
friends and associates, still less on account of use to the
commonwealth; further, that they never seek honors for any other use
than to become great, and for the sake of self-honor, \[and\] not on
account of use to others, still less on account of the general good.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2567.">2567.</span></span>

In like manner, they who aim to grow wise from the sciences never \[do
so\] for any other use than self in order to become great, and appear
\[so\] in the world. Wherefore, in that sphere, which may be called the
sphere of intentions, and is the interior \[sphere\] of the world of
spirits, the insanity is such that \[that world\] is nearly overflowing
with insanities: thus, the iniquity of those called Christians is
consummated: wherefore the Lord's kingdom is now turned to others, as is
predicted, otherwise the world would perish, for from the world of
spirits is known the quality of the human race, and how perverted \[the
human race is\] is not thus \[known\] from the exterior world of spirits
and from souls.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2568.">2568.</span></span>

Certain souls, a short time after death, also came amongst them, who, to
wit, in the world have been deceitful \[dolosi\], and have openly
\[manifestius\] and with all their might \[fortius\] kept ends out of
sight, and have proposed to themselves no other ends than such \[as have
been mentioned\]: thus, as it were, have they spoken in themselves and
have persuaded \[themselves\] that none ought to aim at anything but
self, and to indulge \[nothing else\]; thus entirely hold in slight
estimation their companions and the common \[good\] in comparison with
themselves. Others of a more serious mind enter that sphere. (The rest
enter that sphere in a more serious frame of mind.) - 1748, July 8.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2569.">2569.</span></span>

Those spirits who are the interior \[spirits\] of the world of spirits
indeed inflow into man's thoughts, but do not perceive them \[but\] only
their intentions; wherefore, when such intentions are absent from man,
then these cannot understand \[his thoughts\]; then good spirits, \[who
are\] also interior \[spirits\] of the world of spirits, take \[them\]
up. The Lord so disposing. - 1748, July 8.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2570.">2570.</span></span>

When it is left to them to inflow, even a very little, there is
immediately perceived cold, or tedium in those things that belong to the
Lord's Word, to faith and salvation. This was given me to perceive, that
when they were allowed but a very slight relaxation, they inflowed with
their tedium or cold.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2571.">2571.</span></span>

Nor can these interior spirits be where there are good interior spirits,
- in like manner neither in the world can they be together, for their
intentions are contrary. That they can be together in the world is only
that they may take away their goods by their depredations, or artifices,
or use them for servants. It is different in the other life: when good
spirits are present, they must needs certainly flee, because they are,
as it were, killed with tedium, for there they cannot make gain out of
them. That they are unable to be together is apparent merely from this,
that if angels work into such, they are affected with such anguish that
they seem to perish, and seem to themselves to be turned into loathsome
reptiles and wild beasts. Wherefore, the Lord so disposes that they are
unable to breathe evil or poison into the faithful. - 1748, July 8.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2572.">2572.</span></span>

Besides those inclinations, of which \[I have treated\] above, they also
have such as with manifold variety follow therefrom; to wit, that they
desire to destroy the human race as to their life, so that they are
entirely as cruel as Neros in their minds; that they desire to take away
everything from the neighbor, deriding their poverty and misery, yea,
even should they die before their eyes, they hence derive delight;
because they are opposed to all mercy, like as the deceitful are opposed
to all innocence. Besides, they also \[hence\] delight much in being
able to destroy friendships, and especially conjugial loves, by devising
enmities between husband and wife \[conjuges\], and by alluring
\[enticing\] the wives of others to adulteries, and the like, which
necessarily flow from these two fountains, self-love and love of the
world. - 1748, July 9. \[Marg. Note: "obs."\]

<span class="margnote"><span id="2573.">2573.</span></span>

But as respects those who have been in faith, these after death are not
elevated into that sphere, although they can be immediately brought in
that sphere, as is granted me to know from man's past experience. But
the Lord counsels otherwise for them. They are kept in the sphere
beneath those \[interior spirits\], so that they may not understand, nor
plainly perceive them; and this, till externals are given them by the
Lord, which may correspond to the intentions or inclinations of the
angels, and are adapted to the society of the upright in the same
sphere. Then are they elevated from an external life to the interior
\[life\] of those spirits, and can enjoy their company, and so
correspond to the angels, who are all led by the Lord immediately or
more immediately, and enjoy all unspeakable felicity, with indefinite
variety. - 1748, July 9. \[Marg. Note: "obs."\]

<span class="margnote"><span id="2574.">2574.</span></span>

Those who are in the interior sphere of the world of spirits use those
spirits who are in the exterior sphere, as they are wont in the life of
the body, when they speak, to use the \[an\] exterior sphere for
thinking and speaking, so that there is hardly any other difference than
that these spirits are distinct. In the life of the body, although the
spirits are likewise distinct, yet they appear to them, as it were, a
one, or as if a one commanded; the inferior acting in accordance, so
that they are, as it were, in them, as they also said to me; for they
clothe themselves with \[put him on\] \[induunt eum\] themselves; though
he does not know other than that he speaks from himself Hence it follows
that they clothe themselves with the man himself because those spirits
are with \[apud\] him, as suppose themselves to be the man.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2575.">2575.</span></span>

It was now also granted to know by experience that they could be reduced
by the spirits beneath them into a sort of sleep, so as to be ignorant
what they did. They were put to sleep in such a manner as is almost
similar when man's exteriors are put to sleep, and his interiors are
awake; for I have perceived a certain sparkling \[something\] which was
from their life.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2576.">2576.</span></span>

WHAT IS SIGNIFIED IN THE WORD BY THEIR LEARNING WAR, AND WHY THEY
UNDERGO TEMPTATIONS. There are very many reasons why the faithful must
needs sustain persecutions and temptations: I will mention only one,
which it was now given to learn; that \[it is\] because there is such a
multitude of evil spirits, especially in the interior sphere, as they
can learn to be the case, and because the Lord wills to govern each and
all things according to order, so that thus they may be faithful in the
state of resisting them, so that there may be an equilibrium; for the
evil continually assault; the faithful resist; not resisting from
themselves, but from the Lord. - 1748, July 9.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2577.">2577.</span></span>

CONCERNING THE INTERIOR SPIRITS OF THE SPHERE When license is allowed to
those evil \[spirits\] in that sphere to act according to their
intentions, then there are innumerable inventions, and indeed so profane
and loathsome, that man can never conceive there are such; for when such
\[a license\] prevails among them, then whatever object is given they
turn it into inventions similar to their state, besides which, whatever
is noticed to be opposed, or contrary to the upright, this they seize
hold of and turn into loathsome inventions, and machinations, \[and\]
invert, \[and) pervert \[it\], as if it were a certain horrid thing, not
commonly permitted on account of its foulness, which was devised by
\[their\] intentions.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2578.">2578.</span></span>

Since there is such an interior sphere in the natural man it hence
follows that \[these\] are the last times, and the human race will
perish in this world, unless they revive to themselves, and \[to\] faith
in the Lord.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2579.">2579.</span></span>

That sphere, or the evil who are in that sphere of intentions, are not
vastated like those who are evil in externals; for the more interiorly
evil a man is, so much the more grievous and prolonged the punishment.
This, there remains \[to\] them a most grievous and prolonged hell and
vastation, till almost nothing remains with them, who are contrary to
mercy, as already described, and who are contrary to innocence, all of
whom are deceitful, and more interiorly evil than others. - 1748, July
9.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2580.">2580.</span></span>

(((((((((Their effigy was shown me, in clear day, with eyes open, of
what quality they at last become to the sight of the upright, to wit;
that their face is, as it were, an osseous substance, worse \[looking\]
than a corpse, \[and\] with frightful cavities \[lacunis\], the color of
a most ugly, livid brown, \[and\] cadaverous \[hue\]. They are not able
to think at all, are dead to themselves, \[and\] cadaverous \[hue\].
They are not able to think at all, are dead to themselves, \[and
afflicted\] with the torments of anxiety. - 1748, July 9.)))))))))

<span class="margnote"><span id="2581.">2581.</span></span>

THAT THE CONVERSATIONS OF ANGELS CONCERNING CERTAIN THINGS FALL INTO
REPRESENTATIONS OF CITIES WITH INFERIOR SPIRITS. This day, in the
morning, in a state nearly intermediate between waking and sleeping,
there were some things which slipped into my thoughts; for instance, a
lute, and other musical instruments, and at the same time I thought of
cities, so that those thoughts were \[together\] with the idea of
cities; when \[I was\] slightly awake, it was told me that the
conversations of the angels concerning the like fell into ideas of
cities amongst the spirits, which was also affirmed by the spirits; and
indeed the continued speech of angels concerning one thing, as
concerning a lute or other thing, is only presented to spirits simply as
the idea of a city, without variety; from which may also be apparent how
many things there are among the angels which present but the one idea of
a city amongst in inferior spirits. Thus that which with the angels
concerns spiritual things, is turned into the idea of a city and the
like, and that which \[relates\] to celestial things \[is turned\] into
\[the idea\] of animals and the like. - 1748, July 10.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2582.">2582.</span></span>

THAT THERE IS A GREAT MULTITUDE OF SPIRITS WHO DELIGHT IN INFLICTING
HARM ON OTHERS. No one can help wondering at there being a very great
multitude in the world of spirits, as well in its inferior as in its
interior \[sphere\], of those whose only delight almost is that they may
be able to torment whomsoever they meet with. This has become apparent
to me from manifold and almost daily experience. \[It arises\] from the
cause that men in the life of the body are such as to delight in being
able to inflict harm upon others as to their body and property \[opes\],
yea, also as to their soul, as may be manifest to anyone who attends
\[thereto\]. Since punishment is in sins, it is hence also apparent what
sort of punishment awaits them; for before they can be in good
societies, such things must be removed by torment. If man is such as to
the interiors of his nature, then how much torment \[must he endure\],
and how much \[long a\] time must elapse until he returns to reason \[ut
tandem mentis suae compos fiat\].

<span class="margnote"><span id="2583.">2583.</span></span>

Inasmuch as man, on account of ignorance and the like, supposes that the
soul of man will be tormented to eternity, this is made evident \[hoc
constat\], \[to wit\], that man is condemned to eternal punishment, for
he has deserved it; but out of the Lord's mercy damnation is at last
taken away, yet \[sed\] through vastations and punishments, according to
their actual sins, and hence \[their\] acquired nature. - 1748, July 10.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2584.">2584.</span></span>

THAT THEY WHO HAVE LIVED ONE THOUSAND OR FOUR THOUSAND YEARS BEFORE, ARE
ENTIRELY SIMILAR TO THEMSELVES WHEN RESTORED TO THAT STATE WHICH WAS
THEIRS IN THE LIFE OF THE BODY \[dum in statu suo, in vita corporis\].
It is granted me to know, from much experience, that they who have lived
1700, 2000, 3000 to 4000 years before, as in the time of the Lord, and
1000 \[and\] 2000 years before his time, when they are restored to the
state of \[their\] former life are quite similar to themselves, so that
nothing at all is wanting, or is missing, as well also as regards the
mind, manners, yea, all the life which they had possessed in the world,
\[also\] as regards the gait \[gressum\], for it was given to converse
with them very long, and at many times, during \[for\] months and years,
so that I knew for certain that they were the same. Hence may be known
that man loses nothing of those things which he possessed in the life of
the body except the body alone, and such as are entirely proper
\[propria\] to the body. But when they are remitted into the heavenly
state, then it is different with them, and then they are ignorant of
those things which are merely corporeal. - 1748, July 10.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2585.">2585.</span></span>

THAT IN THE SPIRITUAL WORLD ARE STATES WHICH ARE MOST UNKNOWN TO MEN.
Today it has granted me to experience some states, like as previously
\[I had experienced\] some, which are entirely unknown to men, and
indeed many of them ineffable; and if it should be endeavored to form
any idea \[thereof\] by words, yet \[would they be\] wholly
unintelligible, therefore incredible, so that only from a scientific
tone \[principle\] can be formed the integral state of the affection,
wherein reigns either affection, or more or less of the true; yea,
similar states may be communicated to those who are not in the truth of
natural things, and are in the truth of spiritual things. Hence, it may
also be evident that these states are with indefinite variety. Since
such ineffable and never comprehensible states are given in the interior
spiritual world, what \[is not given\] in the interior heaven, from
which such states have their proximate origin, and there everyone is
with indefinite variety; for the least thing in the spiritual world
which appears as one exists in the interior degree from an indefinite of
such things, yea, every variety has its indefinite.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2586.">2586.</span></span>

And since it is so in the spiritual world in respect to the interior
heaven, hence it may be manifest that it is similar in the interior
heaven as respects the more interior heaven, and so in respect to the
inmost, wherein indefinities of states, therefore of felicities,
increase in indefinite.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2587.">2587.</span></span>

Since there are such and so indefinite inexpressible states of
pleasantnesses and felicities, hence it may also be manifest that their
speech is also inexpressible, and more inexpressible in interiors, for
every speech lays down \[ponit\] a state, which may be to it in place of
a foundation; according to it speech exists, and suitably flows
\[labitur\].

<span class="margnote"><span id="2588.">2588.</span></span>

Hence it may also be manifest that every least idea in man and in spirit
when he thinks, still more when he speaks, has its corresponding state
in the interior heaven, and the thought and speech of this one, or \[of
both of\] these \[its corresponding state\] in the interior heaven, and
again the thought and speech of this one \[its corresponding state\] in
the more interior heaven. Wherefore, every idea is a certain affection,
or common \[general\] state of affections, which are in interiors -
otherwise never could any thought have existed or lived. - 1748, July
13.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2589.">2589.</span></span>

THAT NO MERCY OR INNOCENCE CAN BELONG TO MAN. Since man is such that he
is nothing but self-love and love of the world, thus from his least to
his greatest principle is self-love and world-love, hence hatred of the
neighbor and of the Lord, which necessarily flows from love of self and
of the world, he can by no means be otherwise than unmerciful, and
nothing but mercilessness, and what is contrary to innocence; wherefore
mercy and innocence must come and inflow from an origin which is
elsewhere, and from whence is there any other fountain than the Divine
one, or \[that which springs\] from the Lord, who is Mercy and Innocence
Itself. This it was granted to see into, more fully \[melius\] by a
spiritual idea. - 1748, July 13.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2590.">2590.</span></span>

THAT SPIRITS KNOW FROM REFLECTION THAT THEY ARE PRESENT. It had happened
many times when I was thinking concerning anyone that he was displayed
\[as\] present, and when I was not thinking \[concerning him\] that \[he
was\] as it were absent; and indeed when I was thinking \[concerning
him\], he was immediately near me, yea, at \[my\] head. I have seen the
proximate cause \[thereof\], that when they were present they have not
known without reflection that they were present, as is wont to happen in
the life of the body, in societies, although \[they\] are present, yet
without reflection it is not known what is present: from which it may
also be manifest what reflection affects in the other life, where they
are visible to themselves, in such a manner, by the sight of the body. -
1748, July 13.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2591.">2591.</span></span>

THAT THE LORD HAS LED THE HUMAN RACE SINCE THE CREATION OF THE FIRST
MAN. This tender scruple had occurred: since it is so, that to man, and
each of his members and parts there correspond angels and spirits in the
Grand Man \[Maximo Corpore\], and that hence \[come\] endeavors
\[conatus\], which are active wherever is given power or passive
\[cedentia\], as may be known from certain truths of human philosophy,
if they are attended to, wherefore the scruple had occurred, how the
first man, and those who were born at first, before this Grand Man
\[Maximum Corpore\] was formed, could have existed. I received the reply
by a spiritual idea which is persuasive. It was confirmed that the first
man, and those born at first, have not been led by any other than the
Lord alone. For the Lord is all in all, nor is there any endeavor
\[conatus\] by the single things, in heaven and the spiritual world,
unless \[springing\] \[it arise\] from the Lord; also before man was
born, in the same manner as after man was born; for man, as to all his
degrees, existed similarly before his nativity as \[he existed\]
afterwards. Without Him nothing could be created, nor exist created.
Wherefore, also, He alone sustains the human race; like as formerly, but
now by mediate angels and spirits, then also immediately, without angels
and spirits, as also is confirmed by experience; of which I think \[I
have treated\] previously. For the human race was of Him from the
beginning, wherefore He has all care \[for them.\] - 1748, July 13.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2592.">2592.</span></span>

THAT THE LORD PRESERVES MAN FROM EVERY EVIL. This is evident to me from
such manifold experience that if I might bring together only my
experiences in general, a volume might be compiled; for almost daily
now, for some years, I have been surrounded by evil spirits, as well
around me as next to the head, \[and\] to the back; and not only have
they labored hard with every exertion, open insults, sorceries, deceits,
\[but also\] have attempted with clandestine arts to bring harm upon me,
as well also by dire maledictions, of which \[I have treated\]
previously. But each and all \[of these\] were fruitless, so that at
length I could utterly deride their endeavors and open insults. Thus the
Lord preserves the human race, each of whom is surrounded with evil
spirits, and especially at this day when evil has increased to such a
degree, and hence evil spirits have been increased, yea have existed of
the worst sort; and man does not wish to know this, but supposes that it
is he who preserves himself when nothing is farther from the truth: for
if the Lord should take away His hand only one littlest moment of all,
man would perish. - 1748, July 13.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2593.">2593.</span></span>

THAT NOTHING CAN BE LEARNED WITHOUT REFLECTION. When reflection is
absent not \[anything\] comes into the memory, as is sufficiently
evident; although the human sight is diffused into thousands and
thousands of objects, yet nevertheless the memory retains none of them
upon which he has had no external reflection. In like manner when he
thinks that upon which he has had reflection the memory retains. In a
word, without reflection nothing is infixed in man.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2594.">2594.</span></span>

But there is given an interior memory wherein everything whatever,
whether he reflects or does not reflect, is infixed, so that there is
not even the least thing, whatever has reached the sight of the body and
whatever has reached the internal sense, but is most accurately
impressed; hence the things upon which man does not reflect.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2595.">2595.</span></span>

But upon those things which are inscribed in his interior and more
interior things \[trusts\], man could never have any reflection, like as
neither upon this, how was acquired by him the faculty of thinking and
concluding analytically, which is so great a faculty as to exceed
indefinitely the artificial \[faculty of reasoning\], and man is so
ignorant as to his being endowed with such a faculty that he scarcely
knows anything concerning it, save afterwards by reflection.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2596.">2596.</span></span>

Such things, as also those which by that most hidden reflection are
insinuated in man by the Lord, because not through the reflection
accepted by him, still less manifested to him, are from the Lord \[and\]
not from another; therefore it is the gift of the Lord, so that man
cannot take the least glory to himself that he is man, and that it is
his to be able to think, still less that he may be regenerated. - 1748,
July 13.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2597.">2597.</span></span>

THAT THEY ARE OFTEN EXPELLED FROM HEAVEN. This takes place very often
and daily that certain spirits are expelled from heaven and brought back
to the inferior spirits. Certain of them talked with me after they had
been expelled. The reason is that they are in some falsity; wherefore
when they are amongst those who are in truth, they cannot be otherwise
than distressed, because immediately the truth of others and of the
whole heaven in general and singular, in the society where they are,
runs together as it were, wherefore unless they withdraw they cannot but
be grievously tormented; then they seem to themselves to be expelled and
to slide down or fall down.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2598.">2598.</span></span>

The reason that they are so often expelled and again put among inferior
spirits, to whom they are then entirely alike, \[is\] because when a
spirit is elevated into heaven, which also happens daily and in great
numbers, then those who have not been brought through many states, so as
to be able to be in many spiritual or celestial states, when they come
into such a spiritual or celestial state as they have not been initiated
in by the Lord, then are they in falsity, wherefore they fall down and
are also initiated in these states.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2599.">2599.</span></span>

Hence may be manifest that they who fall down from heaven do not
therefore become evil spirits; they were good who talked with me.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2600.">2600.</span></span>

It is otherwise with those who insinuate themselves by deceit, which
happens permissively; when these fall down thence they are evil. - 1748,
July 14.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2601-2650](sd23)
