[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Swedenborg](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sd24)  [Next](sd26.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0766143007/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Spiritual Diary*, by Emanuel Swedenborg, \[1758\], tr. by Bush,
Smithson and Buss \[1883-9\] at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Spiritual Diary

<span class="margnote"><span id="2701.">2701.</span></span>

CONCERNING PHILOSOPHIC AND NATURAL TRUTHS, TO WHOM THEY AVAIL IN
CONFIRMING SPIRITUAL THINGS. In a dream these was seen by me, a field,
which was of thick \[crasso\] and beautiful grass, but \[inserviente\]
for \[as\] food to \[for\] beast, for instance, oxen and horses, and, at
the same time in the same field there was seen a ripe \[matura\]
harvest, very dense \[heavy\], which was together with that dense grass,
and this was beyond a river \[fluvium\], and I perceived that the river
was called Euphrates: it seemed (as it were in Russia): and when I was
in the vision of the dream in this field thus sown beyond the Euphrates,
it came into my thought that it would be useful if all the fields in our
land also were sown with a similar grass along with a harvest \[crop\]
of wheat or barley: but it was replied to me in the dream, that if
\[this were done\] in our land (on this side \[intia\] the Euphrates)
that the land would be destroyed, but not so in that land across the
Euphrates. More things still \[yet\] were seen by me, in the dream,
which I do not remember. When I awoke, I thought as to what these things
signified.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2702.">2702.</span></span>

At length it was opened \[revealed\] to me, that the land across the
Euphrates is those who are in naturals and philosophies, and wish to be
confirmed thence, concerning spiritual and celestial things, and that
they cannot believe otherwise: for they are in such things, and think in
such a manner. Such thoughts are that plentiful grass, wherein wheat and
barley grow in exceeding abundance, until the grass scarcely appeared,
and is useful in such a land beyond \[across\] the Euphrates: but in the
lands which are on this side \[intra\] the Euphrates, to wit, amongst
those who do not care for such things, and yet believe in, yea love,
such grass or hay is not useful for their beasts \[cattle\], that is
philosophies and naturals, but they would destroy their land that is
their minds and thoughts \[by using it\]. These things were explained
from heaven. - 1748, July 29.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2703.">2703.</span></span>

IN ORDER THAT MEN OR SPIRITS MAY BE IN AN ANGELIC AND CELESTIAL SPHERE,
IT IS NECESSARY THAT THEY BE IN PERSUASION FROM \[de\] THE LORD. It is
known that science ought to precede, but science does nothing, next what
is intellectual which is the first of persuasion, then persuasion
thence, which is only intellectual, then interior persuasion: Unless man
is in the interior persuasion of things which belong to faith in the
Lord, he cannot be in an angelic and celestial sphere, for there are
repugnances \[contrarieties\], which repugnances expel him, yea distress
\[him\]. It was granted \[me\] to see this in spiritual idea. - 1748,
July 29.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2704.">2704.</span></span>

CONCERNING THOSE WHO ARE CARRIED AWAY WITH THE CUPIDITY \[LUST\] OF
MAIDENHOOD \[virginitatum\]. (((((Immediately before waking when I was
still, more asleep than awake, it seemed to me that someone read a
letter, which I heard, wherein was treated concerning the excrements of
maidenhood \[virginitatum\]; and when I awoke \[my\] mind \[animus\] was
held therein, as to what this meant \[asset\] \[concerning\] the
excrements of maidenhood. Then certain spirits spoke with me, and
explained who this was, to wit that there are those in the world who are
smitten with that perverse cupidity that they desire nothing more than
maidenhood; and the theft of maidenhood or the flowers of virgins is to
them the greatest delight, and so when they have stolen maidenhood, and
snatched away the first flower of youth, they afterwards forsake
\[relinquant\], loathe, reject them; certain also hold them in hatred,
as is read of Amnon the son of David; thus during their life, the more
maidenhoods they can carry off stealthily, and so the more \[virgins\]
they can deflower, the more they boast. Such were the cupidities which
were understood by the excrements of maidenhood.)))))

<span class="margnote"><span id="2705.">2705.</span></span>

Concerning these I then conversed with spirits, and was informed, that
such cannot be tolerated among other spirits, but are rejected like
excrements from their societies, which also flows confirmed from the
laws of order of natural and spiritual and celestial things, concerning
which they also spoke with me: for every celestial society is founded in
conjugial love, from which all good loves and affections are derived:
thus \[they are founded\] in innocence. Such \[persons\] endeavor to
destroy with their cupidities the principles of love as well as of
innocence, for these are not wholly opposed \[contra\] to all conjugial
love, which they hold in hatred, but also are opposed to innocence,
which they so injure that they may kill it: besides which they induce
innocent \[persons\] who can be imbued with conjugial love, to live
afterwards in harlotry, thus are the murderers \[homicidia, I think\] of
the interior nature: for it is well known that the first flower of love
is what inducts virgins into conjugial love, and conjoins \[conectit\]
the minds \[animos\] of husband and wife \[conjugum\]. Spirits spoke
with me of these things.)))))

<span class="margnote"><span id="2706.">2706.</span></span>

It was further told me that such cupidities and practices of such
cupidities are what are understood by sins against the Holy Spirit: for
the holiness of angels is founded in conjugial love, and in innocence,
as \[already\] said: which are the principles of all spiritual and
celestial loves and affections of good, thus of societies in the
heavens, and since such cupidities are contrary to the principles of
holiness, therefore such are what are principally understood by sins
against the Holy Spirit.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2708.">2708.</span></span>

(((((Wherefore their punishment in the other life is most grievous, for
they cannot be admitted into societies. Their punishment was also seen
by me \[to wit\] that they seem to themselves to sit on a furious horse,
who projects them upwards, so that they are thrown from the horse, with
danger \[discriminibus\] to their life; and afterwards they are
represented under the horse, covered up \[obvelati\]. I do not yet know
on what account they are represented as covered up, and stand under the
belly of that horse; and the horse above, and likewise furious \[and\]
seem to themselves to endeavor to kill them. Then they seem to
themselves to pass under through the interior part of the horse's belly
into his belly,

<span class="margnote"><span id="2709.">2709.</span></span>

and then suddenly it appears to them, as if (they were in the belly of a
meretricious woman, who, shortly \[ilico\] seems to them to be changed
into a great dragon or serpent, such as some of the Gentiles adore
\[worship\], and there \[such a spirit\] remains in \[cum\] torment,
covered up; for he seems to himself covered up, and thus seems to be
without respiration; and thus they are vastated. This punishment recurs
many times, and I was told for many years, if not hundreds or thousands
of years, until they no longer remember such cupidities; and not even
themselves \[qui\], no matter how much of life they have passed
\[habuerint\] in such things.)))))

<span class="margnote"><span id="2710.">2710.</span></span>

((((Concerning the offspring, I was told that they are worse than the
infants of others; for they also derive such \[a principle\] by
inheritance from their parent; wherefore not many infants are born of
such, and if born, do not remain in life. - 1748, July 30.))))

<span class="margnote"><span id="2711.">2711.</span></span>

CONCERNING A KITCHEN. When I went to bed, suddenly to me there was
opened a door to a sort of kitchen; and when the door was opened, I felt
the heat of a kitchen strike my face, and saw some running about there,
and hard at work; besides culinary vessels around the walls, also a
great fire-place; but these things \[were seen\] obscurely, hence I
could notice that it was a kitchen \[culinary\] place, and they who were
there were called cooks. When it was inquired what manner of persons
were such in the other life, I was instructed that these are they, who
are delighted with \[that\] foulest lust, of defiling infants and very
little girls. (These things it is not thus proper to speak in public,
lest they come into man's thought.) Sometimes, also, were shown there,
who have been infants, some 1/2, 1, 3, 5, 6 years old. These are in such
a kitchen, and one cooks another in boiling water, and are therein
tormented in the direst manner. - 1748, July 31.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2712.">2712.</span></span>

Those who spoke afterwards, said that they wonder that all are not such;
with such delight are they affected that the delight from such things
exceeds with them every other delight. The world at this day is thus
corrupt, and such has become the hereditary \[principle\], and so
diffuses itself into posterities by various ways are not, therefore, the
last times at hand? Things are generated before unheard of, which
destroy the nature of man, like as with those who perished at last by
the deluge.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2713.">2713.</span></span>

CONCERNING THE GOVERNMENT OR THE UNIVERSE, - THAT THE UNIVERSE IS NOT
RULED BY THE LORD, ACCORDING TO THE FALLACIES AND PHANTASIES OF MEN
WHEREIN THERE ARE INDEFINITE THINGS WHICH RESIST \[REPUGNANT\]. In human
minds, perverted and inverted, their conclusions are principally, and
almost wholly, drawn from the government of externals; thus from the
fallacies of the senses and phantasies, especially as to why the Lord
does not guard and turn away man from evils, yea, from cruelties, and
the like, which are to be dreaded and execrated, when yet the hearts of
all are in his hand. For instance, why he did not turn away David from
so cruelly treating the Ammonites; from adultery with Bathsheba; Solomon
from idolatry; and indefinite things of this kind, which may occur at
any moment in the thoughts of man. I conversed concerning this matter
yesterday and today, of whom they are of a perverted and inverted
nature, pertinaciously insist that, either the Lord cannot \[or will
not\]; beside very many other things which they revolved in their minds.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2714.">2714.</span></span>

But this is a \[the\] truth, that the Lord rules the universe by an
infinite providence, than which nothing can be conceived \[that is\]
more infinite and wise. And because this is the truth, it follows that
thoughts \[cogitata\] which resist \[repugnant\] are false; for \[this\]
one thing is true, - moreover, that there is no moment of man's thought
and action, which has not along with itself, and is wont to have, a
successive series of consequents to eternity; every moment whatever of
life, is a beginning of consequents of life, and as it were a seed from
which one \[thing\] indefinites follow to eternity; this also is true.
Since these are truths, it follows that the things which in lowest
nature appear resistances \[repugnantioe\] are fallacies of the senses
and phantasies.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2715.">2715.</span></span>

Moreover, this also is a truth, that externals are ruled by internals,
and that otherwise they cannot be ruled, and indeed through \[by\] order
of succession from priors or interiors. Since, therefore, externals are
so perverted and inverted, as no longer to suffer themselves to be
ruled; and these things are rooted in man's nature and so transplanted
into posterity, it follows that man of such a quality, or \[his\] nature
of such a quality, does not, because it is impossible, suffer \[itself\]
to be ruled by order of succession \[succedentium\] from priors or
interiors in order. But that the reins are, as it were, loosened, and
\[they\] rush along without a leader, and without order. Wherefore,
there are other bonds which are called external bonds, wherewith the
Lord governs them, as through fear of the loss of their life, their
wealth, their honors and dignities, their beauty \[suoe formoe\] the
punishments of law, and the like, by which man is at last ruled by the
Lord; and so not by internal bonds, which are called bonds of
conscience; consequently, not through \[by\] faith, and \[the things\]
which are its bonds, to wit, fear of punishment, fear of evil, love of
the true and good.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2716.">2716.</span></span>

Wherefore it is in general \[communi\] society, as in every man
whatever. When evil begins to prevail in the body, \[in\] its blood,
then disease threatens and attacks \[it\], and the soul thereof which is
called nature, labors in vain to repair slips and hurts, wherefore man
dies.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2717.">2717.</span></span>

It is like what happens in the atmosphere, when it is hurried along
\[rapitur\] by a violent tempest, and overturns houses, woods, ships,
although the interior atmosphere, which \[is\] its nature, and
continually reduces the exterior to equilibrium, is then of no avail, by
reason of so great a tempest, to equilibrium. This, if not known to
everyone, may still be known to many and the learned of the world. -
1748, July 3. Hence also may be apparent, that if man concludes from
external appearances concerning internal, spiritual, and celestial
things, then he begins utterly to deny heavenly truths. \[It is\]
otherwise if \[he concludes\] from heavenly truths.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2718.">2718.</span></span>

CONCERNING PREVIDENCE AND PROVIDENCE. From eternity are previded and
provided by the Lord, each and all things, but evils are previded and
provided. - 1748, July 31.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2719.">2719.</span></span>

CONTINUATION CONCERNING THE KITCHEN \[culinario\] \[HEAT\]. Those of
such a sort as I have previously written of, came where there were
societies of spirits, and these said that they could not have subsided,
on account of the offensive smell \[propter, gravedinem foetoris\],
thus, that they could not have lived unless they had been permitted to
flee away. Of such a sort are those who are in the kitchen fire
\[heat\], and are the worst and most offensive \[gravissimi\] of all in
the world, so that the world can scarcely subsist if such were
multiplied; yea, they are such that they boast of these things; they
also delight with exceeding ardor \[summa cupidine\] in this, that they
can inveigle others, which is the reason that their infernal punishments
are more grievous than the infernal punishment of all other sins. -
1748, July 31.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2720.">2720.</span></span>

CONCERNING THE VARIETIES OF FELICITIES IN THE HEAVENS. There are souls,
who have been raised up into a sort of heavenly joy, that spoke with me
concerning heavenly joy, to whom it was granted me to say that every
soul, even the evil, can be in heavenly Joy in some state or other; and
that there are indefinite states, and their variations of a most general
kind \[communissimi\], so that they cannot be in the joys of heaven save
in a very few \[states\], \[and\] in others not at all. It was also
granted to say, that the variations of general states also have their
order, or that there is an order of general states, as also that the
changes are perpetual to eternity, but wholly out of the Lord's good
pleasure. - 1748, August 1.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2721.">2721.</span></span>

CONCERNING THE FOUR PECULIAR STYLES OF THE OLD TESTAMENT. I was told
from heaven that there are four styles peculiar to the Old Testament;
the style of the Ancient and Most ancient Churches, such as is employed
in the Book of Genesis in treating of Paradise and the tower of Babel;
and another style is the historical style employed in the First Book of
Moses, whereof the writer was ignorant that it contained heavenly
arcana: the third style is the prophetic, such as the prophets employed,
which is indeed similar to the style of the Ancient Church, only that
\[things\] are scattered. This style was retained because the men of
that time admired it on account of its antiquity. The fourth style was
such as belongs to the Psalms of David which is an intermediate style. -
1748, August 2.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2722.">2722.</span></span>

THAT NO EFFECT CAN EXIST IN THE UNIVERSE WITHOUT AN ACTIVE AND PASSIVE,
THEREFORE WITHOUT A MARRIAGE. Whatever is born \[brought forth\] in the
world and its threefold kingdom, can by no means be born without a
patient and agent. There are indefinite things which confirm this, and
there is no effect in the universe that would not confirm it, if man
applied himself to the conforming of these things. In the human body not
the least particle is given that produces anything in regard to
\[circa\] which there is not an agent and patient and thus (it produces
and procreates an effect: nor the least idea of thought \[but is
similarly circumstanced\]. This is most true.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2723.">2723.</span></span>

Hence it can be known that in human minds, unless that which is the
principal is the agent, and that which is subordinate is the patient,
order is inverted, and nothing but evil can be produced.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2724.">2724.</span></span>

Hence it may also be known that in the universal heaven and world of
spirits and the earth \[et terris\], unless the Lord is agent and ruler
\[dominans\] and all are patients and obedient, never can anything true
and good be produced. This is called the heavenly marriage. This \[is
said\] from heaven. - 1748, August 2.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2725.">2725.</span></span>

CONCERNING SPIRITS WHO WISHED TO ENTER BY THOUGHT INTO THE MYSTERIES OF
FAITH AND TO BELIEVE FROM RATIOCINATIONS. This often happened that
spirits have wished to enter by ratiocinations into the mysteries of
faith, and not to believe unless they have grasped by apprehension that
it can be so - to these it was granted to say that we should believe,
though we do not grasp by apprehension, and that to wish to believe,
because they apprehend, is an inversion of order. This was shown in many
ways.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2726.">2726.</span></span>

Today, also, certain wished to enter into the inmost mysteries of faith,
to whom it was granted to show that this is a perverted way, and that we
should believe because \[it is\] the truth, and if no reason penetrates
\[the mysteries of faith\] or is discovered, still we should believe,
and if any \[reason\] be discovered, still we should believe. And it was
given to represent to them by a representative idea, a little seed of a
tree; so that if it were said that a little seed produces a sound and
blooming tree, which also was represented for them to the life, with
boughs, leaves \[and\] fruits, yea that such a little seed can thus
produce a field \[campun\] full of trees when they were told.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2727.">2727.</span></span>

that such a seed principle \[seminatum\] produces such \[a result\], and
yet they can see nothing in the seed and know the causes whence such
things exist, they do not on that account deny; for the truth is
demonstrated. Thus we should believe in the truths spoken by the Lord
and concerning the Lord, although we do not penetrate them by reason;
and therefore to wish to deny, because we do not penetrate by reason, is
like wishing to deny the procreations of trees from seeds, and of
animals from eggs. It is so in a thousand other things. Hence may be
manifest of what quality is the faith of man when he believes nothing
but what he sees, which is common at this day, especially amongst the
learned of the world. - 1748, August 3.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2728.">2728.</span></span>

(CONCERNING THE WONDERFUL CIRCULATION OF IDEAS IN HEAVEN. It has been
previously shown me that the thoughts and speech of spirits, in the
world of spirits, circulate almost according to \[such\] circumvolutions
as are in the human cerebrum, where are wonderful windings
\[circuitiones\], inflexions, influxes, returns \[reditus\], which can
never be comprehended, because they are according to the forms of
turnings \[volutionum\] of the world of spirits.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2729.">2729.</span></span>

In heaven there are still more wonderful circumvolutions, according to
the celestial form, and indeed incomprehensible, according to which
ideas, hence thoughts, hence speech, hence also representations, do
circulate. Affections produce them.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2730.">2730.</span></span>

These circulations are so wonderful that no one is capable of ever
comprehending \[them\] in the most general manner.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2731.">2731.</span></span>

Hence it may be concluded that all the thoughts of angels, and hence of
spirits, exist and are produced by \[from\] the Lord alone; for these
things must exist from one who is in the highest things \[in supremis\],
otherwise would exist no circumvolution, nor idea, nor order thereof,
nor form, nor law, nor distinction, as to genera and species; in a word
nothing vital, consequently nothing natural wherein \[is\] life, nor any
inanimate natural thing. - 1748, August 3.)

<span class="margnote"><span id="2732.">2732.</span></span>

CONCERNING THE OPINION \[HELD BY\] SOME THAT INASMUCH AS THE LORD GRANTS
ALL THE THINGS OF FAITH, AND NOTHING IS OF MAN, THEREFORE \[MAN\] MAY
ACT PASSIVELY AND DROP HIS HAND. When certain spirits have heard and
thought that the Lord alone lives, and they are nothing, and that it is
an especial point of faith that the Lord alone gives faith, and that man
of his own strength was adequate to nothing, nor could will, nor do
anything, they fell into the opinion that thus they should drop
\[remitterent\] everything, and act as if they were nothing, and expect
the active force \[vim agentem\] and influx from the Lord.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2733.">2733.</span></span>

But such a conclusion is of no value. The Lord grants to man to be, as
it were, active, and to be, as it were, adequate of himself, so that
sometimes he knows no other than that \[he acts\] of himself. Wherefore,
man ought not to fall into that opinion; when he is in that opinion he
then does nothing, and no effect can be imputed to him, therefore he
cannot be reformed. But the strength which he receives \[is\] from the
Lord, and when the Lord thus operates in him, he then should strive from
himself; but still to believe, when he thinks of these things, that the
strength is not his but the Lord's. This also is a \[the\] part of
faith. - 1748, August 4.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2734.">2734.</span></span>

This thing is as hidden from the natural man who is not led by the Lord,
as is perception; whereof \[I have treated\] previously, only such
induced belief \[inductio\], opinion and reflection, causes that the
Lord does not operate, and man is not reformed, but that he is in a
state of nonentity. Nor can man come into persuasion save by the Lord's
operation through his \[own\] strength as it were. Hence the Lord
persuades man, otherwise the word becomes mere knowledge, and produces
no effect, just like miracles.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2735.">2735.</span></span>

THAT EYERYTHING PERTAINING TO MAN'S LIFE INFLOWS FROM THE LORD. Spirits
around me insisted that they each were \[those\] who excited life in
\[apud\] themselves: they supposed that they excited the objects of
thoughts, and thus live of themselves; but it was granted to tell them
that nothing moves \[stirs at\] the thought unless it be an object, thus
through the eye and ear, \[and\] so from the memory; otherwise confusion
of everything would result: and that these objects could come from
nowhere else than from the Lord, the only fountain of life, and that
they are varied according to their natural dispositions; so the objects
of ideas, consequently ideas, pass from one to another; hence they
suppose that \[it proceeds\] from others, and that \[it proceeds\] from
themselves, which is most false. The eye cannot see without light, nor
the ear hear without sound and so forth. - 1748, August 4.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2736.">2736.</span></span>

THAT SCIENCES CONTRIBUTE NOTHING TO SALVATION, BUT RATHER CONFUSE
\[AND\] DISTORT IDEAS. I conversed with spirits concerning this: that
the sciences do not contribute to salvation, but only the knowledges of
truth out of the Lord's Word, are \[what contribute\] - and that this
may be compared to the knowledge of the human body, as to anatomies, the
blood, all the constitution of the rest, \[which knowledge\] contributes
nothing to the preservation of health; so that he who understands
nothing of these things, still lives as healthy as he who during all his
life has been intent on these studies. Likewise intellectual health
\[soundness\] \[sanitas\] may be possessed in much greater degree by
those who know nothing of the understanding and its faculties, than by
him who has studied these things all his life, and confused with
hypotheses, and scholastics. - 1748, August 4.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2737.">2737.</span></span>

CONCERNING THE SPIRITUAL BONDS, WHEREIN ALL ARE HELD. These spiritual
bonds cannot so \[easily\] be described to the apprehension, for \[the
spirits\] are held, like as was given me to observe with \[apud\]
spirits, or in the world of spirits, that they are so held, that they
cannot think as much evil as do \[it\]. Thus they are kept by the good
of the Lord from evil, as if they were held suspended away from evil;
which also was granted to learn from living experience. For as soon as
the bond was relaxed, the spirit was borne away into evil, and indeed
into enormous \[evil\], as much the willing as the thinking of evil
\[tam velle, malum, quam, cogitare malum\]. So the Lord alone is he who
thus detains \[keeps\] heaven, the world and spirits and the human race
from evil, and indeed in such a manner, that if \[the bond\] were
relaxed, everyone would rush into enormous evil, yea into all
destruction - likewise also into falsehoods \[mendacia\]. - 1748, August
5.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2738.">2738.</span></span>

These bonds do not appear as bonds to spirits, nor likewise to man, but
as liberties; for they do not perceive that they are thus held back: yea
so free do the bonds appear to them, that when they are remitted to
them, and they have hence perceived that they would rush into all evil,
they have asked that they should not be remitted: thus do spirits abhor
the remission of bonds.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2739.">2739.</span></span>

In regard to my own case, I have now sensibly perceived for three years
that I am detained in such a bond, so that to myself I might seem to
think, will and act from myself, also \[that I am\] in a \[the\] sphere
of faith, in which sphere I have sensibly perceived \[myself\] detained
for three years.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2740.">2740.</span></span>

CONCERNING SORCERIES OR TRULLDOM IN THE OTHER. CONCERNING THEIR SPHERE
WHO ARE WORLDLY, IN THE OTHER LIFE, AND DESIRE TO COMMAND OTHERS.
((((They who in the life of the body are of such a nature that by means
of interior craftiness they allure to themselves companions and friends,
and insinuate themselves by means of externals, have in the other life a
sphere sufficiently powerful to effect the like; and because there are
such numbers \[tam multi\] who live for the world, inclination \[genio\]
and cupidities, they are also easily allured into the society of such,
and sometimes involuntarily, or when they are unwilling: for of such a
nature is the sphere of these, as was shown me today by living
experience. Which happened from permission that it might be known, and
that \[they\] might know of what quality \[these enticing spirits\]
were. - 1748, August 5.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2741.">2741.</span></span>

Since such \[enticing spirits\] desire to command others, and exercise
punishments, and by various cunning to subordinate them to themselves,
and are habituated to these \[things\] in the life of the body - many
are associated with them in the other life; hence their sphere is a
great \[one\], and inasmuch as they seem to themselves adequate of
themselves to everything, yea by various arts which they devise and
invent, therefore they are such male and female \[qui et quae\] as are
reckoned amongst sorcerers \[seu trulldoms stuggelser\].

<span class="margnote"><span id="2742.">2742.</span></span>

It is a general tenet, that they who think that of themselves they are
adequate to all things are reckoned amongst sorcerers male and female
\[proestigfiatores et proestigiatrices\]. Of such there are even genera
and species. \[They are not those\] who \[act\] from simplicity, and
who, when they act, purpose good to the neighbor and society, but are
those who \[act\] from cunning and purpose evil. Wherefore such suppose
that of themselves they are adequate to all things; and because they
have been of such a character in the life of the body, that they loved
nothing more than to devise ways \[modus\] how they could subject others
to themselves and command them, from very many causes \[springing\] from
self and the world, therefore in the other life when they \[come\] into
other powers and other arts, and amongst such as are called sorcerers,
diviners, etc., therefore because they are of \[in\] such a nature, they
think of nothing else, than to command by right or wrong \[her fas et me
fas\] and to subject others to themselves, by arts which they easily
learn and take up in that world.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2743.">2743.</span></span>

Such \[spirits\] inasmuch as in the life of the body they have loved
nothing more than such things, take parts unknown to them whilst in the
life of the body, or to those who are in the body, as easily as if they
were sponges put in the water, so that they immediately suck
\[exseegant\] from the man with whom they are present, or the spirits
with whom they are nothing else but such things: from whomsoever they
can obtain these things, moreover they also turn goods into evils. They
are as it were venomous animals like scorpions, from which when pounded
up and mixed with oil, they immediately snatch to themselves every
poison that wounds \[vulneris\], etc.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2744.">2744.</span></span>

It may be proper to narrate a single instance: When I was asleep at
night, such \[spirits\] stood by, and by their deadly arts \[practiced\]
upon those who were around; they spoke with others as if it was I, with
my speech as it were, and indeed so similar that they induced many to
believe that it was I: and thus they love to induce a persuasion of what
are falsehoods, and to destroy what things are true, yea, with such
ingenuity that spirits even more subtle, who were at a distance from me
were persuaded and supposed it was I: and it is the same to them, by
what means profane or sacred they obtain \[their ends\].

<span class="margnote"><span id="2745.">2745.</span></span>

They are exceedingly proud of this, that they can be subtle, and within
the sphere of speech, or in the sphere of thoughts within speech,
wherein are interior spirits, since \[when\] in that sphere are
innumerable \[spirits\] as you may see above. They can transmit
\[transfer\] themselves in such a manner, by an art unknown in the life
of the body, but still innate in them, through almost continual
intentions in the life of the body, that they can transmit themselves
into that inferior sphere, and thus remove themselves from the society
of those who are in the exterior sphere. Concerning that interior sphere
see above: and there are many things \[besides\] \[concerning it\] which
are unknown to me.))))

<span class="margnote"><span id="2746.">2746.</span></span>

But they, inasmuch as they love nothing more than through cunning to
attract the minds \[animos\] of other spirits by right or wrong, and so
love nothing above the deceiving with falsehoods and \[their\] arts at
the same time, or with kinds of deceit familiar to them, therefore when
I awoke, and they were still at the work of speaking as it were I, with
their arts which man cannot perceive, should they be declared, and when
they observed that I had waked in the night, wished to contrive
falsehoods and thus steal away: which when the upright spirits observed,
whom they had deceived, thence \[were\] angry. There came those who
punished them and indeed with intense \[ingenti\] torment by rending
them, by a mode of punishment of which I think \[I have treated
already\], thus \[rending them\] piece by piece and particle by particle
\[ita frustatim et ita minutim\], by (((((tearing asunder, and various
collisions, so that there was nothing of them))))) but what was rended.
Thus the \[punishers\] endeavor to disjoin \[dissolve\] \[everything\]
in them, piece by piece and particle by particle. But a spirit cannot be
dissolved, and perish, but \[this\] is done with the greatest torment
and pain.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2747.">2747.</span></span>

But those who were able to let themselves into the interior sphere of
spirits said that they are free from rending; whether it was so, I do
not yet know, for of such \[spirits\] the nature is to love nothing
above falsifying, so that they can speak nothing at all but what are
falsehoods, and if \[they speak\] things \[that are\] true, it is only
for the sake of craftiness, that they may deceive and persuade.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2748.">2748.</span></span>

I saw afterwards how such \[spirits\] appeared as to their fingers: they
were very black, without flesh; they were as it were the fingers of a
scorpion, thus: \[klor\] and hung down \[hooked\] at the lower part.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2749.">2749.</span></span>

There afterwards appeared a long porch where \[halm\]; and I saw one
spirit entering at the right side, where I perceived was (Ladugard); it
is not permitted to relate \[any\] more. - 1748, August 6.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2750.">2750.</span></span>

Such are \[those\] who are to be denominated interior sorcerers
\[trulldom\]; for they act interiorly, and their arts are not so patent
to spirits. Moreover there are given \[those\] who practice grosser
sorceries: they are like foolish \[persons\]: they commingle whatever is
visible \[obvium\] mutual, natural, spiritual, and suppose that in them
is great power \[vim\] of doing \[to do\] whatever they desire. Such are
in a sort of dream, and do not know what they are doing, and such are
\[those\] who dwell in a privy.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2751-2800](sd26.md)
