[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Swedenborg](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sd34)  [Next](sd36.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0766143007/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Spiritual Diary*, by Emanuel Swedenborg, \[1758\], tr. by Bush,
Smithson and Buss \[1883-9\] at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Spiritual Diary

<span class="margnote"><span id="3201.">3201.</span></span>

CONCERNING PERSUASION. In order that I may know how and wherefore the
Lord permits spirits to undergo sometimes such punishments and torments
in the other life, I was let into a state so that a certain very
friendly spirit might, as it were, be borne into the most grievous
punishments, although it was others \[who endured them\]; and then I was
held in that state \[so as to see\] \[know\] that if he did not undergo
such punishments as were most grievous, he would never become good. In
that state I was kept with a persuasion that it was impossible for him
to have become good unless tempered. In that state I could not at all
pity him, still less wish to yield him assistance; for good was then in
my heart and was continually infused into my meditation \[volvere\].
Hence I may know how the Lord permits such even grievous punishments,
because he turns everything into good, and intends nothing else but
good, and what may be a means to his reformation. - 1748, September 19.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3202.">3202.</span></span>

THAT IN THE LEFT FOOT, UP TO THE KNEE, DWELL THOSE WHO \[AS\] NATURAL
\[SPIRITS\] CORRESPOND TO CELESTIAL \[SPIRITS\]. In my left foot I felt
a multitude of spirits: I believe I spoke a little with them, and told
them that they seem to be in the foot, but that they were dispersed
throughout the world \[universum orbem terrarum\], and yet are felt in
the foot; and I was instructed that these are they who are natural good
spirits, and correspond to celestial spirits, so that the celestial
spirits adjoined to them could have spoken with me. - 1748, September
19.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3203.">3203.</span></span>

CONCERNING NUDITY OF THE HEAD. A certain one desired that his head
should be laid bare \[nudari\]. This is usual with those from whom
callosities \[calli\] are taken away, and \[who\] then become infantile.
It is otherwise with some according to their interior constitution. But
with him who wished it, when \[his\] head was laid bare, there appeared
a bare, osseous \[bony\] head of the color of the human face; and
spirits said that he was of such a nature interiorly that he could never
forgive anyone who once seemed to him to do him harm, so that he
retained vengeance till death; and in like manner the same \[spirit\]
confessed that unless such excuse was made (intervened) \[intervenerit\]
before the whole world, the honor of his reputation should be revenged;
but I apperceive that not even then \[would he have been appeased\]. -
1748, September 19.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3204.">3204.</span></span>

THAT THEY HAVE READ \[MY\] WRITING FROM AFAR. When certain were removed,
according to appearance, to a distance, yea to such a distance that they
were but slightly heard, they then read \[my\] writing from thence by
\[with\] their mouth \[acting\] in \[apud\] me, better than I \[could\].
Since they were thus able to see thence, from which it is apparent that
distance is an imaginary thing. - 1748, September 19.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3205.">3205.</span></span>

CONCERNING SIRENS. There were many sirens with me who were afterwards
represented by inverted bodies; so that as far as the head they were
towards me, and the other part towards Gehenna; so they who suffer
themselves to be enticed \[pelliceri, I think\] by them pass from their
sweet \[flatteries\] to their posteriors, where was Gehenna. - 1748,
September 19.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3206.">3206.</span></span>

CONCERNING GEHENNA. ((((Gehenna appears to those who rush \[appellunt\]
thither, as a fire; and indeed that it is like a fire was granted \[me\]
to know from the heat that flowed thence into my face. Spirits said, and
lamented, that such offensive smell \[foetor\] exhales thence from burnt
bones and hairs, as it were, so that they could not endure it. Something
of it was also brought to me, but I felt little of it. The most
deceitful are there, especially sirens, who by a species of piety enter
the minds of others, and most deceitfully delude and seduce \[mislead\]
\[them\], so that never can anyone resist unless the Lord protect him;
companies \[phalanges\] of sirens flew out of thence, and were perceived
through \[per\] the hairs and topmost \[supremum\] skin of my head,
which they caused to quiver \[tremiscenter movebant\]. These are also
such as esteem the conjugial \[principle\] as of no account, \[being\]
in the greatest \[summa\] persuasion, that it is of no account, \[and\]
so regard adulteries as proper. Again, there came a blast \[afflabat\]
thence to the nostrils, like the offensive smell \[foetor\] of bones and
hairs, together with heat. Such \[spirits\] greatly persecute the
innocent, and entice them to lusts, harlotries, and finally to
adulteries, under the pretext of propriety \[honesti\]. There also are
those principally who were reputed in the world as leading a becoming
life, \[also\] a few of the lower sort; and they there feel sweetness as
if in their atmosphere, which is of such a nature; but afterwards it is
changed into dreadful serpents, that bite and devour their breasts and
genital members, as they report to me. I have heard them thence, when
only a few serpents begin to arrive there \[es tangere\], \[saying\]
that they care for nothing, because they prefer death to losing the
pleasantness of that atmosphere: with such most disgraceful, lustful
\[venera\] frenzy are they smitten. - 1748, September 19.))))

<span class="margnote"><span id="3207.">3207.</span></span>

CONCERNING THE SIRENS OF GEHENNA. (((Certain of them were with me, and I
was informed by them, that they are \[not only\] as it were hot, just as
it seems to themselves, but are fiery, as is usual, in \[their\] frenzy.
So also when they approach the celestial things of love, thus towards
heaven, that they become cold, yea, as cold as snow and ice. They can
\[become\] both fire and ice: thus \[can undulate\] from one extreme to
the other, so that they are miserably tortured. - 1748, September 19.)))

<span class="margnote"><span id="3208.">3208.</span></span>

CONCERNING A HEAVENLY ARCANUM. It is a heavenly arcanum, that conjugial
love may so enter into heaven according to appearance, as \[to reach\]
the inmost with a perception of felicity. This according to appearance.
That communication is also actually given, is because the life of the
Lord inflows, through the inmost heaven, thus, in order, through
consequents, into the conjugial love of those who are kept such by the
Lord, amongst whom, it does not appear other than that it enters from
them into heaven. - 1748, September 20.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3209.">3209.</span></span>

THAT THE INTELLECTUAL \[PRINCIPLE\] CAN APPREHEND, OR UNDERSTAND, THAT
\[THERE IS\] AN INTERNAL \[PRINCIPLE\] OR \[A PRINCIPLE\] INTERIOR TO
ITSELF, BUT CANNOT ENTER \[IT\]. I perceived this in spiritual idea,
that the rational and intellectual \[principle\] can never enter those
things which are interior to itself but yet can know and understand,
that there are \[such\], also their quality. - 1748, September 20.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3210.">3210.</span></span>

THAT THE QUALITY OF A MAN IS SOMETIMES DISTINGUISHED FROM A SINGLE WORD.
That all words are ideas, and one word signifies many things, is also
\[evident\] by affinities: so that thus also may the quality of a spirit
be detected. Sometimes, from the most general \[things\]: as when it was
inquired concerning someone whether he was merciful: it was said that he
was kairful, which signifies mercy. When \[I had gone on\] farther in
the way, it came to my ears, \[and\] I heard \[as\] at a distance that
he was merciful, further on \[I heard\] somewhat nearer, that he loved
the sex, or women, which also the same word signifies, farther on, when
nearer, he was pitch-black, from kiam, so that he was coal-black. -
1748, September 20.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3211.">3211.</span></span>

CONCERNING THE EXCREMENTITIOUS HELL. The excrementitious hell is under
the seat, or the buttocks, where are many, to whom human excrement is
given to eat. They are those men and women \[qui vel quae\] who in the
life of the body had nothing else, as an end, but the various pleasures
of the body. One was with me; she complained of her miserable fate: then
there was an excrementitious smell \[foetor\]. Such are in privies. -
1748, September 20.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3212.">3212.</span></span>

CONCERNING A PALOESTRA. (((((It has been already mentioned \[mention has
already been made\] concerning a paloestra, a little below, in front. It
was again seen by me: they \[do\] nothing there but sport, dance,
converse, and live in delights, ad Cereos and so forth. From these are
\[come\] they who \[quoe\] are borne away to that excrementitious hell.
- 1748, September 20.)))))

<span class="margnote"><span id="3213.">3213.</span></span>

CONCERNING THE RAINBOW HEAVEN. ((((It was granted to think concerning
the vitreous humour of the eye, where is a pellucid substance,
compounded from lesser forms, in the interior chamber of the eye: and
then certain \[spirits\] to the right, on high, where I did not remember
anyone had previously appeared, said that they saw a heaven than which
was nothing fairer, to wit, a pearly, then a crystalline, then an
adamantine aura: as if the universal aura consisted of such flashes of
light \[fulgurationibus\]; then \[they saw\] an aura, full of the like:
\[this aura was\] radiated in each least form, like most beautiful
rainbows: then there was round about, the form of a very large rainbow,
encircling \[the sky\] \[and\] most beautiful: then the same rainbow
\[was\] as it were composed of those least \[ones\] or \[was that\] from
which the leasts sprung \[were originated\], like most beautiful images.
This is the heaven of the rainbow, or the rainbow \[heaven\] to which
corresponds the vitreous humour of the eye. - 1748, September 20.))))

<span class="margnote"><span id="3214.">3214.</span></span>

CONCERNING A DECEITFUL ASSASSIN \[homicida\] WHO HAS BEEN MENTIONED
BEFORE. For some time, the deceitful assassin was at liberty in heaven,
in the society of similar infernal \[spirits\], and being cast out to
Gehenna, seemed to fly like a black body, or like an inanimate mass, and
still, what astonished me, there exhaled thence so much subtle poison,
that it excited the deceitful and more deceitful sirens, who so
scattered \[sprinkled\] and practiced their deceits, that it cannot be
described: for it would require a very long time to narrate that
history. Hence was granted to learn the quality of the sirens: who also
were with me afterwards.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3215.">3215.</span></span>

The same deceitful assassin, when it was said \[loquutum est\]
concerning the life of spirits, that there is but one \[unica\] life, to
wit \[that\] of the Lord, consequently \[that\] of love: and it was
shown that all were merely organs of life, and the life of the Lord
inflowed, and was varied according to the quality of the organs: also
that love alone is life, and this was shown that man and spirit without
loves and their cupidities enjoy no life, then the deceitful assassin
appeared like an inanimate mass: thus did he represent himself out of
deceit: and then perhaps spread \[his\] deceits around, like poisons;
wherefore other spirits were indignant at him;

<span class="margnote"><span id="3216.">3216.</span></span>

and he was therefore cast, to a greater distance thence, deep down
\[profundius\], on the left, and there lay as if deprived of life, so
that he supposed all of life had been taken away from him: he still
spoke a few words, but yet being raised up, said that he had then been,
as he was in the world, or in the body. Hence it may be evident, what is
the quality of a spirit, when remitted in such a state as was his when
in the body. He, because of such a nature, said that he loves that life.
Wherefore he was again sent thither, I believe, and such a life was left
him, as was taken away, and there remains a little of life, with
torment: such \[a life\] as I was once in: when in that state of life,
he piteously begged to be liberated. I do not remember his words \[ejus
vocis\]: but he made piteous lamentation. He was therefore presently
remitted into another state of life, into which, when he returned, he
again uttered his hatreds, so that he never forgave them.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3217.">3217.</span></span>

At length, when it was granted to speak concerning certain things
written and published by me, concerning the devil \[to wit\], that he
was created before the creation of the world, as a copula \[link\]
between heavenly and corporeal things; which was also confirmed by this,
that they could not have been written differently, inasmuch as the
Christian world does not believe different; and that he was created a
good angel, but afterwards fell and was cast from heaven; besides other
things: then, inasmuch as these were the principles of the worshippers
of nature, he snatched at these things so eagerly, that he said he had
never possessed such a life: thus he \[was\] as it were let into \[his\]
true life, for he was of such a character that he snatched at these
things in the life of the body, and confirmed himself and persuaded
himself \[thereof\]; and I could observe, that from him, poisons were
diffused into spirits, by this, that they being as it were bound
\[ligati\] by his efflux \[effluvie\] could hardly have thought
otherwise.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3218.">3218.</span></span>

CONCERNING A TRITULATORY UNDULATION. I awoke, and above my head
\[appeared\], as it were, a pillar \[column\], the size of my head,
which acted like a perforating undulation; thus when it inflowed, like
those who writhe themselves undulating somewhat grossly, by a sort of
boring; it first, as it were, passed through the head, then, not so
\[plainly\] to the feeling, \[passed through\] the body, but \[plainly\]
through the sole of the left foot, where it bored through, thus boring
like a pillar \[columnatim\], and this lasted quite a long time. It was
inquired in mind or by speech who they were. It was said that they
sought here for someone who was with me; this was also said to me; it
was insinuated that these are they who in the life of the body
scrutinize attentively the thoughts of others, but it is now insinuated
that such are among the interior spirits who have a mind to destroy
\[exstinguant\] the souls of others, but who make a different profession
with the mouth. - 1748, September 21.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3219.">3219.</span></span>

CONCERNING THE ASSASSIN. The same assassin who previously became like a
black mass, as it were inanimate, he was sent to Gehenna into the
society of the infernals, but not into its middle, where are adulterous
women, for these occupy the middle of Gehenna. It was permitted to
perceive \[sentire\] \[their\] detestable lasciviousness by a certain
sort of lascivious undulation.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3220.">3220.</span></span>

He or \[that is\] the assassin, inasmuch as he was not a woman, was
driven to the right side of Gehenna, that he might there be submerged. I
do not remember whether he was there submerged, but still to some
distance thence the sun penetrated the earth, and thence towards the
left where \[are those\] who are \[deep\] under the earth. It was then
seen how \[he flowed\] into serpentine bendings around to left and
right, above, and now \[into\] bends below. There were continually
represented, as it were, serpentine bendings and various twistings;
these spiral twistings \[I will not attempt to describe\], because some
cannot be described. Hence he could also inflow, and hence speak, as I
heard. He was there also reduced into such a state as he was in when he
killed an infant with poison, which state was communicated to me by
those who could communicate such things. It is now insinuated that it
was a detestable deed, and the \[a\] deed of detestable \[spirits\], to
lead anyone into such a state.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3221.">3221.</span></span>

The assassin is under the earth: he attempted to open a way for himself
to glide out of thence: he proceeded towards Gehenna: they said if his
head should emerge here, which continually appeared like a serpent, that
then he would suffer irremediable harm \[tum immedicabile esset\]; but
he proceeded again towards the left and spread out, as it were, a
cavernous plane towards the right of considerable width, which
nevertheless did not afterwards appear.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3222.">3222.</span></span>

At length the same assassin, after such twistings, whirled around, as it
were, such continuous spiral twistings \[circumgyrabat\] continually, so
that he made circumgyrations of spheres; but afterwards being wrapped
around the body, face \[and\] feet, as it were, \[with\] a cloth, so
that he said he was suffocated, he then being thus wrapped, emerged from
that earth, near Gehenna, in front or somewhere else, I do not well
remember. He was thus wrapped up and stood a little before Gehenna.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3223.">3223.</span></span>

While he thus stood, suddenly there flew from him a little spirit, like
an infant, with a similar human body, which afterwards came towards the
upper \[regions\] over my head, and spoke with me, and I did not then
perceive aught but evil \[therein\]. I then spoke, concerning the same,
with spirits, \[asking\] who he was, and where \[was\] the body left
which appeared like a cast-off garment: whether in this remained any
life, inasmuch as interiors were thus separated. It was said that that
little one which \[came\] from him was his interior spirit with whom so
much of the natural \[principle\] followed as could have been
serviceable or obedient. Wherefore it was asked \[looquatum\] whether or
no all the evil can thus exist and so enter heaven; but it was said that
this was contrary to order, or the laws of order, for a man to lose
exteriors: also that such appear indeed \[as\] angels of the interior
heaven,

<span class="margnote"><span id="3224.">3224.</span></span>

but that they still retain such naturals as obey and are serviceable:
thus regard the world of spirits as a body, just as the world of spirits
considers the human body as their own. Thus \[it is in\] order, \[so it
is\] now insinuated, that those things which appear left \[behind\],
like clothing, be similarly renewed amongst \[with\] those who become
interior angels, like as was once upon a time represented to me that
garments \[vestes\] \[are\] left \[relictoe\] in the left eye \[and
are\] there hidden; but that thence are called forth in order those
things which are not obedient or serviceable, and are adjoined to the
naturals from the heaven so that they may also be vastated as to these
of the angels; hence \[arises\] fermentation and dismissal from the
heaven so that they may also be vastated as to these things.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3225.">3225.</span></span>

Such things as are represented by garments or clothing are only
representations of societies which remain in lowest and inferior things,
and that which was represented by the little one, which \[flew forth\]
thence, with his interiors, is the societies which are interior. Thus
such things as were previously represented arise from changes of state
of societies, and are thus presented before the eyes of the world of
spirits.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3226.">3226.</span></span>

We then spoke concerning the left-off clothing, from which he seemed to
speak, whether he could have lived apart from interiors, because it was,
as it were, heard that he remains \[therein\], but inasmuch as this
cannot be given that anyone may live only in the body or lowest nature,
apart from the interior, it was said that it is the lowest society which
still has clothing as a subject, and that then another succeeds in his
place, who appears to them as if inwardly in the garment, for the
subject appears as if in the center. Nevertheless, he who went forth
from thence was not of such a character, but was, as I perceived, an
upright \[person\].

<span class="margnote"><span id="3227.">3227.</span></span>

It was also shown how the minds of others are held bound \[chained\] by
the like; for when he is such in his persuasion as to regard nothing as
evil, like they who \[are\] in Gehenna, then perishes all perception of
those things which are opposed to the good and true, which are, as it
were, destroyed \[extincta\], so that then the spirit also thinks
himself to be of such a nature. The persuasion of one can thus bind
another, and induce, as it were, that he should be similar.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3228.">3228.</span></span>

Afterwards that assassin, when he again became nearly such as he was
before, and the little interior \[spirit\] joined to him, inasmuch as he
was courageous \[high-minded\] in the life of the body, and had aspired
to dignities perhaps the highest; he was told that he knew their
punishment according to the laws of earth; that they who perpetrate such
things were buried within such \[a spot in a profane place\]; and it was
said to him if anyone had committed such \[a crime\], and he should
judge him, what sort of judgment would he pass; he said that he would be
one of the sternest \[maxime serios\] judges, and would so condemn him:
wherefore he condemned himself. - 1748, September 21.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3229.">3229.</span></span>

CONCERNING THE RAINBOW. ((((There were represented to me species of
rainbows which were often seen previously before the eyes, and now
whilst in the midst of such a scene, \[I saw\] a sort of green, as it
were, grassy \[spot\], and after that, as it were, an earth
\[tellurem\]. \[There was\] a sun not visible but illuminating it, and
at the same time diffused a light round about, so bright and beautiful,
that it cannot be described. No comparison exists between that light,
and our light of day or noon, also in that lucid circumference \[were
seen\] most beautiful variations of color: in a lucid pearly plane
\[ground\]: indefinite are the variations of this sort. - 1748,
September 21.))))

<span class="margnote"><span id="3230.">3230.</span></span>

THAT THE THOUGHTS MAY BE BROUGHT FORTH IN THE OTHER LIFE. I am informed
from experience, that whatever good \[anyone\] has thought and spoken in
the life of the body, that this can be brought forth: he is remitted
into that state: then each and all things \[pertaining\] to him are
opened, and then at the same time angels know whatever they had thought
and spoken. Wherefore the memory of particulars is never obliterated in
the other life: but what he has thought and spoken is not revealed
unless the Lord permits and allows. - 1748, September 21.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3231.">3231.</span></span>

THAT THE LORD DOES GOOD TO \[HIS\] ENEMIES. I was overcome with sleep
\[somno eram soportus\] in the afternoon, and with quite a sound
\[sleep\]. When I awoke there were many around me asleep, \[in somno\]
even spirits who wished to lay snares for me: these also overcome
\[gravita\] with sleep were fast asleep \[dormiebant\]: so with all who
came up with the purpose to injure me. When they awoke, they said that
they have been asleep, and fled away one after another: one said that he
had not wished to sleep; it was perceived that he wished to injure
\[me\]. Hence I spoke with spirits \[saying\] that the Lord alone
watches over all, even \[his\] enemies, and does them good. - 1748,
September 21.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3232.">3232.</span></span>

Hence it was granted me to know that evil spirits are compelled to sleep
with \[apud\] man, and so cause that man may sleep: yea, soundly
\[bene\] although surrounded with evil spirits. Otherwise, should they
also lay snares for man, as they desire \[to do\] to \[for\] everyone,
they would then perceive, if not asleep, that they were spirits
separated from man. That this may not happen, spirits ought to sleep.
This was now disclosed to me. - 1748, September 21. When they do not
know other than that they are man, they then do not injure: this would
be \[to injure\] themselves; but when man sleeps, and they are awake,
they then can know it. - 1748, September 21.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3233.">3233.</span></span>

CONCERNING THE SPIRITS OF MERCURY. (I have again, by means of
\[through\] intermediate spirits, heard the spirits of Mercury, who
spoke in volume \[voluminatim\] so rapidly, that scarce could \[an
intermediate\] spirit have uttered it. There was, as it were, a volume
of them speaking together. But it was not their speech, \[but\] only the
thought of the interior sense or memory that flowed into the speech of
the intermediate spirit, \[and was so rapid\]. It was similar with the
perception of those things, which were thought after that. So promptly
did they perceive them, that at once, and in a moment, they judged
\[decided\] as to the quality, saying, "This is so; this is not so; this
is the quality." So that their decision \[judicium\] was almost
instantaneous; and, moreover, they were similar to what they were
before. This is remarkable, that their thought was brought to me in such
volumes, that the spirits quickly undulated above me like an atmosphere;
also that the cogitative undulation did not flow \[labereter\] towards
the left eye, although they were some distance to the right. - 1748,
September 21.)

<span class="margnote"><span id="3234.">3234.</span></span>

(From these things it may be concluded, that whatever spirits hear they
retain much more readily than men, although they do not know they retain
these things; for thus is formed the interior memory. Man being ignorant
\[thereof\], and the purer the angels, the more readily and fully they
retain, so that no idea may perish. It is evident from those who so
readily decide concerning each and all things, this cannot happen unless
they retain. - 1748, September 21.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3235.">3235.</span></span>

(When it was represented to them \[that\] perception is of the Lord,
yea, by means of representations, then, immediately in an instant, as it
were, they said, that it is not so; that he does not know that this is
so: so that they were then distinctly aware what perception is, which
our spirits do not know or understand, even in the grossest manner.)

<span class="margnote"><span id="3236.">3236.</span></span>

(Still, however, spirits of this world \[telluris\] spoke with these, by
angelic ideas, and said, much more readily than those \[spirits of
Mercury\] what they did not know and what they knew; and very many
things more rapidly than those \[spirits of Mercury\], so that I
perceived those \[spirits of Mercury\] acknowledge, like as they also
confessed, that therefore they were nothing as compared \[with our
spirits\]; that \[our spirits\] knew things which they did not know;
also, that \[our spirits\] knew at once what they knew: this so
suddenly, by means of interior ideas, that they could not but have been
amazed, as they now allege. Afterwards, they spoke in indignation; thus
grosser spirits overcame, even the evil \[ones\].)

<span class="margnote"><span id="3237.">3237.</span></span>

(((They did not admit that they were represented as men, but as
crystalline globules.)))

<span class="margnote"><span id="3238.">3238.</span></span>

(For some time, there was again conversation between them and the angels
of the Lord, and it was said to them, in rapid moments, through ideas
not understood by me, that they know and do not know what is \[evil\];
also, that there are indefinite things which they do not know,
indefinites in every idea, and that they cannot know even generals to
eternity. This also was shown them, even to acknowledgement \[so as to
be recognized\]; furthermore, the angels spoke with them such things as
they did \[could\] not perceive, save by changes of state; which things,
they said they do not understand, but perceive by means of changes of
state. It was then said to them that every change \[the least\], now
\[occurring\], contains indefinites. At length, when they perceived
this, they humbled themselves; their humiliation was represented to me
by the letting down of their volume more and more, towards deeper
\[regions\]; and that still the elevation could not be concealed, on
account of the volume being hollowed, and elevated at the sides; thus
also by means of a sort of reciprocal slight motion \[motitationem\]. It
was also told them what it signifies, or what they think in their
humiliation; thus they are halved; a half part of the volume \[is\]
above my head; they are removed \[relegabantur\] towards their planet,
upwards at the back. The other half remaining in humiliation; which was
a proof \[sign\] that they who are such as could not humble themselves,
were sent back home, that they might lean there).

<span class="margnote"><span id="3239.">3239.</span></span>

(\[Their\] internal sense is such, that it delights only in the
knowledges of things, and nothing beyond. Wherefore, also since there
are interiors, which pertain to uses, they do not care \[so much\] for
these; consequently not for ends, thus for the only end: hence also it
comes that they are proud, and because proud \[in fastu\], therefore,
the life of ends and uses cannot inflow into them, before that pride is
taken away from them. This pride it is which has done most of those
things which I have described; for they despised others in comparison
with themselves. They who are in a state of humiliation have now
acknowledged, with some weeping, that the Lord alone is their Lord; they
then acknowledged that what they know scientifically, it is also given
them to know intellectually: for they do not worship another \[Lord\];
but inasmuch as they esteem themselves above others, they do not care.)

<span class="margnote"><span id="3240.">3240.</span></span>

(Those spirits \[were\] around me, together with the spirits of our
world \[telluris\], when they came into a grosser sphere to me; and at
the same time they wondered that those things which I wrote, were so
gross, inasmuch as no idea, as it were, was therein. But it was granted
to reply, that the men of this world are of such a character, that they
did not understand the tenth part, and a much less part of those things
which were written; so that it can scarcely be written so grossly, as
that \[men can perceive\] anything as they perceived \[it\]. I added,
that they do not even know that an internal sense is given, but (suppose
that it is the body which feels; therefore do not believe in a life
after death, nor that the spirit exists \[dari.\] They then asked if
such can become angels: it was said that they who spoke with them must
have been such in the life of the body and yet are now so intelligent;
and in the life of the body they know not the least of those things
which they had said \[to them\] whereat they marveled. - 1748, September
21.)

<span class="margnote"><span id="3241.">3241.</span></span>

CONCERNING THE SPIRITS, SO CALLED, OF THE MOON. (Spirits came above my
head: when they merely spoke they thundered \[tonabant\]: something of
voice or speech was let down from the midst, as if something opened
itself, as happens when lightnings are let out of the clouds. There
appeared, as it were, a great multitude of spirits above me. I thought
they belonged to some world \[and were\] not yet known; but the more
simple and gross spirits of our world, continually ridiculed them;
whereat I marveled; because they intercepted thoughts, no matter from
whence \[they were\] and what spirits they might be. These spirits were
then let down into the depths \[in profundum\], that they might not
hinder: yet others could not restrain themselves from laughing at them,
in nearly the same manner.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3242.">3242.</span></span>

Then were some seen by me obscurely, as it were infants; and one carried
a certain one, who appeared to me distinctly so far as the face, with
\[mossa pa hufwudet\]: he was at first supposed from the face \[to be\]
an infant, but was examined and considered \[to be\] a manniken
\[homuncio\] or a little man \[dwarf\]; because his face \[was\] not
infantile, being somewhat long, but of small breadth, like that of at
ill-proportioned man \[invenusti\] he was carried into my sight by
another as small a \[man\] whom I did not see.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3242_1/2.">3242\_1/2.</span></span>

He who was thus carried and seen, came to me, below the arm, on the left
side, and spoke with me, and said that he was such a one, so small, and
not knowing whence \[he came\]; but that still when he spoke his voice -
then sounded just like the voice of those who \[are\] above the head: he
also showed me how he spoke, that it was, as if from the abdomen, and
that he thus belched out \[egurgitaret\] much speech with much sound,
and there was a sort of egurgitation of sound, with the voice, which
cannot so \[easily\] be described; and in order that he might show what
belongs to such voice or sound of voice, that he might as it were
thunder, like a great multitude of spirits, he also withdrew a little,
still \[was\] near me, and spoke similarly: then I heard as it were the
thunder of heaven along with his voice: and he again returned, and
showed the nature of \[his\] voice, that it was from the abdomen, and
\[was\] an eructation. Thus it was also perceived that they were swollen
\[inflated\] \[tumidi\] and supposed themselves to be great, although
they were so little.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3243.">3243.</span></span>

Also previously, when it was said by a certain one near heaven,
concerning the former \[ones, who thundered\], that they were not so
numerous, he recounted them, and at length \[found\] that they had only
been about 20 or 23 \[in number\], when so great a multitude was heard.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3244.">3244.</span></span>

I spoke concerning what earth they were from, and it was granted me to
perceive to some extent \[after a manner\] that they were from the Moon.
It came into my thought \[cogiatatem\] that they \[were\] not similar to
others because they have not such an atmosphere; and I am ignorant what
atmosphere they have around them; but still that the human race was
there, because there is nothing without an end: thus \[so\] nothing
without the human race, to be a \[the\] bond between terrestrial and
natural things, and celestial things: for otherwise, never can an earth,
whether planet, or moon, or satellite, exist \[duri\].

<span class="margnote"><span id="3245.">3245.</span></span>

Hence, I could now perceive, that it was such as the human race, but I
did not know what province in the body they represented \[had reference
to\]. Wherefore spirits of that earth, either these or others, came
within me, and it hence was granted to perceive, that they had reference
to the scutiform or xiphoid cartilage wherein the ribs are terminated in
front, and which is the fulcrum of the muscles of the diaphragm, on the
anterior side, and thus of the muscles of the abdomen also. It may be
seen whether or no the linea alba passes to that cartilage, and hence
\[if this cartilage\] is continued downward, so as to be the common
fulcrum with the linea alba of the muscles of the abdomen. - 1748,
September 22).

<span class="margnote"><span id="3246.">3246.</span></span>

CONCERNING A BEAUTIFUL BIRD. (There was beheld a sort of flamy
principle, purple, variously red, with white. I saw this before my face,
at a distance, and next \[was seen\] a band, to which this beautiful
flamy \[thing\] adhered, first, to the back part of the band, then in
the palm, by which be had held this flamy \[something\]. This lasted a
short time. I supposed that it was a sort of flamy \[principle\] seen in
their earth, by the spirits, of whom \[I have\] now \[been writing\].
The flamy principle licked his hand round about, and then was compressed
into the hollow of the hand. \[vala\].

<span class="margnote"><span id="3247.">3247.</span></span>

Shortly it was removed to a distance, where it was bright, but
straitened - what was there I could not see. The hand receded thither
also; then this flamy \[principle\] was changed by degrees into a
beautiful bird of similar color, and the bird was also changed, as to
colors even into a pearly species. It was then like a pearl \[lapis
margaritica\]; also expanded its wings and \[acted\] like a living bird;
and like a living bird flew thence to a little distance, in front, and
returned: it also appeared once as a more obscure bird; \[bird of a more
obscure color\], nearly like \[steglisa\]; but without colors, again
like a beautiful bird, \[and\] so was raised up out of sight).

<span class="margnote"><span id="3248.">3248.</span></span>

I reasoned variously concerning the bird, \[as to\] what it signifies:
but my reasoning ended in this, that it is not yet discovered what it
signifies, only \[that it signifies\] the inhabitants of Mars, because I
hear and perceive them, to deny it: still such representation cannot
exist, apart from the society of angels, which it represents: for it is
plain, that bird signifies thought. - 1748, September 22.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3249.">3249.</span></span>

CONTINUATION CONCERNING THE BIRD AND PERSUASION. (Afterwards, there was
a certain one, who from below either through my feet, or through the
region of the loins, I do not know \[which\], ascended inwardly in the
body as high as the breast, and filled the body. At first he was of such
a nature, as to induce the persuasion that he would carry away what was
dearest to me, by what he caused me to think. Next, however, when he
perceived that he could not do this, he persuaded \[me\] \[introduced
the persuasion\] that he was the Lord, with persuasion \[that it was
so\], because such is the case, when spirits do not speak from
themselves but from the Lord. But still I did not believe that \[he
was\] the Lord. He, while of such a nature, carried away the beautiful
bird, which was then flying around me; so that he took away that which
was dearest; for many then desired \[it\]; but he presently let the bird
go free, from his hand).

<span class="margnote"><span id="3250.">3250.</span></span>

(Concerning which spirits it was afterwards said, that they are such as
do not know other than that they are the same, and so can be embued with
persuasion, together with affection; but what he signifies I do not yet
know, only it is insinuated, that if the inhabitants of Mars did not
remain in their state, which amongst us is called the state of
integrity, that others would succeed from a new earth, who would be
similar; for when one \[race\] perishes, another succeeds; for there can
be nothing lacking, so the Lord provides. - 1748, September 22).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 3251-3300](sd36.md)
