[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Swedenborg](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sd37)  [Next](sd39) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0766143007/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Spiritual Diary*, by Emanuel Swedenborg, \[1758\], tr. by Bush,
Smithson and Buss \[1883-9\] at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Spiritual Diary

<span class="margnote"><span id="3351.">3351.</span></span>

HOW MUCH THE SCIENCE \[KNOWLEDGE\] AND INTELLIGENCE OF SPIRITS EXCEEDS
THAT OF MEN. They who come into the other life, sometimes wonder that
they are not gifted with intelligence above the human race, as they
conceived; but they do not perceive in what intelligence they are,
because, therein, neither do angels; for whoever is in a faculty does
not know how much it exceeds that of others, except by reflection upon
others. It was therefore shown to some of this character, how much they
excel in intelligence, by this, that when I wrote concerning thought,
the eustachian tube, and the like ((((it was shown how they understand
these things during life; and it was granted me to know that they had
not possessed any idea at all concerning these things, in the life and
body, inasmuch as they were totally ignorant thereof; but in the other
life, it is usual to have such ideas, so that they immediately know,
although in the life of the body, they had not the slightest knowledge
\[thereof\]. It is so in other things, also, for there is communicated
to them, as far as capable of receiving all the intelligence)))) which
belongs to others, and whomsoever is present. - 1748, September 26.
Besides which, spirits plainly perceive the thoughts of man, and the
thoughts which he has had from infancy: also his intentions, in order
that they might completely know of all his things.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3352.">3352.</span></span>

CONCERNING WORSHIP OF THE LORD, BY A SPIRIT OF MARS. It was shown me by
communication, the nature of the worship of the Lord, by the inhabitants
of Mars, which is so profound, and full of amazement \[cum stupore\]
\[overpowering to the senses\] and at the same time, full of
pleasantness \[cum jucundo plena\], that it cannot be described. It is
wholly unknown to the spirits of our earth. - 1748, September 26.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3353.">3353.</span></span>

CONCERNING THE OFFSPRING OF THE MOST ANCIENT CHURCH; OR ADAM AFTER THE
FALL. ((((There were with me \[some\], above the head, not so high as
they who \[are\] of the Most Ancient Church. These first inflowed quite
mildly and imperceptibly \[inconspicue\]; but it was granted to know
from perception, that they were interiorly evil, because they acted
interiorly against love. Afterwards, it was insinuated into me that they
were of the offspring of the Most Ancient Church, which was spurious,
and of whom it is said, that the device of their heart was nothing but
evil. It was afterwards also signified by respiration about the province
of the genital members, where, as you may see before \[stated\] their
love repaired, which was separated from true love, so that they loved
\[their\] offspring most tenderly, as they also said. And when they
acted with interior deceit in opposition to love, yet in such a manner,
that had not the Lord granted me perception, I could by no means have
perceived it; then when they harbored this in mind, the spirits fled
cried out that they could not endure so cadaverous an odor; so that they
have never perceived such \[an odor\], inasmuch as it would destroy
\[kill\] \[necaret\] them, as they now allege.))))

<span class="margnote"><span id="3354.">3354.</span></span>

(((Also the same \[spirits\], that is \[seu\] the offspring of the Most
Ancient Church, supposed themselves to be so subtle, that no one would
perceive them, and they said to me, that they supposed they could do
good of themselves. Concerning this matter I spoke with them, also
concerning the Lord, that they have expected him, besides other things.
Whom also they could adore, but of themselves. That this might be shown
them, a certain angel merely thought concerning these things; which
thought was communicated to them, and represented by a blowing
\[aspiratum\] of respiration, thus like as it were, a blast of wind,
which also was felt. They said they could not endure it \[and\] wished
to flee away; but, inasmuch as it ceased, they remained. - 1748,
September 26.)))

<span class="margnote"><span id="3355.">3355.</span></span>

(((((How they represented the Lord to themselves was shown: to wit, as
it were, an old man, of a gray beard, that he was holy, and that from
him they became holy, and similarly bearded. Hence, such a religion
originated respecting beards, as is read concerning those whose beards
were shorn off.)))))

<span class="margnote"><span id="3356.">3356.</span></span>

THAT THE THOUGHTS AND SPEECH OP ANGELS, ALSO OF ANGELIC SPIRITS, FALL
INTO PARABLES. When I wrote concerning those things which \[are\] in No.
1577, that the thoughts of angelic spirits and angels are like parables,
certain spirits doubted, because the idea of a parable is not understood
by them; wherefore, angels and angelic spirits tested the matter,
whether their ideas fell into parables, and it was confirmed by them,
that they do not fail other than into parables, for parables contain
generals. - 1748, September 26.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3357.">3357.</span></span>

It was further shown, that \[their ideas\] fall into representations of
paradises, vineyards \[and\] feasts, entirely in accordance with the
genius of the people; for it is otherwise with one than with another.
Wherefore the Lord spoke nearly everything by parables, to \[suit\] the
nature of those who are in the world; he likened heaven to feasts,
because they placed heavenly joy in feasts; otherwise for others. -
1748, September 26.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3358.">3358.</span></span>

CONTINUATION CONCERNING THE ADULTEROUS OR LATER OFFSPRING OF THE
PERVERTED MOST ANCIENT CHURCH. ((((These dwell under the, earth, under a
great rock midway in the deep, under the buttocks, and are there in
their dire phantasies, hostile to the Lord, whom they treat in many most
cruel modes; concerning which impious things it is not permitted to
write. They are in the greatest depth \[profundissimo\] under the
buttocks, and labor under their phantasies; and this is permitted and
admitted to be heard. There is a tumult, inasmuch as it is heard; it is
also felt in each buttock, being subject to slight motion \[qui
motitantur\], as I now perceive)))).

<span class="margnote"><span id="3359.">3359.</span></span>

Such are not permitted to ascend, but sometimes the rock is, as it were,
attenuated; and thus also, are they heard thence, like as they were
heard by me: according to the hardness of the intermediate rock, they
can be heard, and operate into the superior sphere; for that rock is a
representation, that so distant is their impious and persuasive sphere,
from the spheres which are above: thus are they held back

<span class="margnote"><span id="3360.">3360.</span></span>

(((((Certain of them, yea, many were admitted to operate on me in
person, but the Lord disposed by means of intermediate spirits, that
they should do me no injury. Then from that deep \[place\], they came in
front, as it were, through the rock, and seemed to themselves to
contrive a way towards the anterior \[regions\] through the caverns of
the rock, and so \[climb\] upward, which was only a representation of
the Lord disposing by means of mediate spirits that they should do no
injury in the superior sphere.)))))

<span class="margnote"><span id="3361.">3361.</span></span>

((((At length they appeared above to the left, and thence operated into
me; also afterwards, were permitted to come next to me, even to my head,
and then other spirits withdrew. At the right, above, were those who
spoke with me;)))) they did not allow \[admittentes\] them to operate,
and so long did good spirits talk with me, and these infused \[their
persuasions\], till I was almost worn out with hearing good spirits
speak; for from their infused persuasion, I seemed to myself to wish to
speak with them.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3362.">3362.</span></span>

((((The good spirits were continually saying that \[these evil spirits\]
are allowed to operate into the right part of the head, not into the
left, and from the right part of the head into the left side of the
thorax; \[but\] by no means into the left of the head, \[for if\] so,
they said that I would be destroyed \[ruined\]. This they were so long
speaking, as was said, to \[my\] fatigue, and a sort of indignation,
supposed if I spoke with them, no injury would result))).

<span class="margnote"><span id="3363.">3363.</span></span>

((((Through \[by\] the right part of the head, and the left side of the
thorax, is signified that they were permitted to operate by means of
cupidities, by infusing evil and insane cupidities, and so acting, and
thus thinking and speaking from cupidities, consequently from
perception; but not the left of the head, which would be with their
dreadful persuasion; for they are of such a character, as I was
afterwards instructed, and a little by experience, as that they are in
such persuasion, because almost their \[whole\] interior is hostile to
the Lord; so that into whatever they say, they infuse a most strong
persuasion, and thus drive away every good and true thing; just as when
the digits of the foot or hand are concealed by cold and have no more
feeling, but become, as it were, dead and bloodless.)))) (((In like
manner, it is known, that such is their persuasion, and such were they,
and still worse with all their cohorts against whom the Lord fought, and
whom he overcame by his own strength; which, is never possible
\[dabile\] without His Divine; thus also His Human Essence overcame
them.)))

<span class="margnote"><span id="3364.">3364.</span></span>

(((((When they began to operate in me, I fell asleep, and thus by means
of cupidities, which I could not have resisted in wakefulness, they
operated in me, and I had sound \[graven\] sleep, and am not now able to
describe its nature, and wherein its soundness \[heaviness\]
\[gravitas\] consisted; for their cupidities are of such a character as,
cannot be described; only that at length))))), ((((they assayed to kill
me by means of afflatus: then I perceived, in sleep, that they assayed
to suffocate me, and then was perceived, as it were a dreadful incubus,
merely, I think, from the general afflatus of \[their\] phantasies. It
was so like an incubus on me, that I labored similarly. But yet from my
laboring, which was the Lord, who thus operated to turn me around on the
other side. I therefore awoke.))))

<span class="margnote"><span id="3365.">3365.</span></span>

(((((When I awoke they seemed to flee away to their place above, and
acted thence, but with no effect; at length, as I wished to drive them
away from me, they seemed to be wrapped in a cloth \[sheet\] like those
who \[were wrapped in\] the woolen cloth \[sheet\]. I thought it was
they. Thus were they let down through a rock, slanting in a straight
line, to some depth; it was a hard rock, inclining downwards, which
lengthwise was straight; when \[they were let down\] to nearly half
distance, then the bundle of cloth was unloosed and a multitude of small
human bodies seemed to go forth; concerning whom it was said that these
were the ones whom \[the evil spirits\] had carried off with themselves,
\[namely\], all my acquaintances. They also infused so much of
persuasion, as that by their most chilly and deadly persuasion, they
could kill whomsoever they came across. But the little men \[manikins\]
seemed to escape thence, thus were such as were wrapped by them in a
linen cloth \[sheet\] and preserved, not \[my\] acquaintances, but
others; so that I might know how they act, for when they appear to be
wrapped \[in a sheet\], they involve others in their persuasions. But
the involving is preservation that their persuasions may not operate
more strongly than they can endure, and that hence they may become
better.)))))

<span class="margnote"><span id="3366.">3366.</span></span>

((((Afterwards they operated in that middle distance, or in that place,
by means of dreadful phantasies, which it was not permitted to perceive
and see so \[well\], for they were of the cruelest sort against the
Lord, whom with dreadful cruelties they mangled, tore, and cut up. In
such \[things\] consists their pleasantness, and thus their life; their
tumult under the rock \[consisted\] in such things. For phantasies
operate simultaneously with cupidities, and this is what Mark says
concerning the temptations of the Lord in the desert: that he fought
with wild beasts, and was set before them.))))

<span class="margnote"><span id="3367.">3367.</span></span>

(((When they operated in that middle distance of the rock, then there
was continually perceived a sound of boring, as if very many large
augers \[terebroe\] were operating, and only the rough \[rudis\] sound
of such things was heard. This sound not only flowed \[effundebat se\]
forth to me, but to a considerable distance from me, on the right hand,
where at that time were good spirits thus were removed to a considerable
distance so that they might speak with me; thus was the constitution of
the Grand Man changed, as it were, in the world of spirits.)))

<span class="margnote"><span id="3368.">3368.</span></span>

Moreover there was a spirit at the right, who supposed all these things
were real \[vera\], that the Lord was thus tormented by them, that all
my acquaintances were carried away by them, and very many things
\[besides\]; such was his persuasion. But yet he was not evil, inasmuch
as such sound of despair, and such speech arose from a certain \[sort
of\] afflatus of their dreadful persuasion, afar off. All these things
occurred in wakefulness.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3369.">3369.</span></span>

Meanwhile, I was also in a sweet sleep, so that I felt nothing; I do not
know whether those things which were said concerning the spirit
\[occurred\] before or after the sweet sleep.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3370.">3370.</span></span>

When I awaked from the sweet sleep, I then saw human bodies floating
\[natantia\], as it were, in the sea; also some crawling, dead, as it
were, yet human: afterwards, also pendulous \[and\] inanimate. It was
insinuated concerning these, that such thus perished before the flood,
and became dead spirits; others said that they were dead, and so
perished; others that they were thus for ages, and so vastated, \[and
that\] when those things which were so dreadful, had perished, they
would revive \[come to life again\] with remains, which would be
tempered, in their case, by evils wherewith they could live, and
dispositions would be formed by vastation through death of the worst
phantasies, and worst cupidities; like as certain species of rainbows
\[occur\] through representations. Hence it now insinuated that the
rainbow was made a token that the human race should not perish, because
they can revive, and their few remains so tempered with their nearest
evils, and in the case of some, with also the evils next contiguous,
that they might still live as spirits, thus the life of their phantasies
and cupidities would perish and remain such; for nothing can perish save
through such a death.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3371.">3371.</span></span>

(((((Afterwards they were compelled to recede from the middle distance,
through their darksome caverns under the rock, where they dwell and
whence they act tumultuously, into the buttock, but now into the toes of
my left foot.)))))

<span class="margnote"><span id="3372.">3372.</span></span>

It should be observed that when in the middle distance of the oblique
rock, there was granted them so much of the faculty of reason, as they
can receive, and by successive degrees; but still they effected nothing;
yet they persisted. - 1748, September 26, 27.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3373.">3373.</span></span>

From these things it was granted me to conclude that immediately before
the flood, nearly the whole interior man was destroyed, so that scarcely
any human \[principle\] was left.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3374.">3374.</span></span>

It should be well observed that it is not the force of argument, as it
is called, which causes their persuasions of so deadly a nature, but it
is their phantasies, whatever they may be, even if the absurdest; still
are they in such a persuasion, as that they kill every living thing,
that is, the good and true - just as if they should say, that this paper
was black, \[and\] not white, and so forth.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3375.">3375.</span></span>

HOW THE HUMAN RACE WAS AFTERWARDS INVERTED. From those things which were
shown me, \[it is apparent\] that they acted solely into the right part
of the head, that is, by means of cupidities, towards the left side of
the breast, thus by means of phantasies \[arising\] from cupidities,
consequently not with phantasies, apart from these \[cupidities\], thus
not from principle and scientifics, which are of such a nature that they
are in the greatest persuasion; thus they infuse at the same time dire
persuasions and then destroy \[mortificant\] the ideas of man or spirits
by expelling all the warmth of the good and true, just as cold destroys
the members of man.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3376.">3376.</span></span>

Then was it also granted to perceive that after the flood, man was, as
it were, inverted, to wit, that cupidities, or dreadful pleasures in
tormenting the Lord, and the things of faith, remained, and by degrees
\[passim\] that hereditary \[principle\] was lessened in their
posterity, and so succeeded scientific ideas, which were separated; so
that man became entirely different, to wit, that the scientifics and
intellectuals of faith, could be hidden, in \[apud\] man, though he
should remain in his dire cupidities and act madly; thus thought was
separated from the will which was left, as it were, to cupidities, so
that there is no will; but the will of good and true is of the Lord, and
scientific and intellectual faith is separated, or shut up separate,

<span class="margnote"><span id="3377.">3377.</span></span>

otherwise than was the case with the antediluvians. For man is composed
of mere scandals \[offences\], see \[what is said\] previously
\[concerning this\]. This scandal \[was\] as it were, nearly continual
with the antediluvians; amongst their posterity after the flood, it was
made by the Lord, as it were, a separate \[discrete\] \[principle\],
which never could have happened unless scandals \[offences\] should
remain with man; wherefore the Lord also became a scandal \[an offence\]
to them, as the Word here and there \[mentiones\]; therefore did he also
suffer and was crucified, that scandals might remain; otherwise never
could such continued scandal be rendered separate \[discrete\], and thus
man be saved by the implanting \[insertion\] of scientifics and
intellectuals, so that thus scandals should not appear. - 1748,
September 26, 27.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3378.">3378.</span></span>

(((((It should be observed, that before those antediluvian spirits came
to me, that there was first seen by me, a beautiful infant dressed in a
shining \[white\] \[candida\] garment, which signified the Most Ancient
Church, as is now insinuated in me; then in the same open door-way was
seen a boy in a youthful \[viridi\] garment; I do not know what it
signifies, whether \[or no it means\] such \[people\] of the same time,
that is, of the Most Ancient Church. Next were seen two maids in white,
as respects the head, who signify the affections of such \[members of
the Most Ancient Church\], since the youthful boy \[puer\] \[signifies\]
scientifics and intellectuals; wherefore in those times, to wit, those
of the Most Ancient Church, there were in part such rational ideas, that
is, their scientific faith \[was\], as it were, youthful, yet like the
boy; but the affections were like \[those\] of the maids, \[who were\]
shining as to the head. Thus there was just the reverse from what is the
case with us. With us, there are good scientifics, but evil
affections.)))))

<span class="margnote"><span id="3379.">3379.</span></span>

Also afterwards, the sphere was poisoned to some extent from their
persuasions; how much there was, and the quality, was represented by the
way in which disappeared a long blue thread, broken at intervals
\[interstitiate\]. - 1748, September 26, 27.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3380.">3380.</span></span>

CONCERNING DREAMS. ((((In order that I know how dreams inflow into those
who sleep, I dreamed \[dormivi, for somni avi, I think\] things that I
do not remember; at last, that a ship came with all manner of delicacies
for eating and drinking, especially inside of the vessel, so as to be
hidden from me, with two armed sentinels, together with him who was the
captain of the ship: so that there were three, the captain of the ship
and the two sentinels. The ship thus passed through into a chamber, so I
awoke.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3381.">3381.</span></span>

When I awoke I thought about the dream, and then began to speak with
those who introduced dreams, who were above me, a little to the front.
They spoke and said that they introduced everything, but I perceived
that \[my dream came\] through them from angelic spirits, who were near
that region where paradises appear, and that they showed me \[those
things\]; they also showed me many things when awake, which they
introduced into others, to wit, into spirits who slept, with whom I then
spoke, and they acknowledged it. I then saw those things which they
introduced, which were so delightful and varied, such inexpressible
delights, and also men and infants so adorned that they can never be
described; besides in the beginning a sort of unknown animalcule, which
dispersed like black rays, they wonderfully spread around the left eye;
besides other things which I do not remember. There pertained to the
spirits inducing dreams, a certain loud \[sonorous\] sound, as if the
song of certain at a distance, ended obscurely in a sound similar to so
\[loud\] a sound. They also said that they could induce sleep whenever
they pleased; which also as I believe they did effect.))))

<span class="margnote"><span id="3382.">3382.</span></span>

(((((((It is insinuated that the men and posterity of the old Church,
had similar most delightful dreams, and hence by insinuated perception,
as was almost the case with me, \[perceived\] what they signified; hence
their paradisiacal representations, and many things which were familiar
in that time,))))))) (((((for not only did they see delightful
\[dreams\], but also received perception, like as have I so many times,
that I cannot enumerate the times, in order that they might know what
these signified in general, wherefore, that Most Ancient Church was a
representative of all things which they had seen; so that from objects
of sight, they thought at once what was signified, because they
perpetually saw such things with inmost delight.)))))

<span class="margnote"><span id="3383.">3383.</span></span>

CONCERNING DREAMS. Moreover there was another, who in the life of the
body, thought illy of me, as I apperceived, because he spoke thereof so
that if it had been allowed he would have persecuted me to death; such
was his purpose, and it was discovered that he would have killed me. He
was also in a dream, and then was his dream represented to me, whereby
was discovered how something had occurred, and how he had attempted
connection with a virgin in a privy. Thus also may those things be
manifestedly disclosed with all the circumstances, places and persons
which \[occurred\] in the life of the body, \[and\] which they had done.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3384.">3384.</span></span>

THE QUALITY OF THE JEWISH CHURCH. It was shown me by experience how Leah
represented the Jewish Church, and Rachel the new \[one\], to wit: that
the Jewish \[Church\] regarded the conjugial bond \[debt\], as of no
moment, so that, as regards the debt, it was remitted; as was shown me
by experience, and also by a spiritual idea. The conjugial debt was of
such a nature, that so long as the venereal \[principle\] and its
adjoined delights lasted, then there was a spouse or wife; but when
these ceased, that the conjugial debt was remitted, so that they
regarded it as nothing, and since it was remitted that adultery was of
no moment; and thus that they could resort to whomsoever they regarded
as, and desired to be, husband. Such \[women\] are also punished most
grievously, one after another, by inexpressible manglings, in order that
they may be brought back to the conjugial debt. I afterwards spoke with
those above my head, and they immediately breathed in such things as
were opposed to marriage, to wit: that many \[women\] ought to have one
husband \[man\]; thus they hated the marriage of one wife; besides other
things which I do not remember, and which it is not proper to mention.
The same \[women\] also induced a weakness in the right eye. Hence it
was given to know why Leah is described as weak in the eyes. - 1748,
September 27.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3385.">3385.</span></span>

THAT INTERIORS, INMOSTS, AND THE MORE SUPREME THINGS, ARE LIKE THE
DARKNESS OF AN ABYSS; THEN CONCERNING THE KNOWLEDGES OF FAITH,
APPEARANCES, AND FALLACIES. I spoke with spirits who ascended like an
imperceptible cloud \[nimbus\] in front beside the old Jerusalem, thus
on the left, who were said to be of the Ancient Church, or the posterity
of Noah; whether they were, I do not yet know. They put several
questions, and were answered; and they wished to make some inquiries as
to the more arcane, yea most arcane things; but \[when\] I perceived
that they desired to ask these questions, it was granted to tell them,
that I may answer nothing to such \[questions\]. For if they merely
wished to inquire and know concerning those things which pertain to
interior or angelic spirits, these would appear to them like darkness,
or an obscure and darksome \[principle\]; still more \[would this be the
case\] if they wished to inquire concerning those things which pertain
to angels more interior, which would appear to them as dark; what then
\[shall I say\] of the most arcane things; whereby if they wished to
view them from their natural light \[lumine\] they would be surely
blinded; for what could they see in these things which were most dark to
them; and he who desires it, would be surely blinded; wherefore I did
not wish to reply to such things, because I cannot; I am only in
corporeals and naturals; thus prepared so as to be able to serve those
who are in such things.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3386.">3386.</span></span>

I held further discourse concerning fallacies, saying, that there are
fallacies, which they do not consider to be fallacies; then that there
are very many and innumerable things which appear to be so, when they
are not so; for instance, paradisiacal \[scenes\] and the like.
Wherefore they inquired whether or no \[these\] were fallacies; it was
then granted to reply that \[those things\] are fallacies, which are not
true, or which are vessels to which truths cannot be applied; but that
such things as belong to angelic spirits and angels, are not fallacies,
but are appearances, and that they are, as it were, vessels, to which
may be applied the knowledges of faith. Wherefore was told what \[are\]
the knowledges of faith, which \[are\] not appearances, to wit; that the
knowledges of faith are, that the Lord rules the universe, that all good
and true are from the Lord alone, that in \[apud\] us, is nothing but
evil, and the like. - 1748, September 27.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3387.">3387.</span></span>

They afterwards descended into the place from under which they went, and
spoke together; but what they said did not reach me; besides they could
not thus speak with me; but still there was perceived by those in my
cerebrum, a confused, or perturbed something, which was their sphere,
because they are in such things; thus \[it was\] a sort of sphere of
persuasion against the truths of faith, which so affected my cerebrum
with a sort of confusion. For it was granted to tell them, if they
wished to speak concerning the like, which are in the greatest
obscurity, they then could have filled the greatest library with
volumes, as was granted to represent to them, and yet the sum of all
would still be, what they call knowledge of faith, or what has been now
said here previously. - 1748, September 27.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3388.">3388.</span></span>

I spoke with them concerning persuasion, which is of such a nature, that
when man is persuaded that evil is good, \[and\] false is true, then
when he hears others, he can hear attentively, and then seem to himself
to be persuaded, from well-connected arguments, and eloquent speech, the
affection of sound, yet, when it is finished, knows nothing that \[the
speaker\] said: only he praises him for speaking well: like those who
assemble in congregations, and praise the lecture, and so for many
years; but still, as they are in the persuasion of the evil and false,
their life is not at all reformed, nor do they know at all what things
are spoken. - 1748, September 27.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3389.">3389.</span></span>

CONCERNING THE BRIGHTNESS \[candore\] OF INNOCENCE. ((((There were seen
by me, infants and mothers in a lucid space, of such brightness, that
\[anything\] brighter \[is\] never \[seen\]. The brightness was of
innocence, thus represented in this sphere; which brightness is so
distinguished from white \[alba\] that there is no comparison. Snow
approaches its appearance; but still it is such a brightness as cannot
be described.))))

<span class="margnote"><span id="3390.">3390.</span></span>

CONCERNING THE PRE-ADAMITES. I was shown of what quality were the
pre-Adamites who were regenerated by the Lord and called Adam. A certain
one spoke with me in such speech as characterizes their life; not a
rapid and distinct speech, as is customary, but one whose words had in
them a little of life, so that it can be heard I heard him speaking when
I awaked in the night; he was placed to guard me, and said that the evil
wished to carry me off. I heard that he was such a guard, and was not
evil, but had a little of life remaining, so that he was an external
man, but still, internals were within his externals; there was
\[though\] \[but\] a little of his internals \[left\]; so that he has
not become such an external man as those of our day, in whom externals
are separated from internals. But, in this case, internals, were within,
though \[but\] little. This was now manifested to me; and now I can thus
know thence, and also from his speech, that a little of \[his\] interior
life remained; such it is insinuated, or said, were the pre-Adamites; so
that \[they are\] not evil. It was also further insinuated and perceived
that they then bore reference to the hair of the genital members.
Whether, he was a pre-Adamite cannot be known, because the pre-Adamites
\[lived\] so many ages before, and at this day there are very many of
such a character; otherwise there would be no correspondences to have
reference to that hair.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3391.">3391.</span></span>

After that he was tempered; for evil spirits who \[are\] on the same
level with such began to torment him, to wit, by twisting him, in their
manner \[igenom gnuggande\], so that his whole body was thus miserably
twisted by folding back and forth \[gnugges\], not in so \[very\] rapid
times, and not so rapid moments: and this with great pain; and I
wondered that he, not being evil should yet undergo such punishment; but
I perceived that evil spirits could not but have acted into his
exteriors; for \[his\] interiors were perceived like \[those\] of others
who were preserved; but when he was so twisted and tormented by the
evil, that he might agree with them, he, being good, was still held by
companies of good spirits and angels in that state, that he should not
consent but resist; so that they could not compel him to be such, as
they desired, through punishment; so that by degrees he was initiated
into swifter gyres, thus into the first plane of gyration; so that he
could also be with \[his\] externals amongst interior spirits, which is
the first plane into which externals are reduced, so as to correspond
with internals, which indeed occurs with torment; but still they are
kept in that state that they do not feel torment, yea by the Lord, to
wit that interiors are then of such a character that they seem to
themselves to wish to resist and conquer evils, lest external enemies,
who twist their bodies, may conquer: thus are they inaugurated by
degrees; they are then also in a state of a certain sleep, so that thus
they do not feel \[pain.\]

<span class="margnote"><span id="3392.">3392.</span></span>

Another, also, of those who lived in my time, with whom I was acquainted
in life, was left by his companions; he was at my back, as it were,
dead; yet alive, which I perceived \[sentiebam\] from his animation, as
if \[he were\] in a deep lethargy. He was afterwards similarly occupied
by such spirits, so that he likewise was led \[into gyres\]: his gyres
at first were gross; so that, if I mistake not, there were six gross
gyres, distinguished by boundaries \[limits\]; but so gross that I could
hardly have hoped that he could have been exercised in swifter gyres; he
was similarly tormented, but not as to the whole body as the other,
\[but\] chiefly; as was granted to perceive, about the gums; thus less
about the body, which still was reduced to concord, as was afterwards
granted to see. After some hours, principally \[mainly\] while I was
asleep, he was introduced into such rapid gyres that when I awoke I
wondered that within a few \[aliquot\] hours he could have been reduced
into gyres, almost continuous: as I \[thought\] almost similar to the
angelic \[gyres\]: I also observed interiorly: thus that other spirits
wondered and complained that he should thus escape from them,

<span class="margnote"><span id="3393.">3393.</span></span>

for it was perceived that he could, in this way, be in the companies of
angelic spirits, when he could not have been otherwise. But this is only
the first plane wherein they are thus inaugurated; for thoughts and
cupidities still remain as before. But unless this plane be given, so
that thus corporeals may be accommodated \[adapted\] to the next
interiors, it is not granted by the Lord to be present with angelic
\[spirits\] even as to thoughts and affections. That he could now also
be taken from inferior spirits, as to the whole body, was also shown me
by means of circumvolutions, and, at the same time, foldings of his
small body, similar also to the human as regards color, which was shown
to be thus capable of folding \[plicabile\], so that he could \[might\]
not be injured by inferior spirits, therefore by the evil; inasmuch as
it was perceived that they could not inflow, and induce any pain on his
body, through phantasies, as is usual with those who are not yet so
prepared that they can be taken away from such \[inferior spirits\].

<span class="margnote"><span id="3394.">3394.</span></span>

He then spoke with me, and was in the same place as before, and wondered
that he was now different, being ignorant that he has undergone such
contortions; he only wondered that he \[is\] different; therefore says
that he \[has been\] changed because \[he is\] now in the company of
interior spirits; but still it was shown that he could be reduced to his
former state. In that state of first inauguration into the angelic
\[principle\] it was granted him, that when he praised the Lord with
interior motion and gave thanks, it was also granted him to feel
something of his motion, inasmuch as there is still a resistance from
his desire of glory in life, which was of such a character as to nearly
exceed the desires of all others. He was almost of such a character but
still to a less extent, as were the Romans in their time, but the Romans
were braver than he. But it was shown that the bravery of the Romans was
mad. Thus he acquired this reformation, as it were, in sleep, he being
ignorant \[thereof\]; and it is the first reformation.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3395.">3395.</span></span>

CONCERNING THE SPHERE OF PERSUASION. It was again shown me that the
sphere of persuasions diffused by those who \[are\] of the evil \[ones\]
of the Ancient Church, was measured as to its disappearance by a
perpendicular bundle of blue color.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3396.">3396.</span></span>

In this sphere appeared they who were known to me, then in a higher
place, as if within an enclosure \[claustrum\] or wide gallery,
obscurely seen, and thence spoke with me as from afar - also with
another tone. - 1748, September 28.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3397.">3397.</span></span>

THAT INAUGURATION INTO THE FIRST PLANE, OR FIRST FACULTY, SO AS TO BE
CAPABLE OF BEING PRESENT IN ANGELIC COMPANIES, IS FROM THE LORD ALONE.
From what has been said of the pre-Adamites, it was apparent that the
first inauguration is granted by the Lord alone, and even while the
spirit is ignorant \[thereof\]; for when he is thus mangled \[et
gnuggad\] by evil spirits, he was then in sleep and did not feel the
torment, but rather loved \[it\], because the Lord acted through \[his\]
interiors: so that he desired to overcome exterior evils: thus the
preponderance was within, so he felt as it were nothing of exterior
evil; besides which he was in a state of sleep, thus in insensibility,
that thus he was ignorant of what they are ignorant, is also proved by
this, that a few hours after being thus inaugurated he came to me and
wondered that \[he was\] changed, so that he was ignorant how it
happened; he was informed by me how \[it was effected\] and the nature
of \[the change\]. Thus while man and spirit is ignorant, he is prepared
and then reformed. - 1748, September 28.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3398.">3398.</span></span>

HOW HEAVEN IS REPRESENTED. It was represented, when I spoke with spirits
in the street, that angels have, as it were, the head in heaven, but the
feet in the heaven of inferior angelic spirits: that thus similarly
\[these\] have, as it were, the head in their heaven, but the feet in
the world of inferior angelic spirits: that these also \[have\] the head
in their world of spirits, but the feet in man; but they who flow
\[alluuent\] recently from the earth appear to themselves, from fallacy,
like men; but evil spirits, as is now insinuated, the inferior sort,
have the head in the tail, and the feet upwards. - 1748, September 28.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3399.">3399.</span></span>

THAT INAUGURATION INTO GYRES IS \[INAUGURATION\] INTO RESPIRATIONS. When
the pre-Adamites, and \[those who are\] like the pre-Adamites, were
inaugurated into swifter gyres, which I apperceived to be, as it were,
at length continuous, though at first they were highly discrete, it was
granted to perceive that such inaugurations are circumstanced like
\[those\] into respiration: for when respiration is given in man, the
senses and perceptions, also the actions, are alive, and when the
interior respiration \[is given, I perceived\] that the interior senses
and perceptions are alive, which was shown me by living experience; for
I also was exercised in interior gyres which belonged to respiration:
thus inauguration into respiration is only first, which being granted,
the spirit is then introduced into interior perceptions and so forth;
for, as was shown, ideas are moments and varieties of respirations, as
is apparent from the operation of the will into the muscles, through the
applications of the lungs, which \[I have spoken\] of previously. -
1748, September 28.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3400.">3400.</span></span>

CONCERNING SPIRITS OF ANOTHER EARTH. -CONCERNING THE STUPENDOUS DEEDS OF
A CERTAIN KIND OF SPIRITS WHO WERE UNKNOWN. There appeared to me a
spirit, a little in front, above, in bed: who also appeared behind,
above, for he could change his situation, and it was then shown from
many things: yea, he changed the situation of nearly all in the sphere.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 3401-3450](sd39)
