[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Swedenborg](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sd39)  [Next](sd41) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0766143007/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Spiritual Diary*, by Emanuel Swedenborg, \[1758\], tr. by Bush,
Smithson and Buss \[1883-9\] at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Spiritual Diary

<span class="margnote"><span id="3451.">3451.</span></span>

They confirm themselves also by this, that in this manner propagation of
offspring is promoted, and by many other things equally wicked and
revolting. <span id="fr_34"></span>[3451-1](#fn_34)

<span class="margnote"><span id="3452.">3452.</span></span>

When this preacher of the king was thus detected as having been
concerned \[in the abomination\], the rest confessed that such was the
fact, but that still, independent of him, they had had such intercourse,
but that on account of his participation, they had done it with less
shame. The house also, which was of a yellow color, was shown, together
with the entrance, but the entrance was presently covered by a cloud: he
said that he had his wife there.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3453.">3453.</span></span>

Ostensum mihi qualia sunt spurci illorum amores, nempe quomodo
confirmant talia spurcis ratiociniis, per inductos sensus in regionem
membrorum genitalium, primum in glandulas inguinales, tum per invasionem
quandam sensibilem ab abdominis regione versus regionem istam, dein per
inductionem sensus in membrum genitale, successive versus bulbum, et
tunc simul in pollicem sinistri pedis, et per sensum igneum sub media
planta; cumprimis in unguem pollicis pedis sinistri, qui tali igneo
ardori in bulbo tandem correspondet; igneum erat; quibus significatum
quomodo progressive se confirmarint et instigarint spurcis ratiociniis,
tandem crassissimis naturalibus, quae significata per igneum in ungue
pollicis sinistri pedis, tum ardoris cujusdam sensu in urethra prius,
quae significant ea quae ad spurcam vesicam pertinent, sic successerunt
eorum foedi amores, nam ultimo aestimant conjuges, ita conjugia pro
urinatoriis vasis, quibus unicuique permittitur urinam infundere, ita
detestantur et abominantur tandem conjugia, et amorem conjugialem, tum
totum sexum foemininum; consequenter omnes amores inde derivatos, sic ut
vita eorum tandem sit vita hyemis, et quidem spurca.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3454.">3454.</span></span>

They are so powerfully allured by this foul cupidity, that they think
there is not an individual in the whole world who may not be persuaded
that he is of such a disposition, or may become so, for in principle
they place the highest terrestrial pleasure therein, although afterwards
they nauseate and abominate, together with conjugial love, everything
which truly belongs to love.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3455.">3455.</span></span>

That preacher was at length changed as to his face, and having become
fiery yet black, his body clad in white, in this black and deformed
aspect he was carried about and exhibited to spirits and angels, \[that
they might know\] how vile a man he was; and because he deemed that his
conduct was for the sake of offspring, he represented to himself
something like an offspring, which was seen; but, as in the case of a
young child, his head was enveloped round about and made as it were
black, thus rendering his face still more deformed. At length he
represented to himself that the innocent were participators with him,
for these he was in the practice of substituting, that he might screen
himself. He then scraped together whatever he could from the Word, -
some things respecting David, and others respecting the Pre-Adamites, -
which I had not before heard; and his whole body being then again
enveloped, and presenting thus enwrapped a dusky aspect, the entire
front of his person, from his head downwards, became, as it were, an
elongated face, which added vastly to his deformity. Afterwards he was
torn and rent by the tormentors, but still not very cruelly, and placed
against a column, when his face appeared only of its natural dimensions,
but unsightly, from a cadaverous hue.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3456.">3456.</span></span>

But still he spoke, or another in him, from which it was manifest that
he was void of modesty, for he was not ashamed of being made what he
was, nor that he was affixed to the column with his hideous face; for
not the least sign of shame was to be observed. - 1748, October 3.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3457.">3457.</span></span>

IT WAS PERCEIVED, BY A SPIRITUAL IDEA, THAT NOTHING OF \[TRUE\] LIFE
INHERES IN THE WICKED. There were above the head those who act by
clandestine deceit, for they only act when they can do it without harm
to themselves, as is usual with those who are accustomed to act in this
manner. These being remitted for a short time \[into their former
state\], immediately acted from their nature; wherefore I inquired of
them whether there was aught of life in them, for I perceived, by a
spiritual idea, that they acted like a sinew, which acts only as it is
relaxed; with the difference, however, that such spirits being forms
receptive of life, think that they act as if really living. By a
spiritual idea it was also perceived, that of themselves they were
destitute of life, which was indicated by the appearance of something
black \[and\] lifeless. They answered that they did not know, because
they also perceived that they acted like a sinew that is relaxed; thus
they, from their own form, into which the life of the Lord flows, in
proportion as this is diminished or withdrawn, tend to what is deceitful
and depraved. - 1748, October 3.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3458.">3458.</span></span>

In speaking further concerning them when reformed, \[I learned\] that
the means employed were honors, terrors, shames, and things of this
nature, which were impressed upon them by punishments and vastations,
until they contracted the habit of being more watchful over themselves,
and could thus be restrained with less reprehension. The consequence is,
that in process of time, they become such that a greater degree of
liberty can be allowed them, though the same nature remains. - 1748,
October 3.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3459.">3459.</span></span>

CONCERNING THE ANIMAL SPIRITS AND FIBERS. Speaking with some concerning
the animal spirits, when there was one or more present who in the life
of the body seemed to have known something about such things, \[I said\]
that very few of the learned would believe that any animal spirit is
given, but that the fibers are empty, like dry stalks of flax, when yet
it may be evident to anyone that no such fiber could operate without its
inner fluid, any more than there could be a patient without an agent.
This was perceived to be impossible, for the fibers would then be
destitute of all vital operation, like a blood-vessel without blood. Yet
\[these same persons\] if they see any juice expressed, or a liquid
injected by instruments, will then believe, because it becomes sensible;
when at the same time nothing subservient to life can be given, unless
there be an agent within and a re-agent without. This was not all
actually said in so many words, but it was thought over with spirits, as
it is while I am writing. - 1748, October 3. As long as it is disputed
whether an animal spirit exists in the fibers, which may be done for a
thousand years, they can never come even to the outer court of
knowledges, nor even see it, but stand afar off; for on most points the
learned simply dispute whether a thing is or not.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3460.">3460.</span></span>

The sciences are not in themselves of such a nature that they are to be
rejected, for those things which are spiritual may be confirmed by them,
for the angels understand indefinitely more in all sciences than ever
could be believed, and those too of the most hidden character; but the
learned in every science, be it what it may, scarcely ever fail to
endeavor, either openly or to themselves, to reason concerning spiritual
things, each from his peculiar science, and thus everyone blinds
himself; for many, in order to gain a character for learning, reason
from their sciences; as the philosophers from theirs, the logicians from
theirs, the metaphysicians from theirs, the anatomists from theirs, the
geometricians from theirs, the historians from theirs, the politicians
from theirs, and so on, whereby they heap up phantasies, like the Jews
from their trifles; wherefore the ideas of the learned are closed, and
with them spiritual and celestial things, and thus heaven itself, which
is opened to the unlearned. - 1748, October 3. Who worship nature as God
more than those that are skilled in the different sciences?

<span class="margnote"><span id="3461.">3461.</span></span>

CONTINUATION CONCERNING THE PREACHER AND HIS LIFE. It was given to know
the quality of this man's life and that of those of similar stamp, from
this circumstance; that while I was reading of those things that
constitute the primary knowledges of the faith professed in heaven, it
was attended at first with such a full idea that the angels also were
delighted; but when he was present, and the persuasion of his life
flowed in, then those perceptions were so dulled \[and deadened\] that
the spirits around me could scarcely apprehend the sense of the words,
much less feel any delight, so completely was everything closed,
obscured, and weakened, from the life of his persuasion alone.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3462.">3462.</span></span>

Moreover, because he was in the persuasion that he might have eternal
life, he was restored to his former freedom from restraint, and again
explored; the reason was, that being a preacher of much dignity, he
might have served as a subject of this class \[of spirits\], and then,
as a subject, he could not have thought differently \[from them\], and
consequently the explorers themselves might have been deceived. But
because the course of events detected his quality, and the persuasion of
his life, it was given to state what the result would be. But because he
was a priest, and priests are accustomed to shield each other, however
flagitious, certain spirits were disposed to protect him, as if it would
be injurious to the priestly order were he to be impeached. He was
therefore transferred into the society of others, and first of those who
were cunningly malicious; but yet his true character was seen as it was.
Afterwards he was conveyed to a society of the pious \[pietists\], who
deem themselves holy, and who were with me in the face; he there became
associated with those who directed him through right and wrong, pious
and impious, sacred and profane, but still he was recognized there also
in his true character. At length he was delivered over to the company of
certain spirits who, because he was a priest, were ready to screen him,
from the false idea that unless the priests were screened, the
priesthood would suffer. In this society he became such that he never
could have been read as he really was, for he seemed ready to confess
faith as fully as those who now led him, although it was obscurely
perceived that, as the spirits around me said, it was rather they than
he that were chargeable with it, and that he merely served them as a
subject, which he did without his own agency, for from this he would
have shrunk at all hazards; but the truth was, the priests had reduced
him into their own state, so that forgetting himself he spoke as they
did. <span id="fr_35"></span>[3462-1](#fn_35) Hence it appears what the
quality of priests in general is, as well as that of the bishops who are
among them, viz. that from a false principle assumed they will defend
the most abandoned and reprobate, and see the church of the Lord suffer
rather than permit the vilest wretch to be removed from the priesthood,
though it is plainly their duty to prefer the care of souls to the
well-being of a base miscreant who can seduce and pervert whole
congregations, and plunge them into hell. But most priests, as well as
their bishops, rioting in worldly and corporeal indulgence, heed none of
these things, nor think at all of the church and the salvation of souls.
While I am writing this they acknowledge that such is their character,
and being somewhat ashamed, retire.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3463.">3463.</span></span>

But the preacher being suddenly caught away from them, comes towards my
left ear, and a little below, speaking almost like a boisterously
chiding spirit though his speech cannot well be described. He first
makes a grinding noise with his teeth, then a similar one in the
abdomen, belching forth his words, as it were, and in this kind of
utterance confesses that he was in the life of the body of the character
above described, that he delighted in promiscuous adulteries, and not
only approved of them but actually practiced them.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3464.">3464.</span></span>

I was afterwards remitted into the company of those of this character,
from whence respiration flowed in, that I might know their quality; the
respiration was then separated from the pectoral region, and removed to
the abdominal about the naval, nor did it extend itself any further; and
this signifies a life separated from good and truth. There were then
shown to me certain species of respirations, concerning which much
conversation also was had, as, for instance, that there is conjoined
with the usual respirations an external one, which is common to the
world of spirits; then an internal with an insensible external, which is
sufficiently good; then an internal without an external, which is
better; and finally an insensible one that was to me scarcely
perceptible, which is angelic. But these in general; there are still
other genera, and an indefinite number of species, pertaining to
different regions of the body and the determinations thence, concerning
which, by the favor of the Lord, I shall speak elsewhere. I was first
accustomed thus to respire in my early childhood, when saying my morning
and evening prayers, and occasionally afterwards, when exploring the
harmonies of the lungs and heart, and especially when deeply engaged in
writing the works that have been published. For a course of years I
continually observed that there was a tacit respiration, scarcely
perceptible, concerning which it was subsequently given me to reflect,
and then to write. I was thus during many years, from the period of
childhood, introduced into such respirations, especially by means of
absorbing speculations, in which the breathing seems to become
quiescent, as otherwise the intense study of truth is scarcely possible.
Afterwards, when heaven was opened to me, and I was enabled to converse
with spirits, I sometimes scarcely breathed by inspiration at all for
the space of a short hour, and merely drew in enough of air to keep up
the process of thinking. Thus I was introduced by the Lord into interior
respirations. I have also again and again observed, that when I was
passing into a state of sleep, my respiration was almost taken away, so
that I would awake and catch my breath. When I observe nothing of the
kind, I continue to write and think, and am not aware of my respiration
being arrested, unless I reflect upon it. This I may say has happened in
instances innumerable. Nor was I at such times able to observe the
various changes, because I did not reflect upon them. The design of all
this was, that every kind of state, every kind of sphere, and every kind
of society, particularly the more interior, might find in my own a fit
respiration, which should come into play without any reflection on my
part, and that thus a medium of interaction might be afforded with
spirits and angels.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3465.">3465.</span></span>

Once on awakening after sleep I heard a subtle sound as of a peculiar
kind of turning or twisting above my left ear, which I can hardly find
words to describe. Again, on awakening at another time, I heard the
sound of a rougher kind of twisting and rending, and it was perceived
that it was from those who were of similar quality with the preacher, as
were also those who were thus dreadfully torn, the reason of which
\[punishment\] was, that they had deceitfully charged upon others
misdeeds similar to their own; for it was habitual for him to say that
all others, however innocent, were like himself, as he was desirous by
means of phantasy which was perceived, of conjoining others with
himself, in order that the innocent might undergo the rending. <span
id="fr_36"></span>[3465-1](#fn_36) \[It was also perceived\] that he
seemed to believe that he had actually substituted the innocent; but I
maintained, on the other hand, that it was impossible, although I still
had a sort of belief that the fact was so, as the renders labored hard
to hold him, while he seemed several times to escape, and the innocent
to be substituted. Wherefore angelic spirits were \[seen to be\] around
my head, who directed the punishment, and then there was no sign of his
escaping, for it was perceived that they held him, and when he seemed to
escape that he was still brought back. The former illusion was owing to
his being dealt with by renders of a duller genius, who did not duly
perceive interior things.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3466.">3466.</span></span>

I afterwards spoke with those of this stamp, and informed them that it
was impossible for them to enter the sphere of angels, for they would be
distressed like a fish when raised out of the water into the air. But as
they were of a more subtle genius, they were above at a very
considerable height in front, and flowed in with a kind of insensible
subtlety. They were those who think such adulteries with married and
unmarried women as are mentioned above, to be not only lawful, but holy;
thus pretending for them a character of sanctity. To these I remarked,
that it was as impossible for such vile adulterers to enter the angelic
sphere as for a bird to live in the ether; and I represented a bird in
\[the empty receiver of\] an air-pump; but they thought it was possible;
whereupon they themselves were representatively carried upwards, as out
of the atmosphere into the ether; and the preacher himself being made
the subject of this process, it appeared as if with him the urinary
bladder was so dilated as to occupy the whole man, with the exception
perhaps of the head, so that he became, as it were, only a filthy
bladder or vile utensil. Whether anything similar appeared to take place
to those who were in the elevation above-mentioned, I do not recollect.
At this time I saw what I have described; but it was perceived that they
were fearfully tortured, for they were remitted into more subtle ideas,
because they had made a pretence of holiness.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3467.">3467.</span></span>

When they had been thus tortured for a time, and by reason of the
bladders drawn over them were converted to the appearance of these vile
utensils, there burst forth from \[each of\] these coverings, as it
were, a naked human body. This led me to think it might be the remains
of their good, for it differed not from a naked human body, except that
it was somewhat more ruddy. But it was let down almost in a
perpendicular line towards the earth below, and then became somewhat,
though not entirely, fiery; but after some delay it was conveyed to
Gehenna. It was their holy which they had profaned, and which therefore
appeared in this manner.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3468.">3468.</span></span>

When this quasi human body was let down toward the midst of Gehenna,
then those who were there perceived a certain charge; their
lasciviousness, which was fiery, was diminished, because the delight of
the other lasciviousness was greater, as it was given me to perceive. It
appeared from this that their lasciviousness was more outrageous than
that of those in Gehenna, for which reason they could not be sent into
it. The fire of Gehenna is redder, like the fire of flame, but their
fire was represented as white, and like the flame of an intenser heat.
Their passive life in like manner is represented as of a snowy light,
for they represent the light of winter; but when coupled with their
nefarious and abominable lasciviousness, it was of a flamy light.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3469.">3469.</span></span>

When it was found that the fire of Gehenna would not coalesce with the
fiercer fire of this flame, then those from Gehenna who were of similar
quality drew near to them, and both parties forming themselves into a
band, were thence wafted about. I then supposed and said that a new
Gehenna would be formed of those of this character, and that for this
reason they were borne about as described. But they could not remain in
that sphere, and came above my head, and there remained for some time
stationary. I learned that they were exceedingly numerous, from a
hissing kind of whisper, which cannot be described. They were sometime
above my head, and whispered with a horrible hiss, but quite unlike the
Gehenna that had previously approached my left ear, concerning which I
spoke, if I mistake not, before, and the whisper of which was hoarser,
because from a more dense flame of fire. But this was more subtle,
because of a more subtle flame. It extended itself around my head, from
their pretending such principles of holiness. They were afterwards
driven to a region in the rear, or in a back direction, as if to be
remitted from the world of this sun into the open universe, where beings
like them are supposed to be, and there to be plunged into their lakes.
Where they were afterwards driven to I know not. I perceived at the same
time that my eyes were weakened, especially the right. - 1748, October
4.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3470.">3470.</span></span>

CONCERNING SPIRIT, THAT IT IS EXTENDED. I conversed with those who, in
the life of the body, believed that spirit was not extended, and who,
moreover, from such a principle, had irradicated phantasies to that
degree that they would not admit even the use of a term implying the
idea of extension. Upon being aware of the fact, I inquired of one who
was deeply rooted in this persuasion, what he now thought respecting the
soul or spirit, whether it was extended or not, reminding him that he
saw, heard, smelt, touched, and had appetite, just as if he was actually
in the body; that as to touch, for instance, he enjoyed it most
perfectly; besides the various cupidities of which man is possessed in
his corporeal life, and (:now:) that he was even in similar thought. He
confessed that during life he had been of the opinion that the soul or
spirit was not extended, and consequently that he would admit nothing,
not even the use of a word, which would involve such a belief. He was
then held a while in the idea in which he was when he thought thus in
the world, and he then said that spirit was thought. But I answered him
as if he were still living in the world, by inquiring whether sight
could exist without an organ of sight or an eye. Sight in itself is not
extended, but the eye or organ of sight is extended, as are also the
objects of sight, but not sight abstracted from organ and object. So
also with thought, which is internal sight. I asked him whether he could
conceive of thought or internal sight apart from organs or organic
substances, just as sight could not be conceived of without an organ of
sight, adding that thought viewed in itself and without an organic
substance, was like vision, of which extension could not be predicted;
and if internal sight or thought were practicable without an organ, I
demanded from what source or by what means. He then acknowledged that he
had, during the life of the body, indulged the phantasy of supposing
that spirit was only thought, but not organic; he now however manifestly
perceived that it was organic.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3471.">3471.</span></span>

The cause is hence manifest why the learned do not believe in a life
after death, nor in spirit, viz., that they abstract thought from its
organic \[relations\], just as they would sight and hearing from their
organs. To this we may add, that if spirit was nothing but thought, man
would have no need of so much brain as he has, for the whole brain is an
organ of the internal senses. Indeed the skull might in that case be
wholly emptied of its contents, and still the thought act as spirit. How
then can it fail to appear to the learned of the world, that there are
organics of thought in the brain, from whence flow invisible fibers,
along which the thoughts pass from the \[outward\] senses to the
\[interior\] organics, and from the organics to the muscular activities?

<span class="margnote"><span id="3472.">3472.</span></span>

Another subject of discourse was the form of spirits; for they know not
that they are possessed of any other form than the human, inasmuch as
the inmost things of the spirit aspire \[and tend\] to a form similar to
the human body, as the spirit of the parent in the embryo to that form,
and the whole spirit of man to the form of the body, but yet to a much
more perfect form, one fitted and accommodated to the celestial life.
This was illustrated by the case of the nymphae which are transformed
from worms into winged insects, and thus into a form adapted to
generation and to a life in the atmosphere, and to uses in that their
heaven. This form is altogether unlike the form of the worm, because the
use creates the form. But that spirits are not \[earthly\] bodies, is
manifest from this, that the \[earthly\] bodies answer to the worms, and
are the food of worms, but in the other life the various viscera, as the
ventricle, the intestines, the liver, the heart, the lungs, are of no
use, for these are all formed for the sake of the blood, and this for
the sake of the muscles and the organs of sense, that the man may be
able to live and act in the world. Wherefore the forms of spirits are
much more perfect, and the cause of their representing the human form
has already been stated. But of what quality are the forms of spirits,
it is not, for various reasons, given to know. - 1748, October 4.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3473.">3473.</span></span>

WHAT APPEARS CLEAR TO MAN IS OBSCURE TO GOOD SPIRITS, AND THE REVERSE. I
spoke with spirits to the effect, that I ought to write in such a manner
that men would understand and perceive its drift; for if I wrote
according to the understanding and perception of spirits and angels, it
would be so obscure to man that be would scarcely apprehend anything; it
would be in fact involved in darkness, although spirits, good spirits,
and angels, can scarcely believe it, because, being in light themselves,
they naturally conclude that that would be clear to men which is clear
to them. It was therefore given to say to them, that that which is
clearly manifest to men would be obscure to spirits, who understand and
perceive the ideas of thought. In like manner that which is clearly
manifest to spirits would be obscure to angels, because they are in the
light and affection of ideas; for if angels perceived in the same manner
with spirits, their perceptions would be gross, and as if clouded by
darkness. It follows, moreover, on the other hand, that what is obscure
to man, is manifest and clear to spirits; and what is obscure to
spirits, is manifest to angels. - 1748, October 4.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3474.">3474.</span></span>

OF THE PROPRIUM OF MAN, SPIRIT, AND ANGEL, AND A CLEARING UP OF TRUTH
RESPECTING IT. When engaged in writing and saying that the proprium of
man, spirit, and angel was in itself nothing but pure evil, certain
spirits of an interior quality insinuated that they had a proprium which
was not evil, namely, an inward and still inmost mind; and that the
inmost gave to the inward the power of becoming celestial and spiritual.
I had never heretofore supposed any otherwise than that there was an
inmost mind in man which does not exist in brute animals; but they
insisted that these minds, the inward and inmost, are their proprium,
and because they are receptive of celestial and spiritual things from
the Lord, and give its faculty to the proper mind of man, that thus they
had not evil, but good. But it was answered them that these inward and
innermost minds were not their's but the Lord's; and that theirs was a
natural mind, which was altogether perverted; and that if a spirit or
angel were deprived of his proprium, which pertains to his natural mind,
the interior \[or higher\], as well as the lower, he would be utterly
deprived of life, which was also shown to the spirit by a slight
experience, and he confessed that if the experiment should proceed
farther he would become nothing. But that the propriate and natural mind
may be obsequious to the truly spiritual and celestial mind, the matter
is so ordered that it shall not be effaced and nullified, and thus made,
as it were, obsequious, for in that case one would feel nothing of
himself or of his own, but his propria are disposed into a form that may
be compared to a rainbow, in which the colors derive their origin from
black and white, answering to the propria of man, to wit, his evils;
these are disposed by the Lord that the man may live, as it were, from
his own life; and the less of remains there are, the less has he of life
from his proprium. Therefore, for one to claim to himself an interior
and inmost mind, by which the Lord gives power to the natural mind to
become what it is, is to claim for himself what is not his proprium, for
neither man, spirit, nor angel knows anything of these minds.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3475.">3475.</span></span>

Besides, unless those minds should be in a state of perfection, man
could never be reformed. The more interior mind is mere potency when man
is born, and is opened by the inner that it may give to man the faculty
of understanding and perceiving what is true and good. So also, when the
false and evil is much increased, and penetrates towards the interiors,
just in that proportion the more interior mind is closed, that is, so
much less of remains is left, which is everywhere shown. As to what
pertains to infants, their inner mind is opened according to the ideas
of infants in heaven.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3476.">3476.</span></span>

CONCERNING THOSE WHO ARE INSANITIES FROM INQUIRING WHAT GOD WAS EMPLOYED
ABOUT FROM ETERNITY, BEFORE THE CREATION OF THE WORLD, AND WHO THENCE
INFER ON ORIGIN EVEN OF THE LORD HIMSELF. Those who remain \[in great
measure\] corporeal, very much as they were on earth, cannot reason, so
long as they are of this character, otherwise than from corporeal and
material things, consequently from the most finite and exterior,
judging, for instance, of celestial happiness from the pleasures of the
body, and of everything spiritual from the sensual joys of the flesh.
Some of these also, when they reason, fall into speculations grounded
upon the most finite things, as time and space, concluding from time
respecting the eternal, and from space respecting the infinite, not
knowing that in the other life there is no notion of time or space, for
those who have lived thousands of years know not that they have lived a
minute; and those who were locally the most remote from me, as in the
Indies, or in other earths, compared with the distance of which, all the
distances on our earth vanish to nothing, were yet made to be present in
a moment of time. Wherefore the notion of time and space is not given to
spirits, except to those who are corporeal, and while in corporeals. But
a \[true and correct\] notion does not obtain even with them, because
\[interior\] reflection is not given them, and without reflection a
\[true\] notion does not exist, as is evident from the case of a man in
the body who does not reflect upon corporeal things of this kind; he is
not then in the notion of them. This is written in the presence of the
angels, and thus with the angels.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3477.">3477.</span></span>

Hence it is that some engage themselves in reasoning from time
concerning the creation of the world, and thus concerning God, what he
did prior to the creation of the world; and because they have no other
notion than that of time, some say that he was then thinking how he
should create the world, and the things that are in it, and how he
should foresee and provide for everything in particular. Thus they draw
absurd conclusions, and those of them that are altogether corporeal
\[infer\] that God began to exist with the world, thus that nature is
God, or that God existed from nature; besides other things \[of the same
kind\].

<span class="margnote"><span id="3478.">3478.</span></span>

Some corporeal spirits, when they were in such a phantasy, were unable
to perceive time from eternity. They could indeed perceive an eternity
to come from this, that there is no end of time, and that thus it is
time without end; but time from eternity \[past\] they do not conceive;
and when their reasonings extend in that direction, they fall into such
absurdities; whence the naturalists confirm themselves to the utmost
that nature is God, and God from nature. <span
id="fr_37"></span>[3478-1](#fn_37)

<span class="margnote"><span id="3479.">3479.</span></span>

From this it may appear how men fall into impious principles and direful
phantasies, when from things philosophical, material, sensual,
corporeal, yea, natural and finited to the lowest degree, they reason
concerning spiritual and celestial, and still more, Divine things; which
results from their not being in true faith, so that the Lord might lead
each and all their thoughts; whereas they on the contrary lead
themselves, for such things arise from their proprium.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3480.">3480.</span></span>

Some spirits were of such a quality that in reasoning concerning the
creation of the world, \[they made it a question\] what the Lord could
have been before the creation and from eternity, and \[finally
inferred\] that eternity could not be predicated of the Lord; besides
other outrageous things of like nature.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3481.">3481.</span></span>

When I was myself led by them into such phantasies, in order that I
might get free from them by having their fallacy exposed, it was given
to ask them, whether they could conceive of anything existing beyond the
bounds of the universe; whether there were any space without the
universe; and if there were, whether this extended to infinity; for no
termination can be conceived if space is conceived; thus how there could
be space without space, or the infinite, which cannot be predicated of
space (:some suppose that there God is, because he is infinite:)
wherefore those who had been in such phantastic conceits in the life of
the body, appeared to themselves to be conveyed without the universe;
and some of them, when there, armed their condition to be so much to
their mind, that they wished to remain there, aloof from the \[troubles
and\] annoyances to which they were subject in the created universe. But
while held in the phantasy that they were out of the universe, as things
appeared to them according to their phantasy, they then began to reason
concerning that non-space beyond the universe, as having no limit;
wherefore they seemed to themselves to advance still farther, till at
length they saw there certain beings, who spoke to them, and whom I also
heard speaking, and saying, that they were in the terminus beyond the
universe, and in fact that they themselves were termini, and if they
approached that they should swallow them up. Whereupon they were smitten
with terror in the prospect of being devoured if they ventured farther,
and indeed seemed, from the effect of their terror, to be, as it were,
actually devoured; thus deeming themselves reduced to nothing, and
compelled to vanish away. Those who thus stood in the terminus, or as
being themselves termini, were described as a kind of statues, yet
neither of stone nor wood, but as somehow animated, and yet not
animated; whether cold or hot, could not be determined, but they seemed
to be both. These \[reasoners\] were those who in the life of the body
had been in such a phantasy, viz., that of confounding the Divine
infinite with infinite space, so that they could not conceive the
infinite of the Lord except by the infinite of space; wherefore because
they could not conceive the infinite of space, neither do they admit the
infinite of the Lord.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3482.">3482.</span></span>

I was also \[as remarked above\] held by them in that phantasy, though
still recollecting my former state, but I was delivered from it by the
Lord by thinking of infinite space as not being space beyond the
universe, which is without bound. The idea thus falls into the
inconceivable, and as this is true of the thought of space, so also of
that of an eternity before the creation of the world. I was afterwards
led by the Lord himself into a certain perception of forms, the idea of
which exceeded immensely all the ideas received by geometricians, for
even the lowest human forms, as those of the intestines, so vastly
surpass the forms apprehended by geometrical ideas, that they can by no
means be perceived by them. And as this is true of the intestinal
spires, and their consequent forms, so also far more are the forms of
their operations such that the most subtle of them cannot possibly be
conceived from geometry and its calculus of infinites, as they
indefinitely transcend all such calculus. What then can be conceived
from geometry of the forms of the still more subtle organs, and what of
the vital forms, or those adapted to the reception of life, which
immensely transcend the organic forms and \[baffle\] the sight? Hence it
appears in what manner the human mind acts upon spiritual, celestial,
and divine subjects; that it cannot reason even from the excretions of
the intestines, \[and show\] how they are separated, which it cannot
perceive from their calculus of infinites; wherefore they reason from
the very dregs of these excretions, the most vile and sordid of all
things.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3483.">3483.</span></span>

There was shown to me a hand before the left eye, upon the sight of
which it was given to perceive that it signified that they were
inveigled by such a phantasy; for as long as man or spirit holds himself
in phantasy respecting the creation of the world, whether, according to
the opinion of one of the ancient philosophers, it was from eternity, or
not, they are borne away into direful conceits respecting the
orientation of God from nature, thus respecting nature that it is God.
This phantasy once imbibed, so long as they remain thus corporeal, as
remarked above, easily and spontaneously recurs, and thus obtains the
mastery; and if they confirm themselves, \[they will maintain\] that
nature is God, especially the geometricians, who think that nothing can
go beyond or rise above their science, when yet the utmost extent of
geometry cannot reach to the point of detecting the coarsest process of
fecal secretion; and as to the form of the intestines, geometry with its
whole array of infinites cannot grasp it at all.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3484.">3484.</span></span>

Wherefore, that I might not be held in things so extremely ultimated and
finite by the Lord, there was given me a notion of forms entirely
transcending all geometrical forms, for geometry is terminated in the
circle, or in curves referring themselves to the circle, which are
merely terrestrial, and do not embrace even the lowest of the
atmospheric and aqueous forms. From these lowest or terrestrial forms,
it was given, by the removal of imperfections, such as the causes of
gravity, rest, <span id="fr_38"></span>[3484-1](#fn_38) cold, and so on,
to perceive forms which were free from the operation of such causes; and
that then there remained forms still more free from them, and others
freer still, till at length forms were given in which nothing could be
conceived but centers in every point, so that they consisted of mere
centers from whence were all circles and peripheries, each of the points
of which represented centers, and from these centers still had respect
to similars, till the lower form being removed, in which were those
termini signifying the boundaries of space and of time, I saw myself
carried forward to forms almost entirely void of limits and thus taken
out of relative to spaces and time. But all these forms are yet finite,
because an idea of them can be conceived by a certain abstraction of
those things that are more finited, though they yet remain finite;
wherefore all such forms are still within nature, and are without life.
Consequently as long as the mind detains itself or is detained in such
forms, it still falls short of the sphere of life; but the things that
are within or above them, are living from the Lord, but still organic,
because even they have no life of themselves, any more than the forms
within nature. Wherefore no one by any kind of abstraction can conceive
of the forms that are within the natural, as I now perceive while
writing concerning forms on the paper before me, being forced thus to
confess that there are spiritual forms within the most subtle forms of
nature which are never perceptible. - 1748, October 5.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3485.">3485.</span></span>

CONCERNING DIPPEL. A certain one was for some time at my left side, who
attempted wicked things; I did not know who he was, because he acted
with much subtlety, so that I was scarcely aware of his influence, but
yet it was given me to perceive it. He was also, as it were, within me
on the left side, and I called him a most vile devil. He then receded to
a station in front a little higher up, and spoke, but he induced a
common \[or general\] sphere of ideas, which cannot be described. It was
however such that there was no idea of particulars, and yet he spoke as
if from particulars, for all discourse is of particulars. A similar
sphere I do not recollect of having perceived before, that is, of one's
speaking in such a general kind of sphere. His sphere therefore was the
sphere of his nature, the nature of one who was bound to no principles,
but was in general opposed to all, whoever they might be, of whatever
principle or whatever faith. He therefore arrayed himself against all,
and could ingeniously refute and vilify them, while he himself knew
nothing of truth and good. I afterwards wondered that such a genius \[or
character\] should exist - one that could refute others with so much
dexterity, and sting them so keenly, when yet it was not from the
knowledge of truth.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3486.">3486.</span></span>

He afterwards approached nearer, and appeared at first black in the
face. At length advancing still nearer, and being in a certain light, he
took an earthen flask, of a grayish white appearance, and came up to me
with the flask in his hand, that he might offer it to me to drink from,
at the same time insinuating that it \[contained\] excellent wine, so
that I begun to be almost persuaded to comply, for I knew not who he
was; but I was presently informed that it was Dippel, and that he
displayed this flask of wine because he formerly practiced the same
stratagem, when in consequence of his becoming angry with anyone for
contradicting him, he would give him wine containing some poisonous
mixture, that he might destroy his understanding, and cause him to know
no more what he said than if he had been an infant. He was moreover of
such a character in respect to those whom he deceived, from whom he took
away, as it were, all understanding of truth and good; and even those
who adhered to him \[seemed to know nothing\] except his own opinion. I
had myself been among those who adhered to him, and had heard the
various things collected from his writings, but could not retain in
memory the least item, nor know what I thought, nor even help thinking
things absurd. Such was his contrariety even to those who adhered to
him, as to take away all their intelligence of truth and good, and
leaving them in a kind of delirium, not knowing what they were about:
yet still they adhered to him. Whether therefore he gave such a
poisonous draught to anyone, or whether by the flask and the wine was
signified such a quality in himself which he imparted to others who
adhered to him, I know not; it might be both.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3487.">3487.</span></span>

His quality was represented to me by a great hurdle \[or crate\] of
teeth of a yellowish hue, like teeth indeed, but so large as to be
monstrous, so that the entire face was apparently nothing but teeth.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3488.">3488.</span></span>

CONCERNING \[CERTAIN\] EXCELLENT SPIRITS OF ANOTHER EARTH, SIMILAR TO
THE PRIMITIVE OR MORAVIAN CHURCH. A company of spirits came to within a
short distance of my left temple, and breathed upon me with a certain
kind of speech, which, however, I did not understand. But thinking it
might be within the sphere of my thoughts, I felt it as something softer
than I recollect ever to have experienced before, blowing like a very
gentle aura first upon my left temple and left ear upwards, extending to
the left eye and slightly towards the right, then to the lips,
especially from the left eye, and when it reached the lips it entered by
the mouth, and thus as I supposed, through the Eustachian tube into the
thought. There was then given a communication of thoughts, so that I
perceived theirs, and they mine. They then stated, in cogitative speech,
by what manner the utterance was effected, viz. by moving the lips,
which were similarly moved with me, as also the tongue for a short time,
which was a common act \[to them all\], for there ought to be a common
where there are particulars. Moreover their thoughts were communicated
by \[the fibers of\] the lips, and it was said in thought that they thus
perspicuously conveyed their ideas to others. I was able thence to
conclude that they were from some other earth, from their speaking \[by
the simple motion of the lips\], but from what one in particular I was
left in ignorance. From their confession of faith I was prompted to
think them from the earth Jupiter; for in every earth there are various
knowledges of faith, as there are also in our own, and our Most Ancient
Church was extremely similar to that \[to which these spirits
belonged\]. Their speech was moreover marked by another common
peculiarity, viz. that it was effected somehow by the lower jaw, which
with me, as well as with themselves, they made to protrude beyond the
upper lips: <span id="fr_39"></span>[3488-1](#fn_39) quae maxilla simul
movebatur a gingivis, quam motionem habebant, a mea maxilla cum
gingivis, et labiis. <span id="fr_40"></span>[3488-2](#fn_40)

<span class="margnote"><span id="3489.">3489.</span></span>

They confessed that they acknowledged the only Lord, which led me to
conclude that they were from the earth Jupiter, as also that the
proprium with them was only polluted. Concerning these things, and also
perhaps a third topic, I conversed with them, but the third I do not
recollect, though I inferred that they were in the true faith. They then
said that I was impure, for they declared of what character I had
formerly been, which they perceived immediately from my sphere;
wherefore I said to them that it was as they had confessed (:which was
the third topic just mentioned as forgotten:) viz. that all good is of
the Lord, and that in themselves there was nothing but evil, therefore
all their good was from the Lord, and they themselves, considered in
themselves, were devils and infernals; consequently the Lord alone had
delivered and saved them from hell, as he had us. In farther conversing,
they asked me why I spoke with devils? I replied that it was permitted
me, and that too with the very worst of the devils, from whose inflatus
alone man, as to all that is his own, is liable to be spiritually
destroyed. I informed them also that the devils of this character were
once men, and some of them, whom I had known in the life of the body,
were men of eminence, and of whom I had never supposed any such thing as
that they were devils, or would become devils, but that they would
rather become better; <span id="fr_41"></span>[3489-1](#fn_41) for it
would be unreasonable to suppose that the Lord would permit anyone to be
punished in hell, much less to eternity, for \[the sins of\] a short
life, especially as each one considered his principles to be true, and
was thus fixed in his persuasion. It is not to be thought therefore that
the Lord would suffer anyone to be punished, much less without
intermission forever, except with a view to reformation, as whatever is
from the Lord is good, and for a good end, but eternal punishment could
have no \[such\] end. This was the reason that I answered them so
harshly, and called them, as to their proprium, infernals and devils.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3490.">3490.</span></span>

Their respiration, which was interior, within the umbilical region, was
communicated to me, but flowing up and down through the breast, it was
not perceptible.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3490_1/2.">3490\_1/2.</span></span>

It was given me to think concerning the primitive church, of which some
supposed those spirits to be; wherefore some from the primitive church
came near, who were very similar to them, but they did not speak by the
\[simple motion of\] the lips, nor did they flow-in in like manner; they
flowed-in by an afflatus into the upper region of the head, from about
the separating line between the cerebrum and the cerebellum, towards the
forehead, thus above and almost within the brain, and that they who come
into heaven and thence the breath they breathed upon me flowed into the
interior of the thorax and crosswise to the left of the nose. It then
first filled the thorax with respiration, and thence passed to the
region of the umbilicus, where they respired inwardly from the umbilicus
through the back of the thorax, the breath scarcely reaching to the
mouth. The respiration was thus reciprocally inwards, but not evolved
outwardly; that is to say, \[it passed\] from the umbilical region to
that of the thorax towards the back, and then upwards towards the neck,
and thus with a reciprocal rolling, which was sufficiently agreeable.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3491.">3491.</span></span>

I also heard from these the same confessions of faith, viz. that the
Lord ruled the heaven; that all good was from the Lord; and that with
them was nothing but defilement.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3492.">3492.</span></span>

But I still recollect that it came into my thought that these spirits
were not from the primitive church, but from the Moravian church; and
thus is it now said, that they were from the Moravian church, among whom
an image of the primitive church is preserved.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3493.">3493.</span></span>

THAT THE KNOWLEDGES OF FAITH MAY BE BROUGHT, BY DISPUTATIONS, EVEN TO
THE POINT OF DENIAL. I spoke with spirits who supposed themselves to be
in true faith, and who acknowledged with the mouth and in a scientific
way, that the Lord rules the universe; that all good is from Him; and
that everyone's proprium is nothing but evil; all which they affirmed.
But I remarked to them that those things which are luminously clear in
themselves, when they fall under discussion, come into obscurity or
ignorance, and from ignorance or obscurity into doubt, and from doubt
into denial, and thus man becomes an atheist. But they replied that it
could not be so; and this was asserted among them because they had
confirmed in themselves the knowledges of faith, and were thus able
\[without danger\] to dispute with others and even to induce obscurity.
I added from experience, that they might doubt, and even seem to
themselves to deny, because the sphere of certain persuasions is such
that it is able to extinguish spiritual things, as was said to me
respecting the antediluvians; but that those who are in faith, and in
whom the Lord has deeply rooted and confirmed the knowledges of faith,
although they seem to themselves, from the sphere of persuasions, to be
driven to denial, yet that is dispelled (:which is sometimes represented
by removals:) negation being first driven away, then doubt, then
obscurity, till finally they are established in light; that is, in
knowledges. Hence it appears that nothing can injure those who are in
faith, although they should be in the midst of devils, and in such
spheres as seemed to threaten destruction. - 1748, October 6.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3494.">3494.</span></span>

CERTAIN MAHOMETANS CAME ALMOST IMMEDIATELY AFTER DEATH INTO CHOIRS
\[gyros\] OR CONSENTING HARMONIES. I heard a certain sonorous though
somewhat hoarse-voiced choir, which I knew at once, from the gyre and
the sound, to be composed of Mohometans. It was \[as I remarked\], of
hoarser or less flowing sound than that of any choir I had before heard,
and I was informed by others that they were Mohometans, who had died
three or four days previously. In like manner I heard a choir of
Mahometan women, of whom the same thing was said. That they were
Mohometans was given me to perceive by the communication of their
delight when they heard that the women were near. They held on during
the whole night, and I heard at length that they formed their choirs
with peculiar rapidity and ease, as they were in fact almost initiated
into the harmonies in the space of one night; for these choirs are
formed from all speaking and thinking as each one, and each one as all.
Certain spirits remarked that Christians were seldom inaugurated into
these choirs and harmonies in short of thirty years. - 1748, October 6.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3495.">3495.</span></span>

HOW ONE SPIRIT LEADS ANOTHER TO THINK AND SPEAK. When writing concerning
freedom, and saying that he who is led by the Lord is free, and he a
slave who, in his own opinion, is led by himself a spirit applied
himself to my left side, thinking that he was free because he spoke from
himself. But it was given to say to him, that he was not \[led\] by
himself but by others, and by those too of such a character, that they
would kill him if they could; and I asked him if it were not better that
he should be led by the Lord, who gives every good, or wills well to
all? When he still persisted in thinking that he was ruled by himself
and spoke from himself, it was shown him by what spirits he was led, and
what ones spoke through him, and that when these spoke others spoke in
them and led them, and so on successively to the number of five, six, or
seven, who confessed that they spoke through them one from another,
while they supposed that they were speaking from themselves. It was
observed that they formed a certain circular spire, and that thus the
influx of the Lord's life flowed in through a kind of perpetual-spiral
form. But this form no one can know but the Lord.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3496.">3496.</span></span>

CONCERNING THOSE WHO ACT THROUGH THE GOOD AFFECTIONS OF MEN, AND THUS
BEND THEM TO THEIR OWN PURPOSES. There was a certain spirit whom I knew
during his life, although ignorant of his ruling motives and modes of
action, but who in his time was highly esteemed for his endowments of
intellect. With this person I conversed, and he flowed-in in a general
manner, his influx differing but little from that of those who act
without any fixed principles of art \[or method\]; but as he assumed
only such things as are agreeable to a man, and are termed good
affections, to these he assented; as for example he would introduce
infants, and thence exhibit pleasant spectacles, as it were, and such
like things, that he might allure the good. In this manner he attracted
their minds through their good affections. It was discovered also that
he was possessed of conscience, as he was unwilling to do anything
contrary to the sense of goodness and truth. I perceived also his
tenderness, that he would not harm those who were in mutual love, which
love was represented by an infant surrounded by rays and carried by a
mother, as the Lord when an infant is sometimes represented. When he was
told to desist \[from this conduct\], he said he would not desist unless
the Lord should save him; and because he was of such a quality as to act
by good affections, and the like, and because he could be prompted by a
certain tenderness of conscience, he was received to the society of
those of similar stamp, and thence acted by a gentle influx which cannot
better be described than by comparing it to something pearly and yet
flowing, and \[which was directed\] to the tunic of the left eye.
\[Those of this character\] acted by their wills inwardly, but yet they
are those who pertain to the outer tunics of the left eye. Their
afflatus is somewhat cool, and this coolness is now felt especially in
the region of the left knee. He flowed in also by respiration into the
left side of the breast, affecting my sensation, as far as I know rather
pleasantly than otherwise. Such therefore are those who correspond to
the outer tunics of the left eye. - 1748, October 7. They are those
moreover who, from a peculiar tenderness of conscience, protect whatever
belongs to the left eye.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3497.">3497.</span></span>

To this class, however, belong some that are evil as well as those that
are not evil, and their quality may be understood from their resemblance
to Dippel \[mentioned above\]. They are such as have general ideas, not
being bound \[or devoted\] to any particular principle which they have
confirmed to themselves. These general \[or vague\] ideas which
distinguish such spirits are not easily described. They held my mind set
loose, as it were, from everything certain and determinate, and acted as
if roaming abroad in an open field, so that unless certain others had
retained my thoughts in a measure restricted, I should have had no
proper sense of anything, so diffusive is their sphere. And yet, what I
could not but wonder at, they were able, even in that sphere, to speak
of things that were \[definite and\] certain, and if such \[spirits\]
were not detained in ideas of speech, I should scarce know that they
existed, for it is, as it were, a common sphere of spirit as a whole
\[totius spiritus\]. Should the operations in the body take place
according to it the motive fibers would be so relaxed that a man could
scarcely restrain his evacuations, which it was also given to
experience. In fact they had nothing else of a determinate character in
their minds than the wish to lead good men by good affections and evil
men by the cupidities of evil; and because they are in this general
idea, and not determined by life, they that are good can mingle with
many societies of the good, and there be fixed and determined, but not
to anything that is not good, as was clearly ascertained. The evil, on
the other hand, can mingle with many evil societies, and there be fixed.
Those that are in such a general state of ideas reflect but little upon
other persons, though still many things fall into their thoughts; so
that they do not know, until they begin to reflect, that they are
actually drawing others over to their interests. - 1748, October 7.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3498.">3498.</span></span>

CONCERNING THE HOLLANDERS IN PARTICULAR, WHO SEIZE BY CRAFT AND DECEIT
THE GOODS OF OTHERS. A certain spirit, obscurely visible, was present
above the head, which I perceived from the stench of his teeth, and a
still more horrible foetor, and also a little after by a smell as of
burnt horn or bone; and inasmuch as he was not clearly visible, I
supposed he was some one of the class of spirits thus distinguished, but
I was informed that he was one of the Hollanders. There then came up a
vast crowd of these above, below, behind, like a cloud, whom I perceived
to be of the same stamp. Those who were detected as being above the
head, I supposed, from their partial invisibility, to be of a peculiarly
subtle genius, and thus spiritually wicked; but I was informed that
where a sphere is spiritual such persons are not clearly visible, but
that in a natural sphere they appear distinctly to each other, as those
who are thus natural think nothing of spiritual things, nor believe in a
hell or a heaven, or in the existence of spirits; consequently they are
naturally but dimly seen.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3499.">3499.</span></span>

They came in front above and spoke with the greatest earnestness,
striving in the meantime by every cunning art to prevent anything being
divulged concerning them. The particular arts they employed it is not
necessary to relate, only that they aimed to snatch away the ideas of
others, and that they induced a multitude of illusions with a view to
prevent their detection, which was continued for a long time. Hence it
was given to know that they were of such a quality in their lifetime as
made them unwilling that anything they did or thought should be exposed,
assuming a counterfeit face and speech, and all with a view to defraud
others of their property. As a consequence of this habit, contracted in
the life of the body, they fall into a similar practice, in the other
life, of seizing whatever comes in their way, and concealing their
thoughts and actions, though I do not recollect of their resorting to
false pretenses and actual lies, only that they employed a species of
craft in concealing their transactions, and by a simulated cast of
countenance deceiving all they could. They continued this practice for
nearly ten or twelve hours, laboring with all their might to prevent
exposure. I did not perceive a manifest fraud, and they now convey
themselves stealthily away.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3500.">3500.</span></span>

Speaking of their business proceedings, I perceived that their life was
not so much wrapped up in money as in business itself; for their riches
did not consist in money laid up in coffers, nor in their merchandise
itself, of which they think comparatively little, but in business
itself, which was their end and their life. It was however common to
them, at least to some of them, to have magnificent houses and suburban
dwellings, where they lived luxuriously; but this was the case with a
few only. I conversed with them \[at length\] on this business
propensity, which was their life and soul, and their desire for
possessing, by whatever art and management, what others possessed, even
in any part of the world, and their thinking that everything must belong
to them. Concerning the Jews, they said they hated them on account of
their foreign traffic, but as to business, as they draw much money into
their country by various secret methods unknown to them, they regard
them with a degree of tolerance. But as they were unable to defraud them
of anything, they had no dealings with them, though in point of fact
they preferred them to all others, thinking that by their means they
could attract the good of others to themselves.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_34"></span>[3451-1](sd40.htm#fr_34) As there is no
propagation of offspring in the other life, it is to be borne in mind
that the scenes here portrayed were really transacted in the natural
world, but under the instigation of spirits such as those whom
Swedenborg here describes. While abiding in the body they were acted
upon by spirits of a similar love and life to their own, and when they
enter the world of spirits they are immediately associated with their
like, and the traits which are there developed show clearly what they
had been during their lives on earth. The same remark applies to a
multitude of the revelations contained in these pages. -Tr.

<span id="fn_35"></span>[3462-1](sd40.htm#fr_35) In a note on the
lateral margin of the page containing this paragraph, occurs the
following: "I wondered that such a person should be found in the company
of priests, and almost began to think him blameless that he was there,
for a good pectoral respiration flowed in."

<span id="fn_36"></span>[3465-1](sd40.htm#fr_36) Of the nature of the
punishment termed discerptio, or rending, see AC 829, 957, 959.

<span id="fn_37"></span>[3478-1](sd40.htm#fr_37) "Men cannot but
confound the Divine Infinity with infinity of space; and as they cannot
conceive of the infinity of space as being other than a mere nothing, as
it really is, they disbelieve the Divine Infinity. The case is similar
in respect to eternity, which men cannot conceive of otherwise than as
eternity of time, it being presented to the mind under the idea of time
with those who are in time. The real idea of the Divine Infinity is
insinuated into the angels by this, that in an instant they are present
under the Lord's view, even from the farthest extremity of the universe,
without intervening space or time. The real idea of the Divine Eternity
is insinuated into them by this, that thousands of years do not appear
to them as time, but scarce otherwise than as if the had lived a minute.
Both ideas are insinuated into them by this, that in their NOW they have
together things past and future; hence they have no solitude about
things to come, nor have they ever any idea of death, but only an idea
of life: thus in all their NOW there is the Eternity and Infinity of the
Lord." - AC 1382.

<span id="fn_38"></span>[3484-1](sd40.htm#fr_38) From this, and from
what occurs elsewhere in the philosophy of Swedenborg, it appears that
motion is to be regarded as a more native state of elementary matter
than rest. -Tr.

<span id="fn_39"></span>[3488-1](sd40.htm#fr_39) We have left
untranslated the concluding sentence of the above paragraph, because we
know not how to understand it. It evidently points at some difference in
the motion of his jaw and that of the spirits in question, but the
precise nature of the difference is to us unintelligible. -Tr.

<span id="fn_40"></span>[3488-2](sd40.htm#fr_40) Note on the lateral
margin:- "They pertain in the Grand Man to the province intermediate
between the cerebrum and cerebellum, thus to the region of thought or
intellect in the cerebrum, and to that of affection or will in the
cerebellum. Thence it is that intellectual and voluntary things act with
them as one, the face speaking and the eye at the same time, as it were,
thinking."

<span id="fn_41"></span>[3489-1](sd40.htm#fr_41) Dr. Tafel's note on
this passage implies that Swedenborg's meaning here is, not that be
supposed such persons would be regenerated, but that they would be
subdued, and thus ameliorated. As to the paragraph that follows,
respecting, the eternity of punishment, it is probably to be considered
as expressing Swedenborg's opinion during the life-time of the persons
spoken of, and before he became the subject of that full enlightenment
which he afterwards received; for he is elsewhere extremely clear and
emphatic on this subject. Thus, AC 10,749, "The life of man cannot be
changed after death; it remains then such as it had been, nor can the
life of hell be inscribed into the life of heaven, since they are
opposite. Hence it is evident that they who come into hell remain there
to eternity. " -Tr.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 3501-3550](sd41)
