[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Swedenborg](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sd45)  [Next](sd47) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0766143007/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Spiritual Diary*, by Emanuel Swedenborg, \[1758\], tr. by Bush,
Smithson and Buss \[1883-9\] at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Spiritual Diary

<span class="margnote"><span id="3751.">3751.</span></span>

CONCERNING THE QUAKERS. Concerning the Quakers it was said and perceived
that they are of such a quality that they cannot be instructed in the
doctrinals of faith. They cleave to their phantasies more perniciously
than any other people, not only from their thinking many things and thus
being confirmed, but also because \[some kind of\] spirit continually
flows into their thoughts and thus confirms them in the idea that the
Holy Spirit speaks with them. They thus reject all doctrinals; and when
they hear them spoken of by others, they say, "What does this mean?" and
"what this?" as a certain one with me, whatever word I might utter,
would say, "What does this mean? I do not understand this;" and he held
on a long time, saying \[the same thing\]. Thus they are unwilling to be
instructed; they reject immediately what is proposed by others, and they
cannot understand it; therefore they are called by other spirits what
the heathen are called by Christians. They are especially obstinate in
an aversion to having the things made public which are known only among
them, and also what they think. They strove with me and with the spirits
which desired - but in vain - to know their secret things, and when
certain representations were shown, setting forth their secrets of life,
and when the spirits, as they are wont, would fain conjecture what they
were, they brought forward the most abominable objections, the drift of
which was that they should desist \[from the investigation\].

<span class="margnote"><span id="3752.">3752.</span></span>

These things were represented concerning them: a woman was seen near me,
with her back towards me, and the front of her person towards a kitchen
fire-place, where I saw a glowing fire. A table was afterwards seen,
where certain persons were seated at the right a little in front.
Presently a woman \[was seen\] with her head covered, and having a
mantle appropriate to females of rather ample dimensions, and of purple
color; she was lying in a bed before the table. After a short interval
the sole of the left foot on which the flesh was cut and skinless
appeared; the raw flesh \[distinctly\] appeared as if a cutting had been
made; the seat of it was the foot near the great toe, which however was
not excoriated. Afterwards little dogs appeared running to me but what
these things signified I do not yet know. - 1748, October 27, 28. These
\[spirits\] flowed also into the pubes, but it was perceived and said
that it was only into the bony part of that region.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3753.">3753.</span></span>

THAT SPIRITS TERMINATE THEIR IDEAS IN MATERIAL THINGS. You will
previously have seen <span id="fr_57"></span>[3753-1](#fn_57) that when
I came into another place or another chamber, the spirits were
immediately perceived to be estranged, not knowing where they were, and
that a change of garments produced the same effect, so that they
received, as it were, a different idea \[in consequence\] a striking
proof that they terminate their ideas in material things, without which
they are absent. There were two small snow-white vessels which were used
about - <span id="fr_58"></span>[3753-2](#fn_58) and I several times
perceived that certain spirits wished me to use the one, while others
prompted me to use the other. Thus a certain kind of strife was
perceived on the part of those above, and \[it was perceived also\] that
those were of an infantile quality who preferred that which was
handsomer and neater. By the spirits that were above I was impelled to
reject the latter, and while I was held in that idea, the infantile
spirits were indignant, and inclined to withdraw, but in order to their
being retained it was suggested by still other spirits that I should
break the other vessel. When I was held in this idea, then those spirits
began to fear and to grieve, coming to me and beseeching that I would
not do it. It was perceived that thus they would perhaps withdraw, and
also, from their fear and grief, it was perceived that their ideas were
terminated in this object, and that they could not be present, if this
were taken away. Hence it appears how the ideas of spirits are
terminated in material things, and it was perceived, by a certain mode
of representation, that such a vessel is a kind of foot to them, which
they think they lose whenever the vessel is taken away; and so in other
things. - 1748, October 28. There are spirits also who have my books for
an ultimate of order, which are four, and in which I am writing this
\[journal\]. Some \[prefer\] one book, some another.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3754.">3754.</span></span>

THAT THE DIFFUSED IDEA OF SPIRITS PRESENTS AN IDEA AS IF THERE WERE NO
SOCIETY. When such spirits are present and operate as have no idea of
spirits and spiritual things - like those above mentioned, who ascribe
everything to their own prudence, and despise the Word and worship,
saying that they are merely bonds of conscience for the vulgar - then,
although they speak, it appears so diffused as to resemble an
atmospheric emptiness \[inane\]. \[There appears to be\] no society,
still less any order, for all such things as distinguish and determine
vanish, as it were, in consequence of their idea, which is of the same
quality. I then spoke with them concerning this, \[saying\] that
although it appeared thus, yet still the utmost order was maintained by
the Lord, and that it was like the case of the starry heaven, which
appears to the view of man as if void of order, when yet notwithstanding
this appearance, everything was in the most exact order. That no one
could speak except in society, often appeared on former occasions
\[very\] similar. - 1748, October 28.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3755.">3755.</span></span>

THAT THERE ARE CONTRARY SUBJECTS THROUGH WHICH GOOD IS YET INSINUATED BY
THE LORD. There was a certain subject within me for nearly the whole
night, by means of which I experienced a sensation of the highest
pleasure and happiness, continued through the night, although the evil
spirits incessantly strove to rob me of that extreme delight. Afterwards
the spirit that was within me towards the lower parts \[of my person\]
went away and said, that he had infused the pleasant sensation. I also
perceived that the external pleasure receded. But he yet said that he
was contrary, and would have prevented the agreeable feeling. It thence
appeared that the Lord makes use of opposed subjects, and also of evil
ones, through which to insinuate delight, for the reason, as was said to
me, that such an one has not the perception of delight, which if he had,
he would then appropriate it to himself and thus take it away. From
which it appears that evil spirits are also employed to confirm delights
and to appropriate them to man. - 1748, October 28.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3756.">3756.</span></span>

THAT EVIL SPIRITS KNOW NEITHER WHAT IS TRUE NOR WHAT IS EVIL. I spoke
with evil spirits to the effect that they know neither what is evil nor
what is true, and it was manifestly shown to them that whatever is true,
and good, this they call false and evil, for thus they feel it and
perceive it to be; wherefore they are unable to know and perceive the
true and the good except as false and evil. As to what pertains to evil,
they neither know it nor perceive it because they take the false for the
true, and the evil for the good, because they agree with their nature;
hence they know nothing, neither the true nor the good, nor the false,
nor the evil. To this they could not reply, but still adhered to their
phantasies; wherefore it was given to say, when it was declared to them
that they could do nothing, that they would immediately say that this
was false, and would be perceived by them as evil. So (:now:) if it
should be said to them that they could do all things, they would think
that this was true, and would perceive it as good or pleasant. They now
hear and are silent. The conclusion therefore is that they know and
perceive nothing. - 1748, October 28. Hence it appears that they have
not life, for life consists in the understanding of what is true and the
willing of what is good.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3757.">3757.</span></span>

As to what pertains to the life of the body, concerning which I
afterwards spoke with spirits \[remarking\] for instance that some were
acquainted with the streets of cities, some know how to cleanse its
filth, others how to make shoes, they then said that such persons still
lived; but it was given to reply, that this is the life of brutes, for
they know all these things and many more pertaining to their bodies than
man does, and if they were so framed as to have had need of shoes, they
would have made them much better than man makes his, as is evident from
the nests of birds, which they construct with so much ingenuity; but
inasmuch as they have no need of these things, they have no skill in
them; wherefore the life of the brutes is such as it is, because they
are corporeal. If they had had need of garments, they could have made
them much more expertly than man, as appears from their being clad in
more beautiful raiment than he is. It is hence given to conclude that
such things as pertain to the body are the things which are common to
the beasts.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3758.">3758.</span></span>

As to what pertains to a life truly human, it is not such a life as is
common to the beasts, for the beasts, in those things of which they have
need, have the faculty of providing them with much more skill than man;
but a life truly human is one which has respect to eternal life, and
hence to the soul, for a man lives in reference to eternal life, and
from those things it is that he is a man, which life consists in
understanding truth and willing good, and which with evil spirits is
nothing, yea, is dead, as was said. It also appears from those who come
into the other life, and who have had very little of spiritual life, as
they are like sticks of wood, having scarcely the least of life; yet it
is \[sometimes\] excited with them. - 1748, October 28.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3759.">3759.</span></span>

THAT MEN ARE VESSELS. Conversation was had with spirits, intimating that
there are vessels in man's memory in which as their ideas are terminated
they cannot at any time speak otherwise than according to vessels, which
vessels are directed by good spirits, these by the angels, and all by
the Lord, and also immediately by the Lord; wherefore spirits cannot
speak otherwise than according to the direction of vessels, for they
determine their ideas thither, and there they terminate. Spirits
moreover are vessels, and then they move man to speak, and these again
are excited by interior evil spirits, or by the good. - 1748, October
28.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3760.">3760.</span></span>

WHAT INTERIOR THINGS ARE. Certain spirits were ignorant of what is
signified by the interiors of the Word, but they were informed that its
interiors signify the knowledges of faith, thence the things that are of
faith, which with the prophets were represented by exterior things, as
likewise everything spoken by the Lord; as for instance, that Peter
signifies faith, and the like. - 1748, October 29. Thus too it was said,
that the tree of knowledge signifies the interior scientifics which
deceived the Most Ancient Church; that the land of Canaan and the New
Jerusalem signify the heaven of the Lord; that sacrifices, Aaron's
garments, and all the representatives of the Church signified the Lord,
thus heaven; wherefore anyone may know what interior things are.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3761.">3761.</span></span>

As respects the interiors of spirits, which are similar representations,
but of such a quality as can scarce fall under any idea, they are indeed
interior, but yet all and each signify the knowledges of faith, heaven,
and the Lord. - 1748, October 29

<span class="margnote"><span id="3762.">3762.</span></span>

CONCERNING THE QUAKERS. Conversation was had with Quaker spirits, who
are somewhat elevated in front. They thence spoke with me saying that
they were spirits from eternity, thus the Holy Spirit, to whom it was
given in reply that there was no spirit from eternity, \[and asking\]
whether they did not know that they had been men from their associating
new spirits to themselves, that they too might be the Holy Spirit with
them, and that there is one Only Being from eternity, the Lord Who is
holy or Holiness Itself. And when I said that from Him is all Goodness
and Truth, all Innocence, all Peace, and all Mercy, they then withdrew
within themselves, as if there was that within (:gissna <span
id="fr_59"></span>[3762-1](#fn_59).:) which gives them the ability to
think. They said indeed at first that this was from themselves, but at
length confessed that it was from another source, but whence they did
not know. This, however, was their lie, for I perceived that their
belief was, that they lived, thought and spoke from themselves,
consequently that they could of themselves do everything, wherefore they
essayed many things, but in secret, for they act in secret, so that
scarcely any spirit can detect what is from them; but they cannot wholly
conceal it. At length, because they said they were able to do all
things, and yet were plainly shown to have been men, while yet they
vaunt themselves as being saints, they were published with an open voice
by myself and others as foul spirits, much more profane than the dungy,
cadaverous, and most filthy spirits, and as nothing else than abominable
ordure, which was said to them openly, nor could one of them reply.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3764.">3764.</span></span>

These act also on the lower order of Quaker spirits, for these latter
flow to them on their departure from life, as do all to their idols, and
by them are they led. They still inspire and prompt them, as they did
during life, to say nothing to anyone, and thus create a sphere which is
more revoltingly fetid than that of other spirits, so that others cannot
remain with them, but are obliged to separate, and are debarred all
interaction.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3765.">3765.</span></span>

It was made manifest what kind of worship they induced upon the Quakers,
which is known to themselves alone, being kept carefully concealed from
all others, which worship is so wicked, execrable, and abominable, that
if Christians knew it, they would be wholly expelled from society and
permitted to live only among the beasts of the forests.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3766.">3766.</span></span>

They have a vile communion of wives; their wives saying that they are
obsessed by the devil, from whom they say they cannot be liberated
unless some one who is actuated by the Holy Spirit shall cohabit with
them. Being then invited they sit down at a table, which was represented
to me, and wait the operation of the Holy Spirit, and when they feel the
operation of their own spirits, they then say that they are the ones who
are prompted by the Holy Spirit to cohabit with them, which they do, and
thus, as they say, the devil is cast out, and they have obtained the
Holy Ghost, and thus too, they are absolved from their sins, and that by
means of abominable adulteries. Their worship or holy, therefore,
consists of base adulteries, and thus their women not only receive
remission of sins, but these men communicate, infuse, and attribute
holiness to them. Such persons as the wife prefers above others, are
invited for this end, even while the husband is present. She lies in bed
in the same room, and professing to be obsessed by the devil, seeks to
be delivered by someone who is actuated by the Holy Spirit, and these,
after awaiting the influx of the Spirit, as in their conventicles, say
they are the persons, and cohabitation takes place; thus promiscuously.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3767.">3767.</span></span>

As it respects the influx of their spirits, it was in some measure
shown, though not perceived at the present day as formerly; formerly
they were manifestly moved to a trembling, so their spirits convulsed
their whole body. At this day they barely perceive a commotion at the
left side of the abdomen, and in the left arm just above the palms
(:formerly in the palms also:); the left side of the face also is held
in a kind of exhilaration, I inquired whether they did not flow into
their thoughts by a certain manifest influence; but this it is not yet
permitted to know.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3768.">3768.</span></span>

It was told them how abominable this was, since no less than four
outrageous enormities concurred in this conduct - the first, that a
community of wives involved the most detestable adulteries; the second,
that they did this under the semblance of sanctity, placing that which
was holy among things the most profane, and yet so that while they
pretended the devil was driven away, he really entered in; that,
thirdly, by thus giving remission of sins they relaxed every bond of
conscience, to which it was owing that they became a viler offal than
anyone could ever get conceive: fourthly, that thus spirits through men
had connection with their women; for spirits never so govern man as to
act the part of man in those things which are corporeal, as in speaking,
in eating, in walking, in conjugal connection; such things flow in from
a common \[general\] endeavor; they act solely into the thought, and
into the cupidities, but never into such \[corporeal\] things; wherefore
these cohabitations were much more abominable than those of the
Sodomites - all which is now said to those spirits of theirs who say
that they are the Holy Spirit; also that these four abominations are
such as I have described, to which they make no reply, nor are they able
to reply. It was also given to know that when they cohabit with women
they have scarcely any sense, but are so acted by their Holy Spirit that
they are almost beside themselves. Hence also they conclude whether the
women have obtained the Holy Spirit, viz., when they have obtained the
devil. This is their sacrament of the supper, which \[in its truth\]
they reject, as was also represented to me.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3769.">3769.</span></span>

It was inquired also whether \[the same things took place\] with the
virgins, daughters, and maid servants of others, and it was said that
the fact was so. It was moreover shown through a door opening into a
chamber, of which the front part appeared of a grayish color, the door
to which apartment stood open, and a man was passing in and out, who,
stationing himself near the wall, seemed turned into a dog, which
however was not \[clearly\] seen. A bed was then also seen, hung with a
red curtain, by all which was signified that this kind of transaction,
though managed in secret, really took place; for the parents do not
resist when a command of the Holy Spirit is pleaded; but inasmuch as
external bonds here occur, by which they are somewhat withheld, as, for
instance, \[in the consideration\] that these maidens are virgins, and
may be married, and that therefore they ought not \[prematurely\] to
become mothers, lest their wickednesses should become manifest before
men, for they wish to appear holy, and thus blameless before others; for
this reason all this is done in secret.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3770.">3770.</span></span>

It hence appears that they cannot be divorced from this their profane
kind of worship, both because such a profane voluptuousness is
delightful to them, and because they are held in the opinion that the
Holy Spirit speaks through them, and inasmuch as they have cast off all
conscience \[which would admonish them\], that such things are supremely
abominable, they cannot be instructed by others, but despise and
ridicule them, and say that they do not understand \[what they teach\].

<span class="margnote"><span id="3771.">3771.</span></span>

A man was also seen ascending and speaking upon a certain platform
\[plano\], such as is constructed for diviners, who was said to have
been one of their chiefs; this man spoke and said that he had never done
such things nor thought that anything like them could occur.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3772.">3772.</span></span>

These things are written in the presence of their holy spirits who are
now standing by; they at first endeavored to inspire detestable things,
and that too against the Lord, which impieties I do not wish to recall.
It thence appears from what source such a spirit proceeds, namely, that
it is from the foulest devil of all; wherefore it was said also that
their hell was deeper than the hell of others, where they become the
vilest offscouring; such a hell is that of their Holy Spirit.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3773.">3773.</span></span>

Concerning the lives of the Quakers, I was instructed that they are like
the Jews, loving riches with no other end than that they may acquire and
possess them.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3774.">3774.</span></span>

Of what quality those spirits are who call themselves the Holy Spirit, I
was plainly given to understand from their injecting various blasphemies
against the Lord; evidently therefore they proceed by no means from the
Lord, but from the devil. - 1748, October 29, 30. This also \[is said\]
in their presence; they openly injected diabolical calumnies against the
Lord.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3775.">3775.</span></span>

They are moreover denominated Christians. I heard them in their general
meeting, and though they spoke perhaps concerning the Lord, yet the
truth is, that according to their doctrinals they recognize three
persons. They also acknowledge the Word, but they do not regard it, for
they say that they likewise are actuated by the Holy Spirit, wherefore
they have some knowledge of the Lord, and in their convention everywhere
speak \[of Him\], but the fact is, that their spirit cannot speak
otherwise than according to their doctrinals of memory, for spirits when
they lead man think themselves to be the man and put on his memory,
consequently \[they assume\] the doctrinals in their conventicles which
they have derived from others, wherefore they cannot otherwise utter
themselves; for this is a general law, that a spirit cannot bring forth
anything contrary to their doctrinals and persuasions, or add anything
of his own which is not in their memory, thence they speak \[or preach\]
as others; but yet they care nothing for the Lord, but only for the Holy
Spirit, just as the Catholics also acknowledge the Lord and preach Him,
but in the other life are bitterly opposed \[to Him\]. So also the
Quakers; when in the other life they know nothing of the Lord, and are
rebellious against the Lord, setting themselves up for the Holy Spirit,
concerning whom they have continually thought in their life-time, as
they are continually expecting him in their meetings and elsewhere.
Since such is their character, and the spirits speaking through them
have identified themselves with them, it follows, that they are those
who in the other life associate themselves with the former, and profess
to be the Holy Spirit; consequently everyone who uniformly during life
supposed that he spoke from the Holy Spirit, and that the Spirit made
one person with him, cannot, in the other life, but fancy himself to be
such as is the Holy Spirit.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3776.">3776.</span></span>

That they reject the doctrinals of faith, and the Lord, appeared also in
an open manner by means of a staff, with which they would strike the
eye, which signifies that they wholly reject and hold in hatred the
doctrinals of faith concerning the Lord. 1748, October 30.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3777.">3777.</span></span>

Since such is their quality, and they are led by spirits who reject and
have in hatred the doctrinals of faith, and thus the Lord, and as they
care nothing for the Word, and discard the sacraments, it may be known
what they are as to life, inasmuch as they think their promiscuous
cohabitations, abominable as they are, to be prompted by the Holy
Spirit; for while they are in the persuasion that the Holy Spirit speaks
\[in them\], and commands, and they are thence sensibly moved, it
follows that this extends also to their connections, and that thus they
are excited by spirits to those abominations.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3778.">3778.</span></span>

But I spoke with them concerning marriage - that marriages or conjugial
love was the foundation of all loves, which is confirmed from the
consideration, that thence is the propagation of human society and
consequently of celestial societies, wherefore it has imparted to it a
corporeal pleasure surpassing all others, for delights are adjoined
according to the necessities of ends, and conjugial love is pleasanter
and happier than any other love, so that a right conjugial union is
heaven on earth, thus is celestial love, from which flow all other
loves, being originally derived from the love or mercy of the Lord
towards heaven, the church, and the universal human race, and descending
from Him alone, (:these things now:) from which it appears how sacred
marriages ought to be held. Upon hearing this they were unable to reply.
Some of them who were of the lower order of spirits, came to me and
said, that they had grievously sinned, and lamented that they had been
such as they were. It was said that they had been among the better
portion of them, and had perceived what the truth was, but from their
associations were unable to say anything. - 1748, October 30.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3779.">3779.</span></span>

I perceived, in an open manner, their venereal cupidities, when I saw,
as I supposed, the Quaker women. - 1748, October 30.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3780.">3780.</span></span>

It was observed that they are not so deceitful as others, but that there
is still a kind of secret deceit \[among them\], while, under the
influence of anger, they then openly vent their calumnies; at other
times they act, as it were, craftily, but still in a clandestine manner,
which they contract from their life in the body, as they thus acted with
me by a secret deceit scarcely to be detected.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3781.">3781.</span></span>

Thence, namely, from the Quakers, it appears how dangerous it is, in
this world, for spirits to speak with men, or for men to attend to the
operations of spirits upon themselves, if they are not in faith towards
the Lord; if they are in faith, it is harmless, for the Lord delivers
them; but if not in faith, like Quakers and Enthusiasts, they are
persuaded not only that it is the Holy Spirit \[who speaks\] but they
are excited and goaded to enormities; for almost the whole world of
spirits is wicked and enthusiastic, and sedulously anxious to obsess
man; but the Lord takes precautions against it, and exercises
\[constant\] care for man. - 1748, October 30. This in the presence of
spirits.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3782.">3782.</span></span>

THAT A MAN CANNOT KNOW OTHERWISE THAN THAT IT IS FROM HIMSELF \[THAT HE
SPEAKS AND ACTS\]. This was shown in a case of a spirit speaking from
others, to whom it was also said, that other spirits spoke through him,
and that he did not know otherwise than that it was from himself. These
other spirits infuse into him their own cupidities and persuasions, so
that he cannot know otherwise than that it is from himself, which when
it was said, it was given to him to observe it, so that he acknowledged
the fact, and thus seemed to withdraw from that society. In order that I
might be aware of the same thing, it has happened now, and on many
former occasions, that spirits would infuse cupidities and persuasions,
and then I knew no otherwise than that it was from myself I then spoke
concerning these matters, intimating that spirits could not infuse
persuasions with man when he was not previously in such a persuasion,
but that they could do this in regard to cupidities, and thus \[beget\]
persuasions from cupidities, as is often the case, and thus not only
excite cupidities, but also inflame them greatly; sometimes \[for
instance\] to a high pitch of unseemly anger and insanity; which is
manifest when a man is in a violent rage, and thinks of nothing else
than revenge or death. Spirits are then in their delight or in their
life, for \[than this\] there is nothing more exquisitely pleasant to
them; hence man contracts the character or nature which makes him such
after death, when he has become a spirit. - 1748, October 30.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3783.">3783.</span></span>

The reason that spirits are unable to induce persuasions is, that they
do not enjoy a corporeal memory, but put on that of man; for were
spirits to retain their corporeal memory, they would so far obsess man,
that he would have no more self-control or be in the enjoyment of his
own life, than one actually obsessed. This is the cause also that it is
not permitted a spirit to usurp a corporeal memory, for thus the human
race would perish. - 1748, October 30. Neither is it allowed to spirits
to have the memory of the past, which is appropriate to man only,
although all and singular things which they had formerly seen and heard
remain with spirits, but it is not permitted them to recall anything of
them, nor can they, but the Lord alone grants at times the power of
recalling what they have seen and heard, as \[for instance\] with some
the fact that they have suffered, and the number of cases, which I
heard. - 1748, October 30.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3784.">3784.</span></span>

CONCERNING THE QUAKERS. It was observed that as often as other spirits
wished to explore their doctrinals and the secrets of their worship, and
would fain instruct them, so often they would turn away on various
pretences, speaking of other things, drawing attention to other
subjects, even to those that were unseemly, and thus putting away
inquiry; for they are unwilling to speak with others either concerning
their own doctrinals or those of others. Yet they desire to hear
concerning \[the tenets\] of others, but still in such a way as not have
them impressed upon themselves or be persuaded by them, thus
intelligently, so that the other party who speaks should not observe
\[that they give any heed to it\]. Their sphere, arising from their
aversion to speak of such things for fear of disclosing their doctrinals
or their secrets, is such that other spirits can by no means be with
them, as they are indignant and angry that they should practice such
concealment, and so avert themselves, since spirits when they cannot
penetrate the secrets of others, cannot tolerate them, for they are
intensely curious. Wherefore the Quaker spirits live apart from others.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3785.">3785.</span></span>

The first outgoing \[or emanation\] of their Holy Spirit, which consists
of Quakers is, that they seem to themselves and others to wander in
thick woods like woodland swine. They are seen in great numbers by
spirits, and it was said to me by an angelic interpreter that they thus
wander about in thick forests, like forest swine. This is from their
life, because they are avaricious and live in such nastinesses, like
swine. It was said however that they were not boars, but she-swine. -
1748, November 1.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3786.">3786.</span></span>

THAT ONE IS LESS FREE IN PROPORTION AS HE THINKS HIMSELF FREE. It was
perceived and noted from former experience that spirits, while they
speak or think through another, infuse largely their cupidities and
persuasions into the other spirit, from whence he supposes that he
speaks and thinks from himself; for whoever acts from cupidity and
persuasion, he thinks he does it from himself and in freedom. From
experience also \[it was evident\] that spirits speaking through another
consider that other through whom they speak as nothing. Hence it appears
that he who supposes that he thinks and speaks from himself, and is thus
in entire freedom, is then in fact in the deepest bondage, and in the
eyes of other spirits is as nothing, scarcely even a slave, for they can
use him as a mere lifeless instrument. But still spirits are indignant
and angry that this should be said, being willing indeed to be deemed by
others viler than slaves, provided that they are their own masters in
their own eyes wherefore he is in a much better state who perceives that
others induce upon him thoughts and discourse.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3787.">3787.</span></span>

But with those who are in faith, that is, who are led by the Lord, the
case is altogether different. To them it is given to know that they have
nothing of their own, but that everything is of the Lord through the
angels, and because good affections with the persuasion of truth and
good are insinuated into them, while reflection is not at the same time
given, then it seems to them that it is from themselves, knowing nothing
else, so that it appears to them that they are in a full state of
liberty. But as soon as anyone begins to claim good and truth for
himself, the Lord knows it, reflection is given him, and by various
lively experiences he is instructed that it is not from himself, but
from the Lord, so that he is at length brought into a state of truth,
and thus again enjoys the happiest liberty. This is what is \[truly\]
called liberty. - 1748, October 31.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3788.">3788.</span></span>

These are things which now from the lively experience of several years I
have fully learned, so that they are among the matters which from
particular instruction I am amply assured of.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3789.">3789.</span></span>

The spirits who are above in front, and who are evil, grieved when these
things were heard by them, being unwilling that the fact should be so.
With these I spoke, \[saying\] that they might know, as well from others
who speak through them, as from those through whom they themselves
speak, that the fact is thus; and since it is, and they are the slaves
of others by whom they are held for nothing, and who infuse evils, is it
not better that they should be led by good spirits, thus by the Lord,
with which happiness is conjoined, since otherwise they are tormented by
an inward repugnance. But they still persist \[in their conceits\],
inasmuch as though they know the fact to be so, they still wish not to
know it. - 1748, October 31.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3790.">3790.</span></span>

CONCERNING A QUAKER HOUSEHOLD. Their household appointments were
exhibited to me in sleep. There is a kitchen of ample dimensions, in
which beds are arranged one above another. In the upper one they lie
when they retire to rest. A man was seen to convey himself thither and
to lie down. A maid-servant approached and laid herself by his side, but
he turned away from her transversely \[across the bed\], as did also the
others. Afterwards certain others were seen to lie down, all of them
disrobed. In the bed below no one lay. Lower still under this bed were
laid their children, but these were boys. In the same kitchen, on one
side was seen a miserable wheel moved by water. In the center were
covered casks, but whether containing warm water I did not observe. A
fire seized the covers of the casks, but they said it could be easily
extinguished, and cared nothing about it. When I awoke I recollected the
dream, and him who lay in the upper bed, who also then awoke from sleep,
and spoke with me both concerning the wheel and the kitchen casks, so
that I was thence able to know that their households were ordered as I
have described. What the beds signify I do not yet know, except that
they agree with their religion, thus that the lying together in the
upper bed has reference to their religion; also that the lower bed in
which no one lay, unless my father and myself, signified the Word which
was below. As to the couch still lower, where their children
\[reposed\], I do not yet know \[its import\]. The miserable wheel
driven by water signifies their spiritual things. The fire that caught
upon the covers of the casks, which they did not heed, signifies
celestial things. What was in the casks I do not know. <span
id="fr_60"></span>[3790-1](#fn_60) - 1748, November 1.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3791.">3791.</span></span>

CONCERNING IDEAL REPRESENTATION. In a state intermediate between
sleeping and waking, but verging nearer to sleep, there was remarkably
represented a tooth. It was not in the form of a tooth, nor of anything
similar to a tooth. When in the waking state I could not know still less
express, what it was, but simply that a tooth was perceived, which,
according as the desire was, was turned into something resembling
coagulated milk. This was from the speech of the celestials, that they
desired that natural things should become such, they being signified by
the tooth. It thence appeared what kind of an idea is given, which in
that state, and thus by interior spirits, is well known as to what it
is, although there was no form or appearance of a tooth, but solely the
perception of one, that it might thence be known that natural things
were signified. There was also something broad and as a plane
represented for a tooth.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3792.">3792.</span></span>

Certain spirits supposed themselves in their sleep about to attack me;
they dreamt also, as I did, that they would lay siege to a certain
castle, upon the capture of which they would attack me. Awaking from the
dream, I spoke with them, and they also deemed themselves awake,
speaking of the castle which they were to besiege, after which they
would seize and plunder me. They supposed themselves to be altogether
awake, which I perceived from them, but I said to them that they were
yet dreaming, though they were scarcely sensible of the fact, yet they
said that the thing had so taken place. At length, I think, they
acknowledged that it was in a dream. Such is the life of such, that
while dreaming they imagine themselves to be altogether awake, and such
phantasies do they have. - 1748, November 1.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3793.">3793.</span></span>

CONCERNING THE QUAKERS. Quaker spirits have been for some days with me,
who boast of being the Holy Spirit, and some have been sent into the
world of spirits, of whom it was said to those \[there\] that they were
Quakers, and others wished to show them where they had been and what
they had been on earth; for this is easy in the other life when the Lord
permits it. From their presence with me for several days it was given to
perceive of what quality they are, namely, that they vaunt themselves of
having existed from eternity, and of being the Holy Spirit. They care
for nothing less than the Lord, against whom, as far as the bond of
restraint was loosened, they inveighed contumaciously, but subtly, from
the nature which they had contracted of saying nothing openly; wherefore
their deceit was evinced to consist in this, that they dare not divulge
their thoughts, but as far as possible act in secret. They are
continually in fear that some one may hear; wherefore they besought that
they might be alone, when they would speak freely. The subtlety
therefore operates in a secret manner, their nature withholding them
\[from publicity\] because they wish to practice concealment. This kind
of deceit differs from others.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3794.">3794.</span></span>

Because they were before spoken with respecting their communion of
wives, and their detestable and abominable adultery, they tried by every
means to make it out to be lawful, and as far as they could, in their
concealed way, they did it, and that also which was indifferent they
made a matter of conscience, that thus they might excuse their
abominable adulteries, sometimes insinuating that they were wives, and
that they could thus \[properly\] dispose of them; and then again
\[professing\] that it was a compact, and that marriages are contracted
by compact. But it was given to insinuate that the primary bond of
conscience is that of marriage, as not only is the propagation of the
human race the principal seminary of terrestrial societies, and thence
of celestial, but also that thence all consociations derive their
origin; but also it is sufficiently apparent that conjugial love is the
principle of all loves and thence of consociations,

<span class="margnote"><span id="3795.">3795.</span></span>

for all consanguinities and affinities on earth derive their origins
from marriage, from whence parents, children, brothers, sisters,
relations, kindreds, receive their denomination, whether nearer or more
remote; in like manner in the heavens, where the love of the Lord
towards heaven and the church is compared to a marriage; whence
conjugial love is the \[fundamental\] principle and thence all loves
draw their origin and are derived, and form consanguinities and
affinities, which are similar derivations of loves. Hence now it appears
that the primary bond of conscience is founded in conjugial love.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3796.">3796.</span></span>

It was also craftily insinuated by them, that the procreation of
offspring still took place, notwithstanding the communion of wives. But
it was answered that in like manner there was procreation of offspring
among the Sodomites; but how abominable this was, they knew \[full
well\]. - 1748, November 1.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3797.">3797.</span></span>

CONCERNING QUAKER SPIRITS. The bond of restraint was loosened to Quaker
spirits, who declare themselves to be the Holy Spirit; and they at first
rushed by phantasies upon a chance innocent person who was with me, but
because they acted by phantasies, as they were wont to do during life,
they could not excite him, but they seemed to themselves to see him, and
thus to ill-use him. Such a phantasy may be called an illusive phantasy,
when they think it is really a person, while yet it is nothing else than
their phantasy in place of persons, and which to those who are not aware
of the truth appears as if it were the reality; but when the Lord grants
he knows that it is only the image of their phantasy, that induces a
likeness as if it were the persons himself; so that there is no other
subject, but only a phantasy formed to his semblance, which is also an
aerial phantasy, such as are the illusions of these spirits agreeing to
their nature, because they boast themselves of being the Holy Spirit,
and this some believe, and thus that they are from eternity.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3798.">3798.</span></span>

When they attempted to evil entreat the formed phantasy by casting it
into the abyss, then by raising it up, aiming to dash it in the way
against the rocks, and also by impelling it to adulteries, then the
abominable sphere of their adultery was manifestly perceived by spirits
and by myself, which \[sphere\] is diabolical, for there is nothing in
it but adultery; and whenever it finds any subject, they endeavor to
affect him with this sphere of adultery. The whole sphere is as it were
such; such is the sphere of their Holy Spirit, which has, for a
sufficiently long time, breathed itself forth from them.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3799.">3799.</span></span>

From a higher place in front, where they were, they were cast into a
depth in front, before the right foot, and thence especially in a vile
sphere of adultery exhaled from them, which, because it was diabolical,
is no farther to be mentioned, nor is it permitted to have it in memory.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3800.">3800.</span></span>

Being inspected when in the deep, they appeared as if they were all
hair, so that they were nothing else than a certain hairy something,
which signifies that they were made up of merely a filthy natural.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_57"></span>[3753-1](sd46.htm#fr_57) Alluding to No.
3608-3610, where the fact is mentioned. It is worthy of notice, that
Swedenborg here speaks as if he expected that what he wrote would come
before other eyes than his own. -Tr.

<span id="fn_58"></span>[3753-2](sd46.htm#fr_58) We leave a blank for
the original word "the" as to the purport of which we are ignorant, it
being unknown to the Latin tongue. -Tr.

<span id="fn_59"></span>[3762-1](sd46.htm#fr_59) A Swedish word
signifying properly slippery, i. e. bland, feigned.

<span id="fn_60"></span>[3790-1](sd46.htm#fr_60) What is here and
elsewhere said of the Quakers is doubtless calculated, at first blush,
to create an impression unfavorable to the charity and liberality of
Swedenborg as the teacher of the doctrines of the New Jerusalem Church.
It will probably be difficult for many readers to conceive how the
principles of the Quakers, which are usually seen to ultimate themselves
in a harmless, gentle, and blameless life, can be justly liable to such
imputations as are virtually cast upon them by the tenor of these
narratives. But it is important to remark that Swedenborg's disclosures
have reference to the interior life and soul of every system of
doctrines professing to be an embodiment of the truths of inspiration.
"The nature and quality," says he, "of the Lord's church on the earth,
cannot be seen by any man so long as he lives in the world; and still
less, how, in process of time, it hath declined from good to evil; the
reason whereof is, because man, during his life in the world is in
externals, and only sees what is before his natural eyes: but the
quality of the church as to spiritual things, which constitute its
internals, is not apparent in the world, although in heaven it appears
as in clear daylight. - (Last Judgement, No. 41.) It is also to be
observed that according to the tenor of his revelations, the Last
Judgment was executed in the spiritual world - the first, or
intermediate state after death - upon those who had not previously been
consigned, by the character of their lives, to heaven or hell.
Consequently the really good of this and every other sect had been
previously put in possession of celestial bliss, and it is plainly to be
inferred from what he says of Penn, that his condition was good, for he
disclaimed all participation in the enormities ascribed to multitudes
that bore the Quaker name. But surely we may suppose that the spirit of
Penn actuated many of his followers, and that their state is equally
good. Let then what is here said of the Quakers be understood of those
only to whom it fairly applies. These are they who during their life in
the world had lived in external sanctity, destitute of that which is
internal, who had been just and sincere in obedience to civil and moral
laws, but not in obedience to those which are divine, and who had
consequently been external or natural men, and not internal or spiritual
men. It may safely be presumed that such persons have always existed
among the Quakers, as well as in other religious bodies. -Tr.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 3801-3850](sd47)
