[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Swedenborg](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sd48)  [Next](sd50) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0766143007/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Spiritual Diary*, by Emanuel Swedenborg, \[1758\], tr. by Bush,
Smithson and Buss \[1883-9\] at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Spiritual Diary

<span class="margnote"><span id="3901.">3901.</span></span>

CONCERNING THE INHABITANTS OF THE STARRY HEAVEN. While I was engaged in
writing the things (related) concerning the spirits of an earth in the
starry universe, who advance to the ninth use, <span
id="fr_64"></span>[3901-1](#fn_64) they were present with me as also
their god above my head, as had been the case before. They spoke indeed,
but very little, being inclined to silence. They said that they could
speak and yet wondered at their ability to do so, observing that when
they spoke with me, as on this occasion, the speech was very obscure to
them, so that they scarcely knew what they said, forasmuch as their life
was not in our speech; wherefore they have a speech in which their life
is, which they derive from the ninth use, where unto they advance. They
are thus endowed with such a speech as can scarcely be expressed by
ideas similar to ours, and their speech would be as obscure to us as
ours is to them; for where the life is, there is the speech, and there
also is the light and the intellectual of speech.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3902.">3902.</span></span>

I observed, as I had sometimes done before, that these spirits, as well
as others, when I walked through the streets, and they had been with me
during nearly the whole day, yet, from their not reflecting, they had
observed nothing, not even the objects that were before my eyes, as
books, papers, and the like, although they could see through my eyes.
Hence it appears what is the quality of the spirits with men, through
whom they do not see, to wit, that they have no concern about anything
\[they see\], neither do they reflect upon it, thus that they neither
see nor hear anything with others. - 1748, November 7.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3903.">3903.</span></span>

HOW DIFFICULT IT IS FOR THOSE WHO ARE NOT IN FAITH TO LIVE THE LIFE OF
FAITH. Certain spirits, not of the evil, but of those who wished to be
in faith were high above the head, and in such a sphere that they
neither thought nor spoke from themselves, which is manifestly perceived
among spirits, and when they were in this perception they said they
could not live thus, for their life was then, as it were, burdensome to
them. It was given to ask why, since this was true, that they did not
think nor speak from themselves, they loved not to live in the truth?
But this availed nothing; it was still difficult for them so to live. It
was moreover given to say, that the angels are then in bliss when they
perceive that they do not live from themselves. But neither did this
comfort them. It thence appeared how burdensome is the life even of
those who are good, \[when required\] to live a life of faith.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3904.">3904.</span></span>

A certain spirit known to me during his life, among those of his own
time, who knew above others what faith is, and what the knowledge of
faith, came to me and said that he now knew nothing, and that he was in
so much obscurity, that he knew as it were nothing as to what was true.
I was aware that he had been of those who had not only understood the
knowledges of true faith above others, but had zealously defended them;
and yet now he declared that he was in such obscurity that he knew
nothing. It was given to say in reply, that he was now reduced to a
state of obscurity or ignorance, not from his merely not knowing what
was true - for he knew it better than \[many\] others - but because
that, in the other life, knowledges are confirmed that they may become
the truths of faith, with which, since his life was repugnant, it was a
consequence that he knew nothing, and was in obscurity; for although one
is in the light of knowledges, yet if his life is repugnant, he does not
love the things confirmatory of the knowledges of faith contrary to
life, but he loves rather the things confirmatory of life against
knowledges; and when there is such a conflict, it follows that he will
be in obscurity and ignorance, into which state I was myself reduced,
before it was given to speak with spirits and angels. It was thus
granted to comfort him \[by the consideration\] that that is a state
into which those are at first reduced, who are in the knowledges of the
truth of faith, and yet their life is not concordant, which is a species
of vastation, wherein the Lord first inseminates truths, and the light
of truths begins gradually to shine forth from this obscure or darkened
\[condition\].

<span class="margnote"><span id="3905.">3905.</span></span>

He still remained above the head in a dense obscurity, with which he was
so oppressed that his weight was thence perceived, as it were,
manifestly moving my head forwards, so that unless I had been in bed my
head would have inclined in that direction and then to one side and the
other. His gravitation, thus sensibly felt by me, was like that of a
superincumbent weight pressing first in a front direction and then round
about towards the sides; from which the inference was plain to me what
kind of an influx is produced by that confused obscureness.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3906.">3906.</span></span>

He afterwards receded, and I spoke with him and with another who was in
his company concerning love, \[saying\] that love is that which
determines all and singular things, and that without love there is
nothing but what would be confused, because wholly indeterminate, and
that the genera and species of loves and their differences, which
distinguish societies, are countless and indefinite; and that the life
of heaven, and thence of the societies of heaven, is a life of love,
namely, that everyone should love his neighbor better than himself. That
life was represented to him \[accompanied\] with perception, and upon
its being thus represented, he perceived that he was so remote from that
life, that he thought he would never be able to come into heaven, for he
perceived the repugnancy of his self-love. His perception was
communicated to me, and thus how far distant he was from heaven. It was
given to say to him that \[such a love\] was possible - as he began to
doubt of its possibility - \[and it was instanced\] from conjugial love,
in which he had also been, in that men love their wives better than
themselves, as also their children; he thus acknowledged that it was
possible, since it was possible in conjugial love and in other loves
thence derived, for it is given likewise to wish better to one's friends
than to one's self; wherefore being remitted into that life he
acknowledged the possibility.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3907.">3907.</span></span>

In short, the Lord's mercy, which is of His love, towards the whole
human race, is that which determines all things, the heavens
immediately, and \[thence\] their societies. Without the Lord's love and
His mercy thence, not only would all and singular thing be
indeterminate, but absolutely nothing; wherefore the Lord is all in all.
- 1748, November 8.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3908.">3908.</span></span>

It was observed and said that those who have enjoyed bodily felicity
from wedlock, and have lived in conjugial love, that they have felicity
also in the other life, so that the felicity of their life in the world
is felicity in the other life; but that those who have lived in
conjugial infelicity, from holding their partners in contempt, aversion,
and hatred, that they are unhappy in the other life also. - 1748,
November 8.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3909.">3909.</span></span>

THAT EVIL SPIRITS ACQUIRE TO THEMSELVES \[ADDITIONAL\] POWERS FROM
NUMBERS. I observed a certain \[female\] who was a subject of evil
spirits, that inspired abominable things with \[a powerful\] persuasion.
Other spirits, partly from curiosity and partly from a desire to
abstract their thoughts from what I was writing, observed with a fixed
attention how such a subject \[would be affected\], and what would
happen; the intuitions and ideas of several were then fixed upon her who
was the subject, from whence her powers of thinking were increased; for
in proportion as the intuitions of a number concenter in one, she acts
more strongly, as I had also observed before, \[in the case of one\] who
had thus magically attracted the intuitions of others by receiving the
things that flowed in, and so going to those from whom the influx came.
It was said to spirits that the power of that subject would be thus
augmented; wherefore they were withdrawn, and she being left alone with
evil spirits, her power was entirely gone, which could be perceived, and
at which the spirits wondered. - 1748, November 8.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3910.">3910.</span></span>

THOSE WHO HAVE CONSCIENCE MAY BE AMENDED IN THE OTHER LIFE. It was said
to me, and perceived likewise, that those who are in phantasies and in
falsities, provided they have held conjugial love sacred and have had
conscience, especially if they have been in it and who have thus had
conscience that such in the other life are capable of amendment, even
though they might have been obstinate, or might obstinately have inhered
in their opinions and falsities; but that those who had not conscience,
especially if they accounted adulteries as nothing, and in other things
were during their life without conscience, they appear in the other
life, as it were, without \[any\] restraining bond, and thus without
connection with heaven. Those who have had no conscience in regard to
adulteries, and thus have been as it were without bond, they are those
who cannot be amended so as to be able to come among the celestials,
except as those that are scarcely self-conscious, that is, as bones in
which there may yet be life, for a bone without vitality can serve to no
use in the human body. - 1748, November 9.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3911.">3911.</span></span>

CONCERNING THE LASCIVIOUS. There appeared a cerulean starry heaven, and
underneath a dark cloudy something like a cragged rock from which arose
a spirit who soared upwards from thence above the head, and thence spoke
with me; but he spoke as one who had little of the rational, which was
known from his speech, it being that of those who are in a natural and
not in a spiritual state. There then came spirits above my head, who
affected the brain as a soft and almost watery mass or volume, of whose
quality I was ignorant. The \[other\] spirits said that they supposed
that they spoke among themselves, but they did not understand their
speech. They one and all spoke, but whatever the \[other\] spirits knew
as to their speech, I could not thus know it, because I did not reflect
upon it. This undulating mass adhered variously to the head, and more
tenaciously than others, even so as to occupy the bones of the cranium,
whence they wished \[to pass\] more interiorly, but they were not able,
except by phantasies, so that they seemed to themselves \[to have
entered in\], when yet \[they merely clung\] to the cranial bones.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3912.">3912.</span></span>

They still adhered there during the whole night, some supposing, and
they also, that they were so infixed that they could never be detached.
I perceived that they were such that others operated through them, -the
lascivious of both sexes, particularly females who were prompted by no
other impulse than that of the delight of lewdness, not \[however\] as
harlots prostituting themselves for gain as an end, but \[on the
contrary\] those who flowed through them had lasciviousness only for an
end. It was afterwards said that those spirits who thus inhered in the
bones of the cranium, were the subjects of these lechers, and that they
could only serve them as subjects, having little of life, and thus but
little of understanding; and that they were antediluvians, who, being
vastated, could serve as subjects, retaining no more of their own life
than there is of life in the osseous parts of the human body. These were
in the head; for those who were of the antediluvians are vastated and
become as skeletons, as before remarked, or as lifeless appendages, and
life is afterwards breathed into them, as they are scarcely
self-conscious or in an degree sensible, and thus they serve as bones,
into whom other spirits can flow.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3913.">3913.</span></span>

But because these also were such and of such a genius \[indoles\], they
were capable of receiving the persuasions of the antediluvians and
\[yet\] of extinguishing their persuasions when poured forth upon them,
or of moderating them so that they should not enter into the cerebrum
and affect it with cold and thus injure it; for such \[spirits\] are
recipient of direful persuasions, as they are the bones of the cranium,
which are of the same substance with the tunics of the brain, yet
growing into bones and defending \[the other parts\] from injuries; just
as bruised scorpions, because of that nature, imbibe poison, and thus
protect others from the danger of dying by the bites of other scorpions.
As to what remains among them, it is to be said, that they are
lascivious, and that they have lasciviousness for an end. - 1748,
November 9.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3914.">3914.</span></span>

It was said that their vastations recur quite often, so that they become
skeletons, as is the case with others, to whom vastations occur by
turns, that they may be initiated into their services, which become
their functions in the other life, for everyone in the other life is
initiated into his functions, because they are reserved for uses, which
also vastations regard, or which they have for an end. - 1748, November
9.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3915.">3915.</span></span>

CONCERNING LOVE. It was perceived that there are variations of form
pertaining to thought, thus to the false and the true, but that love is
without forms, as it produces variations of forms, though it seems to be
produced by them. From love, whatever it may be as to its subjects, is
produced delight, which is peculiar to love. - 1748, November 9.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3916.">3916.</span></span>

CONCERNING PARABLES. I recollect of having perceived, on a former
occasion, that the speech of angels and angelic spirits fell into
parables - a fact, however, which I did not then observe; as also that
they fell into representations of gardens, fig-trees, and other things
\[usually seen\] in dreams; so likewise, into feasts, as I saw them
eating together, and this on several occasions, which it is here proper
to mention, in order to its being known that the ideas of angels and
angelic spirits are thus represented, and fall thus into parables,
representations of gardens, and feasts, concerning which the Lord so
often speaks in his discourses, and to which he so significantly likens
\[the things of\] heaven. - 1748, November 9.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3917.">3917.</span></span>

CONCERNING MEMORY. It was shown by experience that when spirits act upon
man from their own memory of particulars, man does not know otherwise
than that he was previously cognizant of the very thing, as was evinced
\[by what happened\] today; thence is the kind of recollection of which
Cicero speaks, as if he had known \[certain things\] previously. Hence
it appears what confusion would arise if spirits were to act upon man
from their memory of particulars, and not from the memory of the man. On
a former occasion also a spirit acted from his memory of particulars
upon me when I was not aware but that I had known the thing, though I
had in fact known nothing at all of it. Hence it is to be known what
confusion \[would ensue\] if spirits should retain the memory of
particulars. - 1748, November 9.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3918.">3918.</span></span>

THAT IN MAN THERE IS NOTHING TRUE. Scientifics were represented to me by
variations of form, and \[a representation\] of the false \[was
effected\] by a twisting backwards of the same forms. When I was in this
kind of representation, certain spirits would fain have it that an
aptitude for truth was given with man, and that thus variations of form
appropriate to man could be given by progression forward, whereby the
true was represented. While the spirits were in the persuasion that the
true could also be given as the proprium of man, others held that
variations of form could thus be \[derived\] from the Lord, and evolved
forwards, into which His life should flow, and thus the true be plainly
set forth.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3919.">3919.</span></span>

But the good, and also the angelic spirits, indignantly said, that I
would be cast out of heaven, if I retained such an opinion. I was then
instructed that the true can never exist with man as his proprium, for
all truth is from love, while with man there is nothing but evil, the
love of self and of the world; whence everything pertaining to man is
false.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3920.">3920.</span></span>

I was moreover instructed that in proportion as the variations of form
are more \[retorted\] backwards, the more false is the evil signified
thereby; and that to whatever point it is retroverted in the life of the
body, there it remains after death, and he is not led forth to less
evil, and consequently more forwards, where there is also evil, but that
a reformation takes place to such a degree that \[the man\] can subsist
in the least of his evil, and be there held by the Lord, and thus
affected with truth and good. Wherefore it was previously represented to
me that a spirit might be held suspended, as it were, from his evil, and
thus be affected with truth and good, though as far as there is any
relaxation, so far he precipitates himself into evil. It is therefore
solely a detention from evil \[that keeps him back\], and this is
effected by vastations, with a view to his being withheld from evil, and
thus brought into a state in which truth and good from the Lord can flow
in. This I have today, and often before, experienced.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3921.">3921.</span></span>

Hence it may also in some measure appear how the case is with the
rainbow and its innumerable varieties.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3922.">3922.</span></span>

CONCERNING THE LASCIVIOUS. There are lascivious ones, who have
lasciviousness solely for an end. Though having wives, they care nothing
for the married state except in reference to the passion which is their
end. For the same reason they desire not children in wedlock, because
the situation of a wife, with such a prospect, forbids the gratification
which, as an end, rules everything. They are therefore prone to sexual
indulgences beyond those which are lawful with a wife, which they
practice in base modes, and thus pervert those who would otherwise make
good wives, and bear them away into lascivious habits. And when such
lascivious ones cannot cohabit with a wife, they loathe her, and give
themselves up to wantonness with harlots, thereby causing their wives to
become harlots, utterly regardless of the conjugial debt and of the
procreation of offspring. Being thus prone to licentiousness, they dread
to be with other men's' wives, both because they have contracted a
disgust for a wife, and loathe all wives, and because they persuade
themselves that these are also of the same quality. As they, moreover,
make no account of lawless lust in the marriage state, provided only
they can indulge their vile passions, they care nothing if their wives
become as depraved as themselves. These abide somewhat high above the
head a little in the rear; they operate upon a part of the sexual
organs, which they inflame and act with pain. With these I spoke.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3923.">3923.</span></span>

Wives of this quality, who make licentiousness an end, were also seen,
particularly one who appeared in a kind of kitchen apartment. I saw no
fire-place, but I perceived an obscure-looking chimney; I saw also the
back of a person with a hand extended posteriorly towards the left. She
was clothed with a simple garment of dark gray color. Lascivious males,
who bear deceits and malice in their minds, invite such to their
companionship, and by their means devise their deceitful and malicious
plots; and because they plotted deceits and malignities, they contrived
how they might produce infants by phantasies, and place them in the bed
of another who was delighted with infants, and thus might infuse the
phantasy of his being a husband, and that he too might thus incite
\[some female\] to illicit cohabitation; from which it appeared that
they were not only malignities, but basely deceitful, as thus wishing by
means of the innocent to execute their wily machinations.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3924.">3924.</span></span>

The lascivious wife above mentioned, who was seen in the kitchen
apartment, had a knife in her hand, and in her phantasy was an infant.
Her phantasies were represented by different circumgyrations of her
body, which were quick, like those of a wheel, she still holding knives
in her hand. While in this phantasy of an infant lying below \[her\],
the idea assumed a character of cruelty, as if prompting her to kill the
infant, because such is their quality that having lasciviousness for an
end, they are prone to murder infants, as they do not desire them, but
would fain put them to death under the promptings of their lustful
passions. Afterwards she twisted and inverted herself into various
flexures, that she might allure to such consortings, being instigated
thereto by vile and deceitful wretches of whom \[we have spoken
before\]. Awaking after sleep there appeared round about me a multitude
of these detestable women, who, being inspected by the angels, were
represented as filthy conglomerate intestines in two balls, one of which
was foully and disgustingly bloody, and the other of a yellow hue. These
conglobated intestines were so filthy that I shuddered at the sight. It
thence appeared that they were \[female\] magicians, and at the same
time malignities, and \[exceedingly\] deceitful. In this manner their
designs were veiled, for \[it was only that\] they were compelled to
confess their iniquity \[that they did so\]. - 1748, November 9.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3925.">3925.</span></span>

CONCERNING THE NOBLE OFFSPRING OF THE MOST ANCIENT CHURCH. Very high
above the head are those, of a noble quality, who were the offspring of
the Most Ancient Church, concerning whom it was perceived that the Lord
through them rules the intensely deceitful \[spirits\] who are \[also\]
at a great height above the head, -concerning whom presently. They spoke
with me thence, their speech gliding, as it were, into pearls. There was
seen \[issuing\] from them a beautiful aura, as if of pearls of various
colors, and their habitations were shown, though but obscurely. \[It was
seen however that\] they were magnificent buildings, extended to a great
length, as is usual with edifices that correspond to each other from
opposite sides \[of a street\]. They are of a purple color, variegated
from a cerulean to an auroral hue, but as I saw them only obscurely, I
can give no farther description, than merely to say, that they were most
spacious and magnificent, and variegated in this manner with beautiful
colors. It was said that those dwell there, who were the noble offspring
of the Most Ancient Church, by which the Lord rules the most deceitful
above the head.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3926.">3926.</span></span>

CONCERNING THE MOST DECEITFUL ABOVE THE HEAD. Spirits above the head of
most deceitful character plotted nefarious wiles, by inducing \[the
conceit\] of a certain \[quality\] of innocence, pertaining to some one
who was with me in the rear quarter, so that as often as I thought of
him, something of innocence was suggested, but it was detected as being
an abominable deceit. When it was detected, they sent those deceitful
ones whom they lead, and who are in a middle distance, above my head,
who were perceived as a kind of undulation pure and watery. I asked who
they were: it was said they were those \[just mentioned\], and that
those who were in the highest position and promised them that they would
be ready at hand \[to assist them\] in case any harm should accrue from
the detection of their deceit. I spoke with them \[saying\] that by such
conduct they would be in danger of precipitating themselves into sore
punishments, but the subtle among them imagined that they could not be
punished, thinking that their doings were beyond the reach of
punishments.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3927.">3927.</span></span>

After a sleep, in which I dreamed concerning \[certain\] golden coins
lost in a purse, which I sought for but was unable to find, though I
found other golden articles but not the coins, a boy came who showed
that he had similar coins of gold, of whom I could not suspect that he
had taken them away. Being then awakened I heard how they are punished
by severe punishments of contortion, which are of such a nature that
those subjected to them are reduced from the state of subtlety in which
they were to a state of the utmost grossness or dullness. And thus they
are tormented with inflictions of grossness, being reduced thereto even
in their speech, and also by the infusing of a reaction, so that they
were compelled under a kind of torture to comply with it, even against
their own deceits. They were then also contorted, or broken and
lacerated by contortions as to all their members from the breast
successively to the feet. It was said that they did not treat their
heads in this manner, and the reason was perceived to be, that their
heads were hard and bony, and if thus treated would be broken; wherefore
they that deem themselves pre-eminently subtle, are reduced to such
\[mental\] grossness that they cannot speak except in the grossest
manner, and those who are almost without bodies, like spirits, yet
become corporeal, and are able to feel pains and such things in the
body, a fact of which they were fully convinced. The punishment
proceeded from the highest degree of grossness to a less, and so on to
one still more subtle, so that it was shown that they could be punished
even in their own fallacious subtlety.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3928.">3928.</span></span>

Those who were punished were those who were very high above the head and
called themselves princes, popes, and the Holy Spirit, and who were
extremely indignant when I said to them that they were deceits and
malignities, and that whoever they might have been in the life of the
body, \[yet\] since they were deceits and malignities, they are among
their like, and even the vilest of them, and such as they themselves
would reject as base wretches. Wherefore those that perpetrate such
things are of such a quality \[as above described\], because in the
other life there is no respect of persons, \[but\] the quality of
everyone is regarded or determined from those things which are with \[or
in\] him.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3929.">3929.</span></span>

A certain spirit, after punishment, came to me, to whom it was given to
speak at length \[and to say\], that such malignities and deceits are
thus punished, and that they think themselves the Holy Spirit, and
princes and popes; and that their being such, whether the one or the
other, made the matter so much the worse. It was also given to speak in
derogation of their dignity, the angels above the head \[meantime\]
moderating the speech, which as it was in opposition to dignity, and
they spoke grossly at the left ear, as their ideas were gross, and then
not subtle, occasioned them chastisement and thence dissuasion from
persisting in such things, thus with a view to \[their\] amendment; for
I did not perceive with myself a disposition to punish or chastise, but
to speak with them; yet I had, as it were, an external perception <span
id="fr_65"></span>[3929-1](#fn_65) that even this was grievous to them.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3930.">3930.</span></span>

Their operation was perceived as falling upon the ossa pubis to the
left, upon which they inflicted pain by their actings.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3931.">3931.</span></span>

Their habitations were shown, which were vaulted galleries without bed,
and constructed of a common gray stone, so called, similar to those
rocks which usually compose the ruins of temples. In such \[buildings\]
they confessed that they dwelt.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3932.">3932.</span></span>

It was perceived that when their malevolence rises to its height, they
then plunge themselves into punishments, for it is permitted to reach
this point, and then the equilibrium perishes, and they thus precipitate
themselves. They are \[afterwards\] restored to the equilibrium, and if
they do not suffer themselves to be thus restored by punishments, they
are cast into hell that they may there be vastated. - 1748, November 9.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3933.">3933.</span></span>

The deceitful and the most deceitful are in general such, that they take
scarcely anything else from the ideas of man than what is innocent and
celestial, and by means of that lay their plots against man, by turning
it in various modes to his destruction, and by enticing \[him\] to
adulteries and \[other\] enormities, so that to ensnare by means of
innocent and celestial things is the very acme of deceit. There are
those in the other life, who make a pretence of holy, celestial, and
innocent things, with a view to obtain dominion over all on earth and in
heaven, caring nothing for right or wrong provided they can but attain
dominion. - 1748, November 9.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3934.">3934.</span></span>

I spoke with these \[saying\], that they had contracted their nature
from this, that they had always in their writings made a pretence of
holy, celestial, and innocent things, concerning which they \[really\]
thought nothing, as is the custom of popes and papists at this day;
\[this they do\] in the same manner, as kings and their chief ministers
openly write and publish falsehoods, which all know to be falsehoods,
and are therefore of an entirely contrary belief, yet these lofty kings
and caesars do not scruple to write such things, provided it be done
elegantly and certain confirmations \[appear\]. Such is the Christian
orb at this day, but not so the Gentiles. - 1748, November 9.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3935.">3935.</span></span>

It was observed that when I privily took away the things which they had
deceitfully employed for my destruction, and with a view to inspire
adulteries, namely the numbers by which I had designated \[various\]
extracts, they infused innocence upon a certain one, -as much upon any
other subject as upon myself and then complained that thus they would
not have anything to think of. I supposed that they required something
of this kind as a foot to stand upon, as did certain others of whom I
have formerly spoken. Wherefore when I determined \[my\] intuition upon
them, and even upon the feet, they \[the feet\] were not drawn in, but
only their genital members, by which was signified that they were
adulterers of the highest grade. - 1748, November 9.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3936.">3936.</span></span>

It was detected that not only was this continually in their phantasies,
but, what is worse, that they said that they took counsel to destroy by
such means, and that too even in their ruin-like habitations. - 1748,
November 9.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3937.">3937.</span></span>

CONCERNING CONSCIENCE. Those who neither have nor care for any bond of
conscience do not even know what conscience is; wherefore they endeavor
to induce a bond of conscience in regard to everything, even matters of
indifference, not knowing how the case really is as to the bonds of
conscience, which are the same as debts, as the conjugial debt, \[for
instance\], which is such a bond. It was insinuated \[accordingly\],
that the \[true\] bonds of conscience or debts, are the things of
goodness and truth, and exist according to loves, their degrees,
consanguinities, and affinities, all which regard the Lord Who is the
only Bond, and \[who alone\] gives to perceive. - 1748, November 9.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3938.">3938.</span></span>

It appears that there are many spurious consciences, as all heresies,
phantasies, and falsities, in which conscience is placed, or concerning
which the deceitful induce a conscience, which they also call bonds and
debts. - 1748, November 9.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3939.">3939.</span></span>

WHAT IT IS TO BE NOTHING. It was perceived that to be nothing signifies
to be nothing but evil, for evil is in itself death; wherefore compared
to life it is nothing. That the good and the true is everything, is
plain, wherefore the evil and the false is nothing. Hence humiliation
goes, as it were, to the point of self-annihilation, \[coupled\] with an
internal acknowledgment of the total want of the good and the true in
one's self, and that all goodness and truth possessed is of the Lord. It
signifies also that in respect to the Grand Man \[everyone\] is merely a
most diminutive particle, - nothing, as it were - for his all and
singular things flow in through the Grand Man, so that he is but as a
particle of air in comparison with the whole atmosphere, or as a
particle of water in respect to the ocean. Since then he is, in
comparison to the Grand Man, almost nothing, he is in the truth of faith
when be accounts himself as nothing in respect to the \[grand\] common
or general \[commune\], whatever it be, which is good and true.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3940.">3940.</span></span>

It signifies also that one has nothing of life from himself, but that
\[his nature\] is truly dead, because organic, and that all life is of
the Lord, wherefore, as far as he lives, he is nothing. It thence
follows that he can do nothing from himself, or that he has no power of
himself, which to acknowledge is to acknowledge that he is nothing.
Consequently being nothing but evil he can have nothing of truth and
good but from the Lord, and since he has nothing of truth and good from
himself, and the good and the true is because it is eternal, it follows,
that he is nothing. - 1748, November 11.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3941.">3941.</span></span>

THAT CERTAIN REPRESENTATIONS AND MANY THINGS \[BESIDES\] ARE VARIATIONS
OF SOCIETIES. Progressions from one place to another, which do not exist
from phantasy, signify changes of societies, for all societies have
their own situation, wherefore every change of situation proceeds from a
change of society. It was observed that this is true, both in general
and in particular; wherefore the like holds of changes of places, so
that there is not the least step which does not exist from a change of
society.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3942.">3942.</span></span>

And because changes of place arise from changes of societies and
phantasies, and ideas cause them to be changed as to locality, it
follows that every single idea is also a chance of societies, so that it
flows in through societies \[thus\] changed.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3943.">3943.</span></span>

Wherefore the changes of societies are indefinite, and thus also every
single idea flows from indefinite societies, according to an order
established by the Lord, and known to the Lord alone. - 1748, November
11.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3944.">3944.</span></span>

CONCERNING THOSE WHO ARE BONY. It was shown how other spirits speak
through those that represent the bones, \[viz.\] that in accordance with
the quality of bones, they know very little what they say, but yet they
speak; wherefore through them mainly ideas may be terminated in material
things, for they, as it were, present no impediment, because there is
nothing of resistance. But yet such \[spirits\], because they lose
nothing of their former life, after they are reduced by vastation into
such a bony state may be restored: accordingly they are vastated by
turns until they are able to subserve such uses. - 1748, November 11.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3945.">3945.</span></span>

CONCERNING THE NOTION OF LOVE AND OF HEAVEN. As often as love and heaven
were named and thought of, an extremely gross idea or notion thereof
occurred, which ideas and notions can scarcely be described, though very
perceptible in the world of spirits. This grossness arose in the idea,
as often as love and heaven were thought of and continued for some time;
but when the persuasive life of spirits was operative, then the idea or
notion was subtle, or like light, that of love however as of a kind of
lump, and \[that of\] heaven as a dense commune.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3946.">3946.</span></span>

Concerning which and the causes when I spoke with spirits \[I learned
that\] the causes were three of love's existing in such a gross and
lumpish form; namely, \[first\] that conjugial love is nauseated by
them, which being represented excited loathing, since the idea of
adulterers concerning marriage or conjugial love is such, that they
detest wives and women, \[whence\] it follows that when love is thought
of such a result takes place. As mutual love also is wholly wanting, and
hatred \[on the other hand\] reigns with all evil spirits, it follows
that hatred is a \[second\] cause of the gross idea concerning love as
lump-like. The third is, that everyone persuades himself that life is
his own; since \[he regards\] his thought, the most subtle of all
things, \[as his own\], thus also his life; whence it flows that as
often as that is thought of there occurs, as it were, a subtle light,
and the life of the angels that are seen, and \[their\] love, which is
\[really\] their life, are as gross ideas with them, when yet the fact
is quite the contrary, love being the most pure, most holy, and most
distinct life of all, and contrary loves being not of life, but a
something most dense, most gross, and confused, so as to be almost
nothing.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3947.">3947.</span></span>

CONCERNING ARISTOTLE. There was perceived a sonorous something moving my
skin, thus a moving sound, proceeding from the posterior region through
the left side even to the left ear, which something would fain struggle
forth and labored so to do. I perceived that they were spirits, but of
what quality they were I could not know; but when they ascended with an
effort to the ear, they spoke with me saying that they were logicians
and metaphysicians and such as had immersed their thoughts in such
things, and lamenting that they now lived a miserable obscure life,
without perception. Their speech was dull, slow, and rough-sounding.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3948.">3948.</span></span>

There were moreover two who discoursed with me above the head, and it
was said and perceived that it was Aristotle and another, whom it was
not given to know. He spoke with sufficient clearness, as a spirit who
had been some time in the spiritual world. I spoke now with him, and now
with those who were at the left ear and concerning such subjects \[as
are mentioned above\]. It thence first appeared that Aristotle was not
of such a quality as his followers, who reasoned philosophically from
his books, but that he was \[altogether\] of a different genius.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3949.">3949.</span></span>

Aristotle was then remitted into the state which he had when he first
came into the world of spirits, but, what I wondered at, he applied
himself to the right ear, and not to the left, and there spoke hoarsely
\[indeed\], but soundly. I clearly perceived that he was altogether
different from his followers, viz. in that he had developed from his own
thought the things he had written, so that his philosophy had originated
from \[a ground of\] thought which he clearly set forth, in such a way
that his terms were only words by which he represented his scrutinized
thoughts, and thus proceeded from thoughts to terms, which were thence
called scholastic and by which his philosophy \[is distinguished\]. I
then perceived also that he was prompted by a delight of affection which
was predominant, and excited him to thought, so that it was his
\[genius\] that he thought from affection, and thence under the impulse
of delight and thus he described his \[very\] thoughts; wherefore he
\[applied himself\] to the right ear. But his followers \[proceeded\]
not from thought to terms, but from terms scientifically made, thus from
mere \[learned\] dust \[as it were\] to thought, which is an inverted
way, and thus from darkness and deadness to the light of thought, in
which case they do not find light but darkness, nor \[do they find\]
thought but a certain something lumpish and confused. Hence \[they would
proceed\] to delight which cannot be given unless from a certain
affection, which is not \[with them\] an affection and thence a delight
of thinking, but an external cupidity, as of personal honor, and, more
grossly still, \[it is engaged in\] from a regard to superior dignities,
\[to be attained\] by different methods; and also with a view to gain;
all which weigh not at all with those who are excited to think from
affection and thence delight, and \[accordingly\] they form and put
forth such \[fruits of their study\]. This was the reason why Aristotle
was at the right, \[while\] the rest were at the left.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3950.">3950.</span></span>

I spoke with Aristotle when above the head, \[observing\] that a child
could, in the space of half an hour, speak so philosophically,
analytically, and logically, that Aristotle \[himself\] would be unable,
in many volumes, to describe all the recondite philosophy, analysis, and
logic \[embodied in it\], and yet the child knows nothing of it. In like
manner the dancer may ply his arts, moving at the same time each of his
limbs artificially, yet as if naturally, and applying \[the necessary\]
respirations to each \[movement\], which, if they should all be explored
to their source, and their mode of operation be discovered, by
investigating the action of the concurrent fibers flowing from the two
brains, of the motive fibers, of the muscles, of the diaphragm, of the
pulmonary respiration, and of the various application of these and the
other viscera, whole volumes would be required for the description, yet
he knows how to dance without knowing anything of these matters. So it
is with the philosophy of these things, which is of no use, except for
the sake of delight. Aristotle greatly approved of this, and said that
it was so, and said that it was \[otherwise\] as useless and futile as
the dust of the earth, which was to be wholly cast away, because such
\[a mode of philosophizing\] merely throws a heap of rubbish before the
eyes, and blinds them, in case that men proceed in such an inverted
order, and would fain think from an artificial method, when \[yet\]
thought extends itself to such artificials, which seem \[to proceed\]
from thought, instead of thoughts \[proceeding\] from them. These are
the sentiments of Aristotle; he added, if anyone wishes to be
infatuated, let him proceed in this manner.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_64"></span>[3901-1](sd49.htm#fr_64) For an explanation of
what is here meant by the "ninth use" the reader referred to the AC
10,709.

<span id="fn_65"></span>[3929-1](sd49.htm#fr_65) The original phrase
here is "extra me percepi," but the Editor intimates in a note that the
manuscript leaves it doubtful whether the author wrote "extra" or
"intra." I have on the whole concluded to abide by the reading of the
text. -Tr.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 3951-4000](sd50)
