[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Swedenborg](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sd49)  [Next](sd51.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0766143007/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Spiritual Diary*, by Emanuel Swedenborg, \[1758\], tr. by Bush,
Smithson and Buss \[1883-9\] at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Spiritual Diary

<span class="margnote"><span id="3951.">3951.</span></span>

I asked him what idea he had of the supreme Deity. There appeared to me
a certain \[form\] at the left above, having a human face, and his head
surrounded with a kind of radiant circle. It was said that he had such
an idea concerning God, having exhibited Him to himself somewhat in this
form. He said that he had so thought of God, and thus had some idea of
the Lord; yet he now, as a good spirit acknowledges him, and says that
he rules the universe, for he that rules heaven rules the universe; the
one cannot be separated from the other. These also are his sayings.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3952.">3952.</span></span>

A woman appeared to me and extended her hand, as if to stroke my cheek,
and when I wondered what could be meant thereby, it was said that such a
woman, having a beautiful hand sometimes appeared to him \[during his
life\] when his eyes were closed, who would stroke his cheek; and
speaking with the angels respecting her, they said that such were those
who were called Pallases - not Minervas, but Pallases - and that they
were spirits of that and of more ancient times, who, as spirits, were
delighted with ideas, and indulged in thoughts, as is well known in
respect to the Stoics and others; for formerly they could think much
better without philosophy \[than with it\], so that they in a certain
way mingled with spirits. Such spirits were delighted with Aristotle
from his thinking justly, wherefore there was sometimes represented to
him such a woman stroking his cheek. The woman was a representation
\[effected\] by male spirits who were about him and had possession of
him as a subject, so that the woman was not a spirit, but the
representation of a woman, as I myself just before experienced.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3953.">3953.</span></span>

It was shown in what manner spirits governed him from this circumstance,
that when he would speak with the woman whose hand he so often saw, she
immediately averted herself saying that he must not touch her. It was
then seen that she applied herself to his back, and thus took possession
of him, which was a representation of the manner in which such spirits
governed him, for to apply one's self to the back is to command.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3954.">3954.</span></span>

What kind of idea he had of the soul or spirit, which he called pneuma,
was shown to the life, for he became \[himself\] what he had conceived
\[the soul to be\], to wit, something scarcely visible, but yet
something of an ethereal nature, with a kind of general undulation or
self-motion. Such was the idea that he had of the spirit, saying, that
he knew his spirit would survive after death, because it was his
interior essence, which could not die, as it possessed the power of
thought; at the same time \[he said\] that he could not then entertain
the same idea \[on the subject\] which he now had, but only that the
general nature of thought was that of a certain breath which he breathed
with a peculiar kind of motion. As to the quality of his life, he says
that he did not make it a subject of distinct thought. This is what was
said by Aristotle.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3955.">3955.</span></span>

Moreover, Aristotle is among the sane spirits, while his followers are
among the infatuated.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3956.">3956.</span></span>

CONCERNING THOSE WHO REPRESENT THE EAR. There are some who represent the
external, and some \[who represent\] the internal ear. Among them, those
who represent the right internal ear were often heard. They are much
inclined to speak, and can scarcely desist. Those \[who represent\] the
left, I did not thus hear, but I heard that they were choirs of a more
subtle genius, though I could not perceive what they said.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3957.">3957.</span></span>

It was observed that, contrary to the practice of others, these (latter
changed their situation, as man \[does\] his ear, thus \[for instance\]
when, lying in bed, I would turn my right ear upwards, they would thus
be above, speaking thence on the right, from a very considerable
elevation; but when I placed my right ear on the pillow, they were heard
within the pillow, and below, of which they complained, that I should
turn myself over, so that the situation of those representing the ear
should be ordered differently from that of the rest.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3958.">3958.</span></span>

CONCERNING THE LORD. Speaking with spirits \[I observed\] that no idea
respecting the Lord could be perceived nor were any terms applicable
\[to Him\] who is the only Eternal and Infinite, and that the only
Eternal and Infinite Is, and that the only Is \[only\] lives, thus that
whatever things are finite, these neither are not live, except from the
Lord Alone, that is, from the Only Is, that is, from Him Who is Infinite
and Eternal. And since none but eternal things can be predicated of Him,
\[therefore\] the past, the present, and the future is eternal. \[The
spirits\] wondered at its being said that the Present is eternal, but
inasmuch as \[what has been said\] is so, although it cannot be
perceived by \[any\] idea, therefore our Present is to Him eternal. -
1748, November 12.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3959.">3959.</span></span>

CONCERNING THE ANTIPODES. It was said to Aristotle that there are
antipodes and that \[the inhabitants of all parts of the earth\] become
such after \[the lapse of\] twelve hours. When the fact was shown, he as
well as others wondered that they could thus walk on their feet; but the
cause was made known, \[viz.\] that since the minutest portions of the
ether gravitate to the minutest points of our body, towards the center,
\[the gravitation\] is upwards when the center is upwards, and so
downwards when the center is downwards, and thus an upwards and
downwards is induced upon the whole body, which the ideas are to follow.
The subject in this way came into the light, and he said it was so.
Hence also it appeared that when reasonings are instituted from a gross
atmosphere, from stones and the like, \[and\] from the external body, no
one can possibly conceive that he should be able to stand on his feet in
the opposite \[quarter\] of the earth; but as soon as those grossnesses
are removed, or the ideas of them, which are similarly gross, then the
man comes into a certain natural light. - 1748, November 12.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3960.">3960.</span></span>

It was also said to Aristotle that such was at this day the erudition of
those, especially the schoolmen, who call themselves Aristotelians, that
they could fill an entire page with their writing and express things by
mere scholastic terms, such as transubtantiality, predicaments,
entities, and the like, \[drawn\] from their terminology, and when the
page thus written is read, it can scarcely be understood either by
themselves or others, and yet they will have it that it means something
\[important\], and they deem this learned and most learned, when yet
these things are of such a nature that when a man of sense considers
their import he rejects \[them as mere\] scholastic terms, and can in
two lines so clearly explain the same thing that anyone, however
unlearned, can understand what is meant, while the learned, by their
scholastic diction, can scarcely perceive little if any meaning at all.
- 1748, November 12.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3961.">3961.</span></span>

Aristotle appeared, his face being somewhat obscure, but his
head-covering being visible, which was large and of a brownish red. It
was wrapped in ample folds, about his head, not unlike \[the turban\] of
the Turks, but not in just such folds, and also somewhat fuller. He was
\[enveloped\] in a long cloak, almost in the fashion of the Turks. -
1748, November 12.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3962.">3962.</span></span>

CONCERNING MEMORY. In the other life it is not allowed that one should
use his own memory for the reason, that everyone who draws the past from
his own memory, is not only anxious concerning the future, and vexes
himself from the fact that the present is unlike the past, but he
indulges grief in whatever state he is; and then also, as was perceived,
he wishes to live only from himself, for to live from one's own memory
is to live, as it were, from himself which for many reasons, is not
allowed to a spirit, but to a man more than to a spirit. As a spirit,
thinking from the memory of a man, thinks himself to be a man, if he
were to use his own memory he would think he was not the man, but
himself; wherefore for reasons of use, in order that he may be
subservient to man, it is not allowed to exercise his own memory. -
1748, November 13.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3963.">3963.</span></span>

OF THE QUALITY OF THOSE WHO WERE WITH ME. Unlike what happens in regard
to other men, spirits have been with me as they were in the world, for
with me they have been not only as men as to their mind and memory, but
also as to sense, so that they would even suppose themselves to be, as
it were, in the world, or to have returned into the world. They were
able to lead me, to see through my eyes, to hear, through my ears,
others speaking, yea, \[they could have heard\] others speaking with
themselves if it had been lawful for them to speak with them in their
own speech, or to write to them in their own style but these things were
not permitted, neither to touch others through my hands. With other
persons the case is different, for my state is so ordered by the Lord,
that I can be possessed by spirits, and yet without injury, in which my
case is altogether different from that of others when possessed,
inasmuch as they are rendered thereby non compos, while I remain
altogether in my right mind. Indeed, from the very first of my enjoying
this interaction \[with spirits\] onward through the space of several
years, I have been as I was before without the slightest observable
difference. This privilege, therefore, can pertain \[safely\] to him
only who is in faith; by no means to any others, as they would
immediately perish. Such is the state of the world at this day, that
whoever is possessed incurs the peril of his life, so intense is the
internal hatred that now reigns. - 1748, November 13.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3964.">3964.</span></span>

CONCERNING SUBJECTS. Subjects have been present with me, above the head,
and, as it were, incumbent upon it, who spoke with me as if they were in
sleep, although they spoke well and truly like those who are wholly
awake. Evil spirits flowed in through them - a fact that was evinced by
means of various deceitful maneuvers, such as their substituting other
persons and performing several other feats which I do not now remember;
but their influx was immediately dissipated, the subjects barely
receiving them, and the dissipation instantly following. Thus good and
interior spirits also were enabled to act through the same subjects, who
may \[for this reason\] be termed common subjects. But whether such
subject-spirits are with men also, I have not as yet learned.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3965.">3965.</span></span>

But the evil spirits said that they were not their subjects, as theirs
are in the habit of conforming themselves to those whom they are wont to
employ \[in this capacity\] - spirits who are in accordance with
themselves and even of their own society - whom they send forth as
subjects, as I have frequently observed before. But they were still
compelled to act through these subjects, as they could inflict upon them
no harm. It was also apparently to be observed that these were subjects
of many companies of evil spirits; in a word, that they were common
subjects, but still good, as good spirits flow into them, and through
them reject the temptations of evil spirits. - 1748, November 13. <span
id="fr_66"></span>[3965-1](#fn_66.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="3966.">3966.</span></span>

CONCERNING \[CERTAIN\] ABOMINATIONS. Certain spirits spoke above the
head like those who can only speak in the manner of persons that have
lost the power of articulate speech by rheumatism, and who then speak as
it were without distinct sound \[Heesa, hoarsely\]. These were most
malignant, exciting whatever was delightful, and closely following up in
their thoughts all and singular things \[of this nature\], so that they
might thence know how to plot most successfully to my destruction. It
was observed that in every particular that their purpose was to note
each single thing \[pertaining to me\], with the design of injuring, and
totally destroying me. It was said to them that thus acting they could
not become anything else than - not vile excretions - but dead corpses.
They are such as in the world are accustomed to draw out the interior
thoughts of others, and induce them by skilful insinuations, to speak of
their delights, and thus to lure from them more than they would
otherwise reveal. They then incessantly contrive how they may seize upon
such disclosures and turn them to the injury of the party concerned, one
in this thoughts, they still assume a flattering and wheedling air;
which mode and another in that, and while thus inveigling one's was also
perceived.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3967.">3967.</span></span>

It appeared that such were pre-eminently depraved, especially from their
operating basely upon those that represent the right ear, for when I
alluded to such, their idea was fixed upon them, and then the latter
were so infested that there appeared as it were, a black smoke issuing
from a ruined chimney, causing them to complain of the infestation; the
reason was that the right ear signifies also this wheedling from a man
his interior thoughts and inducing him to utter them; but those spirits
who constitute the right ear are not of such a quality but are upright,
only that they love to talk and to divulge the things which they
perceive elsewhere.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3968.">3968.</span></span>

Those spirits then appeared as intensely deceitful, in that they were
inclined to break away from a certain society, in doing which they would
not, like others, bend themselves round about by bodily circumflections,
but acted by a certain species of borings, terminating in sharp
penetrations, and by spiral flexures; and it was said that such are of
the worst class of spirits, as they act in this deceitful manner in
order to extricate themselves from the societies of others, for thus
their phantasies operated. Should they also act from persuasion in the
same way that they do from phantasy, they would be still worse; but as
they are prompted by phantasy only, and not by persuasion, they can be
tolerated in the world of spirits; nevertheless they are cadaverous.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3969.">3969.</span></span>

They cherished in their mind a disposition to esteem others as of no
account. Myself they inwardly regarded as nothing, supposing that they
were all-powerful; just as such characters in the world, who lure from
others their thoughts, think that they are everything and others
nothing. - 1748, November 13.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3970.">3970.</span></span>

CONCERNING A BLACK HORSE. There are spirits who desire to possess all
things, and yet are unable to determine themselves to the possession of
anything; and there are those who desire to know everything, and yet do
not determine themselves to the acquisition of knowledge. They barely
desire to have, and desire to know, but they neither have anything nor
know anything. Such spirits ran to and fro through my memory, prompted
by this kind of impulse, but they were averse to fixing upon anything or
to receiving delight from any specific object, such as the palaces,
pictures, and the like, which I had seen in cities; nor could they
concentrate their view upon anything definite \[certum\]; they simply
ran, as it were, back and forth \[through my mind\], desiring
everything, but yet influenced only by a vague cupidity.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3971.">3971.</span></span>

It was seen of what quality they were from their sitting upon a black
horse, apparently a large and generous animal, but of an ebony or marble
aspect, and lifeless as to his head, neck, and front parts; his hinder
parts were afterwards seen, which were of broad dimensions, and
animated, but full of excrements. Such are they who are thus
indeterminate in their character. - 1748, November 13.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3972.">3972.</span></span>

CONCERNING THE INFLUX OF THE GRAND MAN. It is a general rule that
nothing can exist or subsist from itself, but only from something else,
that is, by or through something else; so also that nothing can be held
in form except from something else, or by something else; and this
appears from all and singular things in nature. The human body cannot be
retained in its form except by the pressure of the atmosphere on every
side, since it is well known that on the recession of the atmospheric
pressure the form perishes. And as these are truths, it manifestly
follows, that nothing can be held in its form in man, in his body, in
his brain, in his organs of sense, both exterior and interior, unless it
exist and subsist, and be retained in forms from other things, and
indeed from something general and universal, thus from the Grand Man; in
like manner, neither the Grand Man himself except from the Divine, that
is, from the Lord alone. - 1748, November 13. This was perceived.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3973.">3973.</span></span>

CONCERNING THE ETERNAL. As the Divine Infinite is not of space, so
neither is the eternal of time. That a kind of idea of the infinite, and
an idea of the Divine eternal is insinuated into the angels by the Lord,
appears from this, that they know not what space is, for those who are
in the extreme of the universe are present in a moment: and as to the
eternal, that they have no idea of things past and future, but the past
and future are in their present, concerning which many more things might
be said: neither is there in their idea anything of old age or of death,
but only of life; wherefore they have no notion of time, but in all
their present everything is as eternal. - 1748, November 13.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3974.">3974.</span></span>

THE OPERATION OF SPIRITS UPON THE TONGUE. Certain Hollandic spirits who
neither receive interior things, nor yet \[wholly\] reject them,
inasmuch as they do not think deeply upon them, and therefore do not
receive them, while yet they are inclined to favor them, operated upon
my tongue, yet not like those who refuse to admit and therefore
positively reject interior things, for they operated as if they would
have me actually sever my tongue with my teeth; but these Hollandic
spirits acted inwardly on the tongue, which it was given manifestly to
perceive; for the tongue corresponds to the thought of things interior,
for it serves the uses of speech, and also of taste, which corresponds
to knowledges. - 1748, November 14.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3975.">3975.</span></span>

CONCERNING THE LOVE OF MARRIAGE. In a state intermediate between waking
and sleeping I manifestly perceived that the joys and felicities flowing
from conjugial love in the other life are, as to its most general or
universal properties, indefinite or innumerable which was so manifestly
perceived that I could by no possibility doubt of it; and as the most
general or universal kinds \[genera\] of happiness arising from
conjugial love in the other life are thus indefinite, what shall be said
of the species which are indefinite under each genus, and what of the
particulars belong to each species, and so on? - 1748, November 14.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3976.">3976.</span></span>

THAT SPIRITS ARE BOUND TO SPEAK AS THEY THINK. When a spirit speaks
otherwise than he thinks, the fact is immediately perceived, wherefore
he is compelled to a truthful mode of speaking, otherwise he cannot be
conjoined with any society, but all such are instantly cast out and
maimed. Such a thing disturbs and disjoins societies; wherefore in the
other life it is not allowable for one to speak otherwise than as he
thinks. If he is bad or thinks badly, it is permitted him also to speak
badly, because he thus thinks; for in this case he speaks truth,
inasmuch as it is not lawful for him to utter anything but truth, that
is, what is true to him; and this principle extends so far that one who
thinks evil, speaks evil, thus what is true, since he is evil; and so
on. - 1748, November 15.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3977.">3977.</span></span>

CONCERNING THINGS CONFIRMATORY OF THE KNOWLEDGES OF FAITH. It was
perceived that the knowledges of faith cannot at first be otherwise
confirmed than by sensual and natural truths, for man cannot believe
without confirmations; but afterwards when such knowledges are
confirmed, then the Lord bestows upon him the gift of conscience, by
which he is enabled to believe without farther confirmations; he then
rejects all ratiocinations. This sphere is angelic, in which evil
spirits cannot be. But as long as one is in the state of their
confirmation, and reasons with them, in order to convince them of truth,
then \[such evil\] spirits can be present, as indeed a certain one \[of
that character\] spoke \[with me\], but not from himself, as he
confessed. The case is almost the same as that of one who is grounded in
\[certain\] principles, and who \[consequently\] rejects all contrary
principles, nay, who is indignant when anything contrary is advanced. -
1748, November 16.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3978.">3978.</span></span>

CONCERNING THE MOST DECEITFUL. There were some who, when I suddenly
awoke in the middle of the night, assaulted me with such a subtlety of
deceit as cannot be described. It was scarcely observed by the angelic
spirits, but I suddenly became aware of it. It was afterwards said to me
that such obtain entrance, by special permission, among angelic spirits,
who are scarcely able to observe them except from the effects produced.
They that are such esteem adulteries of no account, although the fact
can scarce be detected so adroit are they in concealment; their power in
this respect baffling even the angelic spirits. - 1748, November 17.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3979.">3979.</span></span>

CONCERNING GOOD WORKS. While engaged in writing on the subject of good
works, certain spirits approached who not only thought, in the life of
the body, that faith without good works was saving, but had also fully
persuaded and confirmed themselves in the belief. They came in among
good spirits of a lower grade, bringing with them the persuasion that in
order to salvation good works were not required, but simply faith.
These, however, being indignant \[at their false persuasion\] bound them
with a cord, and rolled them round, aiming especially to do up one of
their number as into the form of a garment, and he came to me bound in
that manner.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3980.">3980.</span></span>

The cause of the indignation of the good spirits being divulged, this
spirit was let into the state of his persuasion, that good works were of
no account, but faith only, and from this persuasion diffused around
among many such, there arose a sphere so general that other spirits
seemed to themselves to disappear as if they were not, or to evaporate
into the atmosphere, complaining, at the same time, that they knew not
whether they were spirits, or whether they were dead or alive. Such was
the sphere when good works were surreptitiously taken from them, which,
as they constitute the goods done from the charity of faith, when taken
away, such spirits are deprived of the fulcra on which they rest, or, in
other words, of the very ultimates which are the effects \[of charity as
a cause\]. These ultimate uses or effects where and in which uses
terminate - uses produced by interior principle - being taken away,
spirits scarcely seem to themselves to live, but to be in a kind of
general sphere as of thought alone. Such a sphere was sad as having in
it nothing determinate.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3981.">3981.</span></span>

Being remitted into the state of faith in general, the sphere was that
of a bare intuition, without anything determinate, as everything of
spirit being thus diffused there resulted such a sphere of simple
intuition. Still, however, they spoke, but said they did not know
whether they spoke, or what they said. It was then remarked, that when
the idea is determined to the things of faith, as to a confession of
faith, that perhaps the case might be different, yet still such an
impression remained; it was barely an intuition which cannot be
described, so diffusive and general was it, just as before. It was said
that when they prayed or read, or did other similar things appropriate
to faith, and did not think concerning faith alone without works, that
the case was not so, which indeed was true, because there was then
something determinate. All the particulars which are read are such as
are terminated in the things of faith. But altogether different is the
process when they think of what faith is, and more when they think of
faith alone, and still more, if they think of faith as entirely separate
from works. Hence it appears what an idea many, nay, the most, and among
others this defender, had concerning faith and its properties, viz. that
it was solely their intuition or their thought, thus an aerial faith
which vanishes as a thing of naught.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3982.">3982.</span></span>

Afterwards other spirits came and were remitted into the state of their
thoughts concerning faith; when in this state they had a still more
diffusive idea concerning faith, that it was nothing, or something so
evanescent that it was scarcely a subject of thought, saying that they
did not know what faith was while they thought exclusively upon it;
adding, however, that they knew what it was to do good, or a good work,
whence they could also know that they might receive good from the Lord,
because they do good; but as to barely thinking, and scarcely even that,
they know not what this means. The sphere thus created was still more
irksome to good spirits.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3983.">3983.</span></span>

Some good spirits, inasmuch as they had the idea concerning faith, that
it could be given without good works, said that it would be better to
call such works the goods of charity, although the term "good works" is
applicable, and that works which are without faith are simply works.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3984.">3984.</span></span>

Again by means of cogitative speech the idea was revived, that in the
other life especially those things are actually good which are active in
their nature, concerning which I have spoken before, and that without
them (:now:) the angels could not possibly be angels, much less enjoy
any happiness, for in them their greatest happiness consists. They now
add, that if any should desire to deprive them of these works, they
would in so doing desire that the whole heaven and the whole human race
should perish, which would in fact be the consequence, for to save man,
to teach \[novitiate\] spirits, to resuscitate the dead, to render to
each other mutual offices of charity, these are the things which sustain
heaven and the human race, upon the removal of which all would perish. -
1748, November 17.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3985.">3985.</span></span>

It was given to ask this spirit what he thought of the life in heaven,
whether he would be altogether idle, breathing only joy, with no active
life, that is, with no life of doing good, at the same time intimating
that the bare idea of such an idle life spent in mere joy was
exceedingly sad and repulsive, as thus all joy would perish and become
as nothing, or something vile, which after a short time one would
nauseate and despise; whereas an active life would be attended with a
constant perception of joy. It was also asked of him what he thought of
this - viz. that as he knew there were ministering spirits assigned to
men, called "tiensteandar," <span id="fr_67"></span>[3985-1](#fn_67.md)
whether he supposed they would minister to him, and what opinion he had
of them; as for instance whether he imagined their idea of heavenly joy
was that of dwelling at ease, breathing only an indolent delight, as
also whether spirits would be aware, after death, of the fact of their
being ministering spirits attendant upon man. To myself it was
perceptible, that an idle life of joy was no life at all, but that an
active life alone had in it delight, and that such a life was life
indeed, because a life of action. - 1748, November 17.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3986.">3986.</span></span>

He said that he had supposed that ministering spirits would be created
for the service of man. That men would become spirits he indeed
believed, but not such spirits as should save and minister to anyone,
but such as would have nothing to do but to live in celestial joy,
concerning which he had no other idea than that of a certain indolent
bliss, only that they would be engaged in praising the Lord, in which
alone would consist all the activity of their life. But it was said in
reply that to praise the Lord, to sing, and to utter glorifications, is
not an active life, for the Lord has no need of such things, but that
the great thing is to perform the works of charity according to which
felicity is received of the Lord. But as such spirits could entertain no
other idea on the subject than that of servitude - the subject I mean of
ministering to men, spoken of before - they cannot as yet place anything
of joy or felicity in it, but only that of servitude; but that the case
is altogether different - that they are, in truth, in the most interior
happiness - may be seen from what has been before said. Previous to
their being led into such a love and happiness, no other idea can be
found of such a state than that of servitude.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3987.">3987.</span></span>

Wherefore in order that there may be a true faith, the knowledges of
faith which are founded in love are to be so irradicated, that if one
does anything but good, or anything that is not in accordance with the
knowledges of faith, a violence shall be done to conscience; wherefore
whoever is in true faith he is in the works of charity, nor can he be
otherwise. Thus he is led by the Lord.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3988.">3988.</span></span>

There was such a sphere around me that I scarcely knew anything certain;
all certainty of truth seemed to have disappeared. Spirits also
complained that they, in like manner, neither knew nor saw anything
clearly. They seemed to themselves to vanish into a bare idea, the whole
spirit becoming, as it were, an idea, so that he wondered that one could
speak at all, seeing he was scarcely aware of anything he said. Such is
the faith of the Lutherans. One who has confirmed and persuaded himself
that faith alone saves, thinks nothing of love, because he thinks
nothing of good works, by doing away with which he does away also with
love; wherefore they thus live, thinking if they only have faith \[all
will be well\]; yet even of this they are ignorant as to what it is,
regarding it as a mere intuition or thought, which still they have not,
but the bare idea of a thought and that but barely, as, for instance,
when they undertake to defend it against others, and thus speak of it;
otherwise they are totally in the dark as to what faith is. Thus are
they in the other life while in that state as to faith, that is, while
it is to them as a mere indeterminate, most general, or universal idea,
thus in effect nothing. When love is named they can form no notion of it
except from conjugial love. - 1748, November 17.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3989.">3989.</span></span>

CONCERNING GYRES. I observed, as to gyres, that the common terminations
or circumvolutions coincided with the celestial respiration, which is to
mine as three to one.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3990.">3990.</span></span>

CONCERNING THE LORD. Evil spirits, according to their wont, are
continually in falsities and negations concerning the Lord, and when
they infused something respecting the angels, it was given to demand of
them that they should show me, if they could, one single angel, or point
to one heaven where they are in all wisdom, in intelligence, in mutual
love, in truth, in light, -that they should point \[I say\] to any
angels or any heaven except those which acknowledge the Lord as the life
of all, and that from Him they derive everything which they are taught,
and their happiness also. But they were not able, whereas, if there were
any such they certainly could have done it within so long a space as
three years and a half, but they were never able. - 1748, November 18.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3991.">3991.</span></span>

It was perceived that all the reflections which a man exercises, as in
regard to seeing and looking out for himself while he walks, besides
others elsewhere spoken of; in a word, that he enjoys the use of his
senses - this he has solely from the Lord, from whose influx it is that
he exercises a general reflection enabling him to avoid injury from the
persons and things that he meets with. All this arises from a certain
general reflection or advertence which flows in from the Lord's care
towards everyone, and without which reflection is never enjoyed; and so
in other things. - 1748, November 18.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3992.">3992.</span></span>

THAT AT THIS DAY THERE IS NO FAITH; AND CONCERNING THE MODERN TREE OF
KNOWLEDGE. I was infested during the whole night by evil and cruel
spirits, insomuch that being occasionally awakened, I saw parents who
would reform their children combing them as cruelly as if with saws, so
that the blood ran from their head, besides which they lashed them
severely on the back. Their phantasies, which were continued through the
whole night, were cruel to the last degree, and held me in a state of
subjection from which I was unable to liberate myself.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3993.">3993.</span></span>

Being awakened I saw a tree which was perceived to be the tree of
knowledge, appearing at some distance in the plane of the face. On the
tree was seen a huge viper, of horrid aspect, which had crept thereon,
and whose length nearly equaled that of the trunk of the tree. The tree
presently vanished, and there appeared a yellow dog. Then there was
opened a vaulted chamber in a shining yellow light, as from the fire of
a chimney, and there were seen one or two women who came out from a side
door where there was a hearth which was not visible, and where it was
also perceived that there was a kitchen. Black pieces of flesh hung down
from their sides, which I perceived to be human. All this occurred while
I was awake.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3994.">3994.</span></span>

The idea was impressed that these were anthropophagi \[men-eaters\], but
whether such exist in Christendom I know not. 3994. 1-2. But it is now
perceived that they signify the state of men at the present day
especially in the Christian world, and the tree of knowledge, as to its
quality at this time, that it is a horrid viper rising up; thus that
everything is filled with deceits and malignities, and that nothing but
hatreds reign, which are such that if actuality should be added, they
would even feed upon human flesh, for hatreds involve such issues.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3995.">3995.</span></span>

It was perceived that at this day there is no faith, for faith is of
love, and where hatreds reign there cannot be love, consequently there
can be no faith. - 1748, November 18.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3996.">3996.</span></span>

Before these things were seen there appeared dark clouds, which were as
black devils, striking the mind with horror; first one extremely black,
afterwards another not quite so hideous; which signified that I was to
see what followed.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3997.">3997.</span></span>

CONCERNING THE SIRENS. Those who were greatly elevated above the head,
or the sirens of the highest grade, from a certain anxiety while I was
writing concerning them, especially concerning the pontiff and David,
who flow into the lower deceitful ones, these while I was writing,
inflicted a sensible pain in the region of the abdomen, which was their
own anguish putting forth its effect in that manner, because they were
unwilling to be exposed or to have anything written respecting them. I
spoke with them and perceived that they would insinuate themselves into
the affections, and are able to move compassion as if they were upright.
They even actually excited such emotions, and complained concerning
their state; but it was said to them that they were such as could seduce
even the upright, and that they had derived this from their life in the
body, that they could appear upright before others, and thus act by
insinuation, when yet they had in their mind, as an end, cruelties, the
love of self and adulteries; and while they cherished these things
internally, and had goodness in their mouth, they could then insinuate
themselves into the societies of the upright, which was not to be borne;
wherefore it was out of my power to pity their state of life or their
lot. - 1748, November 19.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3998.">3998.</span></span>

CONCERNING TASTE. I spoke with spirits concerning the sense of taste,
which they do not perceive, but are merely conscious of something from
which they know how a substance tastes to a man. They said that it was a
species of odor, which they could not describe. It was perceived that
taste and smell very nearly agree, as in the case of certain sapid
bodies which are almost similar when perceived by the smell. This is
especially clear as was said, from the fact that brutes perceive by the
smell those kinds of food which are suitable for them, the quality of
which they learn by the smell before tasting of them. Thus it is not the
taste, but the smell which indicates the quality of their food; they
therefore eat no other than such as is adapted to their nature, and
which are wholesome. It is otherwise with man, who is governed by taste
in his eating, and provided the taste be agreeable cares little whether
his food be wholesome or not.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3999.">3999.</span></span>

The sirens above the head, both the high and the highest, supposed that
they were not adulterers of the worst stamp, wherefore the bonds in
which they were were relaxed, and they then excited others to the most
unconscionable adulteries, so that there was sent to them a cloud-devil,
before mentioned, by whom, being smitten with terror and anxiety, they
confessed that they were adulterers; and there was a certain one sent to
me that he might be freed from the fear of the devil, but I said to him
that I could effect nothing, and that unless those of his character
became changed they could not avoid being tormented by such spirits. -
1748, November 19. These are such as excite others in secret, fearing at
the same time detection. They are for the most part such as are called
prelates, who aspire to be pontiffs, and who are persuaded that they
have power to forgive all sins, as the popes are wont to do by their
bulls, provided they are paid for it; thus they say that sins and
adulteries are remitted, wherefore they confirm men in sins, and take
away conscience as to the true and the good, which they have not
themselves, thus communicating their own flagitiousness to others, who
would otherwise be innocent. - 1748, November 19.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4000.">4000.</span></span>

CONCERNING PROVIDENCE. Certain spirits, holding me in a kind of
obscurity, objected that ideas arise from the objects of sight and not
the objects of sight from ideas, -thus that the life of the Lord does
not flow in directly, but is excited by visible objects occurring in a
vast variety of ways. Of this I have spoken before, but it was \[now\]
answered them by thought, and perceived, that this was very much like
saying that the innumerable applications of the lungs to the several
muscles and their fibers, according to all the intention and will of the
thought, together with the muscles and motive fibers, flowed into the
ideas of the thought and will, instead of the reverse, when, in fact,
not a single compound action can take place but by means of innumerable
applications of the lungs prompted by ideas, and bringing into play an
equally countless number of muscular fibers, all of which are disposed
according to the influx of the will alone, and that too in such
boundless diversity of manner that one fiber seems to act altogether
differently from another. Since these things are so, and such
incomprehensible facts occur even in the lowest plane of nature, how can
skeptical reasonings avail concerning the influx of the life of the Lord
into ideas, and thence into objects, as though a different law prevails
here; besides various other inferences that are liable to be drawn? -
1748, November 19.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_66"></span>[3965-1](sd50.htm#fr_66.md) Compare for farther
elucidation on this head AC 5988.

<span id="fn_67"></span>[3985-1](sd50.htm#fr_67.md) A Swedish word
signifying attendant spirits.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 4001-4050](sd51.md)
