[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Swedenborg](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sd50)  [Next](sd52.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0766143007/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Spiritual Diary*, by Emanuel Swedenborg, \[1758\], tr. by Bush,
Smithson and Buss \[1883-9\] at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Spiritual Diary

<span class="margnote"><span id="4001.">4001.</span></span>

CONCERNING THE MEMORY OF SPIRITS. If spirits enjoyed corporeal memory,
no spirit could be with man, consequently he would die; for there cannot
be two memories acting simultaneously; as in that case the memory of the
spirit would take away that of the man, and the spirit would think from
his own memory; and if the man then spoke it would be a kind of speaking
together, as in the case of obsession. Besides, it is not allowed to any
spirit to teach man, nor consequently to lead him, except from cupidity;
but the Lord alone wills to teach man and lead him, which could never be
done if ought of corporeal memory pertained to a spirit. - 1748,
November 19.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4002.">4002.</span></span>

CONCERNING PROVIDENCE AND INFLUX. I have been infested by \[the
suggestions of\] spirits as to the question, how an influx of the Lord's
life into all and singular the things of man can be given, especially
when one considers the variety of things which must occupy his thoughts,
as, for instance, that he must reflect as to the diversified objects
which he sees; as to the conversations of numbers on a multitude of
topics, now on this, and now on that, and now on a hundred others; how
such and such persons can come together and not others; then, how such
particular discourses should arise among them and not others; then, as
to the consequences of one determination of a man, from which flow
others in successive series; besides a multitude of other things that
concern the influx and providence of the Lord - in all which I was held
by spirits to a point of utter weariness, and yet from which I could not
free myself. It was shown me by representation of what quality, or
nature, such things are, viz., by a chamber of a grayish \[or dusky\]
color, not swept out, where earthen vessels and other furniture were in
disorder.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4003.">4003.</span></span>

But it is enough to know that the Lord's life flows into the heavenly
societies, which are innumerable with all variety, according to the
varieties of love; that is, it is received variously by all. In the
interior world of spirits, also, it is variously received from heaven,
according to societies. So also in the lower world \[of spirits\], where
ideas are still variously received, according to the state of the
recipients; with men it is received still more variously, according to
their corporeal memories; so that these influxes can never be understood
as they are in their origin, which appears from this, that they may be
turned into contraries, or other obliquities, according to a man's
persuasions, or the state of his memory at the time, and then according
to the vessels which apply themselves in that state, as also according
to cupidities and their states; for there are states of persuasions and
states of cupidities.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4004.">4004.</span></span>

That all this is so appears likewise from the fact, that it can never be
known in ultimates how things are in interiors, much less in intimates,
causing angelic ideas to be represented by animals and such like things,
in the world of spirits; the ideas of evil spirits by circumflections of
the body, and other things of the sort which there appear.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4005.">4005.</span></span>

Especially is this evinced by the circumstance, that angelic ideas can
fall into innumerable diverse ideas, both in the lower \[spiritual\]
world and with man, as for instance that the representatives of good
alone with the angels can fall into all the innumerable forms of man's
good, whether into his worship, into sweet things, into fat things, thus
into countless particulars, according to his states, yea, into things
contrary and intermediate. Wherefore it can never be known from the
objects of the external memory and from the objects of sight, what is
the nature of things in the more intimate, much less in the most
intimate \[principles\].

<span class="margnote"><span id="4006.">4006.</span></span>

Moreover, angelic ideas are not only representatives which are thus
indefinitely varied as they emanate, but they even become parables which
with man are capable of being varied in innumerable modes; for from one
parabolic idea there shall follow innumerable things that are analogous
and applicable to it,

<span class="margnote"><span id="4007.">4007.</span></span>

as originating from one principle: just as so many various things are
afterwards produced from a \[single\] seed, which were never \[except
potentially\] in the seed; and so on.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4008.">4008.</span></span>

It moreover appears that the providence of the Lord is in all the most
singular or particular things. This may be evinced solely from what are
deemed matters of fortune, as in games, and such things as appear
altogether fortuitous; as, for instance, in a lottery, and other things
that may be noticed; such contingencies pertaining to the lowest
department of nature can never be explained as to their source; and if
this holds in this kind, what shall be said of all and singular other
things, which entirely baffle research as being the contingencies of
Providence?

<span class="margnote"><span id="4009.">4009.</span></span>

Since then these things of the lowest nature cannot be explored, how can
those which are of interior nature, from which the former proceed, and
how those of a still more interior character, and how, above all, those
of the most intimate nature, where the process is not so inconstant, but
uniform? for the most indefinitely variable results exist in degrees in
the lowest things which yet flow from the most unvarying constancy in
the intimate principles; besides many other things.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4010.">4010.</span></span>

From what has been said we are at liberty to conclude, that it is better
to be ignorant of all these matters, and simply to believe that the life
of the Lord flows into all and singular things, and that His providence
governs all and singular things, than to suffer one's self to be
absorbed in such speculations. It is better, I say, to be ignorant; for
if men covet this kind of knowledge, they must necessarily launch out
into a boundless field; just as in my own case, when I wished to know in
what manner the actions of the muscles were ordered in their
representative relation to the ideas of the thoughts, and how the
endeavors and forces of the will conspired to the effect, I spent many
laborious years in investigating the appliances of the lungs in each of
their functions, then those of the muscles, of the motive fibers, of the
nervous fibers, together with the connection and disposition of all the
parts, how actions resulted from the fluction of the brains, as in the
case of the tendinous fibers drawing backwards, obliquely or into a
gyre, and so on, when yet, after all, the action was dependent on other
laws, all which thoroughly to explore were the labor of many years, and
still scarcely even the most general things could be known. Wherefore it
is better simply to know that the will flows in \[and actuates the
body\]; far more is this expedient in those things to which pertain the
influx of the Lord's life, and of his providence. - 1748, November 20.
These things were thought with spirits, through spirits, from the
angels.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4011.">4011.</span></span>

CONCERNING MEMORY. A certain one was represented, who, during his life,
had cultivated the memory only, and had placed in the memory all
intelligence and wisdom, supposing that a man was wise according to the
treasures laid up in his memory, when yet the contrary rather is true,
viz. that a man is less wise in proportion to what he retains in the
corporeal memory. The quality of his life also was represented by an
animal of a yellow hue seen in an obscure light, as a horse, as a
heifer, as a bullock, as a dog. It was mainly the representation of a
horse, but the representation of the others successively followed,
though still in the same subject, so that it was an animal, as it were,
in which were all the rest, or an animal composed of them. It was said
that it was not a horse, and yet it was a horse, not a heifer, and yet a
heifer, not a bullock, and yet a bullock, and not a dog, and yet a dog;
thus an animal was from time to time represented in which, as in a
compound, the others were included.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4012.">4012.</span></span>

He showed me how he had been punished by the wrenching process, as to
which, from being asleep, I was ignorant of his having undergone it. He
exhibited a snow-white brain similar in its hue to that of an animal
when cooked, in which there was a little blood, afterwards more, and
presently more yet, so that at last there was scarcely anything else
visible but blood. From this I perceived that he had been painfully
tortured in the way just mentioned, especially as a hardened callosity
was manifest about him. When I spoke with him he complained that he had
lost everything he had possessed; but in saying this he had become, as
it were, a babbling infant, not knowing what he said. He was also
represented by a bird in which was obscurely seen a lamb. - 1748,
November 20.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4013.">4013.</span></span>

FARTHER CONCERNING INFLUX. Actions do not flow into ideas, consequently
not into the will and the thought, but thought and will flow into
actions; in like manner also angelic ideas flow through the ideas of
spirits into the thoughts of man. But to know how this influx takes
place is to desire to know how the fibers exist in their first
principles, then how they act in the brain, where they are like a jelly,
and then lastly to trace the operation through their inextricable
fluctions into the muscles, to say nothing of the various and countless
motions which precede any single action. Every idea is in like manner a
certain general something which may be compared to an action.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4014.">4014.</span></span>

But how the gestures of one may flow in through the eyes of others, from
which they judge of a man's character; how the countenance of another
makes him known; and especially how the speech of one flows into the
ideas of another, -all this, it is clear, is affected by the removals or
abstractions of lower things, or by their extinction, so that they may
become nothing, as otherwise the perception does not take place. The
sounds or material accompaniments whence flow the proximate ideas, are
forthwith rejected or removed, then these ideas are rejected, whence
arise the interior ideas respecting a man's end, and in many other
things which thus flow from the speech of another. Without these
removals, nothing of the kind can be perceived; but let them be made,
and then the interior idea of another is communicated, and is set forth
nakedly manifest and separate from all extraneous appendages. - 1748.
November 20.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4015.">4015.</span></span>

Inasmuch as there may be such removals of lower things, it hence appears
how the case is with man; there must be a death of corporeal things even
of the corporeal memory, that the spirit may be developed. The ideas
also which are appropriate to lower spirits must undergo a kind of
death, in order that one may be in interior ideas, or the ideas of
angelic spirits. It hence appears, too, how these ideas must be removed
in order to one's becoming an angel, when communication is immediate;
and finally, how lower ideas are nevertheless represented; besides other
things. -All this is said in the presence of spirits who have pondered
upon the subject. - 1748, November 20.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4016.">4016.</span></span>

CONCERNING THE OMNIPRESENCE OF THE LORD. Those who think in ultimates,
and from ultimates, cannot comprehend how the Lord can be omnipresent.
But in order to this being made in some degree intelligible, it is to be
known that in the other life there is neither space nor time, thus all
are as present to each other as if in the nearest proximity, even though
they should really be in the extremity of the universe. It may also
somewhat appear from this, that the soul of man, or his intimate \[most
interior\] principle, may possess a kind of omnipresence by being
everywhere throughout the contracted limits of his body: and so govern
all the internal organs, and all the thoughts, and whatever belongs to
the man, how manifold soever they may be, that everything shall fitly
cohere, and also by its omnipresence provide for all and singular its
parts, without which kind of providence the whole would be dissolved and
dissipated in a moment. This principle \[the soul\] acts from an end,
and because it is the intimate of man, the Lord alone provides by means
of it. - 1748, November 20.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4017.">4017.</span></span>

That distances are phantasies, and that they are ideas, was evinced in a
great variety of ways; for when I saw or perceived anyone depart, or to
be at a distance, or when I represented him to myself as in some other
place, or when I spoke with certain spirits that were elsewhere, myself
knowing the place, or when a certain one was separated from me to the
bounds of the universe, then the distance was perceived according to an
idea formed from sight or from thought, and thus apprehended by him or
by me; for they are present in a moment. Place, therefore, is none at
all; where the idea is, there the spirit is, for the spirit is not
separated from the idea; without the idea the spirit would not be, as it
is his life; therefore where the life is, there is the spirit. Distance
in purer things amounts to nothing; still less is it anything in more
intimate, and least of all in the most intimate, thus absolutely nothing
with the Lord; wherefore He is omnipresent, and sees and orders each
single thing. - 1748, November 20.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4018.">4018.</span></span>

CONCERNING THE REPRESENTATION OF ANGELIC SPEECH BY MEANS OF CLOUDS. In
the world of lower spirits angelic ideas and discourses are wont to be
represented by various forms of clouds, and with them perceptions; for
when such things are exhibited as exist among the angels, in order that
they may come to the knowledge of lower spirits, a certain perception
accompanies them, indicating what they signify. An oblong vessel was
represented in which there was an appearance of milk; this was turned
into a white cloud of similar form, which concentrated itself toward the
middle point, having on the front part something obscure, which
signified that the angels were coming together, though there was yet
some degree of obscurity. There was then represented a cloud almost
white, which passed into a form similar to the human, being also nearly
of the same color, with a perception of the Lord; but a black cloud
coming before took away the sight of it, which signified that they spoke
of things pertaining to faith in the Lord, and that in the world of
spirits this was turned into evil; thus into a black cloud. Then there
were represented two horses' heads turned towards me, with their faces
prominent, but a part of the face became broader and began to appear
otherwise than the face of a horse, and thus vanished. These signified
intellectuals and scientifics. - 1748, November 20.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4019.">4019.</span></span>

CONCERNING THE SIRENS. It was shown how the sirens hold those bound whom
they endeavor to obsess, viz. that \[they pervert\] all the influx from
the angels, which is continual whenever evil spirits induce evil; the
angels then avert it, and react against it. But whenever permission is
granted to sirens, they would enter into the interior of thoughts, and
by perverting turn away everything which flowed from heaven. Thus
whithersoever my own thought was directed, still it was turned to evil,
and that to such a degree that I was at length so wearied by it as to be
induced to desist from writing, for it was then especially that they
flowed in, and as, was also perceived, into interior things with which
it had not then been given me to become so well acquainted. They have
the eyes, as it were, of serpents, which seem to possess sight or ideas
on every side, giving them a kind of ubiquity of presence.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4020.">4020.</span></span>

It was perceived and heard that both the deceitful and most deceitful
above the head adjoined themselves to them, and flowed through them,
whom I also heard, and learned their machinations; and when it was said
to them that they should desist, or they would be reduced to a miserable
state if they persevered, they said they could not by any possibility
desist. - 1748, November 20.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4021.">4021.</span></span>

CONCERNING FAITH AND GOOD WORKS. Among those who contend that faith
without good works is saving, I spoke with one, asking him if it was not
true that a saving faith cannot be given without love, which he
affirmed; afterwards I inquired whether love could be given without good
works, on which he hesitated, because he thought of works separate from
love, and because he knew that if he should have given all his goods to
the poor, and yet had not love, it would amount to nothing; this he
comprehended, and thence the inference, that a saving faith is of love,
and that love without good works cannot exist, -as also, that faith
without good works is no faith at all, as being a mere speculative
\[intuitiva\] faith, for to suppose a faith without good works is to
suppose it without love. He seemed willing to admit that love was of
faith, but not that faith was of love. - 1748, November 20.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4022.">4022.</span></span>

It was said to him that heaven consists of love, and that it thence
derives from the Lord all the knowledges of faith that are necessary to
it, and in which knowledges the celestials are. On the other hand, they
who are only in faith without love, and thus without good works, are in
no knowledge at all; they do not even know that there is an internal
man, as I perceived in regard to this spirit that he was ignorant of it.
The same remark may be confirmed from one who is in false and spurious
love, that he is thereby persuaded and thus confirmed in many falses
which flow from this spurious love or cupidity. It was further said to
him that they are much better who do good works from a conscience
received from this - that the Lord has commanded that we give to the
poor and do good; for those who act from a conscience thus formed, do
not place merit in their works, and thus such are admitted to heaven,
while those who confirm themselves in the belief that faith without good
works is saving, they cannot be admitted into heaven, for they know not
what love is, which is yet the all in all of faith. - 1748, November 20.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4023.">4023.</span></span>

I discoursed still further with him, as he said that if the matter were
rightly explained it would be found that he held the truth. I replied
that it was indeed true that it was faith that saved, but that as the
quality of the faith was, so was the salvation; if the faith was false
and spurious, it could not save, but only the faith which is true, which
carries with it the knowledges of faith, and consequently love. - 1748,
November 20. It was moreover said that the pontificals affirm that faith
saves, but what kind of a faith? to wit, that men should believe
everything that the Pope has uttered and ordained as being of the true
church, as also that they should believe everything which their priests
teach them, upon whom they depend for their faith.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4024.">4024.</span></span>

CONCERNING A BATH. There appeared a bath with a long bench, or
Lafwe, <span id="fr_68"></span>[4024-1](#fn_68.md) such as is common with
us. When the bath appeared, a sensation of great heat pervaded me just
as in the case of a real bath. I then beheld, on one side, a woman, who
presently vanished into a cloud, which becoming black sunk out of sight.
Upon the bench there was an appearance of three infants, but they were
not clearly seen, though they presently spoke and said they did not wish
to be there. What these things signified was a matter of various
conjecture with the attendant spirits, but I do not yet know.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4025.">4025.</span></span>

There then appeared a long lake, like a long bath, where was a woman
washing an infant between her hands, but what this signified I am
equally ignorant.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4026.">4026.</span></span>

During the whole night I was occupied in dreaming of various objects of
a material and corporeal kind, as walkings, dangers, and the like, in a
confused and rambling way, and upon awaking from time to time, I heard
choirs of angels descending one after another, and which I heard more
clearly than on various other occasions. I perceived that there were
certain evil spirits who infested me, and that the angelic choirs were
sent by the Lord, for the purpose of warding off the assaults of such
spirits. But what they said I could not understand, nor did I perceive
anything but the sound peculiar to such choirs.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4027.">4027.</span></span>

There was then opened above the forehead a certain lucid something, of a
beautiful yellow hue, through certain intervening apertures of larger
and smaller size, within which were certain spirits who seemed small
from their great height, while in the very bright yellowish light were
those who appeared of a snowy whiteness. There were afterwards seen
opening \[foramina\] but differently disposed, being arranged regularly
like the cells of bees, through which the inmates would look towards me,
and through which also there shone a perceptible yellowish light.
Afterwards there appeared larger openings of similar arrangement,
through which the light did not thus clearly penetrate; these openings
appeared more and more obscure, till finally there was seen a certain
snowy light, but still obscure.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4028.">4028.</span></span>

I was informed that these were the dwelling-places of those who
constitute the internal nostrils, or the tunic of the internal nostrils,
which are distinguished by such orifices. I spoke with them and they
said that through these openings made by them they could see in any
direction below, and therefore could look towards me, and by means of
them could see my ideas and those also which I had in my sleep, and
generally whatever there was around me. This I found it difficult to
believe, but they said it was so; that they saw ideas represented before
them, as for instance, ideas of love by flames suited to the nature of
that principle; intellectuals by lights suited to them, and so on.
Indeed they said that through these openings they could see whatever
they saw fit by phantasy to array before themselves.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4029.">4029.</span></span>

It was observed that whenever the angelic choirs approached, which
happened from time to time, so often those who were there were driven
away, and that too towards me and towards a lower quarter, for the
spirits who had framed such openings for themselves wished to know what
kind of angelic societies were with me while I was asleep, which they
said they could see, as also whence they were; as there would then
appear a most beautiful variegated something, like elegantly wrought
carpets of broad dimensions, and adorned with purple and similar colors,
but in a somewhat obscure plane, thus a broad rainbow-colored form in an
obscure ground; from this they said they could know that angels were
present from the province of the eye, but whether of the iris or the
retina, I do not know. But inasmuch as these were such as insinuated
themselves among those who constituted the cavity of the internal
nostrils, with the design of plotting against me while asleep, they were
cast down; and this I observed occurred as often as the angelic choirs
drew nigh, which was rather frequently, so that their numbers must have
been large. I afterwards spoke with them, and they are now with me, some
towards the interior of the palate, some towards the ventricle, and some
towards the nates.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4030.">4030.</span></span>

I perceived that their quality was that of those who represent the mucus
of the nostrils, and that they insinuate themselves thither for the
purpose of insidiously lying in wait. They are adulteressess and void of
conscience. That they are such, and that they are wholly destitute of
conscience, was shown me by living experience, for it was given me to
perceive that there is \[usually\] something which holds the conscience
under restraint, but with them there was nothing of the kind; they
wondered that there should be anyone possessed of conscience. They are
therefore the mucus of the nostrils, which also it was given to say to
them and that they were therefore vile and rejectable.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4031.">4031.</span></span>

A lucidity was shown me in which those live who constitute the internals
of the nostrils. It was a light beautifully varied with streaks of
golden flame, representing the things of affection; and varied also by
streaks of silver light to denote the spiritual things there. It was
shown also that they had open holes \[foramina\], but not above or
below, but on the side, through which, as was shown me, they see an
azure heaven studded with beautiful little stars. It was perceived also
that there is with them a copious light, a golden flaming light for
celestial things, and a silver shining light for spiritual things. It
was said too that the light was sometimes very splendid, not, however,
that which entered through the holes, but that which was within their
chambers.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4032.">4032.</span></span>

On two occasions also the heat of a bath, as great as if I actually had
been immersed in one, pervaded the upper region of my forehead towards
the origins of the nose, and thus over the whole forehead and the higher
part of the nose, which heat I perceived so distinctly as to wonder at
it. It was said to me that such is the heat of those who reside there,
and that there are infants also among them, but infants of some years.
It was perceived that the woman seen in the bath, who disappeared in the
form of a cloud, of whom I spoke above, signified those who covertly
insinuate themselves, and who are the mucus of the nostrils before
mentioned, and who were therefore driven away.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4033.">4033.</span></span>

It was worthy of note, that when I related to those who were above in
the cavities of the nostrils, what I had seen in a dream and in a long
series, and twice in succession - how I had walked; with what person;
how they were clothed; and that I had played ball (:boll:), throwing it
against a wall and catching it, beside a multitude of other things -
they said that all this coincided exactly, and was the same with what
they were speaking of among themselves, so that there was not the
slightest difference. They said, however, that the representative which
I had seen in my dream, was not the reality with them, but that their
ideas were utterances \[loquelae\], which could be thus presented, so
that all and singular the things they had spoken, among themselves, were
thus representatively shadowed out to me in the dream. What was further
said by them was also perceived, to wit, that these same discourses of
theirs could also be molded into and exhibited in indefinite other
representations than such as were witnessed, according to the states of
spirits around me, and thence according to my own state, so that
infinitely various dreams might occur from the same discourse, or from
the same ideas of speech, for the memories of men are recipient vessels,
into which flow ideas according to the variations of form and according
to states. <span id="fr_69"></span>[4033-1](#fn_69.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="4034.">4034.</span></span>

It was now observed, as previously remarked above, that evil spirits
were constrained to utter the things that were to be noted \[and
recorded\] by me, although ignorant of the reason of the constraint; on
which account even those mucus-spirits became indignant that they should
speak thus, not knowing that it was for such a purpose or that they
spoke what I was to note down as coming from them. There was then given
also a perception of what was to be observed, and yet evil spirits, as
they have now said, know not whence it came, and are disposed to abstain
from uttering certain things for the reason that they dislike that
anything should be divulged concerning them, from all which it appeared,
that even those things which I have learned by means of evil spirits, I
have learned from the Lord alone, though the spirits spoke. It was
otherwise when good spirits spoke; they declared openly how the truth
was. - 1748, November 22.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4035.">4035.</span></span>

When those mucus-spirits flowed in, it was perceived that they moved my
tongue towards a decayed tooth; there was then also on the back of the
neck a sense of biting as of lice; then an itching in the nates; all
which was from them.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4035a.">4035a.</span></span>

1-2. They farther spoke with me also as if in the throat or trachea, yet
without sound, and solely by a certain self-vibrating wind, saying that
such was their inward speech with man.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4036.">4036.</span></span>

As they were ignorant of what conscience is, they asked of me respecting
its nature. It was given to reply, that it was all that internal
sensation which is experienced when a man acts contrary to goodness and
truth. When anything of this nature is done, man is conscious of the
contrariety, so that it operates as a certain kind of sensible check, as
with me; moreover, that it is a perception given by the Lord, by virtue
of which one is affected with pain that he has done aught that is
contrary to goodness and truth, and with a self-sorrow, so that he, as
it were, sheds tears, as the principle is one of the most interior
nature; for weeping ensues when anything is done contrary to good. -
1748, November 22.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4037.">4037.</span></span>

CONCERNING AMENDMENT IN THE OTHER LIFE. While man is in the life of the
body he can be reformed, for he is then in the enjoyment of a corporeal
memory, in the vessels or ideas of which interior ideas are based, so
that a plane of ideas is prepared in which order is terminated. These
ideas or vessels are prepared by the Lord in various ways, especially by
the connection of such things as agree with other ideas of the corporeal
memory, so that when one is excited another next to it and akin to it
may be produced, and thus be bent to good; then also by the
disposition <span id="fr_70"></span>[4037-1](#fn_70.md) of many ideas, that
there may be more; for certain general ideas are first introduced and
then particular ideas, and afterwards particulars of particulars, which
are connected together by the disposition or arrangement of the Lord,
for there are connections \[of ideas\] as of consanguinities and
affinities in every simple idea, and more so in every compound idea. It
is the same with those things that pertain to the knowledges of faith,
to which knowledges they have respect; ideas are in this manner bent or
inclined by the Lord; confirmations are then added, which are all in the
corporeal memory; where are also the knowledges of faith thus everything
is disposed in a connected chain by the Lord; concerning which much more
might be said.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4038.">4038.</span></span>

But in the other life this implanting or inrooting in the corporeal
memory does not take place, for in that life it is not permitted to use
the corporeal memory, therefore spirits are not then reformed, but
remain in the state in which they were \[in the world\]; only the
defilements and the falsities of the corporeal memory, and of interior
ideas are subdued by vastations and punishments, so that they become as
dead and are made obsequious, concerning which I have spoken before; and
this is what is meant when it is said, that man remains after death such
as he had formed himself in the life of the body; wherefore in that life
they are not reformed, but vastated, that they may subserve some kind of
uses, which also appears sufficiently clear from the case of those who
in the life of the body were devoid of conscience, as adulterers and the
cruel. These become excrements, and sit like dead stocks, and afterwards
serve as a class of subjects that have scarcely anything of life.
Conscience is not subsequently given to them, but those things are taken
away by vastations which hinder their being adapted to uses.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4039.">4039.</span></span>

On the other hand, those who have acquired a conscience in the life of
the body, that is, those who have received goodness and truth, these in
the other life receive far more, yea, infinitely more, for all their
faculties are immensely augmented. In like manner the evil qualities of
the wicked are there so much increased, that those who, in the life of
the body, were but little deceitful, are very deceitful in the other
life, so as there to become magicians. Hence they rush into hell, and
into punishments and vastations. - 1748, November 22. There are also
scientifics which they acquire to themselves there, and the faculty of
their life in regard to acquiring and exercising them is there greater,
but still it does not go beyond the actuality acquired \[in the life of
the body\].

<span class="margnote"><span id="4040.">4040.</span></span>

CONCERNING FORM. Speaking with spirits it was said, that the honestum
signifies all the moral virtues, and that the decorum was on account of
the honestum, thus from it; wherefore it is a form of the honestum, and
not the reverse, the two being related, in fact, just as are the
essential and the formal; the same thing holds in regard to the good and
the true, or the celestial and spiritual; so also with the real and the
non-real. - 1748, November 22.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4041.">4041.</span></span>

THAT NOTHING IS FROM ITSELF. The deceitful spirits over the head, by
means solely of their roundabout leading of thought, prompted the
spirits that were above me to speak, which they supposed to be wholly
from themselves, although it was not congenial to their nature, yet they
supposed it to be from themselves; as, for instance, that I should not
do so and so, because it did not succeed, and that I should ascribe it
to insanity. This they said as from themselves, so that they knew not
the contrary till afterwards. Cupidity and persuasion appeared, but this
was perhaps breathed in, as it usually is. It was thought alone \[that
operated\], and this is merely a directing of the vessels of the memory,
which caused the speaking to be as if from themselves. It thus appeared
how it is that they move subjects to speak, viz., by means of thought
alone, which the subject follows and utters. This was shown from others
who led the deceitful also to speak; one thus prompted said that he
simply thought, and as he thought he spoke, but whence came his thought
he said he did not know.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4042.">4042.</span></span>

That this was merely a directing of the vessels of the memory plainly
appeared, as while the vessels of the memory are directed the spirit who
speaks cannot speak otherwise. It was proved also by experience in the
case of spirits, that they would imperceptibly and quickly dispose the
vessels of the memory, when the spirits \[acted upon\] could not speak
otherwise, than according \[to the influence\]; when they attempted it
others would act upon them, and there was then perceived something
unpleasant and untoward \[or abortive\] which cannot be described. Hence
it is evident, that there is a constant disposition of the vessels of
man's corporeal memory, for as the vessels are disposed, so spirits
speak, and so it is also that those who are in proximity cannot think
otherwise, for the vessels of the memory are planes into which ideas are
determined, which vessels, if they are not fitted, cannot receive, and
as they are fitted, so they receive. The ideas of the proximate spirits
are, as it were, bound to these.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4043.">4043.</span></span>

The vessels of the memory, with those that are in faith, are disposed by
the Lord; with all by the Lord through angels, in a general way \[in
communi\], with a variation of generals, as otherwise angels could not
be present. The particulars of generals belong to men or spirits; thus
no other particulars can coincide than such as pertain to generals, as
otherwise nothing particular could exist in universal nature. Every
general has indefinite particulars, though some are discordant and
opposite, as in musical instruments; thus arises a general sphere, which
exists more or less extended. These generals are not only changed by the
Lord, but there are also indefinite consociations of generals, so that
the generals of many things constitute one general, as there are also
mixtures of cupidities and indefinite consociations of affections.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4044.">4044.</span></span>

Then there are also generals which are not so consociated as to make a
one, which are simultaneously present, as when a man is thinking and yet
notes the objects that occur in his path, and the like. These generals
proceed from what is interior; things interior appear in the corporeal
memory as generals; angels cannot otherwise flow in, for they dispose
the corporeal memory in a general way as to the variations of its
general \[ideas\]. But evil spirits are, as it were, in a chain of
connection with the particulars of the memory of those who think evil,
so that not only are the nearest spirits in such a chain, but also more
remote evil spirits. It is truly a chain, for with those who are not in
true faith, the particulars are produced by evil spirits; but with those
who are in true faith, the Lord disposes, through the interiors and
through heaven and the angels, each distinct particular. - 1748,
November 23.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4045.">4045.</span></span>

There appeared a large mass of silver which was conveyed into the pocket
of my garment. There was moreover a large quantity of silver coins which
were turned into a thickened plate of silver that filled the pocket of
the garment; signing perhaps the \[spiritual\] things or truths that are
now given me. - 1748, November 23.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4046.">4046.</span></span>

CONCERNING LOVE. That love is the fundamental principle from which and
by which heaven exists and subsists, is evident from the circumstance,
that there must be such harmony and unanimity, and hence so universal a
consociation, that the whole heaven, the whole world of spirits, that
is, the whole human race from its first creation, should form a ONE, as
all and every particular in man, in whom there are indefinite things,
forms one body, and thus constitutes one man; in which body if anything
were to prefer itself to any other thing, and not to love another thing
better than itself \[it could not subsist\]. He who is in genuine love
has an idea of the common good and of the universal human race, in
respect to which every individual man should be as nothing, as is known;
wherefore unless a man regards himself as associated with his fellow,
and esteems himself as nothing in respect to the common good, and love
his neighbor better than himself, he can by no means be in the unanimous
body \[heaven\], but he necessarily expels himself from it, so much as
he removes himself from that love. - 1748, November 23.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4047.">4047.</span></span>

CONCERNING CANDLES AND LIGHTS. Candles were often seen by me, and a
light issuing from them round about as from candles \[in this world\];
indeed so often that I cannot recount the times. I have seen also flames
of various size and color. Yesterday I beheld the dry light of a coal
fire, as I have also done at other times. Occasionally the light or fire
was more or less dry, but when the most so, it approached to a
coal-heat, so that there was scarcely anything visible but a black coal,
which also was frequently seen. Yesterday I saw the fire of a hearth
kindled with wood, and the light thence; then also two candles, whereof
the flame was white, and thence there shone such a light. - 1748,
November 23.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4048.">4048.</span></span>

CONCERNING THE HOLY SPIRIT. It was perceived that men could clearly
enough comprehend that there is no Holy Spirit \[as a third Person in
the Trinity\], especially from this, that the Holy Spirit proceeds from
the Lord, by which is signified that the Holy of the Spirit is \[the
Holy\] of the Lord, and this is implied in its proceeding; for what else
proceeds from anyone than what is of him \[or his essence\]; besides
that the Lord openly declared this and demonstrated it by breathing
\[upon the disciples and saying to them\] that they should receive the
Holy Ghost, and that it was from Him. - 1748, November 23. From the Lord
proceed the truths and the knowledges of faith, which are of Him and to
him, because from Him. The knowledges of faith, goodnesses and truths
are holy things, nor do they pertain to anyone but the Lord, for the
Lord is faith and the all of all faith; these are the things which
proceed from the Lord, and when this proceeding is through angels and
spirits, they know not that they speak, and then they may be called the
Holy Spirit, because it is the Lord Who proceeds through them as organs
and mediums. - 1748, November 23.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4049.">4049.</span></span>

CONCERNING THE CRUEL UNDER THE NATES. There are lakes or a direful hell
of the cruel under the nates, where they attempt to strike each other
with knives, aiming the knives at the breasts like furies, everyone thus
striving to murder every other one that is there; but the knives, at the
very instant of giving the stroke, are continually taken away from them.
These are such as \[in the world\] bore so violent a hatred against
their fellows, that they desired utterly to destroy them. Thus in the
other life this becomes their hell. - 1748, November 24. On account of
their manifold cruelty, it was said that this hell should not be opened,
except in a slight degree, to the end that I might see the nature of
such mortal hatreds.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4050.">4050.</span></span>

CONCERNING PERSUASIONS. There are two lives, viz. the life of
persuasions and the life of cupidities, which are at the present day
distinct with the human race, who suppose, that man may be saved by
faith alone, and who thus separate the life by which they are to be
saved from the life of the body, as they separate thought from will,
which is a species of simulation, as if one could think in one way, and
be saved by the life of thought, while he lives in another, thus being,
by the life of thought, in heaven, and by the life of the will in the
world, when yet these lives are not to be separated.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_68"></span>[4024-1](sd51.htm#fr_68.md) A Swedish word,
signifying couch.

<span id="fn_69"></span>[4033-1](sd51.htm#fr_69.md) Compare AC 1980, 1981.

<span id="fn_70"></span>[4037-1](sd51.htm#fr_70.md) The word in the
original is "dissipationem," but the context seems plainly to indicate
that it should be "dispositionem".

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 4051-4100](sd52.md)
