[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Swedenborg](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sd59)  [Next](sd61.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0766143007/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Spiritual Diary*, by Emanuel Swedenborg, \[1758\], tr. by Bush,
Smithson and Buss \[1883-9\] at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Spiritual Diary

<span class="margnote"><span id="4451.">4451.</span></span>

To relate all my experience with regard to them, would be to fill many
pages. They are punished very grievously and frequently, but they elude
punishments either by magical or by filthy means, turning themselves
into various things by phantasies. As they have many such devices, they
sometimes escaped, but sometimes could not; they were thus punished most
grievously, especially with contortions as to the bones and flesh, and
other parts of the body, also by phantasies, but still, when they
returned, they were not made better but worse, and contrived yet more
dire enormities. To relate all these things particularly would be to
write a whole book. They are the experiences of almost a whole year.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4452.">4452.</span></span>

They are removed successively from their former station to one more
remote towards their hell. This takes place at intervals of time, from
which it appears to what hell these sirens are destined, which is one to
the left in front, somewhat deep about the heel of the foot. When they
have at length proceeded to the most flagitious extremes and to
consummations, they are surrounded with sulfur and fire thence, as are
also their phantastic ideas and persuasive exclamations in like manner.
Those above mentioned send forth likewise from themselves, as it were,
an interior man, who, according to their persuasions, appeared as an
infant; but it was a phantasy, and was turned into something sulphurous,
which was of such a nature, that certain spirits said it could not be
extinguished but burned continually, an indication that wherever it
comes it infests with a corresponding persuasion those also who have
anything of this nature with themselves, so that it can be extinguish
only by the Lord; for otherwise those infected never know but that it is
something good with which they \[the sirens\] variously mingle,
according to genius \[or disposition\], every delight of what is holy
and of what is profane.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4453.">4453.</span></span>

They were at length conveyed down to their hell, which is in front, to
the left, at the side where the antediluvians are, but more outward
where there was an entrance; and then a certain deceitful spirit of a
kindred nature was unwilling to go with them, but still, being conveyed
to them, he was held suspended in the flame which was thence with them,
when he said that he had never a perceived anything more delightful;
wherefore he followed under the influence of that delight which was to
him so exquisite. They entered there into caverns and afterwards
proceeded more in front towards the left under a cloud, from which while
they were endeavoring to emerge, there was, as it were, the smoke of a
furnace mixed with sulphurous fire. But because their proper hell was
not there, though that of others of that class was, they made their way
under it, and returned through caverns backwards towards a marsh, so
that I supposed they would proceed under the marsh; but their cavernous
way there took a direction outwardly, even to the limits of the
universe, verging somewhat deeply downwards, and where there before
appeared, as it were, a marshy sea, into which they were to be cast, in
another universe. There they now are.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4454.">4454.</span></span>

Hence it is manifest of what quality the Nephilim of the present period
are, and what kind of a lot awaits them in the other life, as also that
it is a flood by which they perish, like the antediluvians, and almost
in the same manner with them, inasmuch as that other part of the mind
\[namely, the intellectual\] which was restored \[after the flood\], has
been destroyed, and thus made persuasive, as the mind of the
antediluvians was as to both parts.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4455.">4455.</span></span>

They entered with me and others into all and singular the things not
only of thought, but also of the intentions, and extinguished,
suffocated, and perverted them, so that nothing good and true could be
thought, from their having \[completely\] occupied the intentions, even
those intentions that I was perfectly ignorant of \[from
non-reflection\], though within the sphere of perception, where they
have often insinuated themselves, acting with their most deceitful
machinations and there ruling everything that pertained to me while I
was unconscious of it. Thus they are such as obsess men at the present
day.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4456.">4456.</span></span>

They were desirous of obtaining egress for themselves from hell, but
like the antediluvians, they were thrust down by their companions, and
subjected to punishment.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4457.">4457.</span></span>

How much they wished to obsess me may be manifest from the fact, that
they entered into my respiration completely, and \[proceeded\] towards
the heart, and that they thus obtained the power to enter into the life
of my body. They also endeavored to enter into my interior respiration
They thus acquired power - a circumstance, so far as I am aware, not yet
known - to send into me devils and spirits of every kind, so as to
possess me entirely and to hold me in complete subjection to them. This
was that they might have immediate communication; yea, they put on such
a nature as scarcely to exercise thought about these devils and spirits,
but transferred them whithersoever they turned their thoughts, no longer
commanding them from previous thought and will. \[They transferred
them\] also to other spirits and other societies, which is abominable.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4458.">4458.</span></span>

Their subject was able to put forth one idea of himself before his own
associates, and another before others; before the former, the idea of a
queen sitting on a throne in splendid ornaments, and leaning on the arm
of the throne as delicate females are accustomed to do; and before the
latter, an idea of herself as a miserable object, and thus as something
loathsome in their presence. She was thus seen by them in a form, and at
one and the same time by several in different forms, which was something
in the highest degree magical; concerning which I spoke with spirits.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4459.">4459.</span></span>

She was then conveyed without \[this\] universe to the left, to other
\[male sirens\]. Such \[as these\] are, like others, borne about from
one place to another, until they come to their proper and destined
place. There I heard how \[these others\] spoke about her coming, but
she changed the sphere of that other universe, as it were, into one
\[with her own\], and went on to a place where \[the dwellers\] said
that such \[sirens\] had come to them, and that at first they thought
themselves queens. I perceived that \[the sirens\] treated them in the
way \[already described\] with a subtle mockery, and it was told me that
they became as their own \[property\]. <span
id="fr_74"></span>[4459-1](#fn_74.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="4460.">4460.</span></span>

Their most filthy subject had spirits, whom he had acquired to himself,
who flowed in more from the natural.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4461.">4461.</span></span>

THAT CERTAIN ONES ARE TAKEN OUT OF HELL INTO THE WORLD OF SPIRITS FOR
VILE USES. There had been a certain spirit with me for some time in
secret (:Spegel:), who had connected himself \[with me\] from the
delight of ruling and of perverting truths. I knew nothing about him
until some time after he came; he was then detected, and \[found\] to be
one of the deceitful, so that he did not dare to do anything except in
secret. Such was his disposition that he seemed to love truths, and
professed them, so that others could scarce know to the contrary: he
also attracted others in order to teach them, when yet in heart he had
not the least particle of belief \[in what he professed\]. He was first
punished, and while undergoing punishment continued weaving deceits and
speaking through others. It was then also made known to him what he had
thought and said \[in the world\] concerning the Divine, and that he did
not believe in it. This he also retained afterwards, but in the thought
\[not the will\]. It was thence also manifest how things formerly said
and done can be detected from the corporeal memory. He supposed that he
had not been in hell before, wherefore he was led down thither, and it
was shown him where he had been, nearly under the nates in what is
excrementitious, and he recognized that he had been there, and had come
thence into the world of spirits. He was the Archbishop Spegel.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4462.">4462.</span></span>

CONTINUATION CONCERNING THE SIRENS. They were sent into various hells,
as, to the hell on the left, where they said that such were able to
subdue them, but they eluded them: afterwards into other hells,
especially one where David was, who wished to torment them in his own
way, but they eluded him also, so that he fled away. He tormented them
afterwards, but they eluded the rest there, and in other hells. This was
because they mix profane and holy things, and can, at the same time,
introduce themselves into the interior nature, and this simultaneously,
so that, at one, and the same time, they can be as it were holy with the
good, cunning with others, and profane with the profane, and this at
once in each one of their ideas. They there collect ideas and increase
them successively, and do such simultaneous things to such a degree that
they become at length altogether profane.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4463.">4463.</span></span>

But still they are many times punished, and this \[in spite of\] all the
art by which they have been able to elude others. \[These punishments\]
last for hours, \[and are effected\] by collisions as to all even the
lesser parts \[of the body\], with tortures, by circumvolutions this way
and that, like laminoe around a cylinder, by immersions into human
excrement and the like, and because they then fear for their life, they
abstain \[from doing hurt\] for some time, knowing that they cannot
elude the punishment by any art.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4464.">4464.</span></span>

It was told them what their end would be - that they would become like
dead bodies, though still possessed of a miserable life, and \[emit a\]
cadaverous stench, and carry such \[things\] with them. The reason also
is, because they desire nothing else than to return into worldly and
corporeal things - this is their end.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4465.">4465.</span></span>

The \[spirit\] who was their subject, had such speech and thought as
\[she had\] while in the body, so that there was no difference, and
there was scarcely anything of spirit present with her - this she
acquired successively. From their speech and thoughts it can be
perceived whether they think and speak as men, or as spirits; as also,
how far as corporeal men, and how far as spirits. When she was present
she filled the sphere \[with a persuasion\] as if there were men in the
body about me.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4466.">4466.</span></span>

CONCERNING A CERTAIN WICKED DOER, ALDERHEIM. He was about me for several
months; at first he was magical beyond all others, and afterwards
thought of nothing but how he might secretly maintain ascendancy, and at
the same time do evils to others. This evil was of different kinds, but
especially adulteries; these occupied his mind altogether for several
months; when others thought of other things, he thought of them. There
are more things concerning him than can be related. The quality of his
delight was at length shown to him by a pestilent scab, which occupied
his head, and that all his ideas were similar to it. It was shown to the
life what that scab was in quality, that it was full of disgusting
insects which caused a tickling sensation and gave rise to that delight.
There was given him at the same time the faculty of knowing that he was
in it, and that his delight had such a quality in it and was such.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4467.">4467.</span></span>

CONCERNING A CERTAIN WICKED SPIRIT, BISK. BAREK. This one was among the
wicked and the subtle infernals and stood in black clothing, at first in
front beneath, and afterwards to the left, and there governed others
incognito, inciting them to iniquities; such being his delight. He had a
certain one in the life of the body, called Alderheim, for his friend,
who was his partner, and together with him was continually attempting
abominable things. A certain spirit said to have been the son of the
latter is yet more wicked.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4468.">4468.</span></span>

CONCERNING A CERTAIN INFERNAL PUNISHMENT. A certain magical spirit, a
subject of profane magical spirits of the female sex, began to think so
wickedly as that she would enter by phantasies into my lungs and thus
into the other viscera of the body, according to the knowledges which I
had obtained, and thus would destroy me entirely. This she thought while
I was ignorant of it; though the fact was soon discovered; there then
arose a tumult and she was detected from behind where certain infernal
things were excited. She afterwards came to the left in front, and for a
considerable time suffered grievous punishment, but there still inhered
in her a phantasy such as has been mentioned, and it was inspired by
magical spirits into others. It was then permitted that she should
detect something in the mind of others, and because she wished to enter
thither by her ideas she ascended thus into the celestial spiritual
sphere. From this elevation she appeared pendulous like a kind of ghost,
and was kept thus pendulous for a while, and when she was remitted to
her former state she said that she had suffered excessive tortures.
Another one also deliberated in like manner from herself, and she was
also made pendulous in the same way like a ghost, and when she was
remitted said, that she had endured torments greater than she could
describe. This was because they were directed by their ideas to the very
first threshold of the angelic sphere. They thence contracted such a
nature as to know that, whereas their ideas could by phantasies be
elevated thither, if they did not abstain from their acts they would
again be tormented with that infernal pain.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4469.">4469.</span></span>

CONCERNING THE DISPOSITION \[indoles\] OF SPIRITS. As regards the
disposition of spirits, it seems in their present state, to be like
something involuntary, inasmuch as it is their involuntary \[which
acts\], because they act from their disposition, or the nature they have
acquired to themselves, or, as it were, from instinct. Wherefore their
voluntary things, which are chiefly of the exterior memory, are stored
up within, that is, they are not allowed to bring them into use. Those
who are permitted to use them are unhappy in consequence of it for it is
permitted them to descend into worldly and corporeal things, and thus
again to become corrupt and suffer more direfully than others. This was
permitted to a certain female magical spirit, because she so desired,
and she so filled the sphere, that, as it were, there were no longer
spirits but men about me; with whom she thought and spoke, as it were,
in common.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4470.">4470.</span></span>

CONCERNING THE JESUITS. The Jesuits appear as if in front above and
behind above, thus on both sides at the same time. They had a subject
under the nates in hell, who infested me during the whole of one day and
the next. It was also shown to me how he appeared in the face, while in
the life of the body. The wicked flagitious and profane things which he
perpetrated, and the Jesuits through him, cannot be described; they are
the most profane of all spirits. There were others also, disciples, so
called, of the Jesuits, separated from them, who had for their subject a
filthy female spirit above the head; they operated at the same time with
the spirits already mentioned under the nates in hell. The profane
things which they did cannot even be described. They were represented by
serpents of different kinds, viperous, or otherwise as spotted, and more
or less venomous.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4471.">4471.</span></span>

CONCERNING THE STATE OF EVIL SPIRITS BEFORE AND WHEN THEY ARE LET DOWN
INTO HELL IN GENERAL. Evil souls or evil spirits return at first into
their own life, and afterwards, in the world of spirits, exercise their
wickedness according to their various dispositions; and when they then
exceed the delight of their life they are punished, and this frequently,
until they are deterred - which punishment may take place to the number
of twenty, fifty, an hundred, or two hundred times and more. Still,
however, it is provided by the Lord that they shall not do evil to the
good, and those evils which they attempt to inflict are turned by the
Lord into good; these are the temptations by which the good are
fortified. After they have led this life for several years, and
exercised their wickedness, they then collect their evils together and
become nothing else but evil of their own genus, and goods are then
taken away from them; thus their wickedness is at length consummated,
until they are made thoroughly fearful of doing evils, whereupon they
precipitate themselves into the hell where are those of their own
quality. There they torment one another in various ways, according to
all their skill and magic, and, in the meantime, sit like skeletons, or
those deformed in body and face; they are tormented from time to time
interiorly, and are every where then remitted among themselves into
their delights; although they still return to the state above mentioned.
They do not then dare to rise into the world of spirits, for they know
immediately that grievous punishments await them in that case, and they
therefore recede into their hells. At length, after many ages passed in
this kind of torment, their corporeal delights can be laid asleep to
some extent, and they are then from time to time elevated into the world
of spirits, that they may serve for the vilest uses, with very little
life and scarce any delight; for everyone born in the world passes into
the other life, and no one is tormented or punished unless that some use
may arise from it; all things there are on account of use. Such is the
lot of the evil.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4472.">4472.</span></span>

Whenever the infernals came to me they rose into the world of spirits;
but I perceived that they did not dare to remain there, since they
immediately recognized what their state \[there\] was, saying also that
they could not do anything. I perceived that they learned such things by
punishments. Thus the infernals are instructed that their condition is
such, but those who have not yet been let down into hell do not know;
their delight indeed impels them strongly, but yet the dread of
punishment prevails; when the dread of punishment prevails their
consummation is being effected.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4473.">4473.</span></span>

A CONTINUATION CONCERNING THE SIRENS. The wickedness of the most filthy
and profane siren above mentioned increased by degrees. Her first
attempt was to enter into my viscera according to my knowledges, but now
she has been punished and thereby deterred; but since that, her
wickedness and profaneness by means of persuasions and of simulated and
deceitful affections have grown greater and greater, till at length they
have reached such extremities, as to enter into singular my ideas,
binding herself to them, and desiring to convey herself entire into my
spirit, and thus most profanely to carry me down with herself into hell.
This she herself openly declared, besides perpetrating other enormities
which I do not remember. If all her magical practices and all her arts
should be described they would fill many pages. These arts are thus
brought to their highest pitch in singular things - as, in the present
case, by the attempt to destroy me and conjoin me to herself - from that
time, however, her power began to decline.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4474.">4474.</span></span>

She everywhere perverted the sphere, and filled it with corporeal
things. Wherever she spread her corporeal phantasies the sphere
forthwith appeared as \[one\] of corporeal men in the body, and
everyone's walk different from that of spirits. She thus continually
descended into corporeal things, that is, into hell. She was conveyed
downward, behind, by degrees farther and farther, and was punished at
times grievously and long. Afterwards she eluded the punishing spirits,
and continued to ply her arts upon me but in decreasing measure. I doubt
not that the case is the same with other sirens with a difference.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4475.">4475.</span></span>

The things inspired by sirens are persuasions altogether artificially
formed, and affections altogether simulated and deceitful, which act
together so that those unaware cannot possibly view things otherwise
than according to them. They collect such things and increase them, and
at the same time they exist successively in their sphere, until it is
completed and consummated.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4476.">4476.</span></span>

This most filthy and profane siren was remitted into thoughts similar to
those which she had in the body, and then appeared to herself in the
liberty of thinking and acting as she pleased. They think continually
that they will succeed in ruling over all things and at length over the
universe.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4477.">4477.</span></span>

From much experience I am instructed that, whatever may be the idea of
thought, and whatever the idea from scientifics, and whatever the
scientific, the sirens when they call it forth from man turn it into
magical things for the end of ruling and destroying all others and
making them infernal. They entered also into my scientifics as to the
viscera, and thence endeavored to work magical effects while I was
ignorant of it; but they were grievously punished.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4478.">4478.</span></span>

Nay, the sirens carried matters to such extremes, that they did not even
regard punishments any longer, but eluded them by magical arts in
various ways, so that the punishing spirits said that they could no
longer chastise them; they eluded several infernal penalties of a severe
character. But it was told them, that any punishments whatever may be
aggravated indefinitely, and also be made to last to thousands of years.
If anyone, therefore, is so insane as to think that he can withstand
them, let him know that this is indeed insanity, and that the hardening
of himself and his contumacy are altogether nothing; nay, that the more
contumacious they are the more grievously are they punished, because
contumacy must needs be broken.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4479.">4479.</span></span>

The sirens, moreover, are such that no man who has once esteemed
adulteries and such things as nothing, and has thus involved himself as
to the thought in the companionship of those who are such in the other
life, can ever escape being held captive by them to the end of his life;
for they bend the least things of the thoughts in innumerable ways, and
make them delightful, and thus operate for the destruction of the man.
This is yet more the case at the present time, when this crew is greatly
increased, and also because evil spirits are tolerated in the world of
spirits. Wherefore let men beware of actual evils; in this way only can
anyone at last abstain from them; for actualities bring on habits, and
put on a kind of nature, as happens with those who have exercised
themselves in thefts, and thus evils are increased, together with their
delights, and men are carried away by an increasing number of sirens,
like a piece of wood in a rapid stream. Such a wandering crowd of sirens
is multiplied at the present day far beyond their numbers in former
times.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4480.">4480.</span></span>

THE RATIOCINATIONS OF CERTAIN SPIRITS THAT SINS ARE WIPED AWAY IN THE
OTHER LIFE, AND THAT THEY ARE THUS JUSTIFIED IN A MOMENT. Because of
this opinion that men are justified, whatever the life they have led, in
a moment, even if it should be at the last hour of life - an opinion
which has prevailed in the whole Christian world, wherever almost there
is any doctrine of faith certain spirits reasoned concerning it, and
confirmed themselves also from the fact, that they saw certain ones
introduced at once into heaven, and when it was seen that they laid
aside their exteriors like garments, they would fain thus put off their
own, not knowing or not being willing to understand that these things
take place in certain states, when the exteriors are laid asleep, and
that the laying aside, as it were, of garments is an appearance arising
from the fact, that external societies are then taken away from them,
whereupon there is this appearance; for whenever spirits are elevated
into heaven, external societies are also taken away from them, since
otherwise there would be something contrary which would resist.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4481.">4481.</span></span>

It was said to them that man carries with him into the other life all
his states of good and of evil, as also all things which he has done,
thought, learned, and spoken, in their least particulars, not losing the
smallest portion of them, and that they return successively as they are
tempered by the Lord; as also that all the states and all the thoughts,
as also the speeches and actions of the other life remain in like
manner, and this forever, so that nothing ever perishes.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4482.">4482.</span></span>

Certain spirits supposed that those who are elevated into the second
heaven and the third were without those externals above mentioned,
having taken up some idea of this kind; but it was said to them, that
they had all things with them. And that this was the case even with the
angels, and that otherwise they would not be able to subsist or live.
This was confirmed by a comparison, as, that a musical instrument; a
piano, a violin, and the like, unless they have a piece of wood to which
the strings or cords can be fastened cannot produce sound, but that in
fact, their sound is such as the wood is, and also its quality and
extension, and that in the same manner, there must be a correspondence
of externals with internals, as there is with the angels. It was further
illustrated by the fact that the angels, if they were without externals
corresponding, would be like a body without feet, and the inmost ones
like a head without a body.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4483.">4483.</span></span>

Hence now it may be manifest how false it is to believe that a man is
justified in a moment, and that all his sins are wiped away in a moment.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4484.">4484.</span></span>

CONCERNING CONSOCIATIONS ACCORDING TO AFFECTIONS AND CUPIDITIES, AS ALSO
\[ACCORDING TO\] APPEARANCES AND PHANTASIES. THE HELLS. It was given me
to perceive that, in the other life, all consociations are according to
the reigning affections of good in the heavens, and according to the
cupidities of evil in the hells and that \[heaven and hell\] being in
opposition, there is thence equilibrium.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4485.">4485.</span></span>

Souls after death do not immediately come into their \[proper\]
consociations, from the fact that their phantasies are such as do not
arise from their cupidities, nor their appearances such as come from
their affections. So long as their phantasies are not from their
cupidities, nor their appearances from their affections, they are borne
hither and thither, and this according to phantasies and appearances.
This is the reason that \[some\] souls are for a long time in the lower
earth, and also in the world of spirits, before they come to their
\[proper\] place. This also is the reason why those in certain
consociations are conveyed thence upwards and downwards, and at times
hither and thither, since they fall into phantasies, or come into
appearances which do not agree with their \[proper\] phantasies or
appearances.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4486.">4486.</span></span>

In a word, voluntary things and thoughts must act together; but inasmuch
as they do not act together in the Christian world in consequence of
social simulations, so that the countenance expresses something
different from the thoughts \[Christians\] are kept longer than others
in the world of spirits, and wander about longer than others, and are
carried away more easily into other societies, although they relapse
again into their own.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4487.">4487.</span></span>

The life of those who cast themselves into hell is previously nothing
else than the reigning of cupidities and the phantasies thence resulting
- not the reverse - and the life of those who are elevated into heaven
is previously nothing else than the reigning of affections of good, and
thence the appearances of truth, or of the good, and thence of the
truth.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4488.">4488.</span></span>

CONCERNING A CERTAIN INTERIOR SPIRIT WHO WAS PROFANE (:LEJEL:) OR AN
INTERIOR HYPOCRITE. There was a certain one, concerning whom I knew
nothing in the life of the body, but that he cherished integrity
\[honestum\] internally, because he was externally moral; he could speak
perspicuously \[distincte\], refute \[errors\], and \[had\] several
other \[faculties\]; but \[he was one\], who had confirmed himself in
principles of the false, by thought, especially against the Lord, the
Word, and the truths of faith. Of what quality his thoughts were
concerning good it is not yet given me to know. He was able, in the life
of the body, to throw himself into a kind of ecstatic state, as was
shown also by his being several times put into similar ones, when he
spoke as to how the case was, to wit, that he then, as it were, saw
heaven, and that upon holding his thought fixed, as it were, in the
person of another, then everything which he thought concerning that
person presented itself to him \[as if he himself were the person\],
though in fact he knew nothing of them; and as there were spirits of the
same quality in that sphere, they drew certain inferences \[from the
course of thought\] respecting him and his fortunes. Thus he obtained
information on several subjects, and supposed \[this knowledge\] to be a
revelation beyond any other. But it was shown how the case was in this
matter, \[and\] that a man \[in the usual state\] can also conclude in
like manner, but more obscurely, because he cannot remember everything
in particular, as is the case with interior spirits when the thought is
held in the idea of a particular person.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4489.">4489.</span></span>

He was for a long time lurking beneath, but I perceived repugnances \[in
my mind\] against the truths of faith, not knowing that they were from
him; but this was detected \[afterwards\], as also that he excited most
filthy things even among the profane infernals, for they subsequently
adhered to him; they had their interior \[things\] from him; for
example, while I was thinking concerning the urine, there immediately
occurred to them what was against the Lord and the truths of faith,
whence \[something\] most profane was excited among the profane
infernals, so that I could with difficulty urinate, \[and\] this only
from his interior filthy thought against the truth.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4490.">4490.</span></span>

He was able also to receive truths, as that love and its differences
constitute heaven, that there must be an equilibrium, and that he ought
also to receive these \[truths\], but still he was such \[as he was\],
because he was much bent on fame. Before these things were detected,
there was favor shown to him, but he was afterwards sent into a vessel
of urine, and a tun, which, however, he did not fear. But it was told
\[me\] that he had been a robber, and it was shown that he was among the
worst. This punishment he had not undergone before.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4491.">4491.</span></span>

His operation was into the brain, and he induced pains on that part of
it which is above the cerebrum, and afterwards on the part above the
cerebellum.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4492.">4492.</span></span>

He was sent a second time into the urinary tun, and appeared there as if
he had come into his heaven and so said, for he formed there a heaven to
himself.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4493.">4493.</span></span>

There came suddenly a certain one above in front, at whose coming that
robber was seized with a sudden terror, and cast himself downward, but
could not do so as deeply as he would, as he would fain have gone
deeper; he said he greatly feared him, alleging fictitious reasons, but
it was discovered that he had murdered him, and it was \[also\] said,
that he had previously thought of the different ways in which he might
lay wait against him so as to take his life. Hence it may be manifest
with what kind of terror \[murderers\] are stricken when their victims
come upon them, \[viz.\] that they are grievously terrified at their
very first approach.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4494.">4494.</span></span>

There was detected at another time a crime which he had committed
against a woman, whom, perhaps, he had violated; namely that he had
killed her by a certain magical art, concerning which the spirits spoke,
\[saying\] that it was a hidden art, though still known to some on
earth, and that \[some\] are able to kill others without the use of any
knife, sword or dagger, or other \[instrument\], and that it was
\[effected\] by a magical stopping of the breath. This art he was
skilled in, and by means of it took the life of the one first mentioned,
and also of the woman, who was recognized from the fact that she flew to
him, and kissed him; and that he was thereupon tormented with internal
suffering. The very indifference \[to consequences\] and the delight
which he felt in the deed were also wonderfully communicated \[to me\]:
his delight was without any symptom of horror. Certain \[spirits\] also
spoke afterwards, and said that they were skilled in the same art.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4495.">4495.</span></span>

He was an interior magician, and one interiorly profane, cherishing
deadly hostility against any whom \[he held\] in hatred, for which
reason profane and filthy spirits adhered to him as their ring-leader,
and this through their interiors.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4496.">4496.</span></span>

CONCERNING A PROFANE FEMALE, \[CONCERNING\] MAGIC, AND THE MAGICAL
HELLS. That magical and adulterous one, concerning whom above, who had
infested me with her profanations almost a half year, concerning whom
much might be written - sufficient indeed to fill many pages - at length
lost a part of her communication with spirits, and was conveyed nearly
in front beyond the desert of the robbers, and there rose up near me
about my head for some time a continuous something with a kind of
whisper, the effect of her communication with one side of my head; this
she persisted in for a long time, from an art which she knew in the
world and practiced \[there\]. But she was then conveyed downward to the
first hell of the magicians, which is proximately beyond the desert of
the robbers, not in the depth, but in a certain plane, where are those
of both sexes who practiced magical things in the life of the body. She
then, for a whole night, so tied or interlocked herself with several
parts of my face, as the mouth and so forth, and also of the head \[that
I was strangely affected\]. On waking up from time to time, I felt
myself bound as to external ideas, and perceived her almost continual
presence there. It was afterwards made known what she had done in the
world \[namely\], that she had learned magical things from a certain one
whom she had paid \[to teach her how\] she might be able to allure to
adulteries anyone whom she pleased, and that she had practiced this upon
a partner in adultery, by looking on the right side of his face, and
various \[other\] parts, and by muttering magical \[formulae\] to
herself. This she had practiced in her adulteries, and a certain one
\[of her paramours\] confessed it before a priest - who said that he had
often heard such abominable things from herself - remarking in his
confession, that he was astonished at his burning so suddenly with
venereal ardor. This was detected, and being inspected, she was found to
be skilled in fourteen arts of this kind, which were magical, when yet
scarce anyone in the life of the body was aware of this.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4497.">4497.</span></span>

In that hell are the witches of the milder kind, who have exercised such
arts; but the hell of the witches of the worse kind is yet further on,
and tends into the deep there, whither being dismissed she is amongst
the worst, because she had excelled at the same time in endowments of
mind.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4498.">4498.</span></span>

From these things it is manifest how interior magic \[things\] are now
increased; it was said that at this day very many such come into the
other life.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4499.">4499.</span></span>

In that hell are direful poisonous serpents.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4500.">4500.</span></span>

CONCERNING THE ABOMINABLE THINGS PERPETRATED IN THE WORLD BY THOSE WHO
ARE STILL HELD IN ESTEEM BY OTHERS. MEMORY. The subject of the sirens
concerning whom \[it was related\] above that she had learned magical
arts to the number of about fourteen, and had practiced adulteries by
magical means, which were also detected to the number of almost a
hundred, made herself in the other life infernally profane. This was at
length detected by the fact that she was in \[a certain\] hell, and
there tormented by the infernals, and that her jaws and throat were
forced asunder and a baleful fiery something flowed in whereby she was
tormented, and it was afterwards said to her, that she should abstain
from \[entering\] that place. She became a more subtle spirit and fled
far to the rear; but afterwards as before attempted impious and profane
things; there was then seen the couch of an infant upon a heap,
perchance of men, and it was detected \[of her\] that, while unmarried,
she had brought forth an infant and had cast it into a furnace, and that
afterwards she compassed the destruction of two maid-servants, by
throwing them over a bridge into the river; these knew something
concerning the \[deed\], and one of them confessed it to a certain
priest. \[It was also discovered\] that she had plotted in thought how
by profane arts she might destroy them in the other life, so that they
should not rise again, besides other profane things written on holy
paper and then adulterated; there was also seen a certain other profane
\[something\] which I do not know the meaning of. She was able to divine
\[the meaning of\] everything that at occurred, and \[to see\] more in
the other life than others, and this by hidden arts.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_74"></span>[4459-1](sd60.htm#fr_74.md) The reader will
doubtless perceive an unusual degree of obscurity in the details
respecting these sirens. This is in part to be accounted for from the
abstruse nature of the subject, but quite as much from the state of the
author's manuscript, which, Dr. Tafel remarks, abounds here with words
exceedingly difficult to be deciphered. In the last sentence, for
instance, in No. 4459, by a change of eos into eas we may read:- "I
perceived that they treated the sirens in agreement \[with their
phantastic\] appearance with mockery," and c. We have done the best we
could with the translation. -Tr.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 4501-4550](sd61.md)
