[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Swedenborg](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sd61)  [Next](sd63.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0766143007/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Spiritual Diary*, by Emanuel Swedenborg, \[1758\], tr. by Bush,
Smithson and Buss \[1883-9\] at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Spiritual Diary

<span class="margnote"><span id="4551.">4551.</span></span>

CONCERNING A COUNCIL WHEN A DISTINCTION WAS MADE BETWEEN THE DIVINE AND
THE HUMAN NATURE OF THE LORD. It was granted to speak with those who
were in a council, wherein it was concluded that a distinction should be
made between the Lord's Divine and human nature. They were on the left,
in front, at a distance. They said that those who had the greatest
influence in that council, were together in a dark chamber, and made
that decision principally for the reason, that otherwise, if they had
acknowledged the Lord as one with the Father, as He said He was, the
papal throne would not subsist and that the pope could not have been His
vicar in the earth; for schisms existed at that time, whereby the papal
power must have slipped away and been dissipated - therefore, for that
reason, they assembled, that they might distinguish between the Divine
and the human of the Lord; and to corroborate their distinction they
sought out confirmations from the Word, and so persuaded the rest. They
said that they knew otherwise from Scripture, but that they could not
accept it for that reason; and they said, moreover, that, in their
hearts, they did not believe in the lord, but that they did not dare to
publish this, as, in case they did, they would be driven out or slain.
That they could thus rule in heaven and earth, they took from the Word,
in that to the Lord is given all power in heaven and earth: and thus
they could rule over souls. And since, in addition to this, \[they
desired to rule\] over their remaining possessions also, it was said
that they were not content therewith, but also wished to possess
everything on earth. It was replied that they would thus have complete
power.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4552.">4552.</span></span>

THAT EVIL SOCIETIES COHERE, AND ADJOIN TO THEMSELVES STUPID AND SIMPLE
SPIRITS. There were some of the more evil sort of sirens who approached,
when I wrote, because they could thus attract my pleasure to themselves,
and deprive me of it. As often as they came, they also brought along
stupid spirits, who, in the world, were learned, and hence of a haughty
disposition. These were interposed, and as often as they came, they
brought simple upright spirits, whose faith in them was such that they
believed whatever they said, as if they had been oracles. The sirens
appeared in front, on the right hand, beneath; the learned-stupid
spirits to the right on the level of the head, and the simple near by;
and it was observed, that, as often as the sirens came, the others came
also, and arranged themselves thus in order before me, and superinduced
darkness upon me, so that I could scarcely know how to write anything,
nor to think, save confusedly. This was very often said to the stupid
ones; but they took no notice, for the sirens infused into them \[the
belief\] that they were learned, that they were sent hither to rule, and
many such \[notions\]. Hence it was evident, that there was a league of
societies, extending from the evil to the simple upright; but still
those who are upright, after being long harassed by such, are released,
or liberated, from that league, and come amongst the upright.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4553.">4553.</span></span>

CONCERNING THE HELL UNDER THE HEEL OF THE FOOT. Deep under the heel is a
hell. Between the foot and that hell, there appears as it were a vacuum,
so that they appear at once as in the depths. These are the most wicked.
They explore the mind secretly, so that no one may know it, and plot
with others in order to destroy; and this in various modes. Quite often
have I observed and seen them. They stealthily pour out venom on those
who are above, and breathe in evils and incite to their commission. So
wicked are they, and so interior their wickedness, that scarcely any are
more so. There appear there, as it were, Jesuits, sometimes in mantles,
and sometimes in another guise. They are often chastised; and then they
are let down deeper, and shrouded in a cloud like a rock. Those are
there who are inwardly wicked; especially of that sort who are called
Jesuits - who are of such a character. Others are on the right, in
front, near by, above the magicians, and also below. Those who are under
the heel can induce weeping; they also, whenever they wished, forced
tears out of my eyes: moreover, they can strike something of fear, and
this from their custom of obtaining wealth for their monasteries, from
the sick and others they were with; for, then, their artifice was to
compel them to weep so as to move them to pity, and to impress the fear
of purgatory. There were also observed, midway under the heel, some who
appeared to sit there, as in a chamber, and consult together. They also
are wicked, but not in so great a degree.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4554.">4554.</span></span>

CONCERNING A GREAT CITY. In a dream I was conducted about, and came to a
certain little city, where were wooden houses; and, inasmuch as it
seemed to me that I had wandered from the house where I was, a boy was
appointed who led me to a great city, where I seemed to stop, and was
led along by the boy through a region continuously inhabited; and this
for a long while. In this journey I saw many people and the buildings
which they had there; and at length I came to a city, which, seen
without, was vast; in front, also, it was situated upon hills and
mountains, and, on the side, was so great that it could not be
described. Then I awaked, and it was said that, in such cities,
\[spirits\] are together and cohabit; and that more marvelous sights may
there be seen than can in any way be described.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4556.">4556.</span></span>

 <span id="fr_78"></span>[4556-1](#fn_78.md) There were afterwards with me,
when I was in the city in a wakeful state, some evil spirits; but they
saw nothing else but monsters and serpents; so that evil spirits, in a
city where the good are, are unable to see them; but, instead of them,
\[they see\] things of such a kind as they \[the evil\] are, because
there the light of heaven is.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4557.">4557.</span></span>

Therefore, those who come thither, and are not in heavenly light, or in
external sight from the light of heaven, that is, in the good of charity
and in love to the Lord, can see nothing there; those who are a little
in that light see obscurely; they who are not in it at all see nothing,
or even monsters instead of those things \[that are there\].

<span class="margnote"><span id="4558.">4558.</span></span>

HYPOCRITES WHO HURT THE FLESH OF THE GUMS OF THE TEETH. Pain seized upon
the flesh of the gums of the left side, so that they became swollen. I
thence perceived that hypocrites were present, and it was discovered
that it was Dideron, who was such a hypocrite, that, while he spoke in a
courteous and friendly manner with others, he yet mocked them in his
heart. Thence, also, he could be in the company of the good for some
time. Moreover, he was such that his delight was to produce sorrow and
pain in others, and this continually.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4559.">4559.</span></span>

I also perceived a pressure and pain, on the head, in the skull, just
above the part those teeth were below. This also was from thence; for
hypocrites inflict pain on the very bones of the skull.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4560.">4560.</span></span>

CONCERNING THE EVIL WHO HAVE PLACED MERIT IN WORKS. Deep under those who
cut wood, of whom \[I have spoken\] before, in a certain hell, are those
who have placed merit in works. I thought about Bezaleel, who made those
things which belonged to the ark. A certain one was let out thence: I
spoke with him. He said that he had done many good things, and obtains
nothing in the other life, but that he is in hell among similar
\[spirits\], where he suffers harsh things; and I perceived in each
particular of his thought, that if he only, to some extent, thought
well, or spoke well, and still more if he did well, he wished to be
rewarded. So that \[a regard for\] recompense was in each particular. It
was granted to ask him what reward he wished, seeing that he was of such
a character: he said that he wished to be in heaven, and there preside
over others. It was granted to tell him that he could not be among the
good, because he would thus inspire them, from himself with a similar
characteristic to his own, and so do evil to those who thought nothing
of such a kind; for they \[the good\] know that nothing is from merit,
but everything from grace and mercy: thus he would injure them: and,
besides, he would never be content; his constant thought would be that
he wished to be rewarded, and that whatever he might obtain would not
correspond with his merit; thus he would aspire to lordship over all,
and wish to be God - even above God. Wherefore, it cannot happen
otherwise than that he is among such as were in a similar insane
affection. He insisted that he had done many good works; but he was told
that it was for his own sake, and that he had his reward during the life
of the body, in that he was then placed over others, and exercised
dominion over others, and so had his delight; and that he had never
thought about another life. And, furthermore, it was granted to say that
certain simple ones believe something similar from the Word because it
is there said that their reward is in the other life, and that very many
of them are in heaven: this, however, is because they are such that they
are contented with few things in the Lord, and neither aspire to higher
things, nor to dominion; but that it is otherwise with those who are not
contented with a few things, and who wish to rule over others: they are
never contented; which is the reason they are kept so remote from
heaven. These can never have charity towards the neighbor, and wish as
well to him as to themselves, still less so delight therein as to
benefit others rather than themselves - which all the angels do.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4561.">4561.</span></span>

CONCERNING THOSE WHO ARE IN NATURAL GOOD AND IN NO SPIRITUAL GOOD. There
was a certain one whom I supposed to be a good Christian, because he was
in natural good. He likewise performed his work diligently, and was also
accomplished, and at the same time exceedingly ingenious, in his craft;
but I observed that if he had been able \[to determine the matter\], he
would not be such a one. Thence I was led into the thought that his good
was from no internal obligation, but only from nature and external
pleasure. The quality of such people in the other life was also told and
shown to me, that, \[namely\], they are in the greatest pollution and
uncleanness, and are expressly kept away from the good; for they have
done good from no religious motive, thus from no internal bond, still
less from any conscience. Wherefore, in the other life, they are seduced
by the evil, and adhere to them; for the evil obtain ascendancy over
them, and, through them, catch the simple good, and acquire to
themselves a sphere, so that they may exercise rule. The evil direct
that sphere to themselves by every artifice of domineering, and those
\[in natural good\] are the ones to whom they apply themselves, and thus
work many evils. The good, however, employ no craft, but simply say that
it is not good; and they do not add artifice or inspire desires and
pleasures, like the evil: and, because those \[first mentioned\] have no
internal bond, therefore the good which flows in, flows through, and, in
the ultimate, is taken possession of by the evil. Hence arise
pollutions. They are, also, withheld from the company of the good,
because an external sphere of apparent good, inspired by the evil,
operates.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4562.">4562.</span></span>

CONCERNING FORTUNE. INFLUX. ((Very often have I spoken with spirits and
angels concerning fortune, which, in the world, appears as if
accidental, because \[men\] do not know whence it is, and because
everything of fortune appears as if accidental; because, moreover, man
attributes it to himself and his own prudence - to, which, also, he
bends it - and attributes nothing to the Divine. Very often there had
happened to me such an experience as appears as if it were of fortune -
as, for instance, trifling misfortunes - and it was afterwards shown, by
angels, that they happened because spirits of such a kind \[as bring
about misfortune\] were present; and also because their sphere prevailed
against the sphere which was from heaven, thus from the Divine. It was
shown to the life. Moreover, evil spirits, by means of their arts,
acquired a sphere; and, when they had accomplished this, misfortunes
arose, just like accidents or mishaps. Thence, also, it was perceived,
that all things, and the least parts of all things, are directed by
Divine Providence, even as to the slightest step and slightest nod; and
that when such a state prevails as is contrary to the influx from the
Divine, misfortune happens. But \[real\] misfortune is such as concerns
man's eternal happiness and felicity, and not that which concerns such
things as are in the world; for these appear to man as happy when yet
they are hurtful. That fortunate and fortuitous things are thence, and
that there is no accident \[strictly so-called\], I was instructed by
many experiences, which I cannot here adduce.))

<span class="margnote"><span id="4563.">4563.</span></span>

CONCERNING THE HELL OF ADULTERERS. ((The hell of adulterers is under the
buttocks. Those there are in excrements. They continually endeavor to
roll themselves out thence for they desire more than others to come into
the world, because they have also been such as loved mundane and
corporeal things above everything else. In a certain night, while awake,
there appeared there an egurgitation and rising up, as occurs with ashes
under which are live coals and firebrands. A mass of them threw
themselves forth with smoke. I wondered what it could signify: And also
it struck a warm sensation to the cauda <span
id="fr_79"></span>[4563-1](#fn_79.md) and back part of the loins. It was
said that that hell is in the continual endeavor to thus project
itself.))

<span class="margnote"><span id="4564.">4564.</span></span>

CONCERNING THOSE WHO DO NOTHING FROM THEMSELVES BUT \[ONLY\] FROM
OTHERS. There was a certain one, known to me in the life of the body
(Silfwerstrom), with whom, also, I spoke on the day when his body was
buried. He saw, through my eyes, the bier and coffin; he beheld the
funeral obsequies, and those there; he saw his wife and relatives. When,
also, he first came into the other life, it was supposed that he was
upright, as \[is supposed\] with all, in the beginning, when they come
thither. He was surprised that he was immediately like spirits who have
been long in the other life; for, indeed, he supposed that he knew quite
as much as I did. But when he noticed evil ones, whom he had known in
the life of the body, in a special hell, he betook himself thither, and
delighted in their company, and thought altogether like them - thus
their evils and knaveries. I then spoke with angels concerning such,
\[saying\] that they are of such a character that they may be applied
both to the evil and the good, and may be held by the former and the
latter in a similar thought, and this because, in the life of the body,
they had thought nothing steadfastly, but weighed both sides, and
inclined to the side of popular opinion and authority, and where lay the
prospect of gain and hope of honor. It was also said that they cannot be
among the good, because, as soon as they are tempted, or anything
inflows from the evil, they are then separated from the good, and betake
themselves to the quarters of the evil - and this the more readily
because the evil know manifold arts for enticing others to evils and
falses, which the good do not trouble about.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4565.">4565.</span></span>

CONCERNING THE WORD. A certain society was heard where they talked to
one another, saying that there had been some conversation about the
Word, and it was said that there is nothing Divine therein. They also
opened a copy of the Bible, and, no matter where they then read, they
found nothing else, as they said, than what was merely terrestrial, and
nowhere anything Divine. Wherefore, they embraced the opinion that the
Word is not Divine, but \[only\] received and regarded as holy. But a
certain one of them, whom also I heard speaking, had then replied that
it is indispensable that the Divine should be therein, and that there
\[should be\], inwardly in the sense something which is not known. He
had also extracted some things from the prophetic writings, and said
there was concealed there what does not appear to man, for the reason
that there must be some wholly Divine Word on earth, because man is born
in order that he may come into another life. He said, afterwards, that
many things had been opened to him which are in the interiors of the
Word, and that the others apprehended nothing of them.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4566.">4566.</span></span>

CONCERNING HELL. Several times, during sleep, I was conducted through
various places in hell, and then into out of the way places, from which
I longed \[to get\] into the highway: but then, everywhere, I came
across spirits who were robbers - and this in immense abundance - who
cherished no other purpose than to plunder and kill. Several times was I
thus \[led about) for several hours; and I afterwards observed to the
angels, that, at this day, the hells are very full of such characters;
for, inwardly, they desire nothing else than to plunder and kill.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4567.">4567.</span></span>

CONCERNING FORTUNE. INFLUX. (((Once upon a time, I played a game of
chance with a certain person; and then the spirits around me thought
concerning chance or accidental circumstances; and they said that
good-luck was represented to them by a bright cloud, and ill-luck by a
black one; they said, also, that they had, at that time, a perception
that he with whom was the blackish cloud could by no means win the game,
but he with whom was the bright cloud - which also happened. They
asserted this, and apprehended whence came accidental circumstances, to
wit, that \[they are\] from the Providence of the Lord and His influx
into the ultimates of order, where it thus appears; and that such a
thing could by no means exist, unless the Providence of the Lord were in
the minutest particulars of all things.)))

<span class="margnote"><span id="4567a.">4567a.</span></span>

CONCERNING THE SPEECH OF ANGELIC SPIRITS. Several times, in sleep, there
appeared to me representatives accompanied by perception, and this for a
long time; and, at the time, I plainly understood what I was thinking
and speaking. But, as soon as I had waked, I could not recall what it
was, because it appeared imperceptible and inexpressible, as, also, to
the sense of the body and thence to perception, for the most part, it
was. During this night, there appeared to me, in like manner, as it were
a certain something approaching to the form of an arm, then to that of a
thick stick, and this for a long time; and I then continually reflected,
from various points of view, concerning absolute power in kingdoms; and,
afterwards, the arm, or that stick, was more densely fibrated and
compacted, and I then considered that this was not an orderly state of
things, and consequently, that power ought not to be absolute, but
limited by laws. From this it was apparent, that the representatives of
power were in the place of a foundation, whereupon was supported a
perceptive thought for these things - concerning which I then
\[reflected\] and so in other matters. It was also perceived that there
is such a language with man, as to interior thought - whereof he is
ignorant - and that he comes into it after the life of the body, and
that innumerable things can be expressed and comprehended thereby, which
can in no way be expressed by the speech of the body.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4568.">4568.</span></span>

CONCERNING THE LIFE AFTER DEATH: THAT MAN APPEARS TO HIMSELF TO LIVE IN
THE WORLD. I was in discussion with some within the church, concerning
the life of man after death. They said that the man who dies is not
awakened into life till the day of the last judgment; and that, then, he
rises again with the body also. But I, as often, replied to them that
the day of the last judgment to anyone is immediately when he dies, and
that, then, he comes into another life, and, there, plainly appears to
himself in a body just as in the world; but that, there, his body is not
visible to the eyes of the body in the world, just as the body in the
world is not visible to the eyes of that body there. But they of the
Church here in the world, wholly denied this, and also scoffed at it,
being unaware that I knew this from experience itself. They said they
believed that resurrection is only granted when one is at the same time
in the body; and that the soul has a body they were utterly unwilling to
know at all, not even that the soul has any form, still less that the
soul is a spirit in human form after the life of the body. From this, I
clearly saw that they had no idea at all concerning the soul, that it is
anything, nor concerning the spirit, nor concerning the internal man,
and that, to them, it appeared wholly paradoxical, yea, impossible, that
man, in the other life - like the angels and spirits, who appeared to
many, concerning whom \[we read\] in the Word - appears in the human
form. Hence, I was also able to infer that few within the Church believe
in a resurrection. I have also often spoken about this matter with
spirits, and they marveled that the man of the Church is at this day of
such a character, and especially that they wholly reject the truth that
man appears like a man in the other life; and similarly all spirits and
angels to each other; and that they mutually see each other much more
clearly than in the world; mutually hear each other, converse together,
yea, touch each other; so that they are in a body, and also in a world,
but in another, which is not visible to the eyes of men living in the
earthly body, just as the world of men \[is invisible\] to the eyes of
spirits and angels.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4569.">4569.</span></span>

CONCERNING FREEDOM. In order that I might know that man's life consists
in freedom, because freedom is of affection, I was once on a time
brought into coercion, to wit, into such a state that I could not act
from freedom, but \[only\] from coercion. This was insinuated in the
thought. Then the angels said that I have no life; for they are able to
see the quantity and quality of the life that is with man. Hence it was
plain to me, that life consists in freedom, and, that, in proportion to
the deficiency of life is the amount of coercion, consequently, that man
cannot receive the new life, that is, be regenerated, except in freedom
- in order, that is, that it \[the new life\] may be of his own
affection, and of an affection akin to that, which is not possible
unless the evils which constitute an opposite freedom are removed.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4570.">4570.</span></span>

LICE WHICH FREQUENT BUILDINGS. There are some who have been theologians,
and have believed that religion is nothing but a political power in the
world, which they devoted themselves to, on the supposition that when
they died they would die altogether; and also that theological matters
in the world are of use to such as they were, for persuading, and,
likewise, for ruling over, others.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4571.">4571.</span></span>

CONCERNING DISEASES: CONCERNING THOSE WHO INDUCE FEVERS AND THE LIKE.
(((It was shown me, by living experience, that there are mediate
spirits, who are in the deep, directly beneath the spinal marrow, \[and
that\] when there is granted them the means of ascending, or
communicating their sphere - thus when that hell is opened somewhat -
they infuse a feverish heat. This was shown me by living experience for
an entire day. I was as it were feverish, in such a heat; and it was
then given me to know that it was infused from a lower \[region\], and
from those who are there. That heat is purely corporeal, yet from a
vital origin; but it is separated from the interior vital heat - and it
was given me to know, that, with men who are in fevers, such spirits are
present; for the sick man summons those who infuse heat. Such
\[spirits\] rush where their sphere is. Nothing is effected with man
except by means of spirits. Thence is his life; therefore, whatever is
suited and unsuited to his life. As soon as such \[spirits\] are driven
away the fever ceases; but all and everyone of the things happen
according to order, and all things proceed according thereto; therefore
several fevers have also stated alternations, for all things must be
arranged within those periods, so that the man may be able to remain in
safety. And if, as before \[said\], it is expedient for him, he dies of
these things. Medical means are likewise mediate causes, which the Lord
disposes from Providence. That a man becomes restored from the
Providence of God man knows, for he so says; and some acknowledge it by
attributing their restoration to God, and by giving thanks on account of
it.)))

<span class="margnote"><span id="4572.">4572.</span></span>

(((There are also spirits, not far from thence, who infuse cold, and,
thereby, paroxysms of cold fever:))) ((which it was also given me to
know by living and sensible experience. In that region are the most
malicious, the most skilful of all in the art of destroying others and
the human race:)) (they study nothing else; they continually seek after
new things of such a character whereby they can injure; and they put
them into act amongst themselves, so that they may know - for they can
induce infirmities; they can \[effect\] such things as disturb the mind,
and deprive man of his external vitality:) hence he is as if inclined to
fall, just as in sickness, when he begins to come near \[them\], etc. In
a word, they are most malicious: They separate interiors and exteriors,
in various modes, and fill up the exteriors with offensive things,
injurious to man: hence, when interiors fall into \[exteriors\] of such
a kind, they are turned into shocking and deplorable things; for, if the
recipient forms are perverted, whatever falls therein is perverted also.
In such a manner, also, are interiors disunited from exteriors; and,
when this is done, man is no longer of a sound mind - as, also, is the
case in fevers. \[Their\] operation is principally into the stomach, and
also into the biles, both of the pancreas and the liver; and, from
thence, arise such effects \[as have been described\] and also
vomitings, whereto they excite an endeavor. They are indescribably
obstinate; they never desist unless they are driven away. ((There are in
hell very hot places, which it was also granted me to feel, for the sake
of knowing \[where are\] such as induce fevers. They know almost
everything; and from those places they throw forth that impure and
merely corporeal heat, separate from vitality; for, in the other life,
\[evil spirits\] know how to transfer such things skillfully, and they
likewise know by what shifts they can determine them into the body. Such
\[spirits\] are of the most pernicious character, so obstinate as never
to desist unless driven away by the Lord; and when they are driven away,
immediately the febrile heat ceases. Wherefore, they also speak truly
who have been sick when they ascribe their recovery of health to God,
and give thanks to Him; although very many do this only from a custom
derived from infancy, and, when left to themselves, ascribe it to
nature.))

<span class="margnote"><span id="4573.">4573.</span></span>

CONCERNING THE HELLS OF THE SIRENS. Of what nature sirens are has been
described several times already. They are exceedingly malicious, and
have acquired, in the world, the art of simulating goods, as though
\[they were\] angels; wherefore, in externals, they emit from themselves
affections of good, and thence insinuate themselves among simple
spirits, who are related to the exteriors of man's thoughts, or his
natural things. Thus, they keep themselves in the world of spirits, and
can with difficulty be driven out thence; for such things elevate evil
spirits from hell for quite a long time, and they thereby enter into
men's thoughts, and wholly lead them, so that, because they are
internal, they are the worst of those who beset \[man\], and men cannot
at all be defended from them, save by the Lord. They act most
persistently, and do not fear anything; they rely on their arts; they
also know how to insinuate themselves by labyrinthine gyres, from whence
they speak, sometimes in such a manner, that they are heard elsewhere
than where they are, <span id="fr_80"></span>[4573-1](#fn_80.md) and so are
sought after in vain. This was given me to know from many living
experiences. They belong to two genera. Some have for an end to rule
over man, and every society whatever to which they can come, by thus
besieging and leading the thoughts. These are the most harassing kind.
The other genus is similar, but has not such a frenzy for ruling: they
take away all freedom from those who wish to think well, and grant
freedom \[to those\] who will wickedly; for these are the ones who
exercise thought there. They are most obscene; they are sorceresses;
they are against everything good and true. Whence such a crew comes has
been already said. Their hells were in front, at a distance towards the
left: they who wish to rule are somewhat to the right there, in
different caverns. But I saw that their hells were changed, and
transferred to the back on the left, very deep down, from whence they
can by no means burst forth any more, and infest spirits and men. They
are there under a dense cloud, through which their artifices cannot
penetrate. They entered there in crowds of fifty and a hundred each,
more or less. This continued for many hours. On the upper side, the hell
there is like a maw with gullets which are extendible. As soon as they
arrived, it \[the hell\] stretched the maw by bending and forming it in
labyrinths, whereinto they let themselves go, and it engulfed them, and
thus thrust them deep under the disreputable earth there, from whence
they are unable to come forth. This appeared to me on the 5th and 6th of
August, 1752. They likewise form, as it were, serpentine coils, wherein
they place themselves; and then they cannot be removed by others, except
by means of similar coils. Such is the case in the other life.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4574.">4574.</span></span>

CONCERNING THE HELLS OF THOSE WHO ARE EVIL WITHIN AND GOOD WITHOUT. THE
TONGUE. There are those, who, in the world, appeared externally good,
gentle and obliging; but their delight, which they concealed within, was
that they might injure the neighbor in every possible manner. Such are
not distinguished from others - as, for example, (Losche . . .) <span
id="fr_81"></span>[4574-1](#fn_81.md) Such, in the other life, also hold
themselves on high a long time, on account of their being externally
gentle and good. \[They do\] this with the simple, who do not go very
deeply \[into things\]; for, thus, they raise themselves up through a
way to the right, where are such as have been similar; and they
especially desire that such may injure each other. They sit there, to
the right, at a side place, and there delight in such things. Such
spirits are sent to the hell in that region. They are swallowed up by
the thousand. Some are precipitated thither, and this through many
vicissitudes: others forever following. They are malignant genii. Those
who are raised up by these, are of such a character, also. While they
think those things which are of faith - for they have thought and
believed in something of the kind - they compel others, into whom they
are operating, to put the tongue between the teeth in order that they
may bite it, and so cut it off very many times, it was granted me to
experience \[this\] attempt of his, and of such like ones, so that I
might know of what quality they are. \[They are such\] as \[would have\]
rejoiced, if they could \[thus\] have effected it, that they had
destroyed me utterly; for, without a tongue, I should be deprived of the
faculty of eating, and also of speaking, thus, of associating with men.
Hence it is, that their greatest desire is the desire of such things;
hence, also, their delight is augmented according to the magnitude of
the injury \[they are able to inflict\]. I have now seen, for two days,
many thousands thus swallowed down into their new hell.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4575.">4575.</span></span>

CONCERNING A VISION OF A HOUSE AND SPIRITS THERE; ALSO OF A CITY AND
BUILDINGS. When I was in bed and asleep, I was let by the Lord into a
state of vision wherein I had not been before. I was in a wakeful
vision; for I was continually thinking that, although in the body in the
world, I was in the other life among spirits; so that what I then saw,
my spirit beheld, as it were separate from the body. I saw, at that
time, a great building of stone, in which circular stairs, in the midst,
led upward; and there were chambers all round about. I arrived at the
top of that building, and I saw several of those who were there, to whom
I said that I wished to see the apartments of the building, if anyone
would go with me. Then a boy was assigned me to show them to me. He led
me into various apartments, where were men, and from one room to
another. In each something particular was seen, as to utensils and
decorations, and in each I spoke with those there, and saw their faces
in open day; I also heard their voice like a man's in the world, and all
the time as if awake thinking that I was among spirits: so that I saw
them just as they see themselves. They all had clear complexions, and a
distinct utterance. I was received everywhere, nor did they inquire who
I was. Hence it was plain to me, what kinds of spirits dwell with each
other in the other life, and that they associate just as in the world,
and that there are much more marvelous things, there, than in the world.
I told them that they were spirits, and that I was in the world; but to
this they answered nothing.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4576.">4576.</span></span>

After that, I departed thence, and roamed through the streets of the
city - not in a dream, but in spirit amongst spirits and there I saw
many houses, into one of which I entered, and spoke with two persons,
and so returned into the world.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4577.">4577.</span></span>

Those spirits were of those of a middling quality, such as were not in
the lust of injuring others, nor of ruling over others. But where the
angels are, are the most magnificent palaces, such as cannot be
described, and such as the best architect would never believe possible
to be produced. They are resplendent with precious wood and stones; and
\[the angels\] live in the most splendid auras, whereof \[I have
spoken\] already.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4578.">4578.</span></span>

Afterwards, when I was in the body, I spoke with them concerning the
fact that they are like men upon earth. They said that they hardly know
otherwise \[than that they are men upon earth\].

<span class="margnote"><span id="4579.">4579.</span></span>

HELL. CONCERNING SUCH AS, IN EXTERNAL FORM, SOUND OF SPEECH AND EXTERNAL
GESTURE, APPEAR, AS IT WERE, JUST AND SERIOUS, AND SO \[ARE\] IN
AUTHORITY, MANY OF WHOM ARE IN HONORABLE OFFICE, AND YET ARE THE MOST
MALICIOUS. In the other life are some such as have been already
described, having similarly sounding voices, so that, from the sound of
the speech, and from the external sphere, they appear altogether good,
and their sphere is powerful among the simple good. Hence, they are able
to be for a time in the world of spirits; but yet they are lovers of
self, and only benefit those who act in the same manner as they do,
promote their honor and gain, and adhere to them: those, however, who do
not do so, they injure in every manner whatsoever, and feel nothing to
be more sweet than their distresses and torments. They most obstinately
persist in these practices. Such ones hate everybody in the other
\[life\] except the evil, particularly those who at the same time
torture others. So obstinately do they continue to torture others, and
such delight do they find in it, that it is incredible; nor would they
desist to eternity. At length, I saw that such spirits are thrust down
into a hell, on the left hand side there, at a distance, and are there
let down very deep, some of them exceedingly deep: yet, in order that
they may not farther indulge the hope of emerging thence, they are in a
very dense cloud there.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4580.">4580.</span></span>

CONCERNING THE HELLS OF \[THOSE OF\] THE MALE SEX WHO ARE LIKE THE
SIRENS, WHO ARE OF THE FEMALE. There are some of the male sex, who talk
sincerely and as it were truly, and have also acquired from practice and
disposition the ability to appear so, and are also believed to be of
such a character, and quite persuade others that they are such; when yet
they enter into the affections of others, and inveigle them according to
opportunity, and, when their reputation is not endangered, \[they
seduce\] others to such things, and plunder others of their belongings,
in a deceitful and cunning manner. They know different ways of doing
this. They are interiorly the most malicious, having no other end than
to rule and cheat. Such, in the other life, sound as if sincere and
true, and are so believed to be by the simple. They are wholly
pernicious, not unlike the sirens; they suppose that they \[can\] never
be thrust down into hell: they trusted in their art. There is a great
number of such, and their hell was changed. It is near the hell of the
sirens, but nearer, at a less distance \[from me\], and nearer to the
side, to wit, backwards. When they were cast thither, it appeared as if
all were successively heaped together into one ball, and then rolled
down into their hell. There, a nebulous \[cloud\] receives them. Hence,
communication with the world of spirits is taken away from them. They
there practice such things upon one another, because they cannot do so
upon others; and they torment each other, and this by turn and turn
about, and at oft-repeated intervals, even till their malice is subdued,
which only happens after many ages.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4581.">4581.</span></span>

CONCERNING THE HELLS OF THOSE WHO BRING HELP TO THE SIRENS. It was not,
at first, known to me that there was a hell from which were sent forth
those who bore aid to the sirens, and favored them, and also disclosed
many things. It was now revealed to me: it is quite at the back, at a
great distance. As soon as the sirens arrived from afar, then was one
immediately let out, from that hell, high above, and he communicated
with the sirens. They who were in that hell were also successively cast
into another hell, also behind the back, \[but\] nearer the back. They
were swallowed up as soon as they reached thither; and those who were in
the latter hell were also swallowed up. This still continues. They are
genii.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4582.">4582.</span></span>

CONCERNING THE HELL OF THOSE WHO, FROM INMOST DECEIT, WISH AND LABOR TO
INFLICT HARM ON MAN, IN SUCH A MANNER THAT, EXTERIORLY, THEY APPEAR
HONEST AND SINCERE AND FRIENDLY. There are some of such a character
that, in interaction, they appear friendly and sincere, but still their
delight is to inflict harm, not only on friends, but also on neighbors
and other acquaintances. They study this; they secretly contrive it; and
they take precautions, that not anything about it should become known.
One of them (the brewer who lived opposite my house) appeared quite high
above. He also induced an attempt to bite the tongue. The hell of such,
or the like, is on the left side, a little distance backward. They
themselves did not dare to do such things; but it was their delight to
assist that one who was above, so that he might contrive them. I saw
that there appeared as it were a ladder, whereby he might ascend; and
the bystanders assisted that one above, with their arts. They then
posted themselves in a place near their hell, and, by their presence
there, kept him on high; but the mouth of \[another\] hell was opened,
and into it were successively cast all who came to that place: so that
their hell is changed also. They are genii. So much delight attaches to
doing evil, that, even though they see before themselves the mouth of
another hell, and know that they can never emerge thence, yet,
nevertheless, the delight of evil so carries them along, that they do
not refrain; for the delight of doing evil is their life. Similar is the
case with certain other hells.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4583.">4583.</span></span>

CONCERNING A MOST MALICIOUS ONE, WHO WAS DECEITFUL UNDER \[A GUISE OF\]
INNOCENCE. HIS HELL. Once on a time, most filthy things were poured
forth and very powerfully, so that the sphere was filled with such
things. The spirits around me did not know whence they came; but it was
revealed that it was from one of such as seem to themselves to ascend by
ladders, at the back; for he was suddenly drawn by a great veil behind,
and appeared beneath, looking just like an infant, by which was
signified, that it was innocence he put on in order to produce such
abominations. He was then immediately raised up aloft, and shown to the
angels, as to what quality of devil he was, and of what quality he had
been in the life of the body; and he was then rejected to the back, as
far off as the hells there extend themselves, so that he might be
removed from the view of heaven to the remotest hell there.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4584.">4584.</span></span>

CONCERNING THE HELLS. When anyone from the hells appears, it is at once
known from which one they are. Those from different hells appear
distinct. Some appear with a dreadful face, some black and some like
monsters of various kinds; in a word, the forms are innumerable; and,
what is wonderful, all in hell, how many soever they may be, when viewed
in the ordinary light of heaven, appear like each other, and also speak
alike, so that you would believe them to be one and the same person,
when yet they are innumerable, as I proved with the two kinds of sirens,
-everyone speaks and acts like the others; and I saw that there were
thousands upon thousands, everyone of whom was like the others.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4585.">4585.</span></span>

CONCERNING DISEASES. (All the infernals induce diseases, but with a
difference according to the part to which they are attached, so that
they may act from the opposite, to wit, in opposition to those in
heaven, to whom the parts of the body correspond - for there are
opposites to every society in heaven; for, as angels or angelic
societies preserve in connection and soundness all things in man, so
infernals, from the opposite \[side\], divide them. But it is only
permitted them to inflow into the cupidities and falsities pertaining to
man - not into man's organs. Only when man falls into disease, then they
inflow also into those \[organs\] in man where the disease is; for
nothing ever exists with man, save by a cause from the spiritual world.
Man supposes that such things exist in him, and that there is nothing
outside him that acts; when, yet, every natural has its cause from a
spiritual, otherwise it would be without a cause; but, still, this does
not interfere with the fact that they can be, and also ought to be,
cured, or made sound, by natural means. The Lord's providence then
concurs with such means: and thus, also, man is kept the longer away
from faith concerning a providence in the minutest particulars; for, if
he should believe this, and afterwards deny it, he would profane a
sacred truth, which is itself a most dreadful hell.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4586.">4586.</span></span>

That such things derive their cause from the spiritual world, it was
given me to know through much experience, which occurred that never
anything might be left in doubt. Such spirits were often, and for a long
time, attached to me, and they induced torments and pains, yea, even
diseases. They were shown as to where they were, and of what quality
they were; spirits spoke with them, and it was given me to know whence
they came.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4587.">4587.</span></span>

The most obdurate of all are those, who, in the life in the world,
appeared juster than others and hence were in authority, and yet have
believed nothing and have lived the life of the love of self revenging
all things which may be done against them, regarding as enemies those
who have opposed themselves to them and those who have not reverenced
them. When they argued concerning faith, and concerning the life after
death, they were believed by others, \[as\] being in authority by virtue
of their justice and earnestness. They likewise speak, in the other
life, like those who are principled in justice. But they are most
malicious. When they are applied, then they induce agony of the spirit,
by means of tedium, which they increase and inspire continually, and
thus they add impatience, which begets the greatest suffering and
induces such weakness of body that \[the man\] can scarce raise himself
from bed. This was shown me by this means: when they were present, such
a weakness took possession of \[me\], and when they were removed, it
ceased, in proportion as they were removed. They also employ many arts,
so as to infuse weariness and thence weakness. They appeared next the
head; but when they were turned out, they were turned out towards the
left, and cast down into a deep hell there. It is to the left, at a
moderate distance.)

<span class="margnote"><span id="4588.">4588.</span></span>

THAT ALL THINGS INFLOW, THE GOOD AND THE TRUE FROM THE LORD. INFLUX.
((For a whole night I was in a spiritual sphere, but awake just as a
spirit, and an uninterrupted sphere of influx inflowed that all good and
truth is from the Lord. I was in this sphere for many hours at a time,
and, also, in the opposite sphere, that all things are from the
proprium. The latter sphere continually inflowed, and desired to destroy
the other, but it could not accomplish anything for very many hours; but
I was constantly in the sphere that everything good and true is from the
Lord, and the opposite sphere, which assailed \[this\], was able to
effect nothing at all. In such a sphere are those spirits held, who are
initiated and confirmed in that truth. \[They are held in it\],
likewise, to the end that the opposite spirits may recede.))

<span class="margnote"><span id="4589.">4589.</span></span>

A HELL. CONCERNING THOSE WHO INMOSTLY CHERISH TREACHERY AGAINST THE
NEIGHBOR, AND, WITHOUT, APPEAR HONEST, CONCERNING WHOM, ALSO, \[I HAVE
SPOKEN\] JUST ABOVE. This hell was in the left parts, towards the region
of the back. That crew was cast out from the others, and they
immediately inspired a longing to bite the tongue, and also a certain
pain in the extreme edges of the tongue. They were thrust forth into a
hell more in front, as above said, and there appeared, there, a watery
\[mist\], into which they were cast. The ones thrust forth, when
immersed beneath, came into their own atmosphere. This lasted for weeks.
At length, because they did not desist, the watery \[mist\] penetrated
also into the former hell, and swallowed them up. The watery \[mist\] is
exterior honesty. These are most pernicious.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4590.">4590.</span></span>

CONCERNING THE HELL FROM WHENCE COMES FEBRILE HEAT. DISEASE. ((There
appeared a great quadrangular opening, inclining obliquely downwards;
and, there, at a great depth, appeared a round hole, which was then
open, but was immediately closed. It was said, that thence exhales the
dangerous heat which is collected there from various hells - being
derived from such things as induce heats, as, for example, from
adulteries, strifes, revenges, cruelties, and many other such things.
Hence exhales the heat which infests the body when it falls into a
febrile disease; but with much variety.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4591.">4591.</span></span>

The spirits out of such hells are not present with the sick; but there
is a general sphere, and general influx, from such heats, that are at
once appropriated by the disease itself. Spirits from those very hells
were with me, in order that I might be taught whence such things are,
and those spirits had communication with those places: according as they
were withdrawn, the disease became quiescent, and according as they
approached, it became more virulent. Thus it is with heat, with cold,
with pain of the teeth, of the temples, of the head, of the hip, and of
the various joints.))

<span class="margnote"><span id="4592.">4592.</span></span>

CONCERNING DISEASES. ((All diseases, with man, exist from no other
source \[than that just described\], and very many only from cupidities,
as for instance, from excessive indulgence of various vices, and from
the number of them, as from the various bodily delights from lascivious
practices, and from anxiety about the future. These are the real causes
of all diseases. Nor is death itself from any other source, than by
reason of sin. These things vitiate the blood: when this is vitiated,
they obstruct and choke up the very small vessels - wherefore diseases
break out. Hence it is that diseases correspond to those spheres which
are from hell. If mankind had lived in a state of good, then a man would
wane, even to the utmost feebleness of age; and then, when the body
could no longer minister to the internal man, that man would pass away
from its earthly body, without disease.))

<span class="margnote"><span id="4593.">4593.</span></span>

CONCERNING HEAVEN AND HELL. Heaven is in the light of truth, which is
from the Lord; thoughts concerning the Lord are thence; and angels are
those who receive the Lord in such a manner that they are delighted in
the happiness of all, and earnestly desire it, and have their own
happiness therein. Such is the communion of felicities throughout the
universal heaven. But those who will only their own happiness, and care
nothing for others, are not able to be in heaven. They communicate no
happiness from themselves, therefore, they fall down, like heavy bodies,
as if dead \[on approaching heaven\]; for they cannot support the
entrance of such felicity. They are in its opposite. I remarked to the
angels, that it is wonderful that so few, in the other life inquire for
the Lord, although the Christian world is so numerous; when yet others,
such as worshippers of men and saints, ask for those whom they
worshipped in the life of the body, and rejoice because they can find
them - likewise Gentiles who worshipped idols; but it was replied, that
evil, infernal, or diabolical spirits, are, on the first apprehension,
at once averse to that which is truly Divine, for the reason that it
does not accord with them. Hence it may manifestly enough appear that
the Divine Itself whereto they are averse, is the Lord.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4594.">4594.</span></span>

CONCERNING THE CREW OF SIRENS AND THEIR HELL. Those women become sirens,
who devise nothing else than how they may enter into the affections of
men, over whom they wish to rule and by whom to profit, by enticing
their self-love or even self-esteem, so that, being by-and-by
captivated, they may suffer themselves to be ruled by them, and devote
all their powers to them, when yet these women have not even the least
love towards the men, but in their heart, wholly despise them. They thus
act with many in succession, or even simultaneously. Hence, in the other
life, as soon as they come to spirits, they enter into their thoughts,
and hold the thought entirely obsessed, until they \[these spirits\] are
liberated by the Lord. They cannot but at once intrude themselves into
the thoughts and obsess them, from a habit acquired in the life of the
body. There, they are spiritual vermin; and, unless the Lord should free
the world of spirits from such ones, hardly any good spirit would be
able to be in that world, without being led captive by them. Moreover,
they do not care for right and wrong: they also practice abominable
crimes, in a word, even extremely diabolical \[crimes\], and count them
as nothing. When first they enter into the thoughts \[of a man\] they
then follow his thought strongly; afterwards, they lead it.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4595.">4595.</span></span>

They are skilled in very many arts for perverting the order that exists
in the other life. It is a common practice with them, that they do not
speak \[in the ordinary way, but\] from some other place than where they
are, so that spirits may not know their whereabouts. <span
id="fr_82"></span>[4595-1](#fn_82.md) To this end they employ magical art.
They wrap round, as it were, with bandages, a counterfeit wand, and this
in very numerous folds - sometimes a hundred - and this magical wand
they project to the place from which they wish that the voice from them
should be heard; and, also, while they are speaking and entering into
the thought, it is not heard otherwise than as if they are in that
place. The angels, who do not care for magic, see and point out where
they are; but they cannot be resisted unless first that magic \[wand\]
is unwrapped. Sometimes they mix up with the bandages other things,
which they take from some affection.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4596.">4596.</span></span>

For several days, perhaps a week or two, they came to me in crowds,
because, with me, they were able to see the world, and thus to be in the
very corporeal \[state\] and, as soon as they arrived, they flew upon my
thought, which they kept so bound that I had no liberty of thinking, and
also, as a climax, they spoke from elsewhere, by means of their magical
paraphernalia, which, when I perceived, were unfolded; and, so, they
were descried where they were, and sent thence into a hell, which is at
the right, somewhat to the back, and not far off. In that hell, since
they are not able thus to obsess others, and to act in unison, thus to
be accomplices, they there mutually assail each other in a similar way.
Many associate themselves against many; and those who overcome treat the
others miserably, without any mercy. But the ferocious ones among them
are removed; and those who are especially cruel are cast into caverns,
where they are not able to do such things. The angels continually hold
the hells in subjection to themselves, and temper all things there, and
this from the Lord; otherwise, the tortures would be perpetual, and the
states in the highest degree deplorable, by reason of the cruelty in
which they are. So great is the multitude of such, that it can scarcely
be credited; and very many are from the Church. They are destructive,
even of the human race. They obsess the interiors of man, and inspire
everything filthy and nefarious.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4597.">4597.</span></span>

CONCERNING INFLUX. ((Influx is rarely manifest. But, when spirits who
are around, speak about such things as are adverse to the man, and this
inflows, it causes an unpleasant, incongruous and sad experience, in
great variety. When they speak with each other concerning those things
that are agreeable to the man and his disposition, and this inflows, it
produces pleasant, cheerful and congruous feelings, in great variety. I
often wondered whence such things are; but I was instructed, by much
experience, that they are from this source. I spoke with those who
induced the unpleasant feeling. They were driven away, and immediately
it ceased. Such spirits are in various place - around the head, near at
hand and more remote, in the stomach and elsewhere. Thus, it is not
their sphere which inflows, but it is speech and the contrary thereto,
which they know how to infuse and communicate.))

<span class="margnote"><span id="4598.">4598.</span></span>

CONCERNING SIRENS AND IDEAS. It was related above that they \[the
sirens\] produce, by means of wrappings-round, something which they
afterwards project from themselves; and, what is wonderful, when they
speak, they speak by means of that, and the sound is heard as if from
the place where that is, although they are at a great distance from
there; nor is any spirit able to know where they are. It sounds as if
they are there; yea, indeed, as long as that remains in its place they
are safe; they cannot be approached or injured by anyone. Inwardly,
within that wrapper, is generally a wand \[or staff\], by which is
signified power. The angels know where they are; and, when they are cast
together into hell, then also are those puppets unwrapped, and this
quite a long time in a long unbroken line; and, after it has been
unwrapped, or unfolded then, first, can they be approached. They are
also accustomed to infold themselves in wrappings; and thus, also, they
are secure, and cannot be approached by any injury, unless they are
first unwrapped.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4599.">4599.</span></span>

It was inquired what these wrappings were. They are their ideas, which
are variously shaped by them, and are wrapped around in this way; and,
when their ideas are thus wrapped up, they themselves are, for anyone's
mind or thought consists of ideas. Hence they transport themselves, as
it were, into such a puppet; and, when they speak from any quarter, the
sound is heard only from that place \[where the puppet is\], in all
respects as though they were there themselves. Hence it is clear, that
the ideas of man's thoughts, which are from his affections, are real,
because they can thus be transferred. That magic is from the magical
hell. Unless the ideas were real, such a thing could never happen. There
are those who wrap up other things than wands. Nay, certain of them wrap
up any spirits who allow it. Some wrap up obscene things; but such
characters are rejected altogether.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4600.">4600.</span></span>

They came for many days, and were led down into their hell; at first,
into the upper part, then to the side, and afterwards below. They live
there in a deplorable condition; for they are no longer able to wander
about in the way just described, or to practice their abominable arts
against their companions, but are held in check; for there are angels
who are set over the hells, through whom the Lord rules them and
restrains them according to ends.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_78"></span>[4556-1](sd62.htm#fr_78.md) No. 4555 is omitted
from the Latin. Nothing more is involved than an error in numbering.

<span id="fn_79"></span>[4563-1](sd62.htm#fr_79.md) The allusion seems to
be to the bunch of nerve-roots called the cauda equina, which is
situated at the extremity of the spinal column.

<span id="fn_80"></span>[4573-1](sd62.htm#fr_80.md) This description will
suggest to the reader the trick called Ventriloquism.

<span id="fn_81"></span>[4574-1](sd62.htm#fr_81.md) This is as the name
appears in the Latin Edition, the Editor of which was unable to decipher
the manuscript in this place, to his satisfaction. Dr. Achatius Kahl,
however, in his Narratiunculae, conjectures that it may be meant for
Anders Loschern von Hertzfeldt, an officer, of German descent, who lived
in Sweden in the seventeenth century.

<span id="fn_82"></span>[4595-1](sd62.htm#fr_82.md) Evidently, the
spiritual-world equivalent for ventriloquism.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 4601-4650](sd63.md)
