[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Swedenborg](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sd75)  [Next](sd77) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0766143007/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Spiritual Diary*, by Emanuel Swedenborg, \[1758\], tr. by Bush,
Smithson and Buss \[1883-9\] at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Spiritual Diary

<span class="margnote"><span id="5251.">5251.</span></span>

Hence was evident whence it came to pass that so vast a multitude could
have place in one mountain, - at which I had previously marveled. Once
upon a time, I was also led down into such a city, and brought from
thence into a city that was beneath. Hence it was evident that city
existed beneath city.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5252.">5252.</span></span>

Moreover, a vast multitude was able to conceal themselves in one city,
by reason of the fact that great part of them do not appear; for they
who are of a different genius from others, or who turn themselves to
different quarters there, thus to different falses and evils, or to
different loves, immediately become invisible, and only those are
visible who are in a similar faith and love with the others. Hence it
is, that, sometimes, there appear to the inhabitants some that did not
before do so, and that the inhabitants appear, to those who come
thither, either few or many. The houses, also, disappear along with
them, and reappear when they \[i.e. the inhabitants\] are again seen.
Thus is it with things in the other life; which appears from the fact,
that, as soon as a spirit disagrees in opinion with another, he
vanishes. This is one way by which spirits render themselves invisible.
Another is by phantasies.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5253.">5253.</span></span>

Before I was taken quite up to that mountain, I saw an opening, made on
the front side, the long way of the mountain; and into this many were
cast, just as with the opening made in the southern mountain, above
described. <span id="fr_148"></span>[5253-1](#fn_148)

<span class="margnote"><span id="5254.">5254.</span></span>

I observed that there was visitation there for several hours, and then a
silence. The visitation occurred from the Lord, by means of angels; and
the famous ones who were in the monasteries there, and wished to be
lords of heaven and earth and to rule all souls and subject them to
themselves by means of holy things - these famous ones were straightway
cast out, partly into the northern gulf, and partly into the southern,
according to the obscurity, or clearness, of their natural lumen. All
who were in that part were subject to the monks: numberless monasteries
were there. Those in the monasteries were a most lazy crew; and they
subjugated others by means of sacred things, many also by magic and by
phantasies, and the rest by violence; and this to a greater extent than
in the world. When I cast my eyes thither afterwards, the monasteries
appeared empty.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5255.">5255.</span></span>

Those who sat in the windings of the shaft - who also were many - and
guarded it, and carried through and communicated the commands and thus
held the common people in obedience, were afterwards cast down. They
were mingled with the Gentiles who worshipped idols and had no thought
of God. They were also cast into lakes and marshes towards the west - of
which below.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5256.">5256.</span></span>

After this, the rest of the crew was taken away from there, and
dispersed hither and thither, according to their evils and goods.
Lastly, those who were in the lowest place and ruled over all, to wit,
those in IK, <span id="fr_149"></span>[5256-1](#fn_149) amongst whom
were cardinals - of these, a great part were cast into the gulfs, and
some into the southern chasm into which the mountain was sundered as
above described. <span id="fr_150"></span>[5256-2](#fn_150)

<span class="margnote"><span id="5257.">5257.</span></span>

At length, that place was utterly destroyed, so that nothing mountainous
any longer appeared, but the whole appeared like smoke; and this \[was
borne\] into the depth, so that there was no longer any abode there.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5258.">5258.</span></span>

CONTINUATION CONCERNING THE MOHAMMEDANS AND THEIR LAST JUDGMENT. It has
been stated above \[No. 5240\] that these constitute a circle around the
Christians, who form a nucleus. I saw that they were brought from the
west; and they who were round about there, as much as a great multitude,
were brought along a way towards the north-east, apparently in a
circular track; and, on the way, those who were evil were cast outside
that sphere, where is a space of great extent. These were separated from
the rest. There was a desert there, also marshes and ponds, and woods as
well; and into these those who led an evil life were cast. This space
was at the back of that mountain of which I have spoken just above,
where was such a multitude of monasteries which were destroyed with the
mountain. At the side of that space, towards the north, was an immense
and broad gulf, into which many were cast - of whom below.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5259.">5259.</span></span>

The rest went on, by a circuitous way, still farther to the east; and
there they spread themselves over a large and extensive space somewhat
to the back. Those were brought thither who acknowledged God the Father,
and the Son as a Prophet, and \[that He\], together with the Father,
\[was\] also in the sun. Here, therefore, were the better ones. That
ample and wide space was also divided into mountains and valleys, upon
which they were arranged; and there they fare well.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5260.">5260.</span></span>

Those who were still better, who are such as have enjoyed greater light
than the rest, were brought to the front where there is communication
with the Christian heaven - it is an intermediate space - and there,
being instructed, they receive the Lord, and are thence borne right away
towards the south, and there have their heaven behind the Christians in
that part; so that they constitute, also, the remoter borders there.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5260a.">5260a.</span></span>

There are two Mohammeds; and they have their place among the Christians,
on the left, beneath. Inasmuch as they began to rebel against the Lord,
by arrogating power to themselves, therefore, the one who was nearest
was cast down from his place into the very depth, and was there bound in
chains to such a degree that he cannot move himself; and this along with
his satellites. I saw the earth open under them, and they were swallowed
up.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5261.">5261.</span></span>

Afterwards, the other, who likewise arrogated to himself the power of
the Lord, was cast into one of the gulfs.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5262.">5262.</span></span>

When this was done, there occurred a great tumult among those
Mohammedans who were at the east behind the Christians; but they were
brought away from thence, and part of them cast into that desert place
before mentioned and the adjoining chasm. The rest were led around; and
were either scattered on the way, or brought to the places where their
abode was; but some to their heavens in the east and in the south. Many
also were brought in a straight way, across the plain where the
Christians and the Mohammeds were, towards the west.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5263.">5263.</span></span>

CONCERNING THE GENTILES AND THEIR LAST JUDGMENT. The Gentiles constitute
a zone still more remote; but the greatest portion are in the east,
remote from the Christian world, beyond the Mohammedans. These, also,
were brought from thence towards the east; not, however, by a circuit,
but above the northern level of the Christians, and - which I marveled
at - on high; so that a way was granted them above the Christians, and
they did not communicate with them. They were allotted a place around
the Mohammedans, at the east and also in the south.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5264.">5264.</span></span>

Where the heaven of the Mohammedans is, there, on both sides, appear
chasms, descending into the depths. Thither were cast their evil ones,
who have worshipped idols and, thought nothing about God, and at the
same time have lived an evil life.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5265.">5265.</span></span>

There is also a similar chasm on the northern side of the Mohammedan
desert. Thither were cast their worst ones; also, those of the Catholic
religion who worshipped images of the saints and thought nothing about
the Lord. These were mingled with the Gentiles and cast thither.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5266.">5266.</span></span>

Those of the Catholic religion who have adored images and have not
thought of the Lord, are removed from the northern region, under the
mountains there, and mingled with the Gentiles, and brought with them to
their places, just like the Gentiles, because their lot is similar.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5267.">5267.</span></span>

Next, I saw the whole northern valley, as far as the mountains there,
completely upturned, and all who were there scattered, and partly
mingled with the Gentiles and others; and then there also appeared there
as it were a smokiness.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5268.">5268.</span></span>

CONCERNING THE MOHAMMEDS. The first Mohammed <span
id="fr_151"></span>[5268-1](#fn_151) dwelt at the left under the plane
of the sole; and there he held his court, and inflowed from thence into
the Mohammedan people; but, under the guidance of the Lord. There
appeared there a certain radiance, such as is emitted by candles. I was
sent thither, and I perceived lasciviousness mingled with the conjugial
state, which was filthy, for it excited lust. That sphere was loathsome.
It was said, that, in place of these \[Mohammeds\], others now succeed,
who, for the reason that the multitude think much about Mohammed, are to
be kept there by the Lord, lest their phantasies should be destroyed.
That lascivious sphere is from plurality of wives, whom they hold it
lawful to marry. It was granted me to lie down in a warmth not at first
very unpleasant, which, however, immediately became a disagreeable and
exceedingly grievous lascivious heat, from which I greatly desired to
get away.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5269.">5269.</span></span>

CONCERNING THE DESTRUCTION OF BABEL, AND CONCERNING THE GREAT CITY THERE
BETWEEN THE NORTH AND WEST. Between the north and west, behind that
Babylonish city whereof I spoke above - page 356 <span
id="fr_152"></span>[5269-1](#fn_152) - there was a mountain which
continued into a country of mountains and plains, farther on, and also
on both sides, from the north as far as to the southern quarter there,
and from the other side \[of the mountain\] as far as to the eastern; so
that, from the other part of that mountain, and from the sides, there
extended a large and wide district.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5270.">5270.</span></span>

On the top of that mountain was a little city, and in the midst thereof
was a Pope. His palace was exactly like the papal palace on the Monte
Cavallo at Rome. But inside of the mountain was a great city, than which
there is no larger anywhere. It also extended from the northern quarter
as far as to the eastern, into which it penetrated, though slightly;
and, from the other side, through the western quarter, as far as to the
southern. It was, also, exceedingly broad. There was there a vast
multitude of men of various religions; but still the city was of the
Catholic religion. There were said to be there as many as several
myriads. But beneath that under-city, there was not another city.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5271.">5271.</span></span>

That city did exceedingly abound in monasteries of men, amounting to
many thousands; so that it was wholly a monastic city, except for a
small space in the middle towards the west, and on the side towards the
east. The rest of the city was nothing else but monasteries. All the
people there were subject to those who were in the monasteries, just
like slaves to their masters; and, moreover, if anyone had aught of
Divine Blessing, they entered where he was and devoured it till nothing
remained. Whatever they could they brought together into their
monasteries and hid away; thus living by their wits, without performing
any use for the public, and caring for externals and scarcely anything
else. They taught nothing, but only displayed an outward sanctity, which
was wholly hypocritical and also profane. I also found some
acquaintances in that city.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5272.">5272.</span></span>

I was conducted thither when a visitation was commencing; and, then,
they first carried out a golden image of Mary, which they held most
sacred, arrayed as is customary; and next the Pope was led forth to
another place towards the north - whither, I know not. It was perceived
that in the life in the world, he had been blind \[I wonder\] whether,
perchance, he was saved?

<span class="margnote"><span id="5273.">5273.</span></span>

The visitation next entered that great under-city. <span
id="fr_153"></span>[5273-1](#fn_153) There was a great opening in front,
and a road from thence on both sides, and also forwards. But first,
there was an elevation there, and afterwards a descent, for the purpose
that that entrance should not be exposed on that side where the former
city was. <span id="fr_154"></span>[5273-2](#fn_154)

<span class="margnote"><span id="5273a.">5273a.</span></span>

It should first be known, that the dominion of that Pope was over all
that wide and ample tract concerning which see above \[no. 5269\] -
which extended widely round about, and where villas and houses were
closely packed; so that his power was very widespread.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5274.">5274.</span></span>

When the visitation, as was said, entered there, then all who were in
the monasteries were brought out until all the monasteries were emptied.
A Divine force compelled them, so that nobody could withstand it; but
all were brought out through that exit. Those who were first brought
forth, were taken to the place towards the front previously mentioned,
that had been a valley, under which were many hells which were cast
forth, until as it were a smoke appeared. In a word, it was the whole
northern region, as far as the mountainous district. At that time, there
was a great swamp there; and into this those were cast who were brought
out first, of whom there was an immense number. Those who were brought
out after these, were taken to that southern mountain chasm - into which
the mountain was cleft, as above said \[no. 5231\] - and were there
driven into the depth. Lastly, were brought forth some who appeared
altogether hard, who are those that have nothing of good remaining and
are in self-love above others. These were cast \[into\] a gloomy cavern,
under that mountain, at the side of that marshy valley. Thus all the
monasteries were emptied; and they were afterwards destroyed, so that
the city was wholly cleared of monasteries.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5275.">5275.</span></span>

After this, inquiry was made in the city as to where the wicked were;
and they were all cast forth, in great multitude, and thrown into the
same marsh towards the east, and some into the hells of the Gentiles
above described. Thus, that city was purified; and the people who were
left behind, who also live well and take no pleasure in doing ill, were
suffered to remain there.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5276.">5276.</span></span>

After this, the visitation reached the top of the mountainous region,
but at the back of the city, in the distance there; and all the wicked
were brought forth from thence and cast into the hells, and also into
the gulfs. <span id="fr_155"></span>[5276-1](#fn_155)

<span class="margnote"><span id="5277.">5277.</span></span>

CONCERNING THE EASTERN GULF. Afterwards, I was brought to the eastern
gulf, and I saw that all things there were appointed and arranged, that
every evil one was allotted his place, and that some were placed over
them to have charge; and the crew that was not quite so wicked was
removed from there and carried away elsewhere.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5278.">5278.</span></span>

 <span id="fr_156"></span>[5278-1](#fn_156)It was told the rest in the
city, that they should receive their superintending judges and
governors, and also their priests - whom, also, I saw sent thither. The
situation of that city was thus:

<span class="margnote"><span id="5279.">5279.</span></span>

A \[Fig. 3\] <span id="fr_157"></span>[5279-1](#fn_157) was the mountain
mentioned above \[no. 5269\], where was the little city where also the
Pope was: from this was the exit and entrance \[no. 5273\] into the
great city which was beneath \[no. 5270\]: GEF was the northerly
extension: I, the outreach into the east \[ibid.\] BD, the city towards
the west and even as far as the south \[ibid.\], which is at C. But EI
was the part where there were no monasteries \[no. 5271\], because the
people were of another religion. UZYX was the great tract where were the
villas and fields and much people \[no. 5273a\] over whom the
monasteries had dominion.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5280.">5280.</span></span>

CONCERNING BABEL, OR GREAT BABYLON, BETWEEN THE WEST AND SOUTH. There
was, moreover, a great city extending from the west towards the south -
towards the south as far as the chasm there into which the mountain
mentioned above \[no. 5231\] was cleft, and towards the boundary in the
angle at the western side. At this point ended that great subterranean
city of which we now treat.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5281.">5281.</span></span>

And since the situation of that city was between the west <span
id="fr_158"></span>[5281-1](#fn_158) and south, extending in both
directions, therefore, all those assembled there who excelled others in
the light of nature, and were esteemed above others in the world for
ingenuity and skill in invention. Especially the abodes of the Jesuits
were there.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5282.">5282.</span></span>

Their dominion is round about there to a surprising distance. It is a
continuous mountain region. It should be observed, however, that that
city does not appear on the top of the mountain; but they enter it
through a great shaft, and descend from the middle of the mountain, and
then into that great city.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5283.">5283.</span></span>

Likewise, those who dwell in that great surrounding tract, do not appear
above the mountain region, but below it; and they descend through the
shaft to their villas and dwellings.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5284.">5284.</span></span>

The reason is, that robbers and sorcerers, and a crew that can destroy
the inhabitants by magical arts and by phantasies, roam about
everywhere. Therefore they let themselves down under the mountain, where
also there was light like that above - for the mountain does not
obstruct the light.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5285.">5285.</span></span>

Those who dwell in that great city, and those who dwell without it under
the mountain in that great tract, are, principally, the rich. In like
manner in the city, where no one is admitted unless he is rich. The
monasteries there are innumerable. The whole city consists of these -
except for the rich residents amongst them.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5286.">5286.</span></span>

The Jesuits and monks, there, rove everywhere and scrape together
riches, and conceal them in a deep place where they have cellars full of
gold, silver, and diamonds, and precious stones of various forms. They
conceal them all in their cellars beneath the city. There are there
vaults within vaults, darkened; the light is not admitted into them; but
they enter by the light of candles. There they keep their treasures, of
which mention is made in the Apocalypse \[chapter 18\].

<span class="margnote"><span id="5287.">5287.</span></span>

What kind of a city that is, and how their cellars are arranged, may be
seen from the diagram on a subsequent page \[Fig. 4\]. <span
id="fr_159"></span>[5287-1](#fn_159)

<span class="margnote"><span id="5288.">5288.</span></span>

I spoke with the Jesuits who went out and in. They were aware of how it
had fared with the cities already mentioned; wherefore, they descended
to the cellars, and there they hide their more precious things in crypts
there that are still darker, so that they may serve their purposes
afterwards; for they believe that they cannot be taken away from these
hiding-places. They have the greatest anxiety over their riches.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5289.">5289.</span></span>

I spoke with them about their life in the world, and said that they care
nothing about heaven, nor even believe in it, but simply mislead rich
people so that they may get their riches and possess dominion; and,
that, for this reason, they insinuate themselves, by various arts, into
all homes. Also, that they keep the multitude in the darkest ignorance,
and thus block up the way to heaven; for the way to heaven is blocked up
to men when knowledges are hidden away and withdrawn from them. Passage
into heaven, moreover, cannot be effected by their means \[i.e. that of
these Jesuits\], because they believe nothing and are inwardly devils.
It was said that they continually perform masses there as in the world,
and always in a foreign tongue which is not understood of the people;
likewise, that they place all worship in such things, so that there
exists outward sanctity without any inward.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5290.">5290.</span></span>

When they perceived that the Last Judgment was upon them, they then hid
away their more precious things - such as the diamonds and precious
stones - in the crypts; and the gold they carried out. There were many
images of gold.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5291.">5291.</span></span>

A \[Fig. 4\] <span id="fr_160"></span>[5291-1](#fn_160) is the
mountainous surrounding \[no. 5283, 5285\], where the rich dwell
beneath, or inside, in those places; BCD is the mountain under which is
the great city; CE is the shaft \[no. 5282\] whereby they descend; FG is
the great city - G the western quarter, F the eastern quarter; and HI,
the shaft leading into the cellars where they keep their riches. The
chambers there are rendered dark by winding corridors, KSM at length
bent alternately, or reciprocally, at NH, where they keep their most
precious things. They descend into that city by the shaft, and ascend by
circular steps, or in continuous spiral ways, and also by slanting steps
- wide ones, because there is always a multitude going out and in.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5292.">5292.</span></span>

I saw them carrying out their gold, wishing to hide it with the others
who dwell beneath the mountainous part. Some received it; some sent it
back, saying that they have no dealings in such things. All the rich are
admitted, from whatsoever region they may be, and they dwell round about
under the mountainous part there; and also some rich Jews - for they
think of nothing else but riches and dominion: some, of dominion on
account of riches; some, of riches for dominion's sake; and some of
both.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5293.">5293.</span></span>

They also made themselves a communication with the hells under the earth
belonging to the southern part, at the middle there; and they resorted
to these hells, in order to defend themselves by means of magic and
various execrable arts, and to destroy others, and also to coerce those
who were not willing to submit themselves, and who were not willing to
give them their riches. In the hells in that place, the more expert a
devil is in execrable arts, the more welcome he is.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5294.">5294.</span></span>

They placed in their inner cells, dust of the ground, which they
solemnly believe to be gold, <span id="fr_161"></span>[5294-1](#fn_161)
and then, immediately, the ground there, under the treasures, began to
bubble up, and thus \[the cells\] to be overthrown. This happened where
their more precious things were; and, next, an earthquake followed, and
many were cast in from the neighboring hells. Hence there fell upon them
a panic; and all they who were there rushed out of all the monasteries,
and betook themselves through the shafts to the level of the mountain,
where there then appeared a vast multitude of Jesuits and monks,
skilful, when in the world, in learning, arts, and intrigues. Those who
were in the palaces there, who were standing at the windows, kept quiet
till after the monasteries had been deserted; but, being at length
affrighted by the earthquake, they also burst out.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5295.">5295.</span></span>

Some, also, who were wholly devoted to wealth, let themselves down, from
their heart's desire, to their treasures, and resolved to die there,
saying, that, if their treasures are destroyed, it is all over with them
also. These, at the last, however, were cast out, all of them carrying
their golden images along with them; but they were compelled to cast
them away.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5296.">5296.</span></span>

Then, the mountain-top began to be borne away, and the whole city was
presented to sight, along with the magnificent monasteries, their
temples, and the remaining palaces - all which were beheld; and an
eruption burst forth from the lower place where the treasures were. Then
the east wind, or a wind from the east, came, and carried away the whole
city and dispersed it in smoke, and carried it away into the western
sea; and all the treasures were utterly destroyed, and likewise cast
forth into that sea; for, at the west, there is a great sea \[K, Fig.
5\]. <span id="fr_162"></span>[5296-1](#fn_162)

<span class="margnote"><span id="5297.">5297.</span></span>

Afterwards, also, the hells intermediate between the center and that
city were likewise utterly cast forth, and those who were there cast
into the hells of the Gentiles (of which above \[no. 5264\]), which are
on the west, at both sides of the Mohammedan heaven.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5298.">5298.</span></span>

This lasted for some time; and it seemed, at first, as if a deluge was
let loose over the whole region there; and, at length, it appeared to be
divided by a certain precipice which lay between the hells and the
district over which that city ruled.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5299.">5299.</span></span>

At length, also, the district under the rule of that city, where the
rich dwelt under the mountain, was cast out; and they who were there
burst forth, some hither, some thither.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5300.">5300.</span></span>

When this had been accomplished, the whole of that Jesuitical and
monkish crew was brought to the western sea, to the shore there that
faces the south. They stood on the shore in a long row, and were cast
into that sea. Their position in the long row on the shore was according
to their natural lumen and the wickedness plotted from it.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_148"></span>[5253-1](sd76.htm#fr_148) See No. 5231.

<span id="fn_149"></span>[5256-1](sd76.htm#fr_149) See No. 5249.

<span id="fn_150"></span>[5256-2](sd76.htm#fr_150) See No. 5231.

<span id="fn_151"></span>[5268-1](sd76.htm#fr_151) See Nos. 5260a and
5261.

<span id="fn_152"></span>[5269-1](sd76.htm#fr_152) No. 5249

<span id="fn_153"></span>[5273-1](sd76.htm#fr_153) See No. 5270.

<span id="fn_154"></span>[5273-2](sd76.htm#fr_154) i.e. the little city
on the top of the mountain. - See no. 5270, beginning.

<span id="fn_155"></span>[5276-1](sd76.htm#fr_155) These asterisks at
the end of 5276 and at the beginning of 5278, which occur in the Latin,
would seem to signify that the description in 5278 and 5279 follows
immediately upon, on that in 5276. We have, therefore, so placed it,
though preserving the original numbering. - ED.

<span id="fn_156"></span>[5278-1](sd76.htm#fr_156) These asterisks at
the end of 5276 and at the beginning of 5278, which occur in the Latin,
would seem to signify that the description in 5278 and 5279 follows
immediately upon, on that in 5276. We have, therefore, so placed it,
though preserving the original numbering. - ED.

<span id="fn_157"></span>[5279-1](sd76.htm#fr_157) On the next page in
the printed text is a diagram of a city to which the letters of location
refer.

<span id="fn_158"></span>[5281-1](sd76.htm#fr_158) The Latin edition has
"east" (orietem); but, in deference to what seem to be the requirements
of the context, we have substituted "west" in the text, supposing that
orientem, is a misreading of the Latin Editor's for occidentem. -ED.

<span id="fn_159"></span>[5287-1](sd76.htm#fr_159) The diagram is of a
city at the foot of a mountain, with what appear to be tunnels going
down from the top of the mountain and from the center of the city,
leading into caverns beneath.

<span id="fn_160"></span>[5291-1](sd76.htm#fr_160) The diagram is of a
city at the foot of a mountain, with what appear to be tunnels going
down from the top of the mountain and from the center of the city,
leading into caverns beneath.

<span id="fn_161"></span>[5294-1](sd76.htm#fr_161) Dr. Immanuel Tafel,
the Latin Editor, reads verum (truth), instead of, as the context
unmistakably demands, aurum (gold). -ED.

<span id="fn_162"></span>[5296-1](sd76.htm#fr_162) A diagram of two
cities with a mountain between and towards back in reference to them.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 5301-5350](sd77)
