[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Swedenborg](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sd79)  [Next](sd81) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0766143007/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Spiritual Diary*, by Emanuel Swedenborg, \[1758\], tr. by Bush,
Smithson and Buss \[1883-9\] at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Spiritual Diary

<span class="margnote"><span id="5451.">5451.</span></span>

Those who are in any doctrine, although not entirely true, and are
nevertheless in the good of life, are in heaven; for falsity of doctrine
is not falsity when there is good in it. All in heaven differ as to
truths; but those who are not in any doctrine cannot be in heaven.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5452.">5452.</span></span>

ABOUT THE RUSSIAN NATION The Russian nation dwells in the south-eastern
angle - right in the angle - under the earth there. They are in greater
darkness than the rest. I was conveyed to that part; and, at first, I
saw a dirty place where were many who deliberated about matters relating
to their kingdom, and indeed about liberty such as \[is enjoyed\] in
other countries; but they did not show themselves; they were in complete
concealment. I afterwards heard one saying that they feared the Czar,
and that the Czar was everywhere.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5453.">5453.</span></span>

After this, I was carried down to others of that nation who were better.
They worked continually. After this to others, who also worked. I
afterwards saw many who were leading women in procession. It was heard
that this was heaven to them!

<span class="margnote"><span id="5454.">5454.</span></span>

I heard, after this, that they do not care for religion, and scarcely
anything else than that if there is a God there is; if it is asked where
God is, that God is in heaven; if they are asked whether He created all
things, they do not comprehend, because they suppose that, in that case,
He will walk about in every direction and preserve things. In a word,
they are entirely empty; neither do they care for truths, as such things
\[prove\].

<span class="margnote"><span id="5455.">5455.</span></span>

It was said, also, that they were inwardly wickeder than others, and
that they operated, in an exceedingly powerful way, by means of
phantasies, but are not skilled in magic; for those learn magic who are
in knowledges, but not those who are not in knowledges.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5456.">5456.</span></span>

They who were the better amongst them, were, to a great multitude,
carried down thence towards the north, beyond the deserted Babylonish
region there, and let into a plain, at a great distance northwards.
There, this region is terminated in woods, in which are those who are as
it were wild beasts. They enter into vaults in various places there, and
scarcely ever appear above the surface. The tract of those there, is on
the northern side, towards the eastern angle thereof.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5457.">5457.</span></span>

ABOUT THE PROFANE OF VARIOUS RELIGIONS, ESPECIALLY OF THE ROMAN
CATHOLIC. There were collected into one \[assembly\], profane spirits of
both sexes; and, in the first place, those who were of the Catholic
religion. All of them, also, are those who have believed the holy things
of their religion, and have profaned them; as, for example, those who
have contrived deceitful arts against others in any way whatever; who
have perpetrated crimes, without and within monasteries; who have
debauched girls in monasteries, and the girls themselves who have been
debauched; their Superiors, of both sexes, who have allured \[the
girls\] and permitted \[these things\], and who have, afterwards,
contrived their murder, secretly, lest their crime should become known:
besides other abominations \[which they have associated\] with the holy
things of their religion - which abominations must be withheld.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5458.">5458.</span></span>

All such, gathered into one \[group\], were cast into an extremely deep
and dark pit which was opened in the midst of the middle region, and
there were hidden away lest they should appear. Thither these - of both
sexes - were cast; and they were collected in the angle between the
north and the east. <span id="fr_187"></span>[5458-1](#fn_187)

<span class="margnote"><span id="5459.">5459.</span></span>

After this, in the midst of the western part, almost within the
Babylonish territory there, the land was seen to be drawn down from the
earth there to a certain quadrangular space. This was felt as if the
shirt were being drawn away from a man's genital region. And then
appeared there as it were liquefied flesh, dissolved by putrefaction.
Thither all those were cast who have lived well exteriorly, have
attended preachings and the Holy Supper as a habitual practice and
frequently, and yet, inwardly in themselves, have planned murders and
adulteries, and have cherished hatred towards the neighbor, revenge and
ferocity without pity, and have never performed any repentance other
than that they have prayed that their sins might be forgiven, and
nevertheless have not thought about those hatreds, revenges and
cruelties, but have persisted in them, not thinking of those things
which are then read and said, \[namely\] that those are forgiven who
examine themselves and after \[the worship\] shun, and are averse to,
\[their\] evils. Such ones, because they have always believed, and
nevertheless have lived thus, were cast forth into that profaners pond,
which appeared like fluid, naked, putrefied flesh. Thither were cast
all, of various religions, howsoever many, who have been of such a
character; and this to a vast multitude. After this, that pond was
covered with dust brought thither from its southern shore.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5460.">5460.</span></span>

 <span id="fr_188"></span>[5460-1](#fn_188) Thither also were sent those
who have persuaded others to abominable deeds, also by magical arts; and
those, too, who, in the other life, have declared that they are Christ,
either that they are Himself or are sent by Him, and have spoken piously
and devoutly, and, under that mask, have contrived crimes. There are
very many of such a character, especially from the Catholic religion;
the simple-good can be misled by them. Such were seen, first,
\[issuing\] from the monasteries in the western quarter, not from the
northern.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5460a.">5460a.</span></span>

After this, there was seen in that pit a smoky vapor rising on high, as
if towards heaven, to a certain mountain there, on the summit of which
those who are there have placed a certain devil, whom by means of
phantasy they clothed in white, whom they called God the Father, and to
whom they offered adoration. There were many such \[devils\] one after
another, to a very great number. Twelve, who wished to be thus
worshipped, rose up thither: they were all collected into one \[group\],
and were seen cast out of the northern side towards the west, and thrown
into the profane pit. Among them were some Jesuits.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5461.">5461.</span></span>

BABYLON THEREAFTER. ABOUT THE SWEDES OF THE EQUESTRIAN ORDER, <span
id="fr_189"></span>[5461-1](#fn_189) AND ABOUT OTHERS OF THE SWEDISH
NATION. Certain ones appeared in the western quarter, slightly removed
from the middle part, towards the southern, who had badges on the front
of the breast, and were girt and decked with the hands and stars of the
Equestrian Order; and it was perceived that they were of those who have
belonged to the Equestrian Order of Sweden. I then heard the angels
saying, about them, that they were such as have changed their
disposition which they previously had, namely, that they \[now\] thought
only of themselves, of their dignity and of their preeminence over
others, and, thus, that they determined all their thoughts to
themselves; and, if to others around, still so that, on account of such
badges, they regard, venerate and worship themselves more than others:
thus, all \[their\] interiors are determined to themselves on external
grounds; while, formerly, that nation was not of such a character. They
did not think of self from external considerations but from internal; so
that they have, now, by such means, become external men. They said that
they deserved to be set over others more than others did; and therefore
offices were given them. When, however, they were in a certain senate,
and began deliberating about solid realities, it was perceived by the
angels that they were not able to speak from interiors, or to see the
things within themselves, or to discriminate good and evil, from
judgment, but only to speak from the memory, and thus not to judge
anything except on the ground of agreeableness; and this was because
they were now in such a Babel, thinking of themselves, and also of their
importance in the eyes of others; for as far as this occurs, so far
interior obscurity supervenes, and \[the disposition\] also
deteriorates. Wherefore, they were expelled from their offices, and sent
far away into the west, that they might seek offices for themselves
\[there\]; but, wherever they came, those there told them that they
thought only about themselves and not about their duties, save from an
external sensual ground, not from the understanding as others \[did\];
and that, the sensual sphere reigned more with them than with others;
therefore, also, they were not received, but sent into other places,
where they found none over whom they could rule. At last, they were
reduced to extremities, so that they begged aims. Those <span
id="fr_190"></span>[5461-2](#fn_190) who are external and sensual,
reason and speak cleverly, but only from the memory, when they regard
themselves, or are \[arrayed\] in those badges; but internal men are
different. The former, at that time, see nothing from internals, but
only from the memory.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5461a.">5461a.</span></span>

A certain one, also, called Lagerberg, on whom such Equestrian Order and
badge was conferred, and with whom it is well, inasmuch as he has
studied the good of the country and wished it well - not from pride as
some others have done: he then saw these, and said that he discovered
the same tendency in himself, viz., that when he had on the badge, he
was not able to think as before he put it on, because he was then
amongst those who were powerful from thought of self - and also when he
was at home and had the Equestrian robe over his dress; but that, when
he threw off that robe, then he immediately returned to his former
judgment and his former disposition; wherefore, he gradually
discontinued putting on such livery at home, and only \[wore it\] in
public, because of the injunction.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5462.">5462.</span></span>

It happens similarly with those who are in employments and in dignity,
and think only of themselves, of their power, of their authority, of
their knowledge and of their superiority over others. Many Swedes who
are of good family, are of such a character, because they almost all
affect dignities and also titles, solely that they may be distinguished;
and because they are now become external or sensual men, they are more
like this than they were formerly.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5463.">5463.</span></span>

Evil and infernal spirits who have been released in order that they may
minister to men - thus who are in the world of spirits - all know how to
lead those who think of themselves; and they also do lead \[them\]
whithersoever, even towards whatever hell, they will, as far as they are
able to turn their thoughts to self; but those who do not \[direct their
thoughts\] to self, but to others whom they esteem more worthy than
themselves, especially if to the Lord, they are unable to move. When a
man thinks of self he is in the love of self, and of the world for the
sake of self - if he prefers himself before others, and \[considers\]
that he is abler and knows more than they, and is superior to others;
but they who think of others, are in charity towards the neighbor, and
in faith and love towards God. Evil and infernal spirits know how, by
various arts, to turn the thoughts of another spirit upon himself, and
thus to lead him whithersoever they will. Some do it by magical art;
some by arts of phantasy; some from communication of the thoughts and by
influx from themselves at the time:

<span class="margnote"><span id="5464.">5464.</span></span>

\(1\) They place themselves at the back, below and above, and there they
thrust in their thoughts; they turn the thoughts of another spirit, and
thus of a man, to himself, to his own power, to his own praise, in a
word, to the proprium. Almost all infernals know how to do this. (2)
Others gaze upon various parts of the body and upon the head and, where
they see anything black, they know the proprium still rules there - for
the proprium is black, because it is of the love of self - and, then,
they seek to learn what of self is there, and, when they find out, they
infuse their own thoughts there, and lead \[their victim\] whithersoever
they will. (3) Some look into the forehead; and, if it appears black,
they then lead him; likewise, if it is grayish-white like a plastered
wall, inasmuch as this indicates simulated external sincerity; but from
him in whom they see human flesh they withdraw, and him they do not
lead. (4) Some cast a black veil over his face and also over his breast,
and thus they magically take away his thoughts of the neighbor, and
oblige and compel him to think of himself; and so they lead him, but not
like they do others who are black of themselves: the former return
immediately. (5) Some enshroud another in darkness and convey \[him\]
into the dark, and so compel him to think of self. (6) From the color
around a spirit or man - black, white, flesh-color, or yellow - they
conclude something about the man's state as to his proprium, or
self-love. Where it is black, there is self-love: such a one is led; and
it is according to the intensity of the black. (7) Some only perceive by
means of the thoughts of another - for there is a general law of
thoughts - and these insinuate themselves into them and turn them to
\[the victim's\] proprium and love of self, in all ways - by phantasies,
by magic; and by the aid of many of the hells; and, so, they drive him
to thinking about himself; and, when it comes to that, he is in their
power. (8) Sirens know how to insinuate themselves into the various
affections which are the ruling love of a man; and so they take him with
them. Also, they know how to reduce the thoughts of another, magically,
even to the sensual, which is the extreme external; and, when he is
reduced to that, they induce various phantasies and lead him
whithersoever they wish. It is the sensual of man where his self-love,
or proprium, resides: so far as he can be drawn up, or elevated, out of
that, as to the thoughts, towards interiors, so far he can be led away
from his proprium. Man's sensual, at this day, is, with most people,
wholly corporeal, and has not anything spiritual. (9) It was granted me
to perceive when I was in the proprium, and when not in the proprium.
When in the proprium, I was fit for nothing; wherefore, I was led out of
it by the Lord, as far as that could be done. Hence is manifest what the
love of self, and the love of the world for the sake of self, is. When
\[any\] are led in the proprium and borne away, they appear to be led
down through the surrounding places; which is according to the changes
of the state of the thoughts. There were some such of the Swedish
nation, whose desire it had been thus to reduce the thoughts of other
spirits to subjection, and so to lead them whithersoever they would; but
they did not know how, save one or two of them. They were in the western
quarter.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5465.">5465.</span></span>

\[I was\] looking to the east in a certain desert place which ended in a
wood, where, also, some were wandering about. These drove certain ones
into the proprium, and led them to self; and, amongst them, were some
known to me in the world. But by reason of the fact that they were set
over others - for they were without rulers - they, therefore, infested
one another dreadfully; as happens where there is no magistrate and no
order, or no government. I was conveyed to this place; and it was found
that those there were such as had no fear of God nor regard for man, so
that they cared for no one; this is how it was that they acted in such
ways from the hells. The majority of them were of the common people,
who, nevertheless, have thought craftily and wickedly within themselves
in the world. Visitation was then made upon them; and, when it was
proved that they were of such a character, those were taken from them,
who, by the arts of phantasy and magic, brought them thither; and there
was opened, in the middle region, a great cavern which reached into the
depth; and into this were cast all who were there, and all those who
were in the woods were also sought out, and cast thither likewise. There
were, moreover, many who appeared upon a higher place at the end of the
wood, who were such as knew something about God. Those who were yet like
the rest, were also cast into the same cavern. It should be known that
all such are conducted together to the same place - this is usual in the
other life - thus, those who were such \[were conducted\] to the tract
in that part, and into the woods. Those who were in that tract, knew how
to hide themselves in certain subterranean vaults; also, those who were
in the woods; but they were got out of them.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5466.">5466.</span></span>

There were, moreover, still craftier ones who were more skilful in
reducing others to their propriums and leading them. These dwelt under
the earth in a long row, right in the extension of the angle between the
west and south. From the middle-space into the far distance, is what is
called the extension of the angle. <span
id="fr_191"></span>[5466-1](#fn_191) Ba is the south; bc, the east; cd,
the north; da, the west. The extension of the angle between the west and
south is eaf: this is what is called the extension of the angle. They
dwelt along that extension; on the western side, men; on the southern
side, women who have been harlots; towards the middle region, those who
have known something about the Divine; further removed towards f, those
who have known nothing about the Divine. They were thus arranged:
consequently, the men were on one side and the women on the other. Where
the women dwelt, there appeared a sulphurous brightness as it were,
which was by reason of the lasciviousness in which they have been in the
world; for lasciviousness, amongst women, so appears in the other life
when they are together. But where the men dwelt, there was darkness. I
was also led to a certain place there; and it was seen that they dwelt
in their chambers like harlots, but, outside, sat upon seats about the
southern wall. Afterwards, visitation was made to show of what quality
they were; and it was found that the men, who were wicked and cunning,
have, by various arts, stolen men from elsewhere and conveyed them to
the women, who treated them cruelly in different ways. It is said that
they stole them; and this happens when they lead them to their proprium,
and thus carry them away whithersoever they will, according to the
former showing. Those men, also, were able, by their wickedness and art,
to lead away spirits whom others cannot - as, likewise, was done with
certain who were with me.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5467.">5467.</span></span>

After the visitation had shown that such was the character of the women,
and of the men, who dwelt in a long row along the extension of the
angle, then followed the judgment, \[namely,\] that all such ones were
cast into hell, from which they could never more go out. The women were
cast into a place burning with sulfur and fire. This place, or this
shining pond, appeared just as with those in the houses which were
luminous with the sulfurous \[sphere\] of lasciviousness. <span
id="fr_192"></span>[5467-1](#fn_192) Into this pond all the women were
cast. The pond was situated crosswise to the end of the angle, extending
itself from the west into the south, transversely to the angle. It was
large. They who were cast thither were a great number. The men, however,
who dwelt along that angle, were cast to the western side into an abyss
of a like description which opened in front of that pond, which abyss
was dark and extended deeply under the sulfurous pond. Forwards, also,
opened a similar abyss, which likewise extended under the other: into
this, were cast those who knew about the Divine and who attended
churches, and nevertheless had all the while been in a like wickedness.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5468.">5468.</span></span>

The extension of the angle between the west and south is de \[Fig. 9\];
the sulfurous pond into which the women were cast, ae; the abyss where
the men were, b; the abyss, farther forward, into which those were cast
who knew about the Divine and were still of such a character, c. But of
these let something now be said. <span
id="fr_193"></span>[5468-1](#fn_193)

<span class="margnote"><span id="5469.">5469.</span></span>

Since, however, evil spirits who care nothing for the Divine, are able
to effect nothing, by any art or phantasy whatsoever, except they have
with them spirits who know the Divine, thus who have known some of the
truths of faith, it was therefore inquired where such ones were as might
bear them aid; and they were found in a certain mountain above, over the
middle-space, towards the west. There was there a vast multitude, of
both sexes, of such as have been in the like wickedness, and stolen men
by various arts, phantastical and magical, and led them into the cavern
in the western region, at no great distance from the middle-space -
where, also, the brightness appeared - and there barbarously entreated
them in various ways. When this was discovered, then, all those women,
to a great number, who were in the cavern, were cast into the sulphurous
lake, ae \[Fig. 9\], <span id="fr_194"></span>[5469-1](#fn_194) and the
men into the anterior abyss: all the women were adulteresses in the
world, and the men adulterers, and, in various ways, enticed to
adulteries. These, howsoever they may have frequented churches and
participated in the Holy Supper, still are such that they care neither
for God nor men; and, in the other life, they abandon themselves to such
arts - in which they place the delight of their life. Those who \[were\]
in the mountain were of various nations; some of them, also, of the
Swedish. -

<span class="margnote"><span id="5469a.">5469a.</span></span>

After some time, a great part of them were transferred from those hells,
an exceedingly great distance in the west, to other hells. They were
seen by others, who were horror-struck - they were so monstrous,
corpse-like and vile. They were seen by the last pope; and it was said
that he never saw anything more horrible. \[I saw\] also among them, in
a house, some who had been nuns; of \[one of\] whom nothing such was
suspected. I spoke with her.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5470.">5470.</span></span>

 <span id="fr_195"></span>[5470-1](#fn_195) \[Figure 10 is a drawing of
a square, each side of which is labeled with a direction - with east
being on the top. From the four corners proceed straight dashed lines
leading to various areas. Above the drawing are some mountains.\]

<span class="margnote"><span id="5471.">5471.</span></span>

 <span id="fr_196"></span>[5471-1](#fn_196) ABOUT THE FOUR ANGLES, AND
ABOUT THOSE WHO ARE THERE, AND ABOUT THEIR LAST JUDGMENT, ALSO ABOUT THE
DRAGON AND ABOUT THE ABYSSES INTO WHICH THEY WERE CAST. All things in
the other life must be considered in relation to such a site \[as in
Fig. 10\]. <span id="fr_197"></span>[5471-2](#fn_197) The middle-space
is where those are who are truly Christian; and in its midst (A) is the
New Jerusalem. It is quadrangular. The angles must be regarded in
relation to the extensions into the quadrangle as, for example, the
angle between the west and south is ghik; the angle between the east and
south is ab, etc.; the angle between the east and north, op; the angle
between the west and north is mn these lines are called the extensions
of the angle.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5472.">5472.</span></span>

Those who were situated along the extension of the angle between the
west and south, gh, <span id="fr_198"></span>[5472-1](#fn_198) and the
sulfurous lake or pond, l, and the gloomy chasms, k, i, have been
written of immediately above

<span class="margnote"><span id="5473.">5473.</span></span>

They who were situated along the extension of the angle between the east
and south, ab, <span id="fr_200"></span>[5473-1](#fn_200) were those who
have cared nothing for the doctrine of the Church, but have applied the
sense of the letter of the Word to whatsoever they chose, and thus to
favoring whomsoever \[they would\] and their loves and principles; thus,
who have not lived well, and have, in the way specified, been adulterers
with the Word. At the southern side, along the extension of this
\[angle\], were the women of such a description; and on the side towards
the east were the men of such character - thus, the women and the men
dwelt apart. They were, therefore, adulterers in the spiritual sense.
Visitation came upon them, and, after it, the men were cast into that
long chasm tending towards hell in that part which appears at c,
according to the degree of the adulteration they have committed being
more or less. The women of such a character were cast into that chasm,
d, at the southern side \[of the extension\]. The clergy who have been
such and have lived ill, were cast into that chasm more distant from the
others, which is at x; and, there, it appeared, below, like a coal-fire,
and the smoke thence issuing was like the dust of powdered black coal.
In the women's chasm, below, appeared a horrid coaly glare. After these
were cast into these places, a vast number of similar ones were cast
down into the same chasms, and expelled thither from various mountains
in the east, where z is, and round about; then, also, from mountains in
the south, and, likewise, some from the middle - all according to the
degree of their adulteration. It was an immense number.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5474.">5474.</span></span>

After this was shown a plain, lower than the ground, in which were
various dark, subterranean places at the sides, exceedingly broad,
situated where EF <span id="fr_201"></span>[5474-1](#fn_201) is,
crosswise to the angle. Thither were brought down all those, of
whatsoever condition, both priests and others, who have had no doctrine
- thus not a fixed but an unsettled faith - owing to the fact that they
have studied the Word only as to the sense of its letter, and so did not
explain anything in it according to the doctrine of their Church, for
which they had no regard. For they who do not care for doctrine, have
not a fixed faith but an unsettled one; therefore, they do not possess
in the other life an intellect which can be illustrated. These who are
there, have not lived so very ill, but, in externals, morally well; some
not so well. There they are separate: they obtain a situation according
to their life. They were gathered in that part, successively, from the
first centuries; and, now, many are brought down there. It is quite a
large and roomy space. Those who are there are not so badly off; but the
states of their life are changeful and uncertain. They do not dwell in
stated houses, but now in these, now in those; for the reason that they
do not possess a fixed, but only an unsettled faith. It was said that
those who are cast thither are not able to go out any more.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5475.">5475.</span></span>

It should be known that those two chasms c and d, <span
id="fr_202"></span>[5475-1](#fn_202) also that great plain, EF, are what
are called, in the Apocalypse, the abyss into which the dragon was cast;
therefore, those in then are dragons of the abyss, <span
id="fr_203"></span>[5475-2](#fn_203) -Apoc. 20:3; and, in that great
plain, EF, are those who have spiritually committed whoredom with the
Word: in those two anterior ones, those who have committed adultery with
it.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5476.">5476.</span></span>

Beside the angle between the east and north, along its extension,
op, <span id="fr_204"></span>[5476-1](#fn_204) dwell those who have
lyingly made themselves out, before men, to be sincere, devout, and
characterized by every virtue, also that they were endowed with faith,
and who have thus, in various ways, led men astray, inducing them to
believe that they were such; whereas, all the while, they have been
utterly insincere, thieves, harlots and infamous. I have heard that they
have seduced whomsoever they chose, by lying. They have spoken as if
from the heart and trustworthily; devising many such means by which they
might persuade. There were, on the northern side, the women of such a
character, who operated powerfully by phantasies; on the eastern side
were the men, all in chambers there, under the earth, in a long row. The
men and women of such a description who were worse than the rest, were
shut up more interiorly.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5477.">5477.</span></span>

Visitation was made upon them, and they were found to be such, on both
sides; and then they were all cast down thence, and, in fact, into a
certain mountain, q, <span id="fr_205"></span>[5477-1](#fn_205) at the
end of the angle, in the midst of which a shaft opened leading into the
depth. Thither were cast the women of such a kind, to a great number;
and, into the dark chasm beyond the mountain, in a certain plain at the
eastern side of that mountain, a little farther on, at r, were cast the
men who were such.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5478.">5478.</span></span>

At length, \[some\] from the hells under the middle-space, were also
cast thither, even to a great multitude; and they were not seen (to
come) from the mountains, but from the hells under the middle-space. The
men were cast into the chasm r, the women into the shaft in the middle
of the mountain, q, o'. <span id="fr_206"></span>[5478-1](#fn_206)

<span class="margnote"><span id="5479.">5479.</span></span>

At the angle between the west and north, beside its extension, mn, <span
id="fr_207"></span>[5479-1](#fn_207) dwelt those, who, in the world,
have known nothing, and were thence in blindness as to spiritual and
moral things - of an utterly gross nature; some, also, were as it were
idiotic, inasmuch as, in the world, they have wished to know nothing
about the doctrine of the Church, nor about the Word . . . . <span
id="fr_208"></span>[5479-2](#fn_208) There, also, are the two chasms,
the forward one for the men, the hinder for the women; and those who
are, in turn, sent thither, are as it were idiots, many of whom are such
as have been called wise, or clever, in the world, but who yet have
denied the Divine, have cherished hatred and revenges in their heart,
have been adulterers and the like, whatever \[they may have been\] in
moral life: those who are such, lest by means of the gift of natural
ingenuity they should hurt others, are sent thither, and there they grow
idiotic. Such, too, within a short time, were also vastated for two days
together; and, when they arrive at that place, they become stupid and go
as it were silly, just as though they knew nothing at all; for, except
this happened, they would do evil to many by means of the gift of their
ingenuity and its abuse. Lagerberg <span
id="fr_209"></span>[5479-3](#fn_209) was sent thither because of his
haughtiness, arising from dominion in the world; on account of his
confirming himself in adulteries by intrigues before his marriage (he
also afterwards confirmed in himself that there is nothing of evil in
them); on account of the revenges which he cherished in heart against
all who opposed themselves to him; on account of denial of the Divine,
believing that religion is only to be countenanced for the sake of the
masses; and because he did not care for any of the doctrinals of the
Church, but only delighted in reading and re-reading the transactions of
the senate, and the like - on account of the delight he took therein
from his youth, stimulated and enhanced by reason of the influence he
possessed thereby. He was not a man of society, because he was stern:
hence it was that he was given to such \[pursuits\]. He was explored,
and so exposed; wherefore, he was vastated within two days and sent into
that anterior chasm, and became foolish like the others. He breathed
revenge right up to the last, and this for \[slight\] cause, because,
namely, he was hindered from carrying off another man's wife. The light
\[lux\] in that chasm, was altogether coaly nothing else.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5480.">5480.</span></span>

After this, it was seen that a large number who were there, rose up from
the lower earth in the western region towards the southern; also of
those who were carried into the mountains which were in the east in
place of those who were cast down therefrom, whom above \[no. 5427a\].
For, when evil spirits are cast into hell, then good ones succeed in
their place, most of whom have been concealed and reserved by the Lord
in the lower earth, and thus taken away from the contagion of the evil
and there initiated into spiritual life. It was said that they were such
as have learned the doctrinals of the Church in youth for the sake of
the reputation of being learned in such matters; but afterwards, led by
the Lord, they have, by their means, imbued the Christian life, and, as
far as they have done this, so far have put off the pride of erudition.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5481.">5481.</span></span>

Dwellings according to the quarters above the earth. <span
id="fr_210"></span>[5481-1](#fn_210) In the western quarter, towards the
south, dwell those who are cunning and wicked, wishing to lead others to
the north. There, are the dull ones; thus, those who enjoy no talent for
injuring and leading others.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5482.">5482.</span></span>

In the northern quarter, towards the west there, are those who are dull
and enjoy no talent for injuring and leading; but, towards the east
there, dwell those who ingratiated themselves and seduced by lies, thus
were cunning and wicked in that way, and also wished to lead others.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5483.">5483.</span></span>

In the eastern quarter, towards the north, are those who are in lies,
and by that method cunningly seduce - thus, who are not in any religion;
towards the south there, those who are not in any doctrine, vacillating
and believing whatever they have a mind to: to some extent also these
are domineering.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5484.">5484.</span></span>

In the southern quarter, towards the east, are some who are domineering,
and who are in high employments, and who do not know anything with
certainty. Towards the west, were some who were crafty through
affections, as sirens and others.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5485.">5485.</span></span>

These \[habitations\] are above the earth where they appear, and are
evil. Those there who are in mountains and rocks above the earth, and
those who are below the earth at various levels, are, differently from
the former, both good and evil. Angels and good spirits know, solely
from the path which spirits pursue when they walk about, what their
quality is.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5486.">5486.</span></span>

ABOUT THE SIRENS AND THEIR LAST JUDGMENT. Of what quality, and who,
sirens are, has been described several times before. They are the worst
of all in the other life, and exceedingly destructive above all others,
inasmuch as they are able to seduce whomsoever they approach, if these
are not taken away and protected by the Lord. They are an impious crew;
for they enter into the affections, both good and evil, of all, by both
phantastic and magical arts. They conspire with all the hells. In a
word, they are more diabolical than any others. There are also men of
such a quality, who, in the world, have acted similarly, and have
entered into the friendships of everyone whatever, by insinuation into
their affections and interests, solely for the sake of gain and of
obtaining rule over them, and, so, by those means, of governing. It has,
also, been a matter of indifference to them whether they insinuated
themselves by piety, by charity and love, or by impiety, profanity, by
murders, by gross flatterings of all evils, by taking oaths, etc.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5487.">5487.</span></span>

The siren-women dwelt together upon a mountain in the southern quarter,
towards the western, where they were together, and infested all round
about, even those who were very far removed from them - for such is
their nature: wherefore, visitation was made upon them, and it was found
that they were of such a quality. For this reason, they were brought
down, by force, from the mountain far away towards the western line, and
a very great distance above it, till they scarcely appeared - to the
western side, beyond the line there, to the farthest boundary of the
Christian territory (but where the Christian domain ends, inasmuch as
they had no religion); and there they were cast into a lake there
situated, crosswise to the western quarter in that part - at O \[Fig.
10\] <span id="fr_211"></span>[5487-1](#fn_211) there: the worse ones
amongst them being the nearer to the line. The sirenic mountain, or the
one where the sirens were, was at Q \[Fig. 10\].

<span class="margnote"><span id="5488.">5488.</span></span>

After those women who were in the mountain were cast into the lake
mentioned, they were borne away by their own hell - which was in the
southern quarter near the middle-space - where was an immense multitude
of them. They have been sent and led down thither for many years. The
number and multitude was enormous, and seemed to fill the whole
exceedingly extensive intermediate space. There were as many as several
myriads. An exit opened for them in the southern region, and they were
brought down to the same place and all cast thither.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5489.">5489.</span></span>

After this, some were sought for who had hidden themselves in the
mountain. The search was prosecuted by men of a like wickedness to the
women's. They seemed to enter a shaft which was in the midst of the
mountain. They stole into this; and it seemed that they excavated a
space there around the mountain, at another part of it, to an
extraordinary distance, which went round and round and at length from
cavern to cavern. Thither fled the worst of those women, who have also
committed murders and studied magical arts, and likewise profaned holy
things. Those women were thrown down there through the shaft in the
midst of the mountain, and were cast into a place there towards the
southern side.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5490.">5490.</span></span>

After this was accomplished, it seemed that dust was as it were spread
over the whole place, so that it was covered up, in order that no one
should ever rise out thence; and one could scarcely tell where they
were.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5491.">5491.</span></span>

Afterwards, the men of such a quality were cast into the place P \[Fig.
10\] <span id="fr_212"></span>[5491-1](#fn_212) there, which is on the
southern side. They were led beneath, out of the underground \[places\]
in the western region; and, first, those who were there under the earth
near to the southern line. These were conducted down over the mountain
to their place, and cast into the part of it nearer towards the
angle-line. Then, from underground, rose up, in the western part, almost
in the midst, some worse ones, who, in like manner with the sirens, were
able to enter into the affections of others, equally by means of profane
and by means of holy things. They were also taken down over the line
towards the sirenic mountain - but at the western side of it - to the
same lake, into the midst thereof. And, finally, there rose up from
underground, in the west, close to the northern line, those who have
been the worst of all, who have committed murders, thefts and
adulteries; who have been atheists and nevertheless appeared like angels
of light - making a display of holiness; who, also, have, in secret,
practiced magical arts which they have learned from the diabolical crew
- about which, however, nothing was divulged in the world. They, also,
were brought down upon the angle-line, but at the eastern side of the
mountain, to that lake, and were cast thither towards its farther angle
thus, they were hidden so that they might never appear \[again\]. Thus
was that atrocious crew cast into hell: it was also exceedingly
numerous.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5492.">5492.</span></span>

ABOUT THE STATE AFTER DEATH AND ABOUT THE HELLS. ERIK BRAHE. There was a
certain one (Erik Braha), known to me in the world, who, while in the
world, lived gaily, and cared only for worldly things. When he was about
to die, he prepared himself more devoutly than anyone, until the priest
and all \[present\] believed he would come into heaven on account of his
repentance at that time. I spoke with him the third day after death; and
then, immediately he encountered acquaintances there and saw such things
as he had taken delight in the world, he returned to his former life; so
that his repentance at the time of death amounted to nothing at all.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5493.">5493.</span></span>

On the fourth day after death, he was summoned to judgment, being led
below, in the western quarter towards the south, somewhat away from the
middle; and, there, how many adulteries he committed was disclosed; that
he murdered one woman, and ravished many by force, besides hundreds of
other adulteries. After this, were recounted, in order, the tricks by
which he stole wealth, and thus robbed by clandestine arts; which he did
as much as many hundreds \[of times\], and up to many thousands of
copper Thalers. And these things were enumerated in long succession, one
after another; nor was he able to deny anything. The enumeration took
place according to the members of the body. He had lived continually in
luxury and in the practice of atrocious arts; wherefore, he was that day
cast immediately into hell. \[He was\] now, first, where are the
filthinesses which proceed from adulteries and rapes. He there appeared
black, like a devil. Communication with heaven seemed to be taken away -
which appeared like streaks of light being lifted from him.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5494.">5494.</span></span>

After this he was removed thence, but with scarcely any mastery over
himself. Still, some things which were with him were called forth, and
the hells with which he had been associated when in the world, were
discovered. They were most wicked; for he had committed many crimes, and
always so prepared the way beforehand that the affair could not be
brought home to him. Among other hells, was one in the west towards the
northern angle under the earth; in which part were many most infamous
and most wicked hells. There was communication with one of these; and,
then, they who conspired with him were grievously punished. Hence,
others, who also endeavored to rise up, bewailed, in a loud voice, that,
if he roamed about at large, they would run into his grievous
punishments - about which they made great lamentations. It was hence
manifest that they could by no means rise up out of the hells, for fear
of punishment; for they bewailed, in a loud voice, that if he was free
they could not do otherwise than rise up and be punished - that is, if
he should bring them into pride and into such things as relate to pride.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5495.">5495.</span></span>

On the fourth day he was taken away from thence, and there was given him
his former life, such as he had in the world; and, on the fifth day, he
rushed into all crimes according to his criminal arts, and these such
that the angels were horrified; and he was also most grievously punished
several times. This was on the fifth day after death.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5496.">5496.</span></span>

ABOUT THE HELL OF POISONERS, ASSASSINS AND MURDERERS. They who, in the
world, have been poisoners, assassins and murderers, are, in the other
life, carried immediately into hell and vastated; and, lest they should
sally forth thence and commit evils, they are tortured and tormented
with the most grievous punishments until they no longer talk of
ascending therefrom. The hell of these is the first in the western
quarter towards the north, somewhat remotely from the middle. There are
several depths there, according to the degree of the evil. In that part,
they torture one another, even, at length, until they lie as if
half-dead - \[appearing\] in the light of heaven, it is said, like
phlegm, with very little interior life.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5497.">5497.</span></span>

I saw that they raised themselves out of that hell, and menaced others
with such evil as their own, which is, as it were, death-bearing. If,
also, they come to men, they bring death upon them immediately; and this
in the occiput, and in the spinal marrow, and, with some, in the head.
This, also, they attempted with me; and I came almost into a swoon.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5498.">5498.</span></span>

The hell of these is not that hell where the most wicked <span
id="fr_213"></span>[5498-1](#fn_213) ones are; but this one is nearer to
the north. In the hell of assassins and poisoners, appear as it were
tigers, panthers, and, lower down, as it were dragons and vipers;
because they fawn upon \[their prey\] before infusing their poison.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5499.">5499.</span></span>

I saw them, afterwards, being transferred to a part farther removed in
the same quarter, in the north, to the number of some hundreds, and thus
hidden away there in hell, where they lie half-dead, and, ages after,
are called forth and wander about like fools, totally destitute of
understanding.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5500.">5500.</span></span>

These are such as were murderers from will and deliberate intention, and
accustomed themselves to it for a long time, and afterwards experienced
delight in it, and at the same time were crafty and wicked, \[though\]
exteriorly appearing as if honorable; for such ones are exceedingly
dangerous in the other life: they are able to infest the simple-good.
Thus, they are such as slay men in cold and not in hot blood - as was
said.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_187"></span>[5458-1](sd80.htm#fr_187) These asterisks are
evidently intended to signify that no. 5460 should follow immediately
after no. 5458. We have, therefore, placed it accordingly. -ED.

<span id="fn_188"></span>[5460-1](sd80.htm#fr_188) These asterisks are
evidently intended to signify that no. 5460 should follow immediately
after no. 5458. We have, therefore, placed it accordingly. -ED.

<span id="fn_189"></span>[5461-1](sd80.htm#fr_189) It was this "Order"
that Swedenborg himself belonged to. -ED.

<span id="fn_190"></span>[5461-2](sd80.htm#fr_190) In the Latin Edition,
this short paragraph is printed on the margin. -ED.

<span id="fn_191"></span>[5466-1](sd80.htm#fr_191) Here is a drawing
which is a rectangle with lines leading away at the corners.

<span id="fn_192"></span>[5467-1](sd80.htm#fr_192) See previous no.,
5466. -ED.

<span id="fn_193"></span>[5468-1](sd80.htm#fr_193) Figure 9 is a square
with the four directions noted on the sides, with south being on the
top. A line extends from the upper right corner away from the square,
and at the end are three parallel areas.

<span id="fn_194"></span>[5469-1](sd80.htm#fr_194) Figure 9 is a square
with the four directions noted on the sides, with south being on the
top. A line extends from the upper right corner away from the square,
and at the end are three parallel areas.

<span id="fn_195"></span>[5470-1](sd80.htm#fr_195) Number 5470 is placed
after 5475.

<span id="fn_196"></span>[5471-1](sd80.htm#fr_196) For no. 5470, which
is Fig. 10, see page 420. -Ed.

<span id="fn_197"></span>[5471-2](sd80.htm#fr_197) Figure 10 is a
drawing of a square, each side of which is labeled with a direction -
with east being on the top. From the four corners proceed straight
dashed lines leading to various areas. Above the drawing are some
mountains.

<span id="fn_198"></span>[5472-1](sd80.htm#fr_198) - which see.

<span id="fn_199"></span>[5472-2](sd80.htm#fr_199) Figure 10 is a
drawing of a square, each side of which is labeled with a direction -
with east being on the top. From the four corners proceed straight
dashed lines leading to various areas. Above the drawing are some
mountains.  <span id="fr_199"></span>[5472-2](#fn_199) No. 5467. -ED.

<span id="fn_200"></span>[5473-1](sd80.htm#fr_200) Figure 10 is a
drawing of a square, each side of which is labeled with a direction -
with east being on the top. From the four corners proceed straight
dashed lines leading to various areas. Above the drawing are some
mountains.

<span id="fn_201"></span>[5474-1](sd80.htm#fr_201) Figure 10 is a
drawing of a square, each side of which is labeled with a direction -
with east being on the top. From the four corners proceed straight
dashed lines leading to various areas. Above the drawing are some
mountains.

<span id="fn_202"></span>[5475-1](sd80.htm#fr_202) Figure 10 is a
drawing of a square, each side of which is labeled with a direction -
with east being on the top. From the four corners proceed straight
dashed lines leading to various areas. Above the drawing are some
mountains.

<span id="fn_203"></span>[5475-2](sd80.htm#fr_203) Translated in the
Authorized English Version, "bottomless pit," but "abyss" in the
Revised. --ED.

<span id="fn_204"></span>[5476-1](sd80.htm#fr_204) Figure 10 is a
drawing of a square, each side of which is labeled with a direction -
with east being on the top. From the four corners proceed straight
dashed lines leading to various areas. Above the drawing are some
mountains.

<span id="fn_205"></span>[5477-1](sd80.htm#fr_205) Figure 10 is a
drawing of a square, each side of which is labeled with a direction -
with east being on the top. From the four corners proceed straight
dashed lines leading to various areas. Above the drawing are some
mountains.

<span id="fn_206"></span>[5478-1](sd80.htm#fr_206) Figure 10 is a
drawing of a square, each side of which is labeled with a direction -
with east being on the top. From the four corners proceed straight
dashed lines leading to various areas. Above the drawing are some
mountains.

<span id="fn_207"></span>[5479-1](sd80.htm#fr_207) Figure 10 is a
drawing of a square, each side of which is labeled with a direction -
with east being on the top. From the four corners proceed straight
dashed lines leading to various areas. Above the drawing are some
mountains.

<span id="fn_208"></span>[5479-2](sd80.htm#fr_208) This hiatus occurs in
the Latin. -ED.

<span id="fn_209"></span>[5479-3](sd80.htm#fr_209) See above, no. 5461a.
-ED.

<span id="fn_210"></span>[5481-1](sd80.htm#fr_210) The Latin text has
diem, but there can be no doubt that terra was intended by Swedenborg.
See the opening of no. 5485, below. -ED.

<span id="fn_211"></span>[5487-1](sd80.htm#fr_211) Figure 10 is a
drawing of a square, each side of which is labeled with a direction -
with east being on the top. From the four corners proceed straight
dashed lines leading to various areas. Above the drawing are some
mountains.

<span id="fn_212"></span>[5491-1](sd80.htm#fr_212) Figure 10 is a
drawing of a square, each side of which is labeled with a direction -
with east being on the top. From the four corners proceed straight
dashed lines leading to various areas. Above the drawing are some
mountains.

<span id="fn_213"></span>[5498-1](sd80.htm#fr_213) See above, no. 5494.
-ED.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 5501-5550](sd81)
