[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Swedenborg](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sd86)  [Next](sd88.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0766143007/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Spiritual Diary*, by Emanuel Swedenborg, \[1758\], tr. by Bush,
Smithson and Buss \[1883-9\] at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Spiritual Diary

<span class="margnote"><span id="5801.">5801.</span></span>

Others practice magic by means of written characters, by which they know
how to direct themselves to their hells, and likewise to the good, whom
they thus conjoined to themselves.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5802.">5802.</span></span>

There is magic with those who are roundabout; magic with those who are
below; magic by means of words, and, the worst kinds, from the Word;
phantasies by means of thoughts; phantasies by means of various
affections; in a word, there are innumerable kinds.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5803.">5803.</span></span>

Sorcerers who look downwards and abuse correspondences, appear to shine
in the forehead, some for a considerable distance around the mouth;
those who practice other magical arts have wands.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5804.">5804.</span></span>

FAITH ALONE IS NOT POSSIBLE. It was said by angels that faith alone is
not possible. Spirits who were in the principle of faith alone were
indignant, and rushed through every place where good spirits and angelic
spirits were, and inquired whether it was not possible; and they rushed
through as many as ten or fourteen such places; and it was everywhere
answered that it was not possible. They perceived this from a spiritual
idea out of heaven; and it was nowhere otherwise. At length, they took
refuge in this, that, faith is not indeed possible without love; and
thus they wished that faith alone should be the medium of salvation, and
not love, because they were such from the world. They were, therefore,
left to themselves, in order that they might reflect what is the
essential medium of salvation, whether love or faith; also, whether this
is faith alone.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5805.">5805.</span></span>

THE WAY IN WHICH COUNTLESS SPIRITS, UNITED IN ONE, ARE REDUCED TO ORDER,
COMPARED WITH CHAOS. BABYLON. I saw several thousands of spirits united
in one; so that spirits were seen throughout a large space, as far as
the eye could reach. They were of those who were cast down from the
mountains and rocks into the plain; and it was said to me, at that time,
that all are thus united at first, and that it is afterwards infused
into them from the Lord, whither each one must betake himself; also,
that he becomes acquainted with this, like one who goes from home and
returns home. When this takes place, and that is inspired into everyone
whatever, they separate from one another, everyone to his own abode; and
they are then in order, and dwell according to the laws of order.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5805a.">5805a.</span></span>

This was compared with chaos, because all things were similarly thrown
in there, and afterwards all things were reduced into order; in which
respect, it is comparable with the blood, which is first collected into
the heart, and is thence distributed to all the viscera by means of
their arteries: it is also comparable with the sinus of the liver, into
which all things are similarly cast, and afterwards, through the ducts,
into which they are carried, are reduced into order. The like happens
everywhere in the body, and in like manner also in the thought, which
comes forth immediately from the will: this is in such a state; but it
is reduced into order in the understanding, and distributed.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5806.">5806.</span></span>

WHAT PHANTASY IN HELL IS. All things which appear in the hells are
non-real, but they appear as it were real, because those there are
themselves in phantasy, and not in thought from faith. This was shown to
me in a night-vision. I saw something changed into a man, who infested
me somewhat, and I wanted to be separated from him; and it was given me
to observe that it was not real; but, still, I saw it most clearly and
manifestly, and I was conscious of it, as it were, just as in
wakefulness. I prayed to the Lord for help that I might be liberated. It
was then said to me, out of heaven, that it was phantasy, and I still
believed; but I was astonished, because it appeared as it were in day. A
little while afterwards, I awoke; and from this it was given me to know
what the phantasy with those who are in hell is.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5807.">5807.</span></span>

THE SEPARATION OF CHRISTIANS AND GENTILES: THE LORD HAS BETAKEN HIMSELF
TO THE GENTILES. THE LORD'S DIVINE. For a long time, I have suffered
pain in the breast, by reason of an influx out of the Christian world.
They inflowed, and infested the heart and lungs there; some the heart
and some the lungs, and then, at the same time, the mind, in various
ways. This lasted for many weeks, perhaps months; and I was reduced to
extremity, so that I did not know, on account of the suffering of the
heart and the mind, which way to turn. At length, it was brought to an
end and inquiry was also made from whom this was. It was from
Christians; and \[it was ascertained\] that the infestations of the
heart and lungs streamed out from those on high, who said that they
believed in three Persons. Those, also, were separated according to
their faith; and to all were given ways of their own, so that they might
go forth out of heaven, and descend to their own places.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5808.">5808.</span></span>

The exploration lasted for hours, and there were brought from the
Christian world (1) those who believed in Father, Son and Holy Spirit;
(2) those who acknowledged the Lord, but thought nothing about His
Divine; (3) those who were in the belief that He was one with the
Father, but in a different manner; (4) in a word, some \[who believed\]
in one way, some in another. Those who acknowledged the Human and
rejected His Divine, as, for example, the Moravians, inflicted pain in
my right arm up to the shoulder; and the Socinians inflicted a bruising
of the bones of the breast. In a word, Christians were examined as to
what faith they were in about the Lord, and about His Divine, and His
conjunction with the Father. Some of them thought comparatively
sensibly, but only a few. They were all felt by an influx into the
breast, and by various sensations of oppression.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5809.">5809.</span></span>

I was next separated from those in the Christian world who were on the
left hand, and was brought by the Lord to the Gentiles, who were
exhibited as to the kind of faith they possessed about God. There were
(1) those who worshipped an invisible God and a visible God; (2) Some
who made of these, two; some, who made of them, one. (3) Some had been
instructed by Christians that God was born a man, and therefore received
the Christian faith; but, when they heard that Christians distinguished
the Divine into three persons, they went away. Many made of the three,
one; believing, that, although Christians said three, they yet thought
one. (4) There were some who did not understand what born from eternity
meant they were told; and they comprehended very well. (5) Some, who
were the best, believed that God was wholly man, and that this truth is
implanted in everyone. (6) Some, who lived several ages ago, thought in
themselves that God was born altogether a man; but, because they did not
know where, they inquired and heard that it was in Jericho; and, being
satisfied, they held fast that notion and esteemed it holy. As often as
these thought about God born a Man, they saw a brilliant star in the
air. (7) The wiser of the Gentiles, from those who are in Africa, think
becomingly about the Lord's Divine Human, and are wise. They also
possess a Book, which is their Word; but it is not like ours. It is
written, in like manner, by correspondences. It was written through
illustrated men. These are in Africa. (8) It was stated to me, that
there is a Book, among the Mohammedans, which is in their hands, and is
common there; in which some pages are written by correspondences, by
reason of which correspondences there is some light from it in the
heavens. These were all felt, as to their quality, through influx into
the breast, and also through sensations, agreeable and disagreeable.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5810.">5810.</span></span>

I was next brought to those who were from the Ancient Churches, some of
whom worshipped an invisible Divine and a visible some in one way, some
in another. Afterwards to the Most Ancient peoples, who are in the
acknowledgment of the Divine and of Divine things, manifestly, just as
those matters are revealed to me. They examined these and approved.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5811.">5811.</span></span>

THE IDEA OF THE DIVINE. The idea about the Divine conjoins, because it
enters heaven, where everything Divine is; and the idea of the Divine is
possessed from Divine truths implanted in affection, thus the man's
interiors. The greater the number of genuine truths implanted, the
fuller is the idea of the Divine. Apart from Divine truths in a man's
idea, there exists no idea of His \[i.e. the Lord's\] Divine.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5811a.">5811a.</span></span>

One said (it was Dahlborg <span id="fr_296"></span>[5811a-1](#fn_296.md)
who said it), that he had sought, but did not find, anyone who possessed
the idea of a Divine Human; but he was then conveyed over to those who
had the idea of a Divine Human, who consisted for the most part of
converted Gentiles, and also of Africans, who had one so just as to
exceed belief: wherefore, he said aloud that there were entire regions
of them, and they were in heaven among the happy. He was carried through
many regions, higher up and lower down; and there was also granted him
an influx out of the superior heavens, where all are in that idea.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5812.">5812.</span></span>

BABYLON DESTROYED, AND A FLOOD. THE MODERN NEPHILIM. In the western
quarter, towards the north, were some from the Papal religiosity, who
were the worst of all, and who miserably and savagely treated all who
were not willing to acknowledge them as deities. I pass by their
atrocities: some of which have been described before. They had their
emissaries everywhere, who endeavored to seduce all whomsoever they
could, by betaking themselves above the higher places, from which they
could look forth upon the lower ones and rule; and, wherever they came
upon any diabolical spirit in the world of spirits, they adjoined
themselves to him and wrought evils. Their arts are more numerous than
can be described. Before their deceits and cruelties, however, came to a
height, or were consummated, they were destroyed in various, ways and
immediately cast down into hells. But their number still increased, for
days and they held out with such stubbornness that they would never
leave off. They saw hells and torments before them. They were warned
that such a lot awaits them. They saw those of their own number cast
out, up to many thousands, and tormented; but all in vain. Several
times, the surface where they dwelt was overturned; but still they took
no notice; such obstinate wickedness, from the love of self, were they
in. At length, the Last Judgment came upon them, and they were
overflowed as with waters, and were all plunged in the hells, even to
myriads. In like manner, those of the same sort who were in the higher
places went away into the northern quarter. They, also, were overflowed.
Some of them were cast into the hell where the Nephilim are, because
they are like them. Some of them appear bald; some hairy all over. The
ones who were bald were those who were inmostly in evils; the ones who
were hairy, those who were wholly in falsities.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5813.">5813.</span></span>

The following day, there occurred, over a great part of the northern
part, a flood, which proceeded somewhat to the east, and immersed all
there who were in evils; for they would not desist from fighting against
the Divine. It commenced from the Papal crew. Some mountain-dwellers
also were immersed. It is not permitted them any longer to ascend the
mountains, from where they are, or to traverse the path over the
mountains and be borne away; but they immediately entered into the hells
whence they came.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5814.">5814.</span></span>

THOSE WHO ARE IN EXTERNAL HOLINESS. THE LAST JUDGMENT. In a mountain in
the northern quarter, were many who, in the world, had been in external
holiness and not in any affection of truth. They frequented places of
worship, devoutly listened to preachings, attended the sacrament of the
Supper, read the Word and emotional books, but yet were not in any
affection of truth, being scarcely willing to hear about spiritual truth
beyond merely the first rudiments of theology. Investigation was made as
to what they thought of the Lord and it was ascertained that they had
never thought of His Divinity, but only of the Human, just as if He were
only a man like another, and that His Divinity consisted in the fact
that He was loved by the Father. They operated into the lower ribs of
the left side, and inflicted pain. They were cast down from that
mountain, to the number of many thousands; and it was told them that
they might serve for the ultimates in the Lord's Kingdom, which
correspond to the heels of the feet. A heel, also, appeared, which
touched their faces. They were so foolish that they were worthless.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5815.">5815.</span></span>

The majority of them were examined as to what sort they were; and it was
ascertained that they were not in any affection of truth, and that they
did not want to perceive what was true, unless one who had authority, or
concerning whom they had the confidence that he understood the matter,
said it, so that, with them, truths were scientifics without any
discernment, consequently, like soul without sense. It was also
discovered that they believed they would be saved by reason of external
holiness, although they had nothing at all of internal. These, because
they were of such a character, were removed into the southern quarter
towards the western, to the number of myriads, and a region was allotted
to them there, but under the earth. The reason it was under the earth,
was, because they had been able to serve as a fulcrum to the infernal
crew, especially to hypocrites, and to those who were able to seem
Christians in externals, when yet they were inwardly devils. Hence have
the infernal crew their power. For this reason, they were concealed
under the earth, so that those of them who do anything from the heart,
might serve for the ultimates of heaven. Those who believed that
salvation consisted in prayers and in devoutness alone, and have been
diligent in these thing, and have also lived well, were collected into
one and dispatched into a city which is at the southern quarter, where
those are who have lived a Christian life. At first, they believed they
would receive heavenly joy - the nature of which they did not know;
wherefore, whatever they desired was given them, both feasting, and
society, and dwelling in magnificent abodes, and the like; but they said
that that was not the heavenly joy to them which they had hoped for; but
they were never able to find any other joy than being at their devotion
and at their prayers. To them this was their joy. It was, therefore,
permitted them to dwell with the good in that city, to there enjoy
social interaction, and to seek their joy of whatsoever sort they
desired; and if they did not obtain it, they might then be in their
devotion, and at the same time in company with others: with these
things, also, they were content.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5816.">5816.</span></span>

After this, all who were in that heaven were let down; and it was shown
that those in the mountains and hills raised themselves up thither by
means of phantasies, and that they were not there; for they appeared,
before the angels of heaven who were with me, below me, in their own
places, and not above; because these did not see them where they were by
phantasies, but where they were in the body; and this was beneath such
ones, on the level of the ground. When they were seen there, they were
also hidden in a cloud arising from their falsities, and afterwards in
the ground; and thus were covered up - in that place, those who were not
so bad, to the number of many myriads, and those who were bad, below
these, in a similar depth, which was seen by me. When I looked from
angelic sight, upon those who appeared in the mountains, those who
previously appeared above and on high, were all beneath. The evil, when
so seen, were quite deep in the hells. Those who were thus hidden under
the earths, were mostly those who were good - these were roundabout
under the world of spirits; others were about the south-western quarter;
others to the north-western quarter; and so forth.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5819.">5819.</span></span>

 <span id="fr_297"></span>[5819-1](#fn_297.md) All those who, in the world,
acknowledged the Lord's Divine and lived well, especially those who
acknowledged the Divine Human, were preserved in heaven. But the rest,
who did not acknowledge the Lord's Divine, and for the most part thought
of the Lord no otherwise than as of an ordinary man, were let down from
heaven and cast down. Many who did not acknowledge the Lord's Divine in
the world, wished to acknowledge it in the other life, but in vain. They
did it with the mouth, but not in heart.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5820.">5820.</span></span>

They cast themselves forth into the mountains: the evil, on account of
the lust of ruling; for they were thus able to look around and to rule.
Those not evil ascended because they supposed that heaven was there.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5821.">5821.</span></span>

THE ARRANGEMENT OF THE HEAVENS IN ORDER. THE LAST JUDGMENT. Finally, the
heavens were arranged in order. (1) Those were led forth who thought of
the Lord's Divine, and whose ideas were open, and they were
distinguished into classes. (2) In like manner, those who thought of His
union with the Father. (3) Those who, when thinking of the Lord, thought
only of His Human and not at all of His Divine: although they knew, yet
did not think upon it. (4) Those who thought of three Persons of the
Divinity, and were enraged against all who did not believe similarly to
themselves: these, too, were distinguished into classes; and so forth; -
for the chief thing of all is to have the idea of His Divine: hence is
conjunction with heaven, and salvation. (5) Next, those who acknowledged
the Father only were perceived as having no God, and were rejected
outside of heaven. (6) Those who did not believe the Lord to have been
from eternity, but only His \[i.e. God's\] born Son.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5822.">5822.</span></span>

THOSE IN WESTERN INDIA, WHO KNEW NOTHING ABOUT GOD. I was conducted, in
spirit, to those who knew nothing about God in the world, who were said
to live in a certain island, near western Africa, but still lived a
fairly moral life amongst each other. They did not appear like men, but
like monkeys or apes; some like dogs; but, yet, with an almost human
face. They seemed thus to my eyes. I also stated that they were such.
There was a certain one from the Christians who was governor over them;
and I spoke with him. He said that they appeared to themselves with a
human face like other men; that they obey and love him, and execute
labors; also, that they are modest, but that they are not able to grasp
the things of religion. But, afterwards, when a nearer communication
with Christians was granted, it was perceived that they also receive
somewhat of religion, and that thus they are capable of being reformed
to some extent, by reason of the fact that they have led a moral life,
in obedience and in industry; which things are planes \[for heavenly
things\].

<span class="margnote"><span id="5823.">5823.</span></span>

THE FALLACIES OF THE SENSES IN SPIRITUAL THINGS, IN A SUMMARY. A fallacy
of the senses in natural things, is, for instance, that the sun, and
likewise the starry heaven, appears to be borne around the globe, and
the earth to stand motionless; also, that nobody can stand on his feet
who is diametrically opposite to us; as, likewise, that a ship cannot be
borne around the globe of the earth: besides numberless others.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5824.">5824.</span></span>

Fallacies of the senses in spiritual things, are, (1) that man cannot
appear as man after death, nor enjoy the senses as before; still less
that angels and spirits can. (2) That the soul is only a vital
something, purely ethereal, of which none can have any idea. (3) That it
is only the body which feels and sees. (4) That man is like the beasts
save that man is able to speak from his thought; also, that beasts are
similarly able to think. (5) That nature is all, and the first from
which all things are. (6) That man makes the attempt to think, and
learns to do so, by an influx of interior nature and its order. (7) That
there is not a spiritual, and if there is, that it is a purer natural.
(8) That man is not able to enjoy any blessedness, when cut off from the
delights of the love of glory, honor, gain and the pleasures of the
world. (9) That conscience is only distress of mind on account of
non-success, and arises from infirmity of mind, resulting from infirmity
of body. (10) That the Lord's Divine Love is the love of glory. (11)
That there is no Providence. (12) That all things flow from
self-prudence and intelligence: besides other like things. In these is
the man who is in the love of self above others: not so much so he who
is in the love of the world.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5825.">5825.</span></span>

THE ENGLISH AND DUTCH IN GENERAL. The English. - They are of a different
nature to the other nations in Europe. Interior light \[lux\] appears
with them, which is such that those who think about God and religion
receive spiritual truth more quickly than others. They do not let those
things down into the natural so much, since this is not so largely
occupied and filled with the loves of the body, and not so darkened.
Hence they have quite an exquisite perception when anything is said from
reason, and possess interior sight, which is the sight of receptive
intuition. This is apparent with them in the spiritual world: wherefore,
also, in that world, they are in the midst amongst the Christians; for,
there, those are in the midst who are in interior light \[lux\].

<span class="margnote"><span id="5826.">5826.</span></span>

The Dutch. These are very penetrating, but they adhere to their own
doctrine, not receding unless they are fully convinced; and if convinced
in matters of faith, they still turn the back, unwilling to recede. They
excel in judgment from natural light \[lumen\], from which they estimate
affairs in the world and in business, very accurately. Their light
\[lux\] in the other life appears more obscure, because their spiritual
is immersed in the natural. The reason is, because their thought is
constantly in business.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5827.">5827.</span></span>

THOSE WHO ARE IN FAITH ALONE AND NOT IN LIFE - OF WHAT QUALITY THEY ARE
IN HEAVEN. Those in faith alone persecuted me. They assembled themselves
together and inflicted violence; and thus they thrust me into a state
like that in which they were, as regards the respiration and the pulse;
and then I was in, as it were, a non-intelligent and non-voluntary
state, which was entirely overflowed with waters, in a perfectly dark
cloud; and then I perceived that I had scarcely any communication with
heaven. It was told me that there was such a communication of heaven,
with them, as was like that which shipwrecked persons have with the
water, or like the life of fishes relatively to the life of birds, or
comparatively so: in a word, the communication is so dull, that, when
angels look at them it is like looking at those who are under water,
whom they do not see at all, but only know that they are there.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5828.">5828.</span></span>

THOSE IN FAITH ALONE: THEY BECOME HEATHEN, OF NO RELIGION WHATEVER. THE
DRAGON. Those who have confirmed themselves in the doctrine of faith
alone, and have cultivated only doctrine, and have enjoined nothing of
the truth and good of life, since they have rejected all moral life and
good works, saying that they avail nothing, but that no evils whatever
are imputed, because the Lord fulfilled the law - these, again and
again, became rebels, wishing to totally destroy heavenly doctrine to
such a degree that they at length chattered blasphemies against the Lord
as regards the Human, - that He was as they were and no better; and more
things which they do not utter on account of the scandal. They were at
length explored; and it was found that they have enjoined nothing of
Christian truth and good of life. Then, doctrinals, which were only
scientifics and matters of memory, were taken away from them; and they
were thus left without them. They appeared, also, to be without clothes,
because clothes signify such things; and then they understood nothing at
all, not even justice or right, and were altogether like Gentiles who
had no religion, inasmuch as they lived without religion. Those who have
been their spirits, were cast into a certain gloomy gulf in the south,
where they are in darkness, and were thus removed out of the world of
spirits.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5829.">5829.</span></span>

Others appeared towards the front, who only knew doctrinals by memory,
and did not think about them at all. These were in like manner despoiled
of their \[clothes\]; and it was as if only the outermost garment was
taken away, and they became like heathen, of no religion whatever, and
were cast into a gulf which was in the eastern quarter, near to the
southern, where the dragonists are. - These were all dragonists, both
the former <span id="fr_298"></span>[5829-1](#fn_298.md) and the
latter. <span id="fr_299"></span>[5829-2](#fn_299.md) The latter ones
inflowed into the beating of the heart; but the former into the
respiration. In a word, all such live in the world as it were without
religion, inasmuch as in their whole life they think nothing about the
Divine in the things they will and do. Merely thinking and talking does
not constitute religion.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5830.">5830.</span></span>

THE STATE OF THOSE WHO ARE IN THE HELLS. Those from one hell were sent
forth to the number of several hundreds, for the purpose of being
transferred thence into another; and it was then permitted them to act
according to their nature. Immediately, they mounted up, by means of
phantasies, to the higher places, and, looking down thence, strove with
the utmost assiduity to extinguish conjugial love wherever it was,
which, also, they derived from struggling aloft; and afterwards they
attempted to commit evil. It was then recalled to their memory, that
they told each other, in hell, that, if it were permitted them to get
out, they would live as wisely as others, and, nevertheless, they are
now acting the infernal crew more than the rest. Afterwards, I wanted to
speak with them; but they were not able to understand, because they were
in phantasies, just as in their hell. They were so severely tortured at
any discourse in which there was the light of truth, that they fled
before the torture. This occurred several times, to the end that I might
be confirmed in the truth that those who are in the hells cannot bear
the light of truth, consequently, intelligence and wisdom, but, if they
are kept in it, are tormented. They said that I hurt them. I answered
that I wanted to bestow understanding, and that this was what tormented
them. I then clearly perceived, that he who once comes into hell stays
there to eternity, and that he can by no means live where intelligence,
thus where the light of heaven, is. They also stated that they would a
thousand times rather live in hell than out of it. It was also
ascertained that they had no other delight but that of harming everyone
whom they could see, so far as they dare and are able.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5831.">5831.</span></span>

THOSE WHO ARE CAST DOWN FROM ON HIGH AND FROM HEAVEN. All were explored
as to whether they look down from on high into the lower levels, and
roundabout; and all who, from lust, looked down, were cast down. The
reason was, because their minds were thus spread abroad into other
places than those which are of the society \[where they are\]; and there
was fixed in their purpose either mere curiosity, or else the lust of
ruling and also of injuring others; which they durst not attempt as long
as they are in a society. This lasted a long time. They were thus cast
down from the former heaven, and the societies of heaven were thereby
purged. It was frequently said to them, that, in this way, they appear
to the evil spirits who are beneath, who know how to adjoin them to
themselves; and when they have once adjoined them, they cannot be
separated: thus admitting the infernal crew within society. Those who
perform uses, and love the good of the society, do not know what looking
round and down is: there is resistance when they think it. All,
moreover, who are of such a character \[as this last\], are invisible to
all roundabout; for they thus turn the back upon such things. - They
look down, roundabout, in different ways. There are those who look
across their own territory; and the majority cherish in the mind, ruling
over others and injuring others. This happened thousands and thousands
of times. Thus they were cast down out of the former heaven. In this way
were the dragonists cast down; likewise, those who were in faith alone
and not in any life of faith; also many others. All who look down are of
a disposition foreign to the dispositions of the society.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5832.">5832.</span></span>

MARRIAGES AND ADULTERIES. I saw a vast crowd driven into deserts outside
societies. They were those who regarded adulteries as of no consequence
- not only from a principle in thought, but also in acts amongst whom
were many endowed with high rank; and it was said that they were all no
longer like men but like wild beasts, inasmuch as they have put off the
human nature through the fact that they rent asunder and profaned a
society of marriage, and consequently made nothing of the Divine
commands, nothing of the civil laws, nothing of rationality which is
founded upon these: on which account they cannot be said to be like men,
but as wild beasts. For, when that bond is ruptured, then the human is
banished. The idea of them was like that of the vilest rabble, which
divests itself of humanity, and can be no longer tolerated in society.
They were cast out into deserts, so that they might live according to
their nature, lest they should have anything in common with spirits.
That such is the case with spirits, can be known principally from the
fact that all who are in the hells are in favor of adulteries, and all
who are in the heavens against adulteries; and the more so, the more
interiorly in the heavens they are. Hence it may be known, that the
Rational is destroyed with those who have been adulterers from principle
and from life; neither did these know what is the distinction between
man and beast, except that man is able to speak. Hence, also, it was
manifest, that these have destroyed their human rationality and nature
with themselves. It was stated, that, as regards adulteries, and the
principles about them in the Christian world, it is as if hell is opened
and received: not so outside the Christian world.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5833.">5833.</span></span>

THE POPE: ALSO SIXTUS V. I spoke with the Pope who was recently
dead. <span id="fr_300"></span>[5833-1](#fn_300.md) He was in the west
towards the north, where there is ordinarily a council. He was
instructed in detail about Babylon, what and how impious they are. He
was exceedingly astonished, that so many even of the inferior monks made
themselves Christ, and with so great a persuasion, - supposing that
himself only \[was that\]. He spoke about Sixtus V., saying that he had
been \[Pope\] in the world for five years. <span
id="fr_301"></span>[5833-2](#fn_301.md) He wished to see him: wherefore he
was summoned from the hell where he was, which was not far off slightly
backwards towards the north. Having prepared himself, he \[i.e. Sixtus\]
appeared before him; and he recognized him from his portrait in the
world. But Sixtus V. scarcely spoke. He earnestly desired to get away,
and was borne down to his own hell, where, sometimes, he is set over
those who are there, in order that he may hold the impious crews of the
Babylonish race, in check; and it was said, that, if he does not observe
the prescribed laws, he is punished.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5834.">5834.</span></span>

MARY. Mary, who had been the mother of the Lord, was seen. She appeared
somewhat at the back, in white, and spoke but little, save this about
the Lord, that she now worships Him as God, also that He was born of
her, but that He became God and put off all the maternal human; and she
was utterly opposed to anyone's acknowledging Him as her son, because,
in the Lord, all is Divine.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5835.">5835.</span></span>

SENSUAL MEN: THEY APPEAR LEARNED AND INTELLIGENT, EVEN IN THE OTHER
LIFE. I spoke with some about a certain one who appeared to them
intelligent because he was able to reason from the memory, and from a
somewhat interior natural memory: hence, his discourse appeared as if it
proceeded from intelligence, when yet there was nothing at all from any
intelligence, but only from such memory. His intelligence inwardly
resembled as it were some ebony thing, round which those things flowed
according to the order of speaking in the world; and yet it derived
nothing from intelligence, because it was of such a character. (It was
Peter Ribbing.) They were told that it appeared to others like
intelligence, because the intelligent imbibe these things in their
intelligence, and so they believe that it also proceeds from these in
like manner, when yet nothing is farther from the fact. Thus they \[i.e.
sensual men\] are able to deceive others, even the intelligent, and to
snatch a name for being intelligent, especially in the natural world;
but those in the spiritual world who have interior perception, are able
to perceive that nothing of life underlies it, but that they are
tinkling sounds affecting the ear: \[they are able\] also \[to deceive\]
those who interiorly receive those things in intelligence. The former
\[i.e. the sensual\] do not know what intelligence is: they believe it
is intelligence to be able to speak and reason in that way. Such are all
who are in the love of self and self-intelligence; and they are inspired
by that fire to speak according to the manner of the intelligent.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5836.">5836.</span></span>

CONTINUATION. I spoke with a certain woman who believed herself
intelligent because she knew how to talk on certain moral and civil
matters like an intelligent person. But it was perceived and said that
still that was not from intelligence; because, when she learned these
things, she imbibed them from those whom she thought intelligent, or
even from books helpful to intelligence. From these she took up the idea
that she also spoke them from intelligence; but still it was not so.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5837.">5837.</span></span>

THE RESURRECTION. I have spoken with acquaintances after death; with
some, after three days from death. I have spoken thus with
Silfverstrom, <span id="fr_302"></span>[5837-1](#fn_302.md) with Polhem,
with Brita Behm, <span id="fr_303"></span>[5837-2](#fn_303.md) with the
consul of justice; <span id="fr_304"></span>[5837-3](#fn_304.md) and with
others known to me by repute, after several weeks. They attended and
witnessed their own funerals, and saw all things there.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5838.">5838.</span></span>

THE REFORMED. For a long time, even throughout the period of a year, I
saw how all the Reformed were purified, according to their nations; and
this in marvelous order, according to affections and the genera and
species thereof. The purifications took place in various ways,
principally through the presence of the evil, consequently through a
kind of fermentations. <span id="fr_305"></span>[5838-1](#fn_305.md) Hence
appeared who were in the delight of that evil; and these were then
separated from the others, and cast down thence into the different
quarters, principally into the northern and southern, where they were
arranged in societies; and this in low-lying places - the evil, into
marshes and ponds. All those who went out from their own societies <span
id="fr_306"></span>[5838-2](#fn_306.md) and looked around them, inasmuch as
they were of such a character that they did not care for the delight and
use of the society, were cast down, the majority into marshes and ponds
- consequently, below the earths - lest they should look around them and
conjoin themselves with the evil. For, those who have been such, for the
most part infested those who were roundabout, because \[they were\] then
outside the society, believing that they were thus in freedom; and, when
anyone supposes himself to be in freedom, he then comes into his
interiors, not being restrained by external bonds as in society:
wherefore, they came immediately into a different state. Those who are
such that they desire to inflict annoyances and evils on others, are
eager to go out from their societies and thus commit evils in safety.
Then, certain of those who went out, attached themselves to evil spirits
beneath. The evil spirits, by their arts, bound them to themselves. When
these entered a society, they were bound to the evil spirit - for he who
is once bound to them, is kept bound by them, wheresoever he is.
Wherefore, evil spirits communicated with them within the society, and
thus they were able to injure the society: for which reason, when the
society began to be vitiated by them, it was purified from them in
various ways. This lasted a long while. There were also some who hid
themselves in lower places, and rose up and behaved similarly, and
afterwards returned; but all of such a quality were found out and driven
forth.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5839.">5839.</span></span>

Some, also, were skilled in the arts of looking down below themselves
into the very houses, and seeing and hearing those who were beneath, and
likewise at the sides. As these acted similarly, they were all sought
out and driven forth. They occasioned an itchy irritation in my body.
They were all such as did not take pleasure in any use for the sake of
the use, but performed every use for the sake of a living, and for the
sake of honors, reputation and profit, as ends. In a word, ease was
their delight; and they who love ease more than use, collect evils in
their spirit; for they do not determine the mind to use, but to such
things as are in the world, thus, to basenesses and evils of every kind
- from which they are readily withheld, if they delight in uses. - Such
purifications of the nations of the Reformed lasted a long while. It was
permitted them, as before, to as it were mount up to the places where
there were previously similar ones, who constituted the former heaven.
They were afterwards vastated, and then arranged in order by the Lord,
so that they should traverse a road which led to the society suited to
them, or to the marshes and hells, from which roads it was not permitted
them to deviate; and if they did deviate, they were punished. Those who
turned aside had the lust of inflicting injury, or of setting themselves
at liberty so that they might be able to commit evils: wherefore, there
were guards at both sides of the road, and he who went outside the
guards was punished and cast into his hell. Of what nature the
explorations were, was clearly perceived by the angels by the turnings
to the quarters. They were very numerous.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5840.">5840.</span></span>

\[CONVERSATION\] WITH THE BABYLONIANS ABOUT THE CREED OF ATHANASIUS. I
spoke with these, several times, about the Creed of Athanasius, and
showed them that they have from it this doctrine, namely, that the Lord
as to the Divine is one with the Father, since we read that He, in like
manner, is Eternal, Infinite, Omnipotent, and many other things; also,
that the Lord's Divine is in His Human, since it is stated, that, like
as the soul and body make one man, so the Lord's Divine and Human make
one Christ; likewise, that these two are not commingled, but that the
Divine took the Human to itself. \[I remarked\], also, that it is
manifest from this that the Lord's Divine is in His Human like the soul
in the body, consequently, not separate, and that He thus had power of
His Human from His Divine, which was in Him; and that, consequently,
they need not have said that He had power from the Father, since it was
from His very Self, inasmuch as His Divine was like the Divine which is
called the Father. <span id="fr_307"></span>[5840-1](#fn_307.md) And it was
said, too, that the Lord's soul actually was from the Divine which was
the Father, since He was conceived from Him; so that the Father's Divine
was actually in Him, and, so, if they wanted to separate the Human from
the Divine, it would be like separating soul from body. When they heard
this, they could answer nothing, seeking various things in order that
they might explain; but they were not able. They said that they abide in
those decrees which issue from the Consistory at Rome; but it was
inquired whether they have there changed any of those things which are
in the Creed of Athanasius; and they replied that they have altered
nothing at all. - Hence was shown that they have arrogated to themselves
the Divine power of the Lord.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5841.">5841.</span></span>

THE LAST POPE: <span id="fr_308"></span>[5841-1](#fn_308.md) HE HAS
ACKNOWLEDGED THE DIVINE IN THE WORD. I spoke with the last Pope, three
weeks after death. I spoke with him for several days, and showed him, by
many evidences, that, in the Word, and in the smallest details of the
Word, there was a spiritual sense, and that it is thus most holy. When
he had attentively listened to each of the things advanced, he confessed
that the Word is Divine, and that he did not know this in the world,
because, then, he had only investigated it according to the sense of the
letter, in which he did not see anything Divine, and that he, therefore,
then believed that those things which the Pope pronounces in Consistory
are equally Divine, and that, consequently, the Bull Unigenitus <span
id="fr_309"></span>[5841-2](#fn_309.md) was so. He now confessed that the
Word is the Divine Itself, and that a declaration in Consistory ought
never to produce anything which does not agree with the Word 1758, May
21 to 25.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5842.">5842.</span></span>

THE HOLY SUPPER I spoke with Christians, and also with those of the
Babylonish communion, about the Holy Supper, and remarked that they
believe in the material presence of the Body and Blood of Christ; and it
was said that those who go to the Holy Supper, do not think of that
presence, but only of the holiness of it \[i.e. of the Supper\]. They
inquired whether anyone thought otherwise when he went to the Holy
Supper; and it was ascertained that scarcely anyone did. It was also
said that this is from the Lord, lest they should be in such an idea;
likewise, that from this it may be known that nothing but holiness
inflows out of heaven, according to the correspondence. It was also
stated that the Lutherans, with whom the doctrine is that they \[i.e.,
the Body and Blood of Christ\] are in, with and under \[the Bread and
Wine\], <span id="fr_310"></span>[5842-1](#fn_310.md) never think about
this when they partake, but only about the holiness.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5843.">5843.</span></span>

THE LAST POPE, BENEDICT XIV. After three weeks from death, it was
permitted me to speak with the Pope, and at that time for four days,
about many things in the spiritual world, especially about the Lord,
that He is the God of heaven, and has not given any power to any man,
because power belongs solely to the Divine. He was also instructed about
the remission of sins, about heaven and hell, about man - that it falls
out to him according to the life in the world, and very many similar
matters; and, at the time, he seemed to understand them all, and also as
it were to believe them; for he so spoke. For this reason, some
cherished the hope, respecting him, that in the world he may have been a
worshipper of the Lord and in the affection of truth, and thus that he
might have been able to be of use with the people of that religion. But
he was of such disposition, that he spoke in accordance with the
affection of another, and very politely and adroitly. When it was
supposed that he accepted the instruction, he was left to his own love
and its derivative principles; and, when he was so left, he acted in
unison with the most crafty of his religion, countenancing and
instigating the destruction of those who were of the Reformed religion,
but clandestinely. And, inasmuch as he was allied with the most wicked,
he also endeavored, and this in many different ways, to totally destroy
those who ascribed all power to the Lord; and he was told to desist,
because he is now in a world where there is no respect of persons, but
whoever does evil is punished. Still, however, he persisted, believing
that nobody can do anything to him. But, when he persisted, he was
punished like the rest and indeed grievously, in a cavern where was a
rigorous punisher; and, because he still continued such, he was cast
towards the west.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5844.">5844.</span></span>

Inquiry was made as to what he had been in the world, even according to
his own confession: (1) that he esteemed the Word as of no account, and,
when he read it, ridiculed many things in it, as not at all Divine. Many
passages also were recited by him, in regard to which he spoke with
derision, saying, that it was only so written according to the style of
the time: in a word, that nothing of Divinity is to be found in it; (2)
that he, in Consistory, speaks more from the Divine than is spoken in
the Word; so that he extolled his own utterances in Consistory above the
Word; (3) that, for this reason, he confirmed the Bull Unigenitus, and
persuaded people to accept - in which he had done in many ways, of which
he instanced some, and had gone farther than \[it went\] before; (4)
that, for this reason, he loved and honored Jesuits more than others; of
which matter, also, some things were said \[as to\] how \[he did so\].
When he was told that a large part of them were devils, and was likewise
shown this by many being gathered together to him, so that he might see
them as they were, yet, he still loved them as before; (5) he also said,
that, as regards the Saints, he thought that they had more power than
the Lord, because they are inspired by God the Father in what they do,
but that the Lord abdicated all power and conferred it on the Popes;
also, that, although without power, He still ought to be worshipped.
Thus was ascertained of what quality he had been, and therefore that
heaven was entirely closed to him, and that he acted in union with hell;
for, to him who destroys the Word, places a Papal decree above the Word
and denies all power to the Lord, heaven is fast closed, and hell is
open.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5845.">5845.</span></span>

With the former Pope, however, or the predecessor <span
id="fr_311"></span>[5845-1](#fn_311.md) of this one, all is well; for he
was not of such a character.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5846.">5846.</span></span>

That last Pope, who has been described, associated himself with the
worst of his religion, who were sorcerers, and he likewise, three times,
sent forth the worst sorcerers of them: one, to destroy a spirit who was
in favor of the Lord; two, to the Reformed, to seduce them; and,
likewise, he himself wished to learn more about magical arts. He also
sent forth other exceedingly bad sorcerers, to work evil; and, when he
was discovered to be such, he was reduced to his interiors,
consequently, into phantasies; for the interiors of such ones are
phantasies, since they think nothing about God, but about themselves
alone, and about the worship of themselves and about intrigues. It was
then still more clearly seen what he had been, namely, that he at first
reverenced the Word, but afterwards despised it utterly, and accounted
his own decrees Divine; that he believed himself to be wiser than all
others, because he was more crafty, as also was shown; that he was able
to enter into the interior affections of others and to see them; also,
that he reverenced the Saints more than the Lord and made them deities,
and that he dearly loved the maliciously cunning, and, for that reason,
the Jesuits.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5847.">5847.</span></span>

Afterwards, he was led down towards the western sea, <span
id="fr_312"></span>[5847-1](#fn_312.md) at the part facing the south, and
as far as to its extremity, where he stopped and said that he wished to
be in that place, because the most crafty were there; but, still, he was
brought down from thence into the west, and from there towards those who
were in the remotest mountains, <span
id="fr_313"></span>[5847-2](#fn_313.md) who were the Neapolitans and the
worst ones of Italy. When he was there, he also said that he wished to
be there because they are the most crafty of all, asserting that he was
more cunning than they. There he discovered a certain saint, who was a
most powerful sorcerer, and who was then brought out from hell in order
that he might speak with him. That saint, who was the powerful sorcerer,
declared himself to be a Pope. He spoke with the other, and wanted to
determine, by competition, which was the more cunning and it was
ascertained that this one was equally cunning. He was afterwards brought
farther down, as far as somewhat into the north, and was brought back,
for a long while, through various zigzag ways - thus, \~\~\~\~\~\~\~\~ -
to a part where were the worst hells of the Babylonish people; for the
reason that he loved such things, and also in order to attract and
imbibe \[them\], thus, that he might apply himself to hells suited to
his interiors. Thus he was brought back to the remotest boundary, or to
the extremity, of the western sea, and there, of his own accord, plunged
himself down amongst the worst of those who were in the western sea.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5848.">5848.</span></span>

THOSE WHO REASON ABOUT TRUTHS, WHETHER A THING IS SO: THEY DO NOT ARRIVE
EVEN AT THE FIRST THRESHOLD OF WISDOM. There are those who reason about
truths, whether a thing is so, or not. In this case, one speaks and
reasons about a subject from his own science, and from his own store of
confirmations; another, in like manner, undoubtingly believes his dictum
to be the truth; thus, both hold out in confirming their own and in
refuting the other's, for every falsity can be confirmed so as to appear
like truth. Hence, they are at a standstill; nor are they able to
advance farther. But, whoever is in truths, as are the celestial angels,
does not reason about them, but sees them; and, consequently, they
advance from one truth to a thousand others, and see them. The latter,
which flow, and are derived, from the former, when heard by the
spiritual \[angels\], appear as incomprehensible and ineffable matters,
inasmuch as they are not in the truth which is the subject - as was a
celestial angel, who supposed the spiritual to be as wise as the
celestial, since they were able to speak in a similar way about visible
external \[objects\] and to describe them:

<span class="margnote"><span id="5849.">5849.</span></span>

wherefore, he was let down to those who thus reasoned about truths, and
heard them. He then said that he would never have believed there was
such darkness with them: he wanted to say, insanity, because he saw
nothing of truth, not even any little speck of truth. And then he
perceived, for the first time, by experience, what is the distinction;
so that he could also know the distinction of the happiness of the
celestial, from wisdom, and of spirits, from reasoning. <span
id="fr_314"></span>[5849-1](#fn_314.md) The delight of the latter, from
reasoning, was communicated to the celestial angel; and he then said
that their delight was so silly that he could not describe it; but it
was remarked, that it was their delight, and each must be left to his
own delight. Hence he perceived the difference of happiness. Inquiry was
made, whether such are able to receive wisdom among the wise, as many do
and it was said, that, so far as they are in good, when they are kept in
that good, and when, in the meantime, confirmed falsities are laid
asleep, which also occurs in a miraculous way, \[they are able\].

<span class="margnote"><span id="5850.">5850.</span></span>

Hence was manifest of what quality Christians at this day are, by this:
that they distinguish Churches according to truths, and dispute about
those, and do not trouble about good, namely, that the majority of the
learned, there, are of such a quality. Still, however, the same ones are
able to perceive truths when they are turned to those who are in truths,
and speak with them from ideas; but not, when not from ideas. When the
spiritual thus speak, they are still not in phantasies <span
id="fr_315"></span>[5850-1](#fn_315.md); but if they are in evil, then,
when they are let into their interiors and come into hell, they are in
phantasies; for, then, their falsities stand forth in forms which appear
as if real, when, nevertheless, they are illusions. Everyone there who
is in falsities, believes those things to be realities; but he who is in
good, if he should see them, would stand aghast. There was a certain one
who confirmed himself against the conjunction of the Churches by virtue
of the goods of charity, because \[he was\] opposed to syncretism. <span
id="fr_316"></span>[5850-2](#fn_316.md) But it was told him, that, if he
took syncretism from the truths of faith as a principle, and distinction
of Churches according to them, he would never come into light; but that,
on the other hand, if he should take the good of charity for a
principle, he would come into light; which, also, by means of infused
light concerning good, he confessed. It was Pastor Wolf.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_296"></span>[5811a-1](sd87.htm#fr_296.md) Dahlborg - though
Dr. Kahl says the correct spelling is Dalborg - was a Swedish clergyman,
who at one time enjoyed great celebrity for his oratorical gifts. He was
suspected of Pietistic tendencies. -TR.

<span id="fn_297"></span>[5819-1](sd87.htm#fr_297.md) The numbering is the
same as in the original, where 5817 and 5818 are missed out. -TR.

<span id="fn_298"></span>[5829-1](sd87.htm#fr_298.md) Namely, those treated
of in no. 5828. -TR.

<span id="fn_299"></span>[5829-2](sd87.htm#fr_299.md) The ones referred to
in the early portion of the present no. -TR.

<span id="fn_300"></span>[5833-1](sd87.htm#fr_300.md) Benedict XIV. See
heading to no. 5843, below. -TR.

<span id="fn_301"></span>[5833-2](sd87.htm#fr_301.md) Sixtus V. died 1590,
after a Pontificate lasting for five years. -TR

<span id="fn_302"></span>[5837-1](sd87.htm#fr_302.md) Georg Johannes
Silfverstrom, according to Dr. Kahl, a distant connection of
Swedenborg's by marriage, he having married a daughter of one of
Swedenborg's cousins on the mother's side. Silfverstrom was born in 1701
and died 1752. (See Kahl's Narratiunculae, pp. 32 and 4.) -TR.

<span id="fn_303"></span>[5837-2](sd87.htm#fr_303.md) The Latin has Britz.
But as the Behm family-tree does not contain that Christian name, while
it does contain the similar one of Brita, we conclude that the latter is
the name intended, and have, therefore, placed it in the text. Dr. Kahl
in his Narratiunculae comes to the same conclusion (p. 8), whilst Dr. R.
L. Tafel, in his Documents, assumes this to be the case, without remark
(Vol. I. p. 859). Brita Behm was Swedenborg's aunt on the mother's side.
She died, according to Dr. Tafel, in 1755 but Dr. Kahl has it, 1757.
-TR.

<span id="fn_304"></span>[5837-3](sd87.htm#fr_304.md) Respecting this
official, Dr. Kahl says it was, "without doubt, Peter Aulaevill" who is
mentioned at nos. 5800 5948. (See Narratiunculae, art. "Behm Brita," p.
8). -TR.

<span id="fn_305"></span>[5838-1](sd87.htm#fr_305.md) For the comprehension
of this expression, the reader is referred to Divine Providence, 25,
where such "fermentations" as are here meant are described. -TR.

<span id="fn_306"></span>[5838-2](sd87.htm#fr_306.md) See 5831, above. -TR.

<span id="fn_307"></span>[5840-1](sd87.htm#fr_307.md) That is, of course,
that this is the case according to the Athanasian Creed, out of which
Swedenborg is here refuting the errors of these Papists. The statement
of the Creed on the point is; "Equal to the Father as touching His
God-head." -TR.

<span id="fn_308"></span>[5841-1](sd87.htm#fr_308.md) Benedict XIV. See
heading to no. 5843, below. This Pope died May 3rd 1758. He ascended the
Papal throne in 1740, in succession to Clement XII.

<span id="fn_309"></span>[5841-2](sd87.htm#fr_309.md) The Bull Unigenitus
was fulminated by Clement XI., in 1713. -TR.

<span id="fn_310"></span>[5842-1](sd87.htm#fr_310.md) This is the doctrine
of Consubstantiation, invented by Luther, and upheld by Lutherans, even
to this day. -TR.

<span id="fn_311"></span>[5845-1](sd87.htm#fr_311.md) That is, Clement XII.
He reigned from 1790 to 1740. -TR.

<span id="fn_312"></span>[5847-1](sd87.htm#fr_312.md) See, for further
information about this "Western Sea," nos. 5296, 5300, 5303, 5638; also
Fig. 5 (K), Vol. IV., pp. 372-3. -TR

<span id="fn_313"></span>[5847-2](sd87.htm#fr_313.md) See, in reference to
these "mountains" and those who dwell on them, nos. 5648, 5652, of the
present work (Vol. IV.). -TR.

<span id="fn_314"></span>[5849-1](sd87.htm#fr_314.md) In the margin:
"Spiritual Faith - Celestial"

<span id="fn_315"></span>[5850-1](sd87.htm#fr_315.md) In the margin: "Shown
to a celestial angel, by looking into such societies, where there
appeared thence a beautiful colored object, as it were rainbow-colored."

<span id="fn_316"></span>[5850-2](sd87.htm#fr_316.md) "Syncretism" is the
attempt to blend the doctrines of the different Churches into one
harmonious whole; see no. 5662, above. -TR.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 5851-5900](sd88.md)
