[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Swedenborg](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sd91)  [Next](sd93) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0766143007/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Spiritual Diary*, by Emanuel Swedenborg, \[1758\], tr. by Bush,
Smithson and Buss \[1883-9\] at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Spiritual Diary

<span class="margnote"><span id="6051.">6051.</span></span>

ADULTERIES, THE LOVE OF RULING, DECEIT, ETC. It must be described how
infernal are adulteries and the other sins, for instance, in this place,
adulteries that is, believing that adulteries are allowable though there
may, or may not, be adultery. Scarcely anyone, at this day, believes
that they are so infernal, and that adulterers cannot possibly be saved.
The reasons are: (1) Because heaven is marriage, and hell is adultery.
(2) Because conjugial love descends from the marriage of good and truth,
adultery from the marriage of evil and falsity. (3) Because from
marriage, according to conjugial and infernal love, offspring is born.
(4) That in heaven they abhor adulteries, and that therefore heaven is
closed and hell opened widely \[by them\]. (5) That a man by conjugial
love receives the form of love inwardly and outwardly, by adultery the
form of hell; also, that heavenly love is implanted solely through
conjugial love. (6) That conjugial love is the fundamental love of all
loves for, when man becomes a form of love, he becomes an image of the
Lord: otherwise, the reverse is the case. (7) That, therefore, the
delights of conjugial love exceed all other delights, both in number and
quality. (8) That heavenly joy is founded upon that love in heaven; so
that as far as any one is in that, so far he is in heavenly joy of every
kind and degree. (9) That by marriages, in the heavens, wisdom
increases; which increase, there, is in the place of procreation. (10)
That with preachers in hell, there is a doctrinal adultery, which
differs from natural adultery - of which anon. (11) The reason why
wisdom increases according to chastity, is because the origin thereof is
the marriage of good and truth, and the marriage of the Lord with the
Church. This is its cause wherefore, nobody who is an adulterer can be
wise in spiritual things. Hence, so far as he is an adulterer, so far is
he blind in spiritual things, and so far is inwardly a devil. (12) That,
hence, to love the married partner, is to do good in the sight of the
Lord for it is thus, from chastity, to love the Lord. This communicates
with the heavens, and delights the souls of the angels to such an extent
as cannot be believed. (13) There is also a certain kind of coition,
which, when it proceeds from chastity, inasmuch as it is the effect of
that love, delights heaven in the highest degree. On the contrary, it
distresses them so far as it is from adultery. (14) Proofs may be
brought forward, that adulterers, no matter how morally well they may
have lived in other respects and have given themselves to prayers, are
cast into hell. The members devoted to generation, in both sexes,
correspond to the inmost or third heaven, where the angels are in the
heavenly marriage, or that of good and truth, more than the rest. In a
word, marriages in the heavens are most holy; wherefore, they must not
be profaned by adulteries.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6052.">6052.</span></span>

Nor can it be believed that the love of ruling, like adultery, also has
in itself hell. All those \[who are in this love\] are in evils and in
falsities therefrom. The reason is, because the love of ruling sinks the
mind into its proprium, so that it cannot be elevated by the Lord; but
everyone in whom heaven is, is elevated from his proprium, although the
man is not sensible of it. But to describe self-love: Its highest degree
is the love of ruling over others; it also contains in itself the love
of ruling over the Divine; and this is Babel, respecting which so many
abominable things are stated in the Word. To describe the nature of the
love of ruling: It is not ruling over others in one's official position,
but desiring to rule over others outside of that, not being content with
its own domain. The nature of the latter, and the nature of the former
\[love\], might be described further; also, that all \[who are in these
loves\], of whatsoever dignity, are cast down into hell.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6053.">6053.</span></span>

As regards deceit, the reason why it is execrable, is because it enters
man's interiors, even to the Rational, which is the inmost Natural, and
there tightly closes the spiritual mind, in which heaven is. The quality
of such persons might be described. These three things, especially,
those shun who will be of the New Jerusalem.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6054.">6054.</span></span>

Regarding adulteries, moreover, the reason why adulteries are so
prevalent at this day, in the Christian world, is because those there
are in the marriage of falsity and evil. As regards adulteries, they may
be of a married man with harlots, of a man not married with another's
wife, or with an undefiled virgin without the intention of taking her to
wife - thus, the despoiling of virginity - or, the delight of variety;
because all this destroys the conjugial. It is not so with an unmarried
man who is unable to abstain altogether, and yet, from causes in the
laws, cannot enter into matrimony, if he adjoins to himself a consenting
prostitute, a concubine, or a mistress. But let him beware that the
conjugial, which is interior love, do not enter, unless he have the
purpose of taking her to wife. The former class deprive themselves of
all the delight of marriage, but not the latter.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6055.">6055.</span></span>

CONJUGIAL LOVE - (continued). Those men who are in conjugial love, are
in such a state that they can enjoy intercourse with their wife as often
as they please: the ability never fails, inasmuch as all parts of their
body are in that love and, after intercourse, they are affected with
joyfulness, and never with dejection, so that they are invigorated by
it; but the contrary happens with those who are in adulteries. (2) The
husband's love depends on the wife's love; so far as she loves such
things, so far does the husband. It is the reverse in love which is not
conjugial. The reason is because the former are one, and are conjoined
as to interiors: this is meant by their being not twain, but one flesh.
(3) Those who are in conjugial love, feel with certainty whether there
is lasciviousness or not, for all lasciviousness is of adultery; but
there is nothing of lasciviousness with those who are in conjugial love.
This they perceive most perfectly. That sensation is from the interior.
The outward act is similar to that. Adulterers feel nothing save that
which is exterior, and not anything interior; when yet all spiritual
delight is in interiors, and is incomprehensible to those who are not
spiritual. (4) Nobody can be in conjugial love except he be spiritual,
and except he acknowledge the Lord; for the ultimate cause thereof is
from the Lord's marriage with heaven, and with the Church. This is its
Divine-spiritual origin. (5) Since woman is born the affection of truth
and good, and man the understanding of truth and good, it is hence
manifest that they are conjoined as one, and that conjugial love
constantly makes them one, and thus that they are loves, and images, of
the Lord. (6) The effect of conjugial love is wonderful: its power may
be described. (7) There is nothing at all of lasciviousness in conjugial
love; although it is outwardly similar, yet it is dissimilar inwardly.
(8) \[I might mention\] many exceedingly execrable things concerning
adulteries. (9) Cerberus signifies a guard to prevent the delight of
conjugial love from flowing down into hell. (10) Afterwards, \[I might
relate\] various other things concerning adulteries. \[Conjugial love\]
produces the delights of heaven, by communication. (11) The offspring
puts on the affections of the father and mother: hence, the hereditary
nature is not so malignant. The love of marriage opens heaven. The love
of adultery closes heaven.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6056.">6056.</span></span>

THE APARTMENTS OF HOUSES. It is a peculiarity of the apartments of
houses, resulting from their situation, that the dweller, occupant, and
others, in one apartment, have a different disposition from those in
another. The delights are different; so that in one apartment there is
the delight of studying and discharging duty; in another, the delight of
going out; in another, the delight of social interaction, and in another
the delight of being in the society of one's wife; in another, the
delight of eating; in another, they have close communication with those
who are outside, and in others a distant one. Spirits know, as of
themselves, that, if they enter such an apartment, this or that thing is
possible to them; and so forth, with much variety and according to their
affections. This peculiarity derives its cause chiefly from the
quarters, and from the inclinations to dwell in one quarter rather than
in others. Also, everyone knows his own place in the apartment; which
place accords with his disposition. He proceeds to it as soon as he
enters; and if another appears in that place, he goes away. It is
similar in the churches. This is the case in these particulars, because
the greatest form and least form in the heavens are similar; so that
there is an image of heaven in the single details.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6057.">6057.</span></span>

GOD AS A MAN. The truly human idea concerning God, is as of a God-Man.
That it is so, may be evident from these circumstances: (1) That
everyone, in the other life, represents God to himself as a Man; the
good especially, but also the evil. This was investigated, in the case
of many, who, in the world, entertained the idea about God as of
something invisible, or as of something spiritual, as it were aerial, at
a great distance before the eyes. But, still, all these same persons, in
the other life, see God as a Man. It was investigated and found to be
so: it is because that idea is in man's spirit. There are many things in
man's spirit which the man does not know are there; such as spiritual
speech, the idea of space, and many others. From these facts it follows,
that the idea of every single man, deeply rooted in his spirit, is of
God as a Man. (2) But that idea has been destroyed in the world with
those who began to think of Three Persons, and to separate the Lord's
Human from them, and hence made themselves three invisible Gods; (3)
\[as is evident\], also, from the idea of spirits who say that God is as
it were something aerial, or nebulous, either bright or dark. (4) \[The
former idea\] is destroyed, also, with those who attribute everything to
nature, and consequently nothing to the Divine; these, in the spiritual
world, make to themselves gods of all who excel in power, but still
esteem them as men. (5) Children, the simple-minded, women, in a word
all who have not destroyed that idea through the causes mentioned above,
have the idea of God as of a Man. (6) The same idea remains with all
gentiles, especially with Africans, who cannot conceive what a God who
is not Man, is. (7) That idea was held by all the ancients, before and
after the times of Abraham: they saw God as a Man, and called Him
Jehovah and Creator of the Universe. (8) It existed with the gentiles in
ancient times, who acknowledged many gods all of which were men; -
respecting whom see the places in the Word where they are named. (9)
Also, with all the Greeks and Italians; hence the Divine attributes from
which their gods \[take their origin\] all as men, -Jupiter, Apollo,
Venus, etc. (10) So, likewise, the inhabitants of other earths,
respecting whom see my pamphlet. <span
id="fr_361"></span>[6057-1](#fn_361) (11) Papists, also, in that they
are willing to worship the Pope, and to acknowledge Divine power in him
- and kiss his footprints - and in that they are willing to adore saints
as gods. (12) The reason that this is so, is from the influx of heaven,
which is received by every spirit; for heaven is the Divine in Human
form: wherefore, no one can be an angel in heaven without that idea of
God; on which account, the Lord is acknowledged, even by gentiles.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6058.">6058.</span></span>

EVERY MAN IS IN HIS RULING LOVE, AND THUS, AS IT WERE, IN THE CENTER. It
was asked by some, why it is that the evil - thus, those who have denied
God - who keep quiet, cannot be in an angelic society; but they received
reply, that every spirit at last comes to that place in which he may be,
as it were, in his own center; for they who are above, below, and around
him, in every direction, cause him to be in that place; for there is a
communication and influx of affections. Wherefore, no one can, in the
end, be anywhere else than in his own place, as it were in his center.
Moreover, all angels and all spirits are centers for the heavenly form
is one of continued centers.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6059.">6059.</span></span>

THE CIRCUMSTANCE THAT AMONG THE PAPISTS THEY HAVE SEPARATED THE BREAD
AND WINE IN THE SACRAMENT OF THE SUPPER. There was a conversation about
the Sacrament of the Supper, as to why, among the Papists, they have
separated the bread and wine, and give the people the bread and drink
the wine themselves; when, nevertheless, it was instituted differently
by the Lord, and since this did not happen from necessity, by reason of
the want of wine, inasmuch as there is wine in Italy, France, Spain,
Portugal, the interior part of Germany, and Hungary: also, where wine is
not produced - as in England, Holland, Sweden, Denmark, and in the part
of Germany where the Reformed are - wine does not grow, and yet it is
used in the Sacrament of the Supper. The Papists could not tell any
reason, unless the private one that the monks, when they perform masses
for the souls of the dead and attend to their other duties, may not
faint under their continued labor, since they are then revived by wine.
No other reason could be discovered; but it was said that this thing
occurred of the Lord's Divine Providence; because, when they devastated
the Church of every good and truth, they separated \[the bread and the
wine\], because good is not good if separated from truth: it is good
when in truth; nor is truth by any means truth save from good.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6060.">6060.</span></span>

ZINZENDORF. After some time, I spoke with him; and he was, then, as if
enfeebled in mind, because he was not received in the societies, where
he wandered around. They refuted his doctrine by various arguments, and
proved that there was nothing at all of truth in it, except that merit
must not be placed in works. When it was said that neither should merit
be placed in faith alone, and that those \[who profess that\] thereby
exalted themselves over others, they do not answer. He was enfeebled in
mind because his pride was humbled. He stated, that, when he entered
gardens, he did not see any fruits, and that he saw the foliage, not
green, but withered and yellow; when, nevertheless, others, who were
with him, saw both fruits and green leaves, as in gardens. It signified
that \[he possessed\] no truths. I spoke with one of the Moravians, who,
being asked what he felt about evil works and adulteries, and also
heinous sins, stated, that if they were indeed perpetrated, they
admonish the offender to desist from them, but that, nevertheless, they
are overlooked, because he holds their faith; and that if he did not
desist, the evils would still be pardoned, but not to the same extent.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6061.">6061.</span></span>

THE IDEA OF GOD AS A MAN. ZINZENDORF. There was discussion amongst
spirits as to whether it is implanted in man to view God as a Man. Some
said, that they who, in the world, viewed God, in their thought, as a
little cloud, or as light, or as the inmost of nature, are not able to
view God as a Man. Wherefore, this was tested with some and also, once,
with Zinzendorf, and with an elder of the Moravian communion; both of
whom, in the world, viewed Him, in the sight of the thought, as
something cloudy. They were let into their spiritual state; and they
then inquired where God the Father was, and then thought nothing else
than of seeing Him as a Man. They inquired also where He was; and when
they returned into their natural state with me, they regarded Him as
something cloudy. Hence they were convinced that it is rooted in man's
spirit to look upon God as a man. There came to Zinzendorf some of the
gentiles in western India, with whom he there spoke. He talked to them
concerning God, saying, at that time, that God sent His Son, who saved
us from hell. They believed, because they held the idea of God as a Man;
but, when they now gathered together in the spiritual world, they
discerned that he had an idea of God, as being, as it were, in a cloud.
Being astonished at this, they said, What is this? You think of God as
not a Man? when yet they had believed that he thought of God as a Man
when he spoke to them about the Lord.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6062.">6062.</span></span>

ZINZENDORF AND PAUL. He \[viz., Zinzendorf\] was in an abstract idea,
not as though he were speaking to anyone, but as if he thought in
himself, or spoke with a friend who divulges nothing. He said that he
could not at all think otherwise respecting the Lord than as he thought
about another man, and not that He was God; and yet he said the Divine
was in Him, but he meant the Divine as it is with another man: \[He
said\], also, that He spoke in a very simple manner, and not wisely; and
that Paul spoke more wisely. But it was shown him that the Lord spoke
from Divine Wisdom Itself, by correspondences, exactly as He also spoke
by the prophets, consequently from His own Divine; and that Paul indeed
spoke from inspiration, but not in the same way as the prophets, to whom
every single word was dictated but that his inspiration was that he
received an influx, according to those things which were with him, which
is quite a different inspiration, and has no conjunction with heaven by
correspondences.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6063.">6063.</span></span>

WRITINGS AND SPEECH IN THE SPIRITUAL WORLD. That speech and writing in
the spiritual world differ entirely from the speech and languages in the
world, so that there is no similarity, may be evident from these
circumstances: (1) When writing is being done there, a single letter
stands for an entire word, and that word a general term comprehending
many things in itself; and these many things are gathered from what
precedes and what follows, or from the matter itself which is being
written about; say, for example, that it is bono \[= by good\]: the b,
there, signifies glory and majesty; o, signifies along with, or among;
n, signifies the evil - thus, among the evil: when it signifies among
the good, there is a point above. (2) All the vowels signify something
that conjoins, thus among, along with, in, or into, and so on: i, there,
\[i.e. in a word\] signifies that which is from the interior, etc. (3)
They speak in this way, too as, for example, vita \[= life\] signifies
valley, begone, depart, and so forth. This refers to instances in which
they understood nothing of their writing in the natural state, but only
in the spiritual.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6064.">6064.</span></span>

NEWTON. I spoke with him several times. He is a thoroughly sincere man,
and is among his own, and is beloved. He told me that he now knows that
the Lord is the sun of the angelic heaven, and that all light, which in
its essence is Divine Intelligence, and which gives intelligence to
angels and also to men, is from Him; although men are ignorant that that
light enlightens the understanding, and causes them to think
intelligently. He also knew that there was one Life which causes
everyone to live, and that that Life appears amongst them as light, and
that life is from it also, that it inflows into man's inmosts, and
brings it about that it appears to man as if from himself. He also
stated that, where he is, there appear colors much more brilliant than
in the world, and of much greater variety; also, that the colors there
originate from the modification of the Divine Light into life-receiving
form in angels and men, and that from it are the varieties of
understanding. Respecting the planes of colors, he spoke in this
fashion: that there were. . . three: white from light, red from fire,
and black from \[shade\]; and that all the varieties of colors arise
therefrom.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6065.">6065.</span></span>

THOSE WHO ARE IN FAITH SEPARATE: ALSO, WHAT THAT FAITH IS. MELANCTHON,
AND THE TEN COMMANDMENTS. <span id="fr_362"></span>[6065-1](#fn_362)
Melancthon was let out of his cell, and incited to assemble those
spirits who, in the world, confessed faith alone, and with whom this was
the chief thing of religion. They were assembled to the number of many
thousands, and then were sent thence to a field where they might be
separated, each according to his life. When they were assembled, a
communication was made to them out of heaven, that that faith saves no
one, for the reason that there is neither life nor truth in it.
Wherefore, they inquired what truth is, and what life is. \[2\] It was
then replied, that truth and life are to live according to the commands
of the decalog: for instance, not to steal, or act insincerely and
unjustly; which is the 7th <span id="fr_363"></span>[6065-2](#fn_363)
commandment. The truth, in this case, is, that to act insincerely is a
sin; that to live unjustly is a sin also, that living sincerely and
acting justly is truth: thus, truth and life make one. Truth is to know
evil and it is to know good; and truth is man's when he shuns evil and
loves good. In like manner as regards the sixth commandment, to shun
adulteries, to love the chastity of marriage: truth is, to know that
adulteries are sins and it is truth that chastity is heavenly. Hence
life causes truth to be; and truth is when there is also life. It is
similar with not to kill, cherish hatred or take revenge. If this be
shunned, a man comes to have charity. Similarly as regards the 8th, Not
to witness falsely, etc. \[3\] From these things it is manifest that
life and truth are one and so far as man does <span
id="fr_364"></span>[6065-3](#fn_364) falsities, which consist in
believing and doing those evils, so far the truth is not in him. So far,
also, as he lives according to those \[commandments\], so far is he in
truth, and so far he loves truth, and desires to know what sincerity,
justice, chastity, charity and truth are; and, inasmuch as he is then
led by the Lord, it is granted him to know what evil and good are, and
what those specific \[evils and goods\]. \[4\] These things, therefore,
are truth, which is faith. Faith, apart from these, is a sounding word,
and has nothing of articulation, or voice, in the sound. It is sound
inarticulated, consequently, not a word. \[5\] In this, and no other
way, is he able to believe that God is, that the Lord is the Savior of
the world, why He came into the world, why He suffered the cross, what
is meant by His having borne the sins of the world, and many other
things; for, so far as a man practices those precepts which belong to
the second table, which was the covenant on man's part, so far does the
Lord grant him to believe that God is, which is the covenant of the
first table, which is on the part of God. That the decalog is the
complex of all things of truth and good, is hence plain, and also from
the fact that it was promulgated with such a miracle and with such
solemnity, that the ten commandments were written by the finger of God,
that they are called ten from the fact that they are all, and that they
were placed in the ark, upon which was the mercy-seat, and above that,
the cherubim. The mercy-seat is the Lord; and the cherubim were the Word
in the letter - also the veil placed in front and it was called the Holy
of Holies. Outside these, were all things of heaven and the Church in a
representative image. There, was the table with the shew-bread; there,
was the golden altar of incense there, was the candlestick with the
lamps: by all which were represented all things belonging to heaven.
That Church, also, was a representative one and, inasmuch as the Divine
Law in its whole complex was in it, therefore there was a fire there by
night, and a cloud by day. The fire signified love, and the cloud truth.
Hence it was, that all the Levites, together with Aaron, pitched their
tents round the ark, and that Aaron ministered there; likewise, that the
ark showed them the way when they went forward; for the very truth,
which is of faith, when it is living, leads. Afterwards, that ark
divided the Jordan, by which is meant, entrance into the Church: the
land of Canaan signifies the church. And afterwards, also, it wrought
miracles, and was introduced into the city of David, by which is
signified the Church in which Divine Truth reigns. The pattern of it was
seen and exhibited in heaven, and the Lord there spoke, between the
Cherubim, with Moses and Aaron. \[6\] When I know these things, then I
know what faith is, what love, what religion, and what the Church and
heaven in man. Otherwise, not. \[7\] This, therefore, is to think about
God in the life, since \[no one is able\] to think about God in the life
in any other way; and this, also, is to love God. This, too, is to begin
from life and to receive faith thus; and thus faith is from life and
according to it. This, likewise, is love to God and love towards the
neighbor. Hence is plain what the conjunction of love and faith is.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6066.">6066.</span></span>

THE PROVINCE OF THE NECK. That they who are diligent constitute the
province of the neck was manifested from D\[octor\] Heygart, who was
busy in transcribing various things: by diligence, moreover,
communication of the head with the body takes place.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6067.">6067.</span></span>

THE INDO-CHINESE. I was in bed, and slept sweetly and most deliciously
for 6 hours, or more; and, when I awoke, there were, above me, at a
distance, Chinese, sitting there, as the Indians are wont to do with the
feet crossed; and I was told that angels spoke wisely to them about God
and about His marvelous \[attributes\], and that they were so delighted
at this, that the were in the tranquillity of peace. Others were unable
to approach, because it was a spiritual-celestial \[sphere\]. When I had
awaked, the company withdrew.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6068.">6068.</span></span>

ZINZENDORF. I spoke with a certain one and he said \[that\] they who
practice charity, or the Divine commands, on account of God, and at the
same time with a view to heaven, are utterly damned, and that it is
better for Sodom and Gomorrah than for them. He afterwards said, that it
is no harm for a man to live in sins, even the graver ones, inasmuch as
God has then an opportunity for mercy; and that all things are of mercy.
\[He also said\] that, if another had taken on himself the passion of
the cross, he would have been accepted for the Son of God, if Jesus
Christ had not been willing and that He is the adoptive Son of God,
born, in fact, in order to become so, but that He said that it was of
His own will.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6069.">6069.</span></span>

WHAT THE SPIRITUAL IS. The spiritual may think what is the nature and
extent of the Natural. Thus the Spiritual is not finited and bounded, as
the Natural is. There are in the spiritual world, numbers, measures,
spaces, times, and materials, and those there also see them: they see
spaces and materials, and perceive times; they have names for numbers
and measures; but they think of those things from quality, as, also,
\[what they\] signify. - It was perceived that the Spiritual cannot, by
any means, be thought of naturally, but yet that it inflows into the
Rational-natural, as cause into effect.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6070.">6070.</span></span>

THE DRAGON. There was a preacher at the Hague. He was of the doctrine of
faith alone. He appeared to others exactly like a dragon, and also
seemed to stand in front of a woman who was, as it were, bringing forth,
in the desire of devouring the offspring when it should come forth. The
Lord's Church, which is the New Jerusalem, was representatively
portrayed by the woman, and its Doctrine by the offspring.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6071.">6071.</span></span>

POLHEM. He meditated much, just as in the world, but yet in a material
manner, because his thought was engaged only in Mechanics and Physics,
which he applied to mechanical appliances in certain things. He was also
such after death. He there applied himself to the appearances and
objects of sight which are there; and hence invented many magical
things. In these he was a better workman than others. He made statues in
various ways, and also tables, of such things as corresponded to the
affections, and adapted them more diligently than others; by which
things communication was given with certain societies of the lowest
heaven. This was allowed him for the sake of the purgation of those
societies; and he so constructed these things, that the evil in the
societies sometimes communicated replies to them. Hence it happened,
that he was cast \[into\] an exceedingly dark hell, where he was
deprived of that inventiveness.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6072.">6072.</span></span>

IDLENESS - USE - HEN\[RIK\] BENZELSTIERNA. <span
id="fr_365"></span>[6072-1](#fn_365) It was made known to me by
experience, that idleness is the devil's pillow, because idleness is
like a sponge which draws to itself dirty water of various sorts,
inasmuch as he who is in idleness, speaks, and therefore thinks, about
all things in the world, pure and impure, and hence receives the devil
of all impure things - since man inclines to these things and there is
not anything to drive them away. Only the love of uses repels them for
this holds the mind in its delight, and thus regards all other things as
outside itself. This was seen in the case of H\[enrik\]
B\[enzelstierna\], who loved ease. Owing to his delight in it, he
attracted to himself very many evils, and suffered himself to be led by
the delights thereof, thus by the spirits who were in them.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6073.">6073.</span></span>

THE NECK-BAND (NECKTIE <span id="fr_366"></span>[6073-1](#fn_366)).
There was a certain one, who, in his youth, had read the Word
diligently, but afterwards, because he did not understand it, banished
it from the mind, saying to himself that moral or natural theology is a,
better teacher. Wherefore, he fell into that opinion, and forsook the
Word. He came to angels and the angels said, What is the use of the Word
and that moral life apart from theological life, does not effect any
use, does not purify from evils, and by itself does not conduce to life
eternal. He, on hearing this, assented; wherefore a neckband was given
him by the angels - a white neck-tie; <span
id="fr_367"></span>[6073-2](#fn_367) delighted with which, he returned
home. But that necktie made him almost unable to see. The cause was
inquired into; and it was stated that it was because he had burst
asunder the bond between heavenly and moral things, and that,
consequently, with that band on, he was not able to see, but only
without it; because those things which are of heaven and the church
constitute the head; and moral and natural things constitute the body;
and the neck constitutes their conjunction. Hence was manifest what the
neck signifies, and what that which clothes it.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6074.">6074.</span></span>

ZINZENDORF. He was with me for several days, and heard and perceived
what they who were with me from the Lord \[thought\] about charity and
faith, and what befell those who, in doctrine and in life, are in faith
alone, \[namely\], that they are in a wretched condition and, further,
that there is not any faith where there is not charity: it was also told
him what charity is. On being told, he was amazed as, also, at the fact
that the whole Word is the Lord. He saw this; also, \[that he had been
in error in believing\] that the propheticals were nothing, <span
id="fr_368"></span>[6074-1](#fn_368) and many other things; he was also
grieved that he did not know this in the world; and being sent to one of
the same communion, he told him that he may now do as he will, that it
is not as they believe in the world, and withdrew. I conversed with him
about the three great errors: (1) that the Lord is the adoptive Son of
God - by which he denied that His Divine is from Himself; (2) that they
discarded the Word of the Old Testament, and read the Evangelists with a
certain contempt, esteeming only the epistles of Paul; (3) that they
have quite excluded from religion, and almost condemned, the works of
charity. It was also shown that all who so do, close heaven against
themselves. He believed that he was enlightened; but it was shown him
that enlightenment is not conferred, while those three errors are
entertained.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6075.">6075.</span></span>

MERIT IN GOOD WORKS. Good works take place with merit, and they take
place without merit, as may be illustrated by the person who holds an
office, and who performs his duty for the sake of merit: it is in order
to obtain applause, thus for the sake of reputation, and honor and
future promotion, or for the sake of gain; but, if he can have these
things without the performance of his duty, he does so. But he who does
not place merit in it, does it on account his obligation, because it
belongs to his office. In this lies concealed the fear of God, and also
love of the community but in the former is the love of self and the
world. Also take as an example, a workman. One does his work because it
is of his religion, and hence because he is under obligation, to do it:
this is his end; but another does it merely to obtain applause and to be
better thought of, solely that he may profit thereby. The latter places
merit therein, the former not. The former, like the other, accepts any
fame, honor and profit but to such ones these things are additions from
the Lord.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6076.">6076.</span></span>

THE QUAKERS. In addition to what has been previously disclosed, which
are their abominations regarding their wives and sexual intercourse, it
is also added that they preach the New Testament, because He \[i.e. the
Lord\] was born of the Holy Spirit, and \[say\] that they are, likewise;
and hence that they speak from the Holy Spirit as much as He, and that
they are in the Holy Spirit when they eat; and that, when others are
eating, they infuse the Holy Spirit into their feasts, and also that, in
this way, there is the sanctification and proving of others, whether
they are of them, and are able to enter among them.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6077.">6077.</span></span>

THE INHABITANTS OF TARTARY CLOSE TO CHINA - LESSER TARTARY. There were
some from that country with me. They came while I was asleep and I slept
tranquilly. On my awakening, they noticed that they were not at home,
but somewhere else. They wondered where they were, because they did not
recognize such things as were in the world of spiritual things, as at
all like \[those they were accustomed to seeing\]. They spoke of the
country where they lived, that it was populous, and that they knew
nothing about war. They knew of China and of Siberia. They said that,
with them, he governs who is able to govern, and if he is not able, he
is dismissed with a fine. They accord him no other honor than as a wise
man who can tell them whether this or that is just. They stated that
they are all engaged in their labors at home, in making clothes, in
cultivating the land, and the like. When they came, they marveled that
they should be questioned by Christians as to God being a man; inasmuch
as they believed that all knew this, without any question whether it be
so. In like manner respecting the precepts of the Decalog for example,
regarding only one wife, whether they live so, as if they did not know
that everyone so lived, since the Lord wills it, etc. They stated that
they have houses, where they are taught about life, and about the
commandments of God. - They said that they had a book, respecting which
people elsewhere do not know that they have it. They called it the
Divine Book: they read this, and are instructed by it and understand it.
Inquiry was made, and it was the Psalms of David. They said that
strangers are indeed admitted among them, but they do not give them the
means of going away. They give them necessary food; and if one wishes to
work, he is accepted. They also possess the Decalog. They call the
Chinese their friends, because they are of their race: they do not think
of wars, in their country. They have some fear of Siberia, but say that
they have nothing, and that, if they came, they would at once surrender
to them; but still they would all go away with their belongings,
unawares to them.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6078.">6078.</span></span>

ZINZINDORF. I asked him what he thinks about those who are justified by
their faith. He said that they are no longer able to do any evil,
because it is not looked upon as evil by God, and that, even though they
commit an enormous evil, it is not imputed to them if they return to
faith. I heard him saying why they are so furious against those who are
in charity. He said, that this is abominable, because they steal from
God the things which are God's, claiming to themselves merit, which is
God's alone, and that this is the sin of sins.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6079.">6079.</span></span>

THE PATHWAY OF FAITH, OR FROM IT, INTO THE WILL. I conversed with
spirits about the pathway of faith; that it proceeds from the affection
of truth to the perception of truth, consequently from the understanding
to the thought, and afterwards either remains in the memory, or
\[proceeds\] from the memory, thus, from the understanding immediately
into the speech, but is not appropriated to man unless he advances from
understanding to agent: thus it comes into the will. If it is something
to be done, it comes into the intention, thus into the will, and into
act; so that \[the sequence\] is, love, affection of truth, perception
of the understanding, assent or intention, will, and action or speech. I
said to spirits that to go from faith to good works is to go in inverted
order: as, for example, when one provides himself with decorations and
utensils of various kinds, and places them in a room the windows of
which are blocked up, they do not appear, unless a flame be brought in.
A flame gives light, so that all those things appear; otherwise, they
are indeed there, but in darkness. Love, or affection, is the flame
faith is the light from it; and without spiritual faith, which is the
light of life, nothing lives, or is in a light which endures.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6080.">6080.</span></span>

THE LORD'S INFLUX INTO MAN'S HONORS AND GAINS - SHUNNING EVILS. The Lord
is always present with man, and urges that good and truth may be
received. But, with those who had not shunned evils, that influx is
turned into their proprial loves - which are of the love of self and the
world - which are called forth; and thus the Lord leads men of the world
by their proprial affections; so that man turns the influx of good, or
love, in himself, into such things. He who does not shun evils, is
inwardly in himself bowed down with evils, and outside himself is
obsessed by such spirits as relate to his love; consequently, the Lord
is unable to reach the man, because goods are turned into such things.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6081.">6081.</span></span>

THE MORAVIANS AND ZINZENDORF. The Moravians, who believed that they,
more than all communication in the world, were the living and the saved,
on that account mounted on high, as usually happens, and were there
divided into several societies. But, inasmuch as they desired to have
dominion over the rest, they looked down and attached themselves to a
certain devil, through whom they forced others, who did not acknowledge
their religiosity, to obedience, even wishing to torture those who did
not receive it. But, when their time came, they were cast down,
successively, to lower places, and were compelled to enter a cavern
which they entered, complaining that they were surprised that they have
not food as the rest have, nor adornments for the house. But as, on
account of deprivation of food, and other adversities, they were unable
to stay there, they were let out, and the greatest part of them driven
forth into desert places, where they live wretchedly. On their
expressing astonishment at this, they were told that the reason was that
they had rejected the three veriest essentials of the Church and of
heaven: (1) the Divine of the Lord; (2) the Word of the prophets - they
had, also, despised the Evangelists; and (3) the works of charity, which
they had utterly rejected from themselves, and blasphemed; and, since
theme three have been rejected, they have their portion, not with the
blessed but with the miserable. Zinzendorf saw this and he desires to
recede, laboring earnestly, as he sees their calamity, to be able to do
so.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6082.">6082.</span></span>

JERUSALEM AND THE TEMPLE AFTER THE CAPTIVITY. The building of the temple
commenced in the year 72 after the captivity; completed as to the
interior portions in 91, 94. Jerusalem built, 163. Haman wishes to
massacre the Jews, 215. The Temple is pillaged, 439. The Jews are driven
to idols by Antiochus, 441. The Temple cleansed, 444. Alcimus begins to
destroy the Temple wall, 449. Hyrcanus, Anstabulus, Alexander Jannieus
reign in Judea, 504, 505, 506. Aristabulus (II.), till 542. Pompey takes
Jerusalem, 545. Antigonus takes possession of Judea, 568. Herod is then
declared king of Judea, 568. Herod besieges and reduces Jerusalem, 571,
572. Augustus sets about building the Temple, 586. The building of the
Temple finished, Herod celebrates the dedication, 595. The Temple
polluted by the Samaritans, 615. The building of the Temple
discontinued, 631. The Lord is born, 605.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6083.">6083.</span></span>

HIEROGLYPHICS. Trismegistus, living in Egypt in the time of Moses as is
supposed, is believed to have invented the mode of expressing ideas of
the mind by images of beasts, which are called Hieroglyphics.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6084.">6084.</span></span>

THE SPEECH OF THE THIRD HEAVEN. I conversed with spirits about angelic
speech, and said that spiritual speech cannot be at all understood by
anyone who is in a natural state; but that natural speech can be
understood by spirits who are in a spiritual state, though only
according to correspondences - and likewise the reverse, but, in that
case, spiritual speech falls into natural. Hence it is, that man does
not know anything about the spirits amongst whom he is, nor a spirit
know anything about the man with whom he is. They were told that the
spiritual angels are not able to understand celestial speech, or that of
the angels of the third heaven, because their speech is the speech of
affections. As this occasioned surprise, an angel from that heaven spoke
with them, and they did not understand anything at all; by which was
established that the angels of the third heaven have a higher speech.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6085.">6085.</span></span>

THE OPERATION OF THE UNDERSTANDING AND OF THE WILL, THUS OF FAITH AND OF
LOVE. The appearance, which is a fallacy, is, that the understanding
acts upon the will, or faith upon love, and produces it. But it was
shown to many that this is not so. Spirits not good fully understood
their own evils, reasoned against them, and called themselves fools; but
they were then in understanding, resulting from the affection of being
distinguished for intelligence. As soon, however, as they were let into
the evils of their will, their understanding was insane. This was
repeated several times and it always so fell out; so that they confessed
that the understanding merely teaches, and does not produce the will,
but the will the understanding. That such is the appearance is clear. It
appears as though the sight of the eye leads the feet in walking so as
not to stumble, and the hands to act and work; when, yet, the eye only
teaches and does not produce. The action of the feet and hands are the
will's; and the sight of the eye is the understanding's; and there is a
full correspondence. But he who believes that fallacy, and yet lives
aright, suffers no harm for, in the spiritual world, there are many such
who are blessed. When they, however, come to the second or third heaven,
they are instructed and see \[how the case is\]. Nor can the matter be
believed differently, not only on account of the appearance, but also on
account of the received faith, that it \[viz., faith\] produces works.
They liken faith to a tree, and fruit to works. But this is fallacious.
By a tree is meant man, and by branches, boughs and leaves, faith; and
by fruits, good works. Man is what produces.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6086.">6086.</span></span>

SPIRITUAL LIGHT IS DIVINE WISDOM. Worldly spirits do not perceive this,
because they have their idea from the light of the world; but it was
shown them that it is so. A certain one who was in doubt about that
matter, inasmuch as he was as much in light as the others, who were not
worldly, was told, that he does not see there from his own light, but
from theirs. Wherefore, when their light was removed, he was left to his
own light and was in darkness. He was afterwards let into a place where
there were worldly \[spirits\], who, although not in the light of
heaven, still saw. . When he came thither, he at first saw nothing; he
afterwards saw as they did - for his eyes were adapted to darkness, as
is the case with certain birds which see at night; and, then, he saw as
if in the light. Nevertheless, he was shown that it has not spiritual
light. He was brought back to the former place, where there was
spiritual light; and then he did not see until the former sight was
removed.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6087.">6087.</span></span>

QUEEN CHRISTINA. She dwelt in a house, which was quite elegant and
splendid from such things as were within \[meubler <span
id="fr_369"></span>[6087-1](#fn_369)\]. There were servants there to
attend upon her, but not altogether her own - still, sufficient for
politeness. She is in a certain spiritual world which corresponds to
spinning. Thither went C\[harles\] XII, in order to talk; and at length
they went out. It was through a spacious, paneled gallery. Immediately
afterwards, she told how she conversed with the Cardinals in Rome; which
was in a familiar way with all kinds of pleasantries, always bantering
them, as it were, yet understandingly, by various devices, whereby she
represented many things which charmed \[their\] minds: she wished, for
example, \[persons\] to appear naked before them; to which they replied,
saying, that this could not be, and would be unbecoming. She said, that
it was becoming, because to go naked is always to appear in pure truths;
to which they assented. She showed in various ways what sort she was.
She next related various things, how she conversed with the Pope, whom,
also, she sometimes pleased by her ways; and, being asked what she
thought of Christ, she replied that He was the High Pope; to which he
replied that He was not, because He gave the power to Peter, and thus to
him. He said that \[she\] affirmed this of the Son of God, by whom he
meant the human from the mother; but she replied that \[He is\] the Son
of God from eternity, who is equal to the Father, and, since the Father
was above the Pope, He was also. To this, the Pope, on reflection, could
make no reply: nevertheless, he wished her not to tell others; but,
still, \[she\] insisted that it could not be otherwise. - After this,
she spoke with the Cardinals, and told them to swear themselves upon the
creed of Athanasius. They said they had sworn it before; but she
compelled them, by her pleasant ways, to affirm it yet again with a
certain oath - which was done. She then said, that it is there laid down
that His Divine was in His Human, like the soul in the body, and that
thus it is One Person; and then she strenuously insisted that they must
not separate them, - that, since the body apart from its soul is not a
man, there is not anything that could give anything; consequently, that
His soul had given what was its own \[to His body\], inasmuch as they
are one; and that thus the Son of God, as respects both \[soul and
body\], is not able to give away what He still possesses. Today, also,
she bantered the Cardinals, nor were they able to reply. They confessed
that the Lord, since the Divine and Human constitute one Person, was
above the Pope, and ought to be so acknowledged. They gave way to her,
and assented; for she fascinated them by those pleasantries and her
familiar talk, because she was a queen. She also told the Cardinals that
the papal power is Divine, since, according to their doctrine, it was
given to the Son, who also was God, and who was able to receive it
because He was God and the Only begotten Son; but to bestow Divine Power
on a man who is not God, this the understanding does not accept. She
also asked what is meant by the Rock \[Petram\]. The Pope replied that
it was the Lord and so forth.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6088.">6088.</span></span>

FOOD IN THE SPIRITUAL WORLD. They eat and drink there, just as in the
natural world; but all food there is from a spiritual origin: wherefore,
it is not obtained beforehand, but is given daily. When it is
dinner-time, and also when it is supper-time, a table furnished with
viands appears while the meal-time lasts, and disappears when they have
dined, or supped. All spirits whatsoever, are supplied with food
according to their employments - rulers sumptuously; with much pomp, the
magnificence of which cannot be described; the rest less sumptuously
according to their condition. Be it observed that everyone is provided
with food according to the labors which he performs. He who has no
employment, business and work, does not receive food, but begs. I have
seen grandees thus begging, because they were unwilling to do any work;
also, women of rank. - I have seen grandees who lived magnificently in
the world, provided only with bread and milk; and, when they complained
that there was nothing more, they were told that they do no work, and
food is not given to the slothful and those who pass the time in
idleness. By this means, they are reduced to the performance of some
mean employment, in order to receive sustenance. - Moreover, they go to
such as work, and by begging eat with them; but this does not last long.
- Bread can be bought in the places where such ones are, but not every
kind of food. The reason is, because certain ones wish to be paid for
the labors which they do, and because, \[if\] they thus work, the wages
can be spent in buying bread. - But there is no buying except with such
as are good. - To those in such duties, bread comes gratuitously.
Besides other like things. All in the hells are forced to work and those
who do not work receive neither food, nor garments, nor bed. Thus are
they driven into labors. The reason is, because idleness is the root of
all wickedness; for, in idleness, the mind is spread out to various
evils and falsities; but, in work, it is held to one thing. Food cannot
be kept till the morrow: worms breed in it, as in the manna. This is
signified in the Lord's prayer: "Give us daily bread," and also by the
circumstance that nothing of the paschal lamb, nor of the sacrifices,
was to be laid by till the morrow. Inasmuch as the food is from a
spiritual origin, and so is in itself spiritual, and since spirits and
angels are men, and are furnished with a spiritual body, therefore such
spiritual nourishment is adequate for them. A spiritual being is,
therefore, nourished in this spiritual manner, and a material man
materially. As all things that appear in the spiritual world correspond
to the affections, and to the thoughts of the understanding thence,
their houses, garments, fields, gardens, paradises do so - all of which,
likewise, are from a spiritual origin; and good affection, together with
the thought of the understanding of truth, cannot exist in idleness, but
is dispersed. Therefore, food does not exist otherwise than according to
correspondences; and, moreover, the works of those who are in hell have
correspondences with the heavens, but not the infernal spirits
themselves; as was the case with the Israelitish and Jewish nation, who,
although they were evil, yet their representative worship nevertheless
corresponded - respecting which correspondence of those things, see in
The Doctrine of the New Jerusalem <span
id="fr_370"></span>[6088-1](#fn_370) no. \[248\] Their food was seen as
manifestly as the like food in our world. The food is of every kind, and
also of every variety of luxuriousness. There are also table decorations
which cannot be described in natural language.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6089.">6089.</span></span>

THE COUNCIL OF TRENT. The decrees of that council were confirmed by
bull, in 1564, in November of that year. (1) That Holy Scripture is not
to be explained and interpreted by any, save by the Church. (2) That the
seven Sacraments are, Baptism, Confirmation, the Eucharist, Repentance,
Extreme Unction, Order, and Matrimony. (3) That the body and blood are
truly, really, and substantially in the Eucharist, together with the
soul and Divinity of our Lord Jesus Christ, and that there takes place a
turning of the whole substance of the bread into the body, and of the
whole substance of the wine into the blood - which they call conversion
and transubstantiation. (4) That souls detained in purgatory are
benefited by the suffrages of friends. (5) That the saints reigning with
Christ should be venerated and invoked. (6) That honors and veneration
are to be paid to images. (7) That the Pope is the successor of Peter,
the chief of the apostles, and the Vicar of Jesus Christ. The following
are from the bull: That the saints reigning with Christ, offer their
prayers for men to God, and that it is for this reason good and
profitable to invoke them in prayer, and, on account of the benefits
obtained from God by His Son Jesus Christ, who is our only Redeemer and
Savior, to have recourse to their prayers, assistance and help; but that
those think wickedly who deny that the saints enjoying eternal happiness
in heaven are to be invoked, or who assert, either that they do not pray
for men, or that the invoking of them to pray also for each one of us is
idolatrous, or that it is repugnant to the Word of God and opposed to
the honor of the one Mediator of God and men, Jesus Christ, or that it
is folly to supplicate, orally or mentally, those who are reigning in
heaven. Concerning Justification by faith, and Sanctification by it, the
Catholics entertain almost similar opinions with the Reformed. There is
not much difference.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6090.">6090.</span></span>

SPIRITUAL LANGUAGE OR SPEECH. That spiritual language, or speech, has
nothing at all in common with human languages, was manifest to me from
the words of that language, which cannot be in the least understood by
any man; and yet, nevertheless, every man comes into that language,
after death, of his own accord; so that it is implanted in his spiritual
man, but not in the natural. This may be evident from these two words -
they say, vita vella, which signifies, Let him be afar off and depart
quickly; and from the word, scapuleja, which signifies, to cast out of
doors. I have not yet been taught whence the words of that language
originate. They take up the words, not from the sound of affection, but
from the significations of the vowels and consonants: the ideas of
thought fall into such unfoldings of the lips. - Their writing differs
from the speech.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6091.">6091.</span></span>

GENEVIEVE \[Genoveva\]. She sometimes appears to the Parisians, at a
middle elevation above, and in splendid clothing, and with a face of as
it were Divine holiness, and beautiful. She is beheld by many; and there
are some who wish to invoke her. Then her face is changed, and she
becomes like another woman, and chides them, saying that they are
forbidden to be worshippers of men and women - and this till they are
ashamed. She says, also, that she ranks with ordinary women, and is held
in no more estimation than any other woman; that she is in a certain
society where she is not known, being held in small esteem there; and
that she knows nothing at all about those who are in the world, still
less hears or perceives anything, marveling that men of the world are
taken in by such nonsense. She says, also, that she is not among the
better ones; and that whoever wishes to be greater than others becomes
meaner than others; and that it does harm to many to be canonized,
because, when they hear of it, they are puffed up owing to hereditary
evil, and begin to be proud, and are removed from where they are to some
place where they do not know themselves, as to who they were in the
world.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6092.">6092.</span></span>

I heard from a certain Pope, that he has spoken with all who have been
made saints, of both sexes, and that, with the exception of two, he had
not seen one of them in heaven, and these two abhor invocation. The
greatest part do not know who they are: some are as it were silly.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6093.">6093.</span></span>

THREE PERSONS OF THE DIVINITY. I compelled certain spirits to speak out,
or express themselves, concerning the one God, just as they think. Those
who are spiritual, and \[whose\] thoughts fall into their speech and
produce it, could not, at that time, when they would say one God,
pronounce "one God" with the lips. They folded the lips into various
shapes, and wanted to force it out; but in vain.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6094.">6094.</span></span>

IN THE TOUCH OF THE HAND THERE IS AFFECTION FROM THOUGHT. It has been
made known to me, by living experience, that, in the touch of the hand
there is affection together with thought. I touched an angel with my
hand, and the angel stated, that, from the touch alone, he perceived
\[my\] affection and the associated thought. Hence is manifest, whence
it comes that those in the spiritual world are engaged in labors: it is
because, by means of the hand, in work, thought is determined to
something living. This, also, is why the Lord touched many people, and
why inauguration into the priesthood takes place by the touch of the
hand upon the head - and many things besides.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6095.">6095.</span></span>

THE AFRICANS. They appear in striped linen garments. Their women
likewise \[in striped garments\] but silken. They, more than others,
imbibe truths from ardent desire. They call this being fed; for, when
they are in the desire of those \[truths\], they go forth and search for
food. This is innate in them, as is manifest from their infants, in that
they frequently tell their nurses that they want to eat; and, when food
is given, they examine whether it agrees, and this from correspondence;
and, after they have eaten, they again ask to eat; from which is
manifest that it is spiritual hunger which effects it. - They \[i.e. the
Africans\] say that they are indeed permitted by the civil law to take
two or three wives; but they say that yet they take but one, for the
reason that love which is distributed among many is external, and hence
lascivious, but with one wife, is internal, and truly conjugial. They
know in what state of spiritual intelligence they are, by looking at a
sword. If it glitters, it is a sign of the reception of truth in
abundance, with a difference according to the brightness. - They said
that monks sometimes penetrate to them but they then hear what they
know, and when they find that it is nothing but rubbish, they inquire
what the monks are useful for; and, when they are not serviceable in
labors, or in managing anything, they are sold for slaves, and they are
then allowed by their law to chastise them and, if they cannot then be
compelled to perform anything useful, they sell them for a small price
to the lower classes.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6096.">6096.</span></span>

CONJUGIAL LOVE: A SYNOPSIS. I. N. B. - In the Divine sense, it is the
marriage of love and wisdom in the Lord: hence the two \[partners\] are
an image of the Lord. II. 1. The marriage of the Lord with Heaven and
the Church. III. 2. The marriage of love and wisdom, or of good and
truth. IV. 3. Heaven is called a marriage - and the church, also. V. 4.
The Word is a marriage, because it is Divine Good united with Divine
Truth proceeding from the Lord. VI. 5. Man, male and female, or husband
and wife, are especially that marriage. That marriage is in every single
thing in nature. VII. 6. Conjugial love is the fundamental of all loves.
VIII. 7. Conjugial love is a heavenly love. IX. 8. Conjugial love is not
possible, save between two. X. 9. Two married partners are continually
being united, and according to the unition, potency and delight
increase. XI. 10. Adultery is the union of the devil and those who are
adulterers. It is the union of evil and falsity. XII. Hell is adultery,
and evil, also. There cannot be found any who say it is in themselves.
XIII. The adulteration of the good of the Word, and the falsification of
its truth, is adultery: many things about this. XIV. Adultery is opposed
to creation. XV. Adultery is the fundamental love of all evils. XVI.
Adultery is the commingling of many lives in one. XVII. Potency
diminishes, and aversion takes place; it also becomes common,
unaccompanied by any sensation, and, at last, there is aversion. XVIII.
What sort of whoredoms the adulteries which destroy conjugial love are.
XIX. The various kinds of adulteries: see immediately above. MARRIAGE
AND ADULTERY. XX. To acknowledge charity and not faith, is adultery of a
brother and a sister. XXI. Man is formed by conjugial love, to be a form
of love, whence come all the remaining heavenly loves. XXII. The
destruction of that form is from adulteries. XXIII. Hell is adultery.
XXIV. The following things correspond to the acts of adulteries there:
XXV. Those who worship only the Father, and think nothing of the Lord's
Divine, are in the adultery as of a brother with a sister. XXVI. Those
who are in faith alone, are in the adultery as of a mother with a son.
XXVIII. <span id="fr_371"></span>[6096-1](#fn_371) Those who are in the
mere sense of the letter, and study that for the sake of honor only, are
in the adultery of a father with a daughter-in-law. XXIX. Those who are
in the highest degree of the love of ruling from the love of self, and
not for the sake of use, are in Sodom. XXX. Those who are in the delight
of variety of adultery, are such as love commerce with beasts and they
become like the mucus of the nostrils. XXXI. \[I learned\] by
experience, in the night time, from those in faith alone who were in an
expanse above, that those same things which are in the creed of faith
separated, are turned into various foul whoredoms.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6097.">6097.</span></span>

LUTHER AND MELANCTHON. Since Luther, and afterwards Melancthon, began to
make disturbances roundabout in defending faith separated, they were
therefore borne down from the spiritual world to their own places,
according to life, where they do not know who they are. This occurred on
the 30th day of December, 1763.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6098.">6098.</span></span>

AN ENGLISH BISHOP. A Bishop wished to see me for the purpose of refuting
those things which have been written concerning faith separated; and he
saw me. He said, that, in England, they would, indeed, receive the first
work, <span id="fr_372"></span>[6098-1](#fn_372) concerning the Lord,
and also the position that a New Church is meant by the New Jerusalem;
the second work, too, concerning the Sanctity of the Word, and likewise
the third, concerning the Doctrine of Life; but that they would utterly
reject the fourth, concerning Faith. And then I began to reason with him
about justification by that faith; and at length, being convinced he
acknowledged that unless the fourth work, concerning Faith, were
received, the three former would come to naught, besides many other
things. But that Bishop, who died three years before, disclosed what art
he employed to nullify those things which were written previously
concerning Heaven and Hell, <span id="fr_373"></span>[6098-2](#fn_373)
and the rest, both in the House of Lords \[apud Mylords\] and by the
priests at Oxford; also, that he accomplished this, so that nothing is
now heard of them. Moreover, that Bishop, inasmuch as he had confirmed
himself in faith alone, and, consequently, possessed nothing of
spiritual faith, because nothing of charity, was conjoined with
societies of hell; wherefore, also, he became a magician, and abused
correspondences there, - by which means, such ones are able to appear as
if spiritual. I saw him ascending towards heaven with a bundle of wood
on his back, and, afterwards, with an infant in his arms which he
adorned with many beautiful representatives of good and truth. He
changed the bundle of wood into the infant, and, by means of phantasies,
caused it to shine; and thus it seemed no otherwise than that it was
that. But at the entrance to heaven he was recognized, and sent back to
his own; who were all priests, and had confirmed themselves in the same
thing. Wood corresponds to good. - But they were all immediately
separated, according to life, and according to confirmation of faith
separate. I asked them whether they would permit me to recite to them
the words which are read in the exhortation before the Communion, that
if they do not abstain from sin and repent of the sins there mentioned,
the devil would enter into them as into Judas; but they besought me not
to recite those words to them: it is enough that they repeat them in
church, and believe them at the time. That bishop said that there is no
sin. He said that not even adultery was sin, - which, also, he persuaded
a wife. Many others said the like, \[namely,\] that sins did not exist,
because the Lord had taken them away, and because there is not any
condemnation to those who are justified by that faith. He afterwards
appeared like a viper, and was cast into hell. They were in the west
quarter of London; and many were sent forth.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6099.">6099.</span></span>

COCCEIUS AND VOETIUS. I spoke with Cocceius, who was with me for several
days; and I said many things to him about repentance - both from the
exhortation before the Holy Supper, and also from the Decalog and from
the Creed of Athanasius, - to the effect that man ought to shun evils as
sins; and he was convinced, for he could not deny it. But, still, he
insisted that this is not a matter of doctrine, and that his doctrine
was the very doctrine of the Church. I spoke to him out of the Word; but
he said that he saw those things in the Word, but that they relate to
faith. On being examined as to doctrine, it was stated by him and by his
followers, that he preached the mysteries of faith more constantly and
more deeply than others; that \[he went\] beyond justification to
interior effort, saying, that the operation of the Holy Spirit works
through faith received as far as the will, but that, on arriving at the
will, it elevated itself so as not to touch any part of the will of man,
and took its exit on the left, above the will, and thus purified man of
his evils. Besides other mysteries which he fashioned, he made out the
human will, in his idea, to be as it were a plane of filth, above which
the Divine influx operated, and from which it elevated itself so as not
to touch any part of it, for thus man would mix himself up with the
Divine operation. In this way, he excluded all man's externals, saying,
that these were then pure, from the internal influx, and that their evil
was dispersed, and they were consequently, nothing else than good, and
things similar to the internals appeared in the sight of God. To the
question whether or not man should perform repentance, he said that this
is the reply: it is no harm if it be done for the sake of the public
good, but if for the sake of salvation it is damnable. I spoke to him
about that faith; but he said it is the true faith; but, yet, in his
idea, he was unwilling to think of the Lord, but about the Father only,
\[believing\] that the whole of salvation depends on Him, and nothing of
it on the Lord. When I said that He had taught that He has all power in
heaven and on earth, and that He is one with the Father, he was silent,
being unwilling to say anything. In like manner, when I said that God
and man, in the Lord, according to the faith of Athanasius, is one
Person, he said he had not heard this before, therefore that he had not
read \[that Creed\]. He says that he has an idea solely of the Father,
and none respecting the Lord's Divine. Thus he, himself, had denied;
but, still, he had not disclosed the fact to others. He was an out and
out Socinian at heart. It was proved to him, by many statements from the
Word respecting the Lord, that the Father and He are one, and that He is
the Jehovah of the Prophets; but he replied, that he abides in his own
theology, and does not wish to see those declarations there. He was
transferred to a certain society in heaven and, when he opened his
mysteries, it was shown him that the thing he set forth was absurd, yea
ridiculous, and was mere phantasy. It seems as though he is becoming
profane. He has also conjoined himself with a woman who is profane. His
followers, most of whom were priests, who not only imbibed his
principles, but also taught them, were collected together and were
scattered abroad. Those more learned than the rest, are prelates; and
the most learned, therefore, and most renowned in his country, is
Cocceius. But, on investigation being made whether any of the laity and
of the councilors knew anything about his theology, they said that they
knew nothing at all, save that he and his followers were more learned
and scholarly than others. The priests and professors are divided into
Cocceians and Voetians. Voetius lived 100 years before, and Cocceius
110. I spoke with Cocceius himself. He said, that, at first, he was
among his priests from Holland, and, as is customary, lived quite well,
but that he was afterwards taken away to a little stone chamber. It was
a house, or hut, of one apartment, with windows in it. He sits alone,
having no servant, or wife, and prepares papers, which are taken by
others. He said that, round about, there is nothing but gravel, and
pebbles, and stones heaped up, with scanty grass interspersed; and that
he has some communication with certain ones of a like character in the
world of spirits, and also some with the Moravians. He said that he
acknowledged the Divine Trinity, but that, when he thought upon the
Father, the rest, to him, were not anything. He also still writes
something in his solitude, but frequently exclaims, I will demonstrate
this, I know this, I will demonstrate this. I asked whether he was able
to demonstrate it. He said that he knows, or from his idea perceives,
that the thing is so. I inquired whether there were not many in his
desert. He said there was an immense number, and that their huts were
scattered and very little frequented. This desert is towards the front,
at the right hand side, or in front of the desert of those who are in
faith alone. Sometimes he goes away further and to a greater distance,
somewhat into another desert, where dwell such of the Christians as had
indeed read the Word, but did not know its doctrine; and, inasmuch as
they rejected the goods of charity, or good works, like those who have
not any religion, very many of them are in that desert of the Cocceiaus.
None of them have any religion; for religion is of life and thence of
faith, and not of faith separate, which is no religion. - I asked them
again about their religiosity. They stated that the Divine operation is
towards the plane of the will, but that it raises itself therefrom, and
hence those things which are of man's will do not appear in the sight of
God; also, that they are dissipated when man dies, and that their faith
effects this. They said that man has evils, but they are not sins in the
sight of God, but evils against their fellows and the commonwealth. I
told them that they were well aware, from their exhortation before the
Holy Supper, that a man ought to examine himself, to see and confess his
sins, and refrain from them, and that he who does not do so, profanes
the Holy Supper; also, that they have no remission of sins in any other
way, and they knew that, without remission of sins, there is no
Salvation. To this they answered nothing, save that they did not think
about this when they read out that exhortation. I said, also, that the
Old Testament, and the New also, teach nothing else than love,
good-will, works, deeds, doing, thus life; and I asked whether it is
possible for men to be Christians, when they do away with the whole Word
by the doctrine of their faith. They said that they saw such things in
the Word, but said to themselves that they are embraced in their faith.
I spoke with some of the Voetians who said that their belief is that the
Divine operation goes as far as the will, and touches it; that still,
however, it does not so excite man's will that it does anything of
itself, but that, nevertheless, a secret inclination to do good is
experienced, and everything that proceeds from that, unawares to the
man, is of God; but what is from man's will, he knowing of it, is not of
God, thus not good. That influx, and inclination therefrom, they call an
impulse of good. They also say that everything that is done in secret is
from man, and does not appear to God and hence they do not think of evil
regarded as sin, but only of evil against their fellows and the
commonwealth. I asked the Voetians why they wish the Sabbath to be kept
holy. They said that they desire external observances, which are liked
by the multitude, in order to catch the favor, or confidence, of the
people; from this there is the appearance that they are zealous for
doing good: the simpler ones said, because the doing of good is
commanded in the Word. Most of the laity said that they know nothing at
all about this theology of theirs: when any ask whether good is to be
done, they say it is to be done, and they then understand that it is not
for the sake of salvation. Some, when they inquire into their mysteries,
and hear them, say these things are mystical, - nothing else. Some of
the Cocceian priests who had confirmed themselves in that doctrine, were
examined as to whether they had any religion; and it was found that they
had nothing whatever of religion, and that they were entirely destitute
of every truth. There was a Dutch town, situated below, at the right
hand side, respecting which I knew but little as to the character of the
inhabitants, since there was not any communication opened. But I
afterwards heard, that they have indeed lived together as good citizens,
but have thought little about God in their life. They merely attended
church, supposing that all Divine worship consists in that; but, as in
the world, they liked priests who had a reputation for scholarship:
these were the Cocceians. And the former ones, by means of insinuations
into their rulers, brought it about that priests who were not scholars
\[should be appointed\]: these were the ones who preached that evils
were to he shunned as sins against God. Thus there remained Cocceian
priests, who said, indeed, that good ought to be done, but not for the
sake of salvation - they carefully guarded against thinking that; and
said that there was not any sin, provided they held the received faith.
When priests were appointed who were not scholarly, as they were called,
then, from the sphere of the Cocceians and of those who favored them,
and from others there who were led astray by them, a change of their
state was produced; and then the former ruler, who was good, resigned
his office, and another, a slothful and simple man \[succeeded\], who
was such that he did nothing, but merely presided; and then the gates
were opened, and it was allowed to anyone to enter the town who wished.
Hence, their state became such that they no longer thought upon anything
relating to the Church, but lived licentiously. Wherefore, that whole
town sank down to a very great depth, together with the inhabitants and
houses, and reached a situation deeper down. Of these, also, those of
that nation who were above, complained that their minds became
disquieted, because such lower ones were in that place, and formed
\[their\] foundation. I spoke a little with the Cocceians, to the effect
that it was their belief that it was allowed to man to do whatever he
pleases, and that their evils are not seen by God, provided they hold
the received faith; also, in their houses, and to certain ones around,
they said that there is not any sin, and that they can do whatever they
please if only they hold their faith. They preached, in like manner as
in England, in a mystical style, fearing lest the multitude should
penetrate into their mysteries. They said it was because the multitude
understands only external things, but not, internals; and declared that,
if they were to preach their mysteries openly, they would be deprived of
the priestly office by the people, and a riot might ensue. The Divine
operation by faith, as far as to the will, of which man knows nothing,
the Cocceian's call charity, and what proceeds from the will, a
destroyer of charity. I spoke with some of the laity regarding the
Cocceian religiosity. I said, What is the need of those mysteries? they
are empty and likewise false, since they flow from an impure and evil
fount. Is it not the same thing as though a workman, or a speaker,
should want to have knowledge of all the mysteries in the body, of the
muscles, the operation of the trachea, larynx, glottis, tongue, lips, in
order to be able to speak well, or to be able to work well; and thus, to
work and speak from anatomical science? Is it not enough that he learn
to speak well and elegantly, and to work well? this is what he should
study. In like manner with knowledge of the Divine operation and influx,
is it not sufficient that a man know evils, shun them, and live as a
Christian? Does not the Lord effect these things by most secret methods,
just as the soul by secret methods operates that the hands perform their
work aright, and that a speaker speak aright? Can an anatomist work
better, or can the dancer dance better, from anatomy? \[I also said\]
that the Cocceians are Machiavellists.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6100.">6100.</span></span>

THE DUTCH WHO LIVE IN A VOMIT-STENCH. THE RULE OF WIFE OVER HUSBAND
THERE. Visitation was made upon certain societies of the Dutch, where
are those of whom the wives ruled over their husbands. They were in the
boundaries at that part, and there was a vile stench of vomit there;
yea, they collected vessels full of vomit, and held the nostrils over
them, and reveled in the stench. All those who were in the boundaries
were cast down into hell; and some who were nearly like them, were
gathered out of societies, and also cast down.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_361"></span>[6057-1](sd92.htm#fr_361) The treatise On the
Earths in the Universe is the one referred to. -TR.

<span id="fn_362"></span>[6065-1](sd92.htm#fr_362) In the margin: "What
the Mercy-seat is, and what the Cherubim."

<span id="fn_363"></span>[6065-2](sd92.htm#fr_363) The Latin edition of
Dr. Immanuel Tafel here reads, "the 5th"; but, inasmuch as the 5th,
according to the Lutheran division, which was the one Swedenborg
uniformly employed, is, "Thou shalt not commit murder," and is moreover
referred to later on in this very paragraph, whereas the one here under
consideration is, "Thou shalt not steal," which is the 7th in the
Lutheran enumeration, we have substituted 7 for 5 in the text. There is
no doubt whatever that the 7th - which is the 8th in the Church of
England division - is the one meant.

<span id="fn_364"></span>[6065-3](sd92.htm#fr_364) The Editor of the
Latin reads fugit, in this place, and inserts (non) to supply the
manifest sense of the passage. We prefer to read facit; which gives the
sense perfectly without any addition. -TR.

<span id="fn_365"></span>[6072-1](sd92.htm#fr_365) Usually written
Benzelius. At the time of his death, in 1758, he was Archbishop of
Upsal. -TR.

<span id="fn_366"></span>[6073-1](sd92.htm#fr_366) Swedish, halsduk.

<span id="fn_367"></span>[6073-2](sd92.htm#fr_367) Swedish, halsduk
hvit.

<span id="fn_368"></span>[6074-1](sd92.htm#fr_368) That the Moravians,
of whose religiosity Zinzendorf was the founder, do this, is explicitly
stated in n. 6081(2), below. See also the statement numbered "(2)" in
the present section. It should be mentioned that the portion in brackets
is inserted by the Editor of the Latin. -TR.

<span id="fn_369"></span>[6087-1](sd92.htm#fr_369) A French word
meaning, to furnish. -TR.

<span id="fn_370"></span>[6088-1](sd92.htm#fr_370) The full title of the
work here referred to is, The New Jerusalem and Its Heavenly Doctrine.
-TR.

<span id="fn_371"></span>[6096-1](sd92.htm#fr_371) There is no section
XXVII., here, in the original. -TR.

<span id="fn_372"></span>[6098-1](sd92.htm#fr_372) The full titles of
these works, all of which were published in the same year - 1763 - are
1. The Doctrine of the New Jerusalem concerning the Lord; 2. The
Doctrine of the New Jerusalem concerning the Sacred Scripture; 3. The
Doctrine of Life for the New Jerusalem, from the Precepts of the
Decalog; and 4. The Doctrine of the New Jerusalem concerning Faith.
These works are sometimes published, in English, in a collected form,
under the general title, The Four Leading Doctrines of the New Church in
which form the "Doctrine of Faith" is given the third place, and the
"Doctrine of Life" the forth. The text, here, shows that this is a wrong
arrangement. Properly, the "Doctrine of Life" is the third, and that of
"Faith" the forth. The reader should understand that Swedenborg himself
did not publish these treatises collectively, but as four separate
works. -TR.

<span id="fn_373"></span>[6098-2](sd92.htm#fr_373) The contents, that
is, of the work entitled Heaven and Hell and "The Four Doctrines"
mentioned in the text; copies of all of which were presented by
Swedenborg to the Bench of Bishops of the Church of England and the
Protestant peers in the House of Lords (see n. 6101:2 below), and to the
clergy at the University of Oxford. -TR

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 6101-6150](sd93)
