[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Swedenborg](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sd92) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0766143007/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Spiritual Diary*, by Emanuel Swedenborg, \[1758\], tr. by Bush,
Smithson and Buss \[1883-9\] at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Spiritual Diary

<span class="margnote"><span id="6101.">6101.</span></span>

CERTAIN ENGLISH BISHOPS. There was a certain one who was considered more
scholarly and learned than the rest when he lived in the world, who, in
the presence of his fellows, said various things to the King about his
religion; for the King said that he thought of the Lord as his God, and
that the life of charity could not be separated from faith. The Bishop,
however, contradicted this, and thence said divers things among his
fellows respecting the King as regards religion, as though he wanted to
stir them up to something. This he confessed in the spiritual world. He
confessed that he had not thought of the Lord, save as a man. He was
half a Socinian. He was examined as to what theological knowledge he
possessed, and he knew nothing else than confirmations of the received
faith, and in favor of the Divine operation through faith, as far as the
will, from which it raises itself. He was told that thus man was able to
do whatsoever he will. He said, Yes; whatever he will - provided it be
not contrary to the civil laws. I asked whether, if he evade the
punishments of the civil law, the thing is sin. He said that it is sin
against the neighbor, but not against God, and that he ought to
conciliate the neighbor, for the sake of utility, not for the sake of
salvation. I said that in this way they were Machiavellists. This he
denied, inasmuch as he acknowledges God and the Word. I asked whether,
then, if they engage in robberies but evade the punishments, that evil
will cleave to them after death. He said it would not, provided the man
had faith. A certain other English bishop, who in himself cherished the
belief that charity and faith cannot be separated - not internal, but
external, or actual, charity - then examined the religiosity of faith
alone, and found that there was not a single truth in all their
theology, not even one. This he announced, and next proved it before the
former Bishop, and before other priests belonging to England, who, since
it was said from heaven, were not able to answer anything. Afterwards,
that former Bishop described in what manner he especially scoffed at the
five works, on Heaven and Hell, and the rest, <span
id="fr_374"></span>[6101-1](#fn_374) which I made a present to all \[the
Bishops\], and to all the Reformed Lords in Parliament, by abuse and
misrepresentation and at last put a stop to the reading of it - together
with the rest - until they utterly rejected them. He also related what
he had said to them, and something that others had said, and various
discussions respecting them. When he was told that it is not my work,
but the Lord's, who wished to reveal the nature of heaven and hell, and
of man's life after death, and about the Last Judgment, and \[the
truth\] that theological matters do not transcend reason, he was not
ashamed, but some others were that they had done so. I then mentioned
that this is the male whom the woman brought forth, and whom the dragon
wished to devour, and on account of whom he persecuted the woman, -Rev.
xii. He could only reply, that it does indeed seem to be so, but that he
does not wish to know it. Afterwards, that former Bishop betook himself
to a certain devil, with whom he stayed for two days, and consulted how
he might slay me, as they slew the more stubborn deceitful ones: they
tried, but in vain. He has communication with the Moravians in the
desert. <span id="fr_375"></span>[6101-2](#fn_375) Thus he became a
devil, together with many others who have confirmed themselves in that
detestable doctrine concerning faith, which swarms with enormous
falsities. It was also disclosed in what manner other priests were
employed to destroy that work, <span
id="fr_376"></span>[6101-3](#fn_376) which also brought it to pass that
it was utterly rejected, when yet those things are from the Lord out of
heaven. All those priests were brought together, and judged according to
their doctrine and their life according thereto.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6102.">6102.</span></span>

THE MORAVIANS. They \[i.e. the Moravians\] told some of these that they
acknowledge the Lord's Divine but they were then compelled to lay open
the thoughts of their heart, lest they should deceive by lies; and then
they openly declared that the Lord's Divine is nothing different from
the Divine that exists with other men who are in faith toward the
Father, and that He was quite an ignorant man, and more ignorant than
many of their number; and that they no more believe the things He spoke
than those said by any other ignorant man, and that they do not pay any
regard to His words in the Evangelists; also, that He was born of Mary
from Joseph as father, and that those things which are narrated in Luke
are fictions. They further declared that God the Father was not
satisfied with Him, because He \[i.e. the Lord\] said men should have
faith in Him; but, yet, that He was called His Son because He suffered
the cross: besides many more things of a scandalous nature.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6103.">6103.</span></span>

SOME THINGS ABOUT THE ENGLISH, AND ABOUT ADULTERIES. There was a town of
English population - a notable one, at a certain elevation a little to
the left, - which was admonished to recede from faith alone and
everything of the influx of heaven therefrom, which their preachers
held. But the preachers prevailed, consequently they were unwilling to
recede. Wherefore, those who did recede were removed thence, and
afterwards their town, with the inhabitants, sank down to a very great
depth. Afterwards, a great purification took place among the English in
their societies; and, then, all those who committed adulteries from
wantonness were cast down into hells. I then saw many of the more
eminent ones of them, who are called "lords," who took away the
beautiful wives of others, from their husbands, to their own
possessions, which are called "Estates," and there committed adultery
with them - some for a month, some for half a year - and afterwards let
them go. I saw many of these cast into hell. It was said that such
villainy is common among the richer of them; and they related to me many
things - which it is not permitted to divulge - respecting that matter
and, also, that thus those women are discarded by their husbands, and
become prostitutes; and that it all occurs for the most part with the
consent, or connivance, of the husband, by reason of the desire of gain.
They wish to behave similarly in the spiritual world; but they are then
severely punished if they attempt it, and if they commit it, are cast
down into hell. Over a hundred such lords were seen at that time and
place. It was stated that they do this with wives, but not with other
women, for they call them whores: wherefore, it is adultery.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6104.">6104.</span></span>

THE ENGLISH DOCTRINE OF FAITH. Many priests were called together, and
divided, and the simple minded ones removed. The learned ones were then
asked what was the nature of their faith; and they said that faith
produces charity, or good works, but through the Holy Spirit; that when
man feels that operation, and, from a perception of the operation by the
Holy Spirit, does good, then that is good; but if he does not perceive
it, and does good, then, if he does it rightly, it may indeed be called
good, but yet it derives from man the quality that there is merit in it;
also, that this, only, moves the will. Being asked whether men can
receive faith at the hour of death, if they have not done so before,
they said that faith can accomplish this, but they know not how.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6105.">6105.</span></span>

CHARITY TOWARDS THE NEIGHBOR. Charity towards the neighbor, in a
specific sense, is to perform the employment, business, and work, which
belong to one's calling, faithfully, sincerely and justly. The reason
is, because this is a man's daily occupation, the very activity and
delight of his life. When, therefore, a man performs this sincerely and
justly, his life becomes such, thus becomes a certain charity, in its
place and degree. This may be compared to a germ: then, from this as the
essential, the rest, which are called the signs, benevolences and
obligations of charity, proceed and derive their essence; for they flow
from his life, which \[in this case\] is charity; and, without that
essence, even though he have the signs of charity, which are acts of
piety and the like, though he have its benevolences, which are giving to
the poor, and similar things, though he have its obligations, which are
such things as are his duties at home and outside his home, then, all
these are like a shell without a kernel. It is different when he has the
germ and essence already described. Moreover, such a one does good to
the community, and does good to the individuals in the community in
their degree. Hence, from the community there flows to him delight of
life and every necessary. This obtains in heaven, and in the societies
there. For everyone is a part in the common body. From performing his
work sincerely and justly, he becomes a worthy part in the common body.
For everyone in a society must be in some work. Works produce the
communion, and cause all things to be held in connection; for works
contain in them all things human. Wherefore, even in hell they must be
in works. Take, for example, kings, magistrates, priests, judges,
tradesmen, artisans, farmers.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6106.">6106.</span></span>

MARRIAGE. On several occasions, there was with me a woman who said, and
believed, that it is impossible to love one's married partner for long,
for the reason that it becomes a usual thing, and is constantly
permitted; but she received answer that, in heaven, where there are no
adulteries - for they are abominated - that very usualness becomes
delightful, and that they love the married partner because it is always
permitted, and because the deliciousness of heaven enters at such times.
That such a feeling of ordinariness towards a wife takes place is known
to adulterers; wherefore, in order that that sense of ordinariness may
be removed, and the lasciviousness of adultery occur, they wish the wife
to refuse, indeed, to deny that she likes it, and to resist; and then,
out of the ordinariness there arises, as it were the lasciviousness of
adultery. Indeed, some who have pleasure in rapes, and consequently in
an unlawful state, wish that \[the wives\] should fight against the
husbands, and run away, and that the husband should violently force her,
and tear her dress, she still resisting. The women, in such a case, may
be compared to cats, which thus fight, scream out, and run away; whereby
potency is excited in the male cat, and then the female cat yields
herself captive. I made inquiries of spirits newly arrived from the
world, who did not regard lasciviousness as sin - all of whom,
nevertheless, when they enter the world of spirits, desire to go to
heaven - and said that in hell it is allowed to commit whoredom and
adultery, but it is not allowed in heaven, but only to love the married
partner, and live with her to eternity, and never to put her away. I
asked whether they would more willingly be in heaven or in hell. I asked
over a hundred, and never received a reply from one of such a quality.
As respects the state of those who are in hells, under judges, it is,
that, in a separate chamber, behind the males, are some who had been
women. It was permitted to the men to conjoin to themselves anyone of
these, and have her for their woman; but it was not permitted to do so
with any others of them there, thus to commit promiscuous whoredom.
There exist hells filled with harlots, into which newcomers enter, and
commit whoredom to satiety. They are punished by various filthy diseases
there; and on that account they refrain. There are infamous societies
there, where harlots and adulterers resort. There are gatherings where
harlots, every night, choose themselves males: they are not gatherings
where males choose themselves harlots. The harlots there are able, by
means of phantasies, to render themselves beautiful. Harlots who excel
in ingenuity are called sirens; they appear like mice. There are the
larger kinds, <span id="fr_377"></span>[6106-1](#fn_377) there, and the
smaller kinds there. Wherefore, such females are set over them as hold
them in obedience, and compel them to labor. These fly from cats, like
mice and dormice. Some, there, are cats.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6107.">6107.</span></span>

MOSES, WHO WAS SEEN. Jews entreated of the Lord that Moses might be
shown to them. He was, therefore, seen. He was at that time in his own
place, below, where the ancients are in a tranquil state. He also came
to me, and I spoke with him. He was a grave man. He said that he
appeared to himself to be a man of about 50 years of age, although in
the world he had been 120 years; also, that he has with him his five
Books, and also the Old Testament Word. I asked him about the book
Jasher. He said that he has seen it; and he told me that that Word still
exists with the ancients of his day, and is read; also, that he knows
something about the succeeding Word <span
id="fr_378"></span>[6107-1](#fn_378) which exists at this day, but does
not read it. I recited some of those things which he had written
concerning certain ones in the 5 Books; and he acknowledged them all,
just as though they were present to him. 1764, 3rd December.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6108.">6108.</span></span>

THE TWO PROPHETS IN REVELATION XI. A remarkable change took place in the
spiritual world. There was a gathering of persons, consisting for the
most part of those who were in faith alone, both above, and at the side,
and beneath me; and the power of flowing into my brain was granted them.
Thereupon, I became so that I was not able to raise my head, and this
for three and a half days; and it seemed to those who were in the city,
which they had called Jerusalem, as if I were dead in the street. They
looked, and rejoiced; but afterwards, that city, and all who were of
that faith alone, were dissolved, and the inhabitants dispatched to
their own places.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6109.">6109.</span></span>

THOSE WHO CONSTITUTE THE SOLES OF THE FEET, AND THOSE WHO ARE UNDER
THEM. It was granted me to see those who constitute the Nails, who are
those who praise and blame without understanding, yet are not evil.
Those who constitute the right sole near the great toe, make lucifer
matches, <span id="fr_379"></span>[6109-1](#fn_379) and by their art
cause them to shine in-doors. From these they have light in their rooms.
Those who constitute the middle of the sole, make beautiful parchments,
which they sell, out of which the people make smart little purses. <span
id="fr_380"></span>[6109-2](#fn_380) Those who constitute the heel, make
tallow-lights <span id="fr_381"></span>[6109-3](#fn_381) which they
sell: those who dwell there use these for candles. They are able to make
lamps, which last almost forever, and some which do not last so long.
Their light is that of candles. Those who are under the sole of the
foot, are scandal-mongers. They seek, or ferret out news, everywhere,
and relate it to others. Their communication is with those things which
are in the top of the brain. I felt the communication. They are very
numerous. I heard those who constitute the nails, singing, or in their
way confessing the Lord, and also those who are under the nails; and
they are beloved by all. Gifts were presented to them which they carried
back to their companions.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6110.">6110.</span></span>

VARIOUS PARTICULARS RELATING TO MARRIAGE AND ADULTERY. ((((In what
manner a female is born an innocence and in what way a male. How the
female becomes the affection of good, and the male the understanding of
truth. In what way the female becomes the affection of truth, which
occurs when she desires to marry; also in what way the male becomes the
understanding of truth, which also then happens, when he wishes to love
the female sex. 1. How this next increases, with each, till marriage
takes place; and how the understanding of truth then controls the
affection of truth, and they are united.)))) 2. ((What the feminine is,
and what the masculine, interiorly. The feminine, interiorly, is to love
the husband tenderly - but they desire the husband to be ignorant of
this; thus, he governs, and those who are not in the ability of doing
so, become impotent. The wives of the angels said that I must not
disclose this; but I said I would reveal it. This was because they
suppose that this was their weakness; but it is the very good of truth
and truth of good.)) 3. ((How two married partners become one form of
love through conjugial love.)) ((((((From the uniting of minds results
the form of the bodies. - The forms of men, according to affections and
understanding thence, or the things of love and the things of wisdom
thence.)))))) ((((This is the image and likeness of God, Genesis
\[1:26\].)))) ((Potency goes on increasing until it becomes perpetual.))
4. ((Many reasons why a man wishes the woman to refuse. With some it is
the lust of violating; with some it is the result of adultery; with some
it is the excitation of potency thereby. It is from various causes, and
especially from mental ones. They at length become like cats, which tear
each other, stand still, gaze at one another, howl miserably, and wish
to do it by stealth. The women are furious that this is disclosed. They
declare, as if from interior will, that they do not desire it. The
reason is, because potency vanishes if they do otherwise.)) 5. ((The
mere conclusion in the mind, that adultery is not sin, renders a man an
adulterer; - \[shown\] from those things which have been said on this
subject in The Doctrine of Life. <span
id="fr_382"></span>[6110-1](#fn_382) Every conclusion in the mind
constitutes endeavor in the body, which is the essential act.)) ((I
inquired, respecting cats, why they possess such a nature as they do. It
was stated, that, with the female cat, the pleasure of fighting is first
excited, and that this is observed by the male cat, and, when this
passes off, copulation takes place.)) 6. ((I told adulterers, that, in
heaven, there is perpetual potency; and they said, if they had known
this in the world, they would never have committed whoredom, so that
they might come into heaven. But I said, that, in heaven, it is
permitted to love only the married partner, in hell to commit whoredom
at pleasure; \[and I asked\] whether, in this case, they would wish to
be in hell, or in heaven; but I was unable to extort a reply from
them.)) 7. ((If a man concentrates his love upon his wife, by shunning
adultery as sin, then love with its potency increases daily; but if men
take from that love and consume it with harlots, conjugial love becomes
like chaff, and dies.)) 8. ((\[I mentioned\] about a woman, that she
said, that it is impossible to love one's wife, because it becomes
usual. But the angels said that she is mistaken; and that what is usual,
when love is truly conjugial, is the plane in which enjoyments form
themselves, from within, as upon a rose bed; and that every separate
rose becomes a plane in which interior enjoyments are formed and
variegated, and this to eternity.)) 9. ((Fury as it were inflames
infernals, when they become sensible of the sphere of conjugial love, -
from much experience. 10. (((((Married partners together, or conjugial
love, is the very image and likeness of God,))))) ((adultery destroys
it.)) 11. ((Hell is infuriated when those there perceive the sphere of
conjugial love, - from experience, as it were, out of heaven.)) 12.
((When adultery is thought permissible, it exists in endeavor in the
whole body.)) 13. ((Every man is some affection in a form; if a charity,
he is in an angelic form: the kind of affections he then has are lambs
and doves.)) 14. ((Marriage is like the marriage of the will and
understanding, or of affection and thought, in all and every single
thing, because it is \[the union\] of good and truth. The conjunction,
or marriage, of these, may be illustrated by the marriage of sound and
speech, in which it may be clearly seen. As speech is the form of sound,
so man may be described as the form of the wife; they are one flesh; a
man shall cleave to his wife; the wife is the man's soul, and life, or
is the heart of the man; but neither knows anything else than that the
other is his, or hers, and that each is the other's reciprocally and
mutually.)) 15. ((((The nerves are softer in women; the veins somewhat
wider, and the arteries stronger \[than\] in men: the hips broader,
because the hips signify conjugial love, see Arcana Coelestia.)))) 16.
((Unless eternity, or eternal conjunction, be thought of, a woman is not
a wife, but a concubine; and from the lack of the idea of eternity,
conjugial love perishes.)) 17. ((The bond must be on this side and on
that, or forward and back; if not, there is no conjugial love. The bond,
on this side and that, is, that the wife's affection be in the man's
understanding, and the man's understanding be in the wife. And,
nevertheless, it does not become eternal. If angelic spirits speak of
these two things in the world of spirits, the hells are agitated, and
those who are leagued with the hells are as if infuriated.)) 18. ((In
heaven, the wife is spiritual heat, and the husband spiritual light.))
19. ((A beautiful celestial and spiritual woman is beauty itself, or the
form of beauty and of good. From the Lord, as regards every created work
in the universe, it is manifest that there does not exist anything more
beautiful than a virgin.)) 20. ((How the husband's life enters the wife,
through the thighs, and by means of love. How truth then becomes good,
or understanding, the will of the wife, and how, finally, the husband's
understanding becomes the form of the wife's affection. Thus, how it is
to be understood that the wife was formed from Adam's rib, and that Adam
said, Bone of my bone, and flesh of my flesh; also, that they shall
become one flesh, and that a man shall cleave to his wife.)) 21. ((The
delight of rape: the hell of those in that delight is cadaverous: why -.
The delight of deflowering: the quality of whoredom. What kind of
delight the delight of variety is: those in it become like male mice.
What, and of what sort, is the pleasure of committing adultery with the
wife of another. Of what nature the pleasure of fornication with a man
who has a wife, is. The pleasure of having a concubine before marriage:
of what nature it is: that it is permitted: how, and to whom.)) 22.
(((Conjugial love is innocence itself - from the case of Adam. - It is
chastity itself, and purity itself, - from its origin, and from
correspondence, from its playfulness like that of children. A
representation \[thereof\] in grubs, when they become butterflies.)))
23. (((Laws of divorce: (1) whoredom; (2) desertion; (3) diseases, etc.
Why it is not allowable to take a divorced woman, or one irregularly
cast off.))) 24. ((((From chaste conjugial love, a wife and a virgin
have beauty, and a man wisdom.)))) 25. ((There is no lasciviousness in
conjugial love, for lasciviousness is unchaste. There is the identical
sensation with those who are in conjugial love; consequently, there is
nothing unclean, but pure. It appears as if there were, but yet there is
not. The reason is, because inwardly in conjugial love, even to the
ultimates, is heaven, and inwardly in the love of adultery is hell; and
the ultimates of each appear similar, as to their delights, but yet they
are not. The difference is not perceived except by conjugial love. 26.
It was said by the ancients, that like-seeming delights were signified
by Cerberus, who stands at the entrance and keeps watch, lest the
delight of heavenly love descend into hell.)) 27. ((Conjugial love looks
continually to two being one, or one flesh. If conjugial love do not
look to this, \[the love\] is the love of adultery. They \[i.e. a man
and wife\] are able to become one, more and more, to eternity. 28. A
male child is truth from good in the natural man. This truth is born
from the good of the spiritual man in the natural man; but it is from
the marriage of good and truth in the spiritual man. Hence daughters and
sons are goods and truths in the natural man - see Apocalypse Revealed,
n. 543; see, also, respecting Primogeniture.)) 29. ((Of what kind the
love of inmost friendship is among them. The inmost of friendship is
continual, and constitutes the heavenly delight of companionship. The
distinction of that love from the love of conjunction. Of what nature
the difference is. This difference is not known to adulterers: they
instantly believe that the wife desires conjunction, when she says that
she loves her husband.)) 30. (((It was related out of heaven, that the
Most Ancients, who were celestial, called conjugial love the chief of
all loves, and the very delight of life, and \[said\] that love towards
children is the nearest derivation from it.))) 31. ((Of what character
love towards children, which is storge, is with the evil: they see
themselves in them, since the soul of the father is in them. This love
conjoins married partners; but in what way, and with what difference,))
32. ((A female becomes a female after death, and a male becomes a male;
and mutual and reciprocal love remains. For which reason, it cannot be
otherwise than that this \[love\] remains.)) 33. There is sometimes an
investigation by angels, previous to a betrothing, as to whether there
exists the reciprocal of love. If not, they recognize the fact of
themselves; and this is from the Lord. Festivities occur when marriages
take place, but with a difference according to societies.)) 34. ((What
supremacy effects in marriage, either by the man or the woman. What the
submission is that arises from hyper-conscientiousness. What that which
arises from excessive simplicity, in him, or in her: what the
persuasion, or belief, that whoredom is not sin \[effects\])). 35.
(((The infernal marriage, with those who are in the love of ruling and
are atheists. On the part of the man there is deadly hatred. But, still,
he is manifestly the servant and slave of the wife, so that he dares not
murmur against her will: but \[this\], when she, by various means, has
obtained the ascendancy. The reason is, because the man's understanding
is subjugated.))) 36. (((These have no interior virtue and honor:
consequently, \[such a one\] is not a man. The adulterer is unjust,
unfaithful, insincere, an iniquitous violator of a covenant, lying,
shameless. He has no interior justice or interior fidelity, no interior
sincerity, interior truth, interior shame; thus, no honor nor interior
virtue. What such a one is interiorly, and what such a one is
exteriorly, such, then, is the man.))) 37. (((Truth is from good,
through which is the Church; and good is from the Lord. And since the
Lord inflows through good into truth, therefore angels, and men in the
churches, receive the Lord's good in truths: hence is the marriage of
good and truth in angel and man.))) 38. (((If a man decides that
adultery is not a sin, he is an adulterer for, the conclusion is from
the will and the understanding together: there is also intention in it.
Hence is interior will, which is effort; which effort reigns in the
whole man. The nature of effort.))) 39. ((The conjunction of good and
truth takes place because the Lord looks on man in the forehead, and man
at the Lord through the eyes. The forehead is the love of the will, or
good; and the eyes are the understanding, consequently truth. It is on
this account that it is said that man is a recipient of love in wisdom,
or of good in truth. All the angels turn the face to the Lord. The
reigning love turns all to itself, and they follow it.)) 40. ((Man's
spirit co-operates in the sexual embrace, because the spiritual in its
first origin is sown forth. Nevertheless, man's spirit inflows into the
natural. In man's spirit, the inmost is the conjunction of good and
truth, or of delight, which imitates good, and of propriety, which
imitates truth. Therefore, when angels and spirits embrace, it takes
place in a similar manner. They conceive and bring forth nothing but
those things which are of love and wisdom; for no prolification occurs,
apart from the natural. 41. ((All concupiscences of evil spring from
adultery; for that is their very form. The adulterer is confirmed by its
being permitted; which, also, brings it about that he is not able to
acknowledge God in heart, nor to be conjoined with the Lord,
consequently neither with heaven, because his delight is entirely
opposed to spiritual delight. At length he becomes in the highest degree
sensual, corporeal and material, and thinks and speaks from the things
visible to the eye and the things received by the ear, which alone he
stores in the memory.)) 42. ((((Affection is the all of thought, just as
sound is the all of speech: from this it may be known that man is such
as his affection. By that single rule, it may be known what thought is
in its essence and life, and what chaste thought is, and unchaste, and
whence. 43. What in sound is of concupiscence, and what from sound. Man
in the world knows but little what is in sounds; but angels know
perfectly.)))) 44. ((Love of the married partner does not result from
the sexual embrace, as with adulterers, but the sexual embrace from the
love of the partner; so that the love of the partner does not depend on
the fire of that organ, but the reverse. The love of the partner is full
of delights, irrespective of sexual intercourse, and is a delightful
dwelling together. Between that love apart from the sexual embrace, and
the sexual embrace itself, there is a determination, just as there is
between that which a man thinks from the will, which is intention, and
act, or speech. Between these, intervenes determination, which is as it
were the opening of the mind to doing a thing, like the opening of a
door.)) 45. ((((((Why it is not allowed to contract matrimony between
certain relations of consanguinity. What is the punishment, - from
Leviticus.)))))) 46. (((In the next place, the reasons why fornication
dissolves marriages. Why it is not lawful to marry a divorced woman. How
the case is with marriage between persons of different religion.))) 47.
((((The Papists prefer celibacy and virginity to matrimony; but it is on
account of monks and nuns in monasteries. It is pernicious.)))) 48.
(((Many descriptions are to be given of the state of conjugial love
prior to the state in which the effect is. The prior state ought
altogether to precede marriage, and love from that, without thought of
the state following. Then, marriage is happy and lasting; but, so far as
it partakes of the posterior state alone, so far is it lacking. I heard
certain ones saying that they do not know anything of the state
following; nor did they think about it when they desired a wife, and saw
her. Such is the state of maidens. Such is the chaste state.))) 49.
(((\[Show\] from experience that the delights of the earlier state are
indefinite. They approach closely and more closely to the state
following, but yet do not enter it. It appears as if they open it, but
yet it is not so. Between the earlier and the later state, there
intervenes something which is to be called determination, almost like
what occurs between thinking and willing. The later state contains in
itself the whole of the earlier, and all its delights; also, the
delights of that are likewise indefinite. The prior state is the state
of conjugial friendship, which surpasses all friendship.))) 50. (((With
whom the earlier state exists separate from the later; and with whom
both. With whom it does not exist.))) 51. ((((What joint potency those
enjoy, who, together and separately, are in the earlier \[state\]; and
what those who are in the later state only.)))) 52. ((Virgins who have
imbibed piety to the extent of a certain melancholy, become peevish
wives, nor can they be among the happy in heaven - from experience;
consequently, those who have lived in monasteries. 53. Of what character
is the body of a married man, and of what character the body of a
married woman, as compared with their bodies in the earlier state, or
previous to the desire for marriage; as compared with adulterers and
adulteresses; as compared with the bodies of young men, of adults, and
of old men. Of what quality the same are as regards mind, or as regards
spirit. 54. \[They enjoy\] delights and pleasures by the mere touch of
hands and of lips, when they think from love, such things from the Word,
from objects, from various concordant delights, as are applicable. They
have exquisite sensations of their separate, and of their common
\[states\]. These arise from the delights of affection and thought, and
of the conjunction thereof; and the sensation is the more exquisite as
the conjunction is more interior. That there is such delight from the
conjunction of female and male, is because there is such \[from that\]
of good and truth. There are still more delights of conjunction of the
external senses, as of sight, of hearing, of smell; particularly of the
respiration, in which innumerable things lie concealed: they lie
concealed especially in the sound itself of the speech.)) 55. (((Various
fears on the wife's account: as, for example, (1) lest she prove barren;
(2) lest, from disdain, \[she prove\] of unsound mind, or silly, (3) a
cause of disquiet, (4) by reason of quarrels, (5) from various causes in
one's self; also from various causes in the wife - as, that she must
have an allowance, as in Holland; that she must be well treated at home;
that she must eat and drink well, for example, when she is sick; and
this appears like loving the wife; but it is not the fear of the wife,
but it is fear on account of the wife. But the fear of conjugial love is
lest the wife be injured by any evil, or disgrace. In a word, he fears
to do her harm because he loves her. This fear is the fear of the wife,
and not fear on account of the wife. 56. Various despisings on the
wife's account. Various enmities and hatreds on account of the wife,
from various reasons. Various antipathies on the wife's account. 57.
((Appendix. - It may be confirmed that Light is darkness, and darkness
light, from the fact that if man had eyes like an owl \[it would be so
to him\]. It may be confirmed that the confirmation of falsity
corresponds to that light.)) 58. ((The confirmation that adultery is
allowable, may be compared to the confirmation that light is darkness
and darkness light.)) 59. ((Marriage, in a Divine sense, is the marriage
of Love and Wisdom in God, which were one, because the Love is of
Wisdom, and the Wisdom of Love. Hence is \[the marriage-love\] of the
Lord and the Church which love is reciprocal, according to the Lord's
words. From this is the marriage of good and truth: \[show\] how. The
marriage is reciprocal, but it is of good; and this marriage is in image
and in likeness, in the marriage of two who are conjoined by love truly
conjugial. 60. A man is born to be truth, and a wife, to be good. He
turns himself, concerning which turning. Man's nature at birth; and
woman's nature at birth. You may see what boys are, see, also, what
girls are.)) 61. (Love truly conjugial is, at the beginning, like as man
being reformed, and afterwards regenerated. It inverts itself; and, when
it has inverted itself, the man's love proceeds from the wife's love,
and as is the latter such is the former. In like manner is circumstanced
the conjunction of good and truth, in beginning, in progression, and in
end; and this is, that a man shall cleave to his wife. Then the
affection of good does the first things. In the earlier state, also,
there is lasciviousness. The nature of the later state.) 62. ((The
reason why all desire to boast that they are powerful, and that they are
esteemed, and also to be believed to be strong, etc.; - soldiers in
particular. 63. How the seed is distributed through the body in all
directions, is received by the soul \[anima\] which is in the whole
body, thus in the fibers and vessels everywhere, and then delights, -
gives pleasure to the wife, and fills with delight;)) (and thus is she
formed into the form of the man. This is, Bone and flesh of my bone and
flesh. How it produces intelligence in him; and how it produces
impregnation.) 64. (It is allowable to love a pregnant wife. The reasons
are numerous; the arguments against it apply to the weakly: also during
impotence and \[in case of\] adulteries.) 65. (Christian spirits cannot
endure the spiritual sphere of the feminine and the masculine. They
cannot endure the spiritual sphere of conjugial love; and the hells, at
such times, are roused to fury. They cannot endure the sphere of
nakedness between married partners; and, at such times, flee away. They
cannot endure any sphere of love from a married partner. They loathe the
sphere of customary \[intercourse\]; that is, when conjunction with the
wife becomes ordinary, or freely permitted, it produces nausea.) 66.
((Adultery with another's wife destroys all the delight of life between
husband and wife, and induces dislike of the other, and also destroys
care for the children - that is, a mother's and a father's care; at the
same time, it leads to separation. It destroys the Conjugial. The
adulterer does not see this, unless he thinks about his own wife, if any
adulterer should defile her.)) 67. ((Evil spirits cannot at all bear the
idea, and consequently the spiritual sphere, of the feminine \[nature\].
They cry out as if tortured, and flee away, - from experience; but they
can endure it when it is veiled under the sphere, or idea, of
adultery.)) 68. ((The purest touch causes the interiors, which are the
seed, to be called forth. It goes to the inmosts in the body, and into
the liquids; into the animal spirits, or into the spiritual \[parts\]
themselves: hence prolification. There is also; at that time, a
communication of the inmosts \[with\] the outermosts; thus, it is from
firsts through lasts.)) 69. ((The excitation of adultery is external,
from lust, from the touch of the bodies, especially of the parts of
generation. It is external; just as one touches a friend with a feather,
and tickles him. It is called external because there is no feeling in a
feather. But with those who are in conjugial love, the delights of that
love are communicated; which are the wife's when they are the husband's.
The wife's \[delight\] flows into the feeling of the husband, so that
the very sensations and delights are mutually and alternately
communicated. Thus lascivious love is altogether different from
conjugial love.)) 70. ((Conjugial love does not exist save with man: the
reasons. The nature of the analogous love with beasts.)) 71. ((About the
English - the lords - who entice the beautiful wives of others to
themselves, by means of money, and live together with them for months,
and afterwards send them back. These do similarly \[in the other life\];
and those who entice to themselves the wives of others are at once
exposed, and are severely punished. 72. They are punished with the
punishment of rending, which is among the severest of all. They said,
that, after punishment, they do \[not\] know whether their limbs hold
together; and they lie a long time in bed: also, if they do not desist,
they are cast down into hell. They who desisted in the world, because it
is a sin, desist in the other life; and those who desisted for other
reasons, do not desist.)) 73. ((On the 29th day of April, 1765, I saw
removed out of societies English lords, who, in the world, enticed the
beautiful wives of others, and lived with them, until they were no
longer pleasing to them. There was a multitude. They were separated from
the societies, and let down to lower places, to be examined as to
whether they had ever performed repentance afterwards, and had believed
it to be contrary to the Divine Laws.)) 74. ((Respecting circumcision:
it was a representative that sensual corporeal love, which is self-love,
must be removed. Why it was done with stone knives - because truths
remove \[evils\]. Why abolished. For what reason, when the sons of
Israel entered the land of Canaan, by which is signified the spiritual
Church, they were again circumcised.)) 75. ((The majority say, that,
when the delight of marriage becomes customary, it becomes worthless,
and as it were vanishes away. It is otherwise with those who are in
conjugial love. With them, the habitual experience becomes the plane of
interior delights, comparatively like a flower-bed, because it is the
external. With those who are in lascivious love, the interiors, which
are lascivious, depart with the potency, and hence arises cold, in
consequence of which the general plane as it were dies.)) 76. ((With
those with whom marriage is lascivious, also with adulterers, with whom
the woman's love is not communicated to the man, the man's proprial
affection then causes this. Man has a proprial affection which does not
make one with the woman's affection wherefore, both recede. 77. It is
that affection which produces this but it is quickly, consumed and
burned up. It is otherwise when the woman's affection flows into the
man's understanding, as happens with the angels of heaven: from this
cause they have intelligence in their life.)) 78. ((Respecting whoredom
in Paul, 1 Cor. 6:15-19, 7:4: read Ephes. 5:28-33, where marriage is
compared with Christ and the Church. 1 Thess. 4:3, 4.)) 79. ((Marriages
are seed-plots of men, and thus seed-plots of heaven.)) 80. ((The
marriage of evil and falsity originates from the marriage of good and
truth through the influx of good and truth, and of heaven; and, then, by
inversion, - respecting which, experiences are to be related. But
\[show\] what this is, as it exists with adulterers. The evil man feels
evil as good, and falsity as truth. Hence, also, such are among
serpents, basilisks, mice, owls, screech-owls, tigers.)) 81. ((All
things may be reduced to a marriage. Therefore, the not-good and truth
may exist together, but not the truth of good and the falsity of evil:
the falsity not of evil, can, by means of ideas, be turned to somewhat
good.)) 82. ((If beauty only, and not good, conjoins, it is adultery;
this, also, is not human, except so far as it is believed that the
beauty is from good, which is the very esse of beauty. That goodness
also appears in the face is known from merely natural science.)) (((The
nature of horror in genuine conjugial love, and in not-genuine. The
nature of fear, in those two.)))

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_374"></span>[6101-1](sd93.htm#fr_374) The "five works" here
referred to would seem to be Heaven and Hell, and the four small
treatises on The Lord, The Sacred Scripture, Life, and Faith mentioned
in n. 6098, above. It hence becomes probable that the "former Bishop"
mentioned in the present place, is the same with "The English Bishop"
described in n. 6098. -TR.

<span id="fn_375"></span>[6101-2](sd93.htm#fr_375) Possibly the ones
referred to in 6099:7, above. -TR.

<span id="fn_376"></span>[6101-3](sd93.htm#fr_376) That is, Heaven and
Hell. -TR.

<span id="fn_377"></span>[6106-1](sd93.htm#fr_377) The "larger kinds"
are probably rats, which the ancient Latin writers designate by the same
word as "mice," viz., mus. -TR.

<span id="fn_378"></span>[6107-1](sd93.htm#fr_378) That is, presumably,
the Word of the New Testament. -TR.

<span id="fn_379"></span>[6109-1](sd93.htm#fr_379) The original, here,
is Swedish, - sponta stickor.

<span id="fn_380"></span>[6109-2](sd93.htm#fr_380) Swedish, sma
scatuller, wachra.

<span id="fn_381"></span>[6109-3](sd93.htm#fr_381) The original, here,
is Swedish, - talglius.

<span id="fn_382"></span>[6110-1](sd93.htm#fr_382) For example, in nn.
63, 74-77 of that work. -TR. \[THE END.\]
