[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Earth](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](toe29)  [Next](toe31.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Theory of the Earth*, by James Hutton, \[1788 and 1795\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAP. VI.

*A View of the Economy of Nature, and necessity  
of Wasting the Surface of the Earth,  
in serving the purposes of this World*.

There is not perhaps one circumstance, in the constitution of this
terraqueous globe, more necessary to the present theory, than to see
clearly that the solid land must be destroyed, in undergoing the
operations which are natural to the surface of the earth, and in serving
the purposes which are necessary in the system of this living world.
For, all the land of the present earth being a certain composition of
materials, perfectly similar to such as would result from the gradual
destruction of a continent in the operations of the inhabited world,
this composition of our land could not be explained without having
recourse to preternatural means, were there not in the constitution of
this earth an active cause necessarily, in the course of time,
destroying continents.

It is therefore of great importance to this Theory, to show, that the
land is naturally wasted, though with the utmost economy; and that the
continents of this earth must be in time destroyed. It is of importance
to the happiness of man, to find consummate wisdom in the constitution
of this earth, by which things are so contrived that nothing is wanting,
in the bountiful provision of nature, for the pleasure and propagation
of created beings; more particularly of those who live in order to know
their happiness, and who know their happiness on purpose to see the
bountiful source from whence it flows.

We are to conceive the continent of the earth, when first produced above
the surface of the ocean, to be in general consolidated, with regard to
its structure, by the same mineral operations which are necessarily
employed in raising it from its primary situation at the bottom of the
sea, to that in which we now inhabit it.

We are now to consider the purpose of this mineral body, exposed to the
influences of the atmosphere, that so we may see the intention of its
solid composition, as well as that of its resolution, or natural
solubility when thus exposed; and we are to trace the ultimate effects
of this order of action in the economy of the globe, that so we may
perceive the wisdom of nature perpetuating the system of a living world
in an endless succession, of changing perishable forms.

The purpose of the land of this earth, in being placed above the sea and
immersed in the atmosphere, is to sustain a system of plants and
animals. But; for the purpose of plants; there is required a soil; and,
as there is in the vegetable system a vast variety of plants with
different habits or natural constitutions, there is also required a
diversity of soils, in which those vegetable bodies are to be made to
live and prosper. From the bare rock exposed to the sun and wind, to the
tender mud immersed in water, there is a series to be observed; and in
every stage or step of this gradation, there are plants adapted to those
various soils or situations. Therefore nothing short of that diversity
of soils and situations, which we find upon the surface of the earth,
could fulfill the purpose of nature, in producing a system of vegetables
endued with such a diversity of forms and habits.

The soil or surface of this earth is no more properly contrived for the
life and sustenance of plants, than are those plants for that diversity
of animals, which will thus appear to be the peculiar care of nature in
forming a world. Scarce a plant perhaps that has not its peculiar animal
which feeds upon its various productions; scarce an animal that has not
its peculiar tribe of plants on which the economy of its life, its
pleasure, or its prosperity must depend.

If we shall suppose the continent of our earth to be a solid rock, on
which the rain might fall, and the wind and waves might dash
perpetually, without impairing its mass or changing its constitution,
what an imperfect world would we have! how ill adapted to the
preservation of animal and vegetable life! But the opposite extreme
would equally frustrate the intention of nature, in producing
bounteously for the various demands of that multiplicity of species
which the author of this world has thought proper to produce.

For if, instead of a solid rock, we shall suppose a continent composed
of either dry sand or watery mud, without solidity or stability, how
imperfect still would be that world for the purpose of sustaining lofty
trees and affording fruitful soils!

We have now mentioned the two extreme states of things; but the
constitution of this earth is no other than an indefinite number of
soils and situations, placed between those two extremes, and graduating
from the one extreme, in which some species of animals and plants
delight in finding their prosperity, to the other, in which another
species, which would perish in the first, are made to grow luxuriantly.
That is to say, the surface of this earth, which is so widely adapted to
the purpose of an extensive system of vegetating bodies and breathing
animals, must consist of a gradation from solid rock to tender earth,
from watery soil to dry situations; all this is requisite, and nothing
short of this can fulfil the purpose of that world which we actually
see.

We have been representing this continent of our earth as coming out of
the ocean a solid mass, which surely it is in general, or in a great
degree; but we find the surface of this body at present in a very
different state; and now it will be proper to take a view of this change
from solid rock to fertile soil.

Upon this occasion I shall give the description of nature from the
writings of a philosopher who has particularly studied this subject. It
is true that M. de Luc, who furnishes the description, draws, from this
process of nature, an argument for the perpetual duration or stability
of mountains; and this is the very opposite of that view which I have
taken of the subject; but as, in this operation of nature producing
plants on stones, he allows the surface of the solid stone to be changed
into earth and vegetables, it is indifferent to the present theory how
he shall employ this earth and vegetable substance, provided it be
acknowledged that there is a change from the solid state of rock to the
loose or tender nature of an earth, from the state of a body immovable
by the floods and impenetrable to the roots of plants, to one in which
some part of the body may be penetrated and removed.

 <span id="fr_58"></span>[8](#fn_58.md)«Les pluies et les rosées forment
partout où elles séjournent, des dépôts qui sont la première source de
toute *végétation*. Ces dépôts sont toujours mêlés des semences des
*mousses*, que l'air charie continuellement, et auxquelles se joignent
bientôt les semences presque aussi abondantes des *gramens*, qui sont
l'herbe dominante de nos prairies. Ainsi partout où la pluie a formé
quelque petit dépôt, il croît de la mousse ou des *gramens*. Ceux-ci
demandent un peu plus de *terre végétale* pour croître, ils germent, et
se conservent principalement dans les intervalles et les creux des
pierres: mais la *mousse* croît bientôt sur la surface la plus unie. Il
n'est aucune pierre long-temps exposée à l'air, qui soit parfaitement
polie; l'action de l'air, du soleil, des eaux, des gelées, detruiroit ce
poli quand il existeroit. Le moindre creux alors reçoit un dépôt de la
pluie, et nourrit un brin de *mousse,* ces brins poussent des racines;
et de nouveaux jets autour d'eux, qui contribuent à arrêter l'eau de la
pluie et de la rosée, et par ce moyen à arrêter les dépôts Nourriciers.»

«Quand la mousse a multiplié ses filets, les dépôts s'augmentent plus
rapidement encore; les brins de la *mousse,* en séchant et pourrissant,
en forment eux-mêmes; car leur substance n'étoit que ces mêmes dépôts
façonnés: d'autres semences charriées par l'air, qui au-paravant
glissaient sur les pierres, parce que rien ne les retenoit, tombent dans
le fond de la *mousse*, et y trouvent l'humidité nécessaire pour
produire leurs premières racines: celles-ci s'entrelassent dans la
*mousse*, où elles se conservent à l'abri du soleil, et sont alors
autant de petites bouches qui pompent les sucs, que l'air, les pluies,
et les rosées y déposent. Ces premières plantes sont foibles, quelque
fois même elles ne parviennent pas à leur perfection: mais elles ont
contribué à fixer la *terre végétable*. En séchant et se décomposant,
elles se transforment en cette *terre*, qui tombe au fond de la
*mousse*, et qui prépare ainsi de la nourriture pour de nouvelles
plantes qui alors prospèrent et fructifient.

«Nous connoissons peu encore ce que c'est que cette *terre végétable*,
ce dépôt des pluies ou en général de l'air. Cependant, en rassemblant
les phénomènes, on peut conjecturer, que la plupart des corps terrestres
sont susceptibles d'être changés en cette substance, et qu'il ne s'agit
pour cette transformation que de les décomposer. J'entends par là une
telle division de leurs parties, que devenant presque des élémens, elles
puissent être intimement mêlées à l'eau, et pompées avec elle par les
tuyaux capillaires des plantes. En un mot, il semble suffisant qu'une
matière puisse entrer en circulation dans les végétaux, pour qu'elle
serve à en développer le tissu, et qu'elle y prenne la figure et les
qualités que chacun de ces laboratoires est propres à produire.

«Nous pouvons accélérer de bien des manières la transformation des
matières terrestres en *terre végétable*. La fermentation, la
calcination, une plus grande exposition à l'air, différens mélanges,
rendent propres à la végétation, des matières qui ne l'étoient par
elles-mêmes: voila ce que peuvent nos soins. Mais l'air travaille sans
cesse et en mille manières. Son simple frottement sur tous les corps, en
enlève des particules si atténuées que nous ne les reconnoissons plus.
La *poussière* de nos appartemens en est peut-être un exemple. De
quelque nature que soient les corps dont elle se détache, c'est une
poudre grisâtre qui semble être partout la même. La formation de la
*terre végétable* a probablement quelque rapport à celle-là. Toute la
surface de la terre, les rocs les plus durs, les sables et les graviers
les plus arides, les métaux même, éprouvent l'action *rongeante* de
l'air et leurs particules atténuées, décomposées, recomposées de mille
manières, sont probablement la source principal de la végétation.
*L'air* lui-même ainsi que *l'eau*, s'y combinent: beaucoup
d'observations et d'expériences nous prouvent que ces deux fluides
fournissent leur propre substance aux parties solides des végétaux, et
par conséquent à la *terre végétable* qui les produit et qu'ils
déposent. Quantité de plantes se nourrissent de *l'eau* seule, et nous
laissant cependant en se séchant, un résidu de matière solide
permanente. *L'air* aussi se *fixe* dans les corps terrestres, il fait
partie de leur substance solide; les chimistes savent de plus en plus,
et le *fixer*, et lui redonner son élasticité primitive, par divers
procédés: et avant la multitude d'expériences qui se sont de nos jours
sur cet objet intéressant de la physique, le Dr. Hales avoit montré, que
les végétaux renferment une très-grande quantité *d'air*, qui s'y trouve
sans ressort et comme matière constituante.

«Voila donc probablement les sources où la nature puise peu à peu la
*terre végétable* dont elle recouvre la surface de nos continens. Ce
sont les particules, peut-être, de tous les corps tant solides que
fluides, extraites ou fixées par des procédés qui les rapprochent de
leurs premiers élémens, et leur font prendre à nos yeux une même
apparence. Ces particules sont ainsi rendues propres à circuler dans les
semences des plantes, à en étendre le tissu à y prendre toutes les
propriétés qui caractérisent chaque espéce, et à les conserver tant que
la plante existe. Ces mêmes particules, après la destruction des
plantes, prennent le caractère général de *terre végétable*,
c'est-à-dire de provision toute faite pour la végétation.

«Les plus petits recoins des montagnes, qui peuvent arrêter l'eau de la
pluie, sont certainement fertilisés; ce ne sont pas seulement les
grandes surfaces plates, ni les pentes; ce sont même les faces escarpées
des rochers les plus durs. S'il s'y fait quelque crevasse, un arbre s'y
établit bientôt; et souvent il contribue, par l'accroissement de ses
racines, à accélérer la chute du lambeau de rocher qui l'avoit reçu.
S'il y a quelque petite terrasse, ou seulement quelque partie saillante
grande comme la main, elle est bientôt gazonnée. Les plus petites
sinuosités se peuplent de plantes; et les surfaces les plus unies,
celles mêmes qui sont tournées vers la bas, reçoivent au moins
quelqu'une de ces *mousses* plates, nommés *lichen* par les botanistes,
qui ne font en apparence que passer une couleur sur la pierre. Mais
cette couche est écaillée, et elle loge bientôt de petites plantes dans
ses replis; de celles qui veulent l'ardeur du soleil, si le rocher est
au midi, ou la fraîcheur de l'ombre, s'il est au nord: c'est sur ces
rochers en un mot, qui paroissent nues aux spectateurs ordinaires, que
se trouve la plus grande variété de ces petites plantes, qui font les
délices des botanistes, et l'une des sources les plus abondantes où la
médicine puise les secours réels qu'elle fournit à l'humanité.

«Quelle richesse dans les ressources de la nature! La pesanteur n'est
pas plus prête à entraîner les pierres qui se détachent des montagnes,
que l'air à fournir de semences celles qui se fixent: et dès qu'une fois
elles sont recouvertes de plantes, elles sont certainement fixées pour
toujours, du moins contre les injures de l'air. Le fait même nous
l'annonce. Si ces ravins ou ces terreins quelconques, tendoient encore à
rouler ou à se dégrader, en un mot à se detruire de quelque manière que
ce fut, ils ne le recouvriroient, ni de *mousses* ni d'aucune autre
plante. La première végétation est due à quelque dépôt de *terre
végétable*; et les pluies ou l'air n'en forment que lentement; le
moindre mouvement la détruite. Le terrein est donc bien certainement
fixe quand il se recouvre de plantes; et s'il s'y accumule de la *terre
végétable*, c'est un signe bien evident que rien ne l'attaque plus: car
elle seroit la première emportée si quelque cause extérieure tendoit a
detruire le sol qui la porte.»

The doctrine here laid down by our author consists in this; first, That
there is a genus of plants calculated to grow upon rocks or stones;
those hard bodies then decay, in decomposing themselves, and affording
sustenance to the plants which they sustain. Secondly, That by this
dissolution of those rocks, and the accumulation of those vegetable
bodies, there is soil prepared for the nurture and propagation of
another genus of plants, by which the surface of the earth, naturally
barren, is to be fertilised. It is also in this natural progress of
things that the solid parts of the globe come to be wasted in the
operations of the surface, and that lofty rocks are levelled, in always
tending to bring the uneven surface of the earth to a slope of
vegetating or fertile soil.

Here we are to distinguish carefully between the facts described by this
author, who has seen so much of nature, and the conclusion which he
would draw from his principles. The surface of most stones are
dissolved, or corroded by the air and moisture. This gives lodgement to
the roots of plants, which grow, die, and decay; and these are carried
away with the earthy parts of the solid stone, in order to form a
vegetable soil for larger plants, growing upon some bottom or resting
place to which that earth is carried. Here is so far the purpose of
rocks, to sustain a genus of plants which are contrived to live upon
that soil; and here is so far a purpose for certain plants, in
decomposing rocks to form a soil for other plants which have been made
upon a larger scale, and are adapted to the use of man, the ultimate in
the view of nature.

Our author concludes thus: (p. 37.) «Le tems ne fera qu'augmenter
l'épaisseur de la couche de *terre végétable* qui couvre les montagnes,
et qui les garantit ainsi de plus en plus de cette destruction à
laquelle on les croit exposés: les pluies en un mot, au lieu de les
dégrader comme on se l'imagine y accumuleront leurs dépôts. Tel est
l'agent simple qu'employe si admirablement le Createur pour la
conservation de son ouvrage.»

Such, indeed, is the admirable contrivance of the system, that, in the
works of nature, nothing shall be destroyed more than is necessary for
the preservation of the whole. But, that the whole is preserved by the
necessary destruction of every individual body, and the change of every
part which comes within the examination of our senses, is sufficiently
evident to require no farther illustration in this place, where we are
contemplating the destruction of the strongest things, by means the most
effectual, though really slow, and apparently most feeble.

In his 30th letter, this author describes the progress of nature, in
bringing precipitous rocks to that slope and covering of soil which is
to maintain plants of every kind, and to establish woods. (P. 40.) «J'ai
l'honneur d'exposer à V.M. les causes qui garantissent de destruction
extérieure les terreins sur lesquels la *pesanteur* ne peut plus agir
que pour les consolider. Mais ce n'est pas ainsi que sont actuellement
la plupart de nos montagnes; il en est peu qui soyent déjà parvenus à
cet état permanent. Tout roc nud est attaqué par l'air et les météores,
et il tend à se détruire quelle que soit sa dureté. Mais ce seroit peu
que cette destruction extérieure; elle pourroit même cesser enfin
totalement par l'effet seul des *mousses*, s'il n'y avoit pas des causes
plus puissantes qui pendant quelque tems agissent dans l'intérieur.

«Il n'est presque point de rocher qui offre à l'air une seule masse
compacte; ils sont ou crevassés, ou formés par couches; et l'eau
s'insinue toujours dans ces fentes. Quand cette eau vient à se geler,
elle agit comme un coin pour écarter les pièces entre lesquelles elle se
trouve. V.M. seroit étonnée de la grandeur des masses que cette cause
peut mouvoir: elle agit exactement comme la poudre à canon dans les
mines; détachant toutes les pièces extérieures qui commencent à se
séparer, et en découvrant ainsi de nouvelles. Chaque hiver renouvelle
donc la surface de certains rochers, ou facilite l'ouvrage pour les
hivers suivans.

Plusieurs autres causes agissent encore pour séparer les rochers déjà
crevassés, qui se trouvent à l'extérieur des faces escarpées. Le petit
moellon qui s'y accumule, les dépôts des pluies, les plantes qui y
croissent, les alternatives de l'humidité et de la sécheresse, les
vicissitudes de la chaleur, les vents même, sont autant de causes
continuellement agissantes quand la *pesanteur* les seconde. Les rochers
escarpés se détruisent donc par de continuels éboulemens.

«Mais toutes ces matières qui tombent, ne sont pas perdues pour les
montagnes; il s'en perd même bien peu. Elles s'arrêtent au pied des
rochers dont elles sont successivement détachées; et là elles
s'entassent, s'élevant en forme de *talus* contre ces rochers
eux-mêmes.»

If the solid body of the Alps, the most consolidated masses of our land,
is thus reduced to the state of soil upon the surface of the earth
contrived for the use of plants, *a fortiori*, softer bodies, less
elevated and less consolidated masses, will be considered as easily
arriving at the purpose for which the surface of the earth has been
intended. We only wish now to see the ultimate effect that necessarily
follows from this progress of things; and how, in this course of nature,
the land must end, however long protracted shall be the duration of this
body, and however much economy may be perceived in this gradual waste of
land;—a waste which by no means is so slow as not to be perceived by men
reasoning in science; although scientific men, either reasoning for the
purpose of a system which they had devised, or, deceived by the apparent
state of things which truly change, may not acknowledge the necessary
consequence of what they had perceived.

Let us now suppose all the solid mass of land, contained in our
continent, to be transformed into soil and vegetable earth, it must be
evident that no covering of plants, or interlacing of vegetable fibres,
could protect this mass of loose or incoherent materials from the
ravages of floods, so long as rivers flowed, nor from being swallowed by
the ocean, so long as there were winds and tides. From the border of the
land upon the shore, to the middle of the ocean, there is either at
present an equable declivity at the bottom of the sea, or every thing
tends to form this declivity, in gradually moving bodies along this
bottom. But, however gradual the declivity of the bottom, or however
slow the progress of loose materials from the shore towards the deepest
bottom of the sea, so long as there are moving powers for those
materials, they must have a progress to that end; the law of
gravitation, always active, must prevail, and sooner or later the moving
sea must swallow up the land.

But, along the borders of our continent, and in the courses of our
rivers, there are rocks; these must be surmounted or destroyed, before
the parts which they protect can be delivered up to the influence of
those moving powers which tend to form a level; and we may be assured
that those bulwarks waste. The bare inspection of our rocky coasts and
rivers will satisfy the enlightened observator of this truth; and to
endeavour to prove this to a person who has not principles by which to
reason upon the subject, or to one who has false principles, by which he
would create perpetual stability to decaying things, would be but labour
lost.

In proportion as the solid bulwark is destroyed, so is the soil which
had been protected by it; and, in proportion as the solid parts of the
mass of land are exposed to the influences of the atmosphere and water,
by the ablution of the soil, more soil is prepared for the growth of
plants, and more earth is detached from the solid rock, to form deep
soils upon the surface of the earth, and to establish fertile countries
at the mouths of rivers, even in making encroachment on the space
allotted for the sea. But this production of land, in augmentation of
our coasts, is only made by the destruction of the higher country.
While, therefore, we allow that there is any augmentation made to the
coast, or any earthy matter travelling in our rivers, the land above the
coast cannot be stable, nor the constitution of our earth fixed in a
state which has no tendency to be removed.

M. de Luc, in his Histoire de la Terre, would make the mountains last
for ever, after they have come to a certain slope. He sums up his
reasoning upon this subject in these words: «L'adoucissement des pentes
arrête d'abord l'effet de ces deux grandes causes causes de destruction
de montagnes, la *pesanteur* et les *eaux*: la végétation ensuite arrêté
l'effet de toutes les petites cause.»

If all the great and little causes of demolition are arrested by the
slope of mountains and the growth of plants, the surface of the earth
might then remain without any farther change; and this would be a fact
in opposition to the present theory, which represents the surface of the
earth as constantly tending to decay, for the purpose of vegetation, and
as being only preserved from a quick destruction by the solid rocks
protecting, from the ravages of the floods and sea, the loose materials
of the land. It will therefore be proper to show, that this author's
argument does not go to prove his proposition in the terms which he has
given it, which is, that those sloped mountains are to last for ever,
but only that these causes, which he has so well described, make the
destruction of the mountains become more slow <span
id="fr_59"></span>[9](#fn_59.md).

The slope which our author gives to his mountains, in order to secure
them from the ravages of time, is that which, according to his own
reasoning, renders them fertile and proper for the culture of man; but
fertile soil yields always something to the floods to carry away; and,
while any thing is carried from the soil, the land must waste, although
it may not then waste at the rate of those within the valleys of the
Alps. According to the doctrine of this author, our mountains of
Tweeddale and Tiviotdale, being all covered with vegetation, are arrived
at that period in the course of things when they should be permanent.
But is it really so? Do they never waste? Look at the rivers in a
flood;—if these run clear, this philosopher has reasoned right, and I
have lost my argument. Our clearest streams run muddy in a flood. The
great causes, therefore, for the degradation of mountains never stop as
long as there is water to run; although, as the heights of mountains
diminish, the progress of their diminution may be more and more
retarded.

Let us now see how far our author has reasoned justly with regard to
vegetation, which, he says, stops the effects of all the little causes
of destruction; this is the more necessary, as, in the present theory,
it is the little causes, long continued, which are considered as
bringing about the greatest changes of the earth.

Along the courses of our rivers there are plains between the mountains
of greater or lesser extent; these are almost always fertile, and
generally cultivated when large; when small, they are in pasture. The
origin of these fertile soils, and their perpetual change, is to be
described with a view to show, that vegetation, although most powerful
in stopping the ravages of water, and for accumulating soil retained by
this means, does it only for a time; after which the soil is again
abandoned to the ravages of the running water, when no more protected by
the vegetation.

Let us suppose the river running upon the one side of the haugh (which
is the name we gave those little fertile plains) and close by the side
of the mountain. In this case the bed of the river is deepest at the
side of the mountain, which it undermines, leaving a falling *(un
éboulement)* on that side; on the other side, the river shelves
gradually from the plain, and leaves soil in its bottom or stony bed
upon the side of the haugh, in proportion as it makes advances in
carrying away the bank at the bottom of the sloping mountain. The part
which vegetation takes in this operation is now to be considered.

When the river has enlarged its bed by preying upon one side, whether of
the mountain or the haugh, the water only covers it in a flood; at other
times, it leaves it dry. Here, among the rocks and stones, the feeds of
plants, left by the water or blown by the wind, spring up and grow; and,
in little floods, some sand and mud is left among those plants; this
encourages the growth of other plants, which more and more retain the
fertile spoils of the river in its floods. At last, this bed of the
river is covered perfectly with plants, which having retained plenty of
fertile soil, although still rooted among the stones, opposes to the
river a resistance which its greatest velocity is not able to overcome.
In this state, the haugh is always deepening or increasing its soil, and
has its surface heightened. At last, when this soil becomes so high as
only to be flooded now and then, it becomes most fertile, as the heavier
parts are carried in the bed of the river, and the lighter soil
deposited upon the plain. The operations of the river, upon the plain,
thus increase at the same time the height and fertility of the haugh.
But this operation, of accumulated soil upon the stony bottom, has a
period, at which time the river must return again upon its steps, and
sweep away the haugh which it had formed. This is the natural course of
things; and it happens necessarily from the deepening of the soil. Let
us then examine this operation.

When no more soil is left upon the stony bottom than is sufficient for
the covering of the ground, and rooting of plants which are also fixed
in the solid ground or bottom of the soil, the water is not able to
carry away the plants; and these plants protect the surface of loose
soil. When again there is a depth of soil accumulated upon the haugh,
the surface only is protected by the vegetable covering. But what avails
it to the soil to be protected from above, when undermined by the enemy!
The vegetable roots now no longer reaching to the bottom where solidity
is found, the tender soil below is easily washed away by the continued
efforts of the stream; and the unsupported meadow, with the impregnable
texture of its leaves, its roots, and its fibres, falls ruinously into
the river, and is born away in triumph by the flood. The water thus
reclaims its long deserted bed,—only in order to pass from it again, and
circulate or meander from hill to hill in varying perpetually its
course.

Now this progress of the river, or this changing of its bed, is
determined by the strong resistance of the new made haugh, humbly
standing firm in the protection of its vegetation, while the elevated
surface of the older haugh, deserted by the inferior soil which it had
ceased to protect, falls a victim to its exalted state, and passes away
to aggrandize another. This is the fate of haughs or plains erected by
the operations of a river, and again destroyed in the natural course of
things, or in the very continuation of that active cause by which they
had been formed.

The water is constantly carrying the moveable soil from the higher to
the lower place; vegetation often disputes the possession of these
spoils of ruined mountains for a while; but, in the end, this vegetable
protector, not only delivers up to the destroying cause the mineral soil
which it had preserved, but, by its buoyancy in water, it facilitates
the transportation of the stony parts to which this fibrous body is
attached. Over and over a thousand times may be repeated this alternate
possession of the transferable soil, by moving water on the one part and
by fixed vegetation on the other, but at last all must land upon the
shore, whether the river tends. Thus the mountain and the plain, the
vegetable earth and the plants produced in that soil, must all return
into the sea from whence either they themselves or their materials had
come. In proportion as the mountains are diminished, the haugh or plain
between them grows more wide, and also on a lower level; but, while
there is a river running in a plain, and floods produced in the seasons
of rain, there can be nothing stable in this constitution of things
evidently founded upon change.

The description now given is from the rivers of this country, where it
is not unfrequent to see relicts of three or four different haughs which
had occupied the same spot of ground upon different levels, consequently
which had been formed and destroyed at different periods of time. But
the same operation is transacted every where; it is seen upon the plains
of Indostan, as in the haughs of Scotland; the Ganges operates upon its
banks, and is employed in changing its bed continually as well as the
Tweed <span id="fr_60"></span>[10](#fn_60.md). The great city of Babylon
was built upon the haugh of a river. What is become of that city?
nothing remains,—even the place, on which it stood, is not known.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_58"></span>[v2:8](toe30.htm#fr_58.md) Histoire de la Terre,
Tom. 2. page 26.

<span id="fn_59"></span>[v2:9](toe30.htm#fr_59.md) This also would appear
to be a part of that wise system of nature, in which nothing is done in
vain, and in which every thing tends to accomplish the end with the
greatest marks of economy and benevolence. Had it been otherwise, and
the demolishing powers of the land increased, in a growing rate with the
diminution of the height, the changes of this earth and renovation of
our continent, in which occasionally animal life must suffer, would
necessarily require to be often repeated; and, in that case, chaos and
confusion would seem to be introduced into that system which at present
appears to be established with such order and economy that man suspects
not any change; it requires the views of scientific men to perceive that
things are not at present such as they were created; it requires all the
observation of a natural philosopher to know that in this earth there
had been change, although it is not every natural philosopher that
observes the benevolence accompanying this constitution of things which
must subsist in change.

<span id="fn_60"></span>[v2:10](toe30.htm#fr_60.md) An Account of the
Ganges and Burrampooter Rivers, by James Rennel, Esquire. Philosophical
Transactions, 1781.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VII. The Same Subject continued, in giving a View of the
Operations of Air and Water upon the Surface of the Land](toe31.md)
