[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Earth](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](toe36)  [Next](toe38) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Theory of the Earth*, by James Hutton, \[1788 and 1795\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAP. XIII.

*The same Subject continued.*

The Chevalier de Dolomieu, in his most indefatigable search after
natural history and volcanic productions, has given us the description
of some observations which are much calculated to put this subject in a
conspicuous point of view. I give them here as examples of the operation
of water wasting the land and forming valleys in a system where every
thing is tending to the wisest end or purpose; but they are no less
interesting as proper to give us a view of the mineral operations of the
globe. That therefore which, according to the order of the subject,
ought to be cited in another part of this work, is here necessarily
mixed in the narrative of this natural historian.

There is, upon this occasion, such a connection of the facts by which
the mineral operations of the earth, either consolidating the materials
deposited at the bottom of the sea, or elevating land by the power of
subterraneous heat, are to be understood, and of those by which the
operations of the surface are to be explained, that while they cannot be
separated in this narration, they throw mutual light upon each other. It
is in his Mémoire sur les Volcans éteints du Val di Noto en Sicile.
Journal de Physique, Septembre 1784.

«Je trouvai les premiers indices de ces volcans, en allant de Syracuse à
Sortino, à une lieue de cette ville, au fond du profond vallon qui y
conduit. Quelques morceaux de laves entraînés et arrondis par les eaux
m'annoncèrent d'avance que j'allois entrer dans un pay volcanique. Mon
attention se fixa bientôt après sur un courant de laves que je vis
sortir d'une montagne calcaire qui étoit sur ma droite, il étois coupé
par une vallon dont les eaux couloient sur un sol calcaire, et alloit se
perdre dans le massif également calcaire qui étoit sur ma gauche. Je
passai en suite alternativement sur des matières calcaires et
volcaniques, pour arriver à Sortino, ville baronale bâtie sur une
montagne calcaire qui domine la vallon, et qui lui presente des
escarpemens de plus de 200 toises d'élévation, dans lesquels les banc de
pierres dure sont horizontaux, et exactement parallèles.»

Here, it is to be observed, are horizontal beds remaining, which give a
measure of what had been abstracted by some cause, which is our present
subject of investigation. The Chevalier proceeds:

«Les environs de Sortino m'offrirent des phénomènes et des singularités
dont l'explication me parut difficile, et qui tinrent pendant longtemps
mon esprit en suspens. Je vis d'abord les matières volcaniques
ensevelies sous des bancs horizontaux de pierres calcaires,
très-coquillières, contenant sur-tout une infinité de madréporites,
quelques-uns d'un volume énorme. Je vis ensuite des hauteurs dont les
sommets seuls étoient volcaniques, et les noyaux calcaires, sans que les
laves qui couronnoient ces sommets eussent communication avec aucun
courant, et eussent d'autre étendue que le plateau qu'elles
recouvroient. Ces laves n'avoient pu être formées où je les voyois;
elles étoient venues d'ailleurs; mais d'où et comment? etc. Je me
déterminai à consulter les montagnes les plus hautes, qui étoient à
quelque distance. J'en vis de loin plusieurs dont la forme étoit à
peu-près conique, et dont les sommets étoient pointus; elles étoient
vers le nord, ou nord-ouest de Sortino, dans la direction de l'Etna, qui
terminoit mon horizon, à une distance de 13 ou 14 lieues, etc.

«La montagne Saint-George, une des plus hautes de tout le canton du
sommet de laquelle je pouvois prendre une idée topographique de tous le
pays, qui domine tout ce qui entoure, à l'exception de quelques pics
calcaires qui lui sont au sud; (tel que celui de la montagne de
Boujuan); cette montagne, dis-je, dont la forme est conique, et qui est
isolée par des vallées, dont le sol lui étoit sur-abaissé de 3 ou 400
toises, a sa base calcaire. Sur cette première assise repose une couche
volcanique, ensuite une autre tranche volcanique calcaire, à laquelle
succède un sommet formé d'une lave dure. Une autre montagne auprès du
fief de la Copodia, également conique, est toute volcanique, à
l'exception d'une couche de pierre calcaire dure et blanche, qui la
tranche à moitié hauteur parallèlement à sa base. Quelques montagnes où
les couches volcaniques ou calcaires sont plus ou moins nombreuses. La
montagne de Pimalia est volcanique à sa base et calcaire à son sommet;
et enfin la montagne isolée sur laquelle est bâtie la ville de
Carientini est moitié calcaire et moitié volcanique: mais ici la
division des deux substances se fait par un plan verticale, etc. Après
être arrivé à cette limite des volcans, dont je poursuivois le foyer, je
pris du côté de l'est; je suivis jusqu'à Melilli les hauteurs qui
accompagnent la vallée de Lentini, et qui dominent la plaine d'Auguste;
et cheminant à mi côté je vis déboucher du milieu des montagnes
calcaires, qui, réunies par leur base, ne forme qu'une même groupe, sous
le nom de monts Hybleens, *Colles Hyblei*, plusieurs courans de lave qui
se terminent comme s'ils avoient été coupés sans avoir eu le temps de
descendre dans la vallée, et de s'incliner pour en prendre la pente.
Plusieurs de ces courans sont cristallisés en basaltes prismatiques; on
en voit de très-belles colonnes au-près de Melilli. Au delà de cette
ville jusqu'à Syracuse, on ne voit plus de traces de volcans, et les
escarpemens en face du golfe d'Auguste n'offrent qu'un massif calcaire
en bancs horizontaux, etc.

«Je revins a Sortino, et en allant visiter l'emplacement de l'ancienne
Erbessus, connue maintenant sous le nom de Pentarica, je traversai deux
gorges d'une extrême profondeur, dont les encaissemens, taillés presque
à pic, ont plus de 600 pieds d'élévation, etc.»

The Chevalier then found, in the mountain of Santa Venere, an extinct
volcano; and proceeds in his Memoir to give some explanation for those
appearances, as follows:

«Je ne pus pas douter que cette montagne ne fût le volcan que je
cherchois, et qui avoit répandus ses laves à une très-grande distance
autour de lui, sur-tout dans la partie de l'est; mais il me restoit à
résoudre le problème de la formation des montagnes isolées et coniques,
mi-parties volcaniques et calcaires, qui ne tiennent à aucune courant,
et qui sembloient n'avoir aucune relation directe avec mon volcan.
L'étude de la montagne Santa-Venere, et des pays circonvoisins, m'apprit
que ce volcan s'étoit élevé au milieu de la mer qui alors occupoit nos
continens, que sa tête seule s'étoit soulevée au-dessus du niveau des
eaux. Je fus convaincu que, lorsqu'il répandoit autour de lui des
torrens de matières enflammées, la mer entassoit des dépôts calcaires;
que chaque nouvelle éruption trouvoit un sol plus élevé, sur lequel elle
se répandoit; que bientôt les nouvelles matières volcaniques étoient
ensevelies sous de nouveaux dépôts, et qu'ainsi, par l'entassement
successif et régulier des produit du feu et des dépôts de l'eau, s'étoit
formé un énorme massif, á sommet aplati et horizontal. Ce massif
occupoit tout le centre du Val di Noto, recouvroit de plusieurs
centaines de toises le sol sur lequel s'étoit répandu les premières
laves, et fut divisé, morcelé et dégradé par les courans ou par le
ballottement des eaux, lors de la grande débâcle du de la catastrophe
qui changea l'emplacement des mers. Les vallons et les gorges qui se
formèrent au milieu de ce massis, séparèrent les laves de la montagne à
qui elles appartenoient, coupèrent les courans, et façonnèrent, avec les
débris de ce massif des montagnes de toutes les formes, mais la majeure
partie conique, ainsi qu'on peut le voir journellement, lorsque, dans un
terrain argilleux et submergé l'eau, se retirant avec précipitation,
excave par-tout où elles trouve moins de resistance, creuse les premiers
sillons qu'elle a tracés et forme des petits cônes, dont les sommets
sont à la hauteur du sol sur lequel reposoient les eaux. Les parties où
les laves avoient coulé successivement dans la même direction, les unes
au-dessus des autres, ont donné naissance aux montagnes dans lesquelles
les couches volcaniques et calcaires se succèdent parallèlement. Celles
sur lesquelles aucunes laves ne se sont portées, n'ont produit que des
montagnes totalement calcaires que se trouvent entremêlées avec les
autres. Celles enfin sur lesquelles le hazard ou des circonstances
locales out entasse de préférence, et dans le même lieu, les matières
que vomissoit le volcan, sans laisser le temps au dépôt des eaux de se
mêler avec elles, ont produit quelques petites montagnes presque
entièrement volcanique, où les cendres sont agglutinées par une pâte
calcaire, etc. Cette théorie rend raison de tous le phénomènes et de
toutes les singularités qui s'observent dans le mélange des produits du
feu et des dépôts de l'eau, et une infinité de preuves de differens
genres, mais qui seroient étrangères à ce Memoire, concourent à
démontrer, l'existence d'un ancien plateau qui étoit élevé de plusieurs
centaines de toises au-dessus du sol actuel des vallées et du niveau de
la mer, qui couvroit non seulement le Val *di Noto*, mais encore toute
la Sicile, et dont les débris ont formé toutes les montagnes
actuellement existantes, à l'exception de l'Etna.»

It is not the explanation here given by the Chevalier de Dolomieu, of
the manner in which this great mass of land was formed in the sea, that
is concerned with the subject at present under our examination, but
certain facts set forth in the Memoir, and a certain conclusion which is
there endeavoured to be drawn from those interesting facts <span
id="fr_77"></span>[28](#fn_77). This will be understood by considering;
first, it is on all hands acknowledged, that the stratified matter of
the globe was successively deposited in the bottom of the sea; secondly,
it is also agreed, that this great mass of Sicily, formed originally
under the sea, was afterwards placed in the atmosphere, whether by the
retreat of the sea or by the elevation of the land; and now, lastly, we
are of one mind with respect to the present shape of things, as having
been produced by the wasting away of great part of that mass which had
been once continued all over the island, as high at least as the tops of
the mountains, *i.e.* about a mile above the level of the sea; we only
differ in the time and agents which have been employed in this
Operation.

On the one hand, the Memoir now before us represents this great effect
as belonging to an unknown cause, so far as we are ignorant of that
grand *débacle* or *catastrophe* which changed the situation of the sea.
On the other hand, the Theory now proposed explains this operation, of
forming those conical mountains of Sicily, and hollowing out its
valleys, by known causes, and by employing powers the most necessary,
the most constant, and the most general, that act upon the surface of
the earth.

But, besides explaining this change of land and water by an unknown
cause, our author has here employed, for the removing of this mass of
solid rock, powers which appear to me no ways adequate to the end
proposed. The running of water upon the soft mud left by a river, given
here as an example, corresponds indeed in some respects with the form of
valleys; for, water acts upon the same principle, whether it makes a
channel through the subtile sediment of a river, or through the
travelled materials of a valley. But it is not here that there is any
difficulty in conceiving the rivers of Sicily to have shaped the
mountains and the valleys; it is in removing the masses of solid rock,
which covered the whole surface of this land in successive strata, that
any doubt could occur in ascribing the actual appearances of things to
the natural operations of the earth; but it is here particularly that
the retreat of the sea, in whatever manner supposed to be done, is
altogether incompetent for the purpose which is now considered. I
flatter myself, that when the Chevalier de Dolomieu, who has employed
his uncommon talents in examining and elucidating the effects of fire in
the bowels of those burning mountains, shall consider and examine the
effects of time upon the surface of the earth, he will be ready to adopt
my opinion, that there is no occasion to have recourse to any unknown
cause, in explaining appearances which are every where to be found,
although not always attended with such remarkable circumstances as those
with which his labours have enriched natural history.

It may be proper to give a view of the operations of nature upon the
Apennines. It is from an account of a journey into the province of
Abruzzo, by Sir William Hamilton. Phil. Trans. 1786.

The road follows the windings of the Garigliano, which is here a
beautiful clear trout stream, with a great variety of cascades and
water-falls, particularly a double one at Isola, near which place CICERO
had a villa; and there are still some remains of it, though converted
into a chapel. The valley is extensive, and rich with fruit trees, corn,
vines, and olives. Large tracts of land are here and there covered with
woods of oak and chestnut, all timber trees of the largest size. The
mountains nearest the valley rise gently, and are adorned with either
modern castles towns, and villages, or the ruins of ancient ones. The
next range of mountains, rising behind these, are covered with pines,
larches, and such trees and shrubs as usually abound in a like
situation; and above them a third range of mountains and rocks, being
the most elevated part of the Apennine, rise much higher, and, being
covered with eternal snow, make a beautiful contrast with the rich
valley above mentioned; and the snow is at so great a distance as not to
give that uncomfortable chill to the air which I have always found in
the narrow valleys of the Alps and the Tyrol.

Having thus examined the alpine countries both of the Old World and the
New, it remains to observe some river in a more low or level country
emptying itself into a sea that does not communicate with the ocean. The
Wolga will now serve for this purpose; and we shall take our facts from
the observations of those men of science who were employed by their
enlightened Sovereign to give the natural as well as the economical
history of her dominions.

Russia may be considered as a square plain, containing about 40 degrees
of longitude, and 20 of latitude, that is, between the 47° and 67°
degrees. The east side is bounded by the Oural mountains, running in a
straight line from north to south. The west is bounded by Poland. The
south reaches to the Caspian and Black Seas, as does the north to the
Polar Ocean.

The greatest part of the water which falls upon this extensive country
is delivered into the Caspian by the river Wolga; and this water runs
from the east and west sides, gathered in two great rivers, the Kama and
the Oka. The water thus gathered from the two opposite extremities of
this great kingdom meet in the middle with the Wolga, which receives its
water from the north side. We thus find the water of this great plain
running in all directions to its centre. Had this been the lowest place,
here would have been formed a sea or lake. But this water found a lower
place in the bed of the Caspian; and into this bason it has made its
way, in forming to itself a channel in the great plain of the Wolga.

Our present purpose is to show that this channel, which the Wolga has
cut for itself, had been once a continued mass of solid rock and
horizontal strata, which in the course of time has been hollowed out to
form a channel for those waters. These waters have been traversing all
that plain, and have left protuberances as so many testimonies of what
had before existed; for, we here find the horizontal strata cut down and
worn away by the rivers.

M. Pallas gives us very good reason to believe that the Caspian Sea had
formerly occupied a much greater extent than at present; there are the
marks of its ancient banks; and the shells peculiar to the Caspian Sea
are found in the soil of that part of its ancient bottom which it has
now deserted, and which forms the low saline *Steppe*. He also makes it
extremely probable that the Caspian then communicated with the Euxine or
Black Sea, and that the breaking through of the channel from the Euxine
into the Mediterranean had occasioned the disjunction of those seas
which had been before united, as the surface of the Caspian is lowered
by the great evaporation from that sea surrounded with dry deserts.

However that may he, it is plain, that throughout all this great flat
inland country of Russia, the solid rocks are decaying and wearing away
by the operation of water, as certainly, though perhaps not so rapidly,
as in the more mountainous regions of the earth.

If there is so much of the solid parts worn and washed away upon the
surface of this earth, as represented in our Theory; and if the rivers
have run so long in their present courses, it may perhaps be demanded,
Why are not all the lakes filled up with soil; and why have not the
Black and Caspian Seas become land or marshy ground, with rivers passing
through them to the ocean? Here is a question that may be considered
either as being general to all the lakes upon the earth, or as
particular to every lake which should thus find a proper explanation in
the Theory. With regard to the last of these, the question has already
been considered in this view, when the particular case of the Rhône was
taken as an example; and now we are only to consider the question as
general to the globe, or so far as belonging to the Theory, without
particularising any one case.

It must be evident, that the objection to the Theory, here supposed to
be made, is founded necessarily upon this, that the solid basis of our
continent, on whose surface are found the lakes in question, is
preserved without change, because, otherwise, the smallest variation in
the basis may produce the most sensible effects upon the surface; and in
this manner might be produced dry land where there had been a lake, or a
lake where none had been before. But, as the present Theory is founded
upon no such principle of stability in the basis of our land, no
objection, to the wasting operations of the surface of the earth, can be
formed against our Theory, from the consideration of those lakes, when
the immediate cause of them should not appear.

The natural tendency of the operations of water upon the surface of this
earth is to form a system of rivers every where, and to fill up
occasional lakes. The system of rivers is executed by wearing and
wasting away the surface of the earth; and this, it must be allowed, is
perfect or complete, at least so far as consistent with another system,
which would also appear to be in nature. This is a system of lakes with
which the rivers are properly connected. Now, as there are more way than
one by which a lake may be formed, consistent with the Theory, the
particular explanation of every lake must be left to the natural history
of the place, so far as this shall be found sufficient for the purpose.

There are many places which give certain appearances, from which it is
concluded, by most intelligent observators, that there had formerly
existed great lakes of fresh water, which had been drained by the
discharge of those waters through conduits formed by some natural
operation; and those naturalists seem to be disposed to attribute to
some great convulsion, rather than to the slow operation of a rivulet,
those changes which may be observed upon the surface of the earth. Let
us now examine some of those appearances, in order to connect them with
that general system of moving water which we have been representing as
every where modifying the surface of the earth on which we dwell.

It is the P. Chrysologue De Gy, who gives the following description.
Journal de Physique, Avril 1787.

«La principaute de Porrentrui l'emporte encore en ce genre sur le reste
du Jura à ce qu'il paroît. On pourra en juger sur les circonstances
locales que je vais rapporter. Une partie de cette principauté est
divisée en quatre grandes vallées, d'environs quatre lieues de long, sur
trois quarts-d'heure ou une heure de large, séparées par autant de
chaînes de montagnes fort élevés et large en quelques endroits d'une
lieue et demie. Les extrémités de chacune de ces vallées sont plus
élevées que le milieu, et on ne peut pas en sortir par ces extrémités
sans beaucoup monter. Mais ces vallées ont des communications entr'elles
par une pente assez douce à travers ces masses énormes de montagnes qui
les separent, et qui sont coupées au niveau du milieu des vallées sur
300, 400, 500 toises de hauteur et dans toute leur largeur. On pourroit
assez justement comparer ces vallées à des berceaux posés les uns à côté
des autres, dont les extrémités, remplies en talus, seroient plus élevés
que les cotés, et dont ces côtés seroient coupés jusqu'au fond, pour
laisser une passage de l'un à l'autre. Je connois sept à huit passages
semblables à travers ces hautes montagnes, dans une quarré d'environ
quatre à cinq lieues; et dont quatre aboutissent à la vallée de
Mouthier-Grand-Val. Ces passages sont évasés dans le dessus, d'environ
une demi-lieue par endroits; mais leurs parois, en talus, se rejoignent
dans le fond où coule un ruisseau. On a pratiqué des routes sur
quelques-uns de ces talus, mais les roches sont quelquefois si
resserrées et si escarpées, qu'on a été obligé de construire un canal
sur le ruisseau, pour y faire passer la route. C'est-là que l'on voit à
son aise, la nature de ces rochers primitives, leur direction, leur
inclinaison, et tous leurs autres accidens qui demanderaient chacun une
dissertation particulière trop longue pour le moment, et il faut les
avoir vues pour se faire une juste idée des sentimens de grandeur, de
surprise, et d'admiration qu'elles inspirent, et que l'on ne peut pas
exprimer par des paroles. Cependant, les sources de ruisseaux, ou si
l'on veut des rivières qui traversent ces montagnes, sont beaucoup plus
basses que les sommités des montagnes elles-mêmes, ces sources ne font
donc pas la cause de ces effets merveilleux. Il a fallu un agent plus
puissant pour creuser ces abîmes.»

M. de la Metherie has taken a very enlightened view of the country of
France; and has given us a plan of the different ridges of mountains
that may be traced in that kingdom, (Journal de Physique, Janvier 1787).
Now there is a double purpose in natural history to which such a plan as
this may be applied; viz. first, to trace the nature of the solid parts,
on which the soil for vegetation rests; and, secondly, to trace the
nature of the soil or cultivated surface of the earth, on which depends
the growth of plants.

With regard to the first, we may see here the granite raising up the
strata, and bringing them to the light, where they appear on each side
of those centrical ridges. What M. de la Metherie calls *Monts
Secondaires*, I would call the proper strata of the globe, whether
primary or secondary; and the *Monts Granit*, I would consider as
mineral masses, which truly, or in a certain sense, are secondary, as
having been made to invade, in a fluid state, the strata from below,
when they were under water; and which masses had served to raise the
country above the level of the ocean.

But this is not the subject here immediately under consideration; we are
now tracing the operations of rivers upon the surface of the earth, in
order to see in the present state of things a former state, and to
explain the apparent irregularity of the surface and confusion of the
various mineral bodies, by finding order in the works of nature; or a
general system of the globe, in which the preservation of the habitable
world is consulted.

For this last purpose also the mineral map of M. de la Metherie is
valuable. It gives us a plan of the valleys of the great rivers, and
their various branches, which, however infinitely ramified, may be
considered as forming each one great valley watered, or rather drained,
by its proper river. But the view I would now wish to take of those
valleys, is that of habitable and fertile countries formed by the
attrition of those rivers; and to perceive the operation of water
wearing down the softer and less solid parts, while the more hard and
solid rocks of the ridges, as well as scattered mountains, had resisted
and preserved a higher station.

In this map, for example, let us suppose the first and second ridge of
our author's plan to be joined at the mouth of the Loire, and retain the
water of that river, as high as the summit of its surrounding ridges;
this great valley of the Loire, which at present is so fine and fertile
a country, would become a lake; in like manner as the proper valley of
the Rhône, above St Maurice, would be drowned by shutting up that gap of
the mountains through which the Rhône passes in order to enter the plain
of Geneva.

This is the view that P. Chrysologue takes of those small valleys formed
between the ridges of the Jura. But this is not perhaps the just view of
the subject; for though by closing the gap by which the Loire or Rhône,
passes through the inclosing ridge, the present country above would
certainly be overflowed by the accumulated waters, yet it is more
natural to suppose, that the great gap of the Loire, or the Rhône, had
been formed gradually, in proportion as the inclosed country had been
worn down and transported to the sea. We have but to consider, that the
attrition of those transported materials must have been as necessary for
the hollowing out of those gaps in the solid rock of the obstructing
mountains, as the opening of those gaps may have been for the
transporting of those materials to the sea. But it is perhaps
impossible, from the present appearance of things, to see what
revolutions may have happened to this country in the course of its
degradation; what lakes may have been formed; what mountains of softer
materials may have been levelled; and what basons of water filled up and
obliterated.

This general view of the valley of the Loire, and all its branches, is
perhaps too extensive to be admitted in this reasoning from effect to
cause; we must approximate it by an intermediate step, which will easily
be acknowledged as entering within the rule. It is in Forrez, near the
head of the Loire. There we find the plain of Mont Brison, 40,000 toises
or 22 miles long and half as wide, surrounded by a ridge of granite
mountains on every side. Here the river, which is a small branch of the
Loire, enters at the upper end of the plain (as M. de Bournon has
described) <span id="fr_78"></span>[29](#fn_78) «Par une gorge très
étroite et tortueuse,» and goes out in like manner at the under End.

Those French philosophers, who have seen this plain, have little doubts
of this having been a lake, that is to say, they easily admit of the
original continuity of those ridges of mountains in which the gaps are
now found, through which the river passes. But upon those principles it
must be evident, that the river has hollowed out that plain, at the same
time that it had formed the gaps in those ridges of the granite
mountains. The only solid part, or original stratum, which M. de Bournon
has described as having seen in this plain, is a decomposing *grès* or
sandstone; but there is reason to suppose, that there had been both
calcareous and argillaceous or marly strata filling the hollow of that
space which is inclosed by the granite mountains; consequently, no
difficulty in conceiving that the river, which must wear away a passage
through those mountains, should also hollow out the softer materials
within, and thus form the plain, or rather a succession of plains, in
proportion as the level of the water had been lowered with the wearing
mountains.

If we are allowed to make this step, which I think can hardly be
refused, we may proceed to enlarge our view, by comprehending, first,
the Vallais of the Rhône, secondly, the countries of the Seine and
Rhône, above the mountains through which those two rivers in conjunction
have broke, below Lyons; and, lastly, that country of the Rhône and
Durance which is almost inclosed by the surrounding mountains, meeting
at the mouth of the Rhône. But this reasoning will equally apply to the
countries of the Garonne, the Loire, and the Seine.

One observation more may now be made with regard to the courses of great
rivers, and the fertile countries which they form in depositing the
travelled soil; it is this. That though those rivers have hollowed out
their beds and raised their banks; though they are constantly operating
in forming fertile soil in one place and destroying it in another; and
though, in many particular situations, the fertile countries, formed at
the mouths of those rivers, are visibly upon the increase, yet the
general progress of those operations is so slow, that human history does
not serve to give us information almost of any former state of things.
The Nile will serve as an example of this fact.

The river Nile, which rises in the heights of Ethiopia, runs an amazing
tract through desert countries, and discharges its waters near the
bottom of the Mediterranean sea, fertilizes a long valley among barren
countries with which it is surrounded, and thus lays the foundation of a
kingdom, which, from its situation and the number of people it can
maintain and easily bring together for any manner of action, is perhaps
the strongest that can well be imagined. Accordingly, it has been of old
a great kingdom, that is to say, a powerful state within itself; and has
left monuments of this power, which have long been the admiration of the
world. The most ancient Grecian Histories mention these monuments as
being no better known, with regard to their dates and authors, than they
are at this day.

The conclusion here meant to be drawn is this, that, in a period of time
much more ancient than the most ancient periods in human history, Egypt
had been a country formed and watered by the Nile in like manner as it
is at present; that though continual changes are making in this as well
as in every other river, yet, on the whole, no sensible alteration can
be discerned within the compass of human experience, consequently, it is
only by considering, in a scientific manner, the nature of things, and
making allowances for operations which have taken place in time past,
that any competent judgment can be formed of the present shape and
condition of countries, or of any particular place upon the surface of
this earth, so far as regards its date, its causes, or its future state.
Nothing, almost, but the kingdom of Egypt would have formed those
stupendous monuments of art and labour; and nothing but the present
state of Egypt, fertilised by the Nile, could have formed that powerful
kingdom which might execute those works.

Thus there is a system of mountains and valleys, of hills and plains, of
rivulets and rivers, all of which are so perfectly connected, and so
admirably proportioned, in their forms and quantities, like the arteries
and veins of the animal body, that it would be absurd to suppose any
thing but wisdom could have designed this system of the earth, in
delivering water to run from the higher ground; or that any thing could
have formed this beautiful disposition of things but the operation of
the most steady causes; operations which, in the unlimited succession of
time, has brought to our view scenes which seem to us to have been
always, or to have been in the original construction of this earth.

To suppose the currents of the ocean to have formed that system of hill
and dale, of branching rivers and rivulets, divided almost *ad
infinitum*, which assemble together the water poured at large upon the
surface of the earth, in order to nourish a great diversity of animals
calculated for that moving element, and which carry back to the sea the
superfluity of water, would be to suppose a systematic order in the
currents of the ocean, an order which, with as much reason, we might
look for, in the wind. The diversity of heights upon the surface of the
earth, and of hardness and solidity in the masses of which the land is
formed, is doubtless governed by causes proper to the mineral kingdom,
and independent either of the atmosphere or sea; but the form and
structure by which the surface of the earth is fitted peculiarly to the
purpose of this living world, in giving a fertility which sustains both
plants and animals, is only caused by those powers which work upon the
surface of the earth,—those powers, the operation of which men in
general see with indifference every day, sometimes with horror or
apprehension.

The system of sustaining plants and animals upon a surface where
fertility abounds, and where even the desert has its proper use, is to
be perceived from the summit of the mountain to the shore within the
region of the sea; and although we have principally taken the Alps, or
alpine situations, for particular examples, in illustrating this
operation of the waters upon the surface of the earth, it is because the
effects are here more obvious to every inquirer, and not because there
is here to be acknowledged any other principle than that which is to be
found on all the surface of the earth, a principle of generation in one
sense, and of destruction in another.

We may also find in this particular, a certain degree of confirmation to
another part of the same theory; a part which does not come so
immediately within our view, and concerning which so many contradictory
hypotheses have been formed. Naturalists have supposed a certain
original construction of mountains, which constitution of things,
however, they never have explained; they have also distinguished those
which have evidently been formed in another manner, that is to say,
those the materials of which had been collected in the ocean. Now, here
are two things perfectly different; on the one hand original mountains
formed by nature, but we know not how, endued with solidity, but not
differing in this respect from those of a posterior formation; on the
other hand, secondary mountains, formed by the collection of materials
in the sea, therefore, not having solidity as a quality inherent in
their constitution, but only occasional or accidental in their nature.
If, therefore, it be the natural constitution of things upon the surface
of this earth to indurate and become solid, however originally formed
loose and incoherent, we should thus find an explanation of the
consolidation of those masses which had been lately formed of the loose
materials of the ocean; if, on the contrary, we find those pretended
primitive mountains, those bodies which are endued with hardness and
solidity, wasting by the hand of time, and thus wearing in the
operations natural to the surface of the earth, Where shall we find the
consolidating operations, those by which beds of shells have been
transformed into perfect marble, and siliceous bodies into solid flint?
or how reconcile those opposite intentions in the same cause?

Nothing can be more absurd than to suppose a collection of shells and
corals, amassed about the primitive mountains of the earth, to become
mountains equally solid with the others, upon the removal of the sea; it
would be inconsistent with every principle of sound reasoning to suppose
those masses of loose materials to oppose equal resistance to the
wasting and destroying operations of the surface of the earth, as do
those pretended primitive masses, which might be supposed endued with
natural hardness and solidity; yet, consult the matter of fact, and it
does not appear that there is any difference to be perceived. There are
lofty mountains to be found both of the one kind and the other; both
those different masses yield to the wasting operations of the surface;
and they are both carried away with the descending waters of the earth.

It is not here meant to affirm, that a mass of marble, which is a
calcareous substance, opposes equal resistance, whether to the
operations of dissolution or attrition, as a mass composed of granite or
of quartz; it is only here maintained that there are in the Alps lofty
mountains of marble, as there are in other places lower masses of
granite and its accompanying schistus. But that which is particularly to
be attended to here is this: In all countries of the earth, whether of
primitive masses or those of secondary formation, whether uniform and
homogeneous, or compound and mixed of those two different kinds of
bodies, the system is always the same, of hills and valleys, lakes and
rivers, ravines and streams: no man can say, by looking into the most
perfect map, what is primary or what secondary in the constitution of
the globe. It is the same system of larger rivers branching into lesser
and lesser in a continued series, of smaller rivers in like manner
branching into rivulets, and of rivulets terminating at last into
springs or temporary streams. The principle is universal; and, having
learned the natural history of one river, we know the constitution of
every other upon the face of the earth.

Thus all the surface of this earth is formed according to a regular
system of heights and hollows, hills and valleys, rivulets and rivers,
and these rivers return the waters of the atmosphere into the general
mass, in like manner as the blood, returning to the heart, is conducted
in the veins. But as the solid land, formed at the bottom of the sea or
in the bowels of the earth, could not be there constructed according to
that system of things which we find so widely pursued upon the surface
of the globe, it must be by wasting the solid parts of the land that
this system of the surface has been formed, in like manner as it is by
the operations of the sea that the shape of the land is determined, upon
the shore.

Thus it has been shown, that the general tendency of the operations
natural to the surface of the globe is to wear the surface of the earth,
and waste the land; consequently that, however long the continents of
this earth may be supposed to last, they are on the whole in a constant
state of diminution and decay; and, in the progress of time, will
naturally disappear. Hence confirmation is added to that mineral system
of the earth, by which the present land is supposed to have acquired
solidity and hardness; and according to which future land is supposed to
be preparing from the materials of the sea and former continents; which
land will be brought to light in time, to supply the place of that which
necessarily wastes, in serving plants and animals. But what is here more
particularly to the purpose is this; that we find an explanation of that
various shape and conformation which is to be observed upon the surface
of this earth, as being the effect of causes which are constant and
unremitting in their operation, which are widely adapted to the end or
absolutely necessary in the system of this world, and which, in the
indefinite course of time, become unlimited in their effect, or powerful
in any conceivable degree.

It is not sufficient for establishing the present theory, to refute that
most unscientific hypothesis, adopted by some eminent philosophers, of
mountains and valleys being the effect of currents in the ocean; it is
necessary to see what is their proper cause, and to show that by no
other cause known could the general effect, which is of such importance
in the system of this world, be actually produced. It is for this reason
that we have endeavoured to show that there is a general, an universal
system of river and valley, which renders the surface of this earth a
sort of organized body destined to a purpose which it perfectly fulfils.

But to see the full force of this argument, taken from that order of
things which is perceived in that system of valley and river all over
the earth, let us examine, first, what would be the effect, in the
constitution of this world, of bodies of land formed upon no such
system; and, secondly, what would be the effect of the natural
constitution of this world and meteorological operations of the
atmosphere, if continued for a sufficient length of time, upon a mass of
land without any systematic form.

For this purpose we shall take for example a portion of this earth,
which is the best known to us, that is the south-western part of Europe,
in order to compare its present state, which so perfectly fulfils the
purpose of this world, with that in which no order of valley and of
rivers should be fund.

Let us begin at the summit, which is the Mont-Blanc. At present the
water, falling from the heavens upon this continent, is gathered into a
system of rivers which run through valleys, and is delivered at last
into the Adriatic, the Mediterranean, the Atlantic, and the German Seas;
all the rest of this continent, except some lakes and marshes, is dry
land, properly calculated, for the sustenance of a variety of plants and
animals, and so fulfils the purpose of a habitable earth. Now, destroy
that system of river and valley, and the whole would become a mixture of
lakes and marshes, except the summits of a few barren rocks and
mountains. No regular channels for conveying the super-abundant water
being made, every thing must be deluged, and nothing but a system of
aquatic plants and animals appear. A continent of this sort is not found
upon the globe; and such a constitution of things, in general, would not
answer the purpose of the habitable world which we possess. It is
therefore necessary to modify the surface of such a continent of land,
as had been formed in the sea, and produced, by whatever means, into the
atmosphere for the purpose of maintaining that variety of plants and
animals which we behold; and now we are to examine how far the proper
means for that modification is to be found necessarily in the
constitution of this world.

If we consider our continent as composed of such materials as may decay
by the influence of the atmosphere, and be moved by water descending
from the higher to the lower ground, as is actually the case with the
land of our globe, then the water would gradually form channels in which
it would run from place to place; and those channels, continually
uniting as they proceed to the sea or shore, would form a system of
rivers and their branchings. But this system of moving water must
gradually produce valleys, by carrying away stones and earthy matter in
their floods; and those valleys would be changing according to the
softness, and hardness, destructability or indestructability of the
solid parts below. Still however the system of valley and river would be
preserved; and to this would be added the system of mountains, and
valleys, of hills and plains, to the formation of which the unequal
wearing down of the solids must in a great measure contribute.

Here therefore it is evident, *first*, that the great system upon the
surface of this earth, is that of valleys and rivers; *secondly*, that
no such system could arise from the operations of the sea when covering
the nascent land; *thirdly*, that this system is accomplished by the
same means which, are employed for procuring soil from the decaying
rocks and strata; and, *lastly*, that however this system shall be
interrupted and occasionally destroyed, it would necessarily be again
formed in time, while the earth continued above the level of the sea.
Whatever changes take place from the operation of internal causes, the
habitable earth, in general, is always preserved with the vigour of
youth, and the perfection of the most mature age. We cannot see man
cultivate the field, without perceiving that system of dry land provided
by nature in forming valleys and rivers; we cannot study the rocks and
solid strata of the earth, those bulwarks of the field and shore,
without acknowledging the provident design of nature in giving as much
permanency to our continent, as is consistent with sufficient fertility;
and we cannot contemplate the necessary waste of a present continent,
without perceiving the means for laying the foundation of another. But
the evidence of those truths is not open to a vulgar view; *media* are
required, or much reasoning; and between the first link and the last, in
this chain, what a distance, from the wasting of hard bodies upon the
surface of the earth, to the formation of a solid rock at the bottom of
the sea.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_77"></span>[v2:28](toe37.htm#fr_77) In the first part of
this work, the distinction has been made of true volcanic productions,
and those which are so frequently confounded with them; these last,
though the creatures of subterranean fire, and bodies which have been
made to flow in a fluid state, are clearly different from those masses
of lava which have issued from a volcano, as has been there described. I
would only here observe, that, according to this Theory, these bodies,
which the Chevalier de Dolomieu here represented as lava and volcanic
production, must be considered as unerupted lavas, which had been made
to flow among the strata of the earth, where other at the bottom of the
sea, or during those operations by which this land was erected above the
level of the ocean.

<span id="fn_78"></span>[v2:29](toe37.htm#fr_78) Journal de Physique,
Mai 1787.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XIV. Summary of the Doctrine which has been now
Illustrated](toe38)
