[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Earth](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](toe30)  [Next](toe32) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Theory of the Earth*, by James Hutton, \[1788 and 1795\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAP. VII.

*The Same Subject continued, in giving a View  
of the Operations of Air and Water upon the  
Surface of the Land.*

We have but to enlarge our thoughts with regard to things past by
attending to what we see at present, and we shall understand many things
which to a more contracted view appear to be in nature insulated or
without a proper cause; such are those great blocks of granite so
foreign to the place on which they stand, and so large as to seem to
have been transported by some power unnatural to the place from whence
they came. We have but to consider the surface of this earth as having
been upon a higher level; as having been every where the beds of rivers,
which had moved the matter of strata and fragments of rocks, now no more
existing; and as thus disposed upon different planes, which are, like
the haughs of rivers, changing in a continual succession, but changing
upon a scale too slow to be perceived. M. de Luc has given a picture
which is very proper to assist our imagination in contemplating a more
ancient state of this earth, although in this he has a very different
end in view, and means to show that the world, which we inhabit at
present, is of a recent date. It is in the 32d letter of his Histoire de
la Terre, which I beg leave here to transcribe.

«Des montagnes basses (comme le *Jura*, qui est bas comparativement aux
Alpes) sont bientôt fixées par ce moyen. Il ne se fait presque qu'un
seul *talus* depuis leur sommet jusques dans les basses vallées, ou sur
la plaine. Aussi l'état de ces montagnes est-il déjà presqu'entièrement
*fixé*: on y voit très peu de rochers nuds qui s'éboulent, excepté,
auprès des *rivières*. C'est dans ces lieux-la que l'ouvrage tarde le
plus à se finir. Le bas des *talus* est miné par l'eau; leur surface
s'éboule donc, pour ainsi dire, sans cesse, et laisse à découvert les
rochers des sommets, qui par la continuent aussi à *s'ébouler*. Mais les
vallées s'élargissent enfin; et les *talus* s'éloignant ainsi des
*rivières*, commencent à éprouver les influences du repos.»

Here nothing can be more positively described than the natural
destruction of those mountains by the operation of the rivers which run
between them; and this is from the authority of matter of fact, which,
on all occasions, this author faithfully describes. At the same time, we
are desired to believe, upon no better authority than the imagination of
a person hurried on by system, that those mountains are absolutely to
come to rest. I am aware of the danger to which a spirit of
systematising leads; and I wish for nothing more than to have my Theory
strictly examined, in comparing it with nature.

Our author thus proceeds: «La vue seule de la chaine du *Jura* nous
apprend donc ce que deviendroit enfin toutes les montagnes. Dans la plus
grande partie de son étendue, il ne souffre plus aucun changement
ruineux: la *végétation* le recouvre presque partout. Les bas sont
cultivés de toute sorte de manière suivant leur exposition; les sommets
sont couverts de pelouses, qui forment les pâturages les plus precieux.
Cette gazonade s'étend aussi sur toutes les parties des pentes qui ne
sont pas trop rapides, et le reste est couvert de bois.

«J'ai parcouru fort souvent le pied de ces montagnes: leur état est
presque partout tel que je viens d'avoir l'honneur de la descrire à V.M.
J'ai sur-tout observé avec attention les lits des *torrens* qui, en
descendent pour se rendre dans les lacs de *Geneva*, de *Neufchâtel* et
de *Bienne*, ainsi que dans l'Aar et dans le Rhin: et hormis ceux de ces
*torrens* qui viennent des gorges où les terrains sont encore escarpés,
ils ne roulent plus que l'ancien gravier qu'ils out apporté autrefois.

«Mais il n'en est pas ainsi des *Alpes*, des *Pyrénées*, et des autres
montagnes, qui, comme celles-là, sont beaucoup plus élevées, ou qui sans
l'être davantage ont été livrées aux influences de l'air dans un
désordre plus grand. Dans ce genre de montagnes il reste encore à la
*végétation* de bien grandes conquêtes à faire.

«Ces montagnes ne sont pas telles que V.M. pourroit se les figurer
naturellement; il faut y être monté pour s'en former une juste idée. Ce
sont des montagnes sur d'autres montagnes. De près on ne voit que les
parties inférieures; de loin tout se confond; il faut donc être arrivé
sur une des premières *terrasses* pour voir les secondes; sur celles-ci
pour les troisièmes; et ainsi de suite.

«La plupart de ces *terrasses* successives sont de grandes plaines,
dominées par des rochers qui s'éboulent, et forment des *talus*. Si dans
la succession des siècles, les *éboulemens* de ces bandes de rochers en
amphithéâtre finissoient sans emporter les plaines qu'ils soutiennent,
et que les *torrens* eussent creusé leur lit pendant ce tems là à
quelque distance des *talus* tout seroit fini par cette première
operation. Mais il y a peu de hautes montagnes où les arrangemens soient
si simples: souvent ces bandes empiètent les unes sur les autres en
*s'éboulant*, et alors le repos est bien différé.

«Supposons que ces *terrasses* soient étroites, et que leurs murs,
c'est-à-dire les rochers qui les soutiennent, soient fort élevés. Les
*terrasses* alors ne suffiront pas pour recevoir les *éboulemens* qui
doivent se faire sur elles car le dessus de chacune d'elles s'étrécit de
plus en plus par la destruction du rocher qui la soutient. Il pourra
donc arriver que ce talus, s'étant étendu jusqu'au bord de la terrasse,
se trouve reposer sur une base qui s'éboule encore; et même cela arrive
très souvent; de sorte qu'à chaque rétrécissement de la base, le *talus*
lui-même s'éboule. Ainsi deux *talus*, qui étoient peut-être déjà en
pleine végétation par la lenteur des éboulemens des rochers qui les
formoient, pourront être fort reculés à cet égard; le *talus* supérieur,
parce que la surface fertilisée glissera en bas; et le *talus*
inférieur, parce que la sienne sera ensevelie sous de nouveaux
décombres.

«Les montagnes qui sont dans ce cas seront proportionnellement plus
abaissées que les autres; parce que leurs *talus* se confondant ainsi et
devenant par là fort étendus demeureront longtemps à devenir solides.
Les eaux partant de fort haut, auront le tems de s'y rassembler et de
devenir destructives vers le bas. Au lieu que dans les montagnes où les
terrasses subsisteront encore après que tous les rochers se seront
*éboulés*, les eaux étant reçues par reprises, perdront beaucoup de leur
rapidité. Elles se rassembleront dans les enfoncemens des petites
vallées supérieures, elles s'y formeront des lits qu'elles ne rongeront
presque point; et la *végétation* restera tranquille partout.»

Let us now consider the height of the *Alps*, in general, to have been
much greater than it is at present; and this is a supposition of which
we have no reason to suspect the fallacy; for, the wasted summits of
those mountains attest its truth. There would then have been immense
valleys of ice sliding down in all directions towards the lower country,
and carrying large blocks of granite to a great distance, where they
would be variously deposited, and many of them remain an object of
admiration to after ages, conjecturing from whence, or how they came.
Such are the great blocks of granite which now repose upon the hills of
*Saleve*. M. de Saussure, who has examined them carefully, gives
demonstration of the long time during which they have remained in their
present place. The lime-stone bottom around being dissolved by the rain,
while that which serves as the basis of those masses stands high above
the rest of the rock, in having been protected from the rain. But no
natural operation of the globe can explain the transportation of those
bodies of stone, except the changed state of things arising from the
degradation of the mountains.

Every thing, therefore, tends to show that the surface of the earth must
wear; but M. de Luc, although he allows the principles on which this
reasoning is founded, labours to prove that those destructive causes
will not operate in time. Now, What would be the consequence of such a
system?—That the source of vegetation upon the surface of the earth
would cease at last, and perfect sterility be necessarily the effect of
allowing no farther degradation to the surface of the earth; for, What
is to supply the matter of plants? Water, air, and light alone, will not
suffice; there are necessarily required other elements which the earth
alone affords. If, therefore, this world is to continue, as it has done,
to form continents of calcareous strata at the bottom of the ocean, the
animals which form these strata, with their *exuviae*, must be fed. But,
on what can they be fed? not on water alone; the consequence of such a
supposition would lead us to absurdity; nor can they be fed on any other
element without the dissolution of land. According to my views of
things, it is certain that those animals are ultimately fed on vegetable
bodies; and it is equally certain, that plants require a soil on which
they may not only fix their fibrous roots, but find their nourishment at
least in part; for, that air, water, and the matter of light, also
contribute, cannot be doubted. But if animals, which are to form the
strata of the earth, are to be fed on plants, and these are to be
nourished by the matter of this earth, the waste of vegetable matter
upon the surface of the earth must be repaired; the exhausted soil must
be transported from the surface of the land; and fertility must be
restored by the gradual decay of solid parts, and by the successive
removal of soil from stage to stage. What a reverie, therefore, is that
idea, of bringing the earth to perfection by fixing the state of its
vegetable surface!

The description of those natural operations, which M. de Luc has given
with a view to establish the duration of the mountains, is founded upon
nothing but their destruction. These beds of rivers, which, according to
our author, are *hardly* to be wasted any more, will not satisfy a
philosopher, who requires to see no degree of wasting in a body which is
to remain for ever, or continue without change. But, however untenable
this supposition of a fixed state in the surface of this earth, the
accuracy of the natural philosopher may still be observed in the
absurdity of the proposition. «L'état des *montagnes* sera *fixe*,
partout où les *rivières* seront arrivées au point de n'emporter pas
plus de limon hors de leur enceinte, que l'air et les pluies n'y
déposeront de *terre végétable*, et voila enfin quel sera le repos,
l'état permanent de la surface de notre globe. Car alors il y aura
compensation entre les destructions et les réparations simultanées, et
les montagnes sûrement ne s'abaisseront plus.»

Surely, if there is in the system of nature wisdom, we may look for
compensation between the destroying and repairing operations of the
globe. But why seek for this compensation in the *rest* or immobility of
things? Why suppose perfection in the want of change? The summit of the
Alps was once the bottom of the sea; the existence of our land depended
then upon the change of seas and continents. But has the earth already
undergone so great changes, and is it not yet arrived at the period of
its perfection? How can a philosopher, who is so much employed in
contemplating the beauty of nature, the wisdom and goodness of
Providence, allow himself to entertain such mean ideas of the system as
to suppose, that, in the indefinite succession of time past, there has
not been perfection in the works of nature? Every material being exists
in motion, every immaterial being in action and in passion; rest exists
not any where; nor is it found in any other way, except among the parts
of space. Surely it is contrary to every species of philosophy, whether
ancient or modern, to found a system on the inutility of repose, or
place perfection in the vacuity of rest, when every thing that truly
exists, exists in motion; when every real information which we have is
derived from a change; and when every excess in nature is compensated,
not by rest, but by alternation.

M. de Luc allows the rivers to carry matter always to the sea; but then,
at a certain period, this matter carried by the floods is to be
compensated to the mountains by the vegetable earth received from the
air and rains. Here is a proposition which should be well considered,
before it be admitted as a principle, which shall establish the
perpetuity of these mountains, if it be true; or, if false, assure us of
their future demolition. Let us now examine it.

If from air and rain there is produced earth which cannot afterwards be
resolved by the operation of those elements, and thus again dissolved in
the air and water of the land, then this author might have had some
pretext, however insufficient, for alledging that it might be possible
to compensate the loss of mineral substances, carried off the surface of
the earth, by the production of this vegetable matter from the air and
rain; but, when there is not sufficient reason to conclude that any
substance, produced in vegetation, can resist the continued influences
of the air and water, without being decomposed in its principles, and at
last entirely dissolved in water, the cautious argument here employed by
this author, for the permanency of mountains, must appear as groundless
in its principle as it would be insufficient for his purpose, were it to
be admitted; but this will require some discussion.

That which preserves vegetable bodies so long from dissolution in water,
is what may be called the inflammable or phlogistic composition of those
bodies. This composition is quickly resolved in combustion; but it is no
less surely resolved by the influences of the sun and atmosphere, only
in a slower manner. Therefore, to place the permanency of this earth, or
any of its surface, upon a substance which in that situation necessarily
decays, is to form a speculation inconsistent with the principles of
natural philosophy <span id="fr_61"></span>[11](#fn_61).

But even supposing that the degradation of mountains were to be
suspended by the pretended compensation which is formed, by the rivers
carrying mineral mud into the sea, and the air and rain producing
vegetable earth; in what must this operation end? In carrying into the
sea, to be deposited at its bottom, all the vegetable earth produced by
the air and rain. But our cosmologist, in thus procuring an eternal
station to his mountains, has not told us whether this transmutation of
the air and rain be a finite operation, or one that is infinite; whether
it be in other respects confident with the natural operations of the
globe; and whether, to have the air and water of the globe converted
into earth, would ultimately promote, or not, that perfection which he
wishes to establish. Here, therefore, in allowing to this philosophy all
its suppositions, it would be necessary to make another compensation, in
preserving mountains at the expense of air and rain; and, the waste of
air and water, which are limited, would require to be repaired.

It is not in our purpose here to treat of moral causes; but this author
having endeavoured to fortify his system by observing, that the world
certainly cannot be ancient, since men have not ceased as yet to quarrel
and fight, (Lettre 34.) it may be proper to observe, that the absolute
rest of land, like the peace among mankind, will never happen till those
things are changed in their nature and constitution, that is to say,
until the matter of this globe shall be no more a living world, and man
no more an animal that reasons from his proper knowledge, which is still
imperfect. If man must learn to reason, as children learn to speak, he
must reason erroneously before he reasons right; therefore, philosophers
will differ in their opinions as long as there is any thing for man to
learn. But this is right; for, how are false opinions to be corrected,
except in being opposed by the opinions of other men? It is foolish,
indeed, for men to quarrel and fight, because they differ in opinion.
Man quarrels properly, when he is angry; and anger perhaps is almost
always ultimately founded upon erroneous opinion. But, in nature, there
is no opinion; there is truth in every thing that is in nature; and in
man alone is error. Let us, therefore, in studying nature, learn to know
the truth, and not indulge erroneous notions, by endeavouring to
correct, in nature, that which perhaps is only wrong in our opinion.

Having shown that every thing, which is moveable upon the surface of the
land, tends to the sea, however slowly in its pace, we are now to
examine, what comes of those materials deposited within the regions of
the waves, still however within the reach of man, and still subservient
more immediately to that soil on which plants grow, and man may dwell.

As, from the summit of the land, the natural tendency of moveable bodies
is to fall into the water of the sea, so, from the borders of the land
or coast, there being a declivity towards the deepest bottom of the sea,
and there being currents in the waters of the ocean occasionally
rendered more rapid on the shore, every moveable thing must tend to
travel from the coast, and to proceed alone; the shelving bottom of the
sea into the unfathomable deep, when they are beyond the reach of man or
the possibility of returning to the shore.

But it is not every where upon the coast that those materials are
equally delivered; neither is it every where along the shore that the
currents of the ocean are equally perceived, or operate with equal power
in moving bodies along the shelving bottom of the sea. Hence in some
places deep water is found washing rocky coasts, where the waste of land
is only to be perceived from what is visibly wanting in the continuity
of those hard and solid bodies. In other places, again, the land appears
to grow and to encroach upon the space which had been occupied by the
sea; for here the materials of the land are so accumulated on the coast,
that the bottom of the sea is filled up, and dry land is formed in the
bafon of the sea, from those materials which the rivers had brought down
upon the shore. <span id="fr_62"></span>[12](#fn_62)

Holland affords the very best example of this fact. It is a low country
formed in the sea. This low land is situated in the bottom of a deep
bay, or upon the coast of a shallow sea, where more materials are
brought by the great rivers from the land of Germany than what the
currents of the sea can carry out into the deep. Here banks of sand are
gathered together by streams and tides; this sand is blown in hillocks
by the wind; and those sand hills are retained by the plants which have
taken root and fixed those moving sands. Behind that chain of hillocks,
which line the sea shore, the waters of the rivers formed a lake, and
the bottom of this lake had been gradually filled up or heightened by
materials travelling in the rivers, and here finding rest. It grew up
until it became a marsh; then man took possession of the soil; he has
turned it to his own life; and, by artificial ramparts of his forming,
preserves it in the present state, some parts above the level of the
sea, others considerably below the ordinary rise of tides. M de Luc, who
has given a very scientific view of this country in his Lettres
Physiques et Morales, has there also furnished us with the following
register of what had been found by sinking in that soil. It was at
Amsterdam at the year 1605 in making a well.

«Voici la désignation des matières qui furent trouvées en partant de la
surface.

51 pieds, mêlés de sable tourbeux, de fable

des dunes pur et d'argile ou

limon.

22.—-de même sable des dunes pur,

et d'argile bleuâtre.

14.—-du même sable pur.

87 pieds.—Ou rien encore n'indiquoit la

présence de la mer.

55.—-de sable marin, et de limon,

mêles l'un et l'autre de coquilles

dans plusieurs couches.

142 pieds.—Soit la plus grande profondeur,

où s'est manifestée la présence

de la mer.

49.—-Argille dure sans mélange de

coquilles, soit que ce soit une

couche argilleuse continentale,

ou les premiers dépôts des

fleuves; ce qu'il est difficile de

Déterminer.

191 pieds.

13.—-Sable mêlé de pierres; qui est

enfin sûrement le sol vierge

continental.

28.—-Sable pur; continental encore;

car j'ai remarqué partout

dans la Geest, que c'est

dans la couche supérieure, à

une petite profondeur que se

trouvent les pierres; au-dessous

le sable est pur.

232 pieds.—C'est à cette profondeur, ou

dans la masse de ces deux dernières

couches, que se trouva

l'eau douce, et par conséquent

le vrai sol continental.»

The light that we have from this pit which has been made in the soil,
according to my view of the subject, is this, that here is the depth of
232 feet in travelled soil, and no solid bottom found at this distance
from the surface or level of the sea. How far this depth may be from the
bottom of these travelled materials is unknown; but this is certain,
that all that depth, which has been sunk, had been filled up with those
materials <span id="fr_63"></span>[13](#fn_63).

It will thus appear of what unstable materials is composed the land of
that temporary country. It will also be evident, that, by removing the
sand banks of this coast, the whole of this low country would be
swallowed by the sea, notwithstanding every effort that the power of man
could make. But it may be alledged, that those sand banks are increasing
still with the alluvion of Germany, instead of being in a decreasing
state. I should also incline to believe that this is truly the case;
but, though we may acknowledge the growth of land upon the coast of
Holland, we must deny that a stable country can be formed in the bed of
the sea by such means. For, however increasing may be the sand in the
German sea, and however great additions may be made of habitable country
to the coast of Holland, yet, as the islands of Great Britain and
Ireland are worn by attrition on the shores, and are wasted by being
washed away into the ocean, the causes for the accumulation of sand in
the German sea must cease in time, when, in this progress of things, the
sand banks, on which depends the existence of Holland, must diminish,
and at last be swept away, in leaving the solid coast of Germany to be
again buffeted by the waves, as is at present the coasts of Ireland,
France, and Spain.

This reasoning is, indeed, very far removed from that which is commonly
employed for the purpose of conducting human operations, or establishing
the political system of a nation; it is not, however, the less
interesting to man, in that it cannot direct him immediately in his
worldly affairs; and it is the only way of reasoning that can be
employed in order to enlighten man with a view of those operations which
are not to be limited in time, and which are to be concluded as in the
system of nature, a system which man contemplates with much pleasure,
and studies with much profit.

Thus we have shown, that, from the top of the mountain to the shore of
the sea, which are the two extremities of our land, every thing is in a
state of change; the rock and solid strath dissolving, breaking, and
decomposing, for the purpose of becoming soil; the soil travelling along
the surface of the earth, in its way to the shore; and the shore wearing
and wasting by the agitation of the sea, an agitation which is essential
to the purposes of a living world. Without those operations, which wear
and waste the coast, there would not be wind and rain; and, without
those operations which wear and waste the solid land, the surface of the
earth would become sterile. But showers of rain and fertile soil are
necessarily required in the system of this world; consequently, the
dissolution of the rocks, and solid strata of the earth, and the
gradual, flow, but sure destruction of the present land, are operations
necessary in the system of this world; so far from being evils, they are
wisely calculated, in the system of nature, for the general good.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_61"></span>[v2:11](toe31.htm#fr_61) It is from inadvertency
to this fact in natural history, the consuming of vegetable substances
exposed to the influences of the atmosphere, that M. de Luc, in his
*Histoire de la Terre*, has pretended to determine the past duration of
the German heaths as not of a very high antiquity. He has measured the
increase of the vegetable soil, an increase formed by the accumulation
of the decayed heath; and, from the annual increase or deposits of
vegetable matter on that surface, he has formed a calculation which he
then applies to every period of this turfy augmentation, not considering
that there may be definitive causes which increase with this growing
soil, and which, increasing at a greater rate in proportion as the soil
augments, may set a period to the further augmentation of that vegetable
soil. Such is fire in the burning of those parched heaths; such is the
slower but constant and growing operation of the oxygenating atmosphere
upon this turfy substance exposed to the air and moisture. This author
has very well described the constant augmentation of this vegetable
substance in the morasses of that country, as it also happens in those
of our own; but there is a wide difference in those two cases of peat
bog and healthy turf; the vegetable substance in the morass is under
water, and therefore has its inflammable quality or combustible
substance protected from the consuming operation of the vital or
atmospheric air; the turfy soil, on the contrary, is exposed to this
source of resolution in the other situation.

<span id="fn_62"></span>[v2:12](toe31.htm#fr_62) We are not however to
estimate this operation, of forming soil by the muddy waters of a river
depositing sediment, in the manner that M. de Luc has endeavoured to
calculate the short time elapsed in forming the marshlands of the Elbe.
This philosopher, with a view to show that the present earth has not
subsisted long since the time it had appeared above the surface of the
sea, has given an example of the marsh of *Wisebhafen* where the earth,
wasted by inundation, was in a very little time replaced, and the soil
heightened by the flowings of the Elbe, and this he marks as a leading
fact or principle, in calculating the past duration of our continents,
of which he says, we are not to lose sight (Tome 5, p. 136.) But here
this philosopher does not seem to be aware, that he is calculating upon
very false grounds, when he compares two things which are by no means
alike, the natural operations of a river upon its banks, making and
unmaking occasionally its haughs or level lands, that is to say,
alternately making and destroying, and the artificial operations of man
receiving the muddy water of a tide-way into the still water of a pond
formed by his ramparts; yet, it is by this last operation that our
author forms an estimate which he applies to the age of this earth, in
calculating how long time might have been required for producing the
marsh lands of the Elbe.

I would here ask if he can calculate what time it may have required to
hollow out the bed of the Elbe from its source to the sea; and to tell
how often the marsh-lands, which he now sees cultivated, had been formed
and destroyed by the river before they were cultivated in their present
state; or if there is any security that they shall not again be taken
away by the river, and again formed in the same place. If this is the
case, that the river is constantly changing the fertile lands, which it
forms by its inundation, what judgement are we to form by calculating
the quantity of sediment in a certain measure of its muddy water.

<span id="fn_63"></span>[v2:13](toe31.htm#fr_63) An interesting map for
the use of natural history would be made by tracing the places (behind
this country of loose or travelled soil) where the solid strata appear
above the level of the sea. We should be thus able to form some notion
of the quantity of materials which had been deposited in the water of
this sea. But, though we might thus enlarge our views a little with
regard to the transactions of time past, it would only be in a most
imperfect manner that we would thus form a judgment; for, not knowing
the quantity of sand and mud carried out by the currents from the German
sea into the Atlantic, we could only thus perceive a certain minimum,
which is perhaps a little portion of the whole.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VIII. The present Form of the Surface of the Earth
explained, with a View of the Operation of Time upon our Land](toe32)
