[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2080299)  [Next](2080301) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ix.ccxxviii"></span>

<span id="ix.ccxxviii-p1"></span> <span id="page_270">p. 270</span>
<span id="ix.ccxxviii-Page_270"></span><span class="c18"><span
id="ix.ccxxviii-p1.1"></span>Letter CCXXVII. <span
id="fr_2928"></span>[2929](#fn_2928) </span>

<span id="ix.ccxxviii-p3"></span>*Consolatory, to the clergy of
Colonia*. <span id="fr_2929"></span>[2930](#fn_2929)

<span id="ix.ccxxviii-p5"></span><span class="c14"><span
id="ix.ccxxviii-p5.1"></span>What</span> is so goodly and honourable
before God and men as perfect love, which, as we are told by the wise
teacher, is the fulfilling of the law? <span
id="fr_2930"></span>[2931](#fn_2930)   I therefore approve of your warm
affection for your bishop, for, as to an affectionate son the loss of a
good father is unendurable, so Christ’s Church cannot bear the departure
of a pastor and teacher.  Thus, in your exceeding affection for your
bishop, you are giving proof of a good and noble disposition.  But this
your good will towards your spiritual father is to be approved so long
as it is shewn in reason and moderation; once let it begin to overstep
this line, and it is no longer descrying of the same commendation.  In
the case of your very God-beloved brother, our fellow-minister
Euphronius, good government has been shewn by those to whom has been
committed the administration of the Church; they have acted as the
occasion compelled them, to the gain alike of the Church to which he has
been removed and of yourselves from whom he has been taken.  Do not look
at this as merely of man’s ordaining, nor as having been originated by
the calculations of men who regard earthly things.  Believe that those
to whom the anxious care of the Churches belongs have acted, as they
have, with the aid of the Holy Spirit; impress this inception of the
proceedings on your hearts and do your best to perfect it.  Accept
quietly and thankfully what has happened, with the conviction that all,
who refuse to accept what is ordered in God’s Churches by the Churches,
are resisting the ordinance of God. <span
id="fr_2931"></span>[2932](#fn_2931)   Do not enter into a dispute with
your Mother Church at Nicopolis.  Do not exasperate yourselves against
those who have taken the anxious responsibility of your souls.  In the
firm establishment of things at Nicopolis your part in them may also be
preserved; but if some disturbance affects them, though you have
protectors beyond number, with the head the heart will be destroyed.  It
is like men who live on the riverside; when they see some one far up the
stream making a strong dam against the current, they know that, in
stopping the inrush of the current, he is providing for their safety. 
Just so those who have now undertaken the weight of the care of the
Churches, by protecting the rest, are proving for your own security. 
You will be sheltered from every storm, while others have to bear the
brunt of the attack.  But you ought also to consider this; he has not
cast you off; he has taken others into his charge.  I am not so
invidious as to compel the man, who is able to give a share of his good
gifts to others, also to confine his favour to you, and to limit it to
your own city.  A man who puts a fence round a spring, and spoils the
outpour of the waters, is not free from the disease of envy, and it is
just the same with him who tries to prevent the further flow of abundant
teaching.  Let him have some care for Nicopolis too, and let your
interests be added to his anxieties there.  He has received an addition
of labour, but there is no diminution in his diligence on your behalf. 
I am really distressed at one thing that you have said, which seems to
me quite extravagant, namely, that if you cannot obtain your object, you
will betake yourselves to the tribunals, and put the matter into the
hands of men, the great object of whose prayers is the overthrow of the
Churches.  Take heed lest men, carried away by unwise passions, persuade
you, to your hurt, to put in any plea before the courts, and so some
catastrophe may ensue, and the weight of the result fall upon the heads
of those who have occasioned it.  Take my advice.  It is offered you in
a fatherly spirit.  Consent to the arrangement with the very God-beloved
bishops, which has been made in accordance with God’s will.  Wait for my
arrival.  When I am with you, with God’s help, I will give you in person
all the exhortations which it has been impossible for me to express in
my letter, and will do my utmost to give you all possible consolation,
not by word but in deed.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2928"></span>[270:2929](2080300.htm#fr_2928) <span
id="ix.ccxxviii-p1.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ccxxviii-p2"></span> Placed in 375.

<span id="fn_2929"></span>[270:2930](2080300.htm#fr_2929) <span
id="ix.ccxxviii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ccxxviii-p4"></span> *i.e.*in Armenia.  *cf. Letter* cxcv.
p. 234.  The removal of Euphronius to Nicopolis was occasioned by the
death of Theodotus and the consecration of Fronto by the Eustathians, to
whom the orthodox Colonians would not submit.

<span id="fn_2930"></span>[270:2931](2080300.htm#fr_2930) <span
id="ix.ccxxviii-p5.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ccxxviii-p6"></span> [Rom. xiii.
10](../../../bib/kjv/rom013.htm#010)<span id="ix.ccxxviii-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2931"></span>[270:2932](2080300.htm#fr_2931) <span
id="ix.ccxxviii-p6.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ccxxviii-p7"></span> *cf*. [Rom. xiii.
2](../../../bib/kjv/rom013.htm#002)<span id="ix.ccxxviii-p7.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: To the magistrates of Colonia.](2080301)
