[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2080208)  [Next](2080210) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ix.cxxxvii"></span>

<span id="ix.cxxxvii-p1"></span> <span class="c18"><span
id="ix.cxxxvii-p1.1"></span>Letter CXXXVI. <span
id="fr_2444"></span>[2445](#fn_2444) </span>

<span id="ix.cxxxvii-p3"></span>*To Eusebius, bishop of Samosata*. <span
id="fr_2445"></span>[2446](#fn_2445)

<span id="ix.cxxxvii-p5"></span>1.  <span class="c14"><span
id="ix.cxxxvii-p5.1"></span>In</span> what state the good Isaaces has
found me, he himself will best explain to you; though his tongue cannot
be tragic enough to describe my sufferings, so great was my illness. 
However, any one who knows me ever so little, will be able to conjecture
what it was.  For, if when I am called well, I am weaker even than
persons who are given over, you may fancy what I was when thus ill. 
Yet, since disease is my natural state, it would follow (let a fever
have its jest) that in this change of habit, my health became especially
flourishing.  But it is the scourge of the Lord which goes on increasing
my pain according to my deserts; therefore I have received illness upon
illness, so that now even a child may see that this shell of mine must
for certain fail, unless perchance, God’s mercy vouchsafe to me, in His
long suffering, time for repentance, and now, as often before, extricate
me from evils beyond human cure.  This shall be, as it is pleasing to
Him and good for myself.

<span id="ix.cxxxvii-p6"></span>2.  I need hardly tell you how
deplorable and hopeless is the condition of the Churches.  Now, for the
sake of our own safety, we neglect our neighbour’s, and do not even seem
able to see that general disaster involves individual ruin.  Least of
all need I say this to one who, like yourself, foresaw the future from
afar, and has foretold and proclaimed it and has been among the first to
be roused, and to rouse the rest, writing letters, coming yourself in
person, leaving no deed undone, no word unspoken.  I remember this in
every instance, but yet we are none the better off.  Now, indeed, were
not my sins in the way, (first of all, my dear brother the reverend
deacon Eustathius fell seriously ill and detained me two whole months,
looking day by day for his restoration to health; and then all about me
fell sick; brother Isaaces will tell you the rest; then last of all I
myself was attacked by this complaint) I should long ago have been to
see your excellency, not indeed thereby to try to improve the general
state of affairs, but to get some good for myself from your society.  I
had made up my mind to get out of the reach of the ecclesiastical
artillery, because I am quite unprepared to meet my enemies’ attacks. 
May God’s mighty hand preserve you for all of us, as a noble guardian of
the faith, and a vigilant champion of the Churches; and grant me, before
I die, to meet you for the comfort of my soul.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2444"></span>[201:2445](2080209.htm#fr_2444) <span
id="ix.cxxxvii-p1.2"></span>

<span id="ix.cxxxvii-p2"></span> Placed in 373.

<span id="fn_2445"></span>[201:2446](2080209.htm#fr_2445) <span
id="ix.cxxxvii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ix.cxxxvii-p4"></span> On his own sickness and the troubles of
the Church.  On his bad health, *cf. Letters* ix., xxvii., cxcviii.,
ccii., cciii., and ccxvi.  The translation of the first section is
Newman’s.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: To Antipater, on his assuming the governorship of
Cappadocia.](2080210)
