[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2080286)  [Next](2080288) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ix.ccxv"></span>

<span id="ix.ccxv-p1"></span> <span class="c18"><span
id="ix.ccxv-p1.1"></span>Letter CCXIV. <span
id="fr_2808"></span>[2809](#fn_2808) </span>

<span id="ix.ccxv-p3"></span>*To Count Terentius.* <span
id="fr_2809"></span>[2810](#fn_2809)

<span id="ix.ccxv-p5"></span>1. <span class="c14"><span
id="ix.ccxv-p5.1"></span>When</span> I heard that your excellency had
again been compelled to take part in public affairs, I was straightway
distressed (for the truth must be told) at the thought of how contrary
to your mind it must be that you after once giving up the anxieties of
official life, and allowing yourself leisure for the care of your soul,
should again be forced back into your old career.  But then I bethought
me that peradventure the Lord has ordained that your lordship should
again appear in public from this wish to grant the boon of one
alleviation for the countless pains which now beset the Church in our
part of the world.  I am, moreover, cheered by the thought that I am
about to meet your excellency once again before I depart this life.

<span id="ix.ccxv-p6"></span>2.  But a further rumour has reached me
that you are in Antioch, and are transacting the business in hand with
the chief authorities.  And, besides this, I have heard that the
brethren who are of the party of Paulinus are entering on some
discussion with your excellency on the subject of union with us; and by
“us” I mean those who are supporters of the blessed man of God,
Meletius. <span id="fr_2810"></span>[2811](#fn_2810)   I hear, moreover,
that the Paulinians are carrying about a letter of the Westerns, <span
id="fr_2811"></span>[2812](#fn_2811) assigning to them the episcopate of
the Church in Antioch, but speaking under a false impression of
Meletius, the admirable bishop of the true Church of God.  I am not
astonished at this.  They <span id="fr_2812"></span>[2813](#fn_2812) are
totally ignorant of what is going on here; the others, though they might
be supposed to know, give an account to them in which party is put
before truth; and it is only what one might expect that they should
either be ignorant of the truth, or should even endeavour to conceal the
reasons which led the blessed Bishop Athanasius to write to Paulinus. 
But your excellency has on the spot those who are able to tell you
accurately what passed between the bishops in the reign of Jovian, and
from them I beseech you to get information. <span
id="fr_2813"></span>[2814](#fn_2813)   I accuse no one; I pray that I
may have love to all, and “especially unto them who are of the household
of faith;” <span id="fr_2814"></span>[2815](#fn_2814) and therefore I
congratulate those who have received the letter from Rome.  And,
although it is a grand testimony in their favour, I only hope it is true
and confirmed by facts.  But I shall never be able to persuade myself on
these grounds to ignore Meletius, or to forget the Church which is under
him, or to treat as small, and of little importance to the true
religion, the questions which originated the division.  I shall never
consent to give in, merely because somebody is very much elated at
receiving a letter from <span id="page_254">p. 254</span> <span
id="ix.ccxv-Page_254"></span>men. <span
id="fr_2815"></span>[2816](#fn_2815)   Even if it had come down from
heaven itself, but he does not agree with the sound doctrine of the
faith, I cannot look upon him as in communion with the saints.

<span id="ix.ccxv-p13"></span>3.  Consider well, my excellent friend,
that the falsifiers of the truth, who have introduced the Arian schism
as an innovation on the sound faith of the Fathers, advance no other
reason for refusing to accept the pious opinion of the Fathers than the
meaning of the homoousion which they hold in their wickedness, and to
the slander of the whole faith, alleging our contention to be that the
Son is consubstantial in hypostasis.  If we give them any opportunity by
our being carried away by men who propound these sentiments and their
like, rather from simplicity than from malevolence, there is nothing to
prevent our giving them an unanswerable ground of argument against
ourselves and confirming the heresy of those whose one end is in all
their utterances about the Church, not so much to establish their own
position as to calumniate mine.  What more serious calumny could there
be?  What better calculated to disturb the faith of the majority than
that some of us could be shewn to assert that there is one hypostasis of
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost?  We distinctly lay down that there is a
difference of Persons; but this statement was anticipated by Sabellius,
who affirms that God is one by hypostasis, but is described by Scripture
in different Persons, according to the requirements of each individual
case; sometimes under the name of Father, when there is occasion for
this Person; sometimes under the name of Son when there is a descent to
human interests or any of the operations of the œconomy; <span
id="fr_2816"></span>[2817](#fn_2816) and sometimes under the Person of
Spirit when the occasion demands such phraseology.  If, then, any among
us are shewn to assert that Father, Son and Holy Ghost are one in
substance, <span id="fr_2817"></span>[2818](#fn_2817) while we maintain
the three perfect Persons, how shall we escape giving clear and
incontrovertible proof of the truth of what is being asserted about us?

<span id="ix.ccxv-p16"></span>4.  The non-identity of <span
class="c59"><span id="ix.ccxv-p16.1"></span>hypostasis</span> and <span
class="c59"><span id="ix.ccxv-p16.2"></span>ousia</span> is, I take it,
suggested even by our western brethren, where, from a suspicion of the
inadequacy of their own language, they have given the word *<span
class="c59"><span id="ix.ccxv-p16.3"></span>ousia</span>* in the Greek,
to the end that any possible difference of meaning might be preserved in
the clear and unconfounded distinction of terms.  If you ask me to state
shortly my own view, I shall state that <span class="c59"><span
id="ix.ccxv-p16.4"></span>ousia</span> has the same relation to
hypostasis as the common has to the particular.  Every one of us both
shares in existence by the common term of *essence* (<span
class="c59"><span id="ix.ccxv-p16.5"></span>ousia</span>) and by his own
properties is such an one and such an one.  In the same manner, in the
matter in question, the term <span class="c59"><span
id="ix.ccxv-p16.6"></span>ousia</span> is common, like goodness, or
Godhead, or any similar attribute; while hypostasis is contemplated in
the special property of Fatherhood, Sonship, or the power to sanctify. 
If then they describe the Persons as being without hypostasis, <span
id="fr_2818"></span>[2819](#fn_2818) the statement is *per se* absurd;
but if they concede that the Persons exist in real hypostasis, as they
acknowledge, let them so reckon them that the principle of the <span
class="c59"><span id="ix.ccxv-p17.3"></span>homoousion</span> may be
preserved in the unity of the Godhead, and that the doctrine preached
may be the recognition of true religion, of Father, Son, and Holy Ghost,
in the perfect and complete hypostasis of each of the Persons named. 
Nevertheless, there is one point which I should like to have pressed on
your excellency, that you and all who like you care for the truth, and
honour the combatant in the cause of true religion, ought to wait for
the lead to be taken in bringing about this union and peace by the
foremost authorities in the Church, whom I count as pillars and
foundations of the truth and of the Church, and reverence all the more
because they have been sent away for punishment, and have been exiled
far from home.  Keep yourself, I implore you, clear of prejudice, that
in you, whom God has given me as a staff and support in all things, I
may be able to find rest. <span id="fr_2819"></span>[2820](#fn_2819)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2808"></span>[253:2809](2080287.htm#fr_2808) <span
id="ix.ccxv-p1.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ccxv-p2"></span> Placed in 375.

<span id="fn_2809"></span>[253:2810](2080287.htm#fr_2809) <span
id="ix.ccxv-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ccxv-p4"></span> *cf. Letters* xcix. and cv.

<span id="fn_2810"></span>[253:2811](2080287.htm#fr_2810) <span
id="ix.ccxv-p6.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ccxv-p7"></span> On the divisions of Antioch, *cf*. Theod.,
*H.E.* iii. 2.  Basil was no doubt taking the wise course in supporting
Meletius, whose personal orthodoxy was unimpeachable.  But the
irreconcilable Eustathians could not forgive him his Arian nomination.

<span id="fn_2811"></span>[253:2812](2080287.htm#fr_2811) <span
id="ix.ccxv-p7.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ccxv-p8"></span> This description might apply to either of
the two letters written by Damasus to Paulinus on the subject of the
admission to communion of Vitalius, bishop of the Apollinarian schism at
Antioch.  (Labbe. *Conc*. ii. 864 and 900, and Theod. *H.E.* v. ii.) 
The dates may necessitate its being referred to the former.

<span id="fn_2812"></span>[253:2813](2080287.htm#fr_2812) <span
id="ix.ccxv-p8.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ccxv-p9"></span> *i.e.* the Westerns.

<span id="fn_2813"></span>[253:2814](2080287.htm#fr_2813) <span
id="ix.ccxv-p9.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ccxv-p10"></span> *cf. Letter* cclviii. and the
*Prolegomena* to Athanasius in this edition, p. lxi.  The events
referred to took place in the winter of 363, when Athanasius was at
Antioch, and in the early part of 364 on his return to Alexandria.

<span id="fn_2814"></span>[253:2815](2080287.htm#fr_2814) <span
id="ix.ccxv-p10.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ccxv-p11"></span> [Gal. vi.
10](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#010)<span id="ix.ccxv-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2815"></span>[254:2816](2080287.htm#fr_2815) <span
id="ix.ccxv-p11.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ccxv-p12"></span> St. Basil seems quite unaware of any
paramount authority in a letter from Rome.  *cf*. *Prolegomena*.

<span id="fn_2816"></span>[254:2817](2080287.htm#fr_2816) <span
id="ix.ccxv-p13.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ccxv-p14"></span> *Vide* notes, pp. 7 and 12.  On
Sabellius, *cf*. note on *Letter* ccxxxvi.

<span id="fn_2817"></span>[254:2818](2080287.htm#fr_2817) <span
id="ix.ccxv-p14.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ccxv-p15"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.ccxv-p15.1"></span>τὸ ὑποκείμενον</span>.

<span id="fn_2818"></span>[254:2819](2080287.htm#fr_2818) <span
id="ix.ccxv-p16.7"></span>

<span id="ix.ccxv-p17"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.ccxv-p17.1"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.ccxv-p17.2"></span>νυπόστατα</span>

<span id="fn_2819"></span>[254:2820](2080287.htm#fr_2819) <span
id="ix.ccxv-p17.4"></span>

<span id="ix.ccxv-p18"></span> On the point treated of in this letter,
*cf*. note on p. 5 and *Letter* xxxviii. p. 137.  But in the *De S.S.
cap*. 38 (p. 23) St. Basil himself repudiates the assertion of three
“*original hypostases*,” when he is apparently using <span
class="Greek"><span id="ix.ccxv-p18.1"></span>ὑ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="ix.ccxv-p18.2"></span>πόστασις</span> in the
Nicene sense.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: To the Presbyter Dorotheus.](2080288)
