[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2080170)  [Next](2080172) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ix.xcix"></span>

<span id="ix.xcix-p1"></span> <span class="c18"><span
id="ix.xcix-p1.1"></span>Letter XCVIII. <span
id="fr_2342"></span>[2343](#fn_2342) </span>

<span id="ix.xcix-p3"></span>*To Eusebius, bishop of Samosata*. <span
id="fr_2343"></span>[2344](#fn_2343)

<span id="ix.xcix-p5"></span>1.  <span class="c14"><span
id="ix.xcix-p5.1"></span>After</span> receiving the letter of your
holiness, in which you said you would not come, I was most anxious to
set out for Nicopolis, but I have grown weaker in my wish and have
remembered all my infirmity.  I bethought me, too, of the lack of
seriousness in the conduct of those who invited me.  They gave me a
casual invitation by the hands of our reverend brother Hellenius, the
surveyor of customs at Nazianzus, but they never took the trouble to
send a messenger to remind me, or any one to escort me.  As, for my
sins, I was an object of suspicion to them, I shrank from sullying the
brightness of their meeting by my presence.  In company with your
excellency I do not shrink from stripping for even serious trials of
strength; but apart from you I feel myself hardly equal even to looking
at every day troubles.  Since, then, my meeting with them was intended
to be about Church affairs, I let the time of the festival go by, and
put off the meeting to a period of rest and freedom from distraction,
and have decided to go to Nicopolis to discuss the needs of the Churches
with the godly bishop Meletius, in case he should decline to go to
Samosata.  If he agrees, I shall hasten to meet him, provided this is
made clear to me by both of you, by him in reply to me (for I have
written), and by your reverence.

<span id="ix.xcix-p6"></span>2.  We were to have met the bishops of
Cappadocia Secunda, who, directly they were ranked under another
prefecture, suddenly got the idea that they were made foreigners and
strangers to me.  They ignored me, as though they had never been under
my jurisdiction, and had nothing to do with me.  I was expecting too a
second meeting with the reverend bishop Eustathius, which actually took
place.  For on account of the cry raised by many against him that he was
injuring the faith, I met him, and found, by God’s grace, that he was
heartily following all orthodoxy.  By the fault of the very men who
ought to have conveyed my letter, that of the bishop was not transmitted
to your excellency, and, harassed as I was by a multitude of cares, it
escaped my memory.

<span id="ix.xcix-p7"></span>I, too, was anxious that our brother
Gregory <span id="fr_2344"></span>[2345](#fn_2344) should have the
government of a Church commensurate with his abilities; and that would
have been the whole Church under the sun gathered into one place.  But,
as this is impossible, let him be a bishop, not deriving dignity from
his see, but conferring dignity on his see by himself.  For it is the
part of a really great man not only to be sufficient for great things,
but by his own influence to make small things great.

<span id="ix.xcix-p9"></span>But what is to be done to Palmatius, <span
id="fr_2345"></span>[2346](#fn_2345) who, after so many exhortations of
the brethren, still helps Maximus in his persecutions?  Even now they do
not hesitate to write to him.  They are prevented from coming themselves
by bodily weakness and their own occupations.  Believe me, very godly
Father, our own affairs are much in need of your presence, and yet once
more you must put your honourable old age in motion, that you may give
your support to Cappadocia, which is now tottering and in danger of
falling.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2342"></span>[182:2343](2080171.htm#fr_2342) <span
id="ix.xcix-p1.2"></span>

<span id="ix.xcix-p2"></span> Placed in 372.

<span id="fn_2343"></span>[182:2344](2080171.htm#fr_2343) <span
id="ix.xcix-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xcix-p4"></span> On a proposed meeting of bishops, with an
allusion to the consecration of the younger Gregory.

<span id="fn_2344"></span>[182:2345](2080171.htm#fr_2344) <span
id="ix.xcix-p7.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xcix-p8"></span> Tillemont supposes the reference to be to
Gregory of Nyssa.  Maran, however (*Vit. Bas*. xxiv.), regards this as
an error, partly caused by the introduction into the text of the word
<span class="Greek"><span id="ix.xcix-p8.1"></span>ἐ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="ix.xcix-p8.2"></span>μόν</span>, which he has
eliminated; and he points out the Gregory of Nyssa, however unwilling to
accept consecration, never objected after it had taken place, and was
indeed sent to Nazianzus to console the younger Gregory of that place in
his distress under like circumstances.  Moreover, Gregory of Nyssa was
consecrated in the ordinary manner on the demand of the people and
clergy with the assent of the bishops of the province.  (*cf. Letter*
ccxxv.)  Gregory the younger, however, was consecrated to Sasima without
these formalities.

<span id="fn_2345"></span>[182:2346](2080171.htm#fr_2345) <span
id="ix.xcix-p9.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xcix-p10"></span> Maran (*Vit. Bas*. xxiv.) notes that he
knows nothing about Palmatius, and supposes that by “persecutions” are
meant not persecutions in the ecclesiastical sense, but severities in
the exaction of tribute.  In *Letter* cxlvii. Basil calls Maximus “a
very good man,” praise which he is not likely to have given to a
persecutor.  Maximus succeeded Elias, and probably inaugurated a new
régime of strict exaction.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: To Count Terentius.](2080172)
