[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2080070)  [Next](2080072) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="viii.x"></span>

<span id="viii.x-p1"></span> <span class="c18"><span
id="viii.x-p1.1"></span>Homily IX.</span>

<span id="viii.x-p2"></span>The creation of terrestrial animals.

<span id="viii.x-p3"></span>1.  <span class="c14"><span
id="viii.x-p3.1"></span>How</span> did you like the fare of my morning’s
discourse?  It seemed to me that I had the good intentions of a poor
giver of a feast, who, ambitious of having the credit of keeping a good
table saddens his guests by the poor supply of the more expensive
dishes.  In vain he lavishly covers his table with his mean fare; his
ambition only shows his folly.  It is for you to judge if I have shared
the same fate.  Yet, whatever my discourse may have been, take care lest
you disregard it.  No one refused to sit at the table of Elisha; and yet
he only gave his friends wild vegetables. <span
id="fr_1689"></span>[1690](#fn_1689)   I know the laws of allegory,
though less by myself than from the works of others.  There are those
truly, who do not admit the common sense of the Scriptures, for whom
water is not water, but some other nature, who see in a plant, in a
fish, what their fancy wishes, who change the nature of reptiles and of
wild beasts to suit their allegories, like the interpreters of dreams
who explain visions in sleep to make them serve their own ends.  For me
grass is grass; plant, fish, wild beast, domestic animal, I take all in
the literal sense. <span id="fr_1690"></span>[1691](#fn_1690)   “For I
am not ashamed of the gospel.” <span
id="fr_1691"></span>[1692](#fn_1691)   Those who have written about the
nature of the universe have discussed at length the shape of the earth. 
If it be spherical or cylindrical, if it resemble a disc and is equally
rounded in all parts, or if it has the forth of a winnowing basket and
is hollow in the middle; <span id="fr_1692"></span>[1693](#fn_1692) all
these conjectures have been suggested by cosmographers, each one
upsetting that of his predecessor.  It will not lead me to give less
importance to the creation of the universe, that the servant of God,
Moses, is silent as to shapes; <span id="page_102">p. 102</span> <span
id="viii.x-Page_102"></span>he has not said that the earth is a hundred
and eighty thousand furlongs in circumference; he has not measured into
what extent of air its shadow projects itself whilst the sun revolves
around it, nor stated how this shadow, casting itself upon the moon,
produces eclipses.  He has passed over in silence, as useless, all that
is unimportant for us.  Shall I then prefer foolish wisdom to the
oracles of the Holy Spirit?  Shall I not rather exalt Him who, not
wishing to fill our minds with these vanities, has regulated all the
economy of Scripture in view of the edification and the making perfect
of our souls?  It is this which those seem to me not to have understood,
who, giving themselves up to the distorted meaning of allegory, have
undertaken to give a majesty of their own invention to Scripture.  It is
to believe themselves wiser than the Holy Spirit, and to bring forth
their own ideas under a pretext of exegesis.  Let us hear Scripture as
it has been written.

<span id="viii.x-p9"></span>2.  “*Let the earth bring forth the living
creature*.” <span id="fr_1693"></span>[1694](#fn_1693)   Behold the word
of God pervading creation, beginning even then the efficacy which is
seen displayed to-day, and will be displayed to the end of the world! 
As a ball, which one pushes, if it meet a declivity, descends, carried
by its form and the nature of the ground and does not stop until it has
reached a level surface; so nature, once put in motion by the Divine
command, traverses creation with an equal step, through birth and death,
and keeps up the succession of kinds through resemblance, to the
last. <span id="fr_1694"></span>[1695](#fn_1694)   Nature always makes a
horse succeed to a horse, a lion to a lion, an eagle to an eagle, and
preserving each animal by these uninterrupted successions she transmits
it to the end of all things.  Animals do not see their peculiarities
destroyed or effaced by any length of time; their nature, as though it
had been just constituted, follows the course of ages, for ever
young. <span id="fr_1695"></span>[1696](#fn_1695)   “Let the earth bring
forth the living creature.”  This command has continued and earth does
not cease to obey the Creator.  For, if there are creatures which are
successively produced by their predecessors, there are others that even
to-day we see born from the earth itself.  In wet weather she brings
forth grasshoppers and an immense number of insects which fly in the air
and have no names because they are so small; she also produces mice and
frogs.  In the environs of Thebes in Egypt, after abundant rain in hot
weather, the country is covered with field mice. <span
id="fr_1696"></span>[1697](#fn_1696)   We see mud alone produce eels;
they do not proceed from an egg, nor in any other manner; it is the
earth alone which gives them birth. <span
id="fr_1697"></span>[1698](#fn_1697)   Let the earth produce a living
creature.”

<span id="viii.x-p22"></span>Cattle are terrestrial and bent towards the
earth.  Man, a celestial growth, rises superior to them as much by the
mould of his bodily conformation as by the dignity of his soul.  What is
the form of quadrupeds?  Their head is bent towards the earth and looks
towards their belly, and only pursues their belly’s good.  Thy head, O
man! is turned towards heaven; thy eyes look up. <span
id="fr_1698"></span>[1699](#fn_1698)   When therefore thou degradest
thyself by the passions of the flesh, slave of thy belly, and thy lowest
parts, thou approachest animals without reason and becomest like one of
them. <span id="fr_1699"></span>[1700](#fn_1699)   Thou art called to
more noble cares; “seek those things which are above where Christ
sitteth.” <span id="fr_1700"></span>[1701](#fn_1700)   Raise thy soul
above the earth; draw from its natural conformation the rule of thy
conduct; fix thy conversation in heaven.  Thy true country is the
heavenly Jerusalem; <span id="fr_1701"></span>[1702](#fn_1701) thy
fellow-citizens and thy compatriots are “the first-born which are
written in heaven.” <span id="fr_1702"></span>[1703](#fn_1702)

<span id="viii.x-p28"></span>3.  “*Let the earth bring forth the living
creature*.”  Thus when the soul of brutes appeared it was not concealed
in the earth, but it was born by the command of God.  Brutes have one
and the same soul of which the common characteristic is absence of
reason.  But each animal is distinguished by peculiar qualities.  The ox
is steady, the ass is lazy, the horse has strong passions, the wolf
cannot be tamed, the fox is deceitful, the stag timid, the ant
industrious, the dog grateful and faithful in his friendships.  As each
animal was created the distinctive character of his nature appeared in
him in due measure; in the lion spirit, taste for solitary life, an
unsociable character.  True tyrant of animals, he, in his natural
arrogance, admits but few to share his honours.  He disdains his
yesterday’s food and never re<span id="page_103">p. 103</span> <span
id="viii.x-Page_103"></span>turns to the remains of the prey.  Nature
has provided his organs of voice with such great force that often much
swifter animals are caught by his roaring alone.  The panther, violent
and impetuous in his leaps, has a body fitted for his activity and
lightness, in accord with the movements of his soul.  The bear has a
sluggish nature, ways of its own, a sly character, and is very secret;
therefore it has an analogous body, heavy, thick, without articulations
such as are necessary for a cold dweller in dens.

<span id="viii.x-p29"></span>When we consider the natural and innate
care that these creatures without reason take of their lives we shall be
induced to watch over ourselves and to think of the salvation of our
souls; or rather we shall be the more condemned when we are found
falling short even of the imitation of brutes.  The bear, which often
gets severely wounded, cares for himself and cleverly fills the wounds
with mullein, a plant whose nature is very astringent.  You will also
see the fox heal his wounds with droppings from the pine tree; the
tortoise, gorged with the flesh of the viper, finds in the virtue of
marjoram a specific against this venomous animal <span
id="fr_1703"></span>[1704](#fn_1703) and the serpent heals sore eyes by
eating fennel. <span id="fr_1704"></span>[1705](#fn_1704)

<span id="viii.x-p33"></span>And is not reasoning intelligence eclipsed
by animals in their provision for atmospheric changes?  Do we not see
sheep, when winter is approaching, devouring grass with avidity as if to
make provision for future scarcity?  Do we not also see oxen, long
confined in the winter season, recognise the return of spring by a
natural sensation, and look to the end of their stables towards the
doors, all turning their heads there by common consent?  Studious
observers have remarked that the hedgehog makes an opening at the two
extremities of his hole.  If the wind from the north is going to blow he
shuts up the aperture which looks towards the north; if the south wind
succeeds it the animal passes to the northern door. <span
id="fr_1705"></span>[1706](#fn_1705)   What lesson do these animals
teach man?  They not only show us in our Creator a care which extends to
all beings, but a certain presentiment of future even in brutes.  Then
we ought not to attach ourselves to this present life and ought to give
all heed to that which is to come.  Will you not be industrious for
yourself, O man?  And will you not lay up in the present age rest in
that which is to come, after having seen the example of the ant?  The
ant during summer collects treasures for winter.  Far from giving itself
up to idleness, before this season has made it feel its severity, it
hastens to work with an invincible zeal until it has abundantly filled
its storehouses.  Here again, how far it is from being negligent!  With
what wise foresight it manages so as to keep its provisions as long as
possible!  With its pincers it cuts the grains in half, for fear lest
they should germinate and not serve for its food.  If they are damp it
dries them; and it does not spread them out in all weathers, but when it
feels that the air will keep of a mild temperature.  Be sure that you
will never see rain fall from the clouds so long as the ant has left the
grain out. <span id="fr_1706"></span>[1707](#fn_1706)

<span id="viii.x-p39"></span>What language can attain to the marvels of
the Creator?  What ear could understand them?  And what time would be
sufficient to relate them?  Let us say, then, with the prophet, “O Lord,
how manifold are thy works! in wisdom hast thou made them all.” <span
id="fr_1707"></span>[1708](#fn_1707)   We shall not be able to say in
self-justification, that we have learnt useful knowledge in books, since
the untaught law of nature makes us choose that which is advantageous to
us.  Do you know what good you ought to do your neighbour?  The good
that you expect from him yourself.  Do you know what is evil?  That
which you would not wish another to do to you.  Neither botanical
researches nor the experience of simples have made animals discover
those which are useful to them; but each knows naturally what is
salutary and marvellously appropriates what suits its nature.

<span id="viii.x-p41"></span>4.  Virtues exist in us also by nature, and
the soul has affinity with them not by education, but by nature
herself.  We do not need lessons to hate illness, but by ourselves we
repel what afflicts us, the soul has no need of a master to teach us to
avoid vice.  Now all vice is a sickness of the soul as virtue is its
health.  Thus those have defined health well who have called it a
regularity in the discharge of natural functions; a definition that can
be applied without fear to the good condition of the soul.  Thus,
without having need of lessons, the soul can attain by herself to what
is fit and conformable to nature. <span
id="fr_1708"></span>[1709](#fn_1708)   Hence it <span id="page_104">p.
104</span> <span id="viii.x-Page_104"></span>comes that temperance
everywhere is praised, justice is in honour, courage admired, and
prudence the object of all aims; virtues which concern the soul more
than health concerns the body.  Children love <span
id="fr_1709"></span>[1710](#fn_1709) your parents, and you, “parents
provoke not your children to wrath.” <span
id="fr_1710"></span>[1711](#fn_1710)   Does not nature say the same? 
Paul teaches us nothing new; he only tightens the links of nature.  If
the lioness loves her cubs, if the she wolf fights to defend her little
ones, what shall man say who is unfaithful to the precept and violates
nature herself; or the son who insults the old age of his father; or the
father whose second marriage has made him forget his first children?

<span id="viii.x-p45"></span>With animals invincible affection unites
parents with children.  It is the Creator, God Himself, who substitutes
the strength of feeling for reason in them.  From whence it comes that a
lamb as it bounds from the fold, in the midst of a thousand sheep
recognises the colour and the voice of its mother, runs to her, and
seeks its own sources of milk.  If its mother’s udders are dry, it is
content, and, without stopping, passes by more abundant ones.  And how
does the mother recognise it among the many lambs?  All have the same
voice, the same colour, the same smell, as far at least as regards our
sense of smell.  Yet there is in these animals a more subtle sense than
our perception which makes them recognise their own. <span
id="fr_1711"></span>[1712](#fn_1711)   The little dog has as yet no
teeth, nevertheless he defends himself with his mouth against any one
who teases him.  The calf has as yet no horns, nevertheless he already
knows where his weapons will grow. <span
id="fr_1712"></span>[1713](#fn_1712)   Here we have evident proof that
the instinct of animals is innate, and that in all beings there is
nothing disorderly, nothing unforeseen.  All bear the marks of the
wisdom of the Creator, and show that they have come to life with the
means of assuring their preservation.

<span id="viii.x-p55"></span>The dog is not gifted with a share of
reason; but with him instinct has the power of reason.  The dog has
learnt by nature the secret of elaborate inferences, which sages of the
world, after long years of study, have hardly been able to disentangle. 
When the dog is on the track of game, if he sees it divide in different
directions, he examines these different paths, and speech alone fails
him to announce his reasoning.  The creature, he says, is gone here or
there or in another direction.  It is neither here nor there; it is
therefore in the third direction.  And thus, neglecting the false
tracks, he discovers the true one.  What more is done by those who,
gravely occupied in demonstrating theories, trace lines upon the dust
and reject two propositions to show that the third is the true
one? <span id="fr_1713"></span>[1714](#fn_1713)

<span id="viii.x-p57"></span>Does not the gratitude of the dog shame all
who are ungrateful to their benefactors?  Many are said to have fallen
dead by their murdered masters in lonely places. <span
id="fr_1714"></span>[1715](#fn_1714)   Others, when a crime has just
been committed, have led those who were searching for the murderers, and
have caused the criminals to be brought to justice.  What will those say
who, not content with not loving the Master who has created them and
nourished them, have for their friends men whose mouth attacks the Lord,
sitting at the same table with them, and, whilst partaking of their
food, blaspheme Him who has given it to them?

<span id="viii.x-p59"></span><span id="page_105">p. 105</span> <span
id="viii.x-Page_105"></span>5.  But let us return to the spectacle of
creation.  The easiest animals to catch are the most productive.  It is
on account of this that hares and wild goats produce many little ones,
and that wild sheep have twins, for fear lest these species should
disappear, consumed by carnivorous animals.  Beasts of prey, on the
contrary, produce only a few and a lioness with difficulty gives birth
to one lion; <span id="fr_1715"></span>[1716](#fn_1715) because, if they
say truly, the cub issues from its mother by tearing her with its claws;
and vipers are only born by gnawing through the womb, inflicting a
proper punishment on their mother. <span
id="fr_1716"></span>[1717](#fn_1716)   Thus in nature all has been
foreseen, all is the object of continual care.  If you examine the
members even of animals, you will find that the Creator has given them
nothing superfluous, that He has omitted nothing that is necessary.  To
carnivorous animals He has given pointed teeth which their nature
requires for their support.  Those that are only half furnished with
teeth have received several distinct receptacles for their food.  As it
is not broken up enough in the first, they are gifted with the power of
returning it after it has been swallowed, and it does not assimilate
until it has been crushed by rumination.  The first, second, third, and
fourth stomachs of ruminating animals do not remain idle; each one of
them fulfils a necessary function. <span
id="fr_1717"></span>[1718](#fn_1717)   The neck of the camel is long so
that it may lower it to its feet and reach the grass on which it feeds. 
Bears, lions, tigers, all animals of this sort, have short necks buried
in their shoulders; it is because they do not live upon grass and have
no need to bend down to the earth; they are carnivorous and eat the
animals upon whom they prey.

<span id="viii.x-p67"></span>Why has the elephant a trunk?  This
enormous creature, the greatest of terrestrial animals, created for the
terror of those who meet it, is naturally huge and fleshy.  If its neck
was large and in proportion to its feet it would be difficult to direct,
and would be of such an excessive weight that it would make it lean
towards the earth.  As it is, its head is attached to the spine of the
back by short vertebrae and it has its trunk to take the place of a
neck, and with it it picks up its food and draws up its drink.  Its
feet, without joints, <span id="fr_1718"></span>[1719](#fn_1718) like
united columns, support the weight of its body.  If it were supported on
lax and flexible legs, its joints would constantly give way, equally
incapable of supporting its weight, should it wish either to kneel or
rise.  But it has under the foot a little ankle joint which takes the
place of the leg and knee joints whose mobility would never have
resisted this enormous and swaying mass.  Thus it had need of this nose
which nearly touches its feet.  Have you seen them in war marching at
the head of the phalanx, like living towers, or breaking the enemies’
battalions like mountains of flesh with their irresistible charge?  If
their lower parts were not in accordance with their size they would
never have been able to hold their own.  Now we are told that the
elephant lives three hundred years and more, <span
id="fr_1719"></span>[1720](#fn_1719) another reason for him to have
solid and unjointed feet.  But, as we have said, his trunk, which has
the form and the flexibility of a serpent, takes its food from the earth
and raises it up.  Thus we are right in saying that it is impossible to
find anything superfluous or wanting in creation.  Well!  God has
subdued this monstrous animal to us to such a point that he understands
the lessons and endures the blows we give him; a manifest proof that the
Creator has submitted all to our rule, because we have been made in His
image.  It is not in great animals only that we see unapproachable
wisdom; no less wonders are seen in the smallest.  The high tops of the
mountains which, near to the clouds and continually beaten by the winds,
keep up a perpetual winter, do not arouse more admiration in me than the
hollow valleys, which escape the storms of lofty peaks and preserve a
constant mild temperature.  In the same way in the constitution of
animals I am not more astonished at the size of the elephant, than at
the mouse, who is feared by the elephant, or at the scorpion’s delicate
sting, which has been hollowed like a pipe by the supreme artificer to
throw venom into the wounds it makes.  And let nobody accuse the Creator
of having produced venomous animals, destroyers and enemies of our
life.  Else let them consider it a crime in the schoolmaster when he
disciplines the restlessness of youth by the use of the rod and whip to
maintain order. <span id="fr_1720"></span>[1721](#fn_1720)

<span id="viii.x-p71"></span>6.  Beasts bear witness to the faith.  Hast
thou confidence in the Lord?  “Thou <span id="page_106">p. 106</span>
<span id="viii.x-Page_106"></span>shalt walk upon the asp and the
basilisk and thou shalt trample under feet the lion and the
dragon.” <span id="fr_1721"></span>[1722](#fn_1721)   With faith thou
hast the power to walk upon serpents and scorpions.  Do you not see that
the viper which attached itself to the hand of Paul, whilst he gathered
sticks, did not injure him, because it found the saint full of faith? 
If you have not faith, do not fear beasts so much as your faithlessness,
which renders you susceptible of all corruption.  But I see that for a
long time you have been asking me for an account of the creation of man,
and I think I can hear you all cry in your hearts, We are being taught
the nature of our belongings, but we are ignorant of ourselves.  Let me
then speak of it, since it is necessary, and let me put an end to my
hesitation.  In truth the most difficult of sciences is to know one’s
self.  Not only our eye, from which nothing outside us escapes, cannot
see itself; but our mind, so piercing to discover the sins of others, is
slow to recognise its own faults. <span
id="fr_1722"></span>[1723](#fn_1722)   Thus my speech, after eagerly
investigating what is external to myself, is slow and hesitating in
exploring my own nature.  Yet the beholding of heaven and earth does not
make us know God better than the attentive study of our being does; I
am, says the Prophet, fearfully and wonderfully made; <span
id="fr_1723"></span>[1724](#fn_1723) that is to say, in observing myself
I have known Thy infinite wisdom. <span
id="fr_1724"></span>[1725](#fn_1724)   And God said “Let us make
man.” <span id="fr_1725"></span>[1726](#fn_1725)   Does not the light of
theology shine, in these words, as through windows; and does not the
second Person show Himself in a mystical way, without yet manifesting
Himself until the great day?  Where is the Jew who resisted the truth
and pretended that God was speaking to Himself?  It is He who spoke, it
is said, and it is He who made.  “Let there be light and there was
light.”  But then their words contain a manifest absurdity.  Where is
the smith, the carpenter, the shoemaker, who, without help and alone
before the instruments of his trade, would say to himself; let us make
the sword, let us put together the plough, let us make the boot?  Does
he not perform the work of his craft in silence?  Strange folly, to say
that any one has seated himself to command himself, to watch over
himself, to constrain himself, to hurry himself, with the tones of a
master!  But the unhappy creatures are not afraid to calumniate the Lord
Himself.  What will they not say with a tongue so well practised in
lying?  Here, however, words stop their mouth; “And God said let us make
man.”  Tell me; is there then only one Person?  It is not written “Let
man be made,” but, “Let us make man.”  The preaching of theology remains
enveloped in shadow before the appearance of him who was to be
instructed, but, now, the creation of man is expected, that faith
unveils herself and the dogma of truth appears in all its light.  “Let
us make man.”  O enemy of Christ, hear God speaking to His Co-operator,
to Him by Whom also He made the worlds, Who upholds all things by the
word of His power. <span id="fr_1726"></span>[1727](#fn_1726)   But He
does not leave the voice of true religion without answer.  Thus the
Jews, race hostile to truth, when they find themselves pressed, act like
beasts enraged against man, who roar at the bars of their cage and show
the cruelty and the ferocity of their nature, without being able to
assuage their fury.  God, they say, addresses Himself to several
persons; it is to the angels before Him that He says, “Let us make man.”
 Jewish fiction! a fable whose frivolity shows whence it has come.  To
reject one person, they admit many.  To reject the Son, they raise
servants to the dignity of counsellors; they make of our fellow slaves
the agents in our creation.  The perfect man attains the dignity of an
angel; but what creature can be like the Creator?  Listen to the
continuation.  “In our image.”  What have you to reply?  Is there one
image of God and the angels?  Father and Son have by absolute necessity
the same form, but the form is here understood as becomes the divine,
not in bodily shape, but in the proper qualities of Godhead.  Hear also,
you who belong to the new concision <span
id="fr_1727"></span>[1728](#fn_1727) and who, under the appearance of
Christianity, strengthen the error of the Jews. <span
id="fr_1728"></span>[1729](#fn_1728)   To Whom does He say, “in our
image,” to whom if it is not to Him who is “the brightness of His glory
and the express image of His person,” <span
id="fr_1729"></span>[1730](#fn_1729) “the image of the invisible
God”? <span id="fr_1730"></span>[1731](#fn_1730)   It is then to His
living image, to Him Who has said “I and my Father are one,” <span
id="fr_1731"></span>[1732](#fn_1731) “He that hath seen me hath seen the
Father,” <span id="fr_1732"></span>[1733](#fn_1732) that God says “Let
us make man in our image.”  Where is the unlikeness <span
id="fr_1733"></span>[1734](#fn_1733) in these Beings who have only one
image?  “So God created man.” <span id="fr_1734"></span>[1735](#fn_1734)
  <span id="page_107">p. 107</span> <span id="viii.x-Page_107"></span>It
is not “They made.”  Here Scripture avoids the plurality of the
Persons.  After having enlightened the Jew, it dissipates the error of
the Gentiles in putting itself under the shelter of unity, to make you
understand that the Son is with the Father, and guarding you from the
danger of polytheism.  He created him in the image of God.  God still
shows us His co-operator, because He does not say, in His image, but in
the image of God.

<span id="viii.x-p87"></span>If God permits, we will say later in what
way man was created in the image of God, and how he shares this
resemblance.  Today we say but only one word.  If there is one image,
from whence comes the intolerable blasphemy of pretending that the Son
is unlike the Father?  What ingratitude!  You have yourself received
this likeness and you refuse it to your Benefactor!  You pretend to keep
personally that which is in you a gift of grace, and you do not wish
that the Son should keep His natural likeness to Him who begat Him.

<span id="viii.x-p88"></span>But evening, which long ago sent the sun to
the west, imposes silence upon me.  Here, then, let me be content with
what I have said, and put my discourse to bed.  I have told you enough
up to this point to excite your zeal; with the help of the Holy Spirit I
will make for you a deeper investigation into the truths which follow. 
Retire, then, I beg you, with joy, O Christ-loving congregation, and,
instead of sumptuous dishes of various delicacies, adorn and sanctify
your tables with the remembrance of my words.  May the Anomœan be
confounded, the Jew covered with shame, the faithful exultant in the
dogmas of truth, and the Lord glorified, the Lord to Whom be glory and
power, world without end.  Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1689"></span>[101:1690](2080071.htm#fr_1689) <span
id="viii.x-p3.2"></span>

<span id="viii.x-p4"></span> [2 Kings iv.
39](../../../bib/kjv/kg2004.htm#039)<span id="viii.x-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1690"></span>[101:1691](2080071.htm#fr_1690) <span
id="viii.x-p4.2"></span>

<span id="viii.x-p5"></span> Fialon thinks that this plain reference to
Origen may have been evoked by some criticisms on the IIIrd Homily. 
(*cf*. p. 71)  St. Basil’s literalism and bold departure from the
allegorizing of Origen and from the milder mysticism of Eusebius are
remarked on in the Prolegomena.

<span id="fn_1691"></span>[101:1692](2080071.htm#fr_1691) <span
id="viii.x-p5.1"></span>

<span id="viii.x-p6"></span> [Rom. i.
16](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#016)<span id="viii.x-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1692"></span>[101:1693](2080071.htm#fr_1692) <span
id="viii.x-p6.2"></span>

<span id="viii.x-p7"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.x-p7.1"></span>θαλῆς καὶ οἱ Στωϊκοὶ καὶ οἱ ἀπ᾽ αὐτῶν σφαιροειδῆ
τὴν γῆν.  ᾽Αναξίμανδρος λίθῳ κίονι τὴν γῆν προσφερῆ τῶν επιπέδων.
 ᾽Αναξιμένης, τραπεζοειδῆ.  Λεύκιππος, τυμπανοειδῆ.  Δημόκριτος,
δισκοειδῆ μὲν τῷ πλάτει, κοίλην δὲ τὸ μέσον</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.x-p7.2"></span>.  </span>Plut. <span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.x-p7.3"></span>περὶ τῶν ἀρεσκ</span>. iii.
10.  Arist. (*De. Cœlo* ii. 14) follows Thales.  So Manilius i. 235:

<span id="viii.x-p8"></span>“*Ex quo colligitur terrarum*forma rotunda.”

<span id="fn_1693"></span>[102:1694](2080071.htm#fr_1693) <span
id="viii.x-p9.1"></span>

<span id="viii.x-p10"></span> [Gen. i.
24](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#024)<span id="viii.x-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1694"></span>[102:1695](2080071.htm#fr_1694) <span
id="viii.x-p10.2"></span>

<span id="viii.x-p11"></span> *cf*. note on *Hom*. v. p. 76.

<span id="fn_1695"></span>[102:1696](2080071.htm#fr_1695) <span
id="viii.x-p11.1"></span>

<span id="viii.x-p12"></span> “*Sed, si quæque suo ritu procedit, et
omnes*

<span id="viii.x-p13"></span>*Fœdere naturæ certo discrimina servant*.”

<span id="viii.x-p14"></span>Luc. v. 921.

<span id="fn_1696"></span>[102:1697](2080071.htm#fr_1696) <span
id="viii.x-p14.1"></span>

<span id="viii.x-p15"></span> *cf*. Plin. ix. 84:  *Verum omnibus his
fidem Nili inundatio affert omnia exedente miraculo:  quippe detegente
eo musculi reperiuntur inchoato opere genitalis aquæ terrœque, jam parte
corporis viventes, novissima effigie etiamnum terrena*.”  So Mela *De
Nilo* i. 9. “*Glebis etiam infundit animas, ex ipsoque humo vitalia
effingit*,” and Ovid, *Met*. i. 42:

<span id="viii.x-p16"></span>“*Sic ubi deseruit madidos septemfluus
agros*

<span id="viii.x-p17"></span>Nilus, et antiquo sua flumina reddidit
alveo,

<span id="viii.x-p18"></span>*Æthereoque recens exarsit sidere limus,*

<span id="viii.x-p19"></span>Plurima cultores versis animalia glebis

<span id="viii.x-p20"></span>*Inveniunt*.”

<span id="fn_1697"></span>[102:1698](2080071.htm#fr_1697) <span
id="viii.x-p20.1"></span>

<span id="viii.x-p21"></span> Arist. *H.A.* vi. 16.  <span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.x-p21.1"></span>Αἱ ἐγχέλυς γίγνονται εκ τῶν
καλουμένων γῆς ἐντέρων ἃ αὐτόματα συνίσταται εν τῷ πηλῷ καὶ ἐν τῇ γῇ
ἐνίκμῳ.  Καὶ ἤδη εἰσιν ὠμμέναι αἱ μὲν ἐκδύνουσαι ἐκ τούτων, αἱ δὲ ἐν
διακνιζομένοις καὶ διαιρουμένοις γίγνονται φανεραί</span>.

<span id="fn_1698"></span>[102:1699](2080071.htm#fr_1698) <span
id="viii.x-p22.1"></span>

<span id="viii.x-p23"></span> Arist., *Part. An*. iv. 10, 18.  <span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.x-p23.1"></span>μόνον ὀρθόν ἐστι τῶν ζῴων ὁ
ἄνθρωπος</span>.

<span id="fn_1699"></span>[102:1700](2080071.htm#fr_1699) <span
id="viii.x-p23.2"></span>

<span id="viii.x-p24"></span> *cf*. [Ps. xlix.
12](../../../bib/kjv/psa049.htm#012)<span id="viii.x-p24.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1700"></span>[102:1701](2080071.htm#fr_1700) <span
id="viii.x-p24.2"></span>

<span id="viii.x-p25"></span> [Col. iii.
1](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#001)<span id="viii.x-p25.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1701"></span>[102:1702](2080071.htm#fr_1701) <span
id="viii.x-p25.2"></span>

<span id="viii.x-p26"></span> *cf*. [Phil. iii.
20](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#020)<span id="viii.x-p26.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1702"></span>[102:1703](2080071.htm#fr_1702) <span
id="viii.x-p26.2"></span>

<span id="viii.x-p27"></span> [Heb. xii.
23](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#023)<span id="viii.x-p27.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1703"></span>[103:1704](2080071.htm#fr_1703) <span
id="viii.x-p29.1"></span>

<span id="viii.x-p30"></span> Plut. <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.x-p30.1"></span>πότ. τῶν. ζ. κ.τ.λ.  χελῶναι μὲν ὀρίγανον,
γαλαῖ δὲ πήγανον, ὅταν ὄφεως φάγωσιν, ἐπεσθίουσαι</span>.

<span id="viii.x-p31"></span>*cf*. Pliny xx. 68:  “*Tragoriganum contra
viperæ ictum efficacissimum*.”

<span id="fn_1704"></span>[103:1705](2080071.htm#fr_1704) <span
id="viii.x-p31.1"></span>

<span id="viii.x-p32"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.x-p32.1"></span>ὁ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.x-p32.2"></span>δράκων ὁ τῷ μαράθρω τὸν ὀφθαλμὸν ἀμβλυώπτοντα
λεπτύνων καὶ διαχαράττων</span>.  Plut. <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.x-p32.3"></span>πότερα τῶν ζ. κ.τ.λ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.x-p32.4"></span>. 731</span>.

<span id="fn_1705"></span>[103:1706](2080071.htm#fr_1705) <span
id="viii.x-p33.1"></span>

<span id="viii.x-p34"></span> Ar., *Hist. An*. ix. 6.  <span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.x-p34.1"></span>περὶ δὲ τῆς τῶν ἐχινων
αἰσθήσεως συμβέβηκε πολλαχοῦ τεθεωρῆσθαι ὅτι μεταβαλλόντων βορέων καὶ
νότων οἱ μὲν ἐν τῇ γῇ τὰς ὀπὰς αὑτῶν μεταμείβουσι οἱ δ᾽ ἐν ταῖς οἰκιαις
τρεφόμενοι μεταβάλλουσι πρὸς τοὺς τοίχους</span>.

<span id="fn_1706"></span>[103:1707](2080071.htm#fr_1706) <span
id="viii.x-p34.2"></span>

<span id="viii.x-p35"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.x-p35.1"></span>ὑ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.x-p35.2"></span>ετοῦ ποιεῖται σημεῖον ὁ ῎Αρατος</span>

<span id="viii.x-p36"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.x-p36.1"></span>῾</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.x-p36.2"></span>ἢ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.x-p36.3"></span>κοίλης μύρμηκες ὀχῆς ἐξ ὤεα πάντα</span>

<span id="viii.x-p37"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.x-p37.1"></span>θᾶσσον ἀνηνέγκαντο.᾽</span>

<span id="viii.x-p38"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.x-p38.1"></span>καίτινες οὐκ ὠ& 129· γράφουσιν, ἀλλὰ ἵνα τοὺς
ἀποκειμένους καρποὺς ὅταν εὐρῶτα συνάγοντας αἴσθωνται καὶ φοβηθῶσι
φθορὰν καὶ σῆψιν ἀναφερόντων, ὑπερβάλλει δὲ πᾶσαν ἐπινοιαν συνέσεως ἡ
τοῦ πυροῦ τῆς βλαστήσεως προκατάληψις</span>.  Plut. <span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.x-p38.2"></span>ποτ. τῶν. ζ.
κ.τ.λ</span><span class="Greek"><span id="viii.x-p38.3"></span>.
725</span>.

<span id="fn_1707"></span>[103:1708](2080071.htm#fr_1707) <span
id="viii.x-p39.1"></span>

<span id="viii.x-p40"></span> [Ps. civ.
24](../../../bib/kjv/psa004.htm#024)<span id="viii.x-p40.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1708"></span>[103:1709](2080071.htm#fr_1708) <span
id="viii.x-p41.1"></span>

<span id="viii.x-p42"></span> This is the Stoic doctrine.  “*Stoicorum
quidem facilis conclusio est; qui cum finem bonorum esse senserint,
congruere naturæ, cumque ea convenienter vivere*.”  *cf*. Cic., *De
Fin*. iii. 7, 26, and *De Nat. D.* i. 14, and Hor., *Ep*., i. x. 12. 
“*Vivere naturæ si convenienter oportet*.”  So the Stoics’ main rule of
life is <span class="Greek"><span id="viii.x-p42.1"></span>ὁ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.x-p42.2"></span>μολογουμένως τῇ φύσει
ζῆν</span>.  But with Basil this apparent disregard of the doctrine of
original sin and the need of grace for redemption must be understood in
the light of the catholic doctrine that sin is the corruption of human
nature (*cf*. Art. ix. of Original or Birth Sin), which nature, though
corrupt and prone to evil, retains capacities for good.  But these
capacities do need grace and training.  *cf*. Basil’s *Homily on Ps.
xlv*. 166.  “What is said about the Saviour had a double sense on
account of the nature of the Godhead and the Economy of the
incarnation.  So, looking to the humanity of God, it is said ‘thou hast
loved righteousness and hated iniquity,’ instead of saying ‘the rest of
men *by toil and discipline and careful attention* mostly attain a
disposition towards good and an aversion from vice.  But thou hast a
kind of natural relationship to good and alienation from iniquity.’  And
so to us, if we will, it is not hard to acquire a love of righteousness
and a hatred of iniquity.”  *i.e. In Christ*, redeemed humanity loves
good, and all men ‘naturally’ do need toil and discipline.  The heredity
of sin is recognised by Basil.  (*e.g*. in *Hom. in Famen*. 7.)  Man
fell from grace given, and must return to it.  (*Serm. Ascet*. in
init.)  It must always be remembered that questions of original sin, the
will, and grace never had the same importance in the Greek as they had
in the Latin church.  *cf*. Dr. Travers Smith on St. Basil (c. ix. p.
108) and Böhringer (*<span id="viii.x-p42.3"></span>Das Vierte
Jahrhundert. Basil*, p. 102) who remarks:  *<span
id="viii.x-p42.4"></span>Wenn er auch noch von einer “Wieder herstellung
des freien Willens, den wir zu brauchbaren Gefässen für den Herrn und zu
jedem guten Werke fähig Werden” (De spir. sanct. 18) spricht, so hat er
dies doch nirgends begründet, obschon er bei der Besprechung der Folgen
des Falls zuweilen sich äussert, es sei der Mensch der von dem Schöpfer
erhaltenen Freiheit beraubt worden.  Im Allgemeinen setzt er den freien
Willen auch nach dem Fall im Menschen so gut wieder Voraus, wie vor dem
Fall, so dass jene Aeusserungen kaum mehr als den Werth einer Redensart
haben.  Im Ganzen eriunert seine Darstellung wieder an diejenige des
Athanasius, dessen Einfluss Man nicht verkennen kann*.

<span id="fn_1709"></span>[104:1710](2080071.htm#fr_1709) <span
id="viii.x-p42.5"></span>

<span id="viii.x-p43"></span> In [Eph.
vi](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#000)<span id="viii.x-p43.1"></span>. the
word is “obey.”

<span id="fn_1710"></span>[104:1711](2080071.htm#fr_1710) <span
id="viii.x-p43.2"></span>

<span id="viii.x-p44"></span> *cf*. [Eph. vi.
4](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#004)<span id="viii.x-p44.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1711"></span>[104:1712](2080071.htm#fr_1711) <span
id="viii.x-p45.1"></span>

<span id="viii.x-p46"></span> Fialon quotes Luc. ii. 367–370:

<span id="viii.x-p47"></span>“*Præterea teneri tremulis cum vocibus
hædi*

<span id="viii.x-p48"></span>Cornigeras norunt matres, agnique petulci

<span id="viii.x-p49"></span>Balantum pecudes:  ita, quod natura
reposcit,

<span id="viii.x-p50"></span>*Ad sua quisque fere decurrunt ubera
lactis*.”

<span id="fn_1712"></span>[104:1713](2080071.htm#fr_1712) <span
id="viii.x-p50.1"></span>

<span id="viii.x-p51"></span> *cf*. Ovid (*Halieut*. ad init.):

<span id="viii.x-p52"></span>“Accepit mundus legem; dedit arma per
omnes,

<span id="viii.x-p53"></span>Admonuitque sui.  Vitulus sic namque
minatur,

<span id="viii.x-p54"></span>*Qui nondum gerit in tenera jam cornua
fronte*.”

<span id="fn_1713"></span>[104:1714](2080071.htm#fr_1713) <span
id="viii.x-p55.1"></span>

<span id="viii.x-p56"></span> *cf*. Plutarch (<span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.x-p56.1"></span>ποτ. των ζ.φρ. κ.τ.λ</span> 726).  <span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.x-p56.2"></span>οἱ δὲ διαλεκτικοί φασι τὸν
κύνα τῷ διὰ πλειόνων διεζευγμένῳ χρώμενον ἐν τοῖς πολυσχιδέσιν ἀτραποῖς
συλλογίζεσθαι πρὸς ἑαυτὸν ἤτοι τήνδε τὸ θηρίον ὥρμηκεν ἢ τήνδε ἢ τήνδε·
ἀλλὰ μὴν οὔτε τήνδε οὔτε τήνδε, τήνδε λοιπὸν ἄρα</span>.  But the dog is
said to smell the first, the second, *and the third*.  If he started off
on the third without smelling, he would reason.  As it is, there is no
“syllogism.”

<span id="fn_1714"></span>[104:1715](2080071.htm#fr_1714) <span
id="viii.x-p57.1"></span>

<span id="viii.x-p58"></span> Also taken from Plutarch (<span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.x-p58.1"></span>πότερα τῶν ζ</span> 726),
who tells stories of a dog found by King Pyrrhus on a journey, and of
Hesiod’s dog.

<span id="fn_1715"></span>[105:1716](2080071.htm#fr_1715) <span
id="viii.x-p59.1"></span>

<span id="viii.x-p60"></span> *cf*. Herod. iii. 108.  Aristotle (*Hist.
An*. vi. 31) refutes this.

<span id="fn_1716"></span>[105:1717](2080071.htm#fr_1716) <span
id="viii.x-p60.1"></span>

<span id="viii.x-p61"></span> *cf*. Pliny (x. 72):  “*Tertia die intra
uterum catulos excludit, deinde singulos singulis diebus parit, viginti
fere numero.  Itaque ceteræ, tarditatis impatientes, perrumpunt latera,
occisa parente*.  *cf*. Herod. iii. 109.

<span id="viii.x-p62"></span>So Prudentius (*Hamartigenia* 583):

<span id="viii.x-p63"></span> “*Sic vipera, ut aiunt,*

<span id="viii.x-p64"></span> *Dentibus emoritur fusæ per viscera
prolis*.”

<span id="viii.x-p65"></span>See Sir T. Browne’s *Vulgur Errors*, iii.
16.

<span id="fn_1717"></span>[105:1718](2080071.htm#fr_1717) <span
id="viii.x-p65.1"></span>

<span id="viii.x-p66"></span> Pliny (xi. 78) says *ruminantibus*
*geminus*, but this is supposed to be a misreading for *quadrigeminus*,
or a mistaken interpretation of Aristotle (*H.A.* ii. 19), whom Basil is
no doubt following.

<span id="fn_1718"></span>[105:1719](2080071.htm#fr_1718) <span
id="viii.x-p67.1"></span>

<span id="viii.x-p68"></span> See Sir T. Browne, *Vulgar Errors*, iii.
1.

<span id="fn_1719"></span>[105:1720](2080071.htm#fr_1719) <span
id="viii.x-p68.1"></span>

<span id="viii.x-p69"></span> Arist. *H.A*. viii. 12 and ix. 72.  Pliny
vii. 10.

<span id="fn_1720"></span>[105:1721](2080071.htm#fr_1720) <span
id="viii.x-p69.1"></span>

<span id="viii.x-p70"></span> *cf*. *Hom*. v. 4.

<span id="fn_1721"></span>[106:1722](2080071.htm#fr_1721) <span
id="viii.x-p71.1"></span>

<span id="viii.x-p72"></span> *cf*. [Ps. xci.
13](../../../bib/kjv/psa091.htm#013)<span id="viii.x-p72.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1722"></span>[106:1723](2080071.htm#fr_1722) <span
id="viii.x-p72.2"></span>

<span id="viii.x-p73"></span> *cf*. St. [Matt. vii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#003)<span id="viii.x-p73.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1723"></span>[106:1724](2080071.htm#fr_1723) <span
id="viii.x-p73.2"></span>

<span id="viii.x-p74"></span> *cf*. [Ps. cxxxix.
14](../../../bib/kjv/psa039.htm#014)<span id="viii.x-p74.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1724"></span>[106:1725](2080071.htm#fr_1724) <span
id="viii.x-p74.2"></span>

<span id="viii.x-p75"></span> “*E cœlo descendit* <span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.x-p75.1"></span>γνῶθι σεαυτόν</span>” (Juv.
xi. 27).  Socrates, Chilo, Thales, Cleobulus, Bias, Pythagoras, have all
been credited with the saying.  “*On reconnaît ici le précepte fécond de
l’école socratique. * *<span id="viii.x-p75.2"></span>L’église
chrétienne s’en empara comme de tout ce qu’elle trouvait de grand et de
bon dans l’ancienne Grèce*.  Fialon.

<span id="viii.x-p76"></span>St. Basil has a Homily on the text <span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.x-p76.1"></span>πρόσεχε σεαυτῷ</span>
([Deut. xv. 9](../../../bib/kjv/deu015.htm#009)<span
id="viii.x-p76.2"></span>, lxx.)

<span id="fn_1725"></span>[106:1726](2080071.htm#fr_1725) <span
id="viii.x-p76.3"></span>

<span id="viii.x-p77"></span> [Gen. i.
26](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#026)<span id="viii.x-p77.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1726"></span>[106:1727](2080071.htm#fr_1726) <span
id="viii.x-p77.2"></span>

<span id="viii.x-p78"></span> *cf*. [Heb.
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#002),
[3](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#003)<span id="viii.x-p78.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1727"></span>[106:1728](2080071.htm#fr_1727) <span
id="viii.x-p78.2"></span>

<span id="viii.x-p79"></span> [Phil. iii.
2](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#002)<span id="viii.x-p79.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1728"></span>[106:1729](2080071.htm#fr_1728) <span
id="viii.x-p79.2"></span>

<span id="viii.x-p80"></span> The Arians.

<span id="fn_1729"></span>[106:1730](2080071.htm#fr_1729) <span
id="viii.x-p80.1"></span>

<span id="viii.x-p81"></span> [Heb. i.
3](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#003)<span id="viii.x-p81.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1730"></span>[106:1731](2080071.htm#fr_1730) <span
id="viii.x-p81.2"></span>

<span id="viii.x-p82"></span> [Col. i.
15](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#015)<span id="viii.x-p82.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1731"></span>[106:1732](2080071.htm#fr_1731) <span
id="viii.x-p82.2"></span>

<span id="viii.x-p83"></span> [John x.
30](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#030)<span id="viii.x-p83.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1732"></span>[106:1733](2080071.htm#fr_1732) <span
id="viii.x-p83.2"></span>

<span id="viii.x-p84"></span> [John xiv.
9](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#009)<span id="viii.x-p84.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1733"></span>[106:1734](2080071.htm#fr_1733) <span
id="viii.x-p84.2"></span>

<span id="viii.x-p85"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.x-p85.1"></span>τὸ ἀνόμοιον</span>.  Arius had taught that the
Persons are <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.x-p85.2"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.x-p85.3"></span>νόμοιοι πάμπαν ἀλλήλων</span>.

<span id="fn_1734"></span>[106:1735](2080071.htm#fr_1734) <span
id="viii.x-p85.4"></span>

<span id="viii.x-p86"></span> [Gen. i.
27](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#027)<span id="viii.x-p86.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Letters.](2080072)
