[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2080275)  [Next](2080277) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ix.cciv"></span>

<span id="ix.cciv-p1"></span> <span class="c18"><span
id="ix.cciv-p1.1"></span>Letter CCIII. <span
id="fr_2726"></span>[2727](#fn_2726) </span>

<span id="ix.cciv-p3"></span>*To the bishops of the sea coast*. <span
id="fr_2727"></span>[2728](#fn_2727)

<span id="ix.cciv-p5"></span><span class="c14"><span
id="ix.cciv-p5.1"></span>I have</span> had a strong desire to meet you,
but from time to time some hindrance has supervened and prevented my
fulfilling my purpose.  I have either been hindered by sickness, and you
know well how, from my early manhood to my present old age, this ailment
has been my constant companion, brought up with me, and chastising me,
by the righteous judgment of God, Who ordains all things in wisdom; or
by the cares of the Church, or by struggles with the opponents of the
doctrines of truth.  \[Up to this day I live in much affliction and
grief, having the feeling present before me, that you are wanting to
me.  For when God tells me, who took on Him His sojourn in the flesh for
the very purpose that, by patterns of duty, He might regulate our life,
and might by His own voice announce to us the Gospel of the
kingdom,—when He says, ‘By this shall all men know that ye are my
disciples, if ye love one another,’ and whereas the Lord left His own
peace to His disciples as a farewell gift, <span
id="fr_2728"></span>[2729](#fn_2728) when about to complete the
dispensation in the flesh, saying, ‘Peace I leave with you, My peace I
give you,’ I cannot persuade myself that without love to others, and
without, as far as rests with me, peaceableness towards all, I can be
called a worthy servant of Jesus Christ.  I have waited a long while for
the chance of your love paying us a visit.  For ye are not ignorant that
we, being exposed to all, as rocks running out in the sea, sustain the
fury of the heretical waves, which, in that they break around us, do not
cover the district behind.  I say “we” in order to refer it, not to
human power, but to the grace of God, Who, by the weakness of men shows
His power, as says the prophet in the person of the Lord, ‘Will ye not
fear Me, who have placed the sand as a boundary to the sea?’ for by the
weakest and most contemptible of all things, the sand, the Mighty One
has bounded the great and full sea.  Since, then, this is our position,
it became your love to be frequent in sending true brothers to visit us
who labour with the storm, and more frequently letters of love, partly
to confirm our courage, partly to correct any mistake of ours.  For we
confess that we are liable to numberless mistakes, being men, and living
in the flesh.\]

<span id="ix.cciv-p7"></span>2.  But hitherto, very honourable brethren,
you have not given me my due; and this for two reasons.  Either you
failed to perceive the proper course; or else, under the influence of
some of the calumnies spread abroad about me, you did not think me
deserving of being visited by you in love.  <span id="page_242">p.
242</span> <span id="ix.cciv-Page_242"></span>Now, therefore, I myself
take the initiative.  I beg to state that I am perfectly ready to rid
myself, in your presence, of the charges urged against me, but only on
condition that my revilers are admitted to stand face to face with me
before your reverences.  If I am convicted, I shall not deny my error. 
You, after the conviction, will receive pardon from the Lord for
withdrawing yourselves from the communion of me a sinner.  The
successful accusers, too, will have their reward in the publication of
my secret wickedness.  If, however, you condemn me before you have the
evidence before you, I shall be none the worse, barring the loss I shall
sustain of a possession I hold most dear—your love:  while you, for your
part, will suffer the same loss in losing me, and will seem to be
running counter to the words of the Gospel:  “Doth our law judge any man
before it hear him?” <span id="fr_2729"></span>[2730](#fn_2729)   The
reviler, moreover, if he adduce no proof of what he says, will be shewn
to have got nothing from his wicked language but a bad name for
himself.  For what name can be properly applied to the slanderer <span
id="fr_2730"></span>[2731](#fn_2730) except that which he professes to
bear by the very conduct of which he is guilty?  Let the reviler,
therefore, appear not as slanderer, <span
id="fr_2731"></span>[2732](#fn_2731) but as accuser; nay, I will not
call him accuser, I will rather regard him as a brother, admonishing in
love, and producing conviction for my amendment.  And you must not be
hearers of calumny, but triers of proof.  Nor must I be left uncured,
because my sin is not being made manifest.

<span id="ix.cciv-p11"></span>\[3.  Let not this consideration influence
you.  ‘We dwell on the sea, we are exempt from the sufferings of the
generality, we need no succour from others; so what is the good to us of
foreign communion?’  For the same Lord Who divided the islands from the
continent by the sea, bound the island Christians to those of the
continent by love.  Nothing, brethren, separates us from each other, but
deliberate estrangement.  We have one Lord, one faith, the same hope. 
The hands need each other; the feet steady each other.  The eyes possess
their clear apprehension from agreement.  We, for our part, confess our
own weakness, and we seek your fellow feeling.  For we are assured, that
though ye are not present in body, yet by the aid of prayer, ye will do
us much benefit in these most critical times.  It is neither decorous
before men, nor pleasing to God, that you should make avowals which not
even the Gentiles adopt, which know not God.  Even they, as we hear,
though the country they live in be sufficient for all things, yet, on
account of the uncertainty of the future, make much of alliances with
each other, and seek mutual intercourse as being advantageous to them. 
Yet we, the sons of fathers who have laid down the law that by brief
notes the proofs of communion should be carried about from one end of
the earth to the other, and that all should be citizens and familiars
with all, now sever ourselves from the whole world, and are neither
ashamed at our solitariness, nor shudder that on us is fallen the
fearful prophecy of the Lord, ‘Because of lawlessness abounding, the
love of the many shall wax cold.’\]

<span id="ix.cciv-p12"></span>4.  Do not, most honourable brethren, do
not suffer this.  Rather, by letters of peace and by salutations of
love, comfort me for the past.  You have made a wound in my heart by
your former neglect.  Soothe its anguish, as it were, by a tender
touch.  Whether you wish to come to me, and examine for yourselves into
the truth of what you hear of my infirmities, or whether by the addition
of more lies my sins are reported to you to be yet more grievous, I must
accept even this.  I am ready to welcome you with open hands and to
offer myself to the strictest test, only let love preside over the
proceedings.  Or if you prefer to indicate any spot in your own district
to which I may come and pay you the visit which is due, submitting
myself, as far as may be, to examination, for the healing of the past,
and the prevention of slander for the future, I accept this.  Although
my flesh is weak, yet, as long as I breathe, I am responsible for the
due discharge of every duty which may tend to the edification of the
Churches of Christ.  Do not, I beseech you, make light of my entreaty. 
Do not force me to disclose my distress to others.  Hitherto, brethren,
as you are well aware, I have kept my grief to myself, for I blush to
speak of your alienation from me to those of our communion who are at a
distance.  I shrink at once from paining them and from gratifying those
who hate me.  I alone am writing this now; but I send in the name of all
the brethren in Cappadocia, who have charged me not to employ any chance
messenger, but some one who, in case I should, from my anxiety not to be
too prolix, leave out any points of importance, might supply them with
the intelligence wherewith God has gifted him.  I refer to my beloved
and reverend fellow presbyter Petrus.  Welcome him in love, and send him
forth to me in peace, that he may be a messenger to me of good things.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2726"></span>[241:2727](2080276.htm#fr_2726) <span
id="ix.cciv-p1.2"></span>

<span id="ix.cciv-p2"></span> Placed in 375.

<span id="fn_2727"></span>[241:2728](2080276.htm#fr_2727) <span
id="ix.cciv-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ix.cciv-p4"></span> On this letter Newman notes that
Eustathius brought about a separation of a portion of the coast of
Pontus from the Church of Cæsarea, which for a time caused Basil great
despondency, as if he were being left solitary in all Christendom,
without communion with other places.  With the advice of the bishops of
Cappadocia, he addressed an expostulation with these separatists for not
coming to him.  (*Ch. of the Fathers*, p. 95.)  The portion of the
translation of this letter enclosed in brackets is Newman’s.

<span id="fn_2728"></span>[241:2729](2080276.htm#fr_2728) <span
id="ix.cciv-p5.2"></span>

<span id="ix.cciv-p6"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.cciv-p6.1"></span>ἑ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.cciv-p6.2"></span>ξιτήριον δῶρον</span>.  *cf*. note on p. 46.

<span id="fn_2729"></span>[242:2730](2080276.htm#fr_2729) <span
id="ix.cciv-p7.1"></span>

<span id="ix.cciv-p8"></span> [John vii.
51](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#051)<span id="ix.cciv-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2730"></span>[242:2731](2080276.htm#fr_2730) <span
id="ix.cciv-p8.2"></span>

<span id="ix.cciv-p9"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.cciv-p9.1"></span>τὸν διαβάλλοντα</span>.

<span id="fn_2731"></span>[242:2732](2080276.htm#fr_2731) <span
id="ix.cciv-p9.2"></span>

<span id="ix.cciv-p10"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.cciv-p10.1"></span>διάβολος</span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: To the Neocæsareans.](2080277)
