[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2080428)  [Next](2080430) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ix.ccclvii"></span>

<span id="ix.ccclvii-p1"></span> <span class="c18"><span
id="ix.ccclvii-p1.1"></span>Letter CCCLXVI. <span
id="fr_3293"></span>[3294](#fn_3293) </span>

<span id="ix.ccclvii-p3"></span>Basil to Urbicius the monk, concerning
continency.

<span id="ix.ccclvii-p4"></span><span class="c14"><span
id="ix.ccclvii-p4.1"></span>You</span> do well in making exact
definitions for us, so that we may recognise not only continency, but
its fruit.  Now its fruit is the companionship of God.  For not to be
corrupted, is to have part with God; just as to be corrupted is the
companionship of the world.  Continency is denial of the body, and
confession to God.  It withdraws from anything mortal, like a body which
has the Spirit of God.  It is without rivalry and envy, and causes us to
be united to God.  He who loves a body envies another.  He who has not
admitted the disease of corruption into his heart, is for the future
strong enough to endure any labour, and though he have died in the body,
he lives in incorruption.  Verily, if I rightly apprehend the matter,
God seems to me to be continency, because He desires nothing, but has
all things in Himself.  He reaches after nothing, nor has any sense in
eyes or ears; wanting <span id="page_327">p. 327</span> <span
id="ix.ccclvii-Page_327"></span>nothing, He is in all respects complete
and full.  Concupiscence is a disease of the soul; but continency is its
health.  And continency must not be regarded only in one species, as,
for instance, in matters of sensual love.  It must be regarded in
everything which the soul lusts after in an evil manner, not being
content with what is needful for it.  Envy is caused for the sake of
gold, and innumerable wrongs for the sake of other lusts.  Not to be
drunken is continency.  Not to overeat one’s self is continency.  To
subdue the body is continency, and to keep evil thoughts in subjection,
whenever the soul is disturbed by any fancy false and bad, and the heart
is distracted by vain cares.  Continency makes men free, being at once a
medicine and a power, for it does not teach temperance; it gives it. 
Continency is a grace of God.  Jesus seemed to be continency, when He
was made light to land and sea; for He was carried neither by earth nor
ocean, and just as He walked on the sea, so He did not weigh down the
earth.  For if death comes of corruption, and not dying comes of not
having corruption, then Jesus wrought not mortality but divinity. <span
id="fr_3294"></span>[3295](#fn_3294)   He ate and drank in a peculiar
manner, without rendering his food. <span
id="fr_3295"></span>[3296](#fn_3295)   So mighty a power in Him was
continency, that His food was not corrupted in Him, since He had no
corruption.  If only there be a little continency in us, we are higher
than all.  We have been told that angels were ejected from heaven
because of concupiscence and became incontinent.  They were vanquished;
they did not come down.  What could that plague have effected there, if
an eye such as I am thinking of had been there?  Wherefore I said, If we
have a little patience, and do not love the world, but the life above,
we shall be found there where we direct our mind.  For it is the mind,
apparently, which is the eye that seeth unseen things.  For we say “the
mind sees;” “the mind hears.”  I have written at length, though it may
seem little to you.  But there is meaning in all that I have said, and,
when you have read it, you will see it.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3293"></span>[326:3294](2080429.htm#fr_3293) <span
id="ix.ccclvii-p1.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ccclvii-p2"></span> Introduced by the Ben. with the
following preface:  “*En magni Basilii epistolam, ex prisco codice*lxi.
*f.* 324, *a me exscriptam quæ olim clarissimis quoque viris Marcianæ
bibliothecæ descriptoribus Zannetro atque Morellio inedita visa est;
atque utrum sit alicubi postremis his annis edita, mihi non constat, sed
certe in plenissima Garnerii editione desideratur.  Ea scribitur ad
Urbicum monachum, ad quem aliæ duæ Basilii epistolæ exstant, nempe* 123
and 262, *in Garneriana editione.  Argumentum titulusque est De
Continentia, neque vero scriptum hoc Basilianum diutius ego celandum
arbitror præsertim quia Suidas ac Photius nihil præstantius aut
epistolari characteri accommodatius Basilii epistolis esse judicarunt. 
Mai, biblioth. nov. patr.*  iii. 450.

<span id="fn_3294"></span>[327:3295](2080429.htm#fr_3294) <span
id="ix.ccclvii-p4.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ccclvii-p5"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.ccclvii-p5.1"></span>θεότητα οὐ θνητότητα</span>.

<span id="fn_3295"></span>[327:3296](2080429.htm#fr_3295) <span
id="ix.ccclvii-p5.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ccclvii-p6"></span> The Ben. note is:  “*Hac super re
reverentissime theologiceque scribit Athanasius Corinthi episcopus in
fragmento quod nos edidimus* *A.A.* class l. x. p. 499–500, *quod
incipit:*  <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.ccclvii-p6.1"></span>Ζητοῦμεν, εἰ ἡ πλήρωσις τῶν βρωμάτων ἐπὶ
Χριστοῦ ἐκέκτητο καὶ κένωσιν</span>.  *Erat enim hæc quoque una ex
objectionibus hæreticorum.  Definit autem, corpus Christi hac in re
fuisse cæteris superius, sicuti etiam in insolita nativitate.  Utitur
quoque Athanasius exemplo trinitatis illius apud Abrahamum convivantis,
neque tamen naturali necessitati obtemperantis; quod item de Christo
post resurrectionem edente intelligendum dicit.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Indexes](2080430)
