[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2080047)  [Next](2080049) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.xix"></span>

<span id="vii.xix-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="vii.xix-p1.1"></span>Chapter XVIII.</span>

<span id="vii.xix-p2"></span>*In what manner in the confession of the
three hypostases we preserve the pious dogma of the Monarchia.  Wherein
also is the refutation of them that allege that the Spirit is
subnumerated.* <span id="fr_1084"></span>[1085](#fn_1084)

<span id="vii.xix-p5"></span>44.  <span class="c14"><span
id="vii.xix-p5.1"></span>In</span> delivering the formula of the Fa<span
id="page_28">p. 28</span> <span id="vii.xix-Page_28"></span>ther, the
Son, and the Holy Ghost, <span id="fr_1085"></span>[1086](#fn_1085) our
Lord did not connect the gift with number.  He did not say “into First,
Second, and Third,” <span id="fr_1086"></span>[1087](#fn_1086) nor yet
“into one, two, and three, but He gave us the boon of the knowledge of
the faith which leads to salvation, by means of holy names.  So that
what saves us is our faith.  Number has been devised as a symbol
indicative of the quantity of objects.  But these men, who bring ruin on
themselves from every possible source, have turned even the capacity for
counting against the faith.  Nothing else undergoes any change in
consequence of the addition of number, and yet these men in the case of
the divine nature pay reverence to number, lest they should exceed the
limits of the honour due to the Paraclete.  But, O wisest sirs, let the
unapproachable be altogether above and beyond number, as the ancient
reverence of the Hebrews wrote the unutterable name of God in peculiar
characters, thus endeavouring to set forth its infinite excellence. 
Count, if you must; but you must not by counting do damage to the
faith.  Either let the ineffable be honoured by silence; or let holy
things be counted consistently with true religion.  There is one God and
Father, one Only-begotten, and one Holy Ghost.  We proclaim each of the
hypostases singly; and, when count we must, we do not let an ignorant
arithmetic carry us away to the idea of a plurality of Gods.

<span id="vii.xix-p8"></span>45.  For we do not count by way of
addition, gradually making increase from unity to multitude, and saying
one, two, and three,—nor yet first, second, and third.  For “I,” God,
“am the first, and I am the last.” <span
id="fr_1087"></span>[1088](#fn_1087)   And hitherto we have never, even
at the present time, heard of a second God.  Worshipping as we do God of
God, we both confess the distinction of the Persons, and at the same
time abide by the Monarchy.  We do not fritter away the theology <span
id="fr_1088"></span>[1089](#fn_1088) in a divided plurality, because one
Form, so to say, united <span id="fr_1089"></span>[1090](#fn_1089) in
the invariableness of the Godhead, is beheld in God the Father, and in
God the Only begotten.  For the Son is in the Father and the Father in
the Son; since such as is the latter, such is the former, and such as is
the former, such is the latter; and herein is the Unity.  So that
according to the distinction of Persons, both are one and one, and
according to the community of Nature, one.  How, then, if one and one,
are there not two Gods?  Because we speak of a king, and of the king’s
image, and not of two kings.  The majesty is not cloven in two, nor the
glory divided.  The sovereignty and authority over us is one, and so the
doxology ascribed by us is not plural but one; <span
id="fr_1090"></span>[1091](#fn_1090) because the honour paid to the
image passes on to the prototype.  Now what in the one case the image is
by reason of imitation, that in the other case the Son is by nature; and
as in works of art the likeness is dependent on the form, so in the case
of the divine and uncompounded nature the union consists in the
communion of the Godhead. <span id="fr_1091"></span>[1092](#fn_1091)  
One, moreover, is the Holy Spirit, and we speak of Him singly, conjoined
as He is to the one Father through the one Son, and through Himself
completing the adorable and blessed Trinity.  Of Him the intimate
relationship to the Father and the Son is sufficiently declared by the
fact of His not being ranked in the plurality of the creation, but being
spoken of singly; for he is not one of many, but One.  For as there is
one Father and one Son, so is there one Holy Ghost.  He is consequently
as far removed from created Nature as reason requires the singular to be
removed from compound and plural bodies; and He is in such wise united
to the Father and to the Son as unit has affinity with unit.

<span id="vii.xix-p14"></span><span id="page_29">p. 29</span> <span
id="vii.xix-Page_29"></span>46.  And it is not from this source alone
that our proofs of the natural communion are derived, but from the fact
that He is moreover said to be “of God;” <span
id="fr_1092"></span>[1093](#fn_1092) not indeed in the sense in which
“all things are of God,” <span id="fr_1093"></span>[1094](#fn_1093) but
in the sense of proceeding out of God, not by generation, like the Son,
but as Breath of His mouth.  But in no way is the “mouth” a member, nor
the Spirit breath that is dissolved; but the word “mouth” is used so far
as it can be appropriate to God, and the Spirit is a Substance having
life, gifted with supreme power of sanctification.  Thus the close
relation is made plain, while the mode of the ineffable existence is
safeguarded.  He is moreover styled ‘Spirit of Christ,’ as being by
nature closely related to Him.  Wherefore “If any man have not the
Spirit of Christ, he is none of His.” <span
id="fr_1094"></span>[1095](#fn_1094)   Hence He alone worthily glorifies
the Lord, for, it is said, “He shall glorify me,” <span
id="fr_1095"></span>[1096](#fn_1095) not as the creature, but as “Spirit
of truth,” <span id="fr_1096"></span>[1097](#fn_1096) clearly shewing
forth the truth in Himself, and, as Spirit of wisdom, in His own
greatness revealing “Christ the Power of God and the wisdom of
God.” <span id="fr_1097"></span>[1098](#fn_1097)   And as
Paraclete <span id="fr_1098"></span>[1099](#fn_1098) He expresses in
Himself the goodness of the Paraclete who sent Him, and in His own
dignity manifests the majesty of Him from whom He proceeded.  There is
then on the one hand a natural glory, as light is the glory of the sun;
and on the other a glory bestowed judicially and of free will ‘*ab
extra*’ on them that are worthy.  The latter is twofold.  “A son,” it is
said, “honoureth his father, and a servant his master.” <span
id="fr_1099"></span>[1100](#fn_1099)   Of these two the one, the
servile, is given by the creature; the other, which may be called the
intimate, is fulfilled by the Spirit.  For, as our Lord said of Himself,
“I have glorified Thee on the earth:  I have finished the work which
thou gavest me to do;” <span id="fr_1100"></span>[1101](#fn_1100) so of
the Paraclete He says “He shall glorify me:  for He shall receive of
mine, and shall show it unto you.” <span
id="fr_1101"></span>[1102](#fn_1101)   And as the Son is glorified of
the Father when He says “I have both glorified *it* and will glorify
*it* <span id="fr_1102"></span>[1103](#fn_1102) again,” <span
id="fr_1103"></span>[1104](#fn_1103) so is the Spirit glorified through
His communion with both Father and Son, and through the testimony of the
Only-begotten when He says “All manner of sin and blasphemy shall be
forgiven unto men:  but the blasphemy against the Holy Ghost shall not
be forgiven unto men.” <span id="fr_1104"></span>[1105](#fn_1104)

<span id="vii.xix-p28"></span>47.  And when, by means of the power that
enlightens us, we fix our eyes on the beauty of the image of the
invisible God, and through the image are led up to the supreme beauty of
the spectacle of the archetype, then, I ween, is with us inseparably the
Spirit of knowledge, in Himself bestowing on them that love the vision
of the truth the power of beholding the Image, not making the exhibition
from without, but in Himself leading on to the full knowledge.  “No man
knoweth the Father save the Son.” <span
id="fr_1105"></span>[1106](#fn_1105)   And so “no man can say that Jesus
is the Lord but by the Holy Ghost.” <span
id="fr_1106"></span>[1107](#fn_1106)   For it is not said through the
Spirit, but by the Spirit, and “God is a spirit, and they that worship
Him must worship Him in spirit and in truth,” <span
id="fr_1107"></span>[1108](#fn_1107) as it is written “in thy light
shall we see light,” <span id="fr_1108"></span>[1109](#fn_1108) namely
by the illumination of the Spirit, “the true light which lighteth every
man that cometh into the world.” <span
id="fr_1109"></span>[1110](#fn_1109)   It results that in Himself He
shows the glory of the Only begotten, and on true worshippers He in
Himself bestows the knowledge of God.  Thus the way of the knowledge of
God lies from One Spirit through the One Son to the One Father, and
conversely the natural Goodness and the inherent Holiness and the royal
Dignity extend from the Father through the Only-begotten to the Spirit. 
Thus there is both acknowledgment of the hypostases and the true <span
id="page_30">p. 30</span> <span id="vii.xix-Page_30"></span>dogma of the
Monarchy is not lost. <span id="fr_1110"></span>[1111](#fn_1110)   They
on the other hand who support their sub-numeration by talking of first
and second and third ought to be informed that into the undefiled
theology of Christians they are importing the polytheism of heathen
error.  No other result can be achieved by the fell device of
sub-numeration than the confession of a first, a second, and a third
God.  For us is sufficient the order prescribed by the Lord.  He who
confuses this order will be no less guilty of transgressing the law than
are the impious heathen.

<span id="vii.xix-p35"></span>Enough has been now said to prove, in
contravention of their error, that the communion of Nature is in no wise
dissolved by the manner of sub-numeration.  Let us, however, make a
concession to our contentious and feeble minded adversary, and grant
that what is second to anything is spoken of in sub-numeration to it. 
Now let us see what follows.  “The first man” it is said “is of the
earth earthy, the second man is the Lord from heaven.” <span
id="fr_1111"></span>[1112](#fn_1111)   Again “that was not first which
is spiritual but that which is natural and afterward that which is
spiritual.” <span id="fr_1112"></span>[1113](#fn_1112)   If then the
second is subnumerated to the first, and the subnumerated is inferior in
dignity to that to which it was subnumerated, according to you the
spiritual is inferior in honour to the natural, and the heavenly man to
the earthy.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1084"></span>[27:1085](2080048.htm#fr_1084) <span
id="vii.xix-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xix-p3"></span> The term <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xix-p3.1"></span>Μοναρχία</span> first acquired importance in
patristic literature in Justin’s work *De monarchia*, against
Polytheism.  Of the lost letter of Irenæus to the Roman Presbyter
Florinus, who was deposed for heresy, presumably gnostic, the title,
according to Eusebius (*H.E*. v. 20), was <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xix-p3.2"></span>περὶ Μοναρχίας, ἢ περὶ τοῦ μὴ εἶναι τὸν θεὸν
ποιητὴν κακῶν</span>.  Later it came to be used to express not the
Divine unity as opposed to Polytheism or Oriental Dualism, but the
Divine unity as opposed to Tritheism.  *Vide* the words of Dionysius of
Rome, as quoted by Athan. *De Decretis*, § 26, “Next let me turn to
those who cut in pieces, divide, and destroy that most sacred doctrine
of the church of God, the divine Monarchy, making it, as it were, three
powers and divided subsistences and three godheads.”  So St. Basil
*Cont. Eunom*. ii. <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xix-p3.3"></span>᾽</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xix-p3.4"></span>Α</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xix-p3.5"></span>ρχὴ μὲν οὖν πατρὸς οὐδεμία, ἀρχὴ δὲ τοῦ υἱοῦ ὁ
πατήρ</span>.  And in *Ep*. xxxviii. <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xix-p3.6"></span>᾽</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xix-p3.7"></span>Αλλά τίς ἐστι δύναμις ἀγεννήτως καὶ ἀνάρχως
ὑφεοτῶσα ἥτις ἐςτὶν αἰτία τῆς ἁπάντων τῶν ὄντων αἰτίας, ἐκ γὰρ τοῦ
πατρὸς ὁ υἱ& 232·ς δι᾽ οὗ τὰ πάντα</span>.  And in *Ep*. cxxv. <span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.xix-p3.8"></span>Ενα γὰρ οἴδαμεν ἀγέννητον
καὶ μίαν τῶν πάντων ἀρχὴν, τὸν πατέρα τοῦ κυρίου ἡμῶν ᾽Ιησοῦ
Χριστοῦ</span>.  On the doctrine and its exponents compare § 72 of the
*De Sp. S.*

<span id="vii.xix-p4"></span>On the other hand “Monarchians” was a name
connoting heresy when applied to those who pushed the doctrine of the
Unity to an extreme, involving denial of a Trinity.  Of these, among the
more noteworthy were Paul of Samosata, bp. of Antioch, who was deposed
in 269, a representative of thinkers who have been called dynamical
monarchians, and Praxeas (supposed by some to be a nickname), who taught
at Rome in the reign of Marcus Aurelius, and of whom Tertullian, the
originator of the term patripassians, as applied to Monarchians, wrote
“*Paracletum fugavit et patrem crucifixit*.”  This heretical
Monarchianism culminated in Sabellius, the “most original, ingenious,
and profound of the Monarchians.”  Schaff. *Hist. Chr. Church*, i. 293. 
*cf*. Gisseler, i. p. 127, Harnack’s *Monarchianismus* in Herzog’s *Real
Encyclopædie*, Vol. x.  Thomasius *Dog. Gesch*. i. p. 179, and Fialon
*Et. Hist*. p. 241.

<span id="fn_1085"></span>[28:1086](2080048.htm#fr_1085) <span
id="vii.xix-p5.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xix-p6"></span> [Matt. xxviii.
19](../../../bib/kjv/mat028.htm#019)<span id="vii.xix-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1086"></span>[28:1087](2080048.htm#fr_1086) <span
id="vii.xix-p6.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xix-p7"></span> Mr. C.F.H. Johnston quotes as instances of
the application of the word “third” to the Holy Ghost; Justin Martyr
(*Apol*. i. 13) “We honour the Spirit of prophecy in the third rank.” 
Tertullian (*In Prax*. 8) “As the fruit from the tree is third from the
root, and the rivulet from the river third from the source, and the
flame from the ray third from the sun.”  Eunomius (*Lib. Apol*. § 25)
“observing the teaching of Saints, we have learned from them that the
Holy Spirit is third in dignity and order, and so have believed him to
be third in nature also.”  On the last St. Basil (*Adv. Eunom*. ii.)
rejoins “Perhaps the word of piety allows Him to come in rank second to
the Son…although He is inferior to the Son in rank and dignity (that we
may make the utmost possible concession) it does not reasonably follow
thence that he is of a different nature.”  On the word “perhaps” a
dispute arose at the Council of Florence, the Latins denying its
genuineness.

<span id="fn_1087"></span>[28:1088](2080048.htm#fr_1087) <span
id="vii.xix-p8.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xix-p9"></span> [Is. xliv.
6](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#006)<span id="vii.xix-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1088"></span>[28:1089](2080048.htm#fr_1088) <span
id="vii.xix-p9.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xix-p10"></span> According to patristic usage <span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.xix-p10.1"></span>θεολογία</span> proper is
concerned with all that relates to the Divine and Eternal nature of our
Lord.  *cf*. Bp. Lightfoot.  *Ap Fathers*, Part II. vol. ii. p. 75.

<span id="fn_1089"></span>[28:1090](2080048.htm#fr_1089) <span
id="vii.xix-p10.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xix-p11"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xix-p11.1"></span>ἑ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xix-p11.2"></span>νιζομένην</span>.  Var. lectiones are <span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.xix-p11.3"></span>ἐ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.xix-p11.4"></span>νιζομένην</span>, “seated
in,” and <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xix-p11.5"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xix-p11.6"></span>νεικονιζομένην</span>, “imaged in.”

<span id="fn_1090"></span>[28:1091](2080048.htm#fr_1090) <span
id="vii.xix-p11.7"></span>

<span id="vii.xix-p12"></span> *cf*. the embolismus, or intercalated
prayer in the *Liturgy of St. James*, as cited by Mr. C.F.H. Johnston. 
“For of thee is the kingdom and the power and the glory, of Father, of
Son, and of Holy Ghost, now and ever.”

<span id="fn_1091"></span>[28:1092](2080048.htm#fr_1091) <span
id="vii.xix-p12.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xix-p13"></span> On the right use of the illustration of
<span class="Greek"><span id="vii.xix-p13.1"></span>εἰκών</span>, *cf*.
Basil *Ep*. xxxviii., and Bp. Lightfoot’s note on [Col. i.
15](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#015)<span id="vii.xix-p13.2"></span>. 
*cf.* also [John i. 18](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#018)<span
id="vii.xix-p13.3"></span> and xiv. 9, 10.

<span id="fn_1092"></span>[29:1093](2080048.htm#fr_1092) <span
id="vii.xix-p14.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xix-p15"></span> [2 Cor. i.
12](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#012)<span id="vii.xix-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1093"></span>[29:1094](2080048.htm#fr_1093) <span
id="vii.xix-p15.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xix-p16"></span> [1 Cor. xi.
12](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#012)<span id="vii.xix-p16.1"></span>. 
George of Laodicea applied this passage to the Son, and wrote to the
Arians:  “Why complain of Pope Alexander (*i.e.* of Alexandria) for
saying that the Son is from the Father.…For if the apostle wrote All
things are from God…He may be said to be from God in that sense in which
all things are from God.”  Athan., *De Syn*. 17.

<span id="fn_1094"></span>[29:1095](2080048.htm#fr_1094) <span
id="vii.xix-p16.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xix-p17"></span> [Rom. viii.
9](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#009)<span id="vii.xix-p17.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1095"></span>[29:1096](2080048.htm#fr_1095) <span
id="vii.xix-p17.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xix-p18"></span> [John xvi.
14](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#014)<span id="vii.xix-p18.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1096"></span>[29:1097](2080048.htm#fr_1096) <span
id="vii.xix-p18.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xix-p19"></span> [John xiv.
17](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#017)<span id="vii.xix-p19.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1097"></span>[29:1098](2080048.htm#fr_1097) <span
id="vii.xix-p19.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xix-p20"></span> [1 Cor. i.
24](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#024)<span id="vii.xix-p20.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1098"></span>[29:1099](2080048.htm#fr_1098) <span
id="vii.xix-p20.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xix-p21"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xix-p21.1"></span>παράκλητος</span> occurs five times in the
N.T., and is rendered in A.V. in [John
14:16](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#016),
[26](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#026), [John
15:26](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#026), [John
16:7](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#007)<span id="vii.xix-p21.2"></span>,
*Comforter;* in [1 John ii. 1](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#001)<span
id="vii.xix-p21.3"></span> *Advocate*, as applied to the Son.  In the
text the Son, the Paraclete, is described as sending the Spirit, the
Paraclete; in the second clause of the sentence it can hardly be
positively determined whether the words <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xix-p21.4"></span>τοῦ ὁθεν προῆλθεν</span> refer to the Father
or to the Son.  The former view is adopted by Mr. C.F.H. Johnson, the
latter by the editor of Keble’s *Studia Sacra*, p. 176.  The sequence of
the sentence in [John xv. 26](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#026)<span
id="vii.xix-p21.5"></span> might lead one to regard <span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.xix-p21.6"></span>ὁ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.xix-p21.7"></span>θεν προῆλθεν</span> as
equivalent to <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xix-p21.8"></span>παρὰ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xix-p21.9"></span>̀</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xix-p21.10"></span>τοῦ Πατρὸς ἐκπορεύεται</span>.  On the other
hand. St. Basil’s avoidance of direct citation of the verb <span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.xix-p21.11"></span>ἐ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.xix-p21.12"></span>κπορεύεται</span>, his
close connexion of <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xix-p21.13"></span>τοῦ ἀποστείλαντος</span> with <span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.xix-p21.14"></span>ὅ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.xix-p21.15"></span>θεν προῆλθεν</span>, and
the close of the verse in St. John’s gospel <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xix-p21.16"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xix-p21.17"></span>κεῖνος μαρτυρήσει περὶ ἐμοῦ</span>, suggest
that the <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xix-p21.18"></span>μεγαλωσύνη</span> in St. Basil’s mind may be
the <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xix-p21.19"></span>μεγαλωσύνη</span> of the Son.  At the same
time, while the Western Church was in the main unanimous as to the
double procession, this passage from St. Basil is not quoted as an
exception to the general current of the teaching of the Greek Fathers,
who, as Bp. Pearson expresses it, “stuck more closely to the phrase and
language of the Scriptures, saying that the spirit proceedeth from the
Father.”  (Pearson *On the Creed*, Art. viii. where *vide*quotations) 
*Vide* also Thomasius, *Christ. Dogm*., i. 270, *<span
id="vii.xix-p21.20"></span>Namentlich auf letzere Bestimmung legten die
griechischen Väter groszes Gewicht. Im Gegensatz gegen den macedonischen
Irrtum, der den Geist für ein Geschüpf des Sohnes ansah, führte man die
Subsistenz desselben ebenso auf den Vater zuruck wie die des Sohnes. 
Man lehrte,* *, also,* *<span id="vii.xix-p21.21"></span>der heilige
Geist geht vom Vater aus, der Vater ist die* <span
id="vii.xix-p21.22"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xix-p21.23"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xix-p21.24"></span>ρχή</span> *<span
id="vii.xix-p21.25"></span>wie des Sohnes so auch des Geistes; aber mit
der dem herkömmlichen Zuge des Dogma entsprechenden Näherbestimmung: 
nicht* <span id="vii.xix-p21.26"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xix-p21.27"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xix-p21.28"></span>μέσως</span>, *<span
id="vii.xix-p21.29"></span>sondern* <span
id="vii.xix-p21.30"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xix-p21.31"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xix-p21.32"></span>μμέσως</span>, *<span
id="vii.xix-p21.33"></span>interventu filii geht der Geist vom Vater
aus, also “<span id="vii.xix-p21.34"></span>durch den Sohn vom Vater.” 
So die bedeutendsten Kirchenlehrer, während andere einfach bei der
Formel stehen blieben; er gehe vom Vater aus*.

<span id="fn_1099"></span>[29:1100](2080048.htm#fr_1099) <span
id="vii.xix-p21.35"></span>

<span id="vii.xix-p22"></span> [Mal. i.
6](../../../bib/kjv/mal001.htm#006)<span id="vii.xix-p22.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1100"></span>[29:1101](2080048.htm#fr_1100) <span
id="vii.xix-p22.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xix-p23"></span> [John xvii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#004)<span id="vii.xix-p23.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1101"></span>[29:1102](2080048.htm#fr_1101) <span
id="vii.xix-p23.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xix-p24"></span> [John xvi.
14](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#014)<span id="vii.xix-p24.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1102"></span>[29:1103](2080048.htm#fr_1102) <span
id="vii.xix-p24.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xix-p25"></span> Four <span class="c14"><span
id="vii.xix-p25.1"></span>mss.</span> of the De S.S. read <span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.xix-p25.2"></span>ἐ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.xix-p25.3"></span>δόξασά σε</span>, a
variation not appearing in <span class="c14"><span
id="vii.xix-p25.4"></span>mss.</span> of the Gospel.

<span id="fn_1103"></span>[29:1104](2080048.htm#fr_1103) <span
id="vii.xix-p25.5"></span>

<span id="vii.xix-p26"></span> [John xii.
28](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#028)<span id="vii.xix-p26.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1104"></span>[29:1105](2080048.htm#fr_1104) <span
id="vii.xix-p26.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xix-p27"></span> [Matt. xii.
31](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#031)<span id="vii.xix-p27.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1105"></span>[29:1106](2080048.htm#fr_1105) <span
id="vii.xix-p28.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xix-p29"></span> [Matt. xi.
27](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#027)<span id="vii.xix-p29.1"></span>,
“<span class="Greek"><span id="vii.xix-p29.2"></span>οὐδεὶς οἶδε τὸν
πατέρα εἰ μὴ ὁ Υἱ& 231·ς</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xix-p29.3"></span>”</span> substituted for “<span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.xix-p29.4"></span>οὐ δὲ τὸν πατέρα τὶς
ἐπιγνώσκει εἰ μὴ ὁ Υἱ& 231·ς</span>.”

<span id="fn_1106"></span>[29:1107](2080048.htm#fr_1106) <span
id="vii.xix-p29.5"></span>

<span id="vii.xix-p30"></span> [1 Cor. xii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#003)<span id="vii.xix-p30.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1107"></span>[29:1108](2080048.htm#fr_1107) <span
id="vii.xix-p30.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xix-p31"></span> [John iv.
24](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#024)<span id="vii.xix-p31.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1108"></span>[29:1109](2080048.htm#fr_1108) <span
id="vii.xix-p31.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xix-p32"></span> [Ps. xxxvi.
9](../../../bib/kjv/psa036.htm#009)<span id="vii.xix-p32.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1109"></span>[29:1110](2080048.htm#fr_1109) <span
id="vii.xix-p32.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xix-p33"></span> [John i.
9](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#009)<span id="vii.xix-p33.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1110"></span>[30:1111](2080048.htm#fr_1110) <span
id="vii.xix-p33.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xix-p34"></span> *cf*. note on p. 27 and the distinction
between <span class="Greek"><span id="vii.xix-p34.1"></span>δόγμα</span>
and <span class="Greek"><span id="vii.xix-p34.2"></span>κήουγμα</span>
in § 66.  “The great objection which the Eastern Church makes to the
*Filioque* is, that it implies the existence of two <span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.xix-p34.3"></span>ἀ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.xix-p34.4"></span>ρχαὶ</span> in the
godhead; and if we believe in <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xix-p34.5"></span>δύο ἄναρχοι</span>; we, in effect, believe in
two Gods.  The unity of the Godhead can only be maintained by
acknowledging the Father to be the sole <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xix-p34.6"></span>᾽</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xix-p34.7"></span>Αρχὴ</span> or <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xix-p34.8"></span>πηγὴ θεοτήτος</span>, who from all eternity
has communicated His own Godhead to His co-eternal and consubstantial
Son and Spirit.  This reasoning is generally true.  But, as the doctrine
of the Procession of the Spirit from the Father and the Son presupposes
the eternal generation of the Son from the Father; it does not follow,
that that doctrine impugns the Catholic belief in the <span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.xix-p34.9"></span>Μία ᾽Αρχή</span>.”  Bp.
Harold Browne, *Exp. xxxix Art*., Note on Art v.

<span id="fn_1111"></span>[30:1112](2080048.htm#fr_1111) <span
id="vii.xix-p35.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xix-p36"></span> [1 Cor. xv.
47](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#047)<span id="vii.xix-p36.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1112"></span>[30:1113](2080048.htm#fr_1112) <span
id="vii.xix-p36.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xix-p37"></span> [1 Cor. xv.
46](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#046)<span id="vii.xix-p37.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Against those who assert that the Spirit ought not to be
glorified.](2080049)
