[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2080271)  [Next](2080273) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ix.cc"></span>

<span id="ix.cc-p1"></span> <span class="c18"><span
id="ix.cc-p1.1"></span>Letter CXCIX. <span
id="fr_2691"></span>[2692](#fn_2691) </span>

<span id="ix.cc-p3"></span><span class="c14"><span
id="ix.cc-p3.1"></span>Canonica</span> <span class="c14"><span
id="ix.cc-p3.2"></span>Secunda</span>.

<span id="ix.cc-p4"></span>*To Amphilochius, concerning the Canons*.

<span id="ix.cc-p5"></span>I <span class="c14"><span
id="ix.cc-p5.1"></span>wrote</span> some time ago in reply to the
questions of your reverence, but I did not send the letter, partly
because from my long and dangerous illness I had not time to do so;
partly because I had no one to send with it.  I have but few men with me
who are experienced in travelling and fit for service of this kind. 
When you thus learn the causes of my delay, forgive me.  I have been
quite astonished at your readiness to learn and at your humility.  You
are entrusted with the office of a teacher, and yet you condescend to
learn, and to learn of me, who pretend to no great knowledge. 
Nevertheless, since you consent, on account of your fear of God, to do
what another man might hesitate to do, I am bound for my part to go even
beyond my strength in aiding your readiness and righteous zeal.

<span id="ix.cc-p6"></span>XVII.  You asked me about the presbyter
Bianor—can he be admitted among the clergy, because of his oath?  I know
that I have already given the clergy of Antioch a general sentence in
the case of all those who had sworn with him; namely, that they should
abstain from the public congregations, but might perform priestly
functions in private. <span id="fr_2692"></span>[2693](#fn_2692)  
Moreover, he has the further liberty for the performance of his
ministerial functions, from the fact that his sacred duties lie not at
Antioch, but at Iconium; for, as you have written to me yourself, he has
chosen to live rather at the latter than at the former place.  The man
in question may, therefore, be received; but your reverence must require
him to shew repentance for the rash readiness of the oath which he took
before the unbeliever, <span id="fr_2693"></span>[2694](#fn_2693) being
unable to bear the trouble of that small peril.

<span id="ix.cc-p9"></span>XVIII.  Concerning fallen virgins, who, after
professing a chaste life before the Lord, make their vows vain, because
they have fallen under the lusts of the flesh, our <span
id="page_237">p. 237</span> <span id="ix.cc-Page_237"></span>fathers,
tenderly <span id="fr_2694"></span>[2695](#fn_2694) and meekly making
allowance for the infirmities of them that fall, laid down that they
might be received after a year, ranking them with the digamists.  Since,
however, by God’s grace the Church grows mightier as she advances, and
the order of virgins is becoming more numerous, it is my judgment that
careful heed should be given both to the act as it appears upon
consideration, and to the mind of Scripture, which may be discovered
from the context.  Widowhood is inferior to virginity; consequently the
sin of the widows comes far behind that of the virgins.  Let us see what
Paul writes to Timothy.  “The young widows refuse:  for when they have
begun to wax wanton against Christ, they will marry; having damnation
because they have cast off their first faith.” <span
id="fr_2695"></span>[2696](#fn_2695)   If, therefore, a widow lies under
a very heavy charge, as setting at naught her faith in Christ, what must
we think of the virgin, who is the bride of Christ, and a chosen vessel
dedicated to the Lord?  It is a grave fault even on the part of a slave
to give herself away in secret wedlock and fill the house with impurity,
and, by her wicked life, to wrong her owner; but it is forsooth far more
shocking for the bride to become an adulteress, and, dishonouring her
union with the bridegroom, to yield herself to unchaste indulgence.  The
widow, as being a corrupted slave, is indeed condemned; but the virgin
comes under the charge of adultery.  We call the man who lives with
another man’s wife an adulterer, and do not receive him into communion
until he has ceased from his sin; and so we shall ordain in the case of
him who has the virgin.  One point, however, must be determined
beforehand, that the name *virgin* is given to a woman who voluntarily
devotes herself to the Lord, renounces marriage, and embraces a life of
holiness.  And we admit professions dating from the age of full
intelligence. <span id="fr_2696"></span>[2697](#fn_2696)   For it is not
right in such cases to admit the words of mere children.  But a girl of
sixteen or seventeen years of age, in full possession of her faculties,
who has been submitted to strict examination, and is then constant, and
persists in her entreaty to be admitted, may then be ranked among the
virgins, her profession ratified, and its violation rigorously
punished.  Many girls are brought forward by their parents and brothers,
and other kinsfolk, before they are of full age, and have no inner
impulse towards a celibate life.  The object of the friends is simply to
provide for themselves.  Such women as these must not be readily
received, before we have made public investigation of their own
sentiments.

<span id="ix.cc-p13"></span>XIX.  I do not recognise the profession of
men, except in the case of those who have enrolled themselves in the
order of monks, and seem to have secretly adopted the celibate life. 
Yet in their case I think it becoming that there should be a previous
examination, and that a distinct profession should be received from
them, so that whenever they may revert to the life of the pleasures of
the flesh, they may be subjected to the punishment of fornicators.

<span id="ix.cc-p14"></span>XX.  I do not think that any condemnation
ought to be passed on women who professed virginity while in heresy, and
then afterwards preferred marriage.  “What things soever the law saith,
it saith to them who are under the law.” <span
id="fr_2697"></span>[2698](#fn_2697)   Those who have not yet put on
Christ’s yoke do not recognise the laws of the Lord.  They are therefore
to be received in the church, as having remission in the case of these
sins too, as of all, from their faith in Christ.  As a general rule, all
sins formerly committed in the catechumenical state are not taken into
account. <span id="fr_2698"></span>[2699](#fn_2698)   The Church does
not receive these persons without baptism; and it is very necessary that
in such cases the birthrights should be observed.

<span id="ix.cc-p17"></span>XXI.  If a man living with a wife is not
satisfied with his marriage and falls into fornication, I account him a
fornicator, and prolong his period of punishment.  Nevertheless, we have
no canon subjecting him to the charge of adultery, if the sin be
committed against an unmarried woman.  For the adulteress, it is said,
“being polluted shall be polluted,” <span
id="fr_2699"></span>[2700](#fn_2699) and she shall not return to her
husband:  and “He that keepeth an adulteress is a fool and
impious.” <span id="fr_2700"></span>[2701](#fn_2700)   He, however, who
has committed fornication is not to be cut off from the society of his
own wife.  So the wife will receive the husband on his return from
fornication, but the husband will expel the polluted woman from his
house.  The argument here is not easy, but the custom has so
obtained. <span id="fr_2701"></span>[2702](#fn_2701)

<span id="ix.cc-p21"></span><span id="page_238">p. 238</span> <span
id="ix.cc-Page_238"></span>XXII.  Men who keep women carried off by
violence, if they carried them off when betrothed to other men, must not
be received before removal of the women and their restoration to those
to whom they were first contracted, whether they wish to receive them,
or to separate from them.  In the case of a girl who has been taken when
not betrothed, she ought first to be removed, and restored to her own
people, and handed over to the will of her own people whether parents,
or brothers, or any one having authority over her.  If they choose to
give her up, the cohabitation may stand; but, if they refuse, no
violence should be used.  In the case of a man having a wife by
seduction, be it secret or by violence, he must be held guilty of
fornication.  The punishment of fornicators is fixed at four years.  In
the first year they must be expelled from prayer, and weep at the door
of the church; in the second they may be received to sermon; in the
third to penance; in the fourth to standing with the people, while they
are withheld from the oblation.  Finally, they may be admitted to the
communion of the good gift.

<span id="ix.cc-p22"></span>XXIII.  Concerning men who marry two
sisters, or women who marry two brothers a short letter of mine has been
published, of which I have sent a copy to your reverence. <span
id="fr_2702"></span>[2703](#fn_2702)   The man who has taken his own
brother’s wife is not to be received until he have separated from her.

<span id="ix.cc-p24"></span>XXIV.  A widow whose name is in the list of
widows, that is, who is supported <span
id="fr_2703"></span>[2704](#fn_2703) by the Church, is ordered by the
Apostle to be supported no longer when she marries. <span
id="fr_2704"></span>[2705](#fn_2704)

<span id="ix.cc-p27"></span>There is no special rule for a widower.  The
punishment appointed for digamy may suffice.  If a widow who is sixty
years of age chooses again to live with a husband, she shall be held
unworthy of the communion of the good gift until she be moved no longer
by her impure desire.  If we reckon her before sixty years, the blame
rests with us, and not with the woman.

<span id="ix.cc-p28"></span>XXV.  The man who retains as his wife the
woman whom he has violated, shall be liable to the penalty of rape, but
it shall be lawful for him to have her to wife.

<span id="ix.cc-p29"></span>XXVI.  Fornication is not wedlock, nor yet
the beginning of wedlock.  Wherefore it is best, if possible, to put
asunder those who are united in fornication.  If they are set on
cohabitation, let them admit the penalty of fornication.  Let them be
allowed to live together, lest a worse thing happen.

<span id="ix.cc-p30"></span>XXVII.  As to the priest ignorantly involved
in an illegal marriage, <span id="fr_2705"></span>[2706](#fn_2705) I
have made the fitting regulation, that he may hold his seat, but must
abstain from other functions.  For such a case pardon is enough.  It is
unreasonable that the man who has to treat his own wounds should be
blessing another, for benediction is the imparting of holiness.  How can
he who through his fault, committed in ignorance, is without holiness,
impart it to another?  Let him bless neither in public nor in private,
nor distribute the body of Christ to others, nor perform any other
sacred function, but, content with his seat of honour, let him beseech
the Lord with weeping, that his sin, committed in ignorance, may be
forgiven.

<span id="ix.cc-p32"></span>XXVIII.  It has seemed to me ridiculous that
any one should make a vow to abstain from swine’s flesh.  Be so good as
to teach men to abstain from foolish vows and promises.  Represent the
use to be quite indifferent.  No creature of God, received with
thanksgiving, is to be rejected. <span
id="fr_2706"></span>[2707](#fn_2706)   The vow is ridiculous; the
abstinence unnecessary.

<span id="ix.cc-p34"></span>XXIX.  It is especially desirable that
attention should be given to the case of persons in power who threaten
on oath to do some hurt to those under their authority.  The remedy is
twofold.  In the first place, let them be taught not to take oaths at
random:  secondly, not to persist in their wicked determinations.  Any
one who is arrested in the design of fulfilling an oath to injure
another ought to shew repentance for the rashness of his oath, and must
not confirm his wickedness under the pretext of piety.  Herod was none
the better for fulfilling his oath, when, of course only to save himself
from perjury, he became the prophet’s murderer. <span
id="fr_2707"></span>[2708](#fn_2707)   Swearing is absolutely
forbidden, <span id="fr_2708"></span>[2709](#fn_2708) and it is only
reasonable that the oath which tends to evil should be condemned.  The
swearer must therefore change his mind, and not persist in confirming
his impiety.  Consider the absurdity of the thing a little further. 
Suppose a man to swear that he will put his brother’s eyes out:  is it
well for him to <span id="page_239">p. 239</span> <span
id="ix.cc-Page_239"></span>carry his oath into action?  Or to commit
murder? or to break any other commandment?  “I have sworn, and I will
perform it,” <span id="fr_2709"></span>[2710](#fn_2709) not to sin, but
to “keep thy righteous judgments.”  It is no less our duty to undo and
destroy sin, than it is to confirm the commandment by immutable
counsels.

<span id="ix.cc-p38"></span>XXX.  As to those guilty of abduction we
have no ancient rule, but I have expressed my own judgment.  The period
is three years; <span id="fr_2710"></span>[2711](#fn_2710) the culprits
and their accomplices to be excluded from service.  The act committed
without violence is not liable to punishment, whenever it has not been
preceded by violation or robbery.  The widow is independent, and to
follow or not is in her own power.  We must, therefore, pay no heed to
excuses.

<span id="ix.cc-p40"></span>XXXI.  A woman whose husband has gone away
and disappeared, and who marries another, before she has evidence of his
death, commits adultery.  Clerics who are guilty of the sin unto
death <span id="fr_2711"></span>[2712](#fn_2711) are degraded from their
order, but not excluded from the communion of the laity.  Thou shalt not
punish twice for the same fault. <span
id="fr_2712"></span>[2713](#fn_2712)

<span id="ix.cc-p43"></span>XXXIII.  Let an indictment for murder be
preferred against the woman who gives birth to a child on the road and
pays no attention to it.

<span id="ix.cc-p44"></span>XXXIV.  Women who had committed adultery,
and confessed their fault through piety, or were in any way convicted,
were not allowed by our fathers to be publicly exposed, that we might
not cause their death after conviction.  But they ordered that they
should be excluded from communion till they had fulfilled their term of
penance.

<span id="ix.cc-p45"></span>XXXV.  In the case of a man deserted by his
wife, the cause of the desertion must be taken into account.  If she
appear to have abandoned him without reason, he is deserving of pardon,
but the wife of punishment.  Pardon will be given to him that he may
communicate with the Church.

<span id="ix.cc-p46"></span>XXXVI.  Soldiers’ wives who have married in
their husbands’ absence will come under the same principle as wives who,
when their husbands have been on a journey, have not waited their
return.  Their case, however, does admit of some concession on the
ground of there being greater reason to suspect death.

<span id="ix.cc-p47"></span>XXXVII.  The man who marries after abducting
another man’s wife will incur the charge of adultery for the first case;
but for the second will go free.

<span id="ix.cc-p48"></span>XXXVIII.  Girls who follow against their
fathers’ will commit fornication; but if their fathers are reconciled to
them, the act seems to admit of a remedy.  They are not however
immediately restored to communion, but are to be punished for three
years.

<span id="ix.cc-p49"></span>XXXIX.  The woman who lives with an
adulterer is an adulteress the whole time. <span
id="fr_2713"></span>[2714](#fn_2713)

<span id="ix.cc-p51"></span>XL.  The woman who yields to a man against
her master’s will commits fornication; but if afterwards she accepts
free marriage, she marries.  The former case is fornication; the latter
marriage.  The covenants of persons who are not independent have no
validity.

<span id="ix.cc-p52"></span>XLI.  The woman in widowhood, who is
independent, may dwell with a husband without blame, if there is no one
to prevent their cohabitation; for the Apostle says; “but if her husband
be dead, she is at liberty to be married to whom she will; only in the
Lord.” <span id="fr_2714"></span>[2715](#fn_2714)

<span id="ix.cc-p54"></span>XLII.  Marriages contracted without the
permission of those in authority, are fornication.  If neither father
nor master be living the contracting parties are free from blame; just
as if the authorities assent to the cohabitation, it assumes the fixity
of marriage.

<span id="ix.cc-p55"></span>XLIII.  He who smites his neighbour to death
is a murderer, whether he struck first or in self defence.

<span id="ix.cc-p56"></span>XLIV.  The deaconess who commits fornication
with a heathen may be received into repentance and will be admitted to
the oblation in the seventh year; of course if she be living in
chastity.  The heathen who, after he has believed, takes to idolatry,
returns to his vomit.  We do not, however, give up the body of the
deaconess to the use of the flesh, as being consecrated.

<span id="ix.cc-p57"></span>XLV.  If any one, after taking the name of
Christianity, insults Christ, he gets no good from the name.

<span id="ix.cc-p58"></span>XLVI.  The woman who unwillingly marries a
man deserted at the time by his wife, and is afterwards repudiated,
because of the return of the former to him, commits fornication, but
involuntarily.  She will, therefore, not be prohibited from marriage;
but it is better if she remain as she is. <span
id="fr_2715"></span>[2716](#fn_2715)

<span id="ix.cc-p60"></span>XLVII.  Encratitæ, <span
id="fr_2716"></span>[2717](#fn_2716) Saccophori, <span
id="fr_2717"></span>[2718](#fn_2717) and <span id="page_240">p.
240</span> <span id="ix.cc-Page_240"></span>Apotactitæ <span
id="fr_2718"></span>[2719](#fn_2718) are not regarded in the same manner
as Novatians, since in their case a canon has been pronounced, although
different; while of the former nothing has been said.  All these I
re-baptize on the same principle.  If among you their re-baptism is
forbidden, for the sake of some arrangement, nevertheless let my
principle prevail.  Their heresy is, as it were, an offshoot of the
Marcionites, abominating, as they do, marriage, refusing wine, and
calling God’s creature polluted.  We do not therefore receive them into
the Church, unless they be baptized into our baptism.  Let them not say
that they have been baptized into Father, Son and Holy Ghost, inasmuch
as they make God the author of evil, after the example of Marcion and
the rest of the heresies.  Wherefore, if this be determined on, more
bishops ought to meet together in one place and publish the canon in
these terms, that action may be taken without peril, and authority given
to answers to questions of this kind.

<span id="ix.cc-p64"></span>XLVIII.  The woman who has been abandoned by
her husband, ought, in my judgment, to remain as she is.  The Lord said,
“If any one leave <span id="fr_2719"></span>[2720](#fn_2719) his wife,
saving for the cause of fornication, he causeth her to commit
adultery;” <span id="fr_2720"></span>[2721](#fn_2720) thus, by calling
her adulteress, He excludes her from intercourse with another man.  For
how can the man being guilty, as having caused adultery, and the woman,
go without blame, when she is called adulteress by the Lord for having
intercourse with another man?

<span id="ix.cc-p67"></span>XLIX.  Suffering violation should not be a
cause of condemnation.  So the slave girl, if she has been forced by her
own master, is free from blame.

<span id="ix.cc-p68"></span>L.  There is no law as to trigamy:  a third
marriage is not contracted by law.  We look upon such things as the
defilements of the Church.  But we do not subject them to public
condemnation, as being better than unrestrained fornication. <span
id="fr_2721"></span>[2722](#fn_2721)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2691"></span>[236:2692](2080272.htm#fr_2691) <span
id="ix.cc-p1.2"></span>

<span id="ix.cc-p2"></span> Placed in 375.

<span id="fn_2692"></span>[236:2693](2080272.htm#fr_2692) <span
id="ix.cc-p6.1"></span>

<span id="ix.cc-p7"></span> The Ben. Ed. note:  “*Sæpe vituperantur apud
sanctos Patres, qui sacra in privatis ædibus sive domesticis oratoriis
celebrant.  Hinc Irenæus, lib*. iv. cap. 26, *oportere ait eos, qui*
absistunt a principali successione et quocunque loco colligunt,
suspectos habere, vel quasi hæreticos et malæ sententiæ, vel quasi
scindentes et elatos et sibi placentes; aut rursus ut hypocritas quæstus
gratia et vanæ gloriæ hoc operantes.  Basilius, in [Psalm
xxvii.](../../../bib/kjv/psa027.htm#000)<span id="ix.cc-p7.1"></span> n.
3:  Non igitur extra sanctam hanc aulam adorare oporet, sed intra ipsam,
etc.  *Similia habet Eusebius in eundem psalmum,* p. 313.  *Sic etiam
Cyrillus Alexandrinus in libro adversus Anthropomorphitas, cap.* 12*, et
in libro decimo De adorat.,* p. 356.  *Sed his in locis perspicuum est
hæreticorum aut schismaticorum synagogas notari, vel quas vocat
Basilius, can. 1*.  <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.cc-p7.2"></span>παρασυναγωγάς</span>, *sive illicitos conventus a
presbyteris aut episcopis rebellibus habitos, aut a populis disciplinæ
expertibus.  At interdum graves causæ suberant, cur sacra in privatis
ædibus impermissa non essent.  Ipsa persecutio necessitatem hujus rei
sæpe afferebat, cum catholici episcoporum hæreticorum communionem
fugerent, ut Sebastiæ ecclesiarum aditu prohiberentur.  Minime ergo
mirum, si presbyteris Antiochenis eam sacerdotii perfunctionem Basilius
reliquit, quæ et ad jurisjurandi religionem et ad temporum molestias
accommodata videbatur.  Synodus Laodicena vetat, can.* 58, in domibus
fieri oblationem ab episcopis vel presbyteris.  *Canon* 31.  *Trullanus
id clericis non interdicit, modo accedat episcopi consenus.  Non
inusitata fuisse ejusmodi sacra in domesticis oratoriis confirmat canon
Basilii* 27, *ubi vetatur, ne presbyter illicitis nuptiis implicantus
privatim aut publice sacerdotii munere fungatur.  Eustathius Sebastenus
Ancyræ cum Arianis in domibus communicavit, ut ex pluribus Basilii
epistolis discimus, cum apertam ab eis communionem impetrare non
posset*.”

<span id="fn_2693"></span>[236:2694](2080272.htm#fr_2693) <span
id="ix.cc-p7.3"></span>

<span id="ix.cc-p8"></span> *Videtur infidelis ille vir unus aliquis
fuisse ex potentioribus Arianis ejusque furor idcirco in presbyteros
Antiochenos incitatus quod hi ecclesiam absente Meletio regerent, ac
maximam civium partem in illius fide et communione retinerent.*

<span id="fn_2694"></span>[237:2695](2080272.htm#fr_2694) <span
id="ix.cc-p9.1"></span>

<span id="ix.cc-p10"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.cc-p10.1"></span>ἁ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.cc-p10.2"></span>παλῶς</span>, with four <span class="c14"><span
id="ix.cc-p10.3"></span>mss.</span>, *al*. <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.cc-p10.4"></span>ἁ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.cc-p10.5"></span>πλῶς</span>.

<span id="fn_2695"></span>[237:2696](2080272.htm#fr_2695) <span
id="ix.cc-p10.6"></span>

<span id="ix.cc-p11"></span> [1 Tim.
5:11](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#011),
[12](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#012)<span id="ix.cc-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2696"></span>[237:2697](2080272.htm#fr_2696) <span
id="ix.cc-p11.2"></span>

<span id="ix.cc-p12"></span> “*Hoc Basilii decretum de professionis
ætate citatur in canone quadragesimo synodi in Trullo*” (<span
class="c14"><span id="ix.cc-p12.1"></span>a.d.</span> 691) “*et decem et
septem anni quos Basilius requirit, ad decem rediguntur*.”

<span id="fn_2697"></span>[237:2698](2080272.htm#fr_2697) <span
id="ix.cc-p14.1"></span>

<span id="ix.cc-p15"></span> [Rom. iii.
19](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#019)<span id="ix.cc-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2698"></span>[237:2699](2080272.htm#fr_2698) <span
id="ix.cc-p15.2"></span>

<span id="ix.cc-p16"></span> “*Male Angli in Pandectis et alit
interpretes reddunt, quæ* in catechumenica vita fiunt.  *Non enim dicit
Basilius ea non puniri quæ in hoc statu peccantur, sed tantum peccata
ante baptismum commissa baptismo expiari, nec jam esse judicio
ecclesiastico obnoxia.  Hinc observat Zonaras non pugnare hunc canonem
cum canone quinto Neocæsariensi, in quo pœnæ catechumenis peccantibus
decernuntur*.”

<span id="fn_2699"></span>[237:2700](2080272.htm#fr_2699) <span
id="ix.cc-p17.1"></span>

<span id="ix.cc-p18"></span> [Jer. iii.
1](../../../bib/kjv/jer003.htm#001)<span id="ix.cc-p18.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2700"></span>[237:2701](2080272.htm#fr_2700) <span
id="ix.cc-p18.2"></span>

<span id="ix.cc-p19"></span> [Prov. xviii.
22](../../../bib/kjv/pro018.htm#022)<span id="ix.cc-p19.1"></span>, LXX.

<span id="fn_2701"></span>[237:2702](2080272.htm#fr_2701) <span
id="ix.cc-p19.2"></span>

<span id="ix.cc-p20"></span> “*Non solus Basilius hanc consuetudinem
secutus.  Auctor* constitutionum apostolicarum *sic loquitur lib.* vi.
*cap*. 14:  Qui corruptam retinet, naturæ legem violat:  quando quidem
*qui retinet adulteram, stultus est et impius.  Abscinde enim eam,
inquit, a carnibus tuis.*  Nam adjutrix non est, sed insidiatrix, quæ
mentem ad alium declinarit.  *Canon* 8, *Neocæsariensis laicis, quorum
uxores adulterii convictæ, aditum ad ministerium ecclesiasticum claudit;
clericis depositionis pœnam irrogat, si adulteram nolint dimittere. 
Canon* 65 *Eliberitanus sic habet:*  Si cujus clerici uxor fuerit
mæchata, et scierit eam maritus suus mæchari, et non eam statim
projecerit, nec in fine accipiat communionem.  *Hermas lib*. i, *c*. 2,
*adulteram ejici jubet, sed tamen pœnitentem recipi.  S. Augustinus
adulterium legitimam esse dimittendi causam pronuntiat, sed non
necessariam, lib*. ii. *De Adulter. nuptiis, cap*. 5, *n*. 13.”

<span id="fn_2702"></span>[238:2703](2080272.htm#fr_2702) <span
id="ix.cc-p22.1"></span>

<span id="ix.cc-p23"></span> Probably *Letter* clx. to Diodorus is
referred to.

<span id="fn_2703"></span>[238:2704](2080272.htm#fr_2703) <span
id="ix.cc-p24.1"></span>

<span id="ix.cc-p25"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.cc-p25.1"></span>Διακονουμένην</span>.  So the Ben. Ed.  Another
possible rendering is “received into the order of deaconesses.”

<span id="fn_2704"></span>[238:2705](2080272.htm#fr_2704) <span
id="ix.cc-p25.2"></span>

<span id="ix.cc-p26"></span> [1 Tim.
5:11](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#011),
[12](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#012)<span id="ix.cc-p26.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2705"></span>[238:2706](2080272.htm#fr_2705) <span
id="ix.cc-p30.1"></span>

<span id="ix.cc-p31"></span> “<span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.cc-p31.1"></span>᾽</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.cc-p31.2"></span>Αθέσμῳ γάμῳ</span>.”  *Illicitas nuptias*.

<span id="fn_2706"></span>[238:2707](2080272.htm#fr_2706) <span
id="ix.cc-p32.1"></span>

<span id="ix.cc-p33"></span> [1 Tim. iv.
4](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#004)<span id="ix.cc-p33.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2707"></span>[238:2708](2080272.htm#fr_2707) <span
id="ix.cc-p34.1"></span>

<span id="ix.cc-p35"></span> [Matt. xiv.
10](../../../bib/kjv/mat014.htm#010)<span id="ix.cc-p35.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2708"></span>[238:2709](2080272.htm#fr_2708) <span
id="ix.cc-p35.2"></span>

<span id="ix.cc-p36"></span> [Matt. v.
34](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#034)<span id="ix.cc-p36.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2709"></span>[239:2710](2080272.htm#fr_2709) <span
id="ix.cc-p36.2"></span>

<span id="ix.cc-p37"></span> [Ps. cxix.
106](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#106)<span id="ix.cc-p37.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2710"></span>[239:2711](2080272.htm#fr_2710) <span
id="ix.cc-p38.1"></span>

<span id="ix.cc-p39"></span> The Ben. Ed. point out that in Canon xxii.
four years is the allotted period, as in the case of fornicators.

<span id="fn_2711"></span>[239:2712](2080272.htm#fr_2711) <span
id="ix.cc-p40.1"></span>

<span id="ix.cc-p41"></span> St. Basil on [Isaiah
iv.](../../../bib/kjv/isa004.htm#000)<span id="ix.cc-p41.1"></span>
calls sins wilfully committed after full knowledge “sins unto death.” 
But in the same commentary he applies the same designation to sins which
lead to hell.  The sense to be applied to the phrase in Canon xxxii. is
to be learnt, according to the Ben. note, from Canons lxix. and lxx.,
where a less punishment is assigned to mere wilful sins unto death than
in Canon xxxii.

<span id="fn_2712"></span>[239:2713](2080272.htm#fr_2712) <span
id="ix.cc-p41.2"></span>

<span id="ix.cc-p42"></span> [Nahum i.
9](../../../bib/kjv/nah001.htm#009)<span id="ix.cc-p42.1"></span>, LXX.

<span id="fn_2713"></span>[239:2714](2080272.htm#fr_2713) <span
id="ix.cc-p49.1"></span>

<span id="ix.cc-p50"></span> Or, according to another reading, in every
way.

<span id="fn_2714"></span>[239:2715](2080272.htm#fr_2714) <span
id="ix.cc-p52.1"></span>

<span id="ix.cc-p53"></span> [1 Cor. vii.
39](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#039)<span id="ix.cc-p53.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2715"></span>[239:2716](2080272.htm#fr_2715) <span
id="ix.cc-p58.1"></span>

<span id="ix.cc-p59"></span> This is Can. xciii. of the Council in
Trullo.

<span id="fn_2716"></span>[239:2717](2080272.htm#fr_2716) <span
id="ix.cc-p60.1"></span>

<span id="ix.cc-p61"></span> Generally reckoned rather as Manichæans
than as here by Basil as Marcionites, but dualism was common to both
systems.

<span id="fn_2717"></span>[239:2718](2080272.htm#fr_2717) <span
id="ix.cc-p61.1"></span>

<span id="ix.cc-p62"></span> A Manichæan sect, who led a solitary life. 
Death is threatened against them in a law of Theodosius dated <span
class="c14"><span id="ix.cc-p62.1"></span>a.d.</span> 322 (*Cod. Theod.
lib*. xvi. *tit*. 5, *leg*. 9), identified by the Ben. Ed. with the
Hydroparastatæ.

<span id="fn_2718"></span>[240:2719](2080272.htm#fr_2718) <span
id="ix.cc-p62.2"></span>

<span id="ix.cc-p63"></span> A Manichæan sect.  *cf*. Epiphanius ii.
18.  In the work of Macarius Magnes, published in Paris 1876, they are
identified with the Encratites.

<span id="fn_2719"></span>[240:2720](2080272.htm#fr_2719) <span
id="ix.cc-p64.1"></span>

<span id="ix.cc-p65"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.cc-p65.1"></span>καταλίπῃ</span> for <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.cc-p65.2"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.cc-p65.3"></span>πολύσῃ</span>.

<span id="fn_2720"></span>[240:2721](2080272.htm#fr_2720) <span
id="ix.cc-p65.4"></span>

<span id="ix.cc-p66"></span> [Matt. v.
22](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#022)<span id="ix.cc-p66.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2721"></span>[240:2722](2080272.htm#fr_2721) <span
id="ix.cc-p68.1"></span>

<span id="ix.cc-p69"></span> *cf*. however Canon iv., where trigamy is
called polygamy or at best a limited fornication, and those guilty of it
subjected to exclusion from the Eucharist.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: To Amphilochius, bishop of Iconium.](2080273)
