[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2080008)  [Next](2080010) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.i.iii"></span>

<span id="vi.i.iii-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="vi.i.iii-p1.1"></span>III.—Life at Cæsarea; Baptism; and Adoption of
Monastic Life.</span>

<span id="vi.i.iii-p2"></span>When Basil overcame the efforts of his
companions to detain him at Athens, Gregory was prevailed on to remain
for a while longer.  Basil therefore made his rapid journey homeward
alone.  His Letter to Eustathius <span id="fr_53"></span>[54](#fn_53)
alleges as the chief reason for his hurried departure the desire to
profit by the instruction of that teacher.  This may be the language of
compliment.  In the same letter he speaks of his fortitude in resisting
all temptation to stop at the city on the Hellespont.  This city I
hesitate to recognise, with Maran, as Constantinople.  There may have
been inducements to Basil to stop at Lampsacus and it is more probably
Lampsacus that he avoided. <span id="fr_54"></span>[55](#fn_54)   At
Cæsarea he was welcomed as one of the most distinguished of her
sons, <span id="fr_55"></span>[56](#fn_55) and there for a time taught
rhetoric with conspicuous success. <span id="fr_56"></span>[57](#fn_56)
  A deputation came from Neocæsarea to request him to undertake
educational work at that city, <span id="fr_57"></span>[58](#fn_57) and
in vain endeavoured to detain <span id="fr_58"></span>[59](#fn_58) him
by lavish promises.  According to his friend Gregory, Basil had already
determined to renounce the world, in the sense of devoting himself to an
ascetic and philosophic life. <span id="fr_59"></span>[60](#fn_59)   His
brother Gregory, however, <span id="fr_60"></span>[61](#fn_60)
represents him as at this period still under more mundane influences,
and as shewing something of the self-confidence and conceit which are
occasionally to be observed in young men who have just successfully
completed an university career, and as being largely indebted to the
persuasion and example of his sister Macrina for the resolution, with
which he now carried out the determination to devote himself to a life
of self-denial.  To the same period may probably be referred Basil’s
baptism.  The sacrament was administered by Dianius. <span
id="fr_61"></span>[62](#fn_61)   It would be quite consonant with the
feelings of the times that pious parents like the elder Basil and
Emmelia should shrink from admitting their boy to holy baptism before
his encountering the temptations of school and university life. <span
id="fr_62"></span>[63](#fn_62)   The assigned date, <span
id="page_xvii">p. xvii</span> <span id="vi.i.iii-Page_xvii"></span>357,
may be reasonably accepted, and shortly after his baptism he was
ordained Reader. <span id="fr_63"></span>[64](#fn_63)   It was about
this that he visited monastic settlements in Palestine, Mesopotamia,
Cœle Syria, and Egypt, <span id="fr_64"></span>[65](#fn_64) though he
was not so fortunate as to encounter the great pope Athanasius. <span
id="fr_65"></span>[66](#fn_65)   Probably during this tour he began the
friendship with Eusebius of Samosata which lasted so long.

<span id="vi.i.iii-p16"></span>To the same period we may also refer his
renunciation of his share of the family property. <span
id="fr_66"></span>[67](#fn_66)   Maran would appear to date this before
the Syrian and Egyptian tour, a journey which can hardly have been
accomplished without considerable expense.  But, in truth, with every
desire to do justice to the self-denial and unworldliness of St. Basil
and of other like-minded and like-lived champions of the Faith, it
cannot but be observed that, at all events in Basil’s case, the
renunciation must be understood with some reasonable reservation.  The
great archbishop has been claimed as a “socialist,” whatever may be
meant in these days by the term. <span id="fr_67"></span>[68](#fn_67)  
But St. Basil did not renounce all property himself, and had a keen
sense of its rights in the case of his friends. <span
id="fr_68"></span>[69](#fn_68)   From his letter on behalf of his
foster-brother, placed by Maran during his presbyterate, <span
id="fr_69"></span>[70](#fn_69) it would appear that this foster-brother,
Dorotheus, was allowed a life tenancy of a house and farm on the family
estate, with a certain number of slaves, on condition that Basil should
be supported out of the profits.  Here we have landlord, tenant, rent,
and unearned increment.  St. Basil can scarcely be fairly cited as a
practical apostle of some of the chapters of the socialist evangel of
the end of the nineteenth century.  But ancient eulogists of the great
archbishop, anxious to represent him as a good monk, have not failed to
foresee that this might be urged in objection to the completeness of his
renunciation of the world, in their sense, and to counterbalance it,
have cited an anecdote related by Cassian. <span
id="fr_70"></span>[71](#fn_70)   One day a senator named Syncletius came
to Basil to be admitted to his monastery, with the statement that he had
renounced his property, excepting only a pittance to save him from
manual labour.  “You have spoilt a senator,” said Basil, “without making
a monk.”  Basil’s own letter represents him as practically following the
example of, or setting an example to, Syncletius.

<span id="vi.i.iii-p22"></span>Stimulated to carry out his purpose of
embracing the ascetic life by what he saw of the monks and solitaries
during his travels, Basil first of all thought of establishing a
monastery in the district of Tiberina. <span
id="fr_71"></span>[72](#fn_71)   Here he would have been in the near
neighbourhood of Arianzus, the home of his friend Gregory.  But the
attractions of Tiberina were ultimately postponed to those of Ibora, and
Basil’s place of retreat was fixed in the glen not far from the old
home, and only separated from Annesi by the Iris, of which we have
Basil’s own picturesque description. <span
id="fr_72"></span>[73](#fn_72)   Gregory declined to do more than pay a
visit to Pontus, and so is said to have caused Basil much
disappointment. <span id="fr_73"></span>[74](#fn_73)   It is a little
characteristic of the imperious nature of the man of stronger will, that
while he would not give up the society of his own mother and sister in
order to be near his friend, he complained of his friend’s not making a
similar sacrifice in order to be near him. <span
id="fr_74"></span>[75](#fn_74)   Gregory <span
id="fr_75"></span>[76](#fn_75) good-humouredly replies to Basil’s
depreciation of Tiberina by a counter attack on Cæsarea and Annesi.

<span id="vi.i.iii-p28"></span>At the Pontic retreat Basil now began
that system of hard ascetic discipline which eventually contributed to
the enfeeblement of his health and the shortening of his life.  He
complains again and again in his letters of the deplorable physical
condition to which he is reduced, and he died at the age of fifty.  It
is a question whether a constitution better capable of sustaining the
fatigue of long journeys, and a life prolonged beyond the Council of
Constantinople, would or would not have left a larger mark upon the
history of the Church.  There can be no doubt, that in Basil’s personal
conflict with the decadent empire represented by Valens, his own cause
was strengthened by his obvious superiority to the hopes and fears of
vulgar ambitions.  He ate no more than was actually necessary for daily
sustenance, and his fare was of the poorest.  Even when he was
archbishop, no flesh meat was dressed in his kitchens. <span
id="fr_76"></span>[77](#fn_76)   His wardrobe consisted of one under and
one <span id="page_xviii">p. xviii</span> <span
id="vi.i.iii-Page_xviii"></span>over garment.  By night he wore
haircloth; not by day, lest he should seem ostentatious.  He treated his
body, says his brother, with a possible reference to St. Paul, <span
id="fr_77"></span>[78](#fn_77) as an angry owner treats a runaway
slave. <span id="fr_78"></span>[79](#fn_78)   A consistent celibate, he
was yet almost morbidly conscious of his unchastity, mindful of the
Lord’s words as to the adultery of the impure thought. <span
id="fr_79"></span>[80](#fn_79)   St. Basil relates in strong terms his
admiration for the ascetic character of Eustathius of Sebaste, <span
id="fr_80"></span>[81](#fn_80) and at this time was closely associated
with him.  Indeed, Eustathius was probably the first to introduce the
monastic system into Pontus, his part in the work being comparatively
ignored in later days when his tergiversation had brought him into
disrepute.  Thus the credit of introducing monasticism into Asia Minor
was given to Basil alone. <span id="fr_81"></span>[82](#fn_81)   A novel
feature of this monasticism was the Cœnobium, <span
id="fr_82"></span>[83](#fn_82) for hitherto ascetics had lived in
absolute solitude, or in groups of only two or three. <span
id="fr_83"></span>[84](#fn_83)   Thus it was partly relieved from the
discredit of selfish isolation and unprofitable idleness. <span
id="fr_84"></span>[85](#fn_84)

<span id="vi.i.iii-p38"></span>The example set by Basil and his
companions spread.  Companies of hard-working ascetics of both sexes
were established in every part of Pontus, every one of them an active
centre for the preaching of the Nicene doctrines, and their defence
against Arian opposition and misconstruction. <span
id="fr_85"></span>[86](#fn_85)   Probably about this time, in
conjunction with his friend Gregory, Basil compiled the collection of
the beauties of Origen which was entitled *Philocalia*.  Origen’s
authority stood high, and both of the main divisions of Christian
thought, the Nicene and the Arian, endeavoured to support their
respective views from his writings.  Basil and Gregory were successful
in vindicating his orthodoxy and using his aid in strengthening the
Catholic position. <span id="fr_86"></span>[87](#fn_86)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_53"></span>[xvi:54](2080009.htm#fr_53) <span
id="vi.i.iii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i.iii-p3"></span> *Ep*. i.

<span id="fn_54"></span>[xvi:55](2080009.htm#fr_54) <span
id="vi.i.iii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i.iii-p4"></span> What these inducements can have been it
seems vain to conjecture.  *cf. Ep*. i. and note.

<span id="fn_55"></span>[xvi:56](2080009.htm#fr_55) <span
id="vi.i.iii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i.iii-p5"></span> Greg. Naz., *Or*. xliii.

<span id="fn_56"></span>[xvi:57](2080009.htm#fr_56) <span
id="vi.i.iii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i.iii-p6"></span> Rufinus xi. 9.

<span id="fn_57"></span>[xvi:58](2080009.htm#fr_57) <span
id="vi.i.iii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i.iii-p7"></span> *Ep*. ccx. § 2.  The time assigned by
Maran for the incident here narrated is no doubt the right one.  But the
deputation need have travelled no farther than to Annesi, if, as is
tolerably certain, Basil on his return from Athens visited his relatives
and the family estate.

<span id="fn_58"></span>[xvi:59](2080009.htm#fr_58) <span
id="vi.i.iii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i.iii-p8"></span> The word <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.i.iii-p8.1"></span>κατασχεῖν</span> would be natural if they
sought to keep him in Pontus; hardly, if their object was to bring him
from Cæsarea.

<span id="fn_59"></span>[xvi:60](2080009.htm#fr_59) <span
id="vi.i.iii-p8.2"></span>

<span id="vi.i.iii-p9"></span> *Or*. xliii.

<span id="fn_60"></span>[xvi:61](2080009.htm#fr_60) <span
id="vi.i.iii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i.iii-p10"></span> *Vit. Mac*.

<span id="fn_61"></span>[xvi:62](2080009.htm#fr_61) <span
id="vi.i.iii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i.iii-p11"></span> *cf. De Sp. Scto*. xxix., where the
description of the bishop who both baptized and ordained Basil, and
spent a long life in the ministry, can apply only to Dianius.  *cf*.
Maran, *Vit. Bas*. iii.

<span id="fn_62"></span>[xvi:63](2080009.htm#fr_62) <span
id="vi.i.iii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i.iii-p12"></span> According to the legendary life of St.
Basil, attributed to St. Amphilochius, he was baptized at Jerusalem. 
Nor is it right to omit to notice the argument of Wall (*Infant
Baptism*, ch. x.) founded on a coincidence between two passages in the
writings of Greg. Naz.  In *Or*. xl. *ad init*. he speaks of baptism as
a <span class="Greek"><span id="vi.i.iii-p12.1"></span>γένεσις ἡμερινὴ
καὶ ἐλευθέρα καὶ λυτικὴ παθῶν, πᾶν τὸ ἀπὸ γενέσεως κάλυμμα περιτέμνουσα,
καὶ πρὸς τὴν ἄνω ζωὴν ἐπανάγουσα</span>.  In *Or*. xliii., he says of
Basil that <span class="Greek"><span id="vi.i.iii-p12.2"></span>τὰ πρῶτα
τῆς ἡλικίας ῦπὸ τῷ πατρὶ</span>…<span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.i.iii-p12.3"></span>σπαργανοῦται καὶ διαπλάττεται πλάσιν τὴν
ἀρίστην τε καὶ καθαρωτάτην, ἣν ἡμερινὴν ὁ θεῖος Δαβιδ καλῶς ὀνουάζει καὶ
τῆς νυχτερινῆς ἀντίθετον</span>.  As they stand alone, there is
something to be said for the conclusion Wall deduces from these
passages.  Against it there is the tradition of the later baptism, with
the indication of Dianius as having performed the rite in the *De Sp.
Scto*. 29.  On the other hand <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.i.iii-p12.4"></span>τὰ πρῶτα τῆς ἡλικιας</span> might possibly
refer not to infancy, but to boyhood.

<span id="fn_63"></span>[xvii:64](2080009.htm#fr_63) <span
id="vi.i.iii-p12.5"></span>

<span id="vi.i.iii-p13"></span> *De S. Scto*. xxiv.  On his growing
seriousness of character, *cf. Ep*. ccxxiii.

<span id="fn_64"></span>[xvii:65](2080009.htm#fr_64) <span
id="vi.i.iii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i.iii-p14"></span> *Epp*. i. and ccxxiii. § 2.

<span id="fn_65"></span>[xvii:66](2080009.htm#fr_65) <span
id="vi.i.iii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i.iii-p15"></span> *Ep*. lxxx.

<span id="fn_66"></span>[xvii:67](2080009.htm#fr_66) <span
id="vi.i.iii-p16.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i.iii-p17"></span> *cf. Ep*. ccxxiii. § 2.  Greg. Naz.,
*Or*. xliii.

<span id="fn_67"></span>[xvii:68](2080009.htm#fr_67) <span
id="vi.i.iii-p17.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i.iii-p18"></span> *e.g. The New Party*, 1894, pp. 82 and
83, quoting Bas., *In Isa*. i., *Hom. in illud Lucæ Destruam horrea*, §
7, and *Hom. in Divites*.

<span id="fn_68"></span>[xvii:69](2080009.htm#fr_68) <span
id="vi.i.iii-p18.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i.iii-p19"></span> *Epp*. iii., xxxvi.  *cf*. Dr. Travers
Smith, *Basil*, p. 33.

<span id="fn_69"></span>[xvii:70](2080009.htm#fr_69) <span
id="vi.i.iii-p19.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i.iii-p20"></span> *Ep*. xxxvii.

<span id="fn_70"></span>[xvii:71](2080009.htm#fr_70) <span
id="vi.i.iii-p20.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i.iii-p21"></span> *Inst*. vii. 19.  *cf*. note on Cassian,
vol. xi. p. 254 of this series.

<span id="fn_71"></span>[xvii:72](2080009.htm#fr_71) <span
id="vi.i.iii-p22.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i.iii-p23"></span> *Ep*. xiv. *ad fin*.

<span id="fn_72"></span>[xvii:73](2080009.htm#fr_72) <span
id="vi.i.iii-p23.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i.iii-p24"></span> *Ep*. xiv.

<span id="fn_73"></span>[xvii:74](2080009.htm#fr_73) <span
id="vi.i.iii-p24.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i.iii-p25"></span> Greg. Naz., *Ep*. i. or xliii. § 25.

<span id="fn_74"></span>[xvii:75](2080009.htm#fr_74) <span
id="vi.i.iii-p25.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i.iii-p26"></span> On the latter difference between the
friends at the time of Basil’s consecration, De Broglie remarks: 
“*Ainsi se trahissait à chaque pas cette profords diversité de caractère
qui devait parfois troubler, mais plus sonnent ranimer et resserrer
l’union de ces deux belles âmes:  Basile, né pour le gouvernement des
hommes et pour la lutte, prompt et précis dans ses resolutions,
embrassant à coup d’œil le but à poursuivre et y marchant droit sans
s’inquiéter des difficultés et du jugement des spectateurs; Grégoire,
atteint de cette délicatesse un peu maladive, qui est, chez les esprits
d’élite, la source de l’inspiration poétique, sensible à la moindre
renonce d’approbation ou de blâme, surtout à la moindre blessure de
l’amitié, plus finement averti des obstacles, mais aussi plus aisément
découragé, mèlant a la poursuite des plus grands intérets un soin peut
être excessif de sa dignité et toutes les inquiétudes d’un cœur
souffrant*.”  *L’Eglise et l’Empire Romain au IVme Siècle*, v. p. 89.

<span id="fn_75"></span>[xvii:76](2080009.htm#fr_75) <span
id="vi.i.iii-p26.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i.iii-p27"></span> Greg. Naz., *Ep*. ii.

<span id="fn_76"></span>[xvii:77](2080009.htm#fr_76) <span
id="vi.i.iii-p28.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i.iii-p29"></span> *Ep*. xli.

<span id="fn_77"></span>[xviii:78](2080009.htm#fr_77) <span
id="vi.i.iii-p29.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i.iii-p30"></span> [1 Cor. ix.
27](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#027)<span id="vi.i.iii-p30.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_78"></span>[xviii:79](2080009.htm#fr_78) <span
id="vi.i.iii-p30.2"></span>

<span id="vi.i.iii-p31"></span> Greg. Nyss., *In Bas*. 314 c.

<span id="fn_79"></span>[xviii:80](2080009.htm#fr_79) <span
id="vi.i.iii-p31.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i.iii-p32"></span> Cassian, *Inst*. vi. 19.

<span id="fn_80"></span>[xviii:81](2080009.htm#fr_80) <span
id="vi.i.iii-p32.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i.iii-p33"></span> *Ep*. ccxxiii. § 3.

<span id="fn_81"></span>[xviii:82](2080009.htm#fr_81) <span
id="vi.i.iii-p33.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i.iii-p34"></span> *cf*. Tillemont ix. *passim*, Walch iii.
552, Schröckh xiii. 25, quoted by Robertson, i. 366.

<span id="fn_82"></span>[xviii:83](2080009.htm#fr_82) <span
id="vi.i.iii-p34.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i.iii-p35"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.i.iii-p35.1"></span>κοινόβιον</span>.

<span id="fn_83"></span>[xviii:84](2080009.htm#fr_83) <span
id="vi.i.iii-p35.2"></span>

<span id="vi.i.iii-p36"></span> Maran, *Vit. Bas*. vi.

<span id="fn_84"></span>[xviii:85](2080009.htm#fr_84) <span
id="vi.i.iii-p36.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i.iii-p37"></span> *cf*. Bas., *Reg. Fus. Resp*. vii.,
quoted by Robertson, i. 366.  His rule has been compared to that of St.
Benedict.  *D.C.B*. i. 284.  On the life in the Retreat, *cf. Epp*. ii.
and ccvii.

<span id="fn_85"></span>[xviii:86](2080009.htm#fr_85) <span
id="vi.i.iii-p38.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i.iii-p39"></span> Soz. vi. 17.

<span id="fn_86"></span>[xviii:87](2080009.htm#fr_86) <span
id="vi.i.iii-p39.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i.iii-p40"></span> *cf*. Soc., *Ecc. Hist*. iv. 26.  Of
this work Gregory says, in sending it to a friend:  <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.i.iii-p40.1"></span>ἵ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.i.iii-p40.2"></span>να δέ τι καὶ ὑπόμνημα
παρ᾽ ἡμῶν ἔχης, τὸ δ᾽ αὐτὸ καὶ τοῦ ἁγίου Βασιλείου πυκτίον ἀπεστάλκαμέν
σοι τῆς Ωριγενοῦς φιλοκαλίας, ἐκλογὰς ἔχων τῶν χρησίμων τοῖς
φιλολόγοις</span>.  *Ep*. lxxxvii.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Basil and the Councils, to the Accession of Valens.](2080010)
