[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2080074)  [Next](2080076) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ix.iii"></span>

<span id="ix.iii-p1"></span> <span class="c18"><span
id="ix.iii-p1.1"></span>Letter II. <span
id="fr_1742"></span>[1743](#fn_1742) </span>

<span id="ix.iii-p3"></span>*Basil to Gregory*.

<span id="ix.iii-p4"></span>1. <span class="c14"><span
id="ix.iii-p4.1"></span> \[I recognised</span> your letter, as one
recognises one’s friends’ children from their obvious likeness to their
parents.  Your saying that to describe the kind of place I live in,
before letting you hear anything about how I live, would not go far
towards persuading you to share my life, was just like you; it was
worthy of a soul like yours, which makes nothing of all that concerns
this life here, in comparison with the blessedness which is promised us
hereafter.  What I do myself, day and night, in this remote spot, I am
ashamed to write.  I have abandoned my life in town, as one sure to lead
to countless ills; but I have not yet been able to get quit of myself. 
I am like travellers at sea, who have never gone a voyage before, and
are distressed and seasick, who quarrel with the ship because it is so
big and makes such a tossing, and, when they get out of it into the
pinnace or dingey, are everywhere and always seasick and distressed. 
Wherever they go their nausea and misery go with them.  My state is
something like this.  I carry my own troubles with me, and so everywhere
I am in the midst of similar discomforts.  So in the end I have not got
much good out of my solitude.  What I ought to have done; what would
have enabled me to keep close to the footprints of Him who has led the
way to salvation—for He says, “If any one will come after me, let him
deny himself and take up his cross, and follow me” <span
id="fr_1743"></span>[1744](#fn_1743) —is this.\]

<span id="ix.iii-p6"></span>2.  We must strive after a quiet mind.  As
well might the eye ascertain an object put before it while it is
wandering restless up and down and sideways, without fixing a steady
gaze upon it, as a mind, distracted by a thousand worldly cares, be able
clearly to apprehend the truth.  He who is not yet yoked in the bonds of
matrimony is harassed by frenzied cravings, and rebellious impulses, and
hopeless attachments; he who has found his mate is encompassed with his
own tumult of cares; if he is childless, there is desire for children;
has he children? anxiety about their education, attention to his
wife, <span id="fr_1744"></span>[1745](#fn_1744) care of his house,
oversight of his servants, <span id="fr_1745"></span>[1746](#fn_1745)
misfortunes in trade, quarrels with his neighbours, lawsuits, the risks
of the merchant, the toil of the farmer.  Each day, as it comes, darkens
the soul in its own way; and night after night takes up the day’s
anxieties, and cheats the mind with illusions in accordance.  Now one
way of escaping all this is separation from the whole world; that is,
not bodily separation, but the severance of the soul’s sympathy with the
body, and to live so without city, home, goods, society, possessions,
means of life, business, engagements, human learning, that the heart may
readily receive every impress of divine doctrine.  Preparation of heart
is the unlearning the prejudices of evil converse.  It is the smoothing
the waxen tablet before attempting to write on it. <span
id="fr_1746"></span>[1747](#fn_1746)

<span id="ix.iii-p10"></span>Now solitude is of the greatest use for
this purpose, inasmuch as it stills our passions, and gives room for
principle to cut them out of the soul. <span
id="fr_1747"></span>[1748](#fn_1747)   \[For just as animals are more
easily controlled when they are stroked, lust and anger, fear and
sorrow, the soul’s deadly foes, are better brought under the control of
reason, after being calmed by inaction, and where there is no continuous
stimulation.\]  Let there then be such a place as ours, separate from
intercourse with men, that the tenour of our exercises be not
interrupted from without.  Pious exercises nourish the soul with divine
thoughts.  What state can be more blessed than to imitate on earth the
choruses of angels? to begin the day with <span id="page_111">p.
111</span> <span id="ix.iii-Page_111"></span>prayer, and honour our
Maker with hymns and songs?  As the day brightens, to betake ourselves,
with prayer attending on it throughout, to our labours, and to
sweeten <span id="fr_1748"></span>[1749](#fn_1748) our work with hymns,
as if with salt?  Soothing hymns compose the mind to a cheerful and calm
state.  Quiet, then, as I have said, is the first step in our
sanctification; the tongue purified from the gossip of the world; the
eyes unexcited by fair colour or comely shape; the ear not relaxing the
tone or mind by voluptuous songs, nor by that especial mischief, the
talk of light men and jesters.  Thus the mind, saved from dissipation
from without, and not through the senses thrown upon the world, falls
back upon itself, and thereby ascends to the contemplation of God. 
\[When <span id="fr_1749"></span>[1750](#fn_1749) that beauty shines
about it, it even forgets its very nature; it is dragged down no more by
thought of food nor anxiety concerning dress; it keeps holiday from
earthly cares, and devotes all its energies to the acquisition of the
good things which are eternal, and asks only how may be made to flourish
in it self-control and manly courage, righteousness and wisdom, and all
the other virtues, which, distributed under these heads, properly enable
the good man to discharge all the duties of life.\]

<span id="ix.iii-p14"></span>3.  The study of inspired Scripture is the
chief way of finding our duty, for in it we find both instruction about
conduct and the lives of blessed men, delivered in writing, as some
breathing images of godly living, for the imitation of their good
works.  Hence, in whatever respect each one feels himself deficient,
devoting himself to this imitation, he finds, as from some dispensary,
the due medicine for his ailment.  He who is enamoured of chastity
dwells upon the history of Joseph, and from him learns chaste actions,
finding him not only possessed of self-command over pleasure, but
virtuously-minded in habit.  He is taught endurance by Job \[who, <span
id="fr_1750"></span>[1751](#fn_1750) not only when the circumstances of
life began to turn against him, and in one moment he was plunged from
wealth into penury, and from being the father of fair children into
childlessness, remained the same, keeping the disposition of his soul
all through uncrushed, but was not even stirred to anger against the
friends who came to comfort him, and trampled on him, and aggravated his
troubles.\]  Or should he be enquiring how to be at once meek and
great-hearted, hearty against sin, meek towards men, he will find David
noble in warlike exploits, meek and unruffled as regards revenge on
enemies.  Such, too, was Moses rising up with great heart upon sinners
against God, but with meek soul bearing their evil-speaking against
himself.  \[Thus, <span id="fr_1751"></span>[1752](#fn_1751) generally,
as painters, when they are painting from other pictures, constantly look
at the model, and do their best to transfer its lineaments to their own
work, so too must he who is desirous of rendering himself perfect in all
branches of excellency, keep his eyes turned to the lives of the saints
as though to living and moving statues, and make their virtue his own by
imitation.

<span id="ix.iii-p17"></span>4.  Prayers, too, after reading, find the
soul fresher, and more vigorously stirred by love towards God.  And that
prayer is good which imprints a clear idea of God in the soul; and the
having God established in self by means of memory is God’s indwelling. 
Thus we become God’s temple, when the continuity of our recollection is
not severed by earthly cares; when the mind is harassed by no sudden
sensations; when the worshipper flees from all things and retreats to
God, drawing away all the feelings that invite him to self-indulgence,
and passes his time in the pursuits that lead to virtue.\]

<span id="ix.iii-p18"></span>5.  This, too, is a very important point to
attend to,—knowledge how to converse; to interrogate without
over-earnestness; to answer without desire of display; not to interrupt
a profitable speaker, or to desire ambitiously to put in a word of one’s
own; to be measured in speaking and hearing; not to be ashamed of
receiving, or to be grudging in giving information, nor to pass
another’s knowledge for one’s own, as depraved women their
supposititious children, but to refer it candidly to the true parent. 
The middle tone of voice is best, neither so low as to be inaudible, nor
to be ill-bred from its high pitch.  One should reflect first what one
is going to say, and then give it utterance:  be courteous when
addressed; amiable in social intercourse; not aiming to be pleasant by
facetiousness, but cultivating gentleness in kind admonitions. 
Harshness is ever to be put aside, even in censuring. <span
id="fr_1752"></span>[1753](#fn_1752)   \[The more you shew modesty and
humility yourself, the more likely are you to be acceptable to the
patient who needs your treatment.  There are however many occasions when
we shall do well to employ the kind of rebuke used by the prophet who
did not in his own person utter the sentence of condemnation on David
after his sin, but by suggesting an imaginary character made the <span
id="page_112">p. 112</span> <span id="ix.iii-Page_112"></span>sinner
judge of his own sin, so that, after passing his own sentence, he could
not find fault with the seer who had convicted him. <span
id="fr_1753"></span>[1754](#fn_1753)

<span id="ix.iii-p25"></span>6.  From the humble and submissive spirit
comes an eye sorrowful and downcast, appearance neglected, hair rough,
dress dirty; <span id="fr_1754"></span>[1755](#fn_1754) so that the
appearance which mourners take pains to present may appear our natural
condition.  The tunic should be fastened to the body by a girdle, the
belt not going above the flank, like a woman’s, nor left slack, so that
the tunic flows loose, like an idler’s.  The gait ought not to be
sluggish, which shews a character without energy, nor on the other hand
pushing and pompous, as though our impulses were rash and wild.  The one
end of dress is that it should be a sufficient covering alike in winter
and summer.  As to colour, avoid brightness; in material, the soft and
delicate.  To aim at bright colours in dress is like women’s beautifying
when they colour cheeks and hair with hues other than their own.  The
tunic ought to be thick enough not to want other help to keep the wearer
warm.  The shoes should be cheap but serviceable.  In a word, what one
has to regard in dress is the necessary.  So too as to food; for a man
in good health bread will suffice, and water will quench thirst; such
dishes of vegetables may be added as conduce to strengthening the body
for the discharge of its functions.  One ought not to eat with any
exhibition of savage gluttony, but in everything that concerns our
pleasures to maintain moderation, quiet, and self-control; and, all
through, not to let the mind forget to think of God, but to make even
the nature of our food, and the constitution of the body that takes it,
a ground and means for offering Him the glory, bethinking us how the
various kinds of food, suitable to the needs of our bodies, are due to
the provision of the great Steward of the Universe.  Before meat let
grace be said, in recognition alike of the gifts which God gives now,
and which He keeps in store for time to come.  Say grace after meat in
gratitude for gifts given and petition for gifts promised.  Let there be
one fixed hour for taking food, always the same in regular course, that
of all the four and twenty of the day and night barely this one may be
spent upon the body.  The rest the ascetic <span
id="fr_1755"></span>[1756](#fn_1755) ought to spend in mental exercise. 
Let sleep be light and easily interrupted, as naturally happens after a
light diet; it should be purposely broken by thoughts about great
themes.  To be overcome by heavy torpor, with limbs unstrung, so that a
way is readily opened to wild fancies, is to be plunged in daily death. 
What dawn is to some this midnight is to athletes of piety; then the
silence of night gives leisure to their soul; no noxious sounds or
sights obtrude upon their hearts; the mind is alone with itself and God,
correcting itself by the recollection of its sins, giving itself
precepts to help it to shun evil, and imploring aid from God for the
perfecting of what it longs for.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1742"></span>[110:1743](2080075.htm#fr_1742) <span
id="ix.iii-p1.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iii-p2"></span> Placed circa 358, on Basil’s retiring to
Pontus.  Translated in part by Newman, *The Church of the Fathers*, p.
131, ed. 1840.  With the exception of the passages in brackets \[\], the
version in the text is that of Newman.

<span id="fn_1743"></span>[110:1744](2080075.htm#fr_1743) <span
id="ix.iii-p4.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iii-p5"></span> [Matt. xvi.
24](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#024)<span id="ix.iii-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1744"></span>[110:1745](2080075.htm#fr_1744) <span
id="ix.iii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iii-p7"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.iii-p7.1"></span>γυναικὸς φυλακή</span>, rather “guardianship of
his wife.”

<span id="fn_1745"></span>[110:1746](2080075.htm#fr_1745) <span
id="ix.iii-p7.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iii-p8"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.iii-p8.1"></span>οἰκετῶν προστασιαι</span>, rather “protection of
his servants.”

<span id="fn_1746"></span>[110:1747](2080075.htm#fr_1746) <span
id="ix.iii-p8.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iii-p9"></span> Rather “for just as it is impossible to
write on the wax without previously erasing the marks on it, so is it
impossible to communicate divine doctrines to the soul without removing
from it its preconceived and habitual notions.”

<span id="fn_1747"></span>[110:1748](2080075.htm#fr_1747) <span
id="ix.iii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iii-p11"></span> The following paragraph is altogether
omitted by Newman.

<span id="fn_1748"></span>[111:1749](2080075.htm#fr_1748) <span
id="ix.iii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iii-p12"></span> Rather “season.”

<span id="fn_1749"></span>[111:1750](2080075.htm#fr_1749) <span
id="ix.iii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iii-p13"></span> Omitted by Newman.

<span id="fn_1750"></span>[111:1751](2080075.htm#fr_1750) <span
id="ix.iii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iii-p15"></span> Clause omitted by Newman.

<span id="fn_1751"></span>[111:1752](2080075.htm#fr_1751) <span
id="ix.iii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iii-p16"></span> Omitted by Newman.

<span id="fn_1752"></span>[111:1753](2080075.htm#fr_1752) <span
id="ix.iii-p18.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iii-p19"></span> Here Newman notes that Basil seems
sometimes to have fallen short of his own ideal.  His translation ends
at this point.

<span id="fn_1753"></span>[112:1754](2080075.htm#fr_1753) <span
id="ix.iii-p19.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iii-p20"></span> Basil’s admirable little summary of the
main principles of conversation may have been suggested by the
recollection of many well known writers.  On such a subject no wide
reader could be original.  *cf.* *inter alios*, the <span
class="Greek"><span id="ix.iii-p20.1"></span>ἄ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="ix.iii-p20.2"></span>κουε πολλὰ λάλει δ᾽
ὀλίνα</span> of Bias; the <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.iii-p20.3"></span>γλῶττα μὴ προτρεχέτω τοῦ νοῦ</span> of
Pittacus.  Aulus Gellius (*Noct. Att*. i. 15), referring to the

<span id="ix.iii-p21"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.iii-p21.1"></span>Γλώσσης τοι θησαυρὸς ἐν ἀνθρώποισιν
ἄριστος</span>

<span id="ix.iii-p22"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.iii-p22.1"></span>Φειδωλῆς πλείστη δὲ χάρις κατὰ μέτρον
ἰούσῆς</span>

<span id="ix.iii-p23"></span>of Hesiod, says:  “*Hesiodus poetarum
prudentissimus linguam non vulgandam sed recondendam esse dicit, perinde
ut thesaurum.  Ejusque esse in promendo gratiam plurimam, si modesta et
parca et modulata sit*.”

<span id="ix.iii-p24"></span>On the desirability of gentleness in blame,
*cf*. Ambrose, *In Lucam*.:  “*Plus proficit amica correctio quam
accusatio turbulenta:  illa pudorem incutit, hæc indignationem movet*.”

<span id="fn_1754"></span>[112:1755](2080075.htm#fr_1754) <span
id="ix.iii-p25.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iii-p26"></span> This was the mark of the old heathen
philosophers.  *cf*. Aristoph., *Birds* 1282, <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.iii-p26.1"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.iii-p26.2"></span>ρρύπων ἐσωκράτων</span>.

<span id="fn_1755"></span>[112:1756](2080075.htm#fr_1755) <span
id="ix.iii-p26.3"></span>

<span id="ix.iii-p27"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.iii-p27.1"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.iii-p27.2"></span>σκητὴς</span>, firstly an artisan, came
to=<span class="Greek"><span id="ix.iii-p27.3"></span>ἀ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="ix.iii-p27.4"></span>θλητὴς</span>, and by
ecclesiastical writers is used for hermit or monk.  The <span
class="Greek"><span id="ix.iii-p27.5"></span>ἐ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="ix.iii-p27.6"></span>ρημιτης</span>, or desert
dweller, lives either in retreat as an anchoret, or solitary, <span
class="Greek"><span id="ix.iii-p27.7"></span>μοναχός</span>, whence
“monk;” or in common with others, in a <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.iii-p27.8"></span>κοινόβιον</span>, as a “cœnobite.”  All would
be <span class="Greek"><span id="ix.iii-p27.9"></span>ἀ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="ix.iii-p27.10"></span>σκηταί</span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: To Candidianus.](2080076)
