[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2080245)  [Next](2080247) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ix.clxxiv"></span>

<span id="ix.clxxiv-p1"></span> <span class="c18"><span
id="ix.clxxiv-p1.1"></span>Letter CLXXIII. <span
id="fr_2571"></span>[2572](#fn_2571) </span>

<span id="ix.clxxiv-p3"></span>*To Theodora the Canoness*. <span
id="fr_2572"></span>[2573](#fn_2572)

<span id="ix.clxxiv-p5"></span>I <span class="c14"><span
id="ix.clxxiv-p5.1"></span>should</span> be more diligent in writing to
you but for my belief that my letters do not always, my friend, reach
your own hands.  I am afraid that through the naughtiness of those on
whose service I depend, especially at a time like this when the whole
world is in a state of confusion, a great many other people get hold of
them.  So I wait to be found fault with, and to be eagerly asked for my
letters, that so I may have this proof of their delivery.  Yet, whether
I write or not, one thing I do without failing, and that is to keep in
my heart the memory of your excellency, and to pray the Lord to grant
that you may complete the course of good living which you have chosen. 
For in truth it is no light thing for one, who makes a profession, to
follow up all that the promise entails.  Any one may embrace the gospel
life, but only a very few of those who have come within my knowledge
have completely carried out their duty in its minutest details, and have
overlooked nothing that is contained therein.  Only a very few have been
consistent in keeping the tongue in check and the eye under guidance, as
the Gospel would have it; in working with the hands according to the
mark of doing what is pleasing to God; in moving the feet, and using
every member, as the Creator ordained from the beginning.  Propriety in
dress, watchfulness in the society of men, moderation in eating and
drinking, the avoidance of superfluity in the acquisition of
necessities; all these things seem small enough when they are thus
merely mentioned, but, as I have found by experience, their consistent
observance requires no light struggle.  Further, such a perfection of
humility as not even to remember nobility of family, nor to be elevated
by any natural advantage of body or mind which we may have, nor to allow
other people’s opinion of us to be a ground of pride and exaltation, all
this belongs to the evangelic life.  There is also sustained
self-control, industry in prayer, sympathy in brotherly love, generosity
to the poor, lowliness of temper, contrition of heart, soundness of
faith, calmness in depression, while we never forget the terrible and
inevitable tribunal.  To that judgment we are all hastening, but those
who remember it, and are anxious about what is to follow after it, are
very few.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2571"></span>[219:2572](2080246.htm#fr_2571) <span
id="ix.clxxiv-p1.2"></span>

<span id="ix.clxxiv-p2"></span> Placed in 374.

<span id="fn_2572"></span>[219:2573](2080246.htm#fr_2572) <span
id="ix.clxxiv-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ix.clxxiv-p4"></span> On the Canonicæ, pious women who devoted
themselves to education, district visiting, funerals, and various
charitable works, and living in a community apart from men, *cf*. Soc.
i. 17, “virgins in the register,” and Sozomen viii. 23, on Nicarete. 
They were distinguished from nuns as not being bound by vows, and from
deaconesses as not so distinctly discharging ministerial duties.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: To a Widow.](2080247)
