[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2080015)  [Next](2080017) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.i.x"></span>

<span id="vi.i.x-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="vi.i.x-p1.1"></span>X.—Troubles of the Closing Years.</span>

<span id="vi.i.x-p2"></span>The relief to the Catholic East was brief. 
The paroxysm of passion which caused Valentinian to break a blood-vessel
and ended his life, <span id="fr_259"></span>[260](#fn_259) ended also
the force of the imperial rescript.  The Arians lifted their heads
again.  A council was held at Ancyra, <span
id="fr_260"></span>[261](#fn_260) in which the homoousion was condemned,
and frivolous and vexatious charges were brought against Gregory of
Nyssa. <span id="fr_261"></span>[262](#fn_261)   At Cyzicus a Semiarian
synod blasphemed the Holy Spirit. <span
id="fr_262"></span>[263](#fn_262)   Similar proceedings characterized a
synod of Antioch at about the same time. <span
id="fr_263"></span>[264](#fn_263)   Gregory of Nyssa having been
prevented by illness from appearing before the synod of Ancyra,
Eustathius and Demosthenes persisted in their efforts to wound Basil
through his brother, and summoned a synod at Nyssa itself, where Gregory
was condemned in his absence and deposed. <span
id="fr_264"></span>[265](#fn_264)   He was not long afterwards
banished. <span id="fr_265"></span>[266](#fn_265)   On the other hand
the Catholic bishops were not inactive.  Synods were held on their part,
and at Iconium Amphilochius presided over a gathering at which Basil was
perhaps present himself, and where his treatise on the Holy Spirit was
read and approved. <span id="fr_266"></span>[267](#fn_266)   The
Illyrian Council was a result incommensurate with Basil’s passionate
entreaties for the help of the westerns.  From the midst of the troubles
which beset the Eastern Church Basil appealed, <span
id="fr_267"></span>[268](#fn_267) as he had appealed before, <span
id="fr_268"></span>[269](#fn_268) for the sympathy and active aid of the
other half of the empire.  He was bitterly chagrined at the failure of
his entreaties for support, and began to suspect that the neglect he
complained of was due to coldness and to pride. <span
id="fr_269"></span>[270](#fn_269)   It has seemed to some that this
coldness in the West was largely due to resentment at Basil’s
non-recognition of the supremacy of the Roman see. <span
id="fr_270"></span>[271](#fn_270)   In truth the supremacy of the Roman
see, as it has been understood in later times, was hardly in the
horizon. <span id="fr_271"></span>[272](#fn_271)   No bishop of Rome had
even been present at Nicæa, or at Sardica, where a certain right of
appeal to his see was conceded.  A bishop of Rome signed the Sirmian
blasphemy.  No bishop of Rome was present to save ‘the world’ from the
lapse of Ariminum.  Julian “might seem to have forgotten that there was
such a city as Rome.” <span id="fr_272"></span>[273](#fn_272)   The
great intellectual Arian war was fought out without any claim of Rome to
speak.  Half a century after Basil’s death great orientals were quite
unconscious of this supremacy. <span id="fr_273"></span>[274](#fn_273)  
At Chalcedon the measure of the growing claim is aptly typified by the
wish of Paschasinus of Lilybæum, one of the representatives of Leo, to
be regarded as presiding, though he did not preside.  The supremacy is
hardly in view even at the last of the four great Councils.

<span id="vi.i.x-p18"></span>In fact the appeal of Basil seems to have
failed to elicit the response he desired, not so much from the
independent tone of his letters, which was only in accordance with the
recognised facts of the age, <span id="fr_274"></span>[275](#fn_274) as
from occidental suspicions of Basil’s orthodoxy, <span
id="fr_275"></span>[276](#fn_275) and from the failure of men, who
thought and wrote in Latin, to enter fully into the controversies
conducted in a more subtle tongue. <span
id="fr_276"></span>[277](#fn_276)   Basil had taken every precaution to
ensure the conveyance of his letters by messengers of tact and
discretion.  He had deprecated the advocacy of so simple-minded and
undiplomatic an ambassador as his brother Gregory. <span
id="fr_277"></span>[278](#fn_277)   He <span id="page_xxxi">p.
xxxi</span> <span id="vi.i.x-Page_xxxi"></span>had poured out his very
soul in entreaty. <span id="fr_278"></span>[279](#fn_278)   But all was
unavailing.  He suffered, and he had to suffer unsupported by a human
sympathy on which he thought he had a just claim. <span
id="fr_279"></span>[280](#fn_279)

<span id="vi.i.x-p26"></span>It is of a piece with Basil’s habitual
silence on the general affairs of the empire that he should seem to be
insensible of the shock caused by the approach of the Goths in 378.  A
letter to Eusebius in exile in Thrace does shew at least a consciousness
of a disturbed state of the country, and he is afraid of exposing his
courier to needless danger by entrusting him with a present for his
friend.  But this is all. <span id="fr_280"></span>[281](#fn_280)   He
may have written letters shewing an interest in the fortunes of the
empire which have not been preserved.  But his whole soul was absorbed
in the cause of Catholic truth, and in the fate of the Church.  His
youth had been steeped in culture, but the work of his ripe manhood left
no time for the literary amusement of the dilettante.  So it may be that
the intense earnestness with which he said to himself, “This one thing I
do,” of his work as a shepherd of souls, and a fighter for the truth,
and his knowledge that for the doing of this work his time was short,
accounts for the absence from his correspondence of many a topic of more
than contemporary interest.  At all events, it is not difficult to
descry that the turn in the stream of civil history was of vital moment
to the cause which Basil held dear.  The approach of the enemy was
fraught with important consequences to the Church.  The imperial
attention was diverted from persecution of the Catholics to defence of
the realm.  Then came the disaster of Adrianople, <span
id="fr_281"></span>[282](#fn_281) and the terrible end of the
unfortunate Valens. <span id="fr_282"></span>[283](#fn_282)   Gratian, a
sensible lad, of Catholic sympathies, restored the exiled bishops, and
Basil, in the few months of life yet left him, may have once more
embraced his faithful friend Eusebius.  The end drew rapidly near. 
Basil was only fifty, but he was an old man.  Work, sickness, and
trouble had worn him out.  His health had never been good.  A chronic
liver complaint was a constant cause of distress and depression.

<span id="vi.i.x-p30"></span>In 373 he had been at death’s door. 
Indeed, the news of his death was actually circulated, and bishops
arrived at Cæsarea with the probable object of arranging the
succession. <span id="fr_283"></span>[284](#fn_283)   He had submitted
to the treatment of a course of natural hot baths, but with small
beneficial result. <span id="fr_284"></span>[285](#fn_284)   By 376, as
he playfully reminds Amphilochius, he had lost all his teeth. <span
id="fr_285"></span>[286](#fn_285)   At last the powerful mind and the
fiery enthusiasm of duty were no longer able to stimulate the energies
of the feeble frame.

<span id="vi.i.x-p34"></span>The winter of 378–9 dealt the last blow,
and with the first day of what, to us, is now the new year, the great
spirit fled.  Gregory, alas! was not at the bedside.  But he has left us
a narrative which bears the stamp of truth.  For some time the
bystanders thought that the dying bishop had ceased to breathe.  Then
the old strength blazed out at the last.  He spoke with vigour, and even
ordained some of the faithful who were with him.  Then he lay once more
feeble and evidently passing away.  Crowds surrounded his residence,
praying eagerly for his restoration to them, and willing to give their
lives for his.  With a few final words of advice and exhortation, he
said:  “Into thy hands I commend my spirit,” and so ended.

<span id="vi.i.x-p35"></span>The funeral was a scene of intense
excitement and rapturous reverence.  Crowds filled every open space, and
every gallery and window; Jews and Pagans joined with Christians in
lamentation, and the cries and groans of the agitated oriental multitude
drowned the music of the hymns which were sung.  The press was so great
that several fatal accidents added to the universal gloom.  Basil was
buried in the “sepulchre of his fathers”—a phrase which may possibly
mean in the ancestral tomb of his family at Cæsarea.

<span id="vi.i.x-p36"></span>So passed away a leader of men in whose
case the epithet ‘great’ is no conventional compliment.  He shared with
his illustrious brother primate of Alexandria the honour of rallying the
Catholic forces in the darkest days of the Arian depression.  He was
great as foremost champion of a great cause, great in contemporary and
posthumous influence, great in industry and self-denial, great as a
literary controversialist.  The estimate formed of him by his
contemporaries is expressed in the generous, if somewhat turgid,
eloquence of the laudatory oration of the slighted Gregory of
Nazianzus.  Yet nothing in Gregory’s <span id="page_xxxii">p.
xxxii</span> <span id="vi.i.x-Page_xxxii"></span>eulogy goes beyond the
expressions of the prelate who has seemed to some to be “the wisest and
holiest man in the East in the succeeding century.” <span
id="fr_286"></span>[287](#fn_286)   Basil is described by the saintly
and learned Theodoret <span id="fr_287"></span>[288](#fn_287) in terms
that might seem exaggerated when applied to any but his master, as the
light not of Cappadocia only, but of the world. <span
id="fr_288"></span>[289](#fn_288)   To Sophronius <span
id="fr_289"></span>[290](#fn_289) he is the “glory of the Church.”  To
Isidore of Pelusium, <span id="fr_290"></span>[291](#fn_290) he seems to
speak as one inspired.  To the Council of Chalcedon he is emphatically a
minister of grace; <span id="fr_291"></span>[292](#fn_291) to the second
council of Nicæa a layer of the foundations of orthodoxy. <span
id="fr_292"></span>[293](#fn_292)   His death lacks the splendid triumph
of the martyrdoms of Polycarp and Cyprian.  His life lacks the vivid
incidents which make the adventures of Athanasius an enthralling
romance.  He does not attract the sympathy evoked by the unsophisticated
simplicity of Gregory his friend or of Gregory his brother.  There does
not linger about his memory the close personal interest that binds
humanity to Augustine, or the winning loyalty and tenderness that charm
far off centuries into affection for Theodoret.  Sometimes he seems a
hard, almost a sour man. <span id="fr_293"></span>[294](#fn_293)  
Sometimes there is a jarring reminder of his jealousy for his own
dignity. <span id="fr_294"></span>[295](#fn_294)   Evidently he was not
a man who could be thwarted without a rupture of pleasant relations, or
slighted with impunity.  In any subordinate position he was not easy to
get on with. <span id="fr_295"></span>[296](#fn_295)   But a man of
strong will, convicted that he is championing a righteous cause, will
not hesitate to sacrifice, among other things, the amenities that come
of amiable absence of self-assertion.  To Basil, to assert himself was
to assert the truth of Christ and of His Church.  And in the main the
identification was a true one.  Basil was human, and occasionally, as in
the famous dispute with Anthimus, so disastrously fatal to the typical
friendship of the earlier manhood, he may have failed to perceive that
the Catholic cause would not suffer from the existence of two
metropolitans in Cappadocia.  But the great archbishop could be an
affectionate friend, thirsty for sympathy. <span
id="fr_296"></span>[297](#fn_296)   And he was right in his estimate of
his position.  Broadly speaking, Basil, more powerfully than any
contemporary official, worker, or writer in the Church, did represent
and defend through all the populous provinces of the empire which
stretched from the Balkans to the Mediterranean, from the Ægean to the
Euphrates, the cause whose failure or success has been discerned, even
by thinkers of no favourable predisposition, to have meant death or life
to the Church. <span id="fr_297"></span>[298](#fn_297)   St. Basil is
duly canonized in the grateful memory, no less than in the official
bead-roll, of Christendom, and we may be permitted to regret that the
existing Kalendar of the Anglican liturgy has not found room for so
illustrious a Doctor in its somewhat niggard list. <span
id="fr_298"></span>[299](#fn_298)   For the omission some amends have
lately <span id="fr_299"></span>[300](#fn_299) been made in the erection
of a statue of the great archbishop of Cæsarea under the dome of the
Cathedral St. Paul in London. <span id="fr_300"></span>[301](#fn_300)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_259"></span>[xxx:260](2080016.htm#fr_259) <span
id="vi.i.x-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i.x-p3"></span> Nov. 17, 375.  Amm. Marc. xxx. 6.  Soc. iv.
31.

<span id="fn_260"></span>[xxx:261](2080016.htm#fr_260) <span
id="vi.i.x-p3.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i.x-p4"></span> Mansi, iii. 499.  Hefele, § 90.

<span id="fn_261"></span>[xxx:262](2080016.htm#fr_261) <span
id="vi.i.x-p4.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i.x-p5"></span> *Ep*. ccxxv.

<span id="fn_262"></span>[xxx:263](2080016.htm#fr_262) <span
id="vi.i.x-p5.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i.x-p6"></span> *Ep*. ccxliv.

<span id="fn_263"></span>[xxx:264](2080016.htm#fr_263) <span
id="vi.i.x-p6.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i.x-p7"></span> Soc. v. 4.

<span id="fn_264"></span>[xxx:265](2080016.htm#fr_264) <span
id="vi.i.x-p7.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i.x-p8"></span> *Ep*. ccxxxvii.

<span id="fn_265"></span>[xxx:266](2080016.htm#fr_265) <span
id="vi.i.x-p8.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i.x-p9"></span> Greg., *Vit. Mac*. ii. 192.

<span id="fn_266"></span>[xxx:267](2080016.htm#fr_266) <span
id="vi.i.x-p9.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i.x-p10"></span> *Ep*. ccii., cclxxii.  Hefele, § 90. 
Mansi, iii. 502–506.  There is some doubt as to the exact date of this
synod.  *cf. D.C.A*. i. 807.

<span id="fn_267"></span>[xxx:268](2080016.htm#fr_267) <span
id="vi.i.x-p10.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i.x-p11"></span> *Ep*. ccxliii.

<span id="fn_268"></span>[xxx:269](2080016.htm#fr_268) <span
id="vi.i.x-p11.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i.x-p12"></span> *Ep*. lxx., addressed in 371 to Damasus.

<span id="fn_269"></span>[xxx:270](2080016.htm#fr_269) <span
id="vi.i.x-p12.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i.x-p13"></span> *Ep*. ccxxxix.

<span id="fn_270"></span>[xxx:271](2080016.htm#fr_270) <span
id="vi.i.x-p13.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i.x-p14"></span> *cf. D.C.B*. i. 294:  “*C’est esprit,
conciliant aux les orientaux jusqu’à soulever l’intolérance orientale,
est aussi inflexible avec les occidentaux qu’avec le pouvoir impérial. 
On sent dans ses lettres la révolte de l’orient qui réclame ses
prérogatives, ses droits d’ancienneté; l’esprit d’indépendance de la
Grèce, qui, si elle supporte le joug matériel de Rome, refuse de
reconnaitre sa suprématie spirituelle*.”  Fialon, *Et. Hist*. 133.

<span id="fn_271"></span>[xxx:272](2080016.htm#fr_271) <span
id="vi.i.x-p14.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i.x-p15"></span> *cf*. note. on § ix.

<span id="fn_272"></span>[xxx:273](2080016.htm#fr_272) <span
id="vi.i.x-p15.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i.x-p16"></span> Milman, *Lat. Christ*. i. 85.

<span id="fn_273"></span>[xxx:274](2080016.htm#fr_273) <span
id="vi.i.x-p16.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i.x-p17"></span> *cf*. Proleg to Theodoret in this series,
p. 9, note.

<span id="fn_274"></span>[xxx:275](2080016.htm#fr_274) <span
id="vi.i.x-p18.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i.x-p19"></span> *A ses yeux, l’Orient et l’Occident ne
sont ils pas, deux frères, dont les droits sont égaux, sans suprématie,
sans aînesse?”*  Fialon, *Et. Hist*. p. 134.  This is exactly what East
and West were to most eyes, and what they were asserted to be in the
person of the two imperial capitals by the Twenty-Eighth Canon of
Chalcedon.  *cf*. Bright, *Canons of the First Four General Councils*,
pp. 93, 192, and note on Theodoret in this series, p. 293.

<span id="fn_275"></span>[xxx:276](2080016.htm#fr_275) <span
id="vi.i.x-p19.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i.x-p20"></span> *Ep*. cclxvi. § 2.

<span id="fn_276"></span>[xxx:277](2080016.htm#fr_276) <span
id="vi.i.x-p20.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i.x-p21"></span> *cf. Ep*. ccxiv. § 4, p. 254.

<span id="fn_277"></span>[xxx:278](2080016.htm#fr_277) <span
id="vi.i.x-p21.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i.x-p22"></span> *Ep*. ccxv.

<span id="fn_278"></span>[xxxi:279](2080016.htm#fr_278) <span
id="vi.i.x-p22.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i.x-p23"></span> See specially *Ep*. ccxlii.

<span id="fn_279"></span>[xxxi:280](2080016.htm#fr_279) <span
id="vi.i.x-p23.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i.x-p24"></span> “Foiled in all his repeated demands; a
deaf ear turned to his most earnest entreaties; the council he had
begged for not summoned; the deputation he had repeatedly solicited
unsent; Basil’s span of life drew to its end amid blasted hopes and
apparently fruitless labours for the unity of the faith.  It was not
permitted him to live to see the Eastern Churches, for the purity of
whose faith he had devoted all his powers, restored to peace and
unanimity.”  Canon Venables, *D.C.B*. i. 295.

<span id="vi.i.x-p25"></span>“He had to fare on as best he
might,—admiring, courting, but coldly treated by the Latin world,
desiring the friendship of Rome, yet wounded by her superciliousness,
suspected of heresy by Damasus, and accused by Jerome of pride.” 
Newman, *Church of the Fathers*, p. 115.

<span id="fn_280"></span>[xxxi:281](2080016.htm#fr_280) <span
id="vi.i.x-p26.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i.x-p27"></span> *Ep*. cclxviii.  So Fialon, *Ét. Hist*. p.
149:  “*On n’y trouve pas un mot sur la désastreuse expédition de
Julien, sur le honteux traité de Jovien, sur la révolte de Procope*.” 
At the same time the argument from silence is always dangerous.  It may
be unfair to charge Basil with indifference to great events, because we
do not possess his letters about them.

<span id="fn_281"></span>[xxxi:282](2080016.htm#fr_281) <span
id="vi.i.x-p27.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i.x-p28"></span> Aug. 9, 378.

<span id="fn_282"></span>[xxxi:283](2080016.htm#fr_282) <span
id="vi.i.x-p28.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i.x-p29"></span> Theod. iv. 32.  Amm. Marc. xxxi. 13.

<span id="fn_283"></span>[xxxi:284](2080016.htm#fr_283) <span
id="vi.i.x-p30.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i.x-p31"></span> *Ep*. cxli.

<span id="fn_284"></span>[xxxi:285](2080016.htm#fr_284) <span
id="vi.i.x-p31.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i.x-p32"></span> *Ep*. cxxxvii.

<span id="fn_285"></span>[xxxi:286](2080016.htm#fr_285) <span
id="vi.i.x-p32.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i.x-p33"></span> *Ep*. ccxxxii.

<span id="fn_286"></span>[xxxii:287](2080016.htm#fr_286) <span
id="vi.i.x-p36.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i.x-p37"></span> Kingsley, *Hypatia*, chap. xxx.

<span id="fn_287"></span>[xxxii:288](2080016.htm#fr_287) <span
id="vi.i.x-p37.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i.x-p38"></span> *cf*. Gibbon, chap. xxi.

<span id="fn_288"></span>[xxxii:289](2080016.htm#fr_288) <span
id="vi.i.x-p38.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i.x-p39"></span> Theod., *H.E*. iv. 16, and *Ep*. cxlvi.

<span id="fn_289"></span>[xxxii:290](2080016.htm#fr_289) <span
id="vi.i.x-p39.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i.x-p40"></span> *Apud Photium Cod*. 231.

<span id="fn_290"></span>[xxxii:291](2080016.htm#fr_290) <span
id="vi.i.x-p40.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i.x-p41"></span> *Ep*. lxi.

<span id="fn_291"></span>[xxxii:292](2080016.htm#fr_291) <span
id="vi.i.x-p41.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i.x-p42"></span> *cf*. Ceillier, vi. 8, 1.

<span id="fn_292"></span>[xxxii:293](2080016.htm#fr_292) <span
id="vi.i.x-p42.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i.x-p43"></span> *Ib*.

<span id="fn_293"></span>[xxxii:294](2080016.htm#fr_293) <span
id="vi.i.x-p43.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i.x-p44"></span> *cf. Ep*. xxv.

<span id="fn_294"></span>[xxxii:295](2080016.htm#fr_294) <span
id="vi.i.x-p44.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i.x-p45"></span> *cf*. xcviii.

<span id="fn_295"></span>[xxxii:296](2080016.htm#fr_295) <span
id="vi.i.x-p45.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i.x-p46"></span> *e.g.* his relations with his predecessor.

<span id="fn_296"></span>[xxxii:297](2080016.htm#fr_296) <span
id="vi.i.x-p46.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i.x-p47"></span> *Ep*. xci.

<span id="fn_297"></span>[xxxii:298](2080016.htm#fr_297) <span
id="vi.i.x-p47.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i.x-p48"></span> *e.g.* T. Carlyle.  “He perceived
Christianity itself to have been at stake.  If the Arians had won, it
would have dwindled away into a legend.”  J. A. Froude, *Life of Carlyle
in London*, ii. 462.

<span id="fn_298"></span>[xxxii:299](2080016.htm#fr_298) <span
id="vi.i.x-p48.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i.x-p49"></span> In the Greek Kalendar January 1, the day
of the death, is observed in honour of the saint.  In the West St.
Basil’s day is June 14, the traditional date of the consecration.  The
martyrologies of Jerome and Bede do not contain the name.  The first
mention is ascribed by the Bollandists to Usuard.  (Usuard’s martyrology
was composed for Charles the Bold at Paris.)  In the tenth century a
third day was consecrated in the East to the common commemoration of SS.
Basil, Gregory of Nazianzus, and John Chrysostom.

<span id="fn_299"></span>[xxxii:300](2080016.htm#fr_299) <span
id="vi.i.x-p49.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i.x-p50"></span> 1894.

<span id="fn_300"></span>[xxxii:301](2080016.htm#fr_300) <span
id="vi.i.x-p50.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i.x-p51"></span> Basil lived at the period when the relics
of martyrs and saints were beginning to be collected and honoured. 
(*e.g. Ep.* cxcvii.)  To Damasus, the bishop of Rome, whose active
sympathy he vainly strove to win, is mainly due the reverent
rearrangement of the Roman catacombs.  (*Roma Sotteranea*, Northcote and
Brownlow, p. 97.)  It was not to be expected that Basil’s own remains
should be allowed to rest in peace; but the gap between the burial at
Cæsarea and the earliest record of their supposed reappearance is wide. 
There was a Church of St. Basil at Bruges founded in 1187, which was
believed to possess some of the archbishop’s bones.  These were solemnly
translated in 1463 to the Church of St. Donatian, which disappeared at
the time of the French revolution.  Pancirola (d. 1599) mentions a head,
an arm, and a rib, said to be Basil’s, among the treasures of Rome.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter II](2080017)
