[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2080056)  [Next](2080058) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.xxviii"></span>

<span id="vii.xxviii-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="vii.xxviii-p1.1"></span>Chapter XXVII.</span>

<span id="vii.xxviii-p2"></span>Of the origin of the word “with,” and
what force it has.  Also concerning the unwritten laws of the church.

<span id="vii.xxviii-p3"></span>65.  <span class="c14"><span
id="vii.xxviii-p3.1"></span>The</span> word “*in,*” say our opponents,
“is exactly appropriate to the Spirit, and sufficient for every thought
concerning Him.  Why then, they ask, have we introduced this new phrase,
saying, “*with* the Spirit” instead of “*in* the Holy Spirit,” thus
employing an expression which is quite unnecessary, and sanctioned by no
usage in the churches?  Now it has been asserted in the previous portion
of this treatise that the word “*in*” has not been specially allotted to
the Holy Spirit, but is common to the Father and the Son.  It has also
been, in my opinion, sufficiently demonstrated that, so far from
detracting anything from the dignity of the Spirit, it leads all, but
those whose thoughts are wholly perverted, to the sublimest height.  It
remains for me to trace the origin of the word “*with*;” to explain what
force it has, and to shew that it is in harmony with Scripture.

<span id="vii.xxviii-p4"></span>66. <span
id="fr_1267"></span>[1268](#fn_1267)   Of the beliefs and practices
whether <span id="page_41">p. 41</span> <span
id="vii.xxviii-Page_41"></span>generally accepted or publicly enjoined
which are preserved in the Church <span
id="fr_1268"></span>[1269](#fn_1268) some we possess derived from
written teaching; others we have received delivered to us “in a
mystery” <span id="fr_1269"></span>[1270](#fn_1269) by the tradition of
the apostles; and both of these in relation to true religion have the
same force.  And these no one will gainsay;—no one, at all events, who
is even moderately versed in the institutions of the Church.  For were
we to attempt to reject such customs as have no written authority, on
the ground that the importance they possess is small, we should
unintentionally injure the Gospel in its very vitals; or, rather, should
make our public definition a mere phrase and nothing more. <span
id="fr_1270"></span>[1271](#fn_1270)   For instance, to take the first
and most general example, who is thence who has taught us in writing to
sign with the sign of the cross those who have trusted in the name of
our Lord Jesus Christ?  What writing has taught us to turn to the East
at the prayer?  Which of the saints has left us in writing the words of
the invocation at the displaying <span
id="fr_1271"></span>[1272](#fn_1271) of the bread of the Eucharist and
the cup of blessing?  For we are not, as is well known, content with
what the apostle or the Gospel has recorded, but both in preface and
conclusion we add other words as being of great importance to the
validity of the ministry, and these we derive from unwritten teaching. 
<span id="page_42">p. 42</span> <span
id="vii.xxviii-Page_42"></span>Moreover we bless the water of baptism
and the oil of the chrism, and besides this the catechumen who is being
baptized.  On what written authority do we do this?  Is not our
authority silent and mystical tradition?  Nay, by what written word is
the anointing of oil <span id="fr_1272"></span>[1273](#fn_1272) itself
taught?  And whence comes the custom of baptizing thrice? <span
id="fr_1273"></span>[1274](#fn_1273)   And as to the other customs of
baptism from what Scripture do we derive the renunciation of Satan and
his angels?  Does not this come from that unpublished and secret
teaching which our fathers guarded in a silence out of the reach of
curious meddling and inquisitive investigation?  Well had they learnt
the lesson that the awful dignity of the mysteries is best preserved by
silence.  What the uninitiated are not even allowed to look at was
hardly likely to be publicly paraded about in written documents.  What
was the meaning of the mighty Moses in not making all the parts of the
tabernacle open to every one?  The profane he stationed without the
sacred barriers; the first courts he conceded to the purer; the Levites
alone he judged worthy of being servants of the Deity; sacrifices and
burnt offerings and the rest of the priestly functions he allotted to
the priests; one chosen out of all he admitted to the shrine, and even
this one not always but on only one day in the year, and of this one day
a time was fixed for his entry so that he might gaze on the Holy of
Holies amazed at the strangeness and novelty of the sight.  Moses was
wise enough to know that contempt stretches to the trite and to the
obvious, while a keen interest is naturally associated with the unusual
and the unfamiliar.  In the same manner the Apostles and Fathers who
laid down laws for the Church from the beginning thus guarded the awful
dignity of the mysteries in secrecy and silence, for what is bruited
abroad random among the common folk is no mystery at all.  This is the
reason for our tradition of unwritten precepts and practices, that the
knowledge of our dogmas may not become neglected and contemned by the
multitude through familiarity.  “Dogma” and “Kerugma” are two distinct
things; the former is observed in silence; the latter is proclaimed to
all the world.  One form of this silence is the obscurity employed in
Scripture, which makes the meaning of “dogmas” difficult to be
understood for the very advantage of the reader:  Thus we all look to
the East <span id="fr_1274"></span>[1275](#fn_1274) at our prayers, but
few of us know that we are seeking our own old country, <span
id="fr_1275"></span>[1276](#fn_1275) Paradise, which God planted in Eden
in the East. <span id="fr_1276"></span>[1277](#fn_1276)   We pray
standing, <span id="fr_1277"></span>[1278](#fn_1277) on the first day of
the week, but we do not all know the reason.  On the day of the
resurrection (or “standing again” Grk. <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xxviii-p22.1"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xxviii-p22.2"></span>νάστασις</span>) we remind ourselves of the
grace given to us by standing at prayer, not only because we rose with
Christ, <span id="fr_1278"></span>[1279](#fn_1278) and are bound to
“seek those things which are above,” <span
id="fr_1279"></span>[1280](#fn_1279) but because the day seems to us to
be in some sense an image of the age which we expect, wherefore, though
it is the beginning of days, it is not called by Moses *first*, but
*one*. <span id="fr_1280"></span>[1281](#fn_1280)   For he says “There
was evening, and there was morning, one day,” as though the same day
often recurred.  Now “one” and “eighth” are the same, in itself
distinctly indicating that really “one” and “eighth” of which the
Psalmist makes mention in certain titles of the Psalms, the state which
follows after this present time, the day which knows no waning or
eventide, and no successor, that age which endeth not or groweth
old. <span id="fr_1281"></span>[1282](#fn_1281)   Of necessity, then,
the church teaches her own foster children to offer their prayers on
that day standing, to the end that through continual reminder of the
endless life we may not neglect to make provision for our removal
thither.  Moreover all Pentecost is a reminder of the resurrection
expected in the age to come.  For that one and first day, if seven times
multiplied by seven, completes the seven weeks of the holy Pentecost;
for, beginning at the first, Pentecost ends with the same, making fifty
revolutions through the like intervening days.  And so it is a likeness
of eternity, beginning as it does and ending, as in a circling course,
at the same point.  On this day the rules of the church have educated us
to prefer the upright attitude of prayer, for by their plain reminder
they, as it were, make our mind to dwell no longer in the present but in
the future.  Moreover every time we fall upon our knees and rise <span
id="page_43">p. 43</span> <span id="vii.xxviii-Page_43"></span>from off
them we shew by the very deed that by our sin we fell down to earth, and
by the loving kindness of our Creator were called back to heaven.

<span id="vii.xxviii-p27"></span>67.  Time will fail me if I attempt to
recount the unwritten mysteries of the Church.  Of the rest I say
nothing; but of the very confession of our faith in Father, Son, and
Holy Ghost, what is the written source?  If it be granted that, as we
are baptized, so also under the obligation to believe, we make our
confession in like terms as our baptism, in accordance with the
tradition of our baptism and in conformity with the principles of true
religion, let our opponents grant us too the right to be as consistent
in our ascription of glory as in our confession of faith.  If they
deprecate our doxology on the ground that it lacks written authority,
let them give us the written evidence for the confession of our faith
and the other matters which we have enumerated.  While the unwritten
traditions are so many, and their bearing on “the mystery of
godliness” <span id="fr_1282"></span>[1283](#fn_1282) is so important,
can they refuse to allow us a single word which has come down to us from
the Fathers;—which we found, derived from untutored custom, abiding in
unperverted churches;—a word for which the arguments are strong, and
which contributes in no small degree to the completeness of the force of
the mystery?

<span id="vii.xxviii-p29"></span>68.  The force of both expressions has
now been explained.  I will proceed to state once more wherein they
agree and wherein they differ from one another;—not that they are
opposed in mutual antagonism, but that each contributes its own meaning
to true religion.  The preposition “*in*” states the truth rather
relatively to ourselves; while “*with*” proclaims the fellowship of the
Spirit with God.  Wherefore we use both words, by the one expressing the
dignity of the Spirit; by the other announcing the grace that is with
us.  Thus we ascribe glory to God both “in” the Spirit, and “with” the
Spirit; and herein it is not our word that we use, but we follow the
teaching of the Lord as we might a fixed rule, and transfer His word to
things connected and closely related, and of which the conjunction in
the mysteries is necessary.  We have deemed ourselves under a necessary
obligation to combine in our confession of the faith Him who is numbered
with Them at Baptism, and we have treated the confession of the faith as
the origin and parent of the doxology.  What, then, is to be done?  They
must now instruct us either not to baptize as we have received, or not
to believe as we were baptized, or not to ascribe glory as we have
believed.  Let any man prove if he can that the relation of sequence in
these acts is not necessary and unbroken; or let any man deny if he can
that innovation here must mean ruin everywhere.  Yet they never stop
dinning in our ears that the ascription of glory “*with*” the Holy
Spirit is unauthorized and unscriptural and the like.  We have stated
that so far as the sense goes it is the same to say “glory be to the
Father and to the Son *and* to the Holy Ghost,” and “glory be to the
Father and to the Son *with* the Holy Ghost.”  It is impossible for any
one to reject or cancel the syllable “and,” which is derived from the
very words of our Lord, and there is nothing to hinder the acceptance of
its equivalent.  What amount of difference and similarity there is
between the two we have already shewn.  And our argument is confirmed by
the fact that the Apostle uses either word indifferently,—saying at one
time “in the name of the Lord Jesus and by the Spirit of our God;” <span
id="fr_1283"></span>[1284](#fn_1283) at another “when ye are gathered
together, and my Spirit, with the power of our Lord Jesus,” <span
id="fr_1284"></span>[1285](#fn_1284) with no idea that it makes any
difference to the connexion of the names whether he use the conjunction
or the preposition.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1267"></span>[40:1268](2080057.htm#fr_1267) <span
id="vii.xxviii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxviii-p5"></span> The genuineness of this latter portion
of the Treatise was objected to by Erasmus on the ground that the style
is unlike that of Basil’s soberer writings.  Bp. Jeremy Taylor follows
Erasmus (Vol. vi. ed. 1852, p. 427).  It was vindicated by Casaubon, who
recalls St. John Damascene’s quotation of the *Thirty Chapters to
Amphilochius*.  Mr. C.F.H. Johnston remarks, “The later discovery of the
Syriac Paraphrases of the whole book pushes back this argument to about
one hundred years from the date of St. Basil’s writing.  The peculiar
care taken by St. Basil for the writing out of the treatise, and for its
safe arrival in Amphilochius’ hands, and the value set upon it by the
friends of both, make the forgery of half the present book, and the
substitution of it for the original within that period, almost
incredible.”  Section 66 is quoted as an authoritative statement on the
right use of Tradition “as a guide to the right understanding of Holy
Scripture, for the right ministration of the Sacraments, and the
preservation of sacred rights and ceremonies in the purity of their
original institution,” in Philaret’s *Longer Catechism of the Eastern
Church*.

<span id="vii.xxviii-p6"></span>St. Basil is, however, strong on the
supremacy of Holy Scripture, as in the passages quoted in Bp. H. Browne,
*On the xxxix Articles*:  “Believe those things which are written; the
things which are not written seek not.”  (*Hom. xxix. adv. Calum. S.
Trin.)*  “It is a manifest defection from the faith, and a proof of
arrogance, either to reject anything of what is written, or to introduce
anything that is not.”  (*De Fide.* i.)  *cf*. also Letters CV. and
CLIX.  On the right use of Tradition *cf*. Hooker, *Ecc. Pol*. lxv. 2,
“Lest, therefore, the name of tradition should be offensive to any,
considering how far by some it hath been and is abused, we mean by
traditions ordinances made in the prime of Christian Religion,
established with that authority which Christ hath left to His Church for
matters indifferent, and in that consideration requisite to be observed,
till like authority see just and reasonable causes to alter them.  So
that traditions ecclesiastical are not rudely and in gross to be shaken
off, because the inventors of them were men.”

<span id="vii.xxviii-p7"></span>*cf*. Tert., *De Præsc*. 36, 20, 21,
“*Constat omnem doctrinam quæ cum illis ecclesiis apostolicis matricibus
et originalibus fidei conspiret veritati deputandam, id sine dubio
tenentem quod ecclesiæ ab apostolis, apostoli a Christo, Christus a Deo
accepit*.”  *Vide*Thomasius, *Christ. Dogm*. i. 105.

<span id="fn_1268"></span>[41:1269](2080057.htm#fr_1268) <span
id="vii.xxviii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxviii-p8"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xxviii-p8.1"></span>“</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xxviii-p8.2"></span>τῶς ἐν τῇ Εκκλησί& 139· πεφυλαγμένων
δογμάτων καὶ κηρυγμάτων</span>.”  To give the apparent meaning of the
original seems impossible except by some such paraphrase as the above. 
In Scripture <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xxviii-p8.3"></span>δόγμα</span>, which occurs five times ([Luke
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#001), [Acts
16:4](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#004), [Acts
17:7](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#007), [Eph.
2:15](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#015), [Col.
2:14](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#014)<span
id="vii.xxviii-p8.4"></span>), always has its proper sense of decree or
ordinances.  *cf*. Bp. Lightfoot, on [Col. ii.
14](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#014)<span id="vii.xxviii-p8.5"></span>,
and his contention that the Greek Fathers generally have mistaken the
force of the passage in understanding <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xxviii-p8.6"></span>δόγματα</span> in both Col. and Eph. to mean
the doctrines and precepts of the Gospel.  <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xxviii-p8.7"></span>Κήρυγμα</span> occurs eight times ([Matt.
12:41](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#041), [Luke
11:32](../../../bib/kjv/luk011.htm#032), [Rom.
16:25](../../../bib/kjv/rom016.htm#025), [1 Cor.
1:21](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#021), [1 Cor.
2:4](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#004), [1 Cor.
15:14](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#014), [2 Tim.
4:17](../../../bib/kjv/ti2004.htm#017), [Titus
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/tit001.htm#003)<span
id="vii.xxviii-p8.8"></span>), always in the sense of preaching or
proclamation.

<span id="vii.xxviii-p9"></span>“The later Christian sense of <span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.xxviii-p9.1"></span>δόγμα</span>, meaning
*doctrine*, came from its secondary classical use, where it was applied
to the authoritative and categorical ‘sentences’ of the philosophers: 
*cf*. Just. Mart., *Apol*. i. 7. <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xxviii-p9.2"></span>οἰ ἐν ῞Ελλησι τὰ αὐτοῖς ἀρεστὰ δογματίσαντες
ἐκ παντὸς τῷ ενὶ ὀνόματι φιλοσοφίας προσαγορεύοντα, καίπερ τῶν δογμάτων
ἐναντίων ὄντων</span>.”  \[All the sects in general among the Greeks are
known by the common name of philosophy, though their doctrines are
different.\]  Cic., *Acad*. ii. 19. ‘*De suis decretis quæ philosophi
vocant* <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xxviii-p9.3"></span>δόγματα</span>.’…There is an approach
towards the ecclesiastical meaning in Ignat., *Mag*. 13, <span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.xxviii-p9.4"></span>βεβαιωθῆσαι ἐν τοῖς
δόγμασι τοῦ κυρίου καὶ τῶν ἀποστόλων</span>.”  Bp. Lightfoot in [Col.
ii. 14](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#014)<span
id="vii.xxviii-p9.5"></span>.  The “doctrines” of heretics are also
called <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xxviii-p9.6"></span>δόγματα</span>, as in Basil, *Ep*. *CCLXI*.
and Socr., *E. H.* iii. 10.  *cf*. Bp. Bull, *in Serm*. 2, “The dogmata
or tenets of the Sadducees.”  In Orig., *c. Cels*. iii. p. 135, Ed.
Spencer, 1658, <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xxviii-p9.7"></span>δόγμα</span> is used of the gospel or
teaching of our Lord.

<span id="vii.xxviii-p10"></span>The special point about St. Basil’s use
of <span class="Greek"><span id="vii.xxviii-p10.1"></span>δόγματα</span>
is that he uses the word of doctrines and practices privately and
tacitly sanctioned in the Church (like <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xxviii-p10.2"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xxviii-p10.3"></span>πόρρητα</span>, which is used of the
esoteric doctrine of the Pythagoreans, Plat., *Phæd*. 62. B.), while he
reserves <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xxviii-p10.4"></span>κηρύγματα</span> for what is now often
understood by <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xxviii-p10.5"></span>δόγματα</span>, *i.e*. “*legitima synodo
decreta*.”  *cf. Ep. LII*., where he speaks of the great <span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.xxviii-p10.6"></span>κήρυγμα</span> of the
Fathers at Nicæa.  In this he is supported by Eulogius, Patriarch of
Alexandria, 579–607, of whom Photius (*Cod*. ccxxx. Migne Pat. Gr. ciii.
p. 1027) writes, “In this work,” *i.e*. Or. II. “he says that of the
doctrines (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xxviii-p10.7"></span>διδαγμάτων</span>) handed down in the
church by the ministers of the word, some are <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xxviii-p10.8"></span>δόγματα</span>, and others <span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.xxviii-p10.9"></span>κηρύγματα</span>.  The
distinction is that <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xxviii-p10.10"></span>δόγματα</span> are announced with
concealment and prudence, and are often designedly compassed with
obscurity, in order that holy things may not be exposed to profane
persons nor pearls cast before swine.  <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xxviii-p10.11"></span>Κηρύγματα</span>, on the other hand, are
announced without any concealment.”  So the Benedictine Editors speak of
Origen (*c. Cels*. i. 7) as replying to Celsus, “*prædicationem
Christianorum toti orbi notiorem esse quam placita philosophorum:  sed
tamen fatetur, ut apud philosophos, ita etiam apud Christianos nonulla
esse veluti interiora, quæ post exteriorem et propositam omnibus
doctrinam tradantur*.”  Of <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xxviii-p10.12"></span>κηρύματα</span> they note, “*Videntur hoc
nomine designari leges ecclesiasticæ et canonum decreta quæ promulgari
in ecclesia mos erat, ut neminem laterent*.”  Mr. C.F.H. Johnston
remarks:  “The <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xxviii-p10.13"></span>ὁ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xxviii-p10.14"></span>μοούσιον</span>, which many now-a-days
would call the Nicene dogma (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xxviii-p10.15"></span>τὰ τοῦ ὁμοουσίου δόγματα</span>, Soc.,
*E.H.* iii. 10) because it was put forth in the Council of Nicæa, was
for that reason called not <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xxviii-p10.16"></span>δόγμα</span>, but <span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.xxviii-p10.17"></span>κήρυγμα</span>, by St.
Basil, who would have said that it became the <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xxviii-p10.18"></span>κήρυγμα</span> (definition) of that
Council, because it had always been the <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xxviii-p10.19"></span>δόγμα</span> of the Church.”

<span id="vii.xxviii-p11"></span>In extra theological philosophy a dogma
has all along meant a certainly expressed opinion whether formally
decreed or not.  So Shaftesbury, *Misc. Ref*. ii. 2, “He who is certain,
or presumes to say he knows, is in that particular whether he be
mistaken or in the right a dogmatist.”  *cf*. Littré S.V. for a similar
use in French.  In theology the modern Roman limitation of dogma to
decreed doctrine is illustrated by the statement of Abbé Bérgier (*<span
id="vii.xxviii-p11.1"></span>Dict. de Théol*. Ed. 1844) of the
Immaculate Conception of the Blessed Virgin.  “Or, *<span
id="vii.xxviii-p11.2"></span>nous convenons que ce n’est pas un dogme de
foi*,” because, though a common opinion among Romanists, it had not been
so asserted at the Council of Trent.  Since the publication of Pius IX’s
Edict of 1854 it has become, to ultramontanists, a “dogma of faith.”

<span id="fn_1269"></span>[41:1270](2080057.htm#fr_1269) <span
id="vii.xxviii-p11.3"></span>

<span id="vii.xxviii-p12"></span> [1 Cor. ii.
7](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#007)<span id="vii.xxviii-p12.1"></span>. 
Whether there is or is not here a conscious reference to St. Paul’s
words, there seems to be both in the text and in the passage cited an
employment of <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xxviii-p12.2"></span>μυστήριον</span> in its proper sense of a
secret revealed to the initiated.

<span id="fn_1270"></span>[41:1271](2080057.htm#fr_1270) <span
id="vii.xxviii-p12.3"></span>

<span id="vii.xxviii-p13"></span> *i.e.* if nothing were of weight but
what was written, what need of any authorisation at all?  There is no
need of <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xxviii-p13.1"></span>κήρυγμα</span> for a <span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.xxviii-p13.2"></span>δόγμα</span> expressly
written in Scripture.

<span id="fn_1271"></span>[41:1272](2080057.htm#fr_1271) <span
id="vii.xxviii-p13.3"></span>

<span id="vii.xxviii-p14"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xxviii-p14.1"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xxviii-p14.2"></span>πὶ τῇ ἀναδείξει</span>.  The Benedictine
note is:  “*Non respicit Basilius ad ritum ostensionis Eucharistiæ, ut
multi existimarunt, sed potius ad verba Liturgiæ ipsi ascriptæ, cum
petit sacerdos, ut veniat Spiritus sanctus*  <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xxviii-p14.3"></span>ἁ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xxviii-p14.4"></span>γιάσαι και ἀναδεῖξαι τὸν μὲν ἄρτον τοῦτον
αὐτὸ τὸ τίμιον σῶμα τοῦ κυρίου</span>.  *Haec autem verba* <span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.xxviii-p14.5"></span>ἐ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.xxviii-p14.6"></span>πὶ τῇ ἀναδειξει</span>,
*sic reddit Erasmus,*cum ostenditur*.  Vituperat eum Ducæus; sicque ipse
vertit,* cum conficitur, *atque hanc interpretationem multis exemplis
confirmat.  Videtur tamen nihil prorsus vitii habitura haec
interpretatio,* Invocationis verba cum ostenditur panis Eucharistiæ, *id
est, cum panis non jam panis est, sed panis Eucharistiæ, sive corpus
Christi ostenditur; et in liturgia,* ut sanctificet et ostendat hunc
quidem panem, ipsum pretiosum corpus Domini.  *Nam 10 Cur eam vocem
reformidemus, qua Latini uti non dubitant, ubi de Eucharistia
loquuntur?  Quale est illud Cypriani in epistola 63 ad Cæcilium:*  Vino
Christi sanguis ostenditur.  *Sic etiam Tertullianus* I. Marc. c. 14: 
Panem quo ipsum corpus suum repræsentat  20 *Ut Græce,* <span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.xxviii-p14.7"></span>ἀ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.xxviii-p14.8"></span>ναδεῖξαι,
ἀποφαίνειν</span>, *ita etiam Latine*, ostendere, *corpus Christi
præsens in Eucharistia significatione quodam modo exprimit.  Hoc enim
verbum non solum panem fieri corpus Domini significat, sed etiam fidem
nostram excitat, ut illud corpus sub specie panis videndum, tegendum,
adorandum ostendi credamus.  Quemadmodum Irenæus, cum ait lib. iv. cap.
33:*  Accipiens panem suum corpus esse confitebatur, et temperamentum
calicis suum sanguinem conformavit, *non solum mutationem panis et vini
in corpus et sanguinem Christi exprimit, sed ipsam etiam Christi
asseverationem, quæ hanc nobis mutationem persuadet:  sic qui corpus
Christi in Eucharistia ostendi et repræsentari dicunt, non modo jejuno
et exiliter loqui non videntur, sed etiam acriores Christi præsentis
adorandi stimulos subjicere.  Poterat ergo retineri interpretatio
Erasmi; sed quia viris eruditis displicuit, satius visum est quid
sentirem in hac nota exponere*.”

<span id="vii.xxviii-p15"></span>This view of the meaning of <span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.xxviii-p15.1"></span>ἀ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.xxviii-p15.2"></span>ναδείκνυσθαι</span> and
<span class="Greek"><span id="vii.xxviii-p15.3"></span>ἀ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.xxviii-p15.4"></span>νάδειξις</span> as
being equivalent to <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xxviii-p15.5"></span>ποιεῖν</span> and <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xxviii-p15.6"></span>ποίησις</span> is borne out and illustrated
by Suicer, S.V. “*Ex his jam satis liquere arbitror* <span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.xxviii-p15.7"></span>ἀ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.xxviii-p15.8"></span>ναδειξαι</span> *apud
Basilium id esse quod alii Græci patres dicunt* <span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.xxviii-p15.9"></span>ποιεῖν</span> *vel*
<span class="Greek"><span id="vii.xxviii-p15.10"></span>ἀ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.xxviii-p15.11"></span>ποφαίνειν σῶμα
χριστοῦ</span>.”

<span id="vii.xxviii-p16"></span>It is somewhat curious to find
Bellarmine (*De Sacr. Euch*. iv. § 14) interpreting the prayer to God
<span class="Greek"><span id="vii.xxviii-p16.1"></span>εὐλογῆσαι καὶ
ἁγιάσαι καὶ ἀναδεῖξαι</span> to mean “ostende *per effectum salutarem in
mentibus nostris istum panem salutificatum non esse panem vulgarem sed
cœlestem*.”

<span id="fn_1272"></span>[42:1273](2080057.htm#fr_1272) <span
id="vii.xxviii-p16.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xxviii-p17"></span> For the unction of catechumens *cf*.
*Ap. Const*. vii. 22; of the baptized, Tertullian, *De Bapt*. vii.; of
the confirmed, *id*. viii.; of the sick *vide* Plumptre on St. [James v.
14](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#014)<span id="vii.xxviii-p17.1"></span>,
in *Cambridge Bible for Schools*.  *cf. Letter* clxxxviii.

<span id="fn_1273"></span>[42:1274](2080057.htm#fr_1273) <span
id="vii.xxviii-p17.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xxviii-p18"></span> For trine immersion an early authority
is Tertullian, *c.* *Praxeam* xxvi.  *cf*. Greg. Nyss., *De Bapt*. <span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.xxviii-p18.1"></span>ὕ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.xxviii-p18.2"></span>δατι ἑαυτοὺς
ἐγκρύπτομεν</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xxviii-p18.3"></span> …</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xxviii-p18.4"></span>καὶ τρίτον τοῦτο ποιήσαντες</span>.  *Dict.
Ch. Ant.* i. 161.

<span id="fn_1274"></span>[42:1275](2080057.htm#fr_1274) <span
id="vii.xxviii-p18.5"></span>

<span id="vii.xxviii-p19"></span> *cf*. my note on Theodoret in this
series, p. 112.

<span id="fn_1275"></span>[42:1276](2080057.htm#fr_1275) <span
id="vii.xxviii-p19.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxviii-p20"></span> [Heb. xi.
14](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#014)<span id="vii.xxviii-p20.1"></span>,
R.V.

<span id="fn_1276"></span>[42:1277](2080057.htm#fr_1276) <span
id="vii.xxviii-p20.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xxviii-p21"></span> [Gen. ii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#008)<span id="vii.xxviii-p21.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1277"></span>[42:1278](2080057.htm#fr_1277) <span
id="vii.xxviii-p21.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xxviii-p22"></span> The earliest posture of prayer was
standing, with the hands extended and raised towards heaven, and with
the face turned to the East.  *cf*. early art, and specially the figures
of “oranti.”  Their rich dress indicates less their actual station in
this life than the expected felicity of Paradise.  *Vide, Dict. Christ.
Ant*. ii. 1684.

<span id="fn_1278"></span>[42:1279](2080057.htm#fr_1278) <span
id="vii.xxviii-p22.3"></span>

<span id="vii.xxviii-p23"></span> “Stood again with”—<span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.xxviii-p23.1"></span>συναναστάντες</span>.

<span id="fn_1279"></span>[42:1280](2080057.htm#fr_1279) <span
id="vii.xxviii-p23.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xxviii-p24"></span> [Col. iii.
1](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#001)<span id="vii.xxviii-p24.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1280"></span>[42:1281](2080057.htm#fr_1280) <span
id="vii.xxviii-p24.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xxviii-p25"></span> [Gen. i.
5](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#005)<span id="vii.xxviii-p25.1"></span>. 
Heb. LXX. Vulg. R.V. *cf*. p. 64.

<span id="fn_1281"></span>[42:1282](2080057.htm#fr_1281) <span
id="vii.xxviii-p25.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xxviii-p26"></span> *Vide* Titles to Pss. vi. and xii. in
A.V. “upon Sheminith,” marg. “the eighth.”  LXX <span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.xxviii-p26.1"></span>ὑ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.xxviii-p26.2"></span>πὲρ τῆς ὀγδόης</span>. 
Vulg. *pro octava*.  On various explanations of the Hebrew word *vide*
Dict Bib. S. V. where Dr. Aldis Wright inclines to the view that it is a
tune or key, and that the Hebrews were not acquainted with the octave.

<span id="fn_1282"></span>[43:1283](2080057.htm#fr_1282) <span
id="vii.xxviii-p27.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxviii-p28"></span> [1 Tim. iii.
16](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#016)<span id="vii.xxviii-p28.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1283"></span>[43:1284](2080057.htm#fr_1283) <span
id="vii.xxviii-p29.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxviii-p30"></span> [1 Cor. vi.
11](../../../bib/kjv/co1006.htm#011)<span id="vii.xxviii-p30.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1284"></span>[43:1285](2080057.htm#fr_1284) <span
id="vii.xxviii-p30.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xxviii-p31"></span> [1 Cor. v.
4](../../../bib/kjv/co1005.htm#004)<span id="vii.xxviii-p31.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: That our opponents refuse to concede in the case of the Spirit
the terms which Scripture uses in the case of men, as reigning together
with Christ.](2080058)
