[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2080080)  [Next](2080082) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ix.ix"></span>

<span id="ix.ix-p1"></span> <span class="c18"><span
id="ix.ix-p1.1"></span>Letter VIII. <span
id="fr_1778"></span>[1779](#fn_1778) </span>

<span id="ix.ix-p3"></span>*To the Cæsareans*.  *A defence of his
withdrawal, and concerning the faith*.

<span id="ix.ix-p4"></span>1.  <span class="c14"><span
id="ix.ix-p4.1"></span>I have</span> often been astonished at your
feeling towards me as you do, and how it comes about that an individual
so small and insignificant, and having, may be, very little that is
lovable about him, should have so won your allegiance.  You remind me of
the claims of friendship and of fatherland, <span
id="fr_1779"></span>[1780](#fn_1779) and <span id="page_116">p.
116</span> <span id="ix.ix-Page_116"></span>press me urgently in your
attempt to make me come back to you, as though I were a runaway from a
father’s heart and home.  That I am a runaway I confess.  I should be
sorry to deny it; since you are already regretting me, you shall be told
the cause.  I was astounded like a man stunned by some sudden noise.  I
did not crush my thoughts, but dwelt upon them as I fled, and now I have
been absent from you a considerable time.  Then I began to yearn for the
divine doctrines, and the philosophy that is concerned with them.  How,
said I, could I overcome the mischief dwelling with us?  Who is to be my
Laban, setting me free from Esau, and leading me to the supreme
philosophy?  By God’s help, I have, so far as in me lies, attained my
object; I have found a chosen vessel, a deep well; I mean Gregory,
Christ’s mouth.  Give me, therefore, I beg you, a little time.  I am not
embracing a city life. <span id="fr_1780"></span>[1781](#fn_1780)   I am
quite well aware how the evil one by such means devises deceit for
mankind, but I do hold the society of the saints most useful.  For in
the more constant change of ideas about the divine dogmas I am acquiring
a lasting habit of contemplation.  Such is my present situation.

<span id="ix.ix-p7"></span>2.  Friends godly and well beloved, do, I
implore you, beware of the shepherds of the Philistines; let them not
choke your wills unawares; let them not befoul the purity of your
knowledge of the faith.  This is ever their object, not to teach simple
souls lessons drawn from Holy Scripture, but to mar the harmony of the
truth by heathen philosophy.  Is not he an open Philistine who is
introducing the terms “*unbegotten*” and “*begotten*” into our faith,
and asserts that there was once a time when the Everlasting was
not; <span id="fr_1781"></span>[1782](#fn_1781) that He who is by nature
and eternally a Father became a Father; that the Holy Ghost is not
eternal?  He bewitches our Patriarch’s sheep that they may not drink “of
the well of water springing up into everlasting life,” <span
id="fr_1782"></span>[1783](#fn_1782) but may rather bring upon
themselves the words of the prophet, “They have forsaken me, the
fountain of living waters, and hewed them out cisterns, broken cisterns,
that can hold no water;” <span id="fr_1783"></span>[1784](#fn_1783) when
all the while they ought to confess that the Father is God, the Son God,
and the Holy Ghost God, <span id="fr_1784"></span>[1785](#fn_1784) as
they have been taught by the divine words, and by those who have
understood them in their highest sense.  Against those who cast it in
our teeth that we are Tritheists, let it be answered that we confess one
God not in number but in nature.  For everything which is called one in
number is not one absolutely, nor yet simple in nature; but God is
universally confessed to be simple and not composite.  God therefore is
not one in number.  What I mean is this.  We say that the world is one
in number, but not one by nature nor yet simple; for we divide it into
its constituent elements, fire, water, air, and earth. <span
id="fr_1785"></span>[1786](#fn_1785)   Again, man is called one in
number.  We frequently speak of one man, but man who is composed of body
and soul is not simple.  Similarly we say one angel in number, but not
one by nature nor yet simple, for we conceive of the hypostasis of the
angel as essence with sanctification.  If therefore everything which is
one in number is not one in nature, and that which is one and simple in
nature is not one in number; and if we call God one in nature how can
number be charged against us, when we utterly exclude it from that
blessed and spiritual nature?  Number relates to quantity; and quantity
is conjoined with bodily nature, for number is of bodily nature.  We
believe our Lord to be Creator of bodies.  Wherefore every number
indicates those things which have received a material and circumscribed
nature.  Monad and Unity on the other hand signify the nature which is
simple and incomprehensible.  Whoever therefore confesses either the Son
of God or the Holy Ghost to be number or creature introduces unawares a
material and circumscribed nature.  And by circumscribed I mean not only
locally limited, but a nature which is comprehended in foreknowledge by
Him who is about to educe it from the non-existent into the existent and
which can be comprehended by science.  Every holy thing then of which
the nature is circumscribed and of which the holiness is acquired is not
insusceptible of evil.  But the Son and the Holy Ghost are the source of
sanctification by which every reasonable creature is hallowed in
proportion to its virtue.

<span id="ix.ix-p13"></span>3.  We in accordance with the true doctrine
speak of the Son as neither like, <span
id="fr_1786"></span>[1787](#fn_1786) nor unlike <span
id="fr_1787"></span>[1788](#fn_1787) the Father.  Each of these terms is
equally <span id="page_117">p. 117</span> <span
id="ix.ix-Page_117"></span>impossible, for like and unlike are
predicated in relation to quality, and the divine is free from quality. 
We, on the contrary, confess identity of nature and accepting the
consubstantiality, and rejecting the composition of the Father, God in
substance, Who begat the Son, God in substance.  From this the
consubstantiality <span id="fr_1788"></span>[1789](#fn_1788) is proved. 
For God in essence or substance is co-essential or con-substantial with
God in essence or substance.  But when even man is called “god” as in
the words, “I have said ye are gods,” <span
id="fr_1789"></span>[1790](#fn_1789) and “dæmon” as in the words, “The
gods of the nations are dæmons,” <span
id="fr_1790"></span>[1791](#fn_1790) in the former case the name is
given by favour, in the latter untruly.  God alone is substantially and
essentially God.  When I say “alone” I set forth the holy and uncreated
essence and substance of God.  For the word “alone” is used in the case
of any individual and generally of human nature.  In the case of an
individual, as for instance of Paul, that he alone was caught into the
third heaven and “heard unspeakable words which it is not lawful for a
man to utter,” <span id="fr_1791"></span>[1792](#fn_1791) and of human
nature, as when David says, “as for man his days are as grass,” <span
id="fr_1792"></span>[1793](#fn_1792) not meaning any particular man, but
human nature generally; for every man is short-lived and mortal.  So we
understand these words to be said of the nature, “who alone hath
immortality” <span id="fr_1793"></span>[1794](#fn_1793) and “to God only
wise,” <span id="fr_1794"></span>[1795](#fn_1794) and “none is good save
one, that is God,” <span id="fr_1795"></span>[1796](#fn_1795) for here
“one” means the same as alone.  So also, “which alone spreadest out the
heavens,” <span id="fr_1796"></span>[1797](#fn_1796) and again “Thou
shalt worship the Lord thy God and Him only shalt thou serve.” <span
id="fr_1797"></span>[1798](#fn_1797)   “There is no God beside
me.” <span id="fr_1798"></span>[1799](#fn_1798)   In Scripture “one” and
“only” are not predicated of God to mark distinction from the Son and
the Holy Ghost, but to except the unreal gods falsely so called.  As for
instance, “The Lord alone did lead them and there was no strange god
with them,” <span id="fr_1799"></span>[1800](#fn_1799) and “then the
children of Israel did put away Baalim and Ashtaroth, and did serve the
Lord only.” <span id="fr_1800"></span>[1801](#fn_1800)   And so St.
Paul, “For as there be gods many and lords many, but to us there is but
one god, the Father, of whom are all things; and one Lord Jesus Christ
by Whom are all things.” <span id="fr_1801"></span>[1802](#fn_1801)  
Here we enquire why when he had said “one God” he was not content, for
we have said that “one” and “only” when applied to God, indicate
nature.  Why did he add the word Father and make mention of Christ? 
Paul, a chosen vessel, did not, I imagine, think it sufficient only to
preach that the Son is God and the Holy Ghost God, which he had
expressed by the phrase “one God,” without, by the further addition of
“the Father,” expressing Him of Whom are all things; and, by mentioning
the Lord, signifying the Word by Whom are all things; and yet further,
by adding the words Jesus Christ, announcing the incarnation, setting
forth the passion and publishing the resurrection.  For the word Jesus
Christ suggests all these ideas to us.  For this reason too before His
passion our Lord deprecates the designation of “Jesus Christ,” and
charges His disciples to “tell no man that He was Jesus, the
Christ.” <span id="fr_1802"></span>[1803](#fn_1802)   For His purpose
was, after the completion of the œconomy, <span
id="fr_1803"></span>[1804](#fn_1803) after His resurrection from the
dead, and His assumption into heaven, to commit to them the preaching of
Him as Jesus, the Christ.  Such is the force of the words “That they may
know Thee the only true God and Jesus Christ whom thou hast sent,” <span
id="fr_1804"></span>[1805](#fn_1804) and again “Ye believe in God,
believe also in me.” <span id="fr_1805"></span>[1806](#fn_1805)  
Everywhere the Holy Ghost secures our conception of Him to save us from
falling in one direction while we advance in the other, heeding the
theology but neglecting the œconomy, <span
id="fr_1806"></span>[1807](#fn_1806) and so by omission falling into
impiety.

<span id="ix.ix-p35"></span>4.  Now let us examine, and to the best of
our ability explain, the meaning of the words of Holy Scripture, which
our opponents seize and wrest to their own sense, and urge against us
for the destruction of the glory of the Only-begotten.  First of all
take the words “I live because of the Father,” <span
id="fr_1807"></span>[1808](#fn_1807) for this is one of the shafts
hurled heavenward by those who impiously use it.  These words I do not
understand to refer to the eternal life; for whatever lives because of
something else cannot be self-existent, just as that which is warmed by
another cannot be warmth itself; but He Who is our Christ and God says,
“I am the life.” <span id="fr_1808"></span>[1809](#fn_1808)   I
understand the life lived because of the Father to be this life in the
flesh, and in this time.  Of His own will He came to live the life of
men.  He did not say “I have lived <span id="page_118">p. 118</span>
<span id="ix.ix-Page_118"></span>because of the Father,” but “I live
because of the Father,” clearly indicating the present time, and the
Christ, having the word of God in Himself, is able to call the life
which He leads, life, and that this is His meaning we shall learn from
what follows.  “He that eateth me,” He says, “he also shall live because
of me;” <span id="fr_1809"></span>[1810](#fn_1809) for we eat His flesh,
and drink His blood, being made through His incarnation and His visible
life partakers of His Word and of His Wisdom.  For all His mystic
sojourn among us He called flesh and blood, and set forth the teaching
consisting of practical science, of physics, and of theology, whereby
our soul is nourished and is meanwhile trained for the contemplation of
actual realities.  This is perhaps the intended meaning of what He
says. <span id="fr_1810"></span>[1811](#fn_1810)

<span id="ix.ix-p40"></span>5.  And again, “My Father is greater than
I.” <span id="fr_1811"></span>[1812](#fn_1811)   This passage is also
employed by the ungrateful creatures, the brood of the evil one.  I
believe that even from this passage the consubstantiality of the Son
with the Father is set forth.  For I know that comparisons may properly
be made between things which are of the same nature.  We speak of angel
as greater than angel, of man as juster than man, of bird as fleeter
than bird.  If then comparisons are made between things of the same
species, and the Father by comparison is said to be greater than the
Son, then the Son is of the same substance as the Father.  But there is
another sense underlying the expression.  In what is it extraordinary
that He who “is the Word and was made flesh” <span
id="fr_1812"></span>[1813](#fn_1812) confesses His Father to be greater
than Himself, when He was seen in glory inferior to the angels, and in
form to men?  For “Thou hast made him a little lower than the
angels,” <span id="fr_1813"></span>[1814](#fn_1813) and again “Who was
made a little lower than the angels,” <span
id="fr_1814"></span>[1815](#fn_1814) and “we saw Him and He had neither
form nor comeliness, his form was deficient beyond all men.” <span
id="fr_1815"></span>[1816](#fn_1815)   All this He endured on account of
His abundant loving kindness towards His work, that He might save the
lost sheep and bring it home when He had saved it, and bring back safe
and sound to his own land the man who went down from Jerusalem to
Jericho and so fell among thieves. <span
id="fr_1816"></span>[1817](#fn_1816)   Will the heretic cast in His
teeth the manger out of which he in his unreasonableness was fed by the
Word of reason?  Will he, because the carpenter’s son had no bed to lie
on, complain of His being poor?  This is why the Son is less than the
Father; for your sakes He was made dead to free you from death and make
you sharer in heavenly life.  It is just as though any one were to find
fault with the physician for stooping to sickness, and breathing its
foul breath, that he may heal the sick.

<span id="ix.ix-p47"></span>6.  It is on thy account that He knows not
the hour and the day of judgment.  Yet nothing is beyond the ken of the
real Wisdom, for “all things were made by Him;” <span
id="fr_1817"></span>[1818](#fn_1817) and even among men no one is
ignorant of what he has made.  But this is His dispensation <span
id="fr_1818"></span>[1819](#fn_1818) because of thine own infirmity,
that sinners be not plunged into despair by the narrow limits of the
appointed period, <span id="fr_1819"></span>[1820](#fn_1819) no
opportunity for repentance being left them; and that, on the other hand,
those who are waging a long war with the forces of the enemy may not
desert their post on account of the protracted time.  For both of these
classes He arranges <span id="fr_1820"></span>[1821](#fn_1820) by means
of His assumed ignorance; for the former cutting the time short for
their glorious struggle’s sake; for the latter providing an opportunity
for repentance because of their sins.  In the gospels He numbered
Himself among the ignorant, on account, as I have said, of the infirmity
of the greater part of mankind.  In the Acts of the Apostles, speaking,
as it were, to the perfect apart, He says, “It is not for you to know
the times or the seasons which the Father hath put in His own
power.” <span id="fr_1821"></span>[1822](#fn_1821)   Here He implicitly
excepts Himself.  So much for a rough statement by way of preliminary
attack.  Now let us enquire into the meaning of the text from a higher
point of view.  Let me knock at the door of knowledge, if haply I may
wake the Master of the house, Who gives the spiritual bread to them who
ask Him, since they whom we are eager to entertain are friends and
brothers.

<span id="ix.ix-p53"></span>7.  Our Saviour’s holy disciples, after
getting beyond the limits of human thought, and then being purified by
the word, <span id="fr_1822"></span>[1823](#fn_1822) are enquiring about
the end, and longing to know the ultimate blessedness which our Lord
declared to be unknown to His angels and to Himself.  He calls all the
exact comprehension of the purposes of God, a day; and the contemplation
of the One-ness and Unity, knowledge of which He attributes to <span
id="page_119">p. 119</span> <span id="ix.ix-Page_119"></span>the Father
alone, an hour.  I apprehend, therefore, that God is said to know of
Himself what is; and not to know what is not; God, Who is, of His own
nature, very righteousness and wisdom, is said to know righteousness and
wisdom; but to be ignorant of unrighteousness and wickedness; for God
who created us is not unrighteousness and wickedness.  If, then, God is
said to know about Himself that which is, and not to know that which is
not; and if our Lord, according to the purpose of the Incarnation and
the denser doctrine, is not the ultimate object of desire; then our
Saviour does not know the end and the ultimate blessedness.  But He says
the angels do not know; <span id="fr_1823"></span>[1824](#fn_1823) that
is to say, not even the contemplation which is in them, nor the methods
of their ministries are the ultimate object of desire.  For even their
knowledge, when compared with the knowledge which is face to face, is
dense. <span id="fr_1824"></span>[1825](#fn_1824)   Only the Father, He
says, knows, since He is Himself the end and the ultimate blessedness,
for when we no longer know God in mirrors and not immediately, <span
id="fr_1825"></span>[1826](#fn_1825) but approach Him as one and alone,
then we shall know even the ultimate end.  For all material knowledge is
said to be the kingdom of Christ; while immaterial knowledge, and so to
say the knowledge of actual Godhead, is that of God the Father.  But our
Lord is also Himself the end and the ultimate blessedness according to
the purpose of the Word; for what does He say in the Gospel?  “I will
raise him up at the last day.” <span
id="fr_1826"></span>[1827](#fn_1826)   He calls the transition from
material knowledge to immaterial contemplation a resurrection, speaking
of that knowledge after which there is no other, as the last day:  for
our intelligence is raised up and roused to a height of blessedness at
the time when it contemplates the One-ness and Unity of the Word.  But
since our intelligence is made dense and bound to earth, it is both
commingled with clay and incapable of gazing intently in pure
contemplation, being led through adornments <span
id="fr_1827"></span>[1828](#fn_1827) cognate to its own body.  It
considers the operations of the Creator, and judges of them meanwhile by
their effects, to the end that growing little by little it may one day
wax strong enough to approach even the actual unveiled Godhead.  This is
the meaning, I think, of the words “my Father is greater than I,” <span
id="fr_1828"></span>[1829](#fn_1828) and also of the statement, “It is
not mine to give save to those for whom it is prepared by my
Father.” <span id="fr_1829"></span>[1830](#fn_1829)   This too is what
is meant by Christ’s “delivering up the kingdom to God even the
Father;” <span id="fr_1830"></span>[1831](#fn_1830) inasmuch as
according to the denser doctrine which, as I said, is regarded
relatively to us and not to the Son Himself, He is not the end but the
first fruits.  It is in accordance with this view that when His
disciples asked Him again in the Acts of the Apostles, “When wilt thou
restore the kingdom of Israel?” He replied, “It is not for you to know
the times or the seasons which the Father hath put in His own
power.” <span id="fr_1831"></span>[1832](#fn_1831)   That is to say, the
knowledge of such a kingdom is not for them that are bound in flesh and
blood.  This contemplation the Father hath put away in His own power,
meaning by “power” those that are empowered, and by “His own” those who
are not held down by the ignorance of things below.  Do not, I beg you,
have in mind times and seasons of sense but certain distinctions of
knowledge made by the sun apprehended by mental perception.  For our
Lord’s prayer must be carried out.  It is Jesus Who prayed “Grant that
they may be one in us as I and Thou are one, Father.” <span
id="fr_1832"></span>[1833](#fn_1832)   For when God, Who is one, is in
each, He makes all out; and number is lost in the in-dwelling of Unity.

<span id="ix.ix-p65"></span>This is my second attempt to attack the
text.  If any one has a better interpretation to give, and can
consistently with true religion amend what I say, let him speak and let
him amend, and the Lord will reward him for me.  There is no jealousy in
my heart.  I have not approached this investigation of these passages
for strife and vain glory.  I have done so to help my brothers, lest the
earthen vessels which hold the treasure of God should seem to be
deceived by stony-hearted and uncircumcised men, whose weapons are the
wisdom of folly. <span id="fr_1833"></span>[1834](#fn_1833)

<span id="ix.ix-p67"></span><span id="page_120">p. 120</span> <span
id="ix.ix-Page_120"></span>8.  Again, as is said through Solomon the
Wise in the Proverbs, “He was created;” and He is named “Beginning of
ways” <span id="fr_1834"></span>[1835](#fn_1834) of good news, which
lead us to the kingdom of heaven.  He is not in essence and substance a
creature, but is made a “way” according to the œconomy.  Being made and
being created signify the same thing.  As He was made a way, so was He
made a door, a shepherd, an angel, a sheep, and again a High Priest and
an Apostle, <span id="fr_1835"></span>[1836](#fn_1835) the names being
used in other senses.  What again would the heretics say about God
unsubjected, and about His being made sin for us? <span
id="fr_1836"></span>[1837](#fn_1836)   For it is written “But when all
things shall be subdued unto Him, then shall the Son also Himself be
subject unto Him that put all things under Him.” <span
id="fr_1837"></span>[1838](#fn_1837)   Are you not afraid, sir, of God
called unsubjected?  For He makes thy subjection His own; and because of
thy struggling against goodness He calls himself unsubjected.  In this
sense too He once spoke of Himself as persecuted—“Saul, Saul,” He says,
“why persecutest thou me?” <span id="fr_1838"></span>[1839](#fn_1838) on
the occasion when Saul was hurrying to Damascus with a desire to
imprison the disciples.  Again He calls Himself naked, when any one of
his brethren is naked.  “I was naked,” He says, “and ye clothed
me;” <span id="fr_1839"></span>[1840](#fn_1839) and so when another is
in prison He speaks of Himself as imprisoned, for He Himself took away
our sins and bare our sicknesses. <span
id="fr_1840"></span>[1841](#fn_1840)   Now one of our infirmities is not
being subject, and He bare this.  So all the things which happen to us
to our hurt He makes His own, taking upon Him our sufferings in His
fellowship with us.

<span id="ix.ix-p77"></span>9.  But another passage is also seized by
those who are fighting against God to the perversion of their hearers: 
I mean the words “The Son can do nothing of Himself.” <span
id="fr_1841"></span>[1842](#fn_1841)   To me this saying too seems
distinctly declaratory of the Son’s being of the same nature as the
Father.  For if every rational creature is able to do anything of
himself, and the inclination which each has to the worse and to the
better is in his own power, but the Son can do nothing of Himself, then
the Son is not a creature.  And if He is not a creature, then He is of
one essence and substance with the Father.  Again; no creature can do
what he likes.  But the Son does what He wills in heaven and in earth. 
Therefore the Son is not a creature.  Again; all creatures are either
constituted of contraries or receptive of contraries.  But the Son is
very righteousness, and immaterial.  Therefore the Son is not a
creature, and if He is not a creature, He is of one essence and
substance with the Father.

<span id="ix.ix-p79"></span>10.  This examination of the passages before
us is, so far as my ability goes, sufficient.  Now let us turn the
discussion on those who attack the Holy Spirit, and cast down every high
thing of their intellect that exalts itself against the knowledge of
God. <span id="fr_1842"></span>[1843](#fn_1842)   You say that the Holy
Ghost is a creature.  And every creature is a servant of the Creator,
for “all are thy servants.” <span id="fr_1843"></span>[1844](#fn_1843)  
If then He is a servant, His holiness is acquired; and everything of
which the holiness is acquired is receptive of evil; but the Holy Ghost
being holy in essence is called “fount of holiness.” <span
id="fr_1844"></span>[1845](#fn_1844)   Therefore the Holy Ghost is not a
creature.  If He is not a creature, He is of one essence and substance
with the Father.  How, tell me, can you give the name of servant to Him
Who through your baptism frees you from your servitude?  “The law,” it
is said, “of the Spirit of life hath made me free from the law of
sin.” <span id="fr_1845"></span>[1846](#fn_1845)   But you will never
venture to call His nature even variable, so long as you have regard to
the nature of the opposing power of the enemy, <span id="page_121">p.
121</span> <span id="ix.ix-Page_121"></span>which, like lightning, is
fallen from heaven and fell out of the true life because its holiness
was acquired, and its evil counsels were followed by its change.  So
when it had fallen away from the Unity and had cast from it its angelic
dignity, it was named after its character “Devil,” <span
id="fr_1846"></span>[1847](#fn_1846) its former and blessed condition
being extinct and this hostile power being kindled.

<span id="ix.ix-p85"></span>Furthermore if he calls the Holy Ghost a
creature he describes His nature as limited.  How then can the two
following passages stand?  “The Spirit of the Lord filleth the
world;” <span id="fr_1847"></span>[1848](#fn_1847) and “Whither shall I
go from thy Spirit?” <span id="fr_1848"></span>[1849](#fn_1848)   But he
does not, it would seem, confess Him to be simple in nature; for he
describes Him as one in number.  And, as I have already said, everything
that is one in number is not simple.  And if the Holy Spirit is not
simple, He consists of essence and sanctification, and is therefore
composite.  But who is mad enough to describe the Holy Spirit as
composite, and not simple, and consubstantial with the Father and the
Son?

<span id="ix.ix-p88"></span>11.  If we ought to advance our argument yet
further, and turn our inspection to higher themes, let us contemplate
the divine nature of the Holy Spirit specially from the following point
of view.  In Scripture we find mention of three creations.  The first is
the evolution from non-being into being. <span
id="fr_1849"></span>[1850](#fn_1849)   The second is change from the
worse to the better.  The third is the resurrection of the dead.  In
these you will find the Holy Ghost cooperating with the Father and the
Son.  There is a bringing into existence of the heavens; and what says
David?  “By the word of the Lord were the heavens made and all the host
of them by the breath of His mouth.” <span
id="fr_1850"></span>[1851](#fn_1850)   Again, man is created through
baptism, for “if any man be in Christ he is a new creature.” <span
id="fr_1851"></span>[1852](#fn_1851)   And why does the Saviour say to
the disciples, “Go ye therefore and teach all nations, baptizing them in
the name of the Father and of the Son and of the Holy Ghost”?  Here too
you see the Holy Ghost present with the Father and the Son.  And what
would you say also as to the resurrection of the dead when we shall have
failed and returned to our dust?  Dust we are and unto dust we shall
return. <span id="fr_1852"></span>[1853](#fn_1852)   And He will send
the Holy Ghost and create us and renew the face of the earth. <span
id="fr_1853"></span>[1854](#fn_1853)   For what the holy Paul calls
resurrection David describes as renewal.  Let us hear, once more, him
who was caught into the third heaven.  What does he say?  “You are the
temple of the Holy Ghost which is in you.” <span
id="fr_1854"></span>[1855](#fn_1854)   Now every temple <span
id="fr_1855"></span>[1856](#fn_1855) is a temple of God, and if we are a
temple of the Holy Ghost, then the Holy Ghost is God.  It is also called
Solomon’s temple, but this is in the sense of his being its builder. 
And if we are a temple of the Holy Ghost in this sense, then the Holy
Ghost is God, for “He that built all things is God.” <span
id="fr_1856"></span>[1857](#fn_1856)   If we are a temple of one who is
worshipped, and who dwells in us, let us confess Him to be God, for thou
shalt worship the Lord thy God, and Him only shalt thou serve. <span
id="fr_1857"></span>[1858](#fn_1857)   Supposing them to object to the
word “God,” let them learn what this word means.  God is called <span
class="Greek"><span id="ix.ix-p98.2"></span>Θεὸς</span> either because
He placed (<span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.ix-p98.3"></span>τεθεικέναι</span>) all things or because He
beholds (<span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.ix-p98.4"></span>Θεᾶσθαι</span>) all things.  If He is called
<span class="Greek"><span id="ix.ix-p98.5"></span>Θεὸς</span> because He
“placed” or “beholds” all things, and the Spirit knoweth all the things
of God, as the Spirit in us knoweth our things, then the Holy Ghost is
God. <span id="fr_1858"></span>[1859](#fn_1858)   Again, if the sword of
the spirit is the word of God, <span
id="fr_1859"></span>[1860](#fn_1859) then the Holy Ghost is God,
inasmuch as the sword belongs to Him of whom it is also called the
word.  Is He named the right hand of the Father?  For “the right hand of
the Lord bringeth mighty things to pass;” <span
id="fr_1860"></span>[1861](#fn_1860) and “thy right hand, O Lord, hath
dashed in pieces the enemy.” <span id="fr_1861"></span>[1862](#fn_1861)
  But the Holy Ghost is the finger of God, as it is said “if I by the
finger of God cast out devils,” <span
id="fr_1862"></span>[1863](#fn_1862) of which the version in another
Gospel is “if I by the Spirit of God cast out devils.” <span
id="fr_1863"></span>[1864](#fn_1863)   So the Holy Ghost is of the same
nature as the Father and the Son.

<span id="ix.ix-p106"></span>12.  So much must suffice for the present
on the subject of the adorable and holy Trinity.  It is not now possible
to extend the enquiry about it further.  Do ye take seeds from a humble
person like me, and cultivate the ripe ear for yourselves, for, as you
<span id="page_122">p. 122</span> <span id="ix.ix-Page_122"></span>know,
in such cases we look for interest.  But I trust in God that you,
because of your pure lives, will bring forth fruit thirty, sixty, and a
hundred fold.  For, it is said, Blessed are the pure in heart, for they
shall see God. <span id="fr_1864"></span>[1865](#fn_1864)   And, my
brethren, entertain no other conception of the kingdom of the heavens
than that it is the very contemplation of realities.  This the divine
Scriptures call blessedness.  For “the kingdom of heaven is within
you.” <span id="fr_1865"></span>[1866](#fn_1865)

<span id="ix.ix-p110"></span>The inner man consists of nothing but
contemplation.  The kingdom of the heavens, then, must be
contemplation.  Now we behold their shadows as in a glass; hereafter,
set free from this earthly body, clad in the incorruptible and the
immortal, we shall behold their archetypes, we shall see them, that is,
if we have steered our own life’s course aright, and if we have heeded
the right faith, for otherwise none shall see the Lord.  For, it is
said, into a malicious soul Wisdom shall not enter, nor dwell in the
body that is subject unto sin. <span
id="fr_1866"></span>[1867](#fn_1866)   And let no one urge in objection
that, while I am ignoring what is before our eyes, I am philosophizing
to them about bodiless and immaterial being.  It seems to me perfectly
absurd, while the senses are allowed free action in relation to their
proper matter, to exclude mind alone from its peculiar operation. 
Precisely in the same manner in which sense touches sensible objects, so
mind apprehends the objects of mental perception.  This too must be said
that God our Creator has not included natural faculties among things
which can be taught.  No one teaches sight to apprehend colour or form,
nor hearing to apprehend sound and speech, nor smell, pleasant and
unpleasant scents, nor taste, flavours and savours, nor touch, soft and
hard, hot and cold.  Nor would any one teach the mind to reach objects
of mental perception; and just as the senses in the case of their being
in any way diseased, or injured, require only proper treatment and then
readily fulfil their own functions; just so the mind, imprisoned in
flesh, and full of the thoughts that arise thence, requires faith and
right conversation which make “its feet like hinds’ feet, and set it on
its high places.” <span id="fr_1867"></span>[1868](#fn_1867)   The same
advice is given us by Solomon the wise, who in one passage offers us the
example of the diligent worker the ant, <span
id="fr_1868"></span>[1869](#fn_1868) and recommends her active life; and
in another the work of the wise bee in forming its cells, <span
id="fr_1869"></span>[1870](#fn_1869) and thereby suggests a natural
contemplation wherein also the doctrine of the Holy Trinity is
contained, if at least the Creator is considered in proportion to the
beauty of the things created.

<span id="ix.ix-p115"></span>But with thanks to the Father, the Son and
the Holy Ghost let me make an end to my letter, for, as the proverb has
it, <span class="Greek"><span id="ix.ix-p115.1"></span>πᾶν μέτρον
ἄριστον</span>. <span id="fr_1870"></span>[1871](#fn_1870)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1778"></span>[115:1779](2080081.htm#fr_1778) <span
id="ix.ix-p1.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ix-p2"></span> This important letter was written <span
class="c14"><span id="ix.ix-p2.1"></span>a.d.</span> 360, when Basil,
shocked at the discovery that Dianius, the bishop who had baptized him,
had subscribed the Arian creed of Ariminum, as revised at Nike (Theod.,
*Hist. Ecc*. II. xvi.), left Cæsarea, and withdrew to his friend Gregory
at Nazianzus.  The Benedictine note considers the traditional title an
error, and concludes the letter to have been really addressed to the
monks of the Cœnobium over which Basil had presided.  But it may have
been written to monks in or near Cæsarea, so that title and sense will
agree.

<span id="fn_1779"></span>[115:1780](2080081.htm#fr_1779) <span
id="ix.ix-p4.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ix-p5"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.ix-p5.1"></span>πατρίς</span> seems to be used of the city or
neighbourhood of Cæsarea, and so far to be in favour of Basil’s birth
there.

<span id="fn_1780"></span>[116:1781](2080081.htm#fr_1780) <span
id="ix.ix-p5.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ix-p6"></span> *i.e.* the life of the city, presumably
Nazianzus, from which he is writing.

<span id="fn_1781"></span>[116:1782](2080081.htm#fr_1781) <span
id="ix.ix-p7.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ix-p8"></span> *cf*. the Arian formula <span
class="Greek"><span id="ix.ix-p8.1"></span>ἦ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="ix.ix-p8.2"></span>ν ποτὲ ὅτε οὐκ ἦν</span>.

<span id="fn_1782"></span>[116:1783](2080081.htm#fr_1782) <span
id="ix.ix-p8.3"></span>

<span id="ix.ix-p9"></span> [John iv.
14](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#014)<span id="ix.ix-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1783"></span>[116:1784](2080081.htm#fr_1783) <span
id="ix.ix-p9.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ix-p10"></span> [Jer. ii.
13](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#013)<span id="ix.ix-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1784"></span>[116:1785](2080081.htm#fr_1784) <span
id="ix.ix-p10.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ix-p11"></span> *cf*. p. 16, note.  This is one of the few
instances of St. Basil’s use of the word <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.ix-p11.1"></span>θεός</span> of the Holy Ghost.

<span id="fn_1785"></span>[116:1786](2080081.htm#fr_1785) <span
id="ix.ix-p11.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ix-p12"></span> For the four elements of ancient philosophy
modern chemistry now catalogues at least sixty-seven.  Of these, earth
generally contains eight; air is a mixture of two; water is a compound
of two; and fire is the visible evidence of a combination between
elements which produces light and heat.  On the “elements” of the Greek
philosophers *vide* Arist., *Met*. i. 3.  Thales (†c. 550 <span
class="c14"><span id="ix.ix-p12.1"></span>b.c.</span>) said *water*;
Anaximenes (†c. <span class="c14"><span
id="ix.ix-p12.2"></span>b.c.</span> 480) *air*; and Heraclitus (†c.
<span class="c14"><span id="ix.ix-p12.3"></span>b.c.</span> 500)
*fire*.  To these Empedocles (who “*ardentem frigidus Ætnam insiluit*,
c. <span class="c14"><span id="ix.ix-p12.4"></span>b.c.</span> 440)
added a fourth, *earth*.

<span id="fn_1786"></span>[116:1787](2080081.htm#fr_1786) <span
id="ix.ix-p13.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ix-p14"></span> Asserted at Seleucia and Ariminum.

<span id="fn_1787"></span>[116:1788](2080081.htm#fr_1787) <span
id="ix.ix-p14.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ix-p15"></span> *cf*. *D. Sp. S*. § 4 on Aetius’
responsibility for the Anomœan formula.

<span id="fn_1788"></span>[117:1789](2080081.htm#fr_1788) <span
id="ix.ix-p15.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ix-p16"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.ix-p16.1"></span>τὸ ὁμοούσιον</span>.

<span id="fn_1789"></span>[117:1790](2080081.htm#fr_1789) <span
id="ix.ix-p16.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ix-p17"></span> [Ps. lxxxii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/psa082.htm#006)<span id="ix.ix-p17.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1790"></span>[117:1791](2080081.htm#fr_1790) <span
id="ix.ix-p17.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ix-p18"></span> [Ps. xcvi.
5](../../../bib/kjv/psa096.htm#005)<span id="ix.ix-p18.1"></span>, LXX.

<span id="fn_1791"></span>[117:1792](2080081.htm#fr_1791) <span
id="ix.ix-p18.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ix-p19"></span> [2 Cor. xii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/co2012.htm#004)<span id="ix.ix-p19.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1792"></span>[117:1793](2080081.htm#fr_1792) <span
id="ix.ix-p19.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ix-p20"></span> [Ps. cii.
15](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#015)<span id="ix.ix-p20.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1793"></span>[117:1794](2080081.htm#fr_1793) <span
id="ix.ix-p20.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ix-p21"></span> [1 Tim. vi.
16](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#016)<span id="ix.ix-p21.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1794"></span>[117:1795](2080081.htm#fr_1794) <span
id="ix.ix-p21.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ix-p22"></span> [Rom. xvi.
27](../../../bib/kjv/rom016.htm#027)<span id="ix.ix-p22.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1795"></span>[117:1796](2080081.htm#fr_1795) <span
id="ix.ix-p22.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ix-p23"></span> [Luke xviii.
19](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#019)<span id="ix.ix-p23.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1796"></span>[117:1797](2080081.htm#fr_1796) <span
id="ix.ix-p23.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ix-p24"></span> [Job ix.
8](../../../bib/kjv/job009.htm#008)<span id="ix.ix-p24.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1797"></span>[117:1798](2080081.htm#fr_1797) <span
id="ix.ix-p24.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ix-p25"></span> [Deut. vi.
13](../../../bib/kjv/deu006.htm#013)<span id="ix.ix-p25.1"></span>,
LXX., where the text runs <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.ix-p25.2"></span>κύριον τὸν θεόν σου φοβηθήσῃ</span>.  St. Basil
may quote the version in [Matt. 4:10](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#010),
[Luke 4:8](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#008)<span
id="ix.ix-p25.3"></span>, <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.ix-p25.4"></span>προσκυνήσεις</span>.  The Hebrew="fear".

<span id="fn_1798"></span>[117:1799](2080081.htm#fr_1798) <span
id="ix.ix-p25.5"></span>

<span id="ix.ix-p26"></span> [Deut. xxxii.
39](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#039)<span id="ix.ix-p26.1"></span>, LXX.

<span id="fn_1799"></span>[117:1800](2080081.htm#fr_1799) <span
id="ix.ix-p26.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ix-p27"></span> [Deut. xxxii.
12](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#012)<span id="ix.ix-p27.1"></span>, LXX.

<span id="fn_1800"></span>[117:1801](2080081.htm#fr_1800) <span
id="ix.ix-p27.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ix-p28"></span> [1 Sam. vii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/sa1007.htm#004)<span id="ix.ix-p28.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1801"></span>[117:1802](2080081.htm#fr_1801) <span
id="ix.ix-p28.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ix-p29"></span> [1 Cor.
8:5](../../../bib/kjv/co1008.htm#005),
[6](../../../bib/kjv/co1008.htm#006)<span id="ix.ix-p29.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1802"></span>[117:1803](2080081.htm#fr_1802) <span
id="ix.ix-p29.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ix-p30"></span> [Matt. xvi.
19](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#019)<span id="ix.ix-p30.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1803"></span>[117:1804](2080081.htm#fr_1803) <span
id="ix.ix-p30.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ix-p31"></span> *i.e.* of His work on earth as God manifest
in the flesh.  *Vide* note, p. 7.

<span id="fn_1804"></span>[117:1805](2080081.htm#fr_1804) <span
id="ix.ix-p31.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ix-p32"></span> [John xvii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#003)<span id="ix.ix-p32.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1805"></span>[117:1806](2080081.htm#fr_1805) <span
id="ix.ix-p32.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ix-p33"></span> [John xiv.
1](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#001)<span id="ix.ix-p33.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1806"></span>[117:1807](2080081.htm#fr_1806) <span
id="ix.ix-p33.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ix-p34"></span> *cf*. note, p. 7.

<span id="fn_1807"></span>[117:1808](2080081.htm#fr_1807) <span
id="ix.ix-p35.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ix-p36"></span> [John vi.
57](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#057)<span id="ix.ix-p36.1"></span>,
R.V.  The Greek is <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.ix-p36.2"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.ix-p36.3"></span>γὼ ζῶ διὰ τὸν πατέρα</span>, *i.e*. not through
or by the Father, but “because of” or “on account of” the Father.  “The
preposition (Vulg. *propter Patrem*) describes the ground or object, not
the instrument or agent (by, through <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.ix-p36.4"></span>διὰ τοῦ π</span>.).  Complete devotion to the
Father is the essence of the life of the Son; and so complete devotion
to the Son is the life of the believer.  It seems better to give this
full sense to the word than to take it as equivalent to ‘*by reason
of*;’ that is, ‘I live because the Father lives.’”  Westcott, *St. John*
ad loc.

<span id="fn_1808"></span>[117:1809](2080081.htm#fr_1808) <span
id="ix.ix-p36.5"></span>

<span id="ix.ix-p37"></span> [John xi.
25](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#025)<span id="ix.ix-p37.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1809"></span>[118:1810](2080081.htm#fr_1809) <span
id="ix.ix-p37.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ix-p38"></span> [John vi.
57](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#057)<span id="ix.ix-p38.1"></span>, R.V.

<span id="fn_1810"></span>[118:1811](2080081.htm#fr_1810) <span
id="ix.ix-p38.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ix-p39"></span> With this striking exposition of Basil’s
view of the spiritual meaning of eating the flesh and drinking the
blood, *cf*. the passage from Athanasius quoted by Bp. Harold Browne in
his *Exposition of the XXXIX. Articles*, p. 693.  It is not easy for
Roman commentators to cite passages even apparently in support of the
less spiritual view of the manducation, *e.g.* Fessler, *Inst. Pat*. i.
530, and the quotations under the word “*Eucharistia*,” in the *Index*
of Basil ed Migne.  Contrast Gregory of Nyssa, in chap. xxxvii. of the
*Greater Catechism*.

<span id="fn_1811"></span>[118:1812](2080081.htm#fr_1811) <span
id="ix.ix-p40.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ix-p41"></span> [John xiv.
28](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#028)<span id="ix.ix-p41.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1812"></span>[118:1813](2080081.htm#fr_1812) <span
id="ix.ix-p41.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ix-p42"></span> [John i.
14](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#014)<span id="ix.ix-p42.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1813"></span>[118:1814](2080081.htm#fr_1813) <span
id="ix.ix-p42.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ix-p43"></span> [Ps. viii.
5](../../../bib/kjv/psa008.htm#005)<span id="ix.ix-p43.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1814"></span>[118:1815](2080081.htm#fr_1814) <span
id="ix.ix-p43.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ix-p44"></span> [Heb. ii.
9](../../../bib/kjv/heb002.htm#009)<span id="ix.ix-p44.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1815"></span>[118:1816](2080081.htm#fr_1815) <span
id="ix.ix-p44.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ix-p45"></span> [Isa.
53:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#002),
[3](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#003)<span id="ix.ix-p45.1"></span>, LXX.

<span id="fn_1816"></span>[118:1817](2080081.htm#fr_1816) <span
id="ix.ix-p45.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ix-p46"></span> *cf*. [Luke x.
30](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#030)<span id="ix.ix-p46.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1817"></span>[118:1818](2080081.htm#fr_1817) <span
id="ix.ix-p47.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ix-p48"></span> [John i.
3](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#003)<span id="ix.ix-p48.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1818"></span>[118:1819](2080081.htm#fr_1818) <span
id="ix.ix-p48.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ix-p49"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.ix-p49.1"></span>τοῦτο οἰκονομεῖ</span>.

<span id="fn_1819"></span>[118:1820](2080081.htm#fr_1819) <span
id="ix.ix-p49.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ix-p50"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.ix-p50.1"></span>τῷ στενῶ τῆς προθεσμίας. ἡ προθεσμία</span>
*sc*<span class="Greek"><span id="ix.ix-p50.2"></span>. ἡ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="ix.ix-p50.3"></span>μέρα</span> was in Attic Law
a day fixed beforehand before which money must be paid, actions brought,
etc.  *cf*. Plat. *Legg*, 954, D.  It is the “time appointed” of the
Father in [Gal. iv. 2](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#002)<span
id="ix.ix-p50.4"></span>.

<span id="fn_1820"></span>[118:1821](2080081.htm#fr_1820) <span
id="ix.ix-p50.5"></span>

<span id="ix.ix-p51"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.ix-p51.1"></span>οἰκονομεῖ</span>.

<span id="fn_1821"></span>[118:1822](2080081.htm#fr_1821) <span
id="ix.ix-p51.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ix-p52"></span> [Acts i.
7](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#007)<span id="ix.ix-p52.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1822"></span>[118:1823](2080081.htm#fr_1822) <span
id="ix.ix-p53.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ix-p54"></span> *cf*. [John xv.
3](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#003)<span id="ix.ix-p54.1"></span>, “Now
ye are clean through the word.”

<span id="fn_1823"></span>[119:1824](2080081.htm#fr_1823) <span
id="ix.ix-p54.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ix-p55"></span> [Mark xiii.
32](../../../bib/kjv/mar013.htm#032)<span id="ix.ix-p55.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1824"></span>[119:1825](2080081.htm#fr_1824) <span
id="ix.ix-p55.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ix-p56"></span> The Ben. note is *Tota hæc explicandi ratio
non sua sponte deducta, sed vi pertracta multis videbitur.  Sed illud ad
excusandum difficilius, quod ait Basilius angelorum scientiam crassam
esse, si comparetur cum ea quæ est facie ad faciem.  Videtur subtilis
explicatio, quam hic sequitur, necessitatem ei imposuisse ita de angelis
sentiendi.  Nam cum diem et horam idem esse statueret, ac extremam
beatitudinem; illud Scriptura,* sed neque angeli sciunt*, cogebat illis
visionem illam, quæ fit facie ad faciem, denegare; quia idem de illis
non poterat dici ac de Filio, eos de se ipsis scire id quod sunt,
nescire quod non sunt.  Quod si hanc hausit opinionem ex origenis
fontibus, qui pluribus locis eam insinuat, certe cito deposuit.  Ait
enim tom* II. p. 320.  *<span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.ix-p56.1"></span>Ανγελοσ ιν δίινυμ φαχιεμ χοντινεντερ ιντεντοσ
οχυλοσ ηαβερε.  Ιδεμ δοχετ ιν Χομ.</span>* *Is*. p. 515, n. 185, *et De
Sp. S. cap*. XVI.

<span id="fn_1825"></span>[119:1826](2080081.htm#fr_1825) <span
id="ix.ix-p56.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ix-p57"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.ix-p57.1"></span>διὰ τῶν ἀλλοτρίων</span>.  *cf*. [1 Cor. xiii.
12](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#012)<span id="ix.ix-p57.2"></span>,
where St. Paul’s word is <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.ix-p57.3"></span>ἔ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.ix-p57.4"></span>σοπτρον</span>.  St. Basil’s <span
class="Greek"><span id="ix.ix-p57.5"></span>κάτοπτρον</span> may rather
be suggested by [2 Cor. iii. 18](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#018)<span
id="ix.ix-p57.6"></span>, where the original is <span
class="Greek"><span id="ix.ix-p57.7"></span>κατοπτριζόμενοι</span>.

<span id="fn_1826"></span>[119:1827](2080081.htm#fr_1826) <span
id="ix.ix-p57.8"></span>

<span id="ix.ix-p58"></span> [John vi.
40](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#040)<span id="ix.ix-p58.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1827"></span>[119:1828](2080081.htm#fr_1827) <span
id="ix.ix-p58.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ix-p59"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.ix-p59.1"></span>κόσμων</span>.  The Ben. note quotes Combefis as
saying, “*Dura mihi hic vox:  sit pro* <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.ix-p59.2"></span>στοιχείων</span>, *per cognata corpori
elementa*,” and then goes on, *sed hac in re minus vidit vir eruditus;
non enim idem sonat illa vox ac*mundi*, quasi plures ejusmodi mundos
admittat Basilius; sed idem ac ornatus, sive ut ait Basilius in Epist*.
vi. <span class="Greek"><span id="ix.ix-p59.3"></span>τὰ περὶ γῆν
κάλλη</span>, *pulchritudines quæ sunt circa terram.  In Com. in* *Is*.
n. 58, p. 422.  *Ecclesia dicitur* <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.ix-p59.4"></span>πρέπουσιν ἑαυτῆ κοσμίοις κεκοσμημένη</span>,
*convenientibus sibi ornamentis instructa eadem voce utitur Gregorius
Nazianz. Ep*. cvii.

<span id="fn_1828"></span>[119:1829](2080081.htm#fr_1828) <span
id="ix.ix-p59.5"></span>

<span id="ix.ix-p60"></span> [John xiv.
28](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#028)<span id="ix.ix-p60.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1829"></span>[119:1830](2080081.htm#fr_1829) <span
id="ix.ix-p60.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ix-p61"></span> [Matt. xx.
23](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#023)<span id="ix.ix-p61.1"></span>. 
*cf*. n. *Theodoret*, p. 28.

<span id="fn_1830"></span>[119:1831](2080081.htm#fr_1830) <span
id="ix.ix-p61.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ix-p62"></span> [1 Cor. xv.
24](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#024)<span id="ix.ix-p62.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1831"></span>[119:1832](2080081.htm#fr_1831) <span
id="ix.ix-p62.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ix-p63"></span> [Acts
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#006),
[7](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#007)<span id="ix.ix-p63.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1832"></span>[119:1833](2080081.htm#fr_1832) <span
id="ix.ix-p63.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ix-p64"></span> [John
17:21](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#021),
[22](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#022)<span id="ix.ix-p64.1"></span>,
slightly varied.

<span id="fn_1833"></span>[119:1834](2080081.htm#fr_1833) <span
id="ix.ix-p65.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ix-p66"></span> Basil also refers to this passage in the
treatise, *C.* *Eunomium* i. 20:  “Since the Son’s origin (<span
class="Greek"><span id="ix.ix-p66.1"></span>ἀ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="ix.ix-p66.2"></span>ρχή</span>) is from (<span
class="Greek"><span id="ix.ix-p66.3"></span>ἀ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="ix.ix-p66.4"></span>πό</span>) the Father, in
this respect the Father is greater, as cause and origin (<span
class="Greek"><span id="ix.ix-p66.5"></span>ὡ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="ix.ix-p66.6"></span>ς</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="ix.ix-p66.7"></span>αἴτιος καὶ ἀρχή</span>). 
Whence also the Lord said thus *my Father is greater than I*, clearly
inasmuch as He is Father (<span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.ix-p66.8"></span>καθὸ πατήρ</span>).  Yea; what else does the
word Father signify unless the being cause and origin of that which is
begotten by Him?”  And in iii. 1:  “The Son is second in order (<span
class="Greek"><span id="ix.ix-p66.9"></span>τάξει</span>) to the Father,
because He is from Him (<span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.ix-p66.10"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.ix-p66.11"></span>πό</span>) and in dignity (<span
class="Greek"><span id="ix.ix-p66.12"></span>ἀ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="ix.ix-p66.13"></span>ξιώματι</span>) because the
Father is the origin and cause of His being.”  Quoted by Bp. Westcott in
his *St. John* in the additional notes on xiv. 16, 28, pp. 211 *seqq*.,
where also will be found quotations from other Fathers on this passage.

<span id="fn_1834"></span>[120:1835](2080081.htm#fr_1834) <span
id="ix.ix-p67.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ix-p68"></span> The text of [Prov. viii.
22](../../../bib/kjv/pro008.htm#022)<span id="ix.ix-p68.1"></span> in
the LXX. is <span class="Greek"><span id="ix.ix-p68.2"></span>κύριος
ἔκτισέ με ἀρχὴν ὁδῶν αὐτοῦ εἰς ἔργα αὐτοῦ</span>.  The rendering of A.V.
is “possessed,” with “formed” in the margin.

<span id="ix.ix-p69"></span>The Hebrew verb occurs some eighty times in
the Old Testament, and in only four other passages is translated by
possess, viz., [Gen. 14:19](../../../bib/kjv/gen014.htm#019),
[22](../../../bib/kjv/gen014.htm#022), [Ps.
139:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa139.htm#013), [Jer.
32:15](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#015), [Zech.
11:5](../../../bib/kjv/zac011.htm#005)<span id="ix.ix-p69.1"></span>. 
In the two former, though the LXX. renders the word in the Psalms <span
class="Greek"><span id="ix.ix-p69.2"></span>ἐ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="ix.ix-p69.3"></span>κτήσω</span>, it would have
borne the sense of “create.”  In the passage under discussion the Syriac
agrees with the LXX., and among critics adopting the same view Bishop
Wordsworth cites Ewald, Hitzig, and Genesius.  The ordinary meaning of
the Hebrew is “get” or “acquire,” and hence it is easy to see how the
idea of getting or possessing passed in relation to the Creator into
that of creation.  The Greek translators were not unanimous and Aquila
wrote <span class="Greek"><span id="ix.ix-p69.4"></span>ἐ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="ix.ix-p69.5"></span>κτήσατο</span>.  The passage
inevitably became the Jezreel or Low Countries of the Arian war, and
many a battle was fought on it.  The depreciators of the Son found in it
Scriptural authority for calling Him <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.ix-p69.6"></span>κτίσμα</span>, *e.g.* Arius in the *Thalia*, is
quoted by Athanasius in *Or. c. Ar*. I. iii. § 9, and such writings of
his followers as the Letter of Eusebius of Nicomedia to Paulinus of Tyre
cited in Theod., *Ecc. Hist*. I. v., and Eunomius as quoted by Greg.
Nyss., *c. Eunom*. II. 10; but as Dr. Liddon observes in his *Bampton
Lect*. (p. 60, ed. 1868), “They did not doubt that this created Wisdom
was a real being or person.”

<span id="ix.ix-p70"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.ix-p70.1"></span>ἔ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.ix-p70.2"></span>κτισε</span>was accepted by the Catholic
writers, but explained to refer to the manhood only, *cf*. Eustathius of
Antioch, quoted in Theod., *Dial*. I.  The view of Athanasius will be
found in his dissertation on the subject in the *Second Discourse
against the Arians*, pp. 357–385 of Schaff & Wace’s edition.  *cf*.
Bull, *Def. Fid. Nic*. II. vi. 8.

<span id="fn_1835"></span>[120:1836](2080081.htm#fr_1835) <span
id="ix.ix-p70.3"></span>

<span id="ix.ix-p71"></span> [Heb. iii.
1](../../../bib/kjv/heb003.htm#001)<span id="ix.ix-p71.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1836"></span>[120:1837](2080081.htm#fr_1836) <span
id="ix.ix-p71.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ix-p72"></span> *cf*. [2 Cor. v.
21](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#021)<span id="ix.ix-p72.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1837"></span>[120:1838](2080081.htm#fr_1837) <span
id="ix.ix-p72.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ix-p73"></span> [1 Cor. xv.
28](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#028)<span id="ix.ix-p73.1"></span>. 
*i.e.* Because the Son *then* shall be subjected, He is previously <span
class="Greek"><span id="ix.ix-p73.2"></span>ἀ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="ix.ix-p73.3"></span>νυπότακτος</span>, not as
being “*disobedient*” ([1 Tim. i.
9](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#009)<span id="ix.ix-p73.4"></span>), or
“*unruly*” ([Titus 1:6](../../../bib/kjv/tit001.htm#006),
[10](../../../bib/kjv/tit001.htm#010)<span id="ix.ix-p73.5"></span>),
but as being made man, and humanity, though subject unto Him, is not yet
seen to be “put under Him” ([Heb. ii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/heb002.htm#008)<span id="ix.ix-p73.6"></span>).

<span id="fn_1838"></span>[120:1839](2080081.htm#fr_1838) <span
id="ix.ix-p73.7"></span>

<span id="ix.ix-p74"></span> [Acts ix.
4](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#004)<span id="ix.ix-p74.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1839"></span>[120:1840](2080081.htm#fr_1839) <span
id="ix.ix-p74.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ix-p75"></span> [Matt. xxv.
36](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#036)<span id="ix.ix-p75.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1840"></span>[120:1841](2080081.htm#fr_1840) <span
id="ix.ix-p75.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ix-p76"></span> *cf*. [Isa.
53:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#004), [Matt.
8:17](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#017)<span id="ix.ix-p76.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1841"></span>[120:1842](2080081.htm#fr_1841) <span
id="ix.ix-p77.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ix-p78"></span> [John v.
19](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#019)<span id="ix.ix-p78.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1842"></span>[120:1843](2080081.htm#fr_1842) <span
id="ix.ix-p79.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ix-p80"></span> [2 Cor. xi.
5](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#005)<span id="ix.ix-p80.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1843"></span>[120:1844](2080081.htm#fr_1843) <span
id="ix.ix-p80.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ix-p81"></span> [Ps. xix.
91](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#091)<span id="ix.ix-p81.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1844"></span>[120:1845](2080081.htm#fr_1844) <span
id="ix.ix-p81.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ix-p82"></span> [Rom. i.
4](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#004)<span id="ix.ix-p82.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1845"></span>[120:1846](2080081.htm#fr_1845) <span
id="ix.ix-p82.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ix-p83"></span> [Rom. viii.
2](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#002)<span id="ix.ix-p83.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1846"></span>[121:1847](2080081.htm#fr_1846) <span
id="ix.ix-p83.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ix-p84"></span> In *Letter* cciv.  The name of <span
class="Greek"><span id="ix.ix-p84.1"></span>Διάβολος</span> is more
immediately connected with <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.ix-p84.2"></span>Διαβάλλειν</span>, to caluminate.  It is curious
that the occasional spelling (*e.g.* in Burton) Divell, which is nearer
to the original, and keeps up the association with Diable, Diavolo,
etc., should have given place to the less correct and misleading
“Devil.”

<span id="fn_1847"></span>[121:1848](2080081.htm#fr_1847) <span
id="ix.ix-p85.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ix-p86"></span> [Wisdom i.
7](../../../bib/apo/wis001.htm#007)<span id="ix.ix-p86.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1848"></span>[121:1849](2080081.htm#fr_1848) <span
id="ix.ix-p86.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ix-p87"></span> [Ps. cxxxix.
7](../../../bib/kjv/psa039.htm#007)<span id="ix.ix-p87.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1849"></span>[121:1850](2080081.htm#fr_1849) <span
id="ix.ix-p88.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ix-p89"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.ix-p89.1"></span>παραγωγὴ ἀπὸ τοῦ μὴ ὄντος εἰς τὸ εἶναι</span>. 
For <span class="Greek"><span id="ix.ix-p89.2"></span>παραγωγή</span> it
is not easy to give an equivalent; it is leading or bringing with a
notion of change, sometimes a change into error, as when it means a
quibble.  It is not quite the Ben. Latin “*productio*.”  It is not used
intransitively; if there is a <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.ix-p89.3"></span>παραγωγὴ</span>, there must be <span
class="Greek"><span id="ix.ix-p89.4"></span>ὁ</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="ix.ix-p89.5"></span>παράγων</span>, and
similarly if there is evolution or development, there must be an evolver
or developer.

<span id="fn_1850"></span>[121:1851](2080081.htm#fr_1850) <span
id="ix.ix-p89.6"></span>

<span id="ix.ix-p90"></span> [Ps. xxxiii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/psa033.htm#006)<span id="ix.ix-p90.1"></span>. 
<span class="Greek"><span id="ix.ix-p90.2"></span>τῷ πνεύματι τοῦ
στόματος αὐτοῦ</span>, LXX.

<span id="fn_1851"></span>[121:1852](2080081.htm#fr_1851) <span
id="ix.ix-p90.3"></span>

<span id="ix.ix-p91"></span> [2 Cor. v.
17](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#017)<span id="ix.ix-p91.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1852"></span>[121:1853](2080081.htm#fr_1852) <span
id="ix.ix-p91.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ix-p92"></span> *cf*. [Gen. iii.
19](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#019)<span id="ix.ix-p92.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1853"></span>[121:1854](2080081.htm#fr_1853) <span
id="ix.ix-p92.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ix-p93"></span> *cf*. [Ps. ciii.
30](../../../bib/kjv/psa003.htm#030)<span id="ix.ix-p93.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1854"></span>[121:1855](2080081.htm#fr_1854) <span
id="ix.ix-p93.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ix-p94"></span> [1 Cor. vi.
19](../../../bib/kjv/co1006.htm#019)<span id="ix.ix-p94.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1855"></span>[121:1856](2080081.htm#fr_1855) <span
id="ix.ix-p94.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ix-p95"></span> The Greek word <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.ix-p95.1"></span>ναός</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.ix-p95.2"></span>(</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.ix-p95.3"></span>ναίω</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.ix-p95.4"></span>)</span>=dwelling-place.  The Hebrew probably
indicates capacity.

<span id="ix.ix-p96"></span>Our “temple,” from the latin *Templum*
(<span class="Greek"><span id="ix.ix-p96.1"></span>τέμενος</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="ix.ix-p96.2"></span>—</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="ix.ix-p96.3"></span>v</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="ix.ix-p96.4"></span>ΤΑΜ</span>) is derivatively
*a place cut off.*

<span id="fn_1856"></span>[121:1857](2080081.htm#fr_1856) <span
id="ix.ix-p96.5"></span>

<span id="ix.ix-p97"></span> [Heb. iii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/heb003.htm#004)<span id="ix.ix-p97.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1857"></span>[121:1858](2080081.htm#fr_1857) <span
id="ix.ix-p97.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ix-p98"></span> [Matt. iv.
10](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#010)<span id="ix.ix-p98.1"></span>. 
*cf.* note on p.  .

<span id="fn_1858"></span>[121:1859](2080081.htm#fr_1858) <span
id="ix.ix-p98.6"></span>

<span id="ix.ix-p99"></span> [1 Cor.
2:10](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#010),
[11](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#011)<span id="ix.ix-p99.1"></span>.  On
the derivation of <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.ix-p99.2"></span>Θεός</span> from <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.ix-p99.3"></span>θέω</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.ix-p99.4"></span>(</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.ix-p99.5"></span>τίθημι</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.ix-p99.6"></span>)</span> or <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.ix-p99.7"></span>θεάομαι</span>, *cf*. Greg. Naz.

<span id="ix.ix-p100"></span>Skeat rejects the theory of connexion with
the Latin *Deus*, and thinks that the root of <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.ix-p100.1"></span>τίθημι</span> may be the origin.

<span id="fn_1859"></span>[121:1860](2080081.htm#fr_1859) <span
id="ix.ix-p100.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ix-p101"></span> [Eph. vi.
17](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#017)<span id="ix.ix-p101.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1860"></span>[121:1861](2080081.htm#fr_1860) <span
id="ix.ix-p101.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ix-p102"></span> [Ps. cxviii.
16](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#016)<span id="ix.ix-p102.1"></span>. 
P.B. “doeth valiantly,” A.V. <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.ix-p102.2"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.ix-p102.3"></span>ποίησε δύνα μιν</span>, LXX.

<span id="fn_1861"></span>[121:1862](2080081.htm#fr_1861) <span
id="ix.ix-p102.4"></span>

<span id="ix.ix-p103"></span> [Ex. xv.
6](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#006)<span id="ix.ix-p103.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1862"></span>[121:1863](2080081.htm#fr_1862) <span
id="ix.ix-p103.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ix-p104"></span> [Luke xi.
20](../../../bib/kjv/luk011.htm#020)<span id="ix.ix-p104.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1863"></span>[121:1864](2080081.htm#fr_1863) <span
id="ix.ix-p104.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ix-p105"></span> [Matt. xii.
28](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#028)<span id="ix.ix-p105.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1864"></span>[122:1865](2080081.htm#fr_1864) <span
id="ix.ix-p106.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ix-p107"></span> [Matt. v.
8](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#008)<span id="ix.ix-p107.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1865"></span>[122:1866](2080081.htm#fr_1865) <span
id="ix.ix-p107.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ix-p108"></span> [Luke xvii.
21](../../../bib/kjv/luk017.htm#021)<span id="ix.ix-p108.1"></span>,
<span class="Greek"><span id="ix.ix-p108.2"></span>ἐ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="ix.ix-p108.3"></span>ντὸς ὑμῶν</span>.  Many
modern commentators interpret “in your midst,” “among you.”  So Alford,
who quotes Xen., *Anab*. I. x. 3 for the Greek, Bp. Walsham How,
Bornemann, Meyer.  The older view coincided with that of Basil; so
Theophylact, Chrysostom, and with them Olshausen and Godet.

<span id="ix.ix-p109"></span>To the objection that the words were said
to the *Pharisees*, and that the kingdom was not in their hearts, it may
be answered that our Lord might use “you” of humanity, even when
addressing Pharisees.  He never, like a merely human preacher, says
“we.”

<span id="fn_1866"></span>[122:1867](2080081.htm#fr_1866) <span
id="ix.ix-p110.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ix-p111"></span> [Wisdom i.
4](../../../bib/apo/wis001.htm#004)<span id="ix.ix-p111.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1867"></span>[122:1868](2080081.htm#fr_1867) <span
id="ix.ix-p111.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ix-p112"></span> [Ps. xviii.
33](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#033)<span id="ix.ix-p112.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1868"></span>[122:1869](2080081.htm#fr_1868) <span
id="ix.ix-p112.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ix-p113"></span> *cf*. [Prov. vi.
6](../../../bib/kjv/pro006.htm#006)<span id="ix.ix-p113.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1869"></span>[122:1870](2080081.htm#fr_1869) <span
id="ix.ix-p113.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ix-p114"></span> [Ecclus. xi.
3](../../../bib/apo/sir011.htm#003)<span id="ix.ix-p114.1"></span>.  The
ascription of this book to Solomon is said by Rufinus to be confined to
the Latin church, while the Greeks know it as the Wisdom of Jesus son of
Sirach (vers. Orig., *Hom. in Num*. xvii.).

<span id="fn_1870"></span>[122:1871](2080081.htm#fr_1870) <span
id="ix.ix-p115.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ix-p116"></span> Attributed to Cleobulus of Lindos.  Thales
is credited with the injunction <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.ix-p116.1"></span>μέτρῳ χρῶ</span>.  *cf*. my note on Theodoret,
*Ep*. cli. p. 329.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: To Maximus the Philosopher.](2080082)
