[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2080124)  [Next](2080126) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ix.liii"></span>

<span id="ix.liii-p1"></span> <span class="c18"><span
id="ix.liii-p1.1"></span>Letter LII. <span
id="fr_2183"></span>[2184](#fn_2183) </span>

<span id="ix.liii-p3"></span>*To the Canonicæ*. <span
id="fr_2184"></span>[2185](#fn_2184)

<span id="ix.liii-p5"></span>1.  <span class="c14"><span
id="ix.liii-p5.1"></span>I have</span> been very much distressed by a
painful report which reached my ears; but I have been equally delighted
by my brother, beloved of God, bishop Bosporius, <span
id="fr_2185"></span>[2186](#fn_2185) who has brought a more satisfactory
account of you.  He avers by God’s grace that all those stories spread
abroad about you are inventions of men who are not exactly informed as
to the truth about you.  He added, moreover, that he found among you
impious calumnies about me, of a kind likely to be uttered by those who
do not expect to have to give the Judge in the day of His righteous
retribution an account of even an idle word.  I thank God, then, both
because I am cured of my damaging opinion of you, an opinion which I
have derived from the calumnies of men, and because I have heard of your
abandonment of those baseless notions about me, on hearing the
assurances of my brother.  He, in all that he has said as coming from
himself, has also completely expressed my own feeling.  For in us both
there is one mind about the faith, as being heirs of the same Fathers
who once at Nicæa promulgated their great decree <span
id="fr_2186"></span>[2187](#fn_2186) concerning the faith.  Of this,
some portions are universally accepted without cavil, but the
homoousion, ill received in certain quarters, is still rejected by
some.  These objectors we may very properly blame, and yet on the
contrary deem them deserving of pardon.  To refuse to follow the
Fathers, not holding their declaration of more authority than one’s own
opinion, is conduct worthy of blame, as being brimful of
self-sufficiency.  On the other hand the fact that they view with
suspicion a phrase which is misrepresented by an opposite party does
seem to a small extent to relieve them from blame.  Moreover, as a
matter of fact, the members of the synods which met to discuss the case
of Paul of Samosata <span id="fr_2187"></span>[2188](#fn_2187) did find
fault with the term as an unfortunate one.

<span id="ix.liii-p10"></span>For they maintained that the homoousion
set forth the idea both of essence and of what is derived from it, so
that the essence, when divided, confers the title of co-essential on the
parts into which it is divided.  This explanation has some reason in the
case of bronze and coins made therefrom, but in the case of God the
Father and God the Son there is no question of substance anterior or
even underlying both; the mere thought and utterance of such a thing is
the last extravagance of impiety.  What can be conceived of as anterior
to the Unbegotten?  By this blasphemy faith in the Father and the Son is
destroyed, for things, constituted out of one, have to one another the
relation of brothers.

<span id="ix.liii-p11"></span>2.  Because even at that time there were
men who asserted the Son to have been brought into being out of the
non-existent, the term homoousion was adopted, to extirpate this
impiety.  For the conjunction of the Son with the Father is without time
and without interval.  The preceding words shew this to have been the
intended meaning.  For after saying that the Son was light of light, and
begotten of the substance of the Father, but was not made, they went on
to add the homoousion, thereby showing that whatever proportion of light
any one would attribute in the case of the Father will obtain also in
that of the Son.  For very light in relation to very light, according to
the actual sense of light, will have no variation.  Since then the
Father is light without <span id="page_156">p. 156</span> <span
id="ix.liii-Page_156"></span>beginning, and the Son begotten light, but
each of Them light and light; they rightly said “of one substance,” in
order to set forth the equal dignity of the nature.  Things, that have a
relation of brotherhood, are not, as some persons have supposed, of one
substance; but when both the cause and that which derives its natural
existence from the cause are of the same nature, then they are called
“of one substance.”

<span id="ix.liii-p12"></span>3.  This term also corrects the error of
Sabellius, for it removes the idea of the identity of the hypostases,
and introduces in perfection the idea of the Persons.  For nothing can
be of one substance with itself, but one thing is of one substance with
another.  The word has therefore an excellent and orthodox use, defining
as it does both the proper character of the hypostases, and setting
forth the invariability of the nature.  And when we are taught that the
Son is of the substance of the Father, begotten and not made, let us not
fall into the material sense of the relations.  For the substance was
not separated from the Father and bestowed on the Son; neither did the
substance engender by fluxion, nor yet by shooting forth <span
id="fr_2188"></span>[2189](#fn_2188) as plants their fruits.  The mode
of the divine begetting is ineffable and inconceivable by human
thought.  It is indeed characteristic of poor and carnal intelligence to
compare the things that are eternal with the perishing things of time,
and to imagine, that as corporeal things beget, so does God in like
manner; it is rather our duty to rise to the truth by arguments of the
contrary, and to say, that since thus is the mortal, not thus is He who
is immortal.  We must neither then deny the divine generation, nor
contaminate our intelligence with corporeal senses.

<span id="ix.liii-p14"></span>4.  The Holy Spirit, too, is numbered with
the Father and the Son, because He is above creation, and is ranked as
we are taught by the words of the Lord in the Gospel, “Go and baptize in
the name of the Father and of the Son and of the Holy Ghost.” <span
id="fr_2189"></span>[2190](#fn_2189)   He who, on the contrary, places
the Spirit before the Son, or alleges Him to be older than the Father,
resists the ordinance of God, and is a stranger to the sound faith,
since he fails to preserve the form of doxology which he has received,
but adopts some new fangled device in order to be pleasing to men.  It
is written “The Spirit is of God,” <span
id="fr_2190"></span>[2191](#fn_2190) and if He is of God, how can He be
older than that of which He is?  And what folly is it not, when there is
one Unbegotten, to speak of something else as superior to the
Unbegotten?  He is not even anterior, for nothing intervenes between Son
and Father.  If, however, He is not of God but is through Christ, He
does not even exist at all.  It follows, that this new invention about
the order really involves the destruction of the actual existence, and
is a denial of the whole faith.  It is equally impious to reduce Him to
the level of a creature, and to subordinate Him either to Son or to
Father, either in time or in rank.  These are the points on which I have
heard that you are making enquiry.  If the Lord grant that we meet I may
possibly have more to say on these subjects, and may myself, concerning
points which I am investigating, receive satisfactory information from
you.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2183"></span>[155:2184](2080125.htm#fr_2183) <span
id="ix.liii-p1.2"></span>

<span id="ix.liii-p2"></span> Placed at the beginning of St. Basil’s
episcopate, c. 370.

<span id="fn_2184"></span>[155:2185](2080125.htm#fr_2184) <span
id="ix.liii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ix.liii-p4"></span> Canonicæ, in the early church, were women
enrolled in a list in the churches, devoted to works of charity, and
living apart from men, though not under vows, nor always in a cœnobium. 
In Soc., *H.E.*i. 17 they are described as the recipients of St.
Helena’s hospitality.  St. Basil is supposed to refuse to recognise
marriage with them as legitimate in *Ep*. cclxxxviii.  The word <span
class="Greek"><span id="ix.liii-p4.1"></span>κανονικῶν</span> may stand
for either gender, but the marriage of Canonici was commonly allowed. 
*Letter* clxxiii. is addressed to the canonica Theodora.

<span id="fn_2185"></span>[155:2186](2080125.htm#fr_2185) <span
id="ix.liii-p5.2"></span>

<span id="ix.liii-p6"></span> *Vide* the *Letter* li.

<span id="fn_2186"></span>[155:2187](2080125.htm#fr_2186) <span
id="ix.liii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="ix.liii-p7"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.liii-p7.1"></span>κήρυγμα</span>.  On Basil’s use of this word
and of dogma, *vide* note on p. 41.

<span id="fn_2187"></span>[155:2188](2080125.htm#fr_2187) <span
id="ix.liii-p7.2"></span>

<span id="ix.liii-p8"></span> *i.e.*the two remarkable Antiochene synods
of 264 and 269, to enforce the ultimate decisions of which against Paul
of Samosata appeal was made to the pagan Aurelian.  On the explanation
of how the Homoousion came to be condemned in one sense by the Origenist
bishops at Antioch in 269, and asserted in another by the 318 at Nicæa
in 325, see prolegomena to *Athanasius* in Schaff and Wace’s ed. p.
xxxi.  *cf.* Ath.,*De Syn*. § 45, Hil., *De Trin*. iv. 4, and Basil,
*Cont. Eunom*. i. 19.  <span id="ix.liii-p8.1"></span>“*Wurde seiner
Lehre:  ‘Gott sey mit dem Logos zugleich Eine Person*, <span
class="Greek"><span id="ix.liii-p8.2"></span>ἓ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="ix.liii-p8.3"></span>ν πρόσωπον</span> *<span
id="ix.liii-p8.4"></span>wie der Mensch mit seiner Vernunft Eines sey,’
entgegengehalteh, die Kirchenlehre verlange Einen Gott, aber mehrere*
<span class="Greek"><span id="ix.liii-p8.5"></span>πρόσωπα</span> *<span
id="ix.liii-p8.6"></span> desselben, so sagte er, da auch ihm Christus
eine Person (nämlich als Mensch) sey, so habe auch sein Glaube mehrere*
<span class="Greek"><span id="ix.liii-p8.7"></span>πρόσωπα</span>,
*<span id="ix.liii-p8.8"></span>Gott und Christus stehen sich als* <span
class="Greek"><span id="ix.liii-p8.9"></span>ὁ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="ix.liii-p8.10"></span>μοούσιοι</span>, *<span
id="ix.liii-p8.11"></span>d. h. wahrscheinlich gleich persönliche
gegenüber, Diese veratorische Dialektik konnte zwar nicht täuschen; wohl
aber wurde das Wort* <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.liii-p8.12"></span>ὁ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.liii-p8.13"></span>μοούσιος</span>, *<span
id="ix.liii-p8.14"></span>so gebraucht und auf die Person überhaupt
bezogen, dadurcheine Weile verdächtig (man fürchtete nach Athan. De Syn.
Ar. et Sel. c.* <span id="ix.liii-p8.15"></span>45, *eine menschliche
Person nach Paul in die Trinität einlassen zu müssen), bis das vierte
Jahrhundert jenem Wort bestimmten kirchlichen Stempel gab*.”  Dorner,
*Christologie*. B. i. 513.

<span id="ix.liii-p9"></span>*Vide* also Thomasius, *<span
id="ix.liii-p9.1"></span>Christliche Dogmengeschichte*, B. 1, p. 188.

<span id="fn_2188"></span>[156:2189](2080125.htm#fr_2188) <span
id="ix.liii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="ix.liii-p13"></span> *cf*. [Luke xxi.
30](../../../bib/kjv/luk021.htm#030)<span id="ix.liii-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2189"></span>[156:2190](2080125.htm#fr_2189) <span
id="ix.liii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="ix.liii-p15"></span> [Matt. xxviii.
19](../../../bib/kjv/mat028.htm#019)<span id="ix.liii-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2190"></span>[156:2191](2080125.htm#fr_2190) <span
id="ix.liii-p15.2"></span>

<span id="ix.liii-p16"></span> [1 Cor. ii.
12](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#012)<span id="ix.liii-p16.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: To the Chorepiscopi.](2080126)
