[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2080228)  [Next](2080230) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ix.clvii"></span>

<span id="ix.clvii-p1"></span> <span class="c18"><span
id="ix.clvii-p1.1"></span>Letter CLVI. <span
id="fr_2511"></span>[2512](#fn_2511) </span>

<span id="ix.clvii-p3"></span>*To the Presbyter Evagrius*. <span
id="fr_2512"></span>[2513](#fn_2512)

<span id="ix.clvii-p5"></span>1.  <span class="c14"><span
id="ix.clvii-p5.1"></span>So</span> far from being impatient at the
length of your letter, I assure you I thought it even short, from the
pleasure it gave me <span id="page_211">p. 211</span> <span
id="ix.clvii-Page_211"></span>when reading it.  For is there anything
more pleasing than the idea of peace?  Is anything more suitable to the
sacred office, or more acceptable to the Lord, than to take measures for
effecting it?  May you have the reward of the peace-maker, since so
blessed an office has been the object of your good desires and earnest
efforts.  At the same time, believe me, my revered friend, I will yield
to none in my earnest wish and prayer to see the day when those who are
one in sentiment shall all fill the same assembly.  Indeed it would be
monstrous to feel pleasure in the schisms and divisions of the Churches,
and not to consider that the greatest of goods consists in the knitting
together of the members of Christ’s body.  But, alas! my inability is as
real as my desire.  No one knows better than yourself, that time alone
is the remedy of ills that time has matured.  Besides, a strong and
vigorous treatment is necessary to get at the root of the complaint. 
You will understand this hint, though there is no reason why I should
not speak out.

<span id="ix.clvii-p6"></span>2.  Self-importance, when rooted by habit
in the mind, cannot be destroyed by one man, by one single letter, or in
a short time.  Unless there be some arbiter in whom all parties have
confidence, suspicions and collisions will never altogether cease.  If,
indeed, the influence of Divine grace were shed upon me, and I were
given power in word and deed and spiritual gifts to prevail with these
rival parties, then this daring experiment might be demanded of me;
though, perhaps, even then, you would not advise me to attempt this
adjustment of things by myself, without the co-operation of the
bishop, <span id="fr_2513"></span>[2514](#fn_2513) on whom principally
falls the care of the church.  But he cannot come hither, nor can I
easily undertake a long journey while the winter lasts, or rather I
cannot anyhow, for the Armenian mountains will be soon impassable, even
to the young and vigorous, to say nothing of my continued bodily
ailments.  I have no objection to write to tell him of all this; but I
have no expectation that writing will lead to anything, for I know his
cautious character, and after all written words have little power to
convince the mind.  There are so many things to urge, and to bear, and
to reply to, and to object, that a letter has no soul, and is in fact
but waste paper.  However, as I have said, I will write.  Only give me
credit, most religious and dear brother, for having no private feeling
in the matter.  Thank God.  I have no such feeling towards any one.  I
have not busied myself in the investigation of the supposed or real
complaints which are brought against this or that man; so my opinion has
a claim on your attention as that of one who really cannot act from
partiality or prejudice.  I only desire, through the Lord’s good will,
that all things may be done with ecclesiastical propriety.

<span id="ix.clvii-p8"></span>3.  I was vexed to find from my dear son
Dorotheus, our associate in the ministry, that you had been unwilling to
communicate with him.  This was not the kind of conversation which you
had with me, as well as I recollect.  As to my sending to the West it is
quite out of the question.  I have no one fit for the service.  Indeed,
when I look round, I seem to have no one on my side.  I can but pray I
may be found in the number of those seven thousand who have not bowed
the knee to Baal.  I know the present persecutors of us all seek my
life; yet that shall not diminish ought of the zeal which I owe to the
Churches of God.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2511"></span>[210:2512](2080229.htm#fr_2511) <span
id="ix.clvii-p1.2"></span>

<span id="ix.clvii-p2"></span> Placed in 373.

<span id="fn_2512"></span>[210:2513](2080229.htm#fr_2512) <span
id="ix.clvii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ix.clvii-p4"></span> *cf. Letter* cxxxviii.

<span id="fn_2513"></span>[211:2514](2080229.htm#fr_2513) <span
id="ix.clvii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="ix.clvii-p7"></span> Meletius of Antioch.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: To Amiochus.](2080230)
