[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2080260)  [Next](2080262) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ix.clxxxix"></span>

<span id="ix.clxxxix-p1"></span> <span class="c18"><span
id="ix.clxxxix-p1.1"></span>Letter CLXXXVIII. <span
id="fr_2610"></span>[2611](#fn_2610) </span>

<span id="ix.clxxxix-p3"></span>(<span class="c14"><span
id="ix.clxxxix-p3.1"></span>Canonica</span> <span class="c14"><span
id="ix.clxxxix-p3.2"></span>Prima</span>.)

<span id="ix.clxxxix-p4"></span>*To Amphilochius, concerning the
Canons*. <span id="fr_2611"></span>[2612](#fn_2611)

<span id="ix.clxxxix-p6"></span>“<span class="c14"><span
id="ix.clxxxix-p6.1"></span>Even</span> a fool,” it is said, “when he
asks questions,” is counted wise. <span
id="fr_2612"></span>[2613](#fn_2612)   But when a wise man asks
questions, he makes even a fool wise.  And this, thank God, is my case,
as often as I receive a letter from your industrious self.  For we
become more learned and wiser than we were before, merely by asking
questions, because we are taught many things which we did not know; and
our anxiety to answer them acts as a teacher to us.  Assuredly at the
present time, though I have never before paid attention to the points
you raise, I have been forced to make accurate enquiry, and to turn over
in my mind both whatever I have heard from the elders, and all that I
have been taught in conformity with their lessons.

<span id="ix.clxxxix-p8"></span>I.  As to your enquiry about the
Cathari, <span id="fr_2613"></span>[2614](#fn_2613) a statement has
already been made, and you have properly reminded me that it is right to
follow the custom obtaining in each region, because those, who at the
time gave decision on these points, held different opinions concerning
their baptism.  But the baptism of the Pepuzeni <span
id="fr_2614"></span>[2615](#fn_2614) seems to me to have no authority;
and I am astonished how this can have escaped Dionysius, <span
id="fr_2615"></span>[2616](#fn_2615) acquainted as he was with the
canons.  The old authorities decided to accept that baptism which in
nowise errs from the faith.  Thus they used the names of heresies, of
schisms, and of unlawful congregations. <span
id="fr_2616"></span>[2617](#fn_2616)   By *heresies* they meant men who
were altogether broken off and alienated in matters relating to the
actual faith; by *schisms* <span id="fr_2617"></span>[2618](#fn_2617)
men who had separated for some ecclesiastical reasons and questions
capable of mutual solution; by *unlawful congregations* gatherings held
by disorderly presbyters or bishops or by unin<span id="page_224">p.
224</span> <span id="ix.clxxxix-Page_224"></span>structed laymen.  As,
for instance, if a man be convicted of crime, and prohibited from
discharging ministerial functions, and then refuses to submit to the
canons, but arrogates to himself episcopal and ministerial rights, and
persons leave the Catholic Church and join him, this is unlawful
assembly.  To disagree with members of the Church about repentance, is
*schism*.  Instances of *heresy* are those of the Manichæans, of the
Valentinians, of the Marcionites, and of these Pepuzenes; for with them
there comes in at once their disagreement concerning the actual faith in
God.  So it seemed good to the ancient authorities to reject the baptism
of heretics altogether, but to admit that of schismatics, <span
id="fr_2618"></span>[2619](#fn_2618) on the ground that they still
belonged to the Church.

<span id="ix.clxxxix-p17"></span>As to those who assembled in unlawful
congregations, their decision was to join them again to the Church,
after they had been brought to a better state by proper repentance and
rebuke, and so, in many cases, when men in orders <span
id="fr_2619"></span>[2620](#fn_2619) had rebelled with the disorderly,
to receive them on their repentance, into the same rank.  Now the
Pepuzeni are plainly heretical, for, by unlawfully and shamefully
applying to Montanus and Priscilla the title of the Paraclete, they have
blasphemed against the Holy Ghost.  They are, therefore, to be condemned
for ascribing divinity to men; and for outraging the Holy Ghost by
comparing Him to men.  They are thus also liable to eternal damnation,
inasmuch as blasphemy against the Holy Ghost admits of no forgiveness. 
What ground is there, then, for the acceptance of the baptism of men who
baptize into the Father and the Son and Montanus or Priscilla?  For
those who have not been baptized into the names delivered to us have not
been baptized at all.  So that, although this escaped the vigilance of
the great Dionysius, we must by no means imitate his error.  The
absurdity of the position is obvious in a moment, and evident to all who
are gifted with even a small share of reasoning capacity.

<span id="ix.clxxxix-p19"></span>The Cathari are schismatics; but it
seemed good to the ancient authorities, I mean Cyprian and our own <span
id="fr_2620"></span>[2621](#fn_2620) Firmilianus, to reject all these,
Cathari, Encratites, <span id="fr_2621"></span>[2622](#fn_2621) and
Hydroparastatæ, <span id="fr_2622"></span>[2623](#fn_2622) by one common
condemnation, because the origin of separation arose through schism, and
those who had apostatized from the Church had no longer on them the
grace of the Holy Spirit, for it ceased to be imparted when the
continuity was broken.  The first separatists had received their
ordination from the Fathers, and possessed the spiritual gift by the
laying on of their hands.  But they who were broken off had become
laymen, and, because they are no longer able to confer on others that
grace of the Holy Spirit from which they themselves are fallen away,
they had no authority either to baptize or to ordain.  And therefore
those who were from time to time baptized by them, were ordered, as
though baptized by laymen, to come to the church to be purified by the
Church’s true baptism.  Nevertheless, since it has seemed to some of
those of Asia that, for the sake of management of the majority, their
baptism should be accepted, let it be accepted.  We must, however,
perceive the iniquitous action of the Encratites; who, in order to shut
themselves out from being received back by the Church have endeavoured
for the future to anticipate readmission by a peculiar baptism of their
own, violating, in this manner even their own special practice. <span
id="fr_2623"></span>[2624](#fn_2623)   <span id="page_225">p. 225</span>
<span id="ix.clxxxix-Page_225"></span>My opinion, therefore, is that
nothing being distinctly laid down concerning them, it is our duty to
reject their baptism, and that in the case of any one who has received
baptism from them, we should, on his coming to the church, baptize him. 
If, however, there is any likelihood of this being detrimental to
general discipline, we must fall back upon custom, and follow the
fathers who have ordered what course we are to pursue.  For I am under
some apprehension lest, in our wish to discourage them from baptizing,
we may, through the severity of our decision, be a hindrance to those
who are being saved.  If they accept our baptism, do not allow this to
distress us.  We are by no means bound to return them the same favour,
but only strictly to obey canons.  On every ground let it be enjoined
that those who come to us from their baptism be anointed <span
id="fr_2624"></span>[2625](#fn_2624) in the presence of the faithful,
and only on these terms approach the mysteries.  I am aware that I have
received into episcopal rank Izois and Saturninus from the Encratite
following. <span id="fr_2625"></span>[2626](#fn_2625)   I am precluded
therefore from separating from the Church those who have been united to
their company, inasmuch as, through my acceptance of the bishops, I have
promulgated a kind of canon of communion with them.

<span id="ix.clxxxix-p26"></span>II.  The woman who purposely destroys
her unborn child is guilty of murder.  With us there is no nice enquiry
as to its being formed or unformed.  In this case it is not only the
being about to be born who is vindicated, but the woman in her attack
upon herself; because in most cases women who make such attempts die. 
The destruction of the embryo is an additional crime, a second murder,
at all events if we regard it as done with intent.  The punishment,
however, of these women should not be for life, but for the term of ten
years.  And let their treatment depend not on mere lapse of time, but on
the character of their repentance.

<span id="ix.clxxxix-p27"></span>III.  A deacon who commits fornication
after his appointment to the diaconate is to be deposed.  But, after he
has been rejected and ranked among the laity, he is not to be excluded
from communion.  For there is an ancient canon that those who have
fallen from their degree are to be subjected to this kind of punishment
alone. <span id="fr_2626"></span>[2627](#fn_2626)

<span id="ix.clxxxix-p29"></span>Herein, as I suppose, the ancient
authorities followed the old rule “Thou shalt not avenge twice for the
same thing.” <span id="fr_2627"></span>[2628](#fn_2627)   There is this
further reason too, that laymen, when expelled from the place of the
faithful, are from time to time restored to the rank whence they have
fallen; but the deacon undergoes once for all the lasting penalty of
deposition.  His deacon’s orders not being restored to him, they rested
at this one punishment.  So far is this as regards what depends on law
laid down.  But generally a truer remedy is the departure from sin. 
Wherefore that man will give me full proof of his cure who, after
rejecting grace for the sake of the indulgence of the flesh, has then,
through bruising of the flesh <span id="fr_2628"></span>[2629](#fn_2628)
and the enslaving of it <span id="fr_2629"></span>[2630](#fn_2629) by
means of self control, abandoned the pleasures whereby he was subdued. 
We ought therefore to know both what is of exact prescription and what
is of custom; and, in cases which do not admit of the highest treatment,
to follow the traditional direction.

<span id="ix.clxxxix-p33"></span>IV.  In the case of trigamy and
polygamy they laid down the same rule, in proportion, as in the case of
digamy; namely one year for digamy (some authorities say two years); for
trigamy men are separated for three and often for four years; but this
is no longer described as marriage at all, but as polygamy; nay rather
as limited fornication.  It is for this reason that the Lord said to the
woman of Samaria, who had five husbands, “he whom thou now hast is not
thy husband.” <span id="fr_2630"></span>[2631](#fn_2630)   He does not
reckon those who had exceeded the limits of a second marriage as worthy
of the title of husband or wife.  In cases of trigamy we have accepted a
seclusion of five years, not by the canons, but following the precept of
our predecessors.  Such offenders ought not to be altogether prohibited
from the privileges of the Church; they should be considered deserving
of hearing after two or three years, and afterwards of being permitted
to stand in their place; but they must be kept from the communion of the
good gift, and only restored to the <span id="page_226">p. 226</span>
<span id="ix.clxxxix-Page_226"></span>place of communion after showing
some fruit of repentance.

<span id="ix.clxxxix-p35"></span>V.  Heretics repenting at death ought
to be received; yet to be received, of course, not indiscriminately, but
on trial of exhibition of true repentance and of producing fruit in
evidence of their zeal for salvation. <span
id="fr_2631"></span>[2632](#fn_2631)

<span id="ix.clxxxix-p37"></span>VI.  The fornication of canonical
persons is not to be reckoned as wedlock, and their union is to be
completely dissolved, for this is both profitable for the security of
the Church and will prevent the heretics from having a ground of attack
against us, as though we induced men to join us by the attraction of
liberty to sin.

<span id="ix.clxxxix-p38"></span>VII.  Abusers of themselves with
mankind, and with beasts, as also murderers, wizards, adulterers, and
idolaters, are deserving of the same punishment.  Whatever rule you have
in the case of the rest, observe also in their case.  There can,
however, be no doubt that we ought to receive those who have repented of
impurity committed in ignorance for thirty years. <span
id="fr_2632"></span>[2633](#fn_2632)   In this case there is ground for
forgiveness in ignorance, in the spontaneity of confession, and the long
extent of time.  Perhaps they have been delivered to Satan for a whole
age of man that they may learn not to behave unseemly; <span
id="fr_2633"></span>[2634](#fn_2633) wherefore order them to be received
without delay, specially if they shed tears to move your mercy, and shew
a manner of living worthy of compassion. <span
id="fr_2634"></span>[2635](#fn_2634)

<span id="ix.clxxxix-p42"></span>VIII.  The man who in a rage has taken
up a hatchet against his own wife is a murderer.  But it is what I
should have expected from your intelligence that you should very
properly remind me to speak on these points more fully, because a wide
distinction must be drawn between cases where there is and where there
is not intent.  A case of an act purely unintentional, and widely
removed from the purpose of the agent, is that of a man who throws a
stone at a dog or a tree, and hits a man.  The object was to drive off
the beast or to shake down the fruit.  The chance comer falls
fortuitously in the way of the blow, and the act is unintentional. 
Unintentional too is the act of any one who strikes another with a strap
or a flexible stick, for the purpose of chastising him, and the man who
is being beaten dies.  In this case it must be taken into consideration
that the object was not to kill, but to improve, the offender.  Further,
among unintentional acts must be reckoned the case of a man in a fight
who when warding off an enemy’s attack with cudgel or hand, hits him
without mercy in some vital part, so as to injure him, though not quite
to kill him.  This, however, comes very near to the intentional; for the
man who employs such a weapon in self defence, or who strikes without
mercy, evidently does not spare his opponent, because he is mastered by
passion.  In like manner the case of any one who uses a heavy cudgel, or
a stone too big for a man to stand, is reckoned among the unintentional,
because he does not do what he meant:  in his rage he deals such a blow
as to kill his victim, yet all he had in his mind was to give him a
thrashing, not to do him to death.  If, however, a man uses a sword, or
anything of the kind, he has no excuse:  certainly none if he throws his
hatchet.  For he does not strike with the hand, so that the force of the
blow may be within his own control, but throws, so that from the weight
and edge of the iron, and the force of the throw, the wound cannot fail
to be fatal.

<span id="ix.clxxxix-p43"></span>On the other hand acts done in the
attacks of war or robbery are distinctly intentional, and admit of no
doubt.  Robbers kill for greed, and to avoid conviction.  Soldiers who
inflict death in war do so with the obvious purpose not of fighting, nor
chastising, but of killing their opponents.  And if any one has
concocted some magic philtre for some other reason, and then causes
death, I count this as intentional.  Women frequently endeavour to draw
men to love them by incantations and magic knots, and give them drugs
which dull their intelligence.  Such women, <span id="page_227">p.
227</span> <span id="ix.clxxxix-Page_227"></span>when they cause death,
though the result of their action may not be what they intended, are
nevertheless, on account of their proceedings being magical and
prohibited, to be reckoned among intentional homicides.  Women also who
administer drugs to cause abortion, as well as those who take poisons to
destroy unborn children, are murderesses.  So much on this subject.

<span id="ix.clxxxix-p44"></span>IX.  The sentence of the Lord that it
is unlawful to withdraw from wedlock, save on account of
fornication, <span id="fr_2635"></span>[2636](#fn_2635) applies,
according to the argument, to men and women alike.  Custom, however,
does not so obtain.  Yet, in relation with women, very strict
expressions are to be found; as, for instance, the words of the apostle
“He which is joined to a harlot is one body” <span
id="fr_2636"></span>[2637](#fn_2636) and of Jeremiah, If a wife “become
another man’s shall he return unto her again? shall not that land be
greatly polluted?” <span id="fr_2637"></span>[2638](#fn_2637)   And
again, “He that hath an adulteress is a fool and impious.” <span
id="fr_2638"></span>[2639](#fn_2638)   Yet custom ordains that men who
commit adultery and are in fornication be retained by their wives. 
Consequently I do not know if the woman who lives with the man who has
been dismissed can properly be called an adulteress; the charge in this
case attaches to the woman who has put away her husband, and depends
upon the cause for which she withdrew from wedlock. <span
id="fr_2639"></span>[2640](#fn_2639)   In the case of her being beaten,
and refusing to submit, it would be better for her to endure than to be
separated from her husband; in the case of her objecting to pecuniary
loss, even here she would not have sufficient ground.  If her reason is
his living in fornication we do not find this in the custom of the
church; but from an unbelieving husband a wife is commanded not to
depart, but to remain, on account of the uncertainty of the issue.  “For
what knowest thou, O wife, whether thou shalt save thy husband?” <span
id="fr_2640"></span>[2641](#fn_2640)   Here then the wife, if she leaves
her husband and goes to another, is an adulteress.  But the man who has
been abandoned is pardonable, and the woman who lives with such a man is
not condemned.  But if the man who has deserted his wife goes to
another, he is himself an adulterer because he makes her commit
adultery; and the woman who lives with him is an adulteress, because she
has caused another woman’s husband to come over to her.

<span id="ix.clxxxix-p51"></span>X.  Those who swear that they will not
receive ordination, declining orders upon oath, must not be driven to
perjure themselves, although there does seem to be a canon making
concessions to such persons.  Yet I have found by experience that
perjurers never turn out well. <span
id="fr_2641"></span>[2642](#fn_2641)   Account must however be taken of
the form of the oath, its terms, the frame of mind in which it was
taken, and the minutest additions made to the terms, since, if no ground
of relief can anywhere be found, such persons must be dismissed.  The
case, however, of Severus, I mean of the presbyter ordained by him, does
seem to me to allow of relief of this kind, if you will permit it.  Give
directions for the district placed under Mestia, to which the man was
appointed, to be reckoned under Vasoda.  Thus he will not forswear
himself by not departing from the place, and Longinus, having Cyriacus
with him, will not leave the Church unprovided for, nor himself be
guilty of neglect of work. <span id="fr_2642"></span>[2643](#fn_2642)  
I moreover shall not be held guilty of taking action in contravention of
any canons by making a concession to Cyriacus who had sworn that he
would remain at Mindana and yet accepted the transfer.  His return will
be in accordance with his oath, and his obedience to the arrangement
will not be reckoned against him as perjury, because it was not added to
his oath that he would not go, even a short time, from Mindana, but
would remain there for the future.  Severus, who pleads forgetfulness, I
shall pardon, only telling him that One who knows what is secret will
not overlook the ravaging of His Church by a man of such a character; a
man who originally appoints uncanonically, then imposes oaths in
violation of the Gospel, then tells a man to <span id="page_228">p.
228</span> <span id="ix.clxxxix-Page_228"></span>perjure himself in the
matter of his transfer, and last of all lies in pretended
forgetfulness.  I am no judge of hearts; I only judge by what I hear;
let us leave vengeance to the Lord, and ourselves pardon the common
human error of forgetfulness, and receive the man without question.

<span id="ix.clxxxix-p54"></span>XI.  The man who is guilty of
unintentional homicide has given sufficient satisfaction in eleven
years.  We shall, without doubt, observe what is laid down by Moses in
the case of wounded men, and shall not hold a murder to have been
committed in the case of a man who lies down after he has been struck,
and walks again leaning on his staff. <span
id="fr_2643"></span>[2644](#fn_2643)   If, however, he does not rise
again after he has been struck, nevertheless, from there being no intent
to kill, the striker is a homicide, but an unintentional homicide.

<span id="ix.clxxxix-p56"></span>XII.  The canon absolutely excludes
digamists from the ministry. <span id="fr_2644"></span>[2645](#fn_2644)

<span id="ix.clxxxix-p59"></span>XIII.  Homicide in war is not reckoned
by our Fathers as homicide; I presume from their wish to make concession
to men fighting on behalf of chastity and true religion.  Perhaps,
however, it is well to counsel that those whose hands are not clean only
abstain from communion for three years. <span
id="fr_2645"></span>[2646](#fn_2645)

<span id="ix.clxxxix-p62"></span>XIV.  A taker of usury, if he consent
to spend his unjust gain on the poor, and to be rid for the future of
the plague of covetousness, may be received into the ministry. <span
id="fr_2646"></span>[2647](#fn_2646)

<span id="ix.clxxxix-p64"></span>XV.  I am astonished at your requiring
exactitude in Scripture, and arguing that there is something forced in
the diction of the interpretation which gives the meaning of the
original, but does not exactly render what is meant by the Hebrew word. 
Yet I must not carelessly pass by the question started by an enquiring
mind.  At the creation of the world, birds of the air and the fishes of
the sea had the same origin; <span id="fr_2647"></span>[2648](#fn_2647)
for both kinds were produced from the water. <span
id="fr_2648"></span>[2649](#fn_2648)   The reason is that both have the
same characteristics.  The latter swim in the water, the former in the
air.  They are therefore mentioned together.  The form of expression is
not used without distinction, but of all that lives in the water it is
used very properly.  The birds of the air and the fishes of the sea are
subject to man; and not they alone, but all that passes through the
paths of the sea.  For every water-creature is not a fish, as for
instance the sea monsters, whales, sharks, dolphins, seals, even
sea-horses, sea-dogs, saw-fish, sword-fish, and sea-cows; and, if you
like, sea nettles, cockles and all hard-shelled creatures of whom none
are fish, and all pass through the paths of the sea; so that there are
three kinds, birds of the air, fishes of the sea, and all
water-creatures which are distinct from fish, and pass through the paths
of the sea.

<span id="ix.clxxxix-p67"></span>XVI.  Naaman was not a great man with
the Lord, but with his lord; that is, he was one of the chief princes of
the King of the Syrians. <span id="fr_2649"></span>[2650](#fn_2649)  
Read your Bible carefully, and you will find the answer to your question
there.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2610"></span>[223:2611](2080261.htm#fr_2610) <span
id="ix.clxxxix-p1.2"></span>

<span id="ix.clxxxix-p2"></span> Placed in 347.

<span id="fn_2611"></span>[223:2612](2080261.htm#fr_2611) <span
id="ix.clxxxix-p4.1"></span>

<span id="ix.clxxxix-p5"></span> In this letter Basil replies to several
questions of Amphilochius concerning the Canons, and also concerning the
interpretation of some passages of Holy Scripture.  Maran dates it at
the end of 374.

<span id="fn_2612"></span>[223:2613](2080261.htm#fr_2612) <span
id="ix.clxxxix-p6.2"></span>

<span id="ix.clxxxix-p7"></span> [Prov. xvii.
28](../../../bib/kjv/pro017.htm#028)<span id="ix.clxxxix-p7.1"></span>,
lxx.

<span id="fn_2613"></span>[223:2614](2080261.htm#fr_2613) <span
id="ix.clxxxix-p8.1"></span>

<span id="ix.clxxxix-p9"></span> *i.e.*the followers of Novatian.  *cf*.
Eusebius vi. 43.  *cf*. *De. Sp. Scto*. ch. x. p. 17 and note.

<span id="fn_2614"></span>[223:2615](2080261.htm#fr_2614) <span
id="ix.clxxxix-p9.1"></span>

<span id="ix.clxxxix-p10"></span> Or Pepuziani, another name for the
Montanists.  “Epiphanius may safely be disregarded, who, treating of the
Montanists, in the 48th section of his work on heresies, treats of the
Pepuziani, in the 49th, as a kindred, but distinct, sect.”  Dr. Salmon
in *D.C.B.* iv. 303.  The name is derived from Pepuza in Western
Phrygia, the Montanist, or Cataphrygian, “Jerusalem.”  (Eus. *H.E.* v.
18.)

<span id="fn_2615"></span>[223:2616](2080261.htm#fr_2615) <span
id="ix.clxxxix-p10.1"></span>

<span id="ix.clxxxix-p11"></span> *i.e.* of Alexandria.  Jerome (*Vir.
illust*. lxix.) says that he agreed with Cyprian and the African Synod
on the rebaptizing of heretics.  The Ben. note says:  “*Videtur hac in
re major auctoritas Basilio attribuenda quam Hieronymo.  Plus operæ
insumpserat Basilius in ea re examinanda*.”

<span id="fn_2616"></span>[223:2617](2080261.htm#fr_2616) <span
id="ix.clxxxix-p11.1"></span>

<span id="ix.clxxxix-p12"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.clxxxix-p12.1"></span>παρασυναγωγή</span>.

<span id="fn_2617"></span>[223:2618](2080261.htm#fr_2617) <span
id="ix.clxxxix-p12.2"></span>

<span id="ix.clxxxix-p13"></span> Archbp. Trench (*N.T. Syn*. 330)
quotes Augustine (*Con. Crescon. Don*. ii. 7):  “Schisma *est recens
congregationis ex aliquâ sententiarum diversitate dissensio;* hæresis
*autem schisma inveteratum;*” and Jerome (*Ep. ad Tit*. iii. 10): 
“*Inter* hæresim *et schisma hoc esse arbitrantur, quod hæresis
perversum dogma habeat;* schisma *propter episcopalem dissensionem ab
ecclesiâ separetur; quod quidem in principio aliquâ ex parte intelligi
queat.  Cæterum nullum schisma non sibi aliquam confingit hæresim, ut
recte ab ecclesia recessisse videatur*.”

<span id="ix.clxxxix-p14"></span>To these may be added Aug. (*Quæst. in
Matt.* xi. 2):  “*<span id="ix.clxxxix-p14.1"></span>Solet autem etiam
quæri schismatici quid ab hæreticis distent, et hoc inveniri quod
schismaticos non fides diversa faciat sed communionis disrupta
societas.  Sed utrum inter zizania numerandi sint dubitari potest, magis
autem videntur spicis corruptis esse similiores, vel paleis aristarum
fractis, vel scissis et de segete abruptis*.”

<span id="fn_2618"></span>[224:2619](2080261.htm#fr_2618) <span
id="ix.clxxxix-p14.2"></span>

<span id="ix.clxxxix-p15"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.clxxxix-p15.1"></span>τῶν ἀποσχισάντων, ὡς ἔτι ἐκ τῆς ἐκκλησίας
ὄντων</span>.

<span id="ix.clxxxix-p16"></span>The Ben. note is “*Quod autem addit
Basilius*, ut adhuc ex Ecclesia exsistentium, *non idcirco addit quod
schismaticos in Ecclesiæ membris numeraret.  Illius verba si quis in
deteriorem partem rapiat, facilis et expedita responsio, Nam sub finem
hujus, canonis de Encratitis ipsis, id est, de hæreticis incarnationem
et Dei singularitatem negantibus, ait sibi non jam integrum esse eos qui
huic sectæ conjuncti sunt* ab Ecclesia separare, *quia duos eorum
episcopos sine baptismo ac sine nova ordinatione receperat.  Nemo autem
suspicabitur Basilium ejusmodi hæreticos ab Ecclesia alienissimos non
judicasse.  Quare quidquid schismaticis tribuit, in sola baptismi
societate positum est.  Nam cum Cyprianus et Firmilianus schismaticos et
hæreticos ita ab Ecclesia distractos crederent, ut nihil prosus ad eos
ex fontibus Ecclesiæ perflueret; Basilius huic sententiæ non assentitur,
et in schismaticis quia fidem Ecclesiæ retinent, vestigium quoddam
agnoscit necessitudinis et societatis cum Ecclesia, ita ut valida
sacramentorum administratio ab Ecclesia ad illos permanare possit.  Hinc
sibi integrum negat detestandos hæreticos* ab Ecclesia separare, *quorum
baptisma ratum habuerat.  Idem docent duo præstantissimi unitatis
defensores.  Optatus et Augustinus.*  Quod enim scissum est, *inquit
Optatus lib. iii. n. 9*, ex parte divisum est, non ex toto:  cum constet
merito, quia nobis et vobis ecclesiastica una est conversatio, et si
hominum litigant mentes, non litigant sacramenta.  *Vid. lib. iv. n. 2. 
Sic etiam Augustinus lib. i.*  De baptismo n. 3:  Itaque isti (*hæretici
et schismatici*) in quibusdam rebus nobiscum sunt:  in quibus autem
nobiscum non sunt, ut veniendo accipiant, vel redeundo recipiant,
adhortamur.  *Vid. lib. iii. n. 26.  Sic ex Basilio hæretici nobiscum
sunt quoad baptisma*.”

<span id="fn_2619"></span>[224:2620](2080261.htm#fr_2619) <span
id="ix.clxxxix-p17.1"></span>

<span id="ix.clxxxix-p18"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.clxxxix-p18.1"></span>τους ἐν βαθμῷ</span>.  *cf*. note on p.
218.

<span id="fn_2620"></span>[224:2621](2080261.htm#fr_2620) <span
id="ix.clxxxix-p19.1"></span>

<span id="ix.clxxxix-p20"></span> As being one of Basil’s predecessors
in the see of Cæsarea.

<span id="fn_2621"></span>[224:2622](2080261.htm#fr_2621) <span
id="ix.clxxxix-p20.1"></span>

<span id="ix.clxxxix-p21"></span> “*Hoc Encratitarum facinore non
corrupta essentialis baptismi forma.  Sed novæ quædam adjectæ
cærimoniæ*.” Ben. Ed.

<span id="fn_2622"></span>[224:2623](2080261.htm#fr_2622) <span
id="ix.clxxxix-p21.1"></span>

<span id="ix.clxxxix-p22"></span> *i.e.*those who used water instead of
wine in the Eucharist, as Tatian and his followers.  *cf*. Clem. Al.,
*Strom*. i. 19 and Cyprian. *Ep*. lxiii.

<span id="fn_2623"></span>[224:2624](2080261.htm#fr_2623) <span
id="ix.clxxxix-p22.1"></span>

<span id="ix.clxxxix-p23"></span> The Ben. note points out that the
improper proceeding of the Encratites consisted not in any corruption of
the baptismal formula, but in the addition of certain novel ceremonies,
and proceeds:  “*Nam in canone 47 sic eos loquentes inducit.*  In Patrem
et Filium et Spiritum baptizati sumus.  *Hinc eorum baptisma ratum
habet, si qua inciderit magni momenti causa.  Quod autem ait hoc facinus
eos incipere*, ut reditum sibi in Ecclesiam intercludant, *videtur id
prima specie in eam sententiam accipiendum, quasi Encratitæ baptisma
suum ea mente immutassent, ut Catholicos ad illud rejiciendum
incitarent, sicque plures in secta contineret odium et fuga novi
baptismatis.  Abhorrebat enim ab omnium animis iteratus baptismus, ut
pluribus exemplis probat Augustinus, lib. v. De baptismo, n. 6.  Videtur
ergo prima specie Encratitis, ea, quam dixi, exstitisse causa, cur
baptismum immutarent.  Atque ita hunc locum interpretatur Tillemontius,
tom. iv. p. 628.  Sic etiam illius exemplo interpretatus sum in Præf.
novæ Cypriani operum editioni præmissa cap. 4. p. 12.  Sed huic
interpretationi non convenit cum his quæ addit Basilius.  Vereri enim se
significat ne Catholici, dum Encratitas ab hac baptismi immutatione
deterrere volunt, nimium restricti sint et severi in eorum baptismo
rejiciendo.  Sperabant ergo Catholici tardiores ad ejus modi baptisma
Encratitas futuros, si illud Catholici ratum habere nollent; nedum ipsi
Encratitæ baptismatis immutationem eo consilio induxerint, ut ejusmodi
baptisma a Catholicis rejiceretur.  Quamobrem hæc verba,* ut reditum
sibi in Ecclesiam intercludant, *non consilium et propositum
Encratitarum designant, sed incommodum quod ex eorum facinore
consequebatur; velut si dicamus aliquem scelus admittere, ut æternam
sibi damnationem accersat*.”

<span id="fn_2624"></span>[225:2625](2080261.htm#fr_2624) <span
id="ix.clxxxix-p23.1"></span>

<span id="ix.clxxxix-p24"></span> *cf*. note on p. 42.  St. Cyprian
(*Ep*. lxx.) says that heretics who have no true altar cannot have oil
sanctified by the altar.  “Gregory of Nazianzus, *Orat*. (xlviii in
Jul.) speaks of oil sanctified or consecrated on the spiritual or divine
table; Optatus of Milevis (*c. Don*. vii. 102) says that this ointment
is compounded (*conditur*) in the name of Christ; and the
Pseudo-Dionysius (*De Hierarch. Eccles*. c. 4) mentions the use of the
sign of the cross in the consecration of it.”  *D.C.A.* i. 355.

<span id="fn_2625"></span>[225:2626](2080261.htm#fr_2625) <span
id="ix.clxxxix-p24.1"></span>

<span id="ix.clxxxix-p25"></span> This is the only known reference to
these two bishops.

<span id="fn_2626"></span>[225:2627](2080261.htm#fr_2626) <span
id="ix.clxxxix-p27.1"></span>

<span id="ix.clxxxix-p28"></span> “*Respicit, ni falor, ad canonem 25
apostolorum, ad quem Balsamon et Zonaras observant nonnulla esse
peccata, quibus excommunicatio, non solum depositio, infligitur; velut
si quis pecunia, vel magistratus potentia, sacerdotium assequatur, ut
sancitur Can.* 29 *et* 30.”  Ben. note.

<span id="fn_2627"></span>[225:2628](2080261.htm#fr_2627) <span
id="ix.clxxxix-p29.1"></span>

<span id="ix.clxxxix-p30"></span> [Nahum i.
9](../../../bib/kjv/nah001.htm#009)<span id="ix.clxxxix-p30.1"></span>,
LXX.

<span id="fn_2628"></span>[225:2629](2080261.htm#fr_2628) <span
id="ix.clxxxix-p30.2"></span>

<span id="ix.clxxxix-p31"></span> “*Duo veteres libri* <span
class="Greek"><span id="ix.clxxxix-p31.1"></span>συντριμμοῦ τῆς
καρδίας</span>.”  Ben. note.

<span id="fn_2629"></span>[225:2630](2080261.htm#fr_2629) <span
id="ix.clxxxix-p31.2"></span>

<span id="ix.clxxxix-p32"></span> *cf*. [1 Cor. ix.
27](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#027)<span id="ix.clxxxix-p32.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2630"></span>[225:2631](2080261.htm#fr_2630) <span
id="ix.clxxxix-p33.1"></span>

<span id="ix.clxxxix-p34"></span> [John iv.
18](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#018)<span
id="ix.clxxxix-p34.1"></span>.  For the more usual modern interpretation
that the sixth union was an unlawful one, *cf*. *Bengel.  Matrimonium
hoc sextum non erat legitimum, vel non consummatum, aut desertio aliudve
impedimentum intercesserat, ex altera utra parte.*

<span id="fn_2631"></span>[226:2632](2080261.htm#fr_2631) <span
id="ix.clxxxix-p35.1"></span>

<span id="ix.clxxxix-p36"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.clxxxix-p36.1"></span>τῶν κανονικῶν</span>.  The Greek is of
either gender.  The Ben. note is:  *Clericos sive eos qui in canone
recensentur hac voce designari hactenus existimarunt Basilii
interpretes, ac ipsi etiam Zonares et Balsamon.  Sed ut canonicas sive
sacras virgines interpreter, plurimis rationum momentis adducor:  1.
Basilius hoc nomine clericos appellare non solet, sed sacras virgines,
ut persici potest ex epistolis 52 et 175; 2. præscriptum Basilii non
convenit in clericos, quorum nonnullis, nempe lectoribus et aliis ejus
modi venia dabatur ineundi matrimonii, quamvis in canone recenserentur;
3. prohibet Basilius ejusmodi stupra quæ honesto matrimonii nomine
prætexi solebant.  At id non inconcessum erat matrimonium, alios vero
matrimonium post ordinationem inire nulla prorsus Ecclesia patiebatur,
aut certe matrimonii pretium erat depositio.  Contra virginibus
nubentibus non longior pœna pluribus in locis imponebatur, quam digamis,
ut perspicitur ex canone 18, ubi Basilius hance consuetudinem abrogat,
ac virginum matrimonia instar adulterii existimat.*

<span id="fn_2632"></span>[226:2633](2080261.htm#fr_2632) <span
id="ix.clxxxix-p38.1"></span>

<span id="ix.clxxxix-p39"></span> So the <span class="c14"><span
id="ix.clxxxix-p39.1"></span>mss.</span>  But the Ben. note points out
that there must be some error, if a sin knowingly committed was punished
by excommunication for fifteen years (Canons lviii., lxii., lxiii.), and
one unwittingly committed by a punishment of twice the duration.

<span id="fn_2633"></span>[226:2634](2080261.htm#fr_2633) <span
id="ix.clxxxix-p39.2"></span>

<span id="ix.clxxxix-p40"></span> *cf*. [1 Tim. i.
20](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#020)<span id="ix.clxxxix-p40.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2634"></span>[226:2635](2080261.htm#fr_2634) <span
id="ix.clxxxix-p40.2"></span>

<span id="ix.clxxxix-p41"></span> The Ben. note continues:  “*Deinde
vero testatur Basilius eos* fere hominis ætatem *satanæ traditos
fuisse.  At ætas hominis* (<span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.clxxxix-p41.1"></span>γενεά</span>) *sæpe annorum viginti spatio
existimatur; velut cum ait Dionysius Alexandrinus Alexandrinus apud
Eusebium, lib. vii. cap. 21.  Israelitas in deserto fuisse duabus
ætatibus.  Ipse Basilius in Epistola 201, quæ scripta est anno 375,
Neocæsarienses incusat quod sibi jam totam fere hominis ætatem
succenseant; quos tamen non ita pridem amicos habuerat; ac anno 568,
Musonii morte affictos litteris amicissimis consolatus fuerat.  Sæculum
apud Latinos non semper stricte sumitur; velut cum ait Hieronymus in
Epist. 27* ad Marcellum, *in Christi verbis explicandis* per tanta jam
sæcula tantorum ingenia sudasse; *vel cum auctor libri* De rebaptismate
*in Cyprianum tacito nomine invehitur, quod* adversus prisca consulta
post tot sæculorum tantam seriem nunc primum repente sine ratione
*insurgat, p. 357.  De hoc ergo triginta annorum numero non paucos
deducendos esse crediderim*.

<span id="fn_2635"></span>[227:2636](2080261.htm#fr_2635) <span
id="ix.clxxxix-p44.1"></span>

<span id="ix.clxxxix-p45"></span> [Matt. v.
32](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#032)<span id="ix.clxxxix-p45.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2636"></span>[227:2637](2080261.htm#fr_2636) <span
id="ix.clxxxix-p45.2"></span>

<span id="ix.clxxxix-p46"></span> [1 Cor. vi.
16](../../../bib/kjv/co1006.htm#016)<span id="ix.clxxxix-p46.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2637"></span>[227:2638](2080261.htm#fr_2637) <span
id="ix.clxxxix-p46.2"></span>

<span id="ix.clxxxix-p47"></span> [Jer. iii.
1](../../../bib/kjv/jer003.htm#001)<span id="ix.clxxxix-p47.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2638"></span>[227:2639](2080261.htm#fr_2638) <span
id="ix.clxxxix-p47.2"></span>

<span id="ix.clxxxix-p48"></span> [Prov. xviii.
22](../../../bib/kjv/pro018.htm#022)<span id="ix.clxxxix-p48.1"></span>,
LXX.

<span id="fn_2639"></span>[227:2640](2080261.htm#fr_2639) <span
id="ix.clxxxix-p48.2"></span>

<span id="ix.clxxxix-p49"></span> The Ben. note is, *Sequitur in hoc
canone Basilius Romanas leges, quas tamen fatetur cum evangelio minus
consentire.  Lex Constantini jubet in repudio mittendo a femina hæc sola
crimina inquiri, si homicidam, vel medicamentarium, vel sepulcrorum
dissolutorem maritum suum esse probaverit.  At eadem lege viris
conceditur, ut adulteras uxores dimittant.  Aliud discrimen hoc in
canone uxores inter et maritos ponitur, quod uxor injuste dimissa, si ab
alia ducatur, adulterii notam non effugiat; dimissus autem injuste
maritus nec adulter sit, si aliam ducat, nec quæ ab eo ducitur,
adultera.  Cæterum Basilius ante episcopatum eodem jure uxorem ac
maritum esse censebat.  Nam in Moral. reg.* 73*statuit virum ab uxore,
aut uxorem a viro non debere separari, nisi quis deprehendatur in
adulterio.  Utrique pariter interdicit novis nuptiis, sive repudient,
sive repudientur.*

<span id="fn_2640"></span>[227:2641](2080261.htm#fr_2640) <span
id="ix.clxxxix-p49.1"></span>

<span id="ix.clxxxix-p50"></span> [1 Cor. vii.
16](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#016)<span id="ix.clxxxix-p50.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2641"></span>[227:2642](2080261.htm#fr_2641) <span
id="ix.clxxxix-p51.1"></span>

<span id="ix.clxxxix-p52"></span> The Ben. note refers to the case of
Dracontius, who had sworn that he would escape if he were ordained
bishop, and so did; but was urged by Athanasius to discharge the duties
of his diocese, notwithstanding his oath.

<span id="fn_2642"></span>[227:2643](2080261.htm#fr_2642) <span
id="ix.clxxxix-p52.1"></span>

<span id="ix.clxxxix-p53"></span> On this obscure passage the Ben. note
is:  *Longinus presbyter erat in agro Mestiæ subjecto.  Sed cum is
depositus essit ob aliquod delictum, ac forte honorem sacerdotii
retineret, ut nonnumquam fiebat, Severus episcopus in ejus locum
transtulit Cyriacum, quem antea Mindanis ordinaverat, ac jurare coegerat
se Mindanis mansurum.  Nihil hac in re statui posse videbatur, quod non
in magnam aliquam diffcultatem incurreret.  Nam si in agro Mestiæ
subjecto Cyriacus remaneret, perjurii culpam sustinebat.  Si rediret
Mindana, ager Mestiæ subjectus presbytero carebat, atque hujus incommodi
culpa redundabat in caput Longini, qui ob delictum depositus fuerat. 
Quid igitur Basilius?  Utrique occurrit incommodo; jubet agrum, qui
Mastiæ subjectus erat Vasodis subjici, id est loco, cui subjecta erant
Mindana.  Hoc ex remedio duo consequebatur Basilius, ut et ager ille
presbytero non careret, et Cyriacus ibi remanens Mindana tamen redire
censeretur, cum jam hic locus eidem ac Mindana chorepiscopo pareret*.

<span id="fn_2643"></span>[228:2644](2080261.htm#fr_2643) <span
id="ix.clxxxix-p54.1"></span>

<span id="ix.clxxxix-p55"></span> [Exod. xxi.
19](../../../bib/kjv/exo021.htm#019)<span id="ix.clxxxix-p55.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2644"></span>[228:2645](2080261.htm#fr_2644) <span
id="ix.clxxxix-p56.1"></span>

<span id="ix.clxxxix-p57"></span> *Ap*. Can. xiii. 14:  “It is clear
from the *Philosophumena* of Hippolytus (ix. 12) that by the beginning
of the 3d century the rule of monogamy for the clergy was well
established, since he complains that in the days of Callistus ‘digamist
and trigamist bishops, and priests and deacons, *began* to be admitted
into the clergy.’  Tertullian recognises the rule as to the clergy. 
Thus in his *De Exhortatione Castitatis* (c. 7) he asks scornfully;
‘Being a digamist, dost thou baptize?  Dost thou make the offering?’” 
*Dict. C. A.* i. 552.

<span id="ix.clxxxix-p58"></span>*Vide* also Canon Bright, *Notes on the
Canons of the first four General Councils*.  On Can. Nic. viii. p. 27.

<span id="fn_2645"></span>[228:2646](2080261.htm#fr_2645) <span
id="ix.clxxxix-p59.1"></span>

<span id="ix.clxxxix-p60"></span> The Ben. note quotes Balsamon,
Zonaras, and Alexius Aristenus as remarking on this that Basil gives
advice, not direction, and regards the hands, not the hearts, of
soldiers as defiled; and as recalling that this canon was quoted in
opposition to the Emperor Phocas when he wished to reckon soldiers as
martyrs.  The canon was little regarded, as being contrary to general
Christian sentiment.

<span id="ix.clxxxix-p61"></span>*cf*. Athan. *Ep*. xlviii. p. 557 of
this edition:  “In war it is lawful and praiseworthy to destroy the
enemy; accordingly not only are they who have distinguished themselves
in the field held worthy of great honours, but monuments are put up
proclaiming their achievements.”

<span id="fn_2646"></span>[228:2647](2080261.htm#fr_2646) <span
id="ix.clxxxix-p62.1"></span>

<span id="ix.clxxxix-p63"></span> *cf*. Can. Nic. xvii.  Canon Bright
(*On the Canons*, etc., p. 56) remarks:  “It must be remembered that
interest, called <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.clxxxix-p63.1"></span>τόκος</span> and *fenus*, as the product of
the principal, was associated in the early stages of society,—in Greece
and Rome as well as in Palestine,—with the notion of undue profit
extorted by a rich lender from the needy borrower (see Grote, *Hist.
Gr*. ii. 311 H.; Arnold, *Hist. Rome* i. 282; Mommsen, *Hist. R.* i.
291).  Hence Tacitus says, ‘*sane vetus urbi fenebre malcum, et
seditionum discordiarumque creberrima causa*’ (*Ann*. vi. 16), and
Gibbon calls usury ‘the inveterate grievance of the city, abolished by
the clamours of the people, revived by their wants and idleness.’”  (v.
314.)

<span id="fn_2647"></span>[228:2648](2080261.htm#fr_2647) <span
id="ix.clxxxix-p64.1"></span>

<span id="ix.clxxxix-p65"></span> [Ps. viii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/psa008.htm#008)<span id="ix.clxxxix-p65.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2648"></span>[228:2649](2080261.htm#fr_2648) <span
id="ix.clxxxix-p65.2"></span>

<span id="ix.clxxxix-p66"></span> [Gen.
1:20](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#020),
[21](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#021)<span
id="ix.clxxxix-p66.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2649"></span>[228:2650](2080261.htm#fr_2649) <span
id="ix.clxxxix-p67.1"></span>

<span id="ix.clxxxix-p68"></span> [2 Kings v.
1](../../../bib/kjv/kg2005.htm#001)<span id="ix.clxxxix-p68.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: To Eustathius the physician.](2080262)
