[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2080046)  [Next](2080048) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.xviii"></span>

<span id="vii.xviii-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="vii.xviii-p1.1"></span>Chapter XVII.</span>

<span id="vii.xviii-p2"></span>Against those who say that the Holy Ghost
is not to be numbered with, but numbered under, the Father and the Son. 
Wherein moreover there is a summary notice of the faith concerning right
sub-numeration.

<span id="vii.xviii-p3"></span>41.  <span class="c14"><span
id="vii.xviii-p3.1"></span>What</span>, however, they call
sub-numeration, <span id="fr_1076"></span>[1077](#fn_1076) and in what
sense they use this word, cannot even be imagined without difficulty. 
It is well known that it was imported into our language from the “wisdom
of the world;” <span id="fr_1077"></span>[1078](#fn_1077) but a point
for our present consideration will be whether it has any immediate
relation to the subject under discussion.  Those who are adepts in vain
investigations tell us that, while some nouns are common and of widely
extended denotation, others are more specific, and that the force of
some is more limited than that of others.  Essence, for instance, is a
common noun, predicable of all things both animate and inanimate; while
animal is more specific, being predicated of fewer subjects than the
former, though of more than those which are considered under it, as it
embraces both rational and irrational nature.  Again, human is more
specific than animal, and man than human, and than man the individual
Peter, Paul, or John. <span id="fr_1078"></span>[1079](#fn_1078)   Do
they then mean by sub-numeration the division of the common into its
subordinate parts?  But I should hesitate to believe they have reached
such a pitch of infatuation as to assert that the God of the universe,
like some common quality conceivable only by reason and without actual
existence in any hypostasis, is divided into subordinate divisions, and
that then this subdivision is called sub-numeration.  This would hardly
be said even by men melancholy mad, for, besides its impiety, they are
establishing the very opposite argument to their own contention.  For
the subdivisions are of the same essence as that from which they have
been divided.  The very obviousness of the absurdity makes it difficult
for us to find arguments to confute their unreasonableness; so that
really their folly looks like an advantage to them; just as soft and
yielding bodies offer no resistance, and therefore cannot be struck a
stout blow.  It is impossible to bring a vigorous confutation to bear on
a palpable absurdity.  The only course open to us is to pass by their
abominable impiety in silence.  Yet our love for the brethren and the
importunity of our opponents makes silence impossible.

<span id="vii.xviii-p13"></span>42.  What is it that they maintain? 
Look at the terms of their imposture.  “We assert that connumeration is
appropriate to subjects of equal dignity, and sub-numeration to those
which vary in the direction of inferiority.”  “Why,” I rejoined, “do you
say this?  I fail to understand your extraordinary wisdom.  Do you mean
that gold is numbered with gold, and that lead is unworthy of the
connumeration, but, because of the cheapness of the material, is
subnumerated to gold?  And do you attribute so much importance to number
as that it can <span id="page_27">p. 27</span> <span
id="vii.xviii-Page_27"></span>either exalt the value of what is cheap,
or destroy the dignity of what is valuable?  Therefore, again, you will
number gold under precious stones, and such precious stones as are
smaller and without lustre under those which are larger and brighter in
colour.  But what will not be said by men who spend their time in
nothing else but either ‘to tell or to hear some new thing’? <span
id="fr_1079"></span>[1080](#fn_1079)   Let these supporters of impiety
be classed for the future with Stoics and Epicureans.  What
sub-numeration is even possible of things less valuable in relation to
things very valuable?  How is a brass obol to be numbered under a golden
stater?  “Because,” they reply, “we do not speak of possessing two
coins, but one and one.”  But which of these is subnumerated to the
other?  Each is similarly mentioned.  If then you number each by itself,
you cause an equality value by numbering them in the same way but, if
you join them, you make their value one by numbering them one with the
other.  But if the sub-numeration belongs to the one which is numbered
second, then it is in the power of the counter to begin by counting the
brass coin.  Let us, however, pass over the confutation of their
ignorance, and turn our argument to the main topic.

<span id="vii.xviii-p15"></span>43.  Do you maintain that the Son is
numbered under the Father, and the Spirit under the Son, or do you
confine your sub-numeration to the Spirit alone?  If, on the other hand,
you apply this sub-numeration also to the Son, you revive what is the
same impious doctrine, the unlikeness of the substance, the lowliness of
rank, the coming into being in later time, and once for all, by this one
term, you will plainly again set circling all the blasphemies against
the Only-begotten.  To controvert these blasphemies would be a longer
task than my present purpose admits of; and I am the less bound to
undertake it because the impiety has been refuted elsewhere to the best
of my ability. <span id="fr_1080"></span>[1081](#fn_1080)   If on the
other hand they suppose the sub-numeration to benefit the Spirit alone,
they must be taught that the Spirit is spoken of together with the Lord
in precisely the same manner in which the Son is spoken of with the
Father.  “The name of the Father and of the Son and of the Holy
Ghost” <span id="fr_1081"></span>[1082](#fn_1081) is delivered in like
manner, and, according to the co-ordination of words delivered in
baptism, the relation of the Spirit to the Son is the same as that of
the Son to the Father.  And if the Spirit is co-ordinate with the Son,
and the Son with the Father, it is obvious that the Spirit is also
co-ordinate with the Father.  When then the names are ranked in one and
the same co-ordinate series, <span id="fr_1082"></span>[1083](#fn_1082)
what room is there for speaking on the one hand of connumeration, and on
the other of sub-numeration?  Nay, without exception, what thing ever
lost its own nature by being numbered?  Is it not the fact that things
when numbered remain what they naturally and originally were, while
number is adopted among us as a sign indicative of the plurality of
subjects?  For some bodies we count, some we measure, and some we
weigh; <span id="fr_1083"></span>[1084](#fn_1083) those which are by
nature continuous we apprehend by measure; to those which are divided we
apply number (with the exception of those which on account of their
fineness are measured); while heavy objects are distinguished by the
inclination of the balance.  It does not however follow that, because we
have invented for our convenience symbols to help us to arrive at the
knowledge of quantity, we have therefore changed the nature of the
things signified.  We do not speak of “weighing under” one another
things which are weighed, even though one be gold and the other tin; nor
yet do we “measure under” things that are measured; and so in the same
way we will not “number under” things which are numbered.  And if none
of the rest of things admits of sub-numeration how can they allege that
the Spirit ought to be subnumerated?  Labouring as they do under heathen
unsoundness, they imagine that things which are inferior, either by
grade of rank or subjection of substance, ought to be subnumerated.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1076"></span>[26:1077](2080047.htm#fr_1076) <span
id="vii.xviii-p3.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xviii-p4"></span> “The word was used as a quasi
philosophical term to express the doctrine quoted by St. Basil, in §
13:  it does not occur in the confession of Eunomius, which was prepared
after this book, <span class="c14"><span
id="vii.xviii-p4.1"></span>a.d.</span> 382; but it was used by him in
his *Liber Apologeticus* (before <span class="c14"><span
id="vii.xviii-p4.2"></span>a.d.</span> 365) against which St. Basil
wrote.”  Rev. C.F.H. Johnston.  For “<span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xviii-p4.3"></span>ὑ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xviii-p4.4"></span>παρίθμησις</span>” the only authorities given
by the lexicons are “ecclesiastical.”  But the importation from the
“wisdom of the world” implies use in heathen philosophy.

<span id="fn_1077"></span>[26:1078](2080047.htm#fr_1077) <span
id="vii.xviii-p4.5"></span>

<span id="vii.xviii-p5"></span> *cf.* [1 Cor. i.
20](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#020)<span id="vii.xviii-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1078"></span>[26:1079](2080047.htm#fr_1078) <span
id="vii.xviii-p5.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xviii-p6"></span> “This portion of the theory of general
language is the subject of what is termed the doctrine of the
Predicables; a set of distinctions handed down from Aristotle, and his
follower Porphyry, many of which have taken a firm root in scientific,
and some of them even in popular, phraseology.  The predicables are a
five-fold division of General Names, not grounded as usual on a
difference in their meaning, that is, in the attribute which they
connote, but on a difference in the kind of class which they denote.  We
may predicate of a thing five different varieties of class-name:

<span id="vii.xviii-p7"></span>A *genus* of the thing (<span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.xviii-p7.1"></span>γένος</span>).

<span id="vii.xviii-p8"></span>A *species* (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xviii-p8.1"></span>εἶδος</span>).

<span id="vii.xviii-p9"></span>A *differentia* (<span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.xviii-p9.1"></span>διαφορα</span>).

<span id="vii.xviii-p10"></span>A *proprium* (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xviii-p10.1"></span>ἰ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xviii-p10.2"></span>διόν</span>).

<span id="vii.xviii-p11"></span>An *accidens* (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xviii-p11.1"></span>συμβεβηκός</span>).

<span id="vii.xviii-p12"></span>It is to be remarked of these
distinctions, that they express, not what the predicate is in its own
meaning, but what relation it bears to the subject of which it happens
on the particular occasion to be predicated.”  *J. S. Mill, System of
Logic*, i. 133.

<span id="fn_1079"></span>[27:1080](2080047.htm#fr_1079) <span
id="vii.xviii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xviii-p14"></span> [Acts xvii.
21](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#021)<span id="vii.xviii-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1080"></span>[27:1081](2080047.htm#fr_1080) <span
id="vii.xviii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xviii-p16"></span> *i.e*. in the second book of his work
against Eunomius.

<span id="fn_1081"></span>[27:1082](2080047.htm#fr_1081) <span
id="vii.xviii-p16.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xviii-p17"></span> [Matt. xxviii.
19](../../../bib/kjv/mat028.htm#019)<span id="vii.xviii-p17.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1082"></span>[27:1083](2080047.htm#fr_1082) <span
id="vii.xviii-p17.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xviii-p18"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xviii-p18.1"></span>ουστοιχία</span>, a series of similar
things, as in Arist. *An. Pr*. ii. 21, 2.  In the Pythagorean
philosophy, a co-ordinate or parallel series.  Arist. *Met*. i. 5, 6,
and *Eth. Nic*. i. 6, 7.

<span id="fn_1083"></span>[27:1084](2080047.htm#fr_1083) <span
id="vii.xviii-p18.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xviii-p19"></span> *cf*. [Wis. xi.
20](../../../bib/apo/wis011.htm#020)<span id="vii.xviii-p19.1"></span>. 
“Thou hast ordered all things in measure and number and weight.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: In what manner in the confession of the three hypostases we
preserve the pious dogma of the Monarchia.  Wherein also is the
refutation of them that allege that the Spirit is
subnumerated.](2080048)
