[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2080335)  [Next](2080337) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ix.cclxiv"></span>

<span id="ix.cclxiv-p1"></span> <span class="c18"><span
id="ix.cclxiv-p1.1"></span>Letter CCLXIII. <span
id="fr_3188"></span>[3189](#fn_3188) </span>

<span id="ix.cclxiv-p3"></span>To the Westerns.

<span id="ix.cclxiv-p4"></span>1.  <span class="c14"><span
id="ix.cclxiv-p4.1"></span>May</span> the Lord God, in Whom we have put
our trust, give to each of you grace sufficient to enable you to realize
your hope, in proportion to the joy wherewith you have filled my heart,
both by the letter which you have sent me by the hands of the
well-beloved fellow-presbyters, and by the sympathy which you have felt
for me in my distress, like men who have put on bowels of mercy, <span
id="fr_3189"></span>[3190](#fn_3189) as you have been described to me by
the presbyters afore-mentioned.  Although my wounds remain the same,
nevertheless it does bring alleviation to me that I should have leeches
at hand, able, should they find an opportunity, to apply rapid remedies
to my hurts.  Wherefore in return I salute you by our beloved friends,
and exhort you, if the Lord puts it into your power to come to me, not
to hesitate to visit me.  For part of the greatest commandment is the
visitation of the sick.  But if the good God and wise <span
id="page_302">p. 302</span> <span
id="ix.cclxiv-Page_302"></span>Dispenser of our lives reserves this boon
for another season, at all events write to me whatever it is proper for
you to write for the consolation of the oppressed and the lifting up of
those that are crushed down.  Already the Church has suffered many
severe blows, and great has been my affliction at them.  Nowhere is
there expectation of succour unless the Lord sends us a remedy by you
who are his true servants.

<span id="ix.cclxiv-p6"></span>2.  The bold and shameless heresy of the
Arians, after being publicly cut off from the body of the Church, still
abides in its own error, and does not do us much harm because its
impiety is notorious to all.  Nevertheless men clad in sheep’s clothing,
and presenting a mild and amiable appearance, but within unsparingly
ravaging Christ’s flocks, find it easy to do hurt to the simpler ones,
because they came out from us.  It is these who are grievous and hard to
guard against.  It is these that we implore your diligence to denounce
publicly to all the Churches of the East; to the end that they may
either turn to the right way and join with us in genuine alliance, or,
if they abide in their perversity, may keep their mischief to themselves
alone, and be unable to communicate their own plague to their neighbours
by unguarded communion.  I am constrained to mention them by name, in
order that you may yourselves recognise those who are stirring up
disturbance here, and may make them known to our Churches.  My own words
are suspected by most men, as though I had an ill will towards them on
account of some private quarrel.  You, however, have all the more credit
with the people, in proportion to the distance that separates your home
from theirs, besides the fact that you are gifted with God’s grace to
help those who are distressed.  If more of you concur in uttering the
same opinions, it is clear that the number of those who have expressed
them will make it impossible to oppose their acceptance.

<span id="ix.cclxiv-p7"></span>3.  One of those who have caused me great
sorrow is Eustathius of Sebasteia in Lesser Armenia; formerly a disciple
of Arius, and a follower of him at the time when he flourished in
Alexandria, and concocted his infamous blasphemies against the
Only-begotten, he was numbered among his most faithful disciples.  On
his return to his own country he submitted a confession of the sound
faith to Hermogenes, the very blessed Bishop of Cæsarea, who was on the
point of condemning him for false doctrine.  Under these circumstances
he was ordained by Hermogenes, and, on the death of that bishop,
hastened to Eusebius of Constantinople, who himself yielded to none in
the energy of his support of the impious doctrine of Arius.  From
Constantinople he was expelled for some reason or another, returned to
his own country and a second time made his defence, attempting to
conceal his impious sentiments and cloking them under a certain verbal
orthodoxy.  He no sooner obtained the rank of bishop than he straightway
appeared writing an anathema on the Homoousion in the Arians’ synod at
Ancyra. <span id="fr_3190"></span>[3191](#fn_3190)   From thence he went
to Seleucia and took part in the notorious measures of his fellow
heretics.  At Constantinople he assented a second time to the
propositions of the heretics.  On being ejected from his episcopate, on
the ground of his former deposition at Melitine, <span
id="fr_3191"></span>[3192](#fn_3191) he hit upon a journey to you as a
means of restitution for himself.  What propositions were made to him by
the blessed bishop Liberius, and to what he agreed, I am ignorant.  I
only know that he brought a letter restoring him, which he shewed to the
synod at Tyana, and was restored to his see.  He is now defaming the
very creed for which he was received; he is consorting with those who
are anathematizing the Homoousion, and is prime leader of the heresy of
the pneumatomachi.  As it is from the west that he derives his power to
injure the Churches, and uses the authority given him by you to the
overthrow of the many, it is necessary that his correction should come
from the same quarter, and that a letter be sent to the Churches stating
on what terms he was received, and in what manner he has changed his
conduct and nullifies the favour given him by the Fathers at that time.

<span id="ix.cclxiv-p10"></span>4.  Next comes Apollinarius, who is no
less a cause of sorrow to the Churches.  With his facility of writing,
and a tongue ready to argue on any subject, he has filled the world with
his works, in disregard of the advice of him who said, “Beware of making
many books.” <span id="fr_3192"></span>[3193](#fn_3192)   In their
multitude there are certainly many errors.  How is it possible to avoid
sin in a multitude of words? <span id="fr_3193"></span>[3194](#fn_3193)
  And the theological works of Apollinarius are founded on Scriptural
proof, but are based on a human origin.  He has written about the
resurrection, from a mythical, or rather Jewish, point of view; urging
that we shall return again to the worship of the Law, be circumcised,
keep the Sabbath, abstain from meats, offer sacrifices to God, <span
id="page_303">p. 303</span> <span id="ix.cclxiv-Page_303"></span>worship
in the Temple at Jerusalem, and be altogether turned from Christians
into Jews.  What could be more ridiculous?  Or, rather, what could be
more contrary to the doctrines of the Gospel?  Then, further, he has
made such confusion among the brethren about the incarnation, that few
of his readers preserve the old mark of true religion; but the more
part, in their eagerness for novelty, have been diverted into
investigations and quarrelsome discussions of his unprofitable
treatises.

<span id="ix.cclxiv-p13"></span>5.  As to whether there is anything
objectionable about the conversation of Paulinus, you can say
yourselves.  What distresses me is that he should shew an inclination
for the doctrine of Marcellus, and unreservedly admit his followers to
communion.  You know, most honourable brethren, that the reversal of all
our hope is involved in the doctrine of Marcellus, for it does not
confess the Son in His proper hypostasis, but represents Him as having
been sent forth, and as having again returned to Him from Whom He came;
neither does it admit that the Paraclete has His own subsistence.  It
follows that no one could be wrong in declaring this heresy to be all at
variance with Christianity, and in styling it a corrupt Judaism.  Of
these things I implore you to take due heed.  This will be the case if
you will consent to write to all the Churches of the East that those who
have perverted these doctrines are in communion with you, if they amend;
but that if they contentiously determine to abide by their innovations,
you are separated from them.  I am myself well aware, that it had been
fitting for me to treat of these matters, sitting in synod with you in
common deliberation.  But this the time does not allow.  Delay is
dangerous, for the mischief they have caused has taken root.  I have
therefore been constrained to dispatch these brethren, that you may
learn from them all that has been omitted in my letter, and that they
may rouse you to afford the succour which we pray for to the Churches of
the East.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3188"></span>[301:3189](2080336.htm#fr_3188) <span
id="ix.cclxiv-p1.2"></span>

<span id="ix.cclxiv-p2"></span> Placed in 377.

<span id="fn_3189"></span>[301:3190](2080336.htm#fr_3189) <span
id="ix.cclxiv-p4.2"></span>

<span id="ix.cclxiv-p5"></span> [Col. iii.
12](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#012)<span id="ix.cclxiv-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3190"></span>[302:3191](2080336.htm#fr_3190) <span
id="ix.cclxiv-p7.1"></span>

<span id="ix.cclxiv-p8"></span> In 358, when the homoiousion was
accepted, and twelve anathemas formulated against all who rejected it.

<span id="fn_3191"></span>[302:3192](2080336.htm#fr_3191) <span
id="ix.cclxiv-p8.1"></span>

<span id="ix.cclxiv-p9"></span> Before 359.  Mansi iii. 291.

<span id="fn_3192"></span>[302:3193](2080336.htm#fr_3192) <span
id="ix.cclxiv-p10.1"></span>

<span id="ix.cclxiv-p11"></span> [Ecc. xii.
12](../../../bib/kjv/ecc012.htm#012)<span id="ix.cclxiv-p11.1"></span>,
LXX.  *cf.* Ep. ccxliv.<span id="ix.cclxiv-p11.2"></span> p. 286.

<span id="fn_3193"></span>[302:3194](2080336.htm#fr_3193) <span
id="ix.cclxiv-p11.3"></span>

<span id="ix.cclxiv-p12"></span> *cf*. [Prov. x.
19](../../../bib/kjv/pro010.htm#019)<span id="ix.cclxiv-p12.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: To Barses, bishop of Edessa, in exile.](2080337)
