[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2080344)  [Next](2080346) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ix.cclxxiii"></span>

<span id="ix.cclxxiii-p1"></span> <span class="c18"><span
id="ix.cclxxiii-p1.1"></span>Letter CCLXXII. <span
id="fr_3225"></span>[3226](#fn_3225) </span>

<span id="ix.cclxxiii-p3"></span>*To Sophronius the magister
officiorum.* <span id="fr_3226"></span>[3227](#fn_3226)

<span id="ix.cclxxiii-p5"></span>1.  <span class="c14"><span
id="ix.cclxxiii-p5.1"></span>It</span> has been reported to me by
Actiacus the deacon, that certain men have moved you to anger against
me, by falsely stating me to be ill-disposed towards your excellency.  I
cannot be astonished at a man in your position being followed by certain
sycophants.  High position seems to be in some way naturally attended by
miserable hangers-on of this kind.  Destitute as they are of any good
quality of their own whereby they may be known, they endeavour to
recommend themselves by means of other people’s ills.  Peradventure,
just as mildew is a blight which grows in corn, so flattery stealing
upon friendship is a blight of friendship.  So, as I said, I am by no
means astonished that these men should buzz about your bright and
distinguished hearth, as drones do about the hives.  But what has moved
my wonderment, and has seemed altogether astounding, is that a man like
yourself, specially distinguished by the seriousness of your character,
should have been induced to give both your ears to these people and to
accept their calumny against me.  From my youth up to this my old age I
have felt affection for many men, but I am not aware that I have ever
felt greater affection for any one than for your excellency.  Even had
not my reason induced me to regard a man of such a character, our
intimacy from boyhood would have sufficed to attach me to your soul. 
You know yourself how much custom has to do with friendship.  Pardon my
deficiency, if I can show nothing worthy of this preference.  You will
not ask some deed from me in proof of my good will; you will be
satisfied with a temper of mind which assuredly prays for you that you
may have all that is best.  May your fortunes never fall so low, as that
you should need the aid of any one so insignificant as myself!

<span id="ix.cclxxiii-p6"></span>2.  How then was I likely to say
anything against you, or to take any action in the matter of Memnonius? 
These points were reported to me by the deacon.  How could I put the
wealth of Hymetius before the friendship of one so prodigal of his
substance as you are?  There is no truth in any of these things.  I have
neither said nor done anything against you.  Possibly some ground may
have been given for some of the lies that are being told, by my
remarking to some of those who are causing disturbance, “If the man has
determined to accomplish what he has in mind, then, whether you make
disturbance or not, what he means to be done will certainly be done. 
You will speak, or hold your tongues; it will make no difference.  If he
changes his mind, beware how you defame my friend’s honourable name.  Do
not, under the pretence of zeal in your patron’s cause, attempt to make
some personal profit out of your attempts to threaten and alarm.”  As to
that person’s making his will, I have never said one word, great or
small, directly or indirectly, about the matter.

<span id="ix.cclxxiii-p7"></span>3.  You must not refuse to believe what
I say, unless you regard me as quite a desperate character, who thinks
nothing of the great sin of lying.  Put away all suspicion of me in
relation to the business, and for the future reckon my affection for you
as beyond the reach of all calumny.  Imitate Alexander, who received a
letter, saying that his physician was plotting his death, at the very
moment when he was just about to drink his medicine, and was so far from
believing the slanderer that he at one and the same time read the letter
and drank the draught. <span id="fr_3227"></span>[3228](#fn_3227)   I
refuse to admit that I am in any <span id="page_310">p. 310</span> <span
id="ix.cclxxiii-Page_310"></span>way inferior to the men who have been
famous for their friendship, for I have never been detected in any
breach of mine; and, besides this, I have received from my God the
commandment of love, and owe you love not only as part of mankind in
general, but because I recognise you individually as a benefactor both
of my country and of myself.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3225"></span>[309:3226](2080345.htm#fr_3225) <span
id="ix.cclxxiii-p1.2"></span>

<span id="ix.cclxxiii-p2"></span> Written in the last years of Basil’s
life.

<span id="fn_3226"></span>[309:3227](2080345.htm#fr_3226) <span
id="ix.cclxxiii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ix.cclxxiii-p4"></span> *cf*. p. 134, n.

<span id="fn_3227"></span>[309:3228](2080345.htm#fr_3227) <span
id="ix.cclxxiii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="ix.cclxxiii-p8"></span> Plut., *Alex*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Without address.  Concerning Hera.](2080346)
