[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2080045)  [Next](2080047) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.xvii"></span>

<span id="vii.xvii-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="vii.xvii-p1.1"></span>Chapter XVI.</span>

<span id="vii.xvii-p2"></span>That the Holy Spirit is in every
conception separable from the Father and the Son, alike in the creation
of perceptible objects, in the dispensation of human affairs, and in the
judgment to come.

<span id="vii.xvii-p3"></span>37.  <span class="c14"><span
id="vii.xvii-p3.1"></span>Let</span> us then revert to the point raised
from the outset, that in all things the Holy Spirit is inseparable and
wholly incapable of being parted from the Father and the Son.  St. Paul,
in the passage about the gift of tongues, writes to the Corinthians, “If
ye all prophesy and there come in one that believeth not, or one
unlearned, he is convinced of all, he is judged of all; and thus are the
secrets of the heart made manifest; and so falling down on his face he
will worship God and report that God is in you of a truth.” <span
id="fr_1029"></span>[1030](#fn_1029)   If then God is known to be in the
prophets by the prophesying that is acting according to the distribution
of the gifts of the Spirit, let our adversaries consider what kind of
place they will attribute to the Holy Spirit.  Let them say whether it
is more proper to rank Him with God or to thrust Him forth to the place
of the creature.  Peter’s words to Sapphira, “How is it that ye have
agreed together to tempt the Spirit of the Lord?  Ye have not lied unto
men, but unto God,” <span id="fr_1030"></span>[1031](#fn_1030) show that
sins against the Holy Spirit and against God are the same; and thus you
might learn that in every operation the Spirit is closely conjoined
with, and inseparable from, the Father and the Son.  God works the
differences of operations, and the Lord the diversities of
administrations, but all the while the Holy Spirit is present too of His
own will, dispensing distribution of the gifts according to each
recipient’s worth.  For, it is said, “there are diversities of gifts,
but the same Spirit; and differences of administrations, but the same
Lord; and there are diversities of operations, but it is the same God
which worketh all in all.” <span id="fr_1031"></span>[1032](#fn_1031)  
“But all these,” it is said, “worketh that one and the self-same Spirit,
dividing to every man severally as He will.” <span
id="fr_1032"></span>[1033](#fn_1032)   It must not however be supposed
because in this passage the apostle names in the first place the Spirit,
in the second the Son, and in the third God the Father, that therefore
their rank is reversed.  The apostle has only started in accordance with
our habits of thought; for when we receive gifts, the first that occurs
to us is the distributer, next we think of the sender, and then we lift
our thoughts to the fountain and cause of the boons.

<span id="vii.xvii-p8"></span>38.  Moreover, from the things created at
the beginning may be learnt the fellowship of the Spirit with the Father
and the Son.  The pure, intelligent, and supermundane powers are and are
styled holy, because they have their holiness of the grace given by the
Holy Spirit.  Accordingly the mode of the creation of the heavenly
powers is passed over in Silence, for the historian of the cosmogony has
revealed to us only the creation of things perceptible by sense.  But do
thou, who hast power from the things that are seen to form an analogy of
the unseen, glorify the Maker by whom all things were made, visible and
invisible, principalities and powers, authorities, thrones, and
dominions, and all other reasonable natures whom we cannot name. <span
id="fr_1033"></span>[1034](#fn_1033)   And in the creation bethink thee
first, I pray thee, of the original cause of all things that are made,
the Father; of the creative cause, the Son; of the perfecting cause, the
Spirit; so that the ministering spirits subsist by the will of the
Father, are brought into being by the operation of the Son, and
perfected by the presence of the Spirit.  Moreover, the perfection of
angels is sanctification and continuance in it.  And let no one imagine
me either to affirm that there are three original hypostases <span
id="fr_1034"></span>[1035](#fn_1034) or to allege the operation of the
Son to be imperfect.  For the first principle of existing things is One,
creating through the Son and perfecting through the Spirit. <span
id="fr_1035"></span>[1036](#fn_1035)   The operation of the Father who
worketh all in all is not imperfect, neither is the creating work of the
Son incomplete if not perfected by the Spirit.  The Father, who creates
by His sole will, could not stand in any need of the Son, but
nevertheless He wills through the Son; nor could the Son, who works
according to the likeness of the Father, need co-operation, but the Son
too wills to make perfect through the Spirit.  “For by the word of the
Lord were the <span id="page_24">p. 24</span> <span
id="vii.xvii-Page_24"></span>heavens made, and all the host of them by
the breath \[the Spirit\] of His mouth.” <span
id="fr_1036"></span>[1037](#fn_1036)   The Word then is not a mere
significant impression on the air, borne by the organs of speech; nor is
the Spirit of His mouth a vapour, emitted by the organs of respiration;
but the Word is He who “was with God in the beginning” and “was
God,” <span id="fr_1037"></span>[1038](#fn_1037) and the Spirit of the
mouth of God is “the Spirit of truth which proceedeth from the
Father.” <span id="fr_1038"></span>[1039](#fn_1038)   You are therefore
to perceive three, the Lord who gives the order, the Word who creates,
and the Spirit who confirms. <span id="fr_1039"></span>[1040](#fn_1039)
  And what other thing could confirmation be than the perfecting
according to holiness?  This perfecting expresses the confirmation’s
firmness, unchangeableness, and fixity in good.  But there is no
sanctification without the Spirit.  The powers of the heavens are not
holy by nature; were it so there would in this respect be no difference
between them and the Holy Spirit.  It is in proportion to their relative
excellence that they have their meed of holiness from the Spirit.  The
branding-iron is conceived of together with the fire; and yet the
material and the fire are distinct.  Thus too in the case of the
heavenly powers; their substance is, peradventure, an aerial spirit, or
an immaterial fire, as it is written, “Who maketh his angels spirits and
his ministers a flame of fire;” <span
id="fr_1040"></span>[1041](#fn_1040) wherefore they exist in space and
become visible, and appear in their proper bodily form to them that are
worthy.  But their sanctification, being external to their substance,
superinduces their perfection through the communion of the Spirit.  They
keep their rank by their abiding in the good and true, and while they
retain their freedom of will, never fall away from their patient
attendance on Him who is truly good.  It results that, if by your
argument you do away with the Spirit, the hosts of the angels are
disbanded, the dominions of archangels are destroyed, all is thrown into
confusion, and their life loses law, order, and distinctness.  For how
are angels to cry “Glory to God in the highest” <span
id="fr_1041"></span>[1042](#fn_1041) without being empowered by the
Spirit?  For “No man can say that Jesus is the Lord but by the Holy
Ghost, and no man speaking by the Spirit of God calleth Jesus
accursed;” <span id="fr_1042"></span>[1043](#fn_1042) as might be said
by wicked and hostile spirits, whose fall establishes our statement of
the freedom of the will of the invisible powers; being, as they are, in
a condition of equipoise between virtue and vice, and on this account
needing the succour of the Spirit.  I indeed maintain that even
Gabriel <span id="fr_1043"></span>[1044](#fn_1043) in no other way
foretells events to come than by the foreknowledge of the Spirit, by
reason of the fact that one of the boons distributed by the Spirit is
prophecy.  And whence did he who was ordained to announce the mysteries
of the vision to the Man of Desires <span
id="fr_1044"></span>[1045](#fn_1044) derive the wisdom whereby he was
enabled to teach hidden things, if not from the Holy Spirit?  The
revelation of mysteries is indeed the peculiar function of the Spirit,
as it is written, “God hath revealed them unto us by His Spirit.” <span
id="fr_1045"></span>[1046](#fn_1045)   And how could “thrones,
dominions, principalities and powers” <span
id="fr_1046"></span>[1047](#fn_1046) live their blessed life, did they
not “behold the face of the Father which is in heaven”? <span
id="fr_1047"></span>[1048](#fn_1047)   But to behold it is impossible
without the Spirit!  Just as at night, if you withdraw the light from
the house, the eyes fall blind and their faculties become inactive, and
the worth of objects cannot be discerned, and gold is trodden on in
ignorance as though it were iron, so in the order of the intellectual
world it is impossible for the high life of Law to abide without the
Spirit.  For it so to abide were as likely as that an army should
maintain its discipline in the absence of its commander, or a chorus its
harmony without the guidance of the Coryphæus.  How could the Seraphim
cry “Holy, Holy, Holy,” <span id="fr_1048"></span>[1049](#fn_1048) were
they not taught by the Spirit how often true religion requires them to
lift their voice in this ascription of glory?  Do “all His angels” and
“all His hosts” <span id="fr_1049"></span>[1050](#fn_1049) praise God? 
It is through the co-operation of the Spirit.  Do “thousand thousand” of
angels stand before Him, and “ten thousand times ten thousand”
ministering spirits? <span id="fr_1050"></span>[1051](#fn_1050)   They
are blamelessly doing their proper work by the power of the Spirit.  All
the glorious and unspeakable harmony <span
id="fr_1051"></span>[1052](#fn_1051) of the highest heavens both in the
service of God, and in the mutual concord of the celestial powers, can
therefore only be preserved by the direction of the Spirit.  Thus with
those beings who are not gradually perfected by increase and
advance, <span id="fr_1052"></span>[1053](#fn_1052) but are perfect from
the moment of the creation, there is in creation the presence of the
<span id="page_25">p. 25</span> <span id="vii.xvii-Page_25"></span>Holy
Spirit, who confers on them the grace that flows from Him for the
completion and perfection of their essence. <span
id="fr_1053"></span>[1054](#fn_1053)

<span id="vii.xvii-p30"></span>39.  But when we speak of the
dispensations made for man by our great God and Saviour Jesus
Christ, <span id="fr_1054"></span>[1055](#fn_1054) who will gainsay
their having been accomplished through the grace of the Spirit?  Whether
you wish to examine ancient evidence;—the blessings of the patriarchs,
the succour given through the legislation, the types, the prophecies,
the valorous feats in war, the signs wrought through just men;—or on the
other hand the things done in the dispensation of the coming of our Lord
in the flesh;—all is through the Spirit.  In the first place He was made
an unction, and being inseparably present was with the very flesh of the
Lord, according to that which is written, “Upon whom thou shalt see the
Spirit descending and remaining on Him, the same is” <span
id="fr_1055"></span>[1056](#fn_1055) “my beloved Son;” <span
id="fr_1056"></span>[1057](#fn_1056) and “Jesus of Nazareth” whom “God
anointed with the Holy Ghost.” <span
id="fr_1057"></span>[1058](#fn_1057)   After this every operation was
wrought with the co-operation of the Spirit.  He was present when the
Lord was being tempted by the devil; for, it is said, “Jesus was led up
of the Spirit into the wilderness to be tempted.” <span
id="fr_1058"></span>[1059](#fn_1058)   He was inseparably with Him while
working His wonderful works; <span id="fr_1059"></span>[1060](#fn_1059)
for, it is said, “If I by the Spirit of God cast out devils.” <span
id="fr_1060"></span>[1061](#fn_1060)   And He did not leave Him when He
had risen from the dead; for when renewing man, and, by breathing on the
face of the disciples, <span id="fr_1061"></span>[1062](#fn_1061)
restoring the grace, that came of the inbreathing of God, which man had
lost, what did the Lord say?  “Receive ye the Holy Ghost:  whose soever
sins ye remit, they are remitted unto them; and whose soever ye retain,
they are retained.” <span id="fr_1062"></span>[1063](#fn_1062)   And is
it not plain and incontestable that the ordering of the Church is
effected through the Spirit?  For He gave, it is said, “in the church,
first Apostles, secondarily prophets, thirdly teachers, after that
miracles, then gifts of healing, helps, governments, diversities of
tongues,” <span id="fr_1063"></span>[1064](#fn_1063) for this order is
ordained in accordance with the division of the gifts that are of the
Spirit. <span id="fr_1064"></span>[1065](#fn_1064)

<span id="vii.xvii-p42"></span>40.  Moreover by any one who carefully
uses his reason it will be found that even at the moment of the expected
appearance of the Lord from heaven the Holy Spirit will not, as some
suppose, have no functions to discharge:  on the contrary, even in the
day of His revelation, in which the blessed and only potentate <span
id="fr_1065"></span>[1066](#fn_1065) will judge the world in
righteousness, <span id="fr_1066"></span>[1067](#fn_1066) the Holy
Spirit will be present with Him.  For who is so ignorant of the good
things prepared by God for them that are worthy, as not to know that the
crown of the righteous is the grace of the Spirit, bestowed in more
abundant and perfect measure in that day, when spiritual glory shall be
distributed to each in proportion as he shall have nobly played the
man?  For among the glories of the saints are “many mansions” in the
Father’s house, <span id="fr_1067"></span>[1068](#fn_1067) that is
differences of dignities:  for as “star differeth from star in glory, so
also is the resurrection of the dead.” <span
id="fr_1068"></span>[1069](#fn_1068)   They, then, that were sealed by
the Spirit unto the day of redemption, <span
id="fr_1069"></span>[1070](#fn_1069) and preserve pure and undiminished
the first fruits which they received of the Spirit, are they that shall
hear the words “well done thou good and faithful servant; thou hast been
faithful over a few things, I will make thee ruler over many
things.” <span id="fr_1070"></span>[1071](#fn_1070)   In like manner
they which have grieved the Holy Spirit by the wickedness of their ways,
or have not wrought for Him that gave to them, shall be deprived of what
they have received, their grace being transferred to others; or,
according to one of the evangelists, they shall even be wholly cut
asunder, <span id="fr_1071"></span>[1072](#fn_1071) —the cutting asunder
meaning complete separation from the Spirit.  The body is not divided,
part being delivered to chastisement, and part let off; for when a whole
has sinned it were like the old fables, and unworthy of a righteous
judge, for only the half to suffer chastisement.  Nor is the soul cut in
two,—that soul the whole of which possesses the sinful affection
throughout, and works the wickedness in co-operation with the body.  The
cutting asunder, as I have observed, is the separation for aye of the
soul from the Spirit.  For now, although the Spirit does not suffer
admixture with the unworthy, He <span id="page_26">p. 26</span> <span
id="vii.xvii-Page_26"></span>nevertheless does seem in a manner to be
present with them that have once been sealed, awaiting the salvation
which follows on their conversion; but then He will be wholly cut off
from the soul that has defiled His grace.  For this reason “In Hell
there is none that maketh confession; in death none that remembereth
God,” <span id="fr_1072"></span>[1073](#fn_1072) because the succour of
the Spirit is no longer present.  How then is it possible to conceive
that the judgment is accomplished without the Holy Spirit, wherein the
word points out that He is Himself the prize <span
id="fr_1073"></span>[1074](#fn_1073) of the righteous, when instead of
the earnest <span id="fr_1074"></span>[1075](#fn_1074) is given that
which is perfect, and the first condemnation of sinners, when they are
deprived of that which they seem to have?  But the greatest proof of the
conjunction of the Spirit with the Father and the Son is that He is said
to have the same relation to God which the spirit in us has to each of
us.  “For what man” it is said, “knoweth the things of a man, save the
spirit of man which is in him? even so the things of God knoweth no man
but the Spirit of God.” <span id="fr_1075"></span>[1076](#fn_1075)

<span id="vii.xvii-p54"></span>On this point I have said enough.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1029"></span>[23:1030](2080046.htm#fr_1029) <span
id="vii.xvii-p3.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xvii-p4"></span> [1 Cor.
14:24](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#024),
[25](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#025)<span id="vii.xvii-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1030"></span>[23:1031](2080046.htm#fr_1030) <span
id="vii.xvii-p4.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xvii-p5"></span> [Acts
5:9](../../../bib/kjv/act005.htm#009),
[4](../../../bib/kjv/act005.htm#004)<span id="vii.xvii-p5.1"></span>. 
“Thou hast not lied,” said to Ananias, interpolated into the rebuke of
Sapphira.

<span id="fn_1031"></span>[23:1032](2080046.htm#fr_1031) <span
id="vii.xvii-p5.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xvii-p6"></span> [1 Cor.
12:4](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#004),
[5](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#005),
[6](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#006)<span id="vii.xvii-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1032"></span>[23:1033](2080046.htm#fr_1032) <span
id="vii.xvii-p6.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xvii-p7"></span> [1 Cor. xii.
11](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#011)<span id="vii.xvii-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1033"></span>[23:1034](2080046.htm#fr_1033) <span
id="vii.xvii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xvii-p9"></span> *cf*. [Col. i.
16](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#016)<span id="vii.xvii-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1034"></span>[23:1035](2080046.htm#fr_1034) <span
id="vii.xvii-p9.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xvii-p10"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xvii-p10.1"></span>ὑ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xvii-p10.2"></span>ποστάσεις</span>, apparently used here as the
equivalent of <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xvii-p10.3"></span>οὐσίαι</span>, unless the negation only
extends to <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xvii-p10.4"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xvii-p10.5"></span>ρχικάς</span>.  *cf*. note on p. 5.

<span id="fn_1035"></span>[23:1036](2080046.htm#fr_1035) <span
id="vii.xvii-p10.6"></span>

<span id="vii.xvii-p11"></span> Contrast the neuter <span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.xvii-p11.1"></span>τὸ ὄν</span> of Pagan
philosophy with the <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xvii-p11.2"></span>ὁ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xvii-p11.3"></span>ὤν</span> or <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xvii-p11.4"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xvii-p11.5"></span>γώ εἰμι</span> of Christian revelation.

<span id="fn_1036"></span>[24:1037](2080046.htm#fr_1036) <span
id="vii.xvii-p11.6"></span>

<span id="vii.xvii-p12"></span> [Ps. xxxiii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/psa033.htm#006)<span id="vii.xvii-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1037"></span>[24:1038](2080046.htm#fr_1037) <span
id="vii.xvii-p12.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xvii-p13"></span> [John i.
1](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#001)<span id="vii.xvii-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1038"></span>[24:1039](2080046.htm#fr_1038) <span
id="vii.xvii-p13.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xvii-p14"></span> [John xv.
26](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#026)<span id="vii.xvii-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1039"></span>[24:1040](2080046.htm#fr_1039) <span
id="vii.xvii-p14.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xvii-p15"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xvii-p15.1"></span>τὸν στερεοῦντα τὸ πνεῦμα</span>.  It is to be
noticed here that St. Basil uses the masculine and more personal form in
apposition with the neuter <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xvii-p15.2"></span>πνεῦμα</span>, and not the neuter as in the
creed of Constantinople, <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xvii-p15.3"></span>τὸ κύριον καὶ τὸ Ζωοποιὸν τὸ ἐκ τοῦ πατρὸς
ἐκπορευόμενον</span>, etc.  There is scriptural authority for the
masculine in the “<span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xvii-p15.4"></span>ὅ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xvii-p15.5"></span>ταν δὲ ἔλθῃ ἐκεῖνος, τὸ πνεῦμα τῆς
ἀληθείας</span>” of [John xvi. 13](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#013)<span
id="vii.xvii-p15.6"></span>.  *cf.* p. 15–17.

<span id="fn_1040"></span>[24:1041](2080046.htm#fr_1040) <span
id="vii.xvii-p15.7"></span>

<span id="vii.xvii-p16"></span> [Ps. xiv.
4](../../../bib/kjv/psa014.htm#004)<span id="vii.xvii-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1041"></span>[24:1042](2080046.htm#fr_1041) <span
id="vii.xvii-p16.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xvii-p17"></span> [Luke ii.
14](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#014)<span id="vii.xvii-p17.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1042"></span>[24:1043](2080046.htm#fr_1042) <span
id="vii.xvii-p17.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xvii-p18"></span> [1 Cor. xii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#003)<span id="vii.xvii-p18.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1043"></span>[24:1044](2080046.htm#fr_1043) <span
id="vii.xvii-p18.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xvii-p19"></span> [Luke i.
11](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#011)<span id="vii.xvii-p19.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1044"></span>[24:1045](2080046.htm#fr_1044) <span
id="vii.xvii-p19.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xvii-p20"></span> “Man greatly beloved.”  A.V. and R.V.
[Dan. x. 11](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#011)<span
id="vii.xvii-p20.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1045"></span>[24:1046](2080046.htm#fr_1045) <span
id="vii.xvii-p20.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xvii-p21"></span> [1 Cor. ii.
10](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#010)<span id="vii.xvii-p21.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1046"></span>[24:1047](2080046.htm#fr_1046) <span
id="vii.xvii-p21.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xvii-p22"></span> [Col. i.
16](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#016)<span id="vii.xvii-p22.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1047"></span>[24:1048](2080046.htm#fr_1047) <span
id="vii.xvii-p22.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xvii-p23"></span> [Matt. xviii.
10](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#010)<span id="vii.xvii-p23.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1048"></span>[24:1049](2080046.htm#fr_1048) <span
id="vii.xvii-p23.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xvii-p24"></span> [Is. vi.
3](../../../bib/kjv/isa006.htm#003)<span id="vii.xvii-p24.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1049"></span>[24:1050](2080046.htm#fr_1049) <span
id="vii.xvii-p24.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xvii-p25"></span> [Ps. cxlviii.
2](../../../bib/kjv/psa048.htm#002)<span id="vii.xvii-p25.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1050"></span>[24:1051](2080046.htm#fr_1050) <span
id="vii.xvii-p25.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xvii-p26"></span> [Dan. vii.
10](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#010)<span id="vii.xvii-p26.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1051"></span>[24:1052](2080046.htm#fr_1051) <span
id="vii.xvii-p26.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xvii-p27"></span> *cf*. [Job xxxviii.
7](../../../bib/kjv/job038.htm#007)<span id="vii.xvii-p27.1"></span>,
though for first clause the lxx. reads <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xvii-p27.2"></span>ὅ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xvii-p27.3"></span>τε ἐγενήθη ἄστρα</span>.  On the Pythagorean
theory of the harmony of the spheres *vide* Arist. *De Cœl*. ii. 9, 1.

<span id="fn_1052"></span>[24:1053](2080046.htm#fr_1052) <span
id="vii.xvii-p27.4"></span>

<span id="vii.xvii-p28"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xvii-p28.1"></span>προκοπή</span>.  *cf*. <span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.xvii-p28.2"></span>προέκοπτε</span> of the
boy Jesus in [Luke ii. 52](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#052)<span
id="vii.xvii-p28.3"></span>.

<span id="fn_1053"></span>[25:1054](2080046.htm#fr_1053) <span
id="vii.xvii-p28.4"></span>

<span id="vii.xvii-p29"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xvii-p29.1"></span>ὑ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xvii-p29.2"></span>πόστασις</span>, apparently again used in its
earlier identification with <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xvii-p29.3"></span>οὐσία</span>.

<span id="fn_1054"></span>[25:1055](2080046.htm#fr_1054) <span
id="vii.xvii-p30.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xvii-p31"></span> [Titus ii.
13](../../../bib/kjv/tit002.htm#013)<span id="vii.xvii-p31.1"></span>,
R.V.  The A.V. favours the view, opposed to that of the Greek Fathers,
that “the great God” means the Father.  *cf*. Theodoret in this edition,
pp. 319 and 321 and notes.

<span id="fn_1055"></span>[25:1056](2080046.htm#fr_1055) <span
id="vii.xvii-p31.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xvii-p32"></span> [John i.
33](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#033)<span id="vii.xvii-p32.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1056"></span>[25:1057](2080046.htm#fr_1056) <span
id="vii.xvii-p32.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xvii-p33"></span> [Matt. iii.
17](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#017)<span id="vii.xvii-p33.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1057"></span>[25:1058](2080046.htm#fr_1057) <span
id="vii.xvii-p33.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xvii-p34"></span> [Acts x.
38](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#038)<span id="vii.xvii-p34.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1058"></span>[25:1059](2080046.htm#fr_1058) <span
id="vii.xvii-p34.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xvii-p35"></span> [Matt. iv.
1](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#001)<span id="vii.xvii-p35.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1059"></span>[25:1060](2080046.htm#fr_1059) <span
id="vii.xvii-p35.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xvii-p36"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xvii-p36.1"></span>δυνάμεις</span>, rendered “wonderful works”
in [Matt. vii. 22](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#022)<span
id="vii.xvii-p36.2"></span>; “mighty works” in [Matt.
11:20](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#020), [Mark
6:14](../../../bib/kjv/mar006.htm#014), [Luke
10:13](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#013)<span
id="vii.xvii-p36.3"></span>; and “miracles” in [Acts
2:22](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#022), [Acts
19:11](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#011), [Gal.
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#005)<span id="vii.xvii-p36.4"></span>.

<span id="fn_1060"></span>[25:1061](2080046.htm#fr_1060) <span
id="vii.xvii-p36.5"></span>

<span id="vii.xvii-p37"></span> [Matt. xii.
28](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#028)<span id="vii.xvii-p37.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1061"></span>[25:1062](2080046.htm#fr_1061) <span
id="vii.xvii-p37.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xvii-p38"></span> [Gen. ii.
7](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#007)<span id="vii.xvii-p38.1"></span>,
lxx. is <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xvii-p38.2"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xvii-p38.3"></span>νεφύσησεν εἰς τὸ πρόσωπον αὐτοῦ</span>. 
“<span class="Greek"><span id="vii.xvii-p38.4"></span>εἰς τὸ
πρόσωπον</span>” is thence imported into [John xx.
22](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#022)<span id="vii.xvii-p38.5"></span>. 
Mr. C.F.H. Johnston notes, “This addition…is found in the Prayer at the
Little Entrance in the Liturgy of St. Mark.  Didymus, in his treatise on
the Holy Spirit, which we have only in St. Jerome’s Latin Version, twice
used ‘*insufflans in faciem corum*,” §§6, 33.  The text is quoted in
this form by Epiphanius *Adv. Hær*. lxxiv. 13, and by St. Aug. *De
Trin*. iv. 20.”  To these instances may be added Athan. *Ep*. i. § 8,
and the versions of Upper and Lower Egypt, the Thebaic, known as the
Sahidic, and the Memphitic, or Coptic, both ascribed to the 3rd century.

<span id="fn_1062"></span>[25:1063](2080046.htm#fr_1062) <span
id="vii.xvii-p38.6"></span>

<span id="vii.xvii-p39"></span> [John
20:22](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#022),
[23](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#023)<span id="vii.xvii-p39.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1063"></span>[25:1064](2080046.htm#fr_1063) <span
id="vii.xvii-p39.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xvii-p40"></span> [1 Cor. xii.
28](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#028)<span id="vii.xvii-p40.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1064"></span>[25:1065](2080046.htm#fr_1064) <span
id="vii.xvii-p40.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xvii-p41"></span> *cf*. [1 Cor. xii.
11](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#011)<span id="vii.xvii-p41.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1065"></span>[25:1066](2080046.htm#fr_1065) <span
id="vii.xvii-p42.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xvii-p43"></span> [1 Tim. vi.
15](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#015)<span id="vii.xvii-p43.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1066"></span>[25:1067](2080046.htm#fr_1066) <span
id="vii.xvii-p43.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xvii-p44"></span> [Acts xvii.
31](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#031)<span id="vii.xvii-p44.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1067"></span>[25:1068](2080046.htm#fr_1067) <span
id="vii.xvii-p44.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xvii-p45"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xvii-p45.1"></span>παρὰ τῷ πατρί</span>, (=*<span
id="vii.xvii-p45.2"></span>chez le Père*,) with little or no change of
meaning, for <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xvii-p45.3"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xvii-p45.4"></span>ν τῇ οἰκί& 139· τοῦ πατρός μου</span>.  [John
xiv. 2](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#002)<span
id="vii.xvii-p45.5"></span>.

<span id="fn_1068"></span>[25:1069](2080046.htm#fr_1068) <span
id="vii.xvii-p45.6"></span>

<span id="vii.xvii-p46"></span> [1 Cor.
15:41](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#041),
[42](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#042)<span id="vii.xvii-p46.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1069"></span>[25:1070](2080046.htm#fr_1069) <span
id="vii.xvii-p46.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xvii-p47"></span> *cf*. [Eph. iv.
30](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#030)<span id="vii.xvii-p47.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1070"></span>[25:1071](2080046.htm#fr_1070) <span
id="vii.xvii-p47.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xvii-p48"></span> [Matt. xxv.
21](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#021)<span id="vii.xvii-p48.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1071"></span>[25:1072](2080046.htm#fr_1071) <span
id="vii.xvii-p48.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xvii-p49"></span> [Matt. xxiv.
51](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#051)<span id="vii.xvii-p49.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1072"></span>[26:1073](2080046.htm#fr_1072) <span
id="vii.xvii-p49.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xvii-p50"></span> [Ps. vi.
5](../../../bib/kjv/psa006.htm#005)<span id="vii.xvii-p50.1"></span>,
lxx.  <span class="Greek"><span id="vii.xvii-p50.2"></span>ὅ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.xvii-p50.3"></span>τι οὐκ ἔστιν ἐν τῷ θανάτῳ
ὁ μνημονεύων σου, ἐν δὲ τῷ ἅδῃ τίς ἐξομολογήσεται σοι</span>; Vulg. “*In
inferno autem quis confitebitur tibi*?”

<span id="fn_1073"></span>[26:1074](2080046.htm#fr_1073) <span
id="vii.xvii-p50.4"></span>

<span id="vii.xvii-p51"></span> [Phil. iii.
14](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#014)<span id="vii.xvii-p51.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1074"></span>[26:1075](2080046.htm#fr_1074) <span
id="vii.xvii-p51.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xvii-p52"></span> [2 Cor.
1:22](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#022), [2 Cor.
5:5](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#005)<span id="vii.xvii-p52.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1075"></span>[26:1076](2080046.htm#fr_1075) <span
id="vii.xvii-p52.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xvii-p53"></span> [1 Cor. ii.
11](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#011)<span id="vii.xvii-p53.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Against those who say that the Holy Ghost is not to be numbered
with, but numbered under, the Father and the Son.  Wherein moreover
there is a summary notice of the faith concerning right
sub-numeration.](2080047)
