[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2080014)  [Next](2080016) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.i.ix"></span>

<span id="vi.i.ix-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="vi.i.ix-p1.1"></span>IX.—Unbroken Friendships.</span>

<span id="vi.i.ix-p2"></span>Brighter and happier intimacies were those
formed with the older bishop of Samosata, the Eusebius who, of all the
many bearers of the name, most nearly realised its meaning, <span
id="fr_226"></span>[227](#fn_226) and with Basil’s junior, Amphilochius
of Iconium.  With the former, Basil’s relations were those of an
affectionate son and of an enthusiastic admirer.  The many miles that
stretched between Cæsarea and Samosata did not prevent these personal as
well as epistolary communications. <span
id="fr_227"></span>[228](#fn_227)   In 372 they were closely associated
in the eager efforts of the orthodox bishops of the East to win the
sympathy and active support of the West. <span
id="fr_228"></span>[229](#fn_228)   In 374 Eusebius was exiled, with all
the picturesque incidents so vividly described by Theodoret. <span
id="fr_229"></span>[230](#fn_229)   He travelled slowly from Samosata
into Thrace, but does not seem to have met either Gregory or Basil on
his way.  Basil contrived to continue a correspondence with him in his
banishment.  It was more like that of young lovers than of elderly
bishops. <span id="fr_230"></span>[231](#fn_230)   The friends deplore
the hindrances to conveyance, and are eager to assure one another that
neither is guilty of forgetfulness. <span
id="fr_231"></span>[232](#fn_231)

<span id="vi.i.ix-p9"></span>The friendship with Amphilochius seems to
have begun at the time when the young advocate accepted the invitation
conveyed in the name of Heracleidas, <span
id="fr_232"></span>[233](#fn_232) his friend, and repaired from Ozizala
to Cæsarea.  The consequences were prompt and remarkable.  Amphilochius,
at this time between thirty and forty years of age, was soon ordained
and consecrated, perhaps, like Ambrose of Milan and Eusebius of Cæsarea
*per saltum*, to the important see of Iconium, recently vacated by the
death of Faustinus.  Henceforward the intercourse between the spiritual
father and the spiritual son, both by letters and by visits, was
constant.  The first visit of Amphilochius to Basil, as bishop, probably
at Easter 374, not only gratified the older prelate, but made a deep
impression on the Church of Cæsarea. <span
id="fr_233"></span>[234](#fn_233)   But his visits were usually paid in
September, at the time of the services in commemoration of the martyr
Eupsychius.  On the occasion of the first of them, in 374, the friends
conversed together on the doctrine of the Holy Spirit, now impugned by
the Macedonians, and the result was the composition of the treatise *De
Spiritu Sancto*.  This was closely followed by the three famous
canonical epistles, <span id="fr_234"></span>[235](#fn_234) also
addressed to Amphilochius.  Indeed, so great was the affectionate
confidence of the great administrator and theologian <span
id="fr_235"></span>[236](#fn_235) in his younger brother, that, when
infirmities were closing round him, he asked Amphilochius to aid him in
the administration of the archdiocese. <span
id="fr_236"></span>[237](#fn_236)

<span id="vi.i.ix-p15"></span>If we accept the explanation given of
Letter CLXIX. in a note on a previous page, <span
id="fr_237"></span>[238](#fn_237) Gregory the elder, bishop of
Nazianzus, must be numbered among those of Basil’s correspondents
letters to whom have been preserved.  The whole episode referred to in
that and in the two following letters is curiously illustrative of
outbursts of fanaticism and folly which might <span id="page_xxix">p.
xxix</span> <span id="vi.i.ix-Page_xxix"></span>have been expected to
occur in Cappadocia in the fourth century, as well as in soberer regions
in several other centuries when they have occurred.  It has been clothed
with fresh interest by the very vivid narrative of Professor Ramsay, and
by the skill with which he uses the scanty morsels of evidence available
to construct the theory which he holds about it. <span
id="fr_238"></span>[239](#fn_238)   This theory is that the
correspondence indicates a determined attempt on the part of the rigidly
orthodox archbishop to crush proceedings which were really “only keeping
up the customary ceremonial of a great religious meeting,” and, as such,
were winked at, if not approved of, by the bishop to whom the letter of
remonstrance is addressed, and the presbyter who was Glycerius’
superior.  Valuable information is furnished by Professor Ramsay
concerning the great annual festival in honour of Zeus of Venasa (or
Venese), whose shrine was richly endowed, and the inscription discovered
on a Cappadocian hill-top, “Great Zeus in heaven, be propitious to me.” 
But the “evident sympathy” of the bishop and the presbyter is rather a
strained inference from the extant letters; and the fact that in the
days when paganism prevailed in Cappadocia Venasa was a great religious
centre, and the scene of rites in which women played an important part,
is no conclusive proof that wild dances performed by an insubordinate
deacon were tolerated, perhaps encouraged, because they represented a
popular old pagan observance.  Glycerius may have played the patriarch,
without meaning to adopt, or travesty, the style of the former high
priest of Zeus.  Cappadocia was one of the most Christian districts of
the empire long before Basil was appointed to the exarchate of Cæsarea,
and Basil is not likely to have been the first occupant of the see who
would strongly disapprove of and endeavour to repress, any such
manifestations as those which are described. <span
id="fr_239"></span>[240](#fn_239)   That the bishop whom Basil addresses
and the presbyter served by Glycerius should have desired to deal
leniently with the offender individually does not convict them of
accepting the unseemly proceedings of Glycerius and his troupe as a
pardonable, if not desirable, survival of a picturesque national
custom. <span id="fr_240"></span>[241](#fn_240)

<span id="vi.i.ix-p20"></span>Among other bishops of the period with
whom Basil communicated by letter are Abramius, or Abraham, of Batnæ in
Oshoene, <span id="fr_241"></span>[242](#fn_241) the illustrious
Athanasius, <span id="fr_242"></span>[243](#fn_242) and Ambrose, <span
id="fr_243"></span>[244](#fn_243) Athanasius of Ancyra; <span
id="fr_244"></span>[245](#fn_244) Barses of Edessa, <span
id="fr_245"></span>[246](#fn_245) who died in exile in Egypt;
Elpidius, <span id="fr_246"></span>[247](#fn_246) of some unknown see on
the Levantine seaboard, who supported Basil in the controversy with
Eustathius; the learned Epiphanius of Salamis; <span
id="fr_247"></span>[248](#fn_247) Meletius, <span
id="fr_248"></span>[249](#fn_248) the exiled bishop of Antioch;
Patrophilus of Ægæ; <span id="fr_249"></span>[250](#fn_249) Petrus of
Alexandria; <span id="fr_250"></span>[251](#fn_250) Theodotus of
Nicopolis, <span id="fr_251"></span>[252](#fn_251) and Ascholius of
Thessalonica. <span id="fr_252"></span>[253](#fn_252)

<span id="vi.i.ix-p33"></span>Basil’s correspondence was not, however,
confined within the limits of clerical clanship.  His extant letters to
laymen, both distinguished and undistinguished, shew that he was in
touch with the men of mark of his time and neighbourhood, and that he
found time to express an affectionate interest in the fortunes of his
intimate friends.

<span id="vi.i.ix-p34"></span>Towards the later years of his life the
archbishop’s days were darkened not only by ill-health and anxiety, but
by the death of some of his chief friends and allies.  Athanasius died
in 373, and so far as personal living influence went, there was an
extinction of the Pharos not of Alexandria only, but of the world. <span
id="fr_253"></span>[254](#fn_253)   It was no longer *“Athanasius contra
mundum,”* <span id="fr_254"></span>[255](#fn_254) but *“Mundus sine
Athanasio.”*  In 374 Gregory the elder died at Nazianzus, and the same
year saw the banishment of Eusebius of Samosata to Thrace.  In 375 died
Theodotus of Nicopolis, and the succession of Fronto was a cause of deep
sorrow.

<span id="vi.i.ix-p37"></span><span id="page_xxx">p. xxx</span> <span
id="vi.i.ix-Page_xxx"></span>At this time <span
id="fr_255"></span>[256](#fn_255) some short solace would come to the
Catholics in the East in the synodical letter addressed to the Orientals
of the important synod held in Illyria, under the authority of
Valentinian.  The letter which is extant <span
id="fr_256"></span>[257](#fn_256) is directed against the Macedonian
heresy.  The charge of conveying it to the East was given to the
presbyter Elpidius. <span id="fr_257"></span>[258](#fn_257)  
Valentinian sent with it a letter to the bishops of Asia in which
persecution is forbidden, and the excuse of submission to the reigning
sovereign anticipated and condemned.  Although the letter runs in the
names of Valentinian, Valens, and Gratian, the western brother appears
to condemn the eastern. <span id="fr_258"></span>[259](#fn_258)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_226"></span>[xxviii:227](2080015.htm#fr_226) <span
id="vi.i.ix-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i.ix-p3"></span> Bp. in 361.  *cf*. Greg. Naz., *Ep*.
xxviii. and xxix., and Theod., *Ecc. Hist*. xxvii.

<span id="fn_227"></span>[xxviii:228](2080015.htm#fr_227) <span
id="vi.i.ix-p3.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i.ix-p4"></span> In 369, it is to the prayers of Eusebius,
under the divine grace, that Basil refers his partial recovery from
sickness (*Ep*. xxvii.), and sends Hypatius to Samosata in hope of
similar blessing.  (*Ep*. xxxi.)

<span id="fn_228"></span>[xxviii:229](2080015.htm#fr_228) <span
id="vi.i.ix-p4.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i.ix-p5"></span> *Ep*. xcii.

<span id="fn_229"></span>[xxviii:230](2080015.htm#fr_229) <span
id="vi.i.ix-p5.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i.ix-p6"></span> *Ecc. Hist*. iv. 14.

<span id="fn_230"></span>[xxviii:231](2080015.htm#fr_230) <span
id="vi.i.ix-p6.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i.ix-p7"></span> *cf*. Principal Reynolds in *D.C.B*. i.
372.

<span id="fn_231"></span>[xxviii:232](2080015.htm#fr_231) <span
id="vi.i.ix-p7.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i.ix-p8"></span> *Epp*. clvii., clviii., clxii., clxvii.,
clxviii., cxcviii., ccxxxvii., ccxxxix., ccxli., cclxviii.

<span id="fn_232"></span>[xxviii:233](2080015.htm#fr_232) <span
id="vi.i.ix-p9.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i.ix-p10"></span> *Ep*. cl.

<span id="fn_233"></span>[xxviii:234](2080015.htm#fr_233) <span
id="vi.i.ix-p10.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i.ix-p11"></span> *Epp*. clxiii., clxxvi.

<span id="fn_234"></span>[xxviii:235](2080015.htm#fr_234) <span
id="vi.i.ix-p11.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i.ix-p12"></span> *Epp*. clxxxviii., cxcix., ccxvii.

<span id="fn_235"></span>[xxviii:236](2080015.htm#fr_235) <span
id="vi.i.ix-p12.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i.ix-p13"></span> “Pace Eunomii,” whom Greg. of Nyssa
quotes.  *C. Eunom*. i.

<span id="fn_236"></span>[xxviii:237](2080015.htm#fr_236) <span
id="vi.i.ix-p13.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i.ix-p14"></span> *Ep*. cc., cci.

<span id="fn_237"></span>[xxviii:238](2080015.htm#fr_237) <span
id="vi.i.ix-p15.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i.ix-p16"></span> § viii.

<span id="fn_238"></span>[xxix:239](2080015.htm#fr_238) <span
id="vi.i.ix-p16.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i.ix-p17"></span> Ramsay’s *Church of the Roman Empire*,
chap. xviii.

<span id="fn_239"></span>[xxix:240](2080015.htm#fr_239) <span
id="vi.i.ix-p17.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i.ix-p18"></span> The description of Cæsarea, as being
“Christian to a man” (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.i.ix-p18.1"></span>πανδημεὶ χριστιανίζοντας</span>.  Soz. v. 4),
would apply pretty generally to all the province.

<span id="fn_240"></span>[xxix:241](2080015.htm#fr_240) <span
id="vi.i.ix-p18.2"></span>

<span id="vi.i.ix-p19"></span> In the chapter in which Professor Ramsay
discusses the story of Glycerius he asks how it was that, while Phrygia
was heretical, Cappadocia, in the fourth century, was orthodox:  “Can
any reason be suggested why this great Cappadocian leader followed the
Roman Church, whereas all the most striking figures in Phrygian
ecclesiastical history opposed it?”  In Phrygia was the great centre of
Montanism, a form of religionism not unfavourable to excesses such as
those of Glycerius.  But in *Letter* cciv., placed in 375, Basil claims
both the Phrygias, *i.e*. Pacatiana and  Salutaris, as being in
communion with him.  By the “Roman Church,” followed by Cappadocia and
opposed by Phrygia, must be meant either the ecclesiastical system of
the Roman Empire, or the Church at Rome regarded as holding a kind of
hegemony of Churches.  If the former, it will be remembered that
Cappadocia boldly withstood the creed patronized and pressed by imperial
authority, when the influence of Valens made Arianism the official
religion of Rome.  If the latter, the phrase seems a misleading
anachronism.  In the fourth century there was no following or opposing
the Church of Rome as we understand the phrase.  To the bishop of Rome
was conceded a certain personal precedence, as bishop of the capital,
and he was beginning to claim more.  In the West there was the dignity
of the only western apostolic see, and the Church of Rome, as a society,
was eminently orthodox and respectable.  But, as important
ecclesiastical centres, Antioch and Alexandria were far ahead of Rome,
and the pope of Alexandria occupied a greater place than the pope of
Rome.  What Basil was eager to follow was not any local church, but the
Faith which he understood to be the true and Catholic Faith, *i.e*., the
Faith of Nicæa.  There was no church of Rome in the sense of one
organized œcumenical society governed by a central Italian authority. 
Basil has no idea of any such thing as a Roman supremacy.  *cf. Letter*
ccxiv. and note.

<span id="fn_241"></span>[xxix:242](2080015.htm#fr_241) <span
id="vi.i.ix-p20.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i.ix-p21"></span> *Ep*. cxxxii.

<span id="fn_242"></span>[xxix:243](2080015.htm#fr_242) <span
id="vi.i.ix-p21.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i.ix-p22"></span> *Epp*. lxi., lxvi., lxvii., lxix., lxxx.,
lxxxii.

<span id="fn_243"></span>[xxix:244](2080015.htm#fr_243) <span
id="vi.i.ix-p22.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i.ix-p23"></span> *Ep*. cxcvii.

<span id="fn_244"></span>[xxix:245](2080015.htm#fr_244) <span
id="vi.i.ix-p23.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i.ix-p24"></span> *Ep*. xxiv.

<span id="fn_245"></span>[xxix:246](2080015.htm#fr_245) <span
id="vi.i.ix-p24.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i.ix-p25"></span> *Epp*. cclxiv., cclxvii.

<span id="fn_246"></span>[xxix:247](2080015.htm#fr_246) <span
id="vi.i.ix-p25.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i.ix-p26"></span> *Epp*. ccli., ccv., ccvi.

<span id="fn_247"></span>[xxix:248](2080015.htm#fr_247) <span
id="vi.i.ix-p26.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i.ix-p27"></span> *Ep*. cclviii.

<span id="fn_248"></span>[xxix:249](2080015.htm#fr_248) <span
id="vi.i.ix-p27.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i.ix-p28"></span> *Epp*. lvii., lxviii., lxxxix., cxx.,
cxxix., ccxvi.

<span id="fn_249"></span>[xxix:250](2080015.htm#fr_249) <span
id="vi.i.ix-p28.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i.ix-p29"></span> *Epp*. ccxliv., ccl.

<span id="fn_250"></span>[xxix:251](2080015.htm#fr_250) <span
id="vi.i.ix-p29.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i.ix-p30"></span> *Epp*. cxxxiii., cclxvi.

<span id="fn_251"></span>[xxix:252](2080015.htm#fr_251) <span
id="vi.i.ix-p30.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i.ix-p31"></span> *Epp*. cxxi., cxxx.

<span id="fn_252"></span>[xxix:253](2080015.htm#fr_252) <span
id="vi.i.ix-p31.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i.ix-p32"></span> *Epp*. cliv., clxiv., clxv.

<span id="fn_253"></span>[xxix:254](2080015.htm#fr_253) <span
id="vi.i.ix-p34.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i.ix-p35"></span> *cf. Epp*. lxxxii. and note.

<span id="fn_254"></span>[xxix:255](2080015.htm#fr_254) <span
id="vi.i.ix-p35.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i.ix-p36"></span> The proverbial expression is conjectured
by Dean Stanley to be derived from the Latin version of the famous
passage concerning Athanasius in Hooker, *Ecc. Pol*. v. 42.  *Vide*
Stanley, *Grk. Church*, lect. vii.

<span id="fn_255"></span>[xxx:256](2080015.htm#fr_255) <span
id="vi.i.ix-p37.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i.ix-p38"></span> The date of the Council is, however,
disputed.  Pagi is for 373, Cave for 367.  Hefele and Ceillier are
satisfied of the correctness of 375.  *cf. D.C.A*. i. 813.

<span id="fn_256"></span>[xxx:257](2080015.htm#fr_256) <span
id="vi.i.ix-p38.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i.ix-p39"></span> Theod., *Ecc. Hist*. iv. 8.

<span id="fn_257"></span>[xxx:258](2080015.htm#fr_257) <span
id="vi.i.ix-p39.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i.ix-p40"></span> Mansi, iii. 386.  Hefele, § 90.

<span id="fn_258"></span>[xxx:259](2080015.htm#fr_258) <span
id="vi.i.ix-p40.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i.ix-p41"></span> Theod., *H.E*. iv. 7.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Troubles of the Closing Years.](2080016)
