[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2080308)  [Next](2080310) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ix.ccxxxvii"></span>

<span id="ix.ccxxxvii-p1"></span> <span class="c18"><span
id="ix.ccxxxvii-p1.1"></span>Letter CCXXXVI. <span
id="fr_2974"></span>[2975](#fn_2974) </span>

<span id="ix.ccxxxvii-p3"></span>To the same Amphilochius.

<span id="ix.ccxxxvii-p4"></span>1.  <span class="c14"><span
id="ix.ccxxxvii-p4.1"></span>Enquiry</span> has already frequently been
made concerning the saying of the gospels as to our Lord Jesus Christ’s
ignorance of the day and of the hour of the end; <span
id="fr_2975"></span>[2976](#fn_2975) an objection constantly put forward
by the Anomœans to the destruction of the glory of the Only-Begotten, in
order to show Him to be unlike in essence and subordinate in dignity;
inasmuch as, if He know not all things, He cannot possess the same
nature nor be regarded as of one likeness with Him, who by His own
prescience and faculty of forecasting the future has knowledge
coextensive with the universe.  This question has now been proposed to
me by your intelligence as a new one.  I can give in reply the answer
which I heard from our fathers when I was a boy, and which on account of
my love for what is good, I have received without question.  I do not
expect that it can undo the shamelessness of them that fight against
Christ, for where is the reasoning strong enough to stand their attack? 
It may, however, suffice to convince all that love the Lord, and in whom
the previous assurance supplied them by faith is stronger than any
demonstration of reason.

<span id="ix.ccxxxvii-p6"></span>Now “no man” seems to be a general
expression, so that not even one person is excepted by it, but this is
not its use in Scripture, as I have observed in the passage “there is
none good but one, that is, God.” <span
id="fr_2976"></span>[2977](#fn_2976)   For even in this passage the Son
does not so speak to the exclusion of Himself from the good nature. 
But, since the Father is the first good, we believe the words “no man”
to have been uttered with the understood addition of “first.” <span
id="fr_2977"></span>[2978](#fn_2977)   So with the passage “No man
knoweth the Son but the Father;” <span
id="fr_2978"></span>[2979](#fn_2978) even here there is no charge of
ignorance against the Spirit, but only a testimony that knowledge of His
own nature naturally belongs to the Father first.  Thus also we
understand “No man knoweth,” <span id="fr_2979"></span>[2980](#fn_2979)
to refer to the Father the first knowledge of things, both present and
to be, and generally to exhibit to men the first cause.  Otherwise how
can this passage fall in with the rest of the evidence of Scripture, or
agree with the common notions of us who believe that the Only-Begotten
is the image of the invisible God, and image not of the bodily figure,
but of the very Godhead and of the mighty qualities attributed to the
essence of God, image of power, image of wisdom, as Christ is called
“the power of God and the wisdom of God”? <span
id="fr_2980"></span>[2981](#fn_2980)   Now of wisdom knowledge is
plainly a part; and if in any part He falls short, He is not an image of
the whole; and how can we understand the Father not to have shewn that
day and that hour—the smallest portion of the ages—to Him through Whom
He made the ages?  How can the Creator of the universe fall short of the
knowledge of the smallest portion of the things created by Him?  How can
He who says, when the end is near, that such and such signs shall appear
in heaven and in earth, be ignorant of the end itself?  When He says,
“The end is not yet.” <span id="fr_2981"></span>[2982](#fn_2981)   He
makes a definite statement, as though with knowledge and not in doubt. 
Then further, it is plain to the fair enquirer that our Lord says many
things to men, in the character of man; as for instance, “give me to
drink” <span id="fr_2982"></span>[2983](#fn_2982) is a saying of our
Lord, expressive of His bodily necessity; and yet the asker was not
soulless flesh, but Godhead using flesh endued with soul. <span
id="fr_2983"></span>[2984](#fn_2983)   So in the present instance no one
will be carried beyond the bounds of the interpretation of true
religion, who understands the ignorance of him who had received all
things according to the œconomy, <span
id="fr_2984"></span>[2985](#fn_2984) and was advancing with God and man
in favour and wisdom. <span id="fr_2985"></span>[2986](#fn_2985)

<span id="ix.ccxxxvii-p17"></span>2.  It would be worthy of your
diligence to set the phrases of the Gospel side by side, and compare
together those of Matthew and those of Mark, for these two alone are
found in concurrence in this passage.  The wording of Matthew is “of
that day and hour knoweth no man, no, not the angels of heaven, but my
Father only.” <span id="fr_2986"></span>[2987](#fn_2986)   That of Mark
runs, “But of that day and that hour knoweth no man, no, not the angels
which are in heaven, neither the Son, but the <span id="page_277">p.
277</span> <span id="ix.ccxxxvii-Page_277"></span>Father.” <span
id="fr_2987"></span>[2988](#fn_2987)   What is noticeable in these
passages is this; that Matthew says nothing about the ignorance of the
Son, and seems to agree with Mark as to sense in saying “but my Father
only.”  Now I understand the word “only” to have been used in
contradistinction to the angels, but that the Son is not included with
His own servants in ignorance.

<span id="ix.ccxxxvii-p20"></span>He could not say what is false Who
said “All things that the Father hath are Mine,” <span
id="fr_2988"></span>[2989](#fn_2988) but one of the things which the
Father hath is knowledge of that day and of that hour.  In the passage
in Matthew, then, the Lord made no mention of His own Person, as a
matter beyond controversy, and said that the angels knew not and that
His Father alone knew, tacitly asserting the knowledge of His Father to
be His own knowledge too, because of what He had said elsewhere, “as the
Father knoweth me even so know I the Father,” <span
id="fr_2989"></span>[2990](#fn_2989) and if the Father has complete
knowledge of the Son, nothing excepted, so that He knows all knowledge
to dwell in Him, He will clearly be known as fully by the Son with all
His inherent wisdom and all His knowledge of things to come.  This
modification, I think, may be given to the words of Matthew, “but my
Father only.”  Now as to the words of Mark, who appears distinctly to
exclude the Son from the knowledge, my opinion is this.  No man knoweth,
neither the angels of God; nor yet the Son would have known unless the
Father had known:  that is, the cause of the Son’s knowing comes from
the Father.  To a fair hearer there is no violence in this
interpretation, because the word “only” is not added as it is in
Matthew.  Mark’s sense, then, is as follows:  of that day and of that
hour knoweth no man, nor the angels of God; but even the Son would not
have known if the Father had not known, for the knowledge naturally His
was given by the Father.  This is very decorous and becoming the divine
nature to say of the Son, because He has, His knowledge and His being,
beheld in all the wisdom and glory which become His Godhead, from Him
with Whom He is consubstantial.

<span id="ix.ccxxxvii-p23"></span>3.  As to Jeconias, whom the prophet
Jeremiah declares in these words to have been rejected from the land of
Judah, “Jeconias was dishonoured like a vessel for which there is no
more use; and because he was cast out he and his seed; and none shall
rise from his seed sitting upon the throne of David and ruling in
Judah,” <span id="fr_2990"></span>[2991](#fn_2990) the matter is plain
and clear.  On the destruction of Jerusalem by Nebuchadnezzar, the
kingdom had been destroyed, and there was no longer an hereditary
succession of reigns as before.  Nevertheless, at that time, the deposed
descendants of David were living in captivity.  On the return of
Salathiel and Zerubbabel the supreme government rested to a greater
degree with the people, and the sovereignty was afterwards transferred
to the priesthood, on account of the intermingling of the priestly and
royal tribes; whence the Lord, in things pertaining to God, is both King
and High Priest.  Moreover, the royal tribe did not fail until the
coming of the Christ; nevertheless, the seed of Jeconias sat no longer
upon the throne of David.  Plainly it is the royal dignity which is
described by the term “throne.”  You remember the history, how all
Judæa, Idumæa, Moab, both the neighbouring regions of Syria and the
further countries up to Mesopotamia, and the country on the other side
as far as the river of Egypt, were all tributary to David.  If then none
of his descendants appeared with a sovereignty so wide, how is not the
word of the prophet true that no one of the seed of Jeconias should any
longer sit upon the throne of David, for none of his descendants appears
to have attained this dignity.  Nevertheless, the tribe of Judah did not
fail, until He for whom it was destined came.  But even He did not sit
upon the material throne.  The kingdom of Judæa was transferred to
Herod, the son of Antipater the Ascalonite, and his sons who divided
Judæa into four principalities, when Pilate was Procurator and Tiberius
was Master of the Roman Empire.  It is the indestructible kingdom which
he calls the throne of David on which the Lord sat.  He is the
expectation of the Gentiles <span id="fr_2991"></span>[2992](#fn_2991)
and not of the smallest division of the world, for it is written, “In
that day there shall be a root of Jesse which shall stand for an ensign
of the people; to it shall the Gentiles seek.” <span
id="fr_2992"></span>[2993](#fn_2992)   “I have called thee…for a
covenant of the people for a light of the Gentiles”; <span
id="fr_2993"></span>[2994](#fn_2993) and thus then God remained a priest
although He did not receive the sceptre of Judah, and King of all the
earth; so the blessing of Jacob was fulfilled, and in Him <span
id="fr_2994"></span>[2995](#fn_2994) “shall all the nations of the earth
be blessed,” and all the nations shall call the Christ blessed.

<span id="ix.ccxxxvii-p29"></span>4.  And as to the tremendous question
put by the facetious Encratites, why we do <span id="page_278">p.
278</span> <span id="ix.ccxxxvii-Page_278"></span>not eat everything? 
Let this answer be given, that we turn with disgust from our
excrements.  As far as dignity goes, to us flesh is grass; but as to
distinction between what is and what is not serviceable, just as in
vegetables, we separate the unwholesome from the wholesome, so in flesh
we distinguish between that which is good and that which is bad for
food.  Hemlock is a vegetable, just as vulture’s flesh is flesh; yet no
one in his senses would eat henbane nor dog’s flesh unless he were in
very great straits.  If he did, however, he would not sin.

<span id="ix.ccxxxvii-p30"></span>5.  Next as to those who maintain that
human affairs are governed by fate, do not ask information from me, but
stab them with their own shafts of rhetoric.  The question is too long
for my present infirmity.  With regard to emerging in baptism—I do not
know how it came into your mind to ask such a question, if indeed you
understood immersion to fulfil the figure of the three days.  It is
impossible for any one to be immersed three times, without emerging
three times.  We write the word <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.ccxxxvii-p30.1"></span>φάγος</span> paroxytone. <span
id="fr_2995"></span>[2996](#fn_2995)

<span id="ix.ccxxxvii-p32"></span>6.  The distinction between <span
class="Greek"><span id="ix.ccxxxvii-p32.1"></span>οὐσία</span> and <span
class="Greek"><span id="ix.ccxxxvii-p32.2"></span>ὑ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="ix.ccxxxvii-p32.3"></span>πόστασις</span> is the
same as that between the general and the particular; as, for instance,
between the animal and the particular man.  Wherefore, in the case of
the Godhead, we confess one essence or substance so as not to give a
variant definition of existence, but we confess a particular hypostasis,
in order that our conception of Father, Son and Holy Spirit may be
without confusion and clear. <span id="fr_2996"></span>[2997](#fn_2996)
  If we have no distinct perception of the separate characteristics,
namely, fatherhood, sonship, and sanctification, but form our conception
of God from the general idea of existence, we cannot possibly give a
sound account of our faith.  We must, therefore, confess the faith by
adding the particular to the common.  The Godhead is common; the
fatherhood particular.  We must therefore combine the two and say, “I
believe in God the Father.”  The like course must be pursued in the
confession of the Son; we must combine the particular with the common
and say “I believe in God the Son,” so in the case of the Holy Ghost we
must make our utterance conform to the appellation and say “in God <span
id="fr_2997"></span>[2998](#fn_2997) the Holy Ghost.”  Hence it results
that there is a satisfactory preservation of the unity by the confession
of the one Godhead, while in the distinction of the individual
properties regarded in each there is the confession of the peculiar
properties of the Persons.  On the other hand those who identify essence
or substance and hypostasis are compelled to confess only three
Persons, <span id="fr_2998"></span>[2999](#fn_2998) and, in their
hesitation to speak of three hypostases, are convicted of failure to
avoid the error of Sabellius, for even Sabellius himself, who in many
places confuses the conception, yet, by asserting that the same
hypostasis changed its form <span id="fr_2999"></span>[3000](#fn_2999)
to meet the needs of the moment, does endeavour to distinguish persons.

<span id="ix.ccxxxvii-p41"></span>7.  Lastly as to your enquiry in what
manner things neutral and indifferent are ordained for us, whether by
some chance working by its own accord, or by the righteous providence of
God, my answer is this:  Health and sickness, riches and poverty, credit
and discredit, inasmuch as they do not render their possessors good, are
not in the category of things naturally good, but, in so far as in any
way they make life’s current flow more easily, in each case the former
is to be preferred to its contrary, and has a certain kind of value.  To
some men these things are given by God for stewardship’s sake, <span
id="fr_3000"></span>[3001](#fn_3000) as for instance to Abraham, to Job
and such like.  To inferior characters they are a challenge to
improvement.  For the man who persists in unrighteousness, after so
goodly a token of love from God, subjects himself to condemnation
without defence.  The good man, however, <span id="page_279">p.
279</span> <span id="ix.ccxxxvii-Page_279"></span>neither turns his
heart to wealth when he has it, nor seeks after it if he has it not.  He
treats what is given him as given him not for his selfish enjoyment, but
for wise administration.  No one in his senses runs after the trouble of
distributing other people’s property, unless he is trying to get the
praise of the world, which admires and envies anybody in authority.

<span id="ix.ccxxxvii-p43"></span>Good men take sickness as athletes
take their contest, waiting for the crowns that are to reward their
endurance.  To ascribe the dispensation of these things to any one else
is as inconsistent with true religion as it is with common sense.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2974"></span>[276:2975](2080309.htm#fr_2974) <span
id="ix.ccxxxvii-p1.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ccxxxvii-p2"></span> This letter is also dated in 376, and
treats of further subjects not immediately raised by the *De Spiritu
Sancto*:  How Christ can be said to be ignorant of the day and the hour;
Of the prediction of Jeremiah concerning Jeconiah; Of an objection of
the Encratites; Of fate; Of emerging in baptism; Of the accentuation of
the word <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.ccxxxvii-p2.1"></span>φάγος</span>; Of essence and hypostasis; Of
the ordaining of things neutral and indifferent.

<span id="fn_2975"></span>[276:2976](2080309.htm#fr_2975) <span
id="ix.ccxxxvii-p4.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ccxxxvii-p5"></span> [Mark xiii.
32](../../../bib/kjv/mar013.htm#032)<span id="ix.ccxxxvii-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2976"></span>[276:2977](2080309.htm#fr_2976) <span
id="ix.ccxxxvii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ccxxxvii-p7"></span> [Mark x.
18](../../../bib/kjv/mar010.htm#018)<span
id="ix.ccxxxvii-p7.1"></span>.  *i.e.* in *Adv. Eumon*. iv. *vide*
Proleg.

<span id="fn_2977"></span>[276:2978](2080309.htm#fr_2977) <span
id="ix.ccxxxvii-p7.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ccxxxvii-p8"></span> The manuscripts at this point are
corrupt and divergent.

<span id="fn_2978"></span>[276:2979](2080309.htm#fr_2978) <span
id="ix.ccxxxvii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ccxxxvii-p9"></span> [Matt. xi.
27](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#027)<span id="ix.ccxxxvii-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2979"></span>[276:2980](2080309.htm#fr_2979) <span
id="ix.ccxxxvii-p9.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ccxxxvii-p10"></span> [Matt. xxiv.
36](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#036)<span
id="ix.ccxxxvii-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2980"></span>[276:2981](2080309.htm#fr_2980) <span
id="ix.ccxxxvii-p10.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ccxxxvii-p11"></span> [1 Cor. i.
24](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#024)<span
id="ix.ccxxxvii-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2981"></span>[276:2982](2080309.htm#fr_2981) <span
id="ix.ccxxxvii-p11.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ccxxxvii-p12"></span> [Matt. xxiv.
6](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#006)<span id="ix.ccxxxvii-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2982"></span>[276:2983](2080309.htm#fr_2982) <span
id="ix.ccxxxvii-p12.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ccxxxvii-p13"></span> [John iv.
7](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#007)<span id="ix.ccxxxvii-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2983"></span>[276:2984](2080309.htm#fr_2983) <span
id="ix.ccxxxvii-p13.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ccxxxvii-p14"></span> *cf*. *Ep*. cclxi. 2.  The reference
is to the system of Apollinarius, which denied to the Son a <span
class="Greek"><span id="ix.ccxxxvii-p14.1"></span>ψυχὴ λογική</span> or
reasonable soul.

<span id="fn_2984"></span>[276:2985](2080309.htm#fr_2984) <span
id="ix.ccxxxvii-p14.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ccxxxvii-p15"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.ccxxxvii-p15.1"></span>οἰκονομικῶς</span>, *i.e.* according to
the œconomy of the incarnation.  *cf*. note on p. 7.

<span id="fn_2985"></span>[276:2986](2080309.htm#fr_2985) <span
id="ix.ccxxxvii-p15.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ccxxxvii-p16"></span> *cf*. [Luke ii.
52](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#052)<span
id="ix.ccxxxvii-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2986"></span>[276:2987](2080309.htm#fr_2986) <span
id="ix.ccxxxvii-p17.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ccxxxvii-p18"></span> [Matt. xxiv.
36](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#036)<span
id="ix.ccxxxvii-p18.1"></span>.  R.V. in this passage inserts “Neither
the Son,” on the authority of <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.ccxxxvii-p18.2"></span>א</span>, *B. D*.  Plainly St. Basil knew
no such difference of reading.  On the general view taken by the Fathers
on the self-limitation of the Saviour, *cf*. C. Gore’s *Bampton
Lectures* (vi. p. 163, and notes 48 and 49, p. 267).

<span id="fn_2987"></span>[277:2988](2080309.htm#fr_2987) <span
id="ix.ccxxxvii-p18.3"></span>

<span id="ix.ccxxxvii-p19"></span> [Mark xiii.
32](../../../bib/kjv/mar013.htm#032)<span
id="ix.ccxxxvii-p19.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2988"></span>[277:2989](2080309.htm#fr_2988) <span
id="ix.ccxxxvii-p20.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ccxxxvii-p21"></span> [John xvi.
15](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#015)<span
id="ix.ccxxxvii-p21.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2989"></span>[277:2990](2080309.htm#fr_2989) <span
id="ix.ccxxxvii-p21.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ccxxxvii-p22"></span> [John x.
15](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#015)<span
id="ix.ccxxxvii-p22.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2990"></span>[277:2991](2080309.htm#fr_2990) <span
id="ix.ccxxxvii-p23.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ccxxxvii-p24"></span> [Jer. xxii.
28-30](../../../bib/kjv/jer022.htm#028)<span
id="ix.ccxxxvii-p24.1"></span>, LXX.

<span id="fn_2991"></span>[277:2992](2080309.htm#fr_2991) <span
id="ix.ccxxxvii-p24.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ccxxxvii-p25"></span> [Gen. xlix.
10](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#010)<span
id="ix.ccxxxvii-p25.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2992"></span>[277:2993](2080309.htm#fr_2992) <span
id="ix.ccxxxvii-p25.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ccxxxvii-p26"></span> [Is. xi.
10](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#010)<span
id="ix.ccxxxvii-p26.1"></span>.  The LXX. is <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.ccxxxvii-p26.2"></span>καὶ ὁ ἀνιστάμενος ἄρχειν ἐθνῶν</span>.

<span id="fn_2993"></span>[277:2994](2080309.htm#fr_2993) <span
id="ix.ccxxxvii-p26.3"></span>

<span id="ix.ccxxxvii-p27"></span> [Isa.
42:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa042.htm#006), [2 Kings
7:13](../../../bib/kjv/kg2007.htm#013)<span
id="ix.ccxxxvii-p27.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2994"></span>[277:2995](2080309.htm#fr_2994) <span
id="ix.ccxxxvii-p27.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ccxxxvii-p28"></span> [Gen. xxii.
18](../../../bib/kjv/gen022.htm#018)<span
id="ix.ccxxxvii-p28.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2995"></span>[278:2996](2080309.htm#fr_2995) <span
id="ix.ccxxxvii-p30.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ccxxxvii-p31"></span> Amphilochius’s doubt may have arisen
from the fact that <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.ccxxxvii-p31.1"></span>φαγός</span>, the Doric form of <span
class="Greek"><span id="ix.ccxxxvii-p31.2"></span>φηγός</span>, the
esculent oak of Homer, is oxytone.

<span id="fn_2996"></span>[278:2997](2080309.htm#fr_2996) <span
id="ix.ccxxxvii-p32.4"></span>

<span id="ix.ccxxxvii-p33"></span> “<span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.ccxxxvii-p33.1"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.ccxxxvii-p33.2"></span>σύγχυτος</span>,” *unconfounded, or
without confusion*, is the title of *Dialogue II*. of Theodoret.  *cf*.
p. 195. n.

<span id="fn_2997"></span>[278:2998](2080309.htm#fr_2997) <span
id="ix.ccxxxvii-p33.3"></span>

<span id="ix.ccxxxvii-p34"></span> The Benedictine note is *Videtur in
Harlæano codice scriptum prima manu* <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.ccxxxvii-p34.1"></span>εις τὸν θεόν</span>.  Their reading is
<span class="Greek"><span id="ix.ccxxxvii-p34.2"></span>εις το θεῖον
πνεῦμα τὸ ἅγιον</span>.  *cf*. *Ep*. viii., § 2, where no variation of
<span class="c14"><span id="ix.ccxxxvii-p34.3"></span>mss.</span> is
noted and *Ep*. cxli, both written before he was bishop.  *cf*. Proleg.
Gregory of Nazianzus, *Or*. xliii., explains the rationale of St.
Basil’s use of the word “God,” of the Holy Ghost; alike in his public
and private teaching he never shrank from using it, whenever he could
with impunity, and his opinions were perfectly well known, but he sought
to avoid the sentence of exile at the hands of the Arians by its
unnecessary obtrusion.  He never uses it in his homily *De Fide*, and
the whole treatise *De Spiritu Sancto*, while it exhaustively vindicates
the doctrine, ingeniously steers clear of the phrase.

<span id="fn_2998"></span>[278:2999](2080309.htm#fr_2998) <span
id="ix.ccxxxvii-p34.4"></span>

<span id="ix.ccxxxvii-p35"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.ccxxxvii-p35.1"></span>πρόσωπα</span>.

<span id="fn_2999"></span>[278:3000](2080309.htm#fr_2999) <span
id="ix.ccxxxvii-p35.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ccxxxvii-p36"></span> The Ben. Edd. note “*Existimat
Combefisius verbum*  <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.ccxxxvii-p36.1"></span>μετασχηματίζεσθαι</span> *sic reddendum
esse,* in various formas mutari.*  Sed id non dicebat Sabellius.  Hoc
tantum dicebat, ut legimus in Epist*. ccxiv.  Unum quidem hypostasi Deum
esse, sed sub diversis personis a Scripturare præsentari.  According to
Dante the minds of the heresiarchs were to Scripture as bad mirrors,
reflecting distorted images; and, in this sense, <span
class="Greek"><span id="ix.ccxxxvii-p36.2"></span>μετασχηματιζειν</span>
might be applied rather to them.

<span id="ix.ccxxxvii-p37"></span>“*Si fe Sabellio ed Arrio e quegli
stolti*,

<span id="ix.ccxxxvii-p38"></span>Che furon come spade alle scritture

<span id="ix.ccxxxvii-p39"></span>*In render torti li diritti volti*.”

<span id="ix.ccxxxvii-p40"></span>*Par*. xiii. 123 (see Cary’s note).

<span id="fn_3000"></span>[278:3001](2080309.htm#fr_3000) <span
id="ix.ccxxxvii-p41.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ccxxxvii-p42"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.ccxxxvii-p42.1"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.ccxxxvii-p42.2"></span>ξ οἰκονομίας</span>.  In *Ep*. xxxi. Basil
begins a letter to Eusebius of Samosata:  “The dearth has not yet left
us, we are therefore compelled still to remain in the town, either for
stewardship’s sake or for sympathy with the afflicted.”  Here the
Benedictines’ note is *Sæpe apud Basilium* <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.ccxxxvii-p42.3"></span>οικονομία</span> *dicitur id quod
pauperibus distribuitur.  Vituperat in Comment. in Isa. præsules qui
male partam pecuniam accipiunt vel ad suos usus,* <span
class="Greek"><span id="ix.ccxxxvii-p42.4"></span>ἢ</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="ix.ccxxxvii-p42.5"></span>ἐπὶ λόγῳ τῆς τῶν
πτωχευόντων ἐν τῇ ᾽Εκκλησί& 139· οἰκονομίας</span>, *vel per causam
distribuendi pauperibus Ecclesiæ.  In Epistola 92 Orientales inter mala
Ecclesiæ illud etiam deplorant quod ambitiosi præsules* <span
class="Greek"><span id="ix.ccxxxvii-p42.6"></span>οἰκονομ</span> as
<span class="Greek"><span id="ix.ccxxxvii-p42.7"></span>πτωχῶν</span>,
*pecunias pauperibus destinatas in suos usus convertant*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: To Eusebius, bishop of Samosata.](2080310)
