[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2080316)  [Next](2080318) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ix.ccxlv"></span>

<span id="ix.ccxlv-p1"></span> <span class="c18"><span
id="ix.ccxlv-p1.1"></span>Letter CCXLIV. <span
id="fr_3050"></span>[3051](#fn_3050) </span>

<span id="ix.ccxlv-p3"></span>*To Patrophilus, bishop of Ægæ*. <span
id="fr_3051"></span>[3052](#fn_3051)

<span id="ix.ccxlv-p5"></span>1.  <span class="c14"><span
id="ix.ccxlv-p5.1"></span>I have</span> read, and read with pleasure,
the letter which you have sent by Strategius the presbyter.  How should
I not so read it, written as it is by a wise man, and dictated by a
heart which has learned to observe the universal love taught by the
commandment of the Lord?  Possibly I am not unaware of the reasons which
have hitherto kept you silent.  You have been, as it were, amazed and
astounded, at the idea of the change in the notorious Basil.  Why, ever
since he was a boy he did such and such service to such an one; at such
and such times he did such and such things; he waged war against foes
innumerable for the sake of his allegiance to one man; now he has become
a totally different character; he has exchanged love for war; he is all
that you have written; so you naturally shew considerable astonishment
at the very unexpected turn of affairs.  And if you have found some
fault, I do not take it ill.  I am not so beyond correction as to be
amazed at the affectionate rebukes of my brothers.  Indeed so far was I
from being vexed at your letter that it really almost made me laugh to
think that when there were, as I thought, so many strong causes already
existing to cement our friendship, you should have expressed such very
great astonishment at the trifles which have been reported to you.  So
truly have you suffered the fate of all those who omit to enquire into
the nature of circumstances, and give heed to the men who are being
discussed; of all who do not examine into the truth, but judge by the
distinction of persons, in forgetfulness of the exhortion “Ye shall not
respect persons in judgment.” <span id="fr_3052"></span>[3053](#fn_3052)

<span id="ix.ccxlv-p7"></span>2.  Nevertheless, since God in judgment of
man does not accept persons, I will not refuse to make known to you the
defence which I have prepared for the great tribunal.  On my side, from
the beginning, there has been no cause of quarrel, either small or
great; but men who hate me, for what reason is best known to themselves
(I must not say a word about them), incessantly ca<span id="page_286">p.
286</span> <span id="ix.ccxlv-Page_286"></span>lumniated me.  I cleared
myself again and again of slanders.  There seemed no end to the matter,
and no good came of my continual defence, because I was far away, and
the authors of the false statements, being on the spot, were able by
their calumnies against me to wound a susceptible heart, and one which
has never learnt to keep one ear open for the absent.  When the
Nicopolitans, as you yourself are partly aware, were asking for some
proof of faith, I determined to have recourse to the written
document. <span id="fr_3053"></span>[3054](#fn_3053)   I thought that I
should fulfil two objects at once; I expected both to persuade the
Nicopolitans not to think ill of the man, <span
id="fr_3054"></span>[3055](#fn_3054) and to shut the mouths of my
calumniators, because agreement in faith would exclude slander on both
sides.  Indeed the creed had been drawn up, and it was brought from me,
and signed.  After it had been signed, a place was appointed for a
second meeting, and another date fixed, so that my brethren in the
diocese might come together and be united with one another, and our
communion for the future be genuine and sincere.  I, for my part,
arrived at the appointed time, and, of the brethren who act with me,
some were on the spot, and others were hurrying thither, all joyous and
eager as though on the high road to peace. <span
id="fr_3055"></span>[3056](#fn_3055)   Couriers and a letter from myself
announced my arrival; for the spot appointed for the reception of those
who were assembling was mine.  But nobody appeared on the other side; no
one came in advance; no one to announce the approach of the expected
bishops.  So those who had been sent by me returned with the report of
the deep dejection and the complaints of those who were assembled, as
though a new creed had been promulgated by me.  They were moreover said
to be for deciding, that they certainly would not suffer their bishop to
go over to me.  Then came a messenger bringing me a letter hastily drawn
up, and containing no mention of the points originally agreed on.  My
brother Theophilus, <span id="fr_3056"></span>[3057](#fn_3056) a man
worthy of all respect and honour at my hands, sent one of his adherents,
and made certain announcements, which he thought it not improper for him
to utter, nor unbecoming in me to hear.  He did not condescend to write,
not so much because he was afraid of being convicted on written
evidence, as because he was anxious not to be compelled to address me as
bishop.  Assuredly his language was violent, and came from a heart a
vehemently agitated.  Under these circumstances I departed abashed and
depressed, not knowing what to answer to my questioners.  Then, without
any long interval of time, there was the journey into Cilicia, <span
id="fr_3057"></span>[3058](#fn_3057) the return thence, and forthwith a
letter repudiating communion with me. <span
id="fr_3058"></span>[3059](#fn_3058)

<span id="ix.ccxlv-p14"></span>3.  The cause of the rupture was the
allegation that I wrote to Apollinarius and was in communion with the
presbyter Diodorus.  I never regarded Apollinarius as an enemy, and for
some reasons I even respect him.  But I never so far united myself to
him as to take upon me the charges against him; indeed I have myself
some accusations to bring against him after reading some of his books. 
I do not know that I ever asked him for a book on the Holy Spirit, or
received it on his sending:  I am told that he has become a most copious
writer, but I have read very few of his works. <span
id="fr_3059"></span>[3060](#fn_3059)   I have not even time to
investigate such matters.  Indeed I shrink from admitting any of the
more recent works, for my health does not even allow of my reading the
inspired Scriptures with diligence and as I ought.  What, then, is it to
me, if some one has written something displeasing to somebody else?  Yet
if one man is to render an account on behalf of another, let him who
accuses me for Apollinarius’ sake defend himself to me for the sake of
Arius his own master and of Aetius his own disciple.  I never learnt
anything from, nor taught anything to this man whose guilt is laid at my
door.  Diodorus, as a nursling of the blessed Silvanus, I did receive
from the beginning:  I love him now and respect him on account of his
grace of speech, whereby many who meet him are made the better
men. <span id="fr_3060"></span>[3061](#fn_3060)

<span id="ix.ccxlv-p17"></span>4.  At this letter I was affected in such
a manner as might be expected, and astounded at so sudden and pleasant a
change.  I felt quite unable to reply.  My heart could hardly beat; my
tongue failed me, and my hand grew numb.  I felt like a poor creature
(for the truth shall be told; yet it is pardonable); I all but fell into
a state of misanthropy; I looked on every one with suspicion and thought
that there was no charity to be found <span id="page_287">p. 287</span>
<span id="ix.ccxlv-Page_287"></span>in mankind.  Charity seemed a mere
specious word, serving as a kind of decoration to those who use it,
while no such sentiment was really to be found in the heart of man. 
Could it really be that one who seemed to have disciplined himself from
boyhood to old age, could be so easily brutalized on such grounds,
without a thought for me, without any idea that his experience of bygone
years ought to have more weight than this wretched slander?  Could he
really, like an unbroken colt as yet untaught to carry his rider
properly, on some petty suspicion rear and unseat his rider and fling to
the ground what was once his pride?  If so, what must be thought of the
rest with whom I had no such strong ties of friendship, and who had
given no such proofs of a well trained life?  All this I turned over in
my soul and continually revolved in my heart, or, shall I rather say my
heart was turned over by these things fighting and pricking me at the
recollection of them?  I wrote no answer; not that I kept silence from
contempt; do not think it of me my brother, for I am not defending
myself to men but I speak before God in Christ.  I kept silence from
utter inability to say a word commensurate with my grief.

<span id="ix.ccxlv-p18"></span>5.  While I was in this position another
letter came to me, addressed to a certain Dazizas, but in reality
written to all the world.  This is obvious from its very rapid
distribution, for in a few days it was delivered all over Pontus, and
was travelling about Galatia; indeed it is said that the carriers of
this good news traversed Bithynia, and reached the Hellespont itself. 
What was written against me to Dazizas <span
id="fr_3061"></span>[3062](#fn_3061) you are very well aware, for they
do not reckon you as so far beyond the bounds of their friendship as to
have left you alone undistinguished by this honour.  However, if the
letter has not reached you, I will send it to you.  In it you will find
me charged with craft and treachery, with corruption of Churches and
with ruin of souls.  The charge which they think the truest of all is,
that I made that exposition of the faith for secret and dishonest
reasons, not to do service to the Nicopolitans, but with the design of
disingenously extracting a confession from them.  Of all this the Lord
is Judge.  What clear evidence can there be of the thoughts of the
heart?  One thing I do wonder at in them, that after signing the
document presented by me, they show so much disagreement, that they
confuse truth and falsehood to satisfy those who are accusing them,
quite forgetful that their written confession of the Nicene Creed is
preserved at Rome, and that they with their own hand delivered to the
council at Tyana the document brought from Rome which is in my hands,
and contains the same creed.  They forgot their own address, when they
came forward and bewailed the deceit by which they had been tricked into
giving their adhesion to the document drawn up by the faction of
Eudoxius, <span id="fr_3062"></span>[3063](#fn_3062) and so bethought
them of the defence for that error, that they should go to Rome <span
id="fr_3063"></span>[3064](#fn_3063) and there accept the creed of the
Fathers, that so they might make amends, for the mischief they had done
the Church by their agreement in evil, by their introduction of
something better.  Now the very men who undertook long journeys for the
faith’s sake, and made all these fine speeches, are reviling me for
walking craftily, and for playing the plotter under the cloke of love. 
It is plain from the Letter, now being carried about, that they have
condemned the faith of Nicæa.  They saw Cyzicus, and came home with
another creed. <span id="fr_3064"></span>[3065](#fn_3064)

<span id="ix.ccxlv-p23"></span>6.  But why say anything of mere verbal
inconsistency?  The practical proofs of their change of position
afforded by their conduct are far stronger.  They refused to yield to
the sentence of fifty bishops passed against them. <span
id="fr_3065"></span>[3066](#fn_3065)   They declined to resign the
government of their Churches although the number of bishops assenting to
the decree for their deposition was so many, on the alleged ground that
they were not partakers of the Holy Ghost, and were not governing their
Churches by the grace of God, but had clutched their dignity by the aid
of human power, and through lust of vain glory.  Now they are for
receiving the men consecrated by these same persons as bishops.  I
should like you to ask them in my stead, (although they despise all
mankind, as bereft of eyes, ears, and common sense), to perceive the
inconsistency of their conduct, what sentiments they do really entertain
in their own hearts.  How can there be two bishops, one deposed by
Euippius, <span id="fr_3066"></span>[3067](#fn_3066) and the other
consecrated by him?  Both are the actions of the same man.  Had he not
been endowed with the grace bestowed upon Jeremiah to pull down and
build again, to root out and to plant, <span
id="fr_3067"></span>[3068](#fn_3067) he certainly would not have rooted
the one out and planted the other.  Grant him the one and you must grant
him the other.  Their <span id="page_288">p. 288</span> <span
id="ix.ccxlv-Page_288"></span>one object, as it seems, is everywhere to
look to their own advantage, and to regard every one who acts in
accordance with their own wishes as a friend, while they treat any one
who opposes them as an enemy, and spare no calumny to run him
down. <span id="fr_3068"></span>[3069](#fn_3068)

<span id="ix.ccxlv-p28"></span>7.  What measures are they now taking
against the Church?  For the shiftiness of their originators, shocking;
for the apathy of all who are affected by them, pitiable.  By a
respectable commission the children and grandchildren of Euippius have
been summoned from distant regions to Sebasteia, and to them the people
have been entrusted. <span id="fr_3069"></span>[3070](#fn_3069)   They
have taken possession of the altar.  They have been made the leaven of
that Church.  I am persecuted by them as a Homoousiast.  Eustathius, who
brought the Homoousion in the script from Rome to Tyana, although he was
not able to get admitted into their much to be coveted communion, either
because they feared, or respected the authority of, the large number of
persons who had agreed in condemning him, is now in intimate alliance
with them.  I only hope that I may never have time enough on my hands to
tell of all their doings—who were gathered together, how each one had
been ordained, and from what kind of earlier life each arrived at his
present dignity.  I have been taught to pray “that my mouth may not
utter the works of the men.” <span id="fr_3070"></span>[3071](#fn_3070)
  If you enquire you will learn these things for yourself, and, if they
are hidden from you, they will not assuredly continue hidden from the
judges.

<span id="ix.ccxlv-p31"></span>8.  I will not, however, omit to tell
you, my dear friend, in what a state I have been.  Last year I suffered
from a very violent fever, and came near to the gates of death.  When,
by God’s mercy, I was restored, I was distressed at coming back to life,
as I bethought me of all the troubles before me.  I considered with
myself for what reason, hidden in the depths of the wisdom of God, yet
further days of life in the flesh had been allowed me.  But when I heard
of these matters I concluded that the Lord wished me to see the Churches
at rest after the storm which they had previously suffered from the
alienation of the men in whom, on account of their fictitious gravity of
character, every confidence had been placed.  Or peradventure the Lord
designed to invigorate my soul, and to render it more vigilant for the
future, to the end that, instead of giving heed to men, it might be made
perfect through those precepts of the Gospel which do not share in the
changes and chances of human seasons and circumstances, but abide for
ever the same, as they were uttered by the blessed lips that cannot
lie. <span id="fr_3071"></span>[3072](#fn_3071)

<span id="ix.ccxlv-p33"></span>9.  Men are like clouds, shifting hither
and thither in the sky with the change of the winds. <span
id="fr_3072"></span>[3073](#fn_3072)   And of all men who have ever come
within my experience these of whom I am speaking are the most unstable. 
As to the other business of life, those who have lived with them may
give evidence; but as to what is within my own knowledge, their
inconsistency as regards the faith, I do not know that I have ever
myself observed it or heard from any one else, of anything like it. 
Originally they were followers of Arius; then they went over to
Hermogenes, who was diametrically opposed to the errors of Arius, as is
evinced by the Creed originally recited by him at Nicæa. <span
id="fr_3073"></span>[3074](#fn_3073)   Hermogenes, fell asleep, and then
they went over to Eusebius, the Coryphæus, as we know on personal
evidence, of the Arian ring.  Leaving this, for whatever reasons, they
came home again, and once more concealed their Arian sentiments.  After
reaching the episcopate, to pass by what occurred in the interval, how
many creeds did they put forth?  One at Ancyra; <span
id="fr_3074"></span>[3075](#fn_3074) another at Seleucia; <span
id="fr_3075"></span>[3076](#fn_3075) another at Constantinople, <span
id="fr_3076"></span>[3077](#fn_3076) the famous one; another at
Lampsacus, <span id="fr_3077"></span>[3078](#fn_3077) then that of Nike
in Thrace; <span id="fr_3078"></span>[3079](#fn_3078) and now again the
creed of Cyzicus. <span id="fr_3079"></span>[3080](#fn_3079)   Of this
last I know nothing, except that I am told that they have suppressed the
homoousion, and are supporting the *like in essence*, while they
subscribe with Eunomius the blas<span id="page_289">p. 289</span> <span
id="ix.ccxlv-Page_289"></span>phemies against the Holy Spirit.  Although
all of the creeds which I have enumerated may not be opposed to one
another, yet they alike exhibit the inconsistency of the men’s minds,
from their never standing by the same words.  I have said nothing as to
countless other points, but this that I do say is true.  Now that they
have gone over to you, I beg you to write back by the same man, I mean
our fellow presbyter Strategius, whether you have remained in the same
mind towards me, or whether you have been alienated in consequence of
your meeting them.  For it was not likely that they would be silent, nor
that you yourself, after writing to me as you have, would not use free
speaking to them too.  If you remain in communion with me, it is well;
it is what I would most earnestly pray for.  If they have drawn you over
to them, it is sad.  How should separation from such a brother not be
sad?  If in nothing else, at least in bearing losses like this, we have
been considerably tried at their hands.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3050"></span>[285:3051](2080317.htm#fr_3050) <span
id="ix.ccxlv-p1.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ccxlv-p2"></span> Placed in 376.

<span id="fn_3051"></span>[285:3052](2080317.htm#fr_3051) <span
id="ix.ccxlv-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ccxlv-p4"></span> “Aigaiai is the more correct form.” 
Ramsay, *Hist. Geog. A.M.* 116.  In the gulf of Issus, now Ayas.  St.
Julianus, son of a senator of Anazarbus, is said to have suffered
there.  (Basil, *Menol*. and, possibly, Chrysost., *Hom. in Jul. Mart.*)

<span id="fn_3052"></span>[285:3053](2080317.htm#fr_3052) <span
id="ix.ccxlv-p5.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ccxlv-p6"></span> [Deut. i.
17](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#017)<span id="ix.ccxlv-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3053"></span>[286:3054](2080317.htm#fr_3053) <span
id="ix.ccxlv-p7.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ccxlv-p8"></span> *i.e.*the formula proposed to Eustathius
by Basil, and signed in 373 by him with Fronto, Severus, and others, and
appearing as *Letter* cxxv.

<span id="fn_3054"></span>[286:3055](2080317.htm#fr_3054) <span
id="ix.ccxlv-p8.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ccxlv-p9"></span> *i.e.* Eustathius.

<span id="fn_3055"></span>[286:3056](2080317.htm#fr_3055) <span
id="ix.ccxlv-p9.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ccxlv-p10"></span> *cf*. *Letter* cxxx.

<span id="fn_3056"></span>[286:3057](2080317.htm#fr_3056) <span
id="ix.ccxlv-p10.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ccxlv-p11"></span> Theophilus of Castabala.

<span id="fn_3057"></span>[286:3058](2080317.htm#fr_3057) <span
id="ix.ccxlv-p11.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ccxlv-p12"></span> *cf. Letter* cxxx.  The journey of
Eustathius to Cilicia was the occasion of his presenting an Arian creed
to a certain Gelasius.

<span id="fn_3058"></span>[286:3059](2080317.htm#fr_3058) <span
id="ix.ccxlv-p12.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ccxlv-p13"></span> *cf. Letter* ccxxvi.  The letter of
repudiation was conveyed by Eustathius the chorepiscopus.

<span id="fn_3059"></span>[286:3060](2080317.htm#fr_3059) <span
id="ix.ccxlv-p14.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ccxlv-p15"></span> Fragments of Apollinarius are extant in
the works of Theodoret and Gregory of Nyssa, and in Mai’s *Script. Vet.
Nov. col.* vii., and *Spicil. Rom.*x. 2.  *cf*. Thomasius, *Christ.
Dogm.* 451.  *cf*. *Ep*. cclxiii. p. 302.

<span id="fn_3060"></span>[286:3061](2080317.htm#fr_3060) <span
id="ix.ccxlv-p15.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ccxlv-p16"></span> Diodorus now presbyter of Antioch, did
not become bishop of Tarsus till about the time of Basil’s death.  On
his services to the Church at Antioch, *cf*. Theod., *H.E.* ii. 19. and
Soc., *H.E.*vi. 8.  The controversy as to his alleged Nestorianism
belongs to a later date.  On the relations between Diodorus and
Apollinarius, *cf*. Dorner, *Christ*. i. pp. 976 and 1022.

<span id="fn_3061"></span>[287:3062](2080317.htm#fr_3061) <span
id="ix.ccxlv-p18.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ccxlv-p19"></span> In *Letter* cxxxi. the name appears as
Dazinas, or Dexinas.  In this place the <span class="c14"><span
id="ix.ccxlv-p19.1"></span>mss.</span> agree in the form Dazizas.

<span id="fn_3062"></span>[287:3063](2080317.htm#fr_3062) <span
id="ix.ccxlv-p19.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ccxlv-p20"></span> ? The Creed of Arminum.

<span id="fn_3063"></span>[287:3064](2080317.htm#fr_3063) <span
id="ix.ccxlv-p20.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ccxlv-p21"></span> Eustathius, Silvanus, and Theophilus
went to Rome after the Lampsacene Council of 365.

<span id="fn_3064"></span>[287:3065](2080317.htm#fr_3064) <span
id="ix.ccxlv-p21.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ccxlv-p22"></span> The Synod of Tyana had been ready to
recognise the Eustathians as Catholics in 374.  The Semi-Arian Council
of Cyzicus was held in 375 or 376 (Mansi iii. 469).

<span id="fn_3065"></span>[287:3066](2080317.htm#fr_3065) <span
id="ix.ccxlv-p23.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ccxlv-p24"></span> *i.e.* at Constantinople in 360.

<span id="fn_3066"></span>[287:3067](2080317.htm#fr_3066) <span
id="ix.ccxlv-p24.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ccxlv-p25"></span> *cf. Letter* ccxxviii.

<span id="fn_3067"></span>[287:3068](2080317.htm#fr_3067) <span
id="ix.ccxlv-p25.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ccxlv-p26"></span> *cf*. [Jer. i.
10](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#010)<span id="ix.ccxlv-p26.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3068"></span>[288:3069](2080317.htm#fr_3068) <span
id="ix.ccxlv-p26.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ccxlv-p27"></span> The Ben. note on this passage suggests
that the reference to Jeremiah is an argument supposed to be put forward
by Eustathius, and immediately answered by Basil, but there seems no
necessity of this.  Basil says nothing for or against the powers of the
bishops who condemned Eustathius; he only points out the inconsistency
of Eustathius in accepting their powers to ordain when it suited his
purpose, while he refused to admit their authority to depose.  It is
enough for Basil’s argument that Eustathius treated him as having
authority.  On Basil’s own views as to the validity of heretical
ordination, *cf*. Canon i., *Letter* clxxxviii.

<span id="fn_3069"></span>[288:3070](2080317.htm#fr_3069) <span
id="ix.ccxlv-p28.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ccxlv-p29"></span> *i.e.* bishops and presbyters whose
spiritual descent is to be traced to Euippius, *viz*.:  Eustathius and
his clergy.  Over what see Euippius presided is unknown.

<span id="fn_3070"></span>[288:3071](2080317.htm#fr_3070) <span
id="ix.ccxlv-p29.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ccxlv-p30"></span> [Ps.
17:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa017.htm#003),
[4](../../../bib/kjv/psa017.htm#004)<span id="ix.ccxlv-p30.1"></span>,
LXX.

<span id="fn_3071"></span>[288:3072](2080317.htm#fr_3071) <span
id="ix.ccxlv-p31.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ccxlv-p32"></span> Contrast the famous appeal of Antigone
in Soph., *Ant*. 454 to the eternal principles of right and wrong; <span
class="Greek"><span id="ix.ccxlv-p32.1"></span>οὐ γάρ τι νῦν γε καχθὲς,
ἀλλ᾽ ἀεί ποτε ζῆ ταῦτα κοὐδεὶς οἶδεν ἐξ ὅτου ᾽φάνη</span>.  The
Christian saint can make the more personal reference to the <span
class="Greek"><span id="ix.ccxlv-p32.2"></span>ἀ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="ix.ccxlv-p32.3"></span>ψευδὲς στόμα</span>.

<span id="fn_3072"></span>[288:3073](2080317.htm#fr_3072) <span
id="ix.ccxlv-p33.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ccxlv-p34"></span> *cf*. [Jude
12](../../../bib/kjv/jde001.htm#012)<span id="ix.ccxlv-p34.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3073"></span>[288:3074](2080317.htm#fr_3073) <span
id="ix.ccxlv-p34.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ccxlv-p35"></span> *cf. Letter* lxxxi. p. 172.  Hermogenes
was bishop of Cæsarea, in which see he preceded Dianius.  He acted as
secretary at Nicæa, when yet a deacon.  “The actual creed was written
out and read, perhaps in consideration of Hosius’ ignorance of Greek, by
Hermogenes.”  (Stanley, *Eastern Church*, p. 140, ed. 1862.)

<span id="fn_3074"></span>[288:3075](2080317.htm#fr_3074) <span
id="ix.ccxlv-p35.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ccxlv-p36"></span> In 358, when the <span
class="Greek"><span id="ix.ccxlv-p36.1"></span>ὁ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="ix.ccxlv-p36.2"></span>μοιο</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="ix.ccxlv-p36.3"></span>ύ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="ix.ccxlv-p36.4"></span>σιον</span> was accepted.

<span id="fn_3075"></span>[288:3076](2080317.htm#fr_3075) <span
id="ix.ccxlv-p36.5"></span>

<span id="ix.ccxlv-p37"></span> In 359, when the Semiarians supported
the Antiochene Dedication Creed of 341.

<span id="fn_3076"></span>[288:3077](2080317.htm#fr_3076) <span
id="ix.ccxlv-p37.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ccxlv-p38"></span> In 360, when the Acacians triumphed, and
Eustathius with other Semiarians were deposed.  The Creed of Ariminum,
as revised at Nike, was accepted.

<span id="fn_3077"></span>[288:3078](2080317.htm#fr_3077) <span
id="ix.ccxlv-p38.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ccxlv-p39"></span> In 364, when the Creeds of Ariminum and
Constantinople were condemned by the Semiarians, and the Dedication
Creed was reaffirmed.

<span id="fn_3078"></span>[288:3079](2080317.htm#fr_3078) <span
id="ix.ccxlv-p39.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ccxlv-p40"></span> The Creed of Nike in Thrace was the
Creed of Arminum revised, and it seems out of order to mention it after
Lampsacus.

<span id="fn_3079"></span>[288:3080](2080317.htm#fr_3079) <span
id="ix.ccxlv-p40.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ccxlv-p41"></span> In 375 or 6.  This is the formula
referred to in *Letter* ccli. 4, as the latest.  On the variety of
Creeds, *cf*. p. 48, n.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: To Theophilus the Bishop.](2080318)
