[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2080141)  [Next](2080143) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ix.lxx"></span>

<span id="ix.lxx-p1"></span> <span class="c18"><span
id="ix.lxx-p1.1"></span>Letter LXIX. <span
id="fr_2245"></span>[2246](#fn_2245) </span>

<span id="ix.lxx-p3"></span>*To Athanasius, bishop of Alexandria*.

<span id="ix.lxx-p4"></span>1.  <span class="c14"><span
id="ix.lxx-p4.1"></span>As</span> time moves on, it continually confirms
the opinion which I have long held of your holiness; or rather that
opinion is strengthened by the daily course of events.  Most men are
indeed satisfied with observing, each one, what lies especially within
his own province; not thus is it with you, but your anxiety for all the
Churches is no less than that which you feel for the Church that has
been especially entrusted to you by our common Lord; inasmuch as you
leave no interval in speaking, exhorting, writing, and despatching
emissaries, who from time to time give the best advice in each emergency
as it arises.  Now, from the sacred ranks of your clergy, you have sent
forth the venerable brother Peter, whom I have welcomed with great joy. 
I have also approved of the good object of his journey, which he
manifests in accordance with the commands of your excellency, in
effecting reconciliation where he finds opposition, and bringing about
union instead of division.  With the object of offering some
contribution to the action which is being taken in this matter, I have
thought that I could not make a more fitting beginning than by having
recourse to your excellency, as to the head and chief of all, and
treating you as alike adviser and commander in the enterprise.  I have
therefore determined to send to your reverence our brother Dorotheus the
deacon, of the Church under the right honourable bishop Meletius, being
one who at once is an energetic supporter of the orthodox faith, and is
earnestly desirous of seeing the peace of the Churches.  The results, I
hope, will be, that, following your suggestions (which you are able to
make with the less likelihood of failure, both from your age and your
experience in affairs, and because you have a greater measure than all
others of the aid of the Spirit), he may thus attempt the achievement of
our objects.  You will welcome him, I am sure, and will look upon him
with friendly eyes.  You will strengthen him by the help of your
prayers; you will give him a letter as provision by the way; you will
grant him, as companions, some of the good men and true that you have
about you; so you will speed him on the road to what is before him.  It
has seemed to me to be desirable to send a letter to the bishop of Rome,
begging him to examine our condition, and since there are difficulties
in the way of representatives being sent from the West by a general
synodical decree, to advise him to exercise his own personal authority
in the matter by choosing suitable persons to sustain the labours of a
journey,—suitable, too, by gentleness and firmness of character, to
correct the unruly among us here; able to speak with proper reserve and
appropriateness, and thoroughly well acquainted with all that has been
effected after Ariminum to undo the violent measures adopted there.  I
should advise that, without any one knowing anything about it, they
should travel hither, attracting as little attention as possible, by the
sea, with the object of escaping the notice of the enemies of peace.

<span id="ix.lxx-p5"></span>2.  A point also that is insisted upon by
some of those in these parts, very necessarily, as is plain even to
myself, is that they <span id="fr_2246"></span>[2247](#fn_2246) should
drive away the heresy of Marcellus, <span
id="fr_2247"></span>[2248](#fn_2247) as grievous and injurious and
opposed to the sound faith.  For up to this time, in all the letters
which they write, they are constant in thoroughly anathematizing the
ill-famed Arius and in repudiating him from the Churches.  But they
attach no blame to Marcellus, who propounded a heresy diametrically
opposite to that of Arius, and impiously attacked the very existence of
the Only begotten Godhead, and erroneously understood the term
“Word.” <span id="fr_2248"></span>[2249](#fn_2248)   He grants indeed
that the Only begotten was called “Word,” on coming forth at need and in
season, but states that He re<span id="page_166">p. 166</span> <span
id="ix.lxx-Page_166"></span>turned again to Him whence He had come
forth, and had no existence before His coming forth, nor
hypostasis <span id="fr_2249"></span>[2250](#fn_2249) after His return. 
The books in my possession which contain his unrighteous writings exist
as a proof of what I say.  Nevertheless they nowhere openly condemned
him, and are to this extent culpable that, being from the first in
ignorance of the truth, they received him into the communion of the
Church.  The present state of affairs makes it specially necessary that
attention should be called to him, so that those who seek for their
opportunity, may be prevented from getting it, from the fact of sound
men being united to your holiness, and all who are lame in the true
faith may be openly known; that so we may know who are on our side, and
may not struggle, as in a night battle, without being able to
distinguish between friends and foes.  Only I do beseech you that the
deacon, whom I have mentioned, be despatched by the earliest possible
packet, that at least some of the ends which we pray for may be
accomplished during the ensuing year.  One thing, however, even before I
mention it, you quite understand and I am sure will give heed to, that,
when they come, if God will, they must not let loose schisms among the
Churches; and, even though they find some who have personal reasons for
mutual differences, they must leave no means untried to unite all who
are of the same way of thinking.  For we are bound to regard the
interests of peace as paramount, and that first of all attention be paid
to the Church at Antioch, lest the sound portion of it grow diseased
through division on personal grounds.  But you will yourself give more
complete attention to all these matters, so soon as, by the blessing of
God, you find every one entrusting to you the responsibility of securing
the peace of the Church.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2245"></span>[165:2246](2080142.htm#fr_2245) <span
id="ix.lxx-p1.2"></span>

<span id="ix.lxx-p2"></span> Of the same period as the preceding.

<span id="fn_2246"></span>[165:2247](2080142.htm#fr_2246) <span
id="ix.lxx-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ix.lxx-p6"></span> *i.e.* the Romans; specially the proposed
commissioners.  It was a sore point with Basil that Marcellus, whom he
regarded as a trimmer, should have been “received into communion by
Julius and Athanasius, popes of Rome and Alexandria.”  Jer., *De Vir.
Illust*. c. 86.

<span id="fn_2247"></span>[165:2248](2080142.htm#fr_2247) <span
id="ix.lxx-p6.1"></span>

<span id="ix.lxx-p7"></span> On the heretical opinions attributed to
Marcellus of Ancyra, *cf. Letters* cxxv. and cclxiii.

<span id="fn_2248"></span>[165:2249](2080142.htm#fr_2248) <span
id="ix.lxx-p7.1"></span>

<span id="ix.lxx-p8"></span> Although he strongly espoused the Catholic
cause of Nicæa later in attacking the errors of Asterius, he was
supposed to teach that the Son had no real personality, but was merely
an external manifestation of the Father.

<span id="fn_2249"></span>[166:2250](2080142.htm#fr_2249) <span
id="ix.lxx-p8.1"></span>

<span id="ix.lxx-p9"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.lxx-p9.1"></span>ὑ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.lxx-p9.2"></span>φεστάναι</span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Without address.](2080143)
