[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2080278)  [Next](2080280) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ix.ccvii"></span>

<span id="ix.ccvii-p1"></span> <span class="c18"><span
id="ix.ccvii-p1.1"></span>Letter CCVI. <span
id="fr_2752"></span>[2753](#fn_2752) </span>

<span id="ix.ccvii-p3"></span>*To Elpidius the bishop. Consolatory*.

<span id="ix.ccvii-p4"></span><span class="c14"><span
id="ix.ccvii-p4.1"></span>Now</span>, most of all, do I feel my bodily
infirmity, when I see how it stands in the way of my soul’s good.  Had
matters gone as I hoped, I should not now be speaking to you by letter
or by messenger, but should in my own person have been paying the debt
of affection and enjoying spiritual advantage face to face.  Now,
however, I am so situated that I am only too glad if I am able even to
move about in my own country in the necessary visitation of parishes in
my district.  But may the Lord grant to you both strength and a ready
will, and to me, in addition to my eager desire, ability to enjoy your
society when I am in the country of Comana.  I am afraid lest your
domestic trouble may be some hindrance to you.  For I have learnt of
your affliction in the loss of your little boy.  To a grandfather his
death cannot but be grievous.  On the other hand to a man who has
attained to so high a degree of virtue, and alike from his experience of
this world and his spiritual training knows what human nature is, it is
natural that the removal of those who are near and dear should not be
wholly intolerable.  The Lord requires from us what He does not require
from every one.  The common mass of mankind lives by habit, but the
Christian’s rule of life is the commandment of the Lord, and the example
of holy men of old, whose greatness of soul was, above all, exhibited in
adversity.  To the end, then, that you may yourself leave to them that
come after you an example of fortitude and of genuine trust in what we
hope for, show that you are not vanquished by your grief, but are rising
above your sorrows, patient in affliction, and rejoicing in hope.  Pray
let none of these things be a hindrance to our hoped for meeting. 
Children, indeed, are held blameless on account of their tender age; but
you and I are under the responsibility of serving the Lord, as He
commands us, and in all things to be ready for the administration of the
affairs of the Churches.  For the due discharge of that duty the Lord
has reserved great rewards for faithful and wise stewards.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2752"></span>[246:2753](2080279.htm#fr_2752) <span
id="ix.ccvii-p1.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ccvii-p2"></span> Placed in 375.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: To the clergy of Neocæsarea.](2080280)
