[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2080337)  [Next](2080339) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ix.cclxvi"></span>

<span id="ix.cclxvi-p1"></span> <span class="c18"><span
id="ix.cclxvi-p1.1"></span>Letter CCLXV. <span
id="fr_3198"></span>[3199](#fn_3198) </span>

<span id="ix.cclxvi-p3"></span>To Eulogius, Alexander, and Harpocration,
bishops of Egypt, in exile.

<span id="ix.cclxvi-p4"></span>1.  <span class="c14"><span
id="ix.cclxvi-p4.1"></span>In</span> all things we find that the
providence exercised by our good God over His Churches is mighty, and
that thus the very things which seem to be gloomy, and do not turn out
as we should like, are ordained for the advantage of most, in the hidden
wisdom of God, and in the unsearchable judgments of His righteousness. 
Now the Lord has removed you from the regions of Egypt, and has brought
you and established you in the midst of Palestine, after the manner of
Israel of old, whom He carried away by captivity into the land of the
Assyrians, and there extinguished idolatry through the sojourn of His
saints.  Now too we find the same thing, when we observe that the Lord
is making known your struggle for the sake of true religion, opening to
you through your exile the arena of your blessed contests, and <span
id="page_304">p. 304</span> <span id="ix.cclxvi-Page_304"></span>to all
who see before them your noble constancy, giving the boon of your good
example to lead them to salvation.  By God’s grace, I have heard of the
correctness of your faith, and of your zeal for the brethren and that it
is in no careless or perfunctory spirit that you provide what is
profitable and necessary for salvation, and that you support all that
conduces to the edification of the Churches.  I have therefore thought
it right that I should be brought into communion with your goodness, and
be united to your reverences by letter.  For these reasons I have sent
my very dear brother the deacon Elpidius, who not only conveys my
letter, but is moreover fully qualified to announce to you whatever may
have been omitted in my letter.

<span id="ix.cclxvi-p5"></span>2.  I have been specially moved to desire
union with you by the report of the zeal of your reverences in the cause
of orthodoxy.  The constancy of your hearts has been stirred neither by
multiplicity of books nor by variety of ingenious arguments.  You have
on the contrary, recognised those who endeavoured to introduce
innovations in opposition to the apostolic doctrines, and you have
refused to keep silence concerning the mischief which they are causing.
 I have in truth found great distress among all who cleave to the peace
of the Lord at the divers innovations of Apollinarius of Laodicea.  He
has all the more distressed me from the fact that he seemed at the
beginning on our side.  A sufferer can in a certain sense endure what
comes to him from an open enemy, even though it be exceedingly painful,
as it is written, “For it was not an enemy that reproached me; then I
could have borne it.” <span id="fr_3199"></span>[3200](#fn_3199)   But
it is intolerable, and beyond the power of comfort, to be wronged by a
close and sympathetic friend.  Now that very man whom I have expected to
have at my right hand in defence of the truth, I have found in many ways
hindering those who are being saved, by seducing their minds and drawing
them away from direct doctrine.  What rash and hasty deed has he not
done?  What ill considered and dangerous argument has he not risked?  Is
not all the Church divided against herself, specially since the day when
men have been sent by him to the Churches governed by orthodox bishops,
to rend them asunder and to set up some peculiar and illegal service? 
Is not ridicule brought upon the great mystery of true religion when
bishops go about without people and clergy, having nothing but the mere
name and title, and effecting nothing for the advancement of the Gospel
of peace and salvation?  Are not his discourses about God full of
impious doctrines, the old impiety of the insane Sabellius being now
renewed by him in his writings?  For if the works which are current
among the Sebastenes are not the forgery of foes, and are really his
composition, he has reached a height of impiety which cannot be
surpassed, in saying that Father, Son, and Spirit are the same, and
other dark pieces of irreverence which I have declined even to hear,
praying that I may have nothing to do with those who have uttered them. 
Does he not confuse the doctrine of the incarnation?  Has not the
œconomy of salvation been made doubtful to the many on account of his
dark and cloudy speculations about it?  To collect them all, and refute
them, requires long time and much discussion.  But where have the
promises of the Gospel been blunted and destroyed as by his figments? 
So meanly and poorly has he dared to explain the blessed hope laid up
for all who live according to the Gospel of Christ, as to reduce it to
mere old wives’ fables and doctrines of Jews.  He proclaims the renewal
of the Temple, the observance of the worship of the Law, a typical high
priest over again after the real High Priest, and a sacrifice for sins
after the Lamb of God Who taketh away the sin of the world. <span
id="fr_3200"></span>[3201](#fn_3200)   He preaches partial baptisms
after the one baptism, and the ashes of a heifer sprinkling the Church
which, through its faith in Christ, has not spot or wrinkle, or any such
thing; <span id="fr_3201"></span>[3202](#fn_3201) cleansing of leprosy
after the painless state of the resurrection; an offering of
jealousy <span id="fr_3202"></span>[3203](#fn_3202) when they neither
marry nor are given in marriage; shew-bread after the Bread from heaven;
burning lamps after the true Light.  In a word, if the law of the
Commandments has been done away with by dogmas, it is plain that under
these circumstances the dogmas of Christ will be nullified by the
injunctions of the law. <span id="fr_3203"></span>[3204](#fn_3203)   At
these things shame and disgrace have covered my face, <span
id="fr_3204"></span>[3205](#fn_3204) and heavy grief hath filled my
heart.  Wherefore, I beseech you, as skilful physicians, and instructed
how to discipline antagonists with gentleness, to try and bring him back
to the right order of the Church, and to persuade him to despise the
wordiness of his own works; for he has proved the truth of the proverb
“in the multitude of words there wanteth not sin.” <span
id="fr_3205"></span>[3206](#fn_3205)   Put boldly before <span
id="page_305">p. 305</span> <span id="ix.cclxvi-Page_305"></span>him the
doctrines of orthodoxy, in order that his amendment may be published
abroad, and his repentance made known to his brethren.

<span id="ix.cclxvi-p13"></span>3.  It is also desirable that I should
remind your reverence about the followers of Marcellus, in order that
you may decide nothing in their case rashly or inconsiderately.  On
account of his impious doctrines he has gone out from the Church. <span
id="fr_3206"></span>[3207](#fn_3206)   It is therefore necessary that
his followers should only be received into communion on condition that
they anathematize that heresy, in order that those who are united to me
through you may be accepted by all the brethren.  And now most men are
moved to no small grief on hearing that you have both received them and
admitted them to ecclesiastical communion on their coming to your
excellency.  Nevertheless you ought to have known that by God’s grace
you do not stand alone in the East, but have many in communion with you,
who vindicate the orthodoxy of the Fathers, and who put forth the pious
doctrine of the Faith at Nicæa.  The Westerns also all agree with you
and with me, whose exposition of the Faith I have received and keep with
me, assenting to their sound doctrine.  You ought, then, to have
satisfied all who are in agreement with you, that the action which is
being taken may be ratified by the general consent, and that peace may
not be broken by the acceptance of some while others are kept apart. 
Thus you ought to have at the same time seriously and gently taken
counsel about matters which are of importance to all the Churches
throughout the world.  Praise is not due to him who hastily determines
any point, but rather to him who rules every detail firmly and
unalterably, so that when his judgment is enquired into, even at a later
time, it may be the more esteemed.  This is the man who is acceptable
both to God and man as one who guides his words with discretion. <span
id="fr_3207"></span>[3208](#fn_3207)   Thus I have addressed your
reverence in such terms as are possible in a letter.  May the Lord grant
that one day we may meet, that so, after arranging everything together
with you for the government of the Churches, I may with you receive the
reward prepared by the righteous Judge for faithful and wise stewards. 
In the mean time be so good as to let me know with what intention you
have received the followers of Marcellus, knowing this, that even if you
secure everything, so far as you yourselves are concerned, you ought not
to deal with a matter of such importance on your own sole
responsibility.  It is further necessary that the Westerns, and those
who are in communion with them in the East, should concur in the
restoration of these men.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3198"></span>[303:3199](2080338.htm#fr_3198) <span
id="ix.cclxvi-p1.2"></span>

<span id="ix.cclxvi-p2"></span> Placed in 377.

<span id="fn_3199"></span>[304:3200](2080338.htm#fr_3199) <span
id="ix.cclxvi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ix.cclxvi-p6"></span> [Ps. lv.
12](../../../bib/kjv/psa055.htm#012)<span id="ix.cclxvi-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3200"></span>[304:3201](2080338.htm#fr_3200) <span
id="ix.cclxvi-p6.2"></span>

<span id="ix.cclxvi-p7"></span> [John i.
29](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#029)<span id="ix.cclxvi-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3201"></span>[304:3202](2080338.htm#fr_3201) <span
id="ix.cclxvi-p7.2"></span>

<span id="ix.cclxvi-p8"></span> [Eph. v.
27](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#027)<span id="ix.cclxvi-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3202"></span>[304:3203](2080338.htm#fr_3202) <span
id="ix.cclxvi-p8.2"></span>

<span id="ix.cclxvi-p9"></span> *cf*. [Num. v.
15](../../../bib/kjv/num005.htm#015)<span id="ix.cclxvi-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3203"></span>[304:3204](2080338.htm#fr_3203) <span
id="ix.cclxvi-p9.2"></span>

<span id="ix.cclxvi-p10"></span> This passage shews in what sense St.
Basil understands <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.cclxvi-p10.1"></span>δόγματα</span> in [Eph.
2:15](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#015), [Col.
2:14](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#014)<span
id="ix.cclxvi-p10.2"></span>.  *cf*. note on p. 41.

<span id="fn_3204"></span>[304:3205](2080338.htm#fr_3204) <span
id="ix.cclxvi-p10.3"></span>

<span id="ix.cclxvi-p11"></span> *cf.* [Ps. lxiv.
7](../../../bib/kjv/psa064.htm#007)<span id="ix.cclxvi-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3205"></span>[304:3206](2080338.htm#fr_3205) <span
id="ix.cclxvi-p11.2"></span>

<span id="ix.cclxvi-p12"></span> [Prov. x.
19](../../../bib/kjv/pro010.htm#019)<span id="ix.cclxvi-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3206"></span>[305:3207](2080338.htm#fr_3206) <span
id="ix.cclxvi-p13.1"></span>

<span id="ix.cclxvi-p14"></span> Here the Ben. note is *Mirum id videtur
ac prima specie vix credibile, Marcellum ob impios errores ex ecclesia
exiisee.  Nam S. Athanasius suspectum illum quidem, sed tamen purgatum
habuit, teste Epiphanio, Hæres. lxxii.*  lxxii. p. 837.  *Hinc illius
discipuli communicatorias beatissimi papæ Athanasii litteras ostenderunt
confessoribus Ægyptiis, ibid.* p. 843.  *Testatur idem Epiphanius varia
esse Catholicorum de Marcello judicia, aliis eum accusantibus, aliis
defendentibus*, p. 834.  *Paulinus ejus discipulos sine discrimine
recipiebat, ut in superiore epistola vidimus.  Ipse Basilius in epist.*
69 *queritur quod eum Ecclesia Romana in communionem ab initio
suscepisset.  Quomodo ergo exiise dicitur ex Ecclesia qui tot habuit
communicatores?  Sed tamen S. Basilii testimonium cum sua sponte magni
est momenti (non enim ut in dijudicandis Marcelli scriptis, ita in
ejusmodi facto proclive fuit errare), tum etiam hoc argumento
confirmatur quod Athanasius extremis vitæ suæ annis Marcellum a
communione sua removerit.  Neque enim, si semper cum eo communicasset
Athanasius, opus habuissent illius discipuli confessione fidei ad
impetrandam confessorum Ægyptiorum communionem:  nec Petrus Athanasii
successor canones violatos, concessa illis communione, quereretur, ut
videmus in epistola sequenti, si Ægyptum inter ac Marcellum ejusque
clerum et plebem non fuisset rupta communio.  Videtur ergo Marcellus sub
finem vitæ aliquid peccasse, quod Athanasium ab ejus communione
discedere cogeret:  et cum jamdudum a tota fere oriente damnatus esset,
amissa Athanasii communione, quæ unicum fere illius refugium erat,
desertus ab omnibus videri debuit, nec ei nova ignominia notato prodesse
poterat concessa olim a Romana Ecclesia communio.*

<span id="fn_3207"></span>[305:3208](2080338.htm#fr_3207) <span
id="ix.cclxvi-p14.1"></span>

<span id="ix.cclxvi-p15"></span> [Ps. cxii.
5](../../../bib/kjv/psa012.htm#005)<span id="ix.cclxvi-p15.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: To Petrus, bishop of Alexandria.](2080339)
