[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2080315)  [Next](2080317) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ix.ccxliv"></span>

<span id="ix.ccxliv-p1"></span> <span class="c18"><span
id="ix.ccxliv-p1.1"></span>Letter CCXLIII. <span
id="fr_3035"></span>[3036](#fn_3035) </span>

<span id="ix.ccxliv-p3"></span>To the bishops of Italy and Gaul
concerning the condition and confusion of the Churches.

<span id="ix.ccxliv-p4"></span>1.  <span class="c14"><span
id="ix.ccxliv-p4.1"></span>To</span> his brethren truly God-beloved and
very dear, and fellow ministers of like mind, the bishops of Gaul and
Italy, Basil, bishop of Cæsarea in Cappadocia.  Our Lord Jesus Christ,
Who has deigned to style the universal Church of God His body, and has
made us individually members one of another, has moreover granted to all
of us to live in intimate association with one another, as befits the
agreement of the members.  Wherefore, although we dwell far away from
one another, yet, as regards our close conjunction, we are very near. 
Since, then, the head cannot say to the feet, I have no need of
you, <span id="fr_3036"></span>[3037](#fn_3036) you will not, I am sure,
endure to reject us; you will, on the contrary, sympathize with us in
the troubles to which, for our sins, we have been given over, in
proportion as we rejoice together with you in your glorying in the peace
which the Lord has bestowed on you.  Ere now we have also at another
time invoked your charity to send us succour and sympathy; but our
punishment was not full, and you were not suffered to rise up to succour
us.  One chief object of our desire is that through you the state of
confusion in which we are situated should be made known to the emperor
of your part of the world. <span id="fr_3037"></span>[3038](#fn_3037)  
If this is difficult, we beseech you to send envoys to visit and comfort
us in our affliction, that you may have the evidence of eyewitnesses of
those sufferings of the East which cannot be told by word of mouth,
because language is inadequate to give a clear report of our condition.

<span id="ix.ccxliv-p7"></span>2.  Persecution has come upon us, right
honourable brethren, and persecution in the severest form.  Shepherds
are persecuted that their flocks may be scattered.  And the worst of all
is that those who are being treated ill cannot accept their sufferings
in proof of their testimony, nor can the people reverence the athletes
as in the army of martyrs, because the name of Christians is applied to
the persecutors.  The one charge which is now sure to secure severe
punishment is the careful keeping of the traditions of the Fathers.  For
this the pious are exiled from their homes, and are sent away to dwell
in distant regions.  No reverence is shown by the judges of iniquity to
the hoary head, to practical piety, to the life lived from boyhood to
old age according to the Gospel.  No malefactor is doomed without proof,
but bishops have been convicted on calumny alone, and are consigned to
penalties on charges wholly unsupported by evidence.  Some have not even
known who has accused them, nor been brought <span id="page_284">p.
284</span> <span id="ix.ccxliv-Page_284"></span>before any tribunal, nor
even been falsely accused at all.  They have been apprehended with
violence late at night, have been exiled to distant places, and, through
the hardships of these remote wastes, have been given over to
death. <span id="fr_3038"></span>[3039](#fn_3038)   The rest is
notorious, though I make no mention of it—the flight of priests; the
flight of deacons; the foraying of all the clergy.  Either the image
must be worshipped, or we are delivered to the wicked flame of
whips. <span id="fr_3039"></span>[3040](#fn_3039)   The laity groan;
tears are falling without ceasing in public and in private; all are
mutually lamenting their woes.  No one’s heart is so hard as to lose a
father, and bear the bereavement meekly.  There is a sound of them that
mourn in the city—a sound in the fields, in the roads, in the deserts. 
But one voice is heard from all that utter sad and piteous words.  Joy
and spiritual gladness are taken away.  Our feasts are turned into
mourning. <span id="fr_3040"></span>[3041](#fn_3040)   Our houses of
prayer are shut.  The altars of the spiritual service are lying idle. 
Christians no longer assemble together; teachers no longer preside.  The
doctrines of salvation are no longer taught.  We have no more solemn
assemblies, no more evening hymns, no more of that blessed joy of souls
which arises in the souls of all that believe in the Lord at communions,
and the imparting of spiritual boons. <span
id="fr_3041"></span>[3042](#fn_3041)   We may well say, “Neither is
there at this time prince, or prophet, or reader, or offering, or
incense, or place to sacrifice before thee, and to find mercy.” <span
id="fr_3042"></span>[3043](#fn_3042)

<span id="ix.ccxliv-p13"></span>3.  We are writing to those who know
these things, for there is not a region of the world which is ignorant
of our calamities.  Do not suppose that we are using these words as
though to give information, or to recall ourselves to your
recollection.  We know that you could no more forget us than a mother
forget the sons of her womb. <span id="fr_3043"></span>[3044](#fn_3043)
  But all who are crushed by any weight of agony find some natural
alleviation for their pain in uttering groans of distress, and it is for
this that we are doing as we do.  We get rid of the load of our grief in
telling you of our manifold misfortunes, and in expressing the hope that
you may haply be the more moved to pray for us, and may prevail on the
Lord to be reconciled to us.  And if these afflictions had been confined
to ourselves, we might even have determined to keep silence, and to
rejoice in our sufferings for Christ’s sake, since “the sufferings of
this present time are not worthy to be compared with the glory which
shall be revealed in us.” <span id="fr_3044"></span>[3045](#fn_3044)  
But at the present time we are alarmed, lest the mischief growing day by
day, like a flame spreading through some burning wood, when it has
consumed what is close at hand, may catch distant objects too.  The
plague of heresy is spreading, and there is ground of apprehension lest,
when it has devoured our Churches, it may afterwards creep on even so
far as to the sound portion of your district. <span
id="fr_3045"></span>[3046](#fn_3045)   Peradventure it is because with
us iniquity has abounded that we have been first delivered to be
devoured by the cruel teeth of the enemies of God.  But the gospel of
the kingdom began in our regions, and then went forth over all the
world.  So, peradventure—and this is most probable—the common enemy of
our souls, is striving to bring it about that the seeds of apostasy,
originating in the same quarter, should be distributed throughout the
world.  For the darkness of impiety plots to come upon the very hearts
whereon the “light of the knowledge” of Christ has shone. <span
id="fr_3046"></span>[3047](#fn_3046)

<span id="ix.ccxliv-p18"></span>4.  Reckon then, as true disciples of
the Lord, that our sufferings are yours.  We are not being attacked for
the sake of riches, or glory, or any temporal advantages.  We stand in
the arena to fight for our common heritage, for the treasure of the
sound faith, derived from our Fathers.  Grieve with us, all ye who love
the brethren, at the shutting of the mouths of our men of true religion,
and at the opening of the bold and blasphemous lips of all that utter
unrighteousness against God. <span id="fr_3047"></span>[3048](#fn_3047)
  The pillars and foundation of the truth are scattered abroad.  We,
whose insignificance has allowed of our being overlooked, are deprived
of our right of free speech.  Do ye enter into the struggle, for the
people’s sake.  Do not think only of your being yourselves moored in a
safe haven, where the grace of God gives you shelter from the tempest of
the winds of wickedness.  Reach out a helping hand to the Churches that
are being buffeted by the storm, lest, if they be abandoned, they suffer
complete shipwreck of the faith.  Lament for us, in that the
Only-begotten is being blasphemed, and there is none to offer
contradiction.  The Holy Ghost is being set at <span id="page_285">p.
285</span> <span id="ix.ccxliv-Page_285"></span>nought and he who is
able to confute the error has been sent into exile.  Polytheism has
prevailed.  Our opponents own a great God and a small God.  “Son” is no
longer a name of nature, but is looked upon as a title of some kind of
honour.  The Holy Ghost is regarded not as complemental of the Holy
Trinity, nor as participating in the divine and blessed Nature, but as
in some sort one of the number of created beings, and attached to Father
and Son, at mere haphazard and as occasion may require.  “Oh that my
head were waters, and mine eyes a fountain of tears,” <span
id="fr_3048"></span>[3049](#fn_3048) and I will weep many days for the
people who are being driven to destruction by these vile doctrines.  The
ears of the simple are being led astray, and have now got used to
heretical impiety.  The nurslings of the Church are being brought up in
the doctrines of iniquity.  What are they to do?  Our opponents have the
command of baptisms; they speed the dying on their way; <span
id="fr_3049"></span>[3050](#fn_3049) they visit the sick; they console
the sorrowful; they aid the distressed; they give succour of various
kinds; they communicate the mysteries.  All these things, as long as the
performance of them is in their hands, are so many ties to bind the
people to their views.  The result will be that in a little time, even
if some liberty be conceded to us, there is small hope that they who
have been long under the influence of error will be recalled to
recognition of the truth.

<span id="ix.ccxliv-p22"></span>5.  Under these circumstances it would
have been well for many of us to have travelled to your reverences, and
to have individually reported each his own position.  You may now take
as a proof of the sore straits in which we are placed the fact that we
are not even free to travel abroad.  For if any one leaves his Church,
even for a very brief space, he will leave his people at the mercy of
those who are plotting their ruin.  By God’s mercy instead of many we
have sent one, our very reverend and beloved brother the presbyter
Dorotheus.  He is fully able to supply by his personal report whatever
has been omitted in our letter, for he has carefully followed all that
has occurred, and is jealous of the right faith.  Receive him in peace,
and speedily send him back to us, bringing us good news of your
readiness to succour the brotherhood.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3035"></span>[283:3036](2080316.htm#fr_3035) <span
id="ix.ccxliv-p1.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ccxliv-p2"></span> Placed in 376.

<span id="fn_3036"></span>[283:3037](2080316.htm#fr_3036) <span
id="ix.ccxliv-p4.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ccxliv-p5"></span> [1 Cor. xii.
21](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#021)<span id="ix.ccxliv-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3037"></span>[283:3038](2080316.htm#fr_3037) <span
id="ix.ccxliv-p5.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ccxliv-p6"></span> *i.e.* Gratian, who succeeded
Valentinian I. in 375.

<span id="fn_3038"></span>[284:3039](2080316.htm#fr_3038) <span
id="ix.ccxliv-p7.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ccxliv-p8"></span> For the midnight banishment, *cf*. the
story of the expulsion of Eusebius from Samosata in Theod. iv. 13.  Of
death following on exile Basil did not live to see the most signal
instance—that of Chrysostom in 407.

<span id="fn_3039"></span>[284:3040](2080316.htm#fr_3039) <span
id="ix.ccxliv-p8.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ccxliv-p9"></span> *cf*. [Dan. iii.
10](../../../bib/kjv/dan003.htm#010)<span id="ix.ccxliv-p9.1"></span>. 
The whips seem as rhetorical as the image and the flame.

<span id="fn_3040"></span>[284:3041](2080316.htm#fr_3040) <span
id="ix.ccxliv-p9.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ccxliv-p10"></span> [Amos viii.
10](../../../bib/kjv/amo008.htm#010)<span id="ix.ccxliv-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3041"></span>[284:3042](2080316.htm#fr_3041) <span
id="ix.ccxliv-p10.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ccxliv-p11"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.ccxliv-p11.1"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.ccxliv-p11.2"></span>πι ταῖς σύναξεσι καὶ τῇ κοινωνί& 139· τῶν
πνευματικῶν χαρισμάτων.</span>

<span id="fn_3042"></span>[284:3043](2080316.htm#fr_3042) <span
id="ix.ccxliv-p11.3"></span>

<span id="ix.ccxliv-p12"></span> *Song of the Three Children*, 14.

<span id="fn_3043"></span>[284:3044](2080316.htm#fr_3043) <span
id="ix.ccxliv-p13.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ccxliv-p14"></span> [Is. xlix.
15](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#015)<span id="ix.ccxliv-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3044"></span>[284:3045](2080316.htm#fr_3044) <span
id="ix.ccxliv-p14.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ccxliv-p15"></span> [Rom. viii.
18](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#018)<span id="ix.ccxliv-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3045"></span>[284:3046](2080316.htm#fr_3045) <span
id="ix.ccxliv-p15.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ccxliv-p16"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.ccxliv-p16.1"></span>παροικία</span>.  The word seems here to
have a wider sense even than that of “diocese.”

<span id="fn_3046"></span>[284:3047](2080316.htm#fr_3046) <span
id="ix.ccxliv-p16.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ccxliv-p17"></span> *cf*. [2 Cor. iv.
6](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#006)<span id="ix.ccxliv-p17.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3047"></span>[284:3048](2080316.htm#fr_3047) <span
id="ix.ccxliv-p18.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ccxliv-p19"></span> *cf*. [Ps. lxxiii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#008)<span id="ix.ccxliv-p19.1"></span>,
LXX.

<span id="fn_3048"></span>[285:3049](2080316.htm#fr_3048) <span
id="ix.ccxliv-p19.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ccxliv-p20"></span> [Jer. ix.
1](../../../bib/kjv/jer009.htm#001)<span id="ix.ccxliv-p20.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3049"></span>[285:3050](2080316.htm#fr_3049) <span
id="ix.ccxliv-p20.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ccxliv-p21"></span> I suggest this rendering of <span
class="Greek"><span id="ix.ccxliv-p21.1"></span>προπομπαὶ τῶν
ἐξοδευόντων</span> with hesitation, and feel no certainty about the
passage except that the Ben. tr., “*deductiones proficiscentium*,” and
its defence in the Ben. note, is questionable.  The escort of a bishop
on a journey is quite on a different plane from the ministrations which
Basil has in mind.  <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.ccxliv-p21.2"></span>προπομπαὶ</span> is used by Chrysostom of
funerals, and Combefis explains “*excedentium deductæ funebres, deducta
funera*;” but the association of ideas seems to necessitate some
reference to the effect of vicious teaching on the living.  There may be
an indirect allusion to the effect on the friends at a funeral, but to
take <span class="Greek"><span id="ix.ccxliv-p21.3"></span>ἐ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="ix.ccxliv-p21.4"></span>ξοδευόντων</span> to
mean “the dying” seems the simplest.  <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.ccxliv-p21.5"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.ccxliv-p21.6"></span>ξοδευθείς</span> is used of Sisera in
[Judges v. 27](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#027)<span
id="ix.ccxliv-p21.7"></span>, LXX.  *cf*. p. 180 n., where perhaps this
rendering might be substituted, and Canon Bright on Canon xiii. of
Nicæa.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: To Patrophilus, bishop of Ægæ.](2080317)
