[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2080404)  [Next](2080406) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ix.cccxxxiii"></span>

<span id="ix.cccxxxiii-p1"></span> <span class="c18"><span
id="ix.cccxxxiii-p1.1"></span>Letter CCCXXXVIII.</span>

<span id="ix.cccxxxiii-p2"></span>Libanius to Basil.

<span id="ix.cccxxxiii-p3"></span>I <span class="c14"><span
id="ix.cccxxxiii-p3.1"></span>know</span> you will often write, “Here is
another Cappadocian for you!”  I expect that you will send me many.  I
am sure that you are everywhere putting pressure on both fathers and
sons by all your complimentary expressions about me.  But it would not
be kind on my part not to mention what happened about your good letter. 
There were sitting with me not a few of our people of distinction, and
among them the very excellent Alypius, Hierocles’ cousin.  The
messengers gave in the letter.  I read it right through without a word;
then with a smile, and evidently gratified, I exclaimed, “I am
vanquished!”  “How?  When?  Where?” they asked.  “How is it that you are
not distressed at being vanquished?”  “I am beaten,” I replied, “in
beautiful letter writing.  Basil has won.  But I love him; and so I am
delighted.”  On hearing this, they all wanted to hear of the victory
from the letter itself.  It was read by Alypius, while all listened.  It
was voted that what I had said was quite true.  Then the reader went
out, with the letter still in his hand, to shew it, I suppose, to
others.  I had some difficulty in getting it back.  Go on writing others
like it; go on winning.  This is for me to win.  You are quite right in
thinking that my services are not measured by money.  Enough for him who
has nothing to give, that he is as wishful to receive.  If I perceive
any one who is poor to be a lover of learning, he takes precedence of
the rich.  True, I <span id="page_322">p. 322</span> <span
id="ix.cccxxxiii-Page_322"></span>never found such instructors; but
nothing shall stand in the way of my being, at least in that respect, an
improvement on mine.  Let no one, then, hesitate to come hither because
he is poor, if only he possesses the one qualification of knowing how to
work.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Basil to Libanius.](2080406)
