[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2080069)  [Next](2080071) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="viii.ix"></span>

<span id="viii.ix-p1"></span> <span class="c18"><span
id="viii.ix-p1.1"></span>Homily VIII.</span>

<span id="viii.ix-p2"></span>*The creation of fowl and water
animals*. <span id="fr_1638"></span>[1639](#fn_1638)

<span id="viii.ix-p4"></span>1.  <span class="c14"><span
id="viii.ix-p4.1"></span>And</span> God said “*Let the earth bring forth
the living creature after his kind, cattle and creeping things, and
beast of the earth after his kind; and it was so*.” <span
id="fr_1639"></span>[1640](#fn_1639)   The command of God advanced step
by step and earth thus received her adornment.  <span id="page_95">p.
95</span> <span id="viii.ix-Page_95"></span>Yesterday it was said, “Let
the waters produce moving things,” and to-day “let the earth bring forth
the living creature.”  Is the earth then alive?  And are the mad-minded
Manichæans right in giving it a soul?  At these words “Let the earth
bring forth,” it did not produce a germ contained in it, but He who gave
the order at the same time gifted it with the grace and power to bring
forth.  When the earth had heard this command “Let the earth bring forth
grass and the tree yielding fruit,” it was not grass that it had hidden
in it that it caused to spring forth, it did not bring to the surface a
palm tree, an oak, a cypress, hitherto kept back in its depths.  It is
the word of God which forms the nature of things created.  “Let the
earth bring forth;” that is to say not that she may bring forth that
which she has but that she may acquire that which she lacks, when God
gives her the power.  Even so now, “Let the earth bring forth the living
creature,” not the living creature that is contained in herself, but
that which the command of God gives her.  Further, the Manichæans
contradict themselves, because if the earth has brought forth the life,
she has left herself despoiled of life.  Their execrable doctrine needs
no demonstration.

<span id="viii.ix-p6"></span>But why did the waters receive the command
to bring forth the moving creature that hath life and the earth to bring
forth the living creature?  We conclude that, by their nature, swimming
creatures appear only to have an imperfect life, because they live in
the thick element of water.  They are hard of hearing, and their sight
is dull because they see through the water; they have no memory, no
imagination, no idea of social intercourse.  Thus divine language
appears to indicate that, in aquatic animals, the carnal life originates
their psychic movements, whilst in terrestrial animals, gifted with a
more perfect life, <span id="fr_1640"></span>[1641](#fn_1640) the
soul <span id="fr_1641"></span>[1642](#fn_1641) enjoys supreme
authority.  In fact the greater part of quadrupeds have more power of
penetration in their senses; their apprehension of present objects is
keen, and they keep all exact remembrance of the past.  It seems
therefore, that God, after the command given to the waters to bring
forth moving creatures that have life, created simply living bodies for
aquatic animals, whilst for terrestrial animals He commanded the soul to
exist and to direct the body, showing thus that the inhabitants of the
earth are gifted with greater vital force.  Without doubt terrestrial
animals are devoid of reason.  At the same time how many affections of
the soul each one of them expresses by the voice of nature!  They
express by cries their joy and sadness, recognition of what is familiar
to them, the need of food, regret at being separated from their
companions, and numberless emotions.  Aquatic animals, on the contrary,
are not only dumb; it is impossible to tame them, to teach them, to
train them for man’s society. <span id="fr_1642"></span>[1643](#fn_1642)
  “The ox knoweth his owner, and the ass his master’s crib.” <span
id="fr_1643"></span>[1644](#fn_1643)   But the fish does not know who
feeds him.  The ass knows a familiar voice, he knows the road which he
has often trodden, and even, if man loses his way, he sometimes serves
him as a guide.  His hearing is more acute than that of any other
terrestrial animal.  What animal of the sea can show so much rancour and
resentment as the camel?  The camel conceals its resentment for a long
time after it has been struck, until it finds an opportunity, and then
repays the wrong.  Listen, you whose heart does not pardon, you who
practise vengeance as a virtue; see what you resemble when you keep your
anger for so long against your neighbour like a spark, hidden in the
ashes, and only waiting for fuel to set your heart ablaze!

<span id="viii.ix-p11"></span>2.  “*Let the earth bring forth a living
soul*.”  Why did the earth produce a living soul? so that you may make a
difference between the soul of cattle and that of man.  You will soon
learn how the human soul was formed; hear now about the soul of
creatures devoid of reason.  Since, according to Scripture, “the life of
every creature is in the blood,” <span
id="fr_1644"></span>[1645](#fn_1644) as the blood when thickened changes
into flesh, and flesh when corrupted decomposes into earth, so the soul
of beasts is naturally an earthy substance.  “Let the earth bring forth
a living soul.”  See the affinity of the soul with blood, of blood with
flesh, of flesh with earth; and remounting in an inverse sense from the
earth to the flesh, from the flesh to the blood, from the blood to the
soul, you will find that the soul of beasts is earth.  Do not suppose
that it is older than the essence <span
id="fr_1645"></span>[1646](#fn_1645) of their body, nor that it survives
the dissolution of the flesh; <span id="fr_1646"></span>[1647](#fn_1646)
avoid the non<span id="page_96">p. 96</span> <span
id="viii.ix-Page_96"></span>sense of those arrogant philosophers who do
not blush to liken their soul to that of a dog; who say that they have
been formerly themselves women, shrubs, fish. <span
id="fr_1647"></span>[1648](#fn_1647)   Have they ever been fish?  I do
not know; but I do not fear to affirm that in their writings they show
less sense than fish.  “Let the earth bring forth the living creature.” 
Perhaps many of you ask why there is such a long silence in the middle
of the rapid rush of my discourse.  The more studious among my auditors
will not be ignorant of the reason why words fail me.  What!  Have I not
seen them look at each other, and make signs to make me look at them,
and to remind me of what I have passed over?  I have forgotten a part of
the creation, and that one of the most considerable, and my discourse
was almost finished without touching upon it.  “Let the waters bring
forth abundantly the moving creature that hath life and fowl that may
fly above the earth in the open firmament, of heaven.” <span
id="fr_1648"></span>[1649](#fn_1648)   I spoke of fish as long as
eventide allowed:  to-day we have passed to the examination of
terrestrial animals; between the two, birds have escaped us.  We are
forgetful like travellers who unmindful of some important object, are
obliged, although they be far on their road, to retrace their steps,
punished for their negligence by the weariness of the journey.  So we
have to turn back.  That which we have omitted is not to be despised. 
It is the third part of the animal creation, if indeed there are three
kinds of animals, land, winged and water.

<span id="viii.ix-p20"></span>“*Let the waters*” it is said “*bring
forth abundantly moving creature that hath life and fowl that may fly
above the earth in the open firmament of heaven*.”  Why do the waters
give birth also to birds?  Because there is, so to say, a family link
between the creatures that fly and those that swim.  In the same way
that fish cut the waters, using their fins to carry them forward and
their tails to direct their movements round and round and
straightforward, so we see birds float in the air by the help of their
wings.  Both endowed with the property of swimming, their common
derivation from the waters has made them of one family. <span
id="fr_1649"></span>[1650](#fn_1649)   At the same time no bird is
without feet, because finding all its food upon the earth it cannot do
without their service.  Rapacious birds have pointed claws to enable
them to close on their prey; to the rest has been given the
indispensable ministry of feet to seek their food and to provide for the
other needs of life.  There are a few who walk badly, whose feet are
neither suitable for walking nor for preying.  Among this number are
swallows, incapable of walking and seeking their prey, and the birds
called swifts <span id="fr_1650"></span>[1651](#fn_1650) who live on
little insects carried about by the air.  As to the swallow, its flight,
which grazes the earth, fulfils the function of feet.

<span id="viii.ix-p24"></span>3.  There are also innumerable kinds of
birds.  If we review them all, as we have partly done the fish, we shall
find that under one name, the creatures which fly differ infinitely in
size, form and colour; that in their life, their actions and their
manners, they present a variety equally beyond the power of
description.  Thus some have tried to imagine names for them of which
the singularity and the strangeness might, like brands, mark the
distinctive character of each kind known.  Some, as eagles, have been
called Schizoptera, others Dermoptera, as the bats, others Ptilota, as
wasps, others Coleoptera, as beetles and all those insects which brought
forth in cases and coverings, break their prison to fly away in
liberty. <span id="fr_1651"></span>[1652](#fn_1651)   But we have enough
words of common usage to characterise each species and to mark the
distinction which Scripture sets up between clean and unclean birds. 
Thus the species of carnivora is of one sort and of one constitution
which suits their manner of living, sharp talons, curved beak, swift
wings, allowing them to swoop easily upon their prey and to tear it up
after having seized it. <span id="fr_1652"></span>[1653](#fn_1652)   The
constitution of those who pick up seeds is different, and again that of
those who live on all they come across.  What a variety in all these
creatures!  Some are gregarious, except the birds of prey who know no
other society than conjugal union; but innumerable kinds, doves, cranes,
starlings, jackdaws, like a common life. <span
id="fr_1653"></span>[1654](#fn_1653)   Among them some live without a
chief and in a sort of independence; others, as cranes, do not refuse to
submit themselves to a leader.  And a fresh difference between <span
id="page_97">p. 97</span> <span id="viii.ix-Page_97"></span>them is that
some are stationary and non-migratory; others undertake long voyages and
the greater part of them migrate at the approach of winter.  Nearly all
birds can be tamed and are capable of training, except the weakest, who
through fear and timidity cannot bear the constant and annoying contact
of the hand.  Some like the society of man and inhabit our dwellings;
others delight in mountains and in desert places.  There is a great
difference too in their peculiar notes.  Some twitter and chatter,
others are silent, some have a melodious and sonorous voice, some are
wholly inharmonious and incapable of song; some imitate the voice of
man, taught their mimicry either by nature or training; <span
id="fr_1654"></span>[1655](#fn_1654) others always give forth the same
monotonous cry.  The cock is proud; the peacock is vain of his beauty;
doves and fowls are amorous, always seeking each other’s society.  The
partridge is deceitful and jealous, lending perfidious help to the
huntsmen to seize their prey. <span id="fr_1655"></span>[1656](#fn_1655)

<span id="viii.ix-p30"></span>4.  What a variety, I have said, in the
actions and lives of flying creatures.  Some of these unreasoning
creatures even have a government, if the feature of government is to
make the activity of all the individuals centre in one common end.  This
may be observed in bees.  They have a common dwelling place; they fly in
the air together, they work at the same work together; and what is still
more extraordinary is that they give themselves to these labours under
the guidance of a king and superintendent, and that they do not allow
themselves to fly to the meadows without seeing if the king is flying at
their head.  As to this king, it is not election that gives him this
authority; ignorance on the part of the people often puts the worst man
in power; it is not fate; the blind decisions of fate often give
authority to the most unworthy.  It is not heredity that places him on
the throne; it is only too common to see the children of kings,
corrupted by luxury and flattery, living in ignorance of all virtue.  It
is nature which makes the king of the bees, for nature gives him
superior size, beauty, and sweetness of character.  He has a sting like
the others, but he does not use it to revenge himself. <span
id="fr_1656"></span>[1657](#fn_1656)   It is a principle of natural and
unwritten law, that those who are raised to high office, ought to be
lenient in punishing.  Even bees who do not follow the example of their
king, repent without delay of their imprudence, since they lose their
lives with their sting.  Listen, Christians, you to whom it is forbidden
to “recompense evil for evil” and commanded “to overcome evil with
good.” <span id="fr_1657"></span>[1658](#fn_1657)   Take the bee for
your model, which constructs its cells without injuring any one and
without interfering with the goods of others.  It gathers openly wax
from the flowers with its mouth, drawing in the honey scattered over
them like dew, and injects it into the hollow of its cells.  Thus at
first honey is liquid; time thickens it and gives it its
sweetness. <span id="fr_1658"></span>[1659](#fn_1658)   The book of
Proverbs has given the bee the most honourable and the best praise by
calling her wise and industrious. <span
id="fr_1659"></span>[1660](#fn_1659)   How much activity she exerts in
gathering this precious nourishment, by which both kings and men of low
degree are brought to health!  How great is the art and cunning she
displays in the construction of the store houses which are destined to
receive the honey!  After having spread the wax like a thin membrane,
she distributes it in contiguous compartments which, weak though they
are, by their number and by their mass, sustain the whole edifice.  Each
cell in fact holds to the one next to it, and is separated by a thin
partition; we thus see two or three galleries of cells built one upon
the other.  The bee takes care not to make one vast cavity, for fear it
might break under the weight of the liquid, and allow it to escape.  See
how the discoveries of geometry are mere by-works to the wise bee! <span
id="fr_1660"></span>[1661](#fn_1660)

<span id="viii.ix-p38"></span>The rows of honey-comb are all hexagonal
with equal sides.  They do not bear on each other in straight lines,
lest the supports should press on empty spaces between and give way; but
the angles of the lower hexagons serve as foundations and bases to those
which rise above, so as to furnish a sure support to the lower mass, and
so that each cell may securely keep the liquid honey. <span
id="fr_1661"></span>[1662](#fn_1661)

<span id="viii.ix-p40"></span><span id="page_98">p. 98</span> <span
id="viii.ix-Page_98"></span>5.  How shall we make an exact review of all
the peculiarities of the life of birds?  During the night cranes keep
watch in turn; some sleep, others make the rounds and procure a quiet
slumber for their companions.  After having finished his duty, the
sentry utters a cry, and goes to sleep, and the one who awakes, in his
turn, repays the security which he has enjoyed. <span
id="fr_1662"></span>[1663](#fn_1662)   You will see the same order reign
in their flight.  One leads the way, and when it has guided the flight
of the flock for a certain time, it passes to the rear, leaving to the
one who comes after the care of directing the march.

<span id="viii.ix-p42"></span>The conduct of storks comes very near
intelligent reason.  In these regions the same season sees them all
migrate.  They all start at one given signal.  And it seems to me that
our crows, serving them as escort, go to bring them back, and to help
them against the attacks of hostile birds.  The proof is that in this
season not a single crow appears, and that they return with wounds,
evident marks of the help and of the assistance that they have lent. 
Who has explained to them the laws of hospitality?  Who has threatened
them with the penalties of desertion?  For not one is missing from the
company.  Listen, all inhospitable hearts, ye who shut your doors, whose
house is never open either in the winter or in the night to travellers. 
The solicitude of storks for their old would be sufficient, if our
children would reflect upon it, to make them love their parents; because
there is no one so failing in good sense, as not to deem it a shame to
be surpassed in virtue by birds devoid of reason.  The storks surround
their father, when old age makes his feathers drop off, warm him with
their wings, and provide abundantly for his support, and even in their
flight they help him as much as they are able, raising him gently on
each side upon their wings, a conduct so notorious that it has given to
gratitude the name of “antipelargosis.” <span
id="fr_1663"></span>[1664](#fn_1663)   Let no one lament poverty; let
not the man whose house is bare despair of his life, when he considers
the industry of the swallow.  To build her nest, she brings bits of
straw in her beak; and, as she cannot raise the mud in her claws, she
moistens the end of her wings in water and then rolls in very fine dust
and thus procures mud. <span id="fr_1664"></span>[1665](#fn_1664)  
After having united, little by little, the bits of straw with this mud,
as with glue, she feeds her young; and if any one of them has its eyes
injured, she has a natural remedy to heal the sight of her little
ones. <span id="fr_1665"></span>[1666](#fn_1665)

<span id="viii.ix-p46"></span>This sight ought to warn you not to take
to evil ways on account of poverty; and, even if you are reduced to the
last extremity, not to lose all hope; not to abandon yourself to
inaction and idleness, but to have recourse to God.  If He is so
bountiful to the swallow, what will He not do for those who call upon
Him with all their heart?

<span id="viii.ix-p47"></span>The halcyon is a sea bird, which lays its
eggs along the shore, or deposits them in the sand.  And it lays in the
middle of winter, when the violence of the winds dashes the sea against
the land.  Yet all winds are hushed, and the wave of the sea grows calm,
during the seven days that the halcyon sits. <span
id="fr_1666"></span>[1667](#fn_1666)

<span id="viii.ix-p52"></span>For it only takes seven days to hatch the
young.  Then, as they are in need of food so that they may grow, God, in
His munificence, grants another seven days to this tiny animal.  All
sailors know this, and call these days halcyon days.  If divine
Providence has established these marvellous laws in favour of creatures
devoid of reason, it is to induce you to ask for your salvation from
God.  Is there a wonder which He will not perform for you—you have been
made in His image, when for so little a bird, the great, the fearful sea
is held in check and is commanded in the midst of winter to be calm.

<span id="viii.ix-p53"></span>6.  It is said that the turtle-dove, once
separated from her mate, does not contract a new union, but remains in
widowhood, in remembrance of her first alliance. <span
id="fr_1667"></span>[1668](#fn_1667)   Listen, O women!  What veneration
for widowhood, even in these creatures devoid of reason, how they prefer
it to an unbecoming multiplicity of marriages.  The eagle shows the
greatest injustice in the edu<span id="page_99">p. 99</span> <span
id="viii.ix-Page_99"></span>cation which she gives to her young.  When
she has hatched two little ones, she throws one on the ground, thrusting
it out with blows from her wings, and only acknowledges the remaining
one.  It is the difficulty of finding food which has made her repulse
the offspring she has brought forth.  But the osprey, it is said, will
not allow it to perish, she carries it away and brings it up with her
young ones. <span id="fr_1668"></span>[1669](#fn_1668)   Such are
parents who, under the plea of poverty, expose their children; such are
again those who, in the distribution of their inheritance, make unequal
divisions.  Since they have given existence equally to each of their
children, it is just that they should equally and without preference
furnish them with the means of livelihood.  Beware of imitating the
cruelty of birds with hooked talons.  When they see their young are from
henceforth capable of encountering the air in their flight, they throw
them out of the nest, striking them and pushing them with their wings,
and do not take the least care of them.  The love of the crow for its
young is laudable!  When they begin to fly, she follows them, gives them
food, and for a very long time provides for their nourishment.  Many
birds have no need of union with males to conceive.  But their eggs are
unfruitful, except those of vultures, who more often, it is said, bring
forth without coupling: <span id="fr_1669"></span>[1670](#fn_1669)   and
this although they have a very long life, which often reaches its
hundredth year.  Note and retain, I pray you, this point in the history
of birds; and if ever you see any one laugh at our mystery, as if it
were impossible and contrary to nature that a virgin should become a
mother without losing the purity of her virginity, bethink you that He
who would save the faithful by the foolishness of preaching, has given
us beforehand in nature a thousand reasons for believing in the
marvellous. <span id="fr_1670"></span>[1671](#fn_1670)

<span id="viii.ix-p58"></span>7.  “*Let the waters bring forth the
moving creatures that have life, and fowl that may fly above the earth
in the open firmament of heaven*.”  They received the command to fly
above the earth because earth provides them with nourishment.  “In the
firmament of heaven,” that is to say, as we have said before, in that
part of the air called <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.ix-p58.1"></span>οὐρανός</span>, heaven, <span
id="fr_1671"></span>[1672](#fn_1671) from the word <span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.ix-p59.1"></span>ὁ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.ix-p59.2"></span>ρᾶν</span>, which means to
see; <span id="fr_1672"></span>[1673](#fn_1672) called firmament,
because the air which extends over our heads, compared to the æther, has
greater density, and is thickened by the vapours which exhale from the
earth.  You have then heaven adorned, earth beautified, the sea peopled
with its own creatures, the air filled with birds which scour it in
every direction.  Studious listener, think of all these creations which
God has drawn out of nothing, think of all those which my speech has
left out, to avoid tediousness, and not to exceed my limits; recognise
everywhere the wisdom of God; never cease to wonder, and, through every
creature, to glorify the Creator.

<span id="viii.ix-p61"></span>There are some kinds of birds which live
by night in the midst of darkness; others which fly by day in full
light.  Bats, owls, night-ravens are birds of night:  if by chance you
cannot sleep, reflect on these nocturnal birds and their peculiarities
and glorify their Maker.  How is it that the nightingale is always awake
when sitting on her eggs, passing the night in a continual melody? <span
id="fr_1673"></span>[1674](#fn_1673)   How is it that one animal, the
bat, is at the same time quadruped and fowl?  That it is the only one of
the birds to have teeth?  That it is viviparous like quadrupeds, and
traverses the air, raising itself not upon wings, but upon a kind of
membrane? <span id="fr_1674"></span>[1675](#fn_1674)   What natural love
bats have for each other!  How they interlace like a chain and hang the
one upon the other!  A very rare spectacle among men, who for the
greater part prefer individual and private life to the union of common
life.  Have not those who give themselves up to vain science the eyes of
owls?  The sight of the owl, piercing during the night time, is dazzled
by the splendour of the sun; thus the intelligence of these men, so keen
to contemplate vanities, is blind in presence of the true light.

<span id="viii.ix-p64"></span>During the day, also, how easy it is for
you to admire the Creator everywhere!  See how <span id="page_100">p.
100</span> <span id="viii.ix-Page_100"></span>the domestic cock calls
you to work with his shrill cry, and how, forerunner of the sun, and
early as the traveller, he sends forth labourers to the harvest!  What
vigilance in geese!  With what sagacity they divine secret dangers!  Did
they not once upon a time save the imperial city?  When enemies were
advancing by subterranean passages to possess themselves of the capitol
of Rome, did not geese announce the danger? <span
id="fr_1675"></span>[1676](#fn_1675)   Is there any kind of bird whose
nature offers nothing for our admiration?  Who announces to the vultures
that there will be carnage when men march in battle array against one
another?  You may see flocks of vultures following armies and
calculating the result of warlike preparations; <span
id="fr_1676"></span>[1677](#fn_1676) a calculation very nearly
approaching to human reasoning.  How can I describe to you the fearful
invasions of locusts, which rise everywhere at a given signal, and pitch
their camps all over a country?  They do not attack crops until they
have received the divine command.  Or shall I describe how the remedy
for this curse, the thrush, follows them with its insatiable appetite,
and the devouring nature that the loving God has given it in His
kindness for men? <span id="fr_1677"></span>[1678](#fn_1677)   How does
the grasshopper modulate its song? <span
id="fr_1678"></span>[1679](#fn_1678)   Why is it more melodious at
midday owing to the air that it breathes in dilating its chest?

<span id="viii.ix-p70"></span>But it appears to me that in wishing to
describe the marvels of winged creatures, I remain further behind than I
should if my feet had tried to match the rapidity of their flight.  When
you see bees, wasps, in short all those flying creatures called insects,
because they have an incision all around, reflect that they have neither
respiration nor lungs, and that they are supported by air through all
parts of their bodies. <span id="fr_1679"></span>[1680](#fn_1679)   Thus
they perish, if they are covered with oil, because it stops up their
pores.  Wash them with vinegar, the pores reopen and the animal returns
to life.  Our God has created nothing unnecessarily and has omitted
nothing that is necessary.  If now you cast your eyes upon aquatic
creatures, you will find that their organization is quite different. 
Their feet are not split like those of the crow, nor hooked like those
of the carnivora, but large and membraneous; therefore they can easily
swim, pushing the water with the membranes of their feet as with oars. 
Notice how the swan plunges his neck into the depths of the water to
draw his food from it, and you will understand the wisdom of the Creator
in giving this creature a neck longer than his feet, so that he may
throw it like a line, and take the food hidden at the bottom of the
water. <span id="fr_1680"></span>[1681](#fn_1680)

<span id="viii.ix-p73"></span>8.  If we simply read the words of
Scripture we find only a few short syllables.  “Let the waters bring
forth fowl that may fly above the earth in the open firmament of
heaven,” but if we enquire into the meaning of these words, then the
great wonder of the wisdom of the Creator appears.  What a difference He
has foreseen among winged creatures!  How He has divided them by kinds! 
How He has characterized each one of them by distinct qualities!  But
the day will not suffice me to recount the wonders of the air.  Earth is
calling me to describe wild beasts, reptiles and cattle, ready to show
us in her turn sights rivalling those of plants, fish, and birds.  “Let
the earth bring forth the living soul” of domestic animals, of wild
beasts, and of reptiles after their kind.  What have you to say, you who
do not believe in the change that Paul promises you in the resurrection,
when you see so many metamorphoses among creatures of the air?  What are
we not told of the horned worm of India!  First it changes into a
caterpillar, <span id="fr_1681"></span>[1682](#fn_1681) then becomes a
buzzing insect, and not content with this form, it clothes itself,
instead of wings, with loose, broad plates.  Thus, O women, when you are
seated busy with your weaving, I mean of the silk which is sent you by
the Chinese to make your delicate dresses, <span
id="fr_1682"></span>[1683](#fn_1682) remember the metamorphoses of this
creature, conceive a clear idea of the resurrection, and do not refuse
to believe in the change that Paul announces for all men.

<span id="viii.ix-p76"></span>But I am ashamed to see that my discourse
oversteps the accustomed limits; if I consider the abundance of matters
on which I have just discoursed to you, I feel that I am being borne
beyond bounds; but when I reflect upon the inexhaustible wisdom which
<span id="page_101">p. 101</span> <span id="viii.ix-Page_101"></span>is
displayed in the works of creation, I seem to be but at the beginning of
my story.  Nevertheless, I have not detained you so long without
profit.  For what would you have done until the evening?  You are not
pressed by guests, nor expected at banquets.  Let me then employ this
bodily fast to rejoice your souls.  You have often served the flesh for
pleasure, to-day persevere in the ministry of the soul.  “Delight
thyself also in the Lord and he shall give thee the desire of thine
heart.” <span id="fr_1683"></span>[1684](#fn_1683)   Do you love
riches?  Here are spiritual riches.  “The judgments of the Lord are true
and righteous altogether.  More to be desired are they than gold and
precious stones.” <span id="fr_1684"></span>[1685](#fn_1684)   Do you
love enjoyment and pleasures?  Behold the oracles of the Lord, which,
for a healthy soul, are “sweeter than honey and the honey-comb.” <span
id="fr_1685"></span>[1686](#fn_1685)   If I let you go, and if I dismiss
this assembly, some will run to the dice, where they will find bad
language, sad quarrels and the pangs of avarice.  There stands the
devil, inflaming the fury of the players with the dotted bones, <span
id="fr_1686"></span>[1687](#fn_1686) transporting the same sums of money
from one side of the table to the other, now exalting one with victory
and throwing the other into despair, now swelling the first with
boasting and covering his rival with confusion. <span
id="fr_1687"></span>[1688](#fn_1687)   Of what use is bodily fasting and
filling the soul with innumerable evils?  He who does not play spends
his leisure elsewhere.  What frivolities come from his mouth!  What
follies strike his ears!  Leisure without the fear of the Lord is, for
those who do not know the value of time, a school of vice. <span
id="fr_1688"></span>[1689](#fn_1688)   I hope that my words will be
profitable; at least by occupying you here they have prevented you from
sinning.  Thus the longer I keep you, the longer you are out of the way
of evil.

<span id="viii.ix-p90"></span>An equitable judge will deem that I have
said enough, not if he considers the riches of creation, but if he
thinks of our weakness and of the measure one ought to keep in that
which tends to pleasure.  Earth has welcomed you with its own plants,
water with its fish, air with its birds; the continent in its turn is
ready to offer you as rich treasures.  But let us put an end to this
morning banquet, for fear satiety may blunt your taste for the evening
one.  May He who has filled all with the works of His creation and has
left everywhere visible memorials of His wonders, fill your hearts with
all spiritual joys in Jesus Christ, our Lord, to whom belong glory and
power, world without end.  Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1638"></span>[94:1639](2080070.htm#fr_1638) <span
id="viii.ix-p2.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ix-p3"></span> *Codex Colb*. 1 has the title “about
creeping things and beasts.”

<span id="fn_1639"></span>[94:1640](2080070.htm#fr_1639) <span
id="viii.ix-p4.2"></span>

<span id="viii.ix-p5"></span> [Gen. i.
24](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#024)<span id="viii.ix-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1640"></span>[95:1641](2080070.htm#fr_1640) <span
id="viii.ix-p6.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ix-p7"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.ix-p7.1"></span>ζωή</span>.

<span id="fn_1641"></span>[95:1642](2080070.htm#fr_1641) <span
id="viii.ix-p7.2"></span>

<span id="viii.ix-p8"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.ix-p8.1"></span>ψυχή</span>.

<span id="fn_1642"></span>[95:1643](2080070.htm#fr_1642) <span
id="viii.ix-p8.2"></span>

<span id="viii.ix-p9"></span> See note on p. 90.

<span id="fn_1643"></span>[95:1644](2080070.htm#fr_1643) <span
id="viii.ix-p9.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ix-p10"></span> [Isa. i.
3](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#003)<span id="viii.ix-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1644"></span>[95:1645](2080070.htm#fr_1644) <span
id="viii.ix-p11.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ix-p12"></span> *cf*. [Lev. xvii.
11](../../../bib/kjv/lev017.htm#011)<span id="viii.ix-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1645"></span>[95:1646](2080070.htm#fr_1645) <span
id="viii.ix-p12.2"></span>

<span id="viii.ix-p13"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.ix-p13.1"></span>ὑ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.ix-p13.2"></span>πόστασις</span>.

<span id="fn_1646"></span>[95:1647](2080070.htm#fr_1646) <span
id="viii.ix-p13.3"></span>

<span id="viii.ix-p14"></span> It may be supposed “that the souls of
brutes, being but so many eradiations or effuxes from that source of
life above, are, as soon as ever those organized bodies of theirs, by
reason of their indisposition, become uncapable of being further acted
upon by them, then to be resumed again and retracted back to their
original head and fountain.  Since it cannot be doubted but what creates
anything out of nothing, or sends it forth from itself, by free and
voluntary emanation, may be able either to retract the same back again
to its original source, or else to annihilate it at pleasure.  And I
find that there have not wanted some among the Gentile philosophers
themselves who have entertained this opinion, whereof Porphyry is one,
<span class="Greek"><span id="viii.ix-p14.1"></span>λύεται ἑκάστη
δύναμις ἀλογος εἰς τὴν ὅλην ζωὴν τοῦ πάντος</span>.”  Cudworth, i. 35.

<span id="fn_1647"></span>[96:1648](2080070.htm#fr_1647) <span
id="viii.ix-p14.2"></span>

<span id="viii.ix-p15"></span> Empedocles is named as author of the
lines:

<span id="viii.ix-p16"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.ix-p16.1"></span>ἤ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.ix-p16.2"></span>δη γὰρ ποτ᾽ ἐγὼ γενόμην κούρητε κόρος
τε,</span>

<span id="viii.ix-p17"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.ix-p17.1"></span>Θάμνος τ᾽ οἰωνός τε καὶ εἰν ἁλὶ ἔλλοπος
ἰχθύς</span>

<span id="viii.ix-p18"></span>*cf*. Diog. Laert. viii. 78, and Plutarch,
*D Solert. An*. ii. 964.  Whether the “faba Pythagoræ cognata” of Hor.,
*Sat*. ii. 6, 63, implies the transmigration of the soul into it is
doubtful.  *cf*. Juv., *Sat*. xv. 153.  Anaximander thought that human
beings were originally generated from fish.  Plut., *Symp*. viii. 8.

<span id="fn_1648"></span>[96:1649](2080070.htm#fr_1648) <span
id="viii.ix-p18.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ix-p19"></span> [Gen. i.
20](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#020)<span id="viii.ix-p19.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1649"></span>[96:1650](2080070.htm#fr_1649) <span
id="viii.ix-p20.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ix-p21"></span> Fialon quotes Bossuet, 1st Elev. 5th
week:  “*<span id="viii.ix-p21.1"></span>Qui a donné aux oiseaux et aux
poissons ces rames naturelles, qui leur font fendre les eaux et les
airs?  Ce qui peut être a donné lieu à leur Créateur de les produire
ensemble, comme animaux d’un dessin à peu près semblable:  le vol des
oiseaux semblant, etre une espèce de faculté de nager dans une liqueur
plus subtile, comme la faculté de nager dans les poissons est une espèce
de vol dans une liqueur plus épaisse*.”

<span id="viii.ix-p22"></span>The theory of evolutionists is, as is well
known, that birds developed out of reptiles and reptiles from fish. 
*Vide* E. Haeckel’s monophyletic pedigree in his *History of Creation*.

<span id="fn_1650"></span>[96:1651](2080070.htm#fr_1650) <span
id="viii.ix-p22.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ix-p23"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.ix-p23.1"></span>δρεπανίς</span>, *i.e*. sickle-bird.

<span id="fn_1651"></span>[96:1652](2080070.htm#fr_1651) <span
id="viii.ix-p24.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ix-p25"></span> These are the terms of Aristotle, *Hist.
An*. i. 5.

<span id="fn_1652"></span>[96:1653](2080070.htm#fr_1652) <span
id="viii.ix-p25.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ix-p26"></span> *cf*. Arist., *Hist. An*. viii. 3.

<span id="fn_1653"></span>[96:1654](2080070.htm#fr_1653) <span
id="viii.ix-p26.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ix-p27"></span> Whence the proverb <span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.ix-p27.1"></span>κολοιὸς ποτὶ
κολοιόν</span>.  Arist., *Eth. Nic*. I. viii. 6.

<span id="fn_1654"></span>[97:1655](2080070.htm#fr_1654) <span
id="viii.ix-p27.2"></span>

<span id="viii.ix-p28"></span> “*Super omnia humanas voces reddunt,
posittaci quidem sermocinantes*.”  Plin. x. 53.

<span id="fn_1655"></span>[97:1656](2080070.htm#fr_1655) <span
id="viii.ix-p28.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ix-p29"></span> Arist., *Hist. An*. ix. 10.

<span id="fn_1656"></span>[97:1657](2080070.htm#fr_1656) <span
id="viii.ix-p30.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ix-p31"></span> Arist., *Hist. An*. v. 21, and Plin. xi.
17.  “*Ecce in re parva, villisque nostra annexa, cujus assidua copia
est, non constat inter auctores, rex nullumne solus habeat aculeum,
majestate tantum armatus:  an dederit eum quidem natura, sed usum ejus
illi tantum negaverit.  Illud constat imperatorem aculeo non uti.*”

<span id="fn_1657"></span>[97:1658](2080070.htm#fr_1657) <span
id="viii.ix-p31.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ix-p32"></span> [Rom.
12:17](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#017),
[21](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#021)<span id="viii.ix-p32.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1658"></span>[97:1659](2080070.htm#fr_1658) <span
id="viii.ix-p32.2"></span>

<span id="viii.ix-p33"></span> The ancient belief was that honey fell
from heaven, in the shape of dew, and the bee only gathered it from
leaves.  So Verg., *Ec*. iv. 30, “*roscida mella*,” and *Georg*. iv. 1,
“*aerii mellis cœlestia dona*.”  *cf*. Arist., *H. A.* v. 22 <span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.ix-p33.1"></span>μελὶ δὲ τὸ πίπτον ἐκ τοῦ
ἀ& 153·ρος, και μάλιστα τῶν ἄστρων ἀνατολαῖς, καὶ ὅταν κατασκήφη ἡ
ἶρις</span>, and Plin. xi. 12.  “*Sive ille est cœli sudor, sive quædam
siderum saliva, sine purgantis se aeris succus,… magnam tamen cœlestis
naturæ voluptatem affert*.”  So Coleridge (Kubla Khan):

<span id="viii.ix-p34"></span>“For he on honey dew hath fed

<span id="viii.ix-p35"></span>And drunk the milk of Paradise.”

<span id="fn_1659"></span>[97:1660](2080070.htm#fr_1659) <span
id="viii.ix-p35.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ix-p36"></span> [Prov. vi.
8](../../../bib/kjv/pro006.htm#008)<span id="viii.ix-p36.1"></span>,
lxx.  The reference to the bee is not in the Hebrew.

<span id="fn_1660"></span>[97:1661](2080070.htm#fr_1660) <span
id="viii.ix-p36.2"></span>

<span id="viii.ix-p37"></span> *cf*. Ælian. v. 13.  <span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.ix-p37.1"></span>γεωμετρίαν δὲ καὶ κάλλη
σχημάτων καὶ ὡραίας πλάσεις αὐτῶν ἄνευ τέχνης τε καὶ κανόνων καὶ τοῦ
καλουμένου ὑπὸ τῶν σοφῶν διαβήτου, τὸ κάλλιστον σχημάτων ἑξαγωνόν τε καὶ
ἑξάπλευρον καὶ ἰσογώνιον ἀποδείκνυνται αἱ μέλιτται</span>.

<span id="fn_1661"></span>[97:1662](2080070.htm#fr_1661) <span
id="viii.ix-p38.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ix-p39"></span> The mathematical exactness of the bee is
described by Darwin in terms which make it even more marvellous than it
appeared to Basil.  “The most wonderful of all known instincts, that of
the hive bee, may be explained by natural selection having taken
advantage of numerous slight modifications of simpler instincts; natural
selection having by slow degrees more and more perfectly led the bees to
sweep equal spheres at a given distance from each other in a double
layer, and to build up and excavate the wax along the planes of
intersection.”  *Origin of Species*, ii. 255, ed. 1861.  According to
this view the beings from whom hive bees, as we know them, are descended
were gifted with certain simple instincts capable of a kind of
hereditary unconscious education, resulting in a complex instinct which
constructs with exact precision the hexagonal chamber best fitted for
the purpose it is designed to fulfil, and then packs it.  And it is
interesting to note how the great apostle of abstract selection
personifies it as a “taker” of “advantage,” and a “leader.”

<span id="fn_1662"></span>[98:1663](2080070.htm#fr_1662) <span
id="viii.ix-p40.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ix-p41"></span> Arist., *Hist. An*. ix. 10.

<span id="fn_1663"></span>[98:1664](2080070.htm#fr_1663) <span
id="viii.ix-p42.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ix-p43"></span> From <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.ix-p43.1"></span>πελαργός</span>.  On the pious affection of
the stork, *cf*. Plato, *Alc*. i. 135 (§ 61), Arist., *H.A*. ix. 13, 20,
Ælian, *H.A*. iii. 23 and x. 16, and Plin. x. 32.  From <span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.ix-p43.2"></span>πελαργὸς</span> was
supposed to be derived the Pythagorean word <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.ix-p43.3"></span>πελαργᾶν</span> (Diog. Laert. viii. 20), but
this is now regarded as a corruption of <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.ix-p43.4"></span>πεδαρτᾶν</span>.

<span id="fn_1664"></span>[98:1665](2080070.htm#fr_1664) <span
id="viii.ix-p43.5"></span>

<span id="viii.ix-p44"></span> “*Hirundines luto construunt, stramine
roborant:  si quando inopia est luti, madefactæ multa aqua pennis
pulverem spargunt*.”  Plin. x. 49.  *cf*. Arist., *Hist. An*. ix. 10.

<span id="fn_1665"></span>[98:1666](2080070.htm#fr_1665) <span
id="viii.ix-p44.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ix-p45"></span> “*Chelidoniam visui saluberriman
hirundines monstravere, vexatis pullorum oculis illa medentes*.”  Plin.
viii. 41. *cf*. Ælian, *H.A*. iii. 25.  Chelidonia is swallowwort or
celandine.

<span id="fn_1666"></span>[98:1667](2080070.htm#fr_1666) <span
id="viii.ix-p47.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ix-p48"></span> “*Fœtificant bruma, qui dies halcyonides
vocantur, placido mari per eos et navigabili, Siculo maxime*.  Plin. x.
47.  *cf*. Arist., *H.A.* v. 8, 9, and Ælian, *H. N.* i. 36.  So Theoc.
vii. 57:

<span id="viii.ix-p49"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.ix-p49.1"></span>Χ᾽ ἁλκυόνες στορεσεῦντι τὰ κύματα, τάν τε
θάλασσαν</span>

<span id="viii.ix-p50"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.ix-p50.1"></span>Τόν τε νότον τόντ᾽ εὖρον ὃς ἔσχατα φυκία
κινεῖ</span>

<span id="viii.ix-p51"></span>Sir Thomas Browne (*Vulgar Errors*) denies
the use of a kingfisher as a weather-gauge, but says nothing as to the
“halcyon days.”  Kingfishers are rarely seen in the open sea, but haunt
estuaries which are calm without any special miracle.  Possibly the
halcyon was a tern or sea-swallow, which resembles a kingfisher, but
they brood on land.

<span id="fn_1667"></span>[98:1668](2080070.htm#fr_1667) <span
id="viii.ix-p53.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ix-p54"></span> Arist., *H.A.* ix. 7.

<span id="fn_1668"></span>[99:1669](2080070.htm#fr_1668) <span
id="viii.ix-p54.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ix-p55"></span> Ar. vi. 6 and ix. 34.  “*Melanaetos…sola
aquilarum fœtus suos alit; ceteræ…fugant*.”  Plin. x. 3.  “*Pariunt ova
terna:  excludunt pullos binos:  visi sunt et tres aliquando*.”  *id*.
4, following Musæus (*apud* Plutarch, *In Mario*, p. 426).  <span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.ix-p55.1"></span>ὡ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.ix-p55.2"></span>ς</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.ix-p55.3"></span>τρία μὲν τίκτει, δύο δ᾽
ἔκλεπει, ἓν δ᾽ ἀλεγίζει</span>.  On the osprey, see Arist., *H.A.* ix.
44 and Pliny *loc*.  “*Sed ejectos ab his cognatum genus ossifragi
excipiunt, et educant cum suis*.”

<span id="fn_1669"></span>[99:1670](2080070.htm#fr_1669) <span
id="viii.ix-p55.4"></span>

<span id="viii.ix-p56"></span> Arist., *Hist. An.* vi. 6 and ix. 15.  So
Pliny x. vii.  “*Nidos nemo attigit:  ideo etiam fuere qui putarent
illos ex adverso orbe advolare, nidificant enim in excelsissimis
rupibus*.”  *cf.* also Ælian, ii. 46:  <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.ix-p56.1"></span>γῦπα δὲ ἄρρενα οὔ φασι γίγνεσθαί ποτε ἀλλὰ
θηλείας ἁπάσας</span>.

<span id="fn_1670"></span>[99:1671](2080070.htm#fr_1670) <span
id="viii.ix-p56.2"></span>

<span id="viii.ix-p57"></span> This analogy is repeated almost in
identical words in Basil’s Hom. xxii. *De Providentia*.  *cf*. also his
*Com. on Isaiah*.  St. Ambrose repeats the illustration (*Hex*. v. 20). 
The analogy, even if the facts were true, would be false and
misleading.  But it is curious to note that were any modern divine
desirous of here following in Basil’s track, he might find the alleged
facts in the latest modern science,—*e.g.* in the so-called
Parthenogenesis, or virginal reproduction, among insects, as said to be
demonstrated by Siebold.  Haeckel (*Hist. of Creation*, Lankester’s ed.
ii. p. 198) represents sexual reproduction as quite a recent development
of non-sexual reproduction.

<span id="fn_1671"></span>[99:1672](2080070.htm#fr_1671) <span
id="viii.ix-p58.2"></span>

<span id="viii.ix-p59"></span> *cf*. note on p. 70.

<span id="fn_1672"></span>[99:1673](2080070.htm#fr_1672) <span
id="viii.ix-p59.3"></span>

<span id="viii.ix-p60"></span> The Greek word <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.ix-p60.1"></span>στερέωμα</span>, from <span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.ix-p60.2"></span>στερεός</span>, strong, is
traceable to the root <span class="c14"><span
id="viii.ix-p60.3"></span>star</span>, to spread out, and so indirectly
associated with the connotation of the Hebrew *rakia.*

<span id="fn_1673"></span>[99:1674](2080070.htm#fr_1673) <span
id="viii.ix-p61.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ix-p62"></span> Arist., *H.A.* viii. 75.  Pliny x. 43. 
“*Luscinus diebus ac noctibus continuis quindecim garrulus sine
intermissu cantus, densante se frondium germine, non in novissimum digna
miratu ave*.”

<span id="fn_1674"></span>[99:1675](2080070.htm#fr_1674) <span
id="viii.ix-p62.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ix-p63"></span> So also Basil in *Hom. on Isaiah* iii.
447.  *cf*. Pliny x. 81, *“cui et membranaceæ pinnæ uni*.”

<span id="fn_1675"></span>[100:1676](2080070.htm#fr_1675) <span
id="viii.ix-p64.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ix-p65"></span> *cf*. Livy v. 47 and Plutarch, Camillus,
or Verg. viii. 655.  The alternative tradition of the mine is preserved
by Servius.

<span id="fn_1676"></span>[100:1677](2080070.htm#fr_1676) <span
id="viii.ix-p65.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ix-p66"></span> *cf*. Ælian, *H.A.* ii. 46.  <span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.ix-p66.1"></span>καὶ μέντοι καὶ ταῖς
ἐκδήμοις στρατιαῖς ἕπονται γῦπες καὶ μάλα γε μαντικῶς ὅτι εἰς πόλεμον
χωροῦσιν εἰδότες καὶ ὅτι μάχη πᾶσα ἐργάζεται νεκροὺς καὶ τοῦτο
ἐγνωκότες</span>.

<span id="viii.ix-p67"></span>*cf*. Pliny x. 88:  “*vultures sagacius
odorantur*.”

<span id="fn_1677"></span>[100:1678](2080070.htm#fr_1677) <span
id="viii.ix-p67.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ix-p68"></span> *cf*. Galen. vi. 3.

<span id="fn_1678"></span>[100:1679](2080070.htm#fr_1678) <span
id="viii.ix-p68.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ix-p69"></span> Fialon, quoting the well known ode of
Anakreon, “<span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.ix-p69.1"></span>μακαρίζομέν σε τέττιξ</span>,” and Plato’s
theory of the affection of grasshoppers and the muses in the *Phædrus*,
contrasts the “*cantu querulæ rumpent arbusta cicadæ*” of Vergil
(*George*. iii. 328) and points out that the Romans did not share the
Greek admiration for the grasshopper’s song.

<span id="fn_1679"></span>[100:1680](2080070.htm#fr_1679) <span
id="viii.ix-p70.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ix-p71"></span> “*Insecta multi negarunt spirare, idque
ratione persuadentes, quoniam in viscera interiora nexus spirabilis non
inesset.  Itaque vivere ut fruges, arboresque:  sed plurimum interesse
spiret aliquid an vivat.  Eadem de causa nec sanguinem iis esse qui sit
nullis carentibus corde atque jecore.  Sic nec spirare ea quibus pulmo
desit unde numerosa series quæstionum exoritur.  Iidem enim et vocem
esse his negant, in tanto murmure apium, cicadarum sono…nec video cur
magis possint non trahere animam talia, et vivere, quam spirare sine
visceribus*.”  Plin. xi. 2.

<span id="fn_1680"></span>[100:1681](2080070.htm#fr_1680) <span
id="viii.ix-p71.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ix-p72"></span> Arist., *De Part. An*. iv. 12.

<span id="fn_1681"></span>[100:1682](2080070.htm#fr_1681) <span
id="viii.ix-p73.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ix-p74"></span> This word is curiously rendered by
Eustathius *verucæ*, and by Ambrose *caulis*.  Garnier (*Præf. in Bas.*
28) thinks that the latter perhaps found in some corrupt <span
class="c14"><span id="viii.ix-p74.1"></span>ms.</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.ix-p74.2"></span>κράμβην</span> for <span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.ix-p74.3"></span>κάμπην</span>.

<span id="fn_1682"></span>[100:1683](2080070.htm#fr_1682) <span
id="viii.ix-p74.4"></span>

<span id="viii.ix-p75"></span> Arist., *H.A.* v. 19.

<span id="fn_1683"></span>[101:1684](2080070.htm#fr_1683) <span
id="viii.ix-p76.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ix-p77"></span> [Ps. xxxvii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#004)<span id="viii.ix-p77.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1684"></span>[101:1685](2080070.htm#fr_1684) <span
id="viii.ix-p77.2"></span>

<span id="viii.ix-p78"></span> [Ps.
19:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#009),
[10](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#010)<span id="viii.ix-p78.1"></span>,
LXX.

<span id="fn_1685"></span>[101:1686](2080070.htm#fr_1685) <span
id="viii.ix-p78.2"></span>

<span id="viii.ix-p79"></span> [Ps. xix.
10](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#010)<span id="viii.ix-p79.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1686"></span>[101:1687](2080070.htm#fr_1686) <span
id="viii.ix-p79.2"></span>

<span id="viii.ix-p80"></span> The <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.ix-p80.1"></span>κύβοι</span> were marked on all six sides, the
<span class="Greek"><span id="viii.ix-p80.2"></span>ἂ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.ix-p80.3"></span>στράγαλοι</span> on only
four, the ends being rounded.

<span id="fn_1687"></span>[101:1688](2080070.htm#fr_1687) <span
id="viii.ix-p80.4"></span>

<span id="viii.ix-p81"></span> With Basil’s description of the gaming
tables, presumably of Cæsarea, *cf*. Ovid’s of those of Rome:

<span id="viii.ix-p82"></span>“*Ira subit, deforme malum, lucrique
cupido;*

<span id="viii.ix-p83"></span>Jurgiaque et rixæ, sollicitusque dolor.

<span id="viii.ix-p84"></span>Crimina dicuntur, resonat clamoribus
æther,

<span id="viii.ix-p85"></span>Invocat iratos et sibi quisque deos,

<span id="viii.ix-p86"></span>Nulla fides:  tabulæque novæ per vota
petuntur,

<span id="viii.ix-p87"></span>*Et lacrymis vidi sæpe madere genis*.

<span id="viii.ix-p88"></span>*De A.A.*iii. 373 *seqq.*

<span id="fn_1688"></span>[101:1689](2080070.htm#fr_1688) <span
id="viii.ix-p88.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ix-p89"></span> “*Cernis ut ignavum corrumpant otia
corpus*.”  Ovid, I. *Pont*. 6.  “*Facito aliquid operis ut semper
Diabolus inveniat te occupatum*.  Jerome, *In R. Monach*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The creation of terrestrial animals.](2080071)
