[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2080210)  [Next](2080212) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ix.cxxxix"></span>

<span id="ix.cxxxix-p1"></span> <span class="c18"><span
id="ix.cxxxix-p1.1"></span>Letter CXXXVIII. <span
id="fr_2449"></span>[2450](#fn_2449) </span>

<span id="ix.cxxxix-p3"></span>*To Eusebius, bishop of Samosata*. <span
id="fr_2450"></span>[2451](#fn_2450)

<span id="ix.cxxxix-p5"></span>1.  <span class="c14"><span
id="ix.cxxxix-p5.1"></span>What</span> was my state of mind, think you,
when I received your piety’s letter?  When I thought of the feelings
which its language expressed, I was eager to fly straight to Syria; but
when I thought of the bodily illness, under which I lay bound, I saw
myself unequal, not only to flying, but even to turning on my bed.  This
day, on which our beloved and excellent brother and deacon, Elpidius,
has arrived, is the fiftieth of my illness.  I am much reduced by the
fever.  For lack of what it might feed on, it lingers in this dry flesh
as in an expiring wick, and so has brought on a wasting and tedious
illness.  Next my old plague, the liver, coming upon it, has kept me
from taking nourishment, prevented sleep, and held me on the confines of
life and death, granting just life enough to feel its inflictions.  In
consequence I have had recourse to the hot springs, and have availed
myself of help from medical men.

<span id="ix.cxxxix-p6"></span>But for all these the mischief has proved
too strong.  Perhaps another man might endure it, but, coming as it did
unexpectedly, no one is so stout as to bear it.  Long troubled by it as
I have been, I have never been so distressed as now at being prevented
by it from meeting you and enjoying your true friendship.  I know of how
much pleasure I am deprived, although last year I did touch with the tip
of my finger the sweet honey of your Church.

<span id="ix.cxxxix-p7"></span>2.  For many urgent reasons I felt bound
to meet your reverence, both to discuss many things with you and to
learn many things from you.  Here it is not possible even to find
genuine affection.  And, could one even find a true friend, none can
give counsel to me in the present emergency with anything like the
wisdom and experience which you have acquired in your many labours on
the Church’s behalf.  The rest I must not write.  I may, however, safely
say what follows.  The presbyter Evagrius, <span
id="fr_2451"></span>[2452](#fn_2451) son of Pompeianus of Antioch, who
set out some time ago to the West with the blessed Eusebius, has now
returned from Rome.  He demands from me a letter couched in the precise
terms dictated by the Westerns.  My own he has brought back again to me,
and reports that it did not give satisfaction to the more precise
authorities there.  He also asks that a commission of men of repute may
be promptly sent, that they may have a reasonable pretext for visiting
me.  My sympathisers in Sebasteia have stripped the covering from the
secret sore of the unorthodoxy of Eustathius, and demand my
ecclesiastical care. <span id="fr_2452"></span>[2453](#fn_2452)

<span id="ix.cxxxix-p10"></span>Iconium is a city of Pisidia, anciently
the first after the greatest, <span id="fr_2453"></span>[2454](#fn_2453)
and now it is capital of a part, consisting of an union of different
portions, and allowed the government of a distinct province.  Iconium
too calls me to visit her and to give her a bishop; for Faustinus <span
id="fr_2454"></span>[2455](#fn_2454) is dead.  Whether I ought to shrink
from consecrations over the border; what answer I ought to give to the
Sebastenes; what attitude I should show to the propositions of Evagrius;
all these are questions to which I was anxious to get answers in a
personal interview with you, for here in my present weakness I am cut
off from everything.  If, then, you can find any one soon coming this
way, be so good as to give me your answer on them all.  If not, pray
that what is pleasing to the Lord may come into my mind.  In your synod
also bid mention to be made of me, and pray for me yourself, and join
your people with you <span id="page_203">p. 203</span> <span
id="ix.cxxxix-Page_203"></span>in the prayer that it may be permitted me
to continue my service through the remaining days or hours of my
sojourning here in a manner pleasing to the Lord.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2449"></span>[202:2450](2080211.htm#fr_2449) <span
id="ix.cxxxix-p1.2"></span>

<span id="ix.cxxxix-p2"></span> Placed in 373.

<span id="fn_2450"></span>[202:2451](2080211.htm#fr_2450) <span
id="ix.cxxxix-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ix.cxxxix-p4"></span> The translation of Sec. 1, down to
“medical men,” is partly Newman’s.

<span id="fn_2451"></span>[202:2452](2080211.htm#fr_2451) <span
id="ix.cxxxix-p7.1"></span>

<span id="ix.cxxxix-p8"></span> On Evagrius, known generally as Evagrius
of Antioch, to distinguish him from Evagrius the historian, see
especially Theodoret, *Ecc. Hist*. v. 23.  He had travelled to Italy
with Eusebius of Vercellæ.  His communication to Basil from the Western
bishops must have been disappointing and unsatisfactory.  On his
correspondence with Basil, after his return to Antioch, see *Letter*
clvi.  His consecration by the dying Paulinus in 388 inevitably
prolonged the disastrous Meletian schism at Antioch.

<span id="fn_2452"></span>[202:2453](2080211.htm#fr_2452) <span
id="ix.cxxxix-p8.1"></span>

<span id="ix.cxxxix-p9"></span> *i.e.* that Basil, as primate, should
either consecrate them an orthodox bishop, or, if this was impossible
under Valens, should take them under his own immediate episcopal
protection.

<span id="fn_2453"></span>[202:2454](2080211.htm#fr_2453) <span
id="ix.cxxxix-p10.1"></span>

<span id="ix.cxxxix-p11"></span> *i.e.* Antioch.

<span id="fn_2454"></span>[202:2455](2080211.htm#fr_2454) <span
id="ix.cxxxix-p11.1"></span>

<span id="ix.cxxxix-p12"></span> He was succeeded by John I.  *cf.
Letter* clxi. and note.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: To the Alexandrians.](2080212)
