[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Earth Mysteries](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](potp14)  [Next](potp16) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_128">p. 128</span>

# CHAPTER XI.

### OPEN WATER AT FARTHEST POINT NORTH AND SOUTH.

It is still claimed by many that the Arctic Ocean is a frozen body of
water. Although it always contains large bodies of drift-ice and
icebergs, it is not frozen over. The student of Arctic travels will
invariably find that explorers were turned back by open water, and many
instances are cited where they came near being carried out to sea and
lost. Had they continued going out to sea,--not knowing that the earth
was hollow,--they might have been lost but still live. One can easily
imagine how those that tried to reach the pole by balloon might get lost
and never find their way out, not knowing that the earth was hollow.
What I wish to present to the reader, however, is the *proof* that the
Arctic Ocean is an open body of water, abounding with game of all kinds,
and the farther one advances the warmer

<span id="page_129">p. 129</span>

it will be found. It is never free from cumulus and dark clouds,--coming
up from the interior of the earth,--and from fogs, vapors, and other
evidences of change. At certain seasons, when the atmosphere of the
earth at the poles and the atmosphere of the interior of the earth were
of the same temperature, no clouds would appear unless caused by an
eruption of some kind, which, in many cases, might be clouds of dust or
smoke.

The following extract will afford sufficient proof that my contention on
this subject is correct. On page 265, Captain C. F. Hall says: "On this
day (Dec. 26th) Captain Budington speaks in his journal respecting the
position of the vessel as follows:

"'On ascending the Providence Iceberg and taking a look around, we see
at first the open water at a distance of from three to four miles,
extending the whole length of the strait from north to south. Our vessel
lies on the edge of the land-floe, protected from seaward by the
iceberg.'"

Here he finds open water to the north,

<span id="page_130">p. 130</span>

extending the whole length of the straits from north to south.

Hall further writes, on page 284: "From the top of Providence Berg a
dark fog was seen to the north, indicating water. At 10 a. m. three of
the men,--Kruger, Nindemann and Hobby,--went to Cape Lupton to
ascertain, if possible, the extent of the open water. On their return
they reported several open spaces and much young ice--not more than a
day old--so thin that it was easily broken by throwing pieces of ice
upon it."

Note that he speaks of the dark fog in the north, indicating water, also
that they found young ice not more than a day old.

Then, on page 288: "On the 23d of January the two Esquimaux, accompanied
by two of the seamen, went to Cape Lupton. They reported a sea of open
water extending as far as the eye could reach."

This also was in January: "a sea of open water as far as the eye could
reach."

"On the 24th, Dr. Bessels, with two of the seamen, started at 11 a. m.,
with a dog team, to go north and examine the water

<span id="page_131">p. 131</span>

reported by the seamen. They reached the third cape without difficulty.
Leaving their sled, they arrived at the open water about 2 p. m. They
reported a current there running to the north at a rate variously
estimated from four miles to a half a mile per hour; at the same hour at
the vessel the tide was falling."

Here again on the 24th open water was found, and a current running to
the north at a rate variously estimated at from four miles to a half
mile per hour; at the same time the tide was falling at the vessel,
whereas, according to all established rules, the current should have
been going the other way.

Page 289--Hall's diary--has more upon the subject: "On the 28th, Mr.
Chester and a small party with dogs and sled, went to inspect the open
water which now prevented their rounding the third cape. Mr. Chester
observed a current of one mile an hour toward the north. The existence
of this open water was regarded as favor-able to boat journeys in the
spring. A large sled was ordered, upon which one

<span id="page_132">p. 132</span>

of the boats could be transported to the open water, the extent of which
it was proposed to ascertain as soon as possible. Toward evening the sky
cleared, and the western coast could be distinctly seen."

Again we have evidence of open water, with the current going north.

Reference to the fog, so frequently referred to by the explorers, is
made by Hall, on page 301: "I had for a short time a very extensive view
over the straits, where the open water appeared as a dark, black spot on
a white field. My joy and pleasure did not, however, last long, as
fifteen minutes only sufficed to cover all by a most impenetrable fog, a
phenomenon which I never observed before in winter. I was hardly able to
see twenty paces to the west and northwest, though toward the south it
remained free for a considerable time. There, above the new ice of the
bay, a most beautiful fog-stratum, intensely white, was hanging, and
continually changing its height."

Being in winter, he calls it a phenomenon. Anything that could cause
that fog

<span id="page_133">p. 133</span>

must be out of the ordinary, and must be accounted for in some other
way. If the earth were solid, and the ocean extended to the pole, or
connected with land surrounding the pole, there would be nothing to
produce that fog. It was caused by the warm air coming from the interior
of the earth.

On page 236 Kane says: "Indeed, some circumstances which he (McGary)
reports seem to point to the existence of a north water all the year
round; and the frequent water-skies, fogs, etc., that we have seen to
the S. W. during the winter go to confirm the fact."

He tells us more on the subject (page 299): "Morton's journal, on
Monday, the 26th, says: 'As far as I could see the open passages were
fifteen miles or more wide, with sometimes mashed ice separating them.
But it is all small ice, and I think it either drives out to the open
space to the north, or rots and sinks, as I could see none ahead to the
north.'

"The coast after passing the cape, he thought, must trend to the
eastward, as he

<span id="page_134">p. 134</span>

could at no time when below it see any land beyond. But the west coast
still opened to the north.

"His highest station of outlook at the point where his progress was
arrested he supposed to be about three hundred feet above the sea. From
this point, some six degrees to the west of north, he remarked in the
farthest distance a peak truncated at its top like the cliffs of
Magdalena Bay. It was bare at its summit. This peak, the most remote
northern land known upon our globe, takes its name from the great
pioneer of Arctic travel, Sir Edward Parry. \* \* \* The summits were
generally rounded, resembling, to use his own expression, a succession
of sugar-loaves and stacked cannon-balls declining slowly in the
perspective. Mr. Morton saw no ice."

Greely says, on page 150, in reference to this open-water question: "The
cliffs on the north side of Wrangel Bay were still washed by the open
sea, showing that the storms of the previous month had broken up the
sea-floe in many places."

<span id="page_135">p. 135</span>

Again, on page 254: "This melting of the snow, as well as the limiting
clause of Dr. Pavy's orders, prevented him from attempting to proceed
northward over the disintegrated pack. He consequently decided to return
at once to Cape Joseph Henry. Taking only indispensable effects, and
sufficient provisions to feed the party for a few days, they started in
haste for the Cape, but on arriving opposite it found open water of
three-quarters of a mile in extent between them and the land. On
returning to their old camp for some further stores, the water-space
toward Cape Hecla was found to have increased in width to about three
miles, while the water-clouds to the north and northeast had increased
in amount and distinctness."

He does not speak of the increase in amount and distinctness of the
water-clouds as one of the signs indicating water in the north, but of
an established fact--that the water-cloud (or cloud where the water is
reflected in the skies) is no longer a question, but a certainty. It may
strike the reader as strange that reference is

<span id="page_136">p. 136</span>

made so often to water, ice, and land being reflected in the sky. This
illustrates that if the sky correctly reflects at all times the
condition of the water, the ice, and the land, it will reflect a fire
with as much accuracy as it reflects water.

Dr. Pavy (Greely, page 255) concluded it unwise to return for some of
the abandoned articles, as the pack was liable to move northward again,
since in the offing it was drifting south. He immediately started
southward, impressed with the idea "that Robeson Channel was open, and
that great haste was necessary, fearing that the ice toward Cape
Sheridan would also break up, and seriously delay their progress
homeward."

The ice leading back to their camp was in better condition than farther
north, and from there they traveled clear back to Lincoln Bay.

"At noon, April 24, the party camped at View Point, where a record was
left in the old English cairn, and in the evening of the following day
they reached Harley Spit. At 7 a. m. of the 26th the party was again

<span id="page_137">p. 137</span>

in the snow-house at Black Cape. From Cape Sheridan, south of the
palæocrystic pack, the ice was broken, in motion, and in many places
separated by large lanes of water." The next morning the wind blew from
the south, and caused an opening to the north of Black Cape, "between
the solid ice of Robeson Channel and the loose floes above--a space of
about a mile wide, and of which the transversal end disappeared two or
three miles from the coast." The party, however, traveled southward over
solid ice to Lincoln Bay.

Despite steady and unremitting labor, and the possession of health and
strength, this attempt to travel over the frozen sea failed through
natural causes. But, as Dr. Pavy says, it "determined the important fact
that last fall open water could have been found as far as Cape Sheridan,
and from Conical Hill perhaps to Cape Columbia; and proved, by our
experience, that even in such high latitudes the pack may be in motion
at an early period of the year; perhaps at any time. I am firmly
convinced that but for our misfortune in finding

<span id="page_138">p. 138</span>

open water, we could, without greatly distancing Commander Markham, have
reached perhaps the latitude of 84 deg. N."

Greely writes, on page 275: "We traveled alongside the open river,
keeping to the bordering ice-walls, which decreased in thickness and
eventually disappeared entirely at a point where the stream doubt-less
remains open the entire year. Here we were driven to the hillside, where
the deep snow and sharp projecting rocks made travel slow, and rendered
the task of keeping the sledge upright a severe one. A couple of hundred
yards farther and a sharp turn brought in sight a scene which we shall
all remember to our dying day. Before us was an immense icebound lake.
Its snowy covering reflected 'diamond dust,' from the midnight sun, and
at our feet was a broad pool of open, blue water which fed the river. To
the northward some eight or ten miles--its base at the northern edge of
the lake (Hazen)--a partly snow-clad range of high hills (Gar-field
Range) appeared, behind and above which the hog-back, snow-clad summits
of

<span id="page_139">p. 139</span>

the United States Mountains rose with their stern, unchanging splendor.
To the right and left on the southern shore low, rounded hills, bare, as
a role, of snow, extended far to east and west, until in reality or
perspective they joined the curving mountains to the north. The scene
was one of great beauty and impressiveness.

"The excitement and enthusiasm which our new discoveries had engendered,
here culminated, for our vantage ground was such that all seemed
revealed, and no point hidden. Connell, who had continually lamented the
frozen foot which turned him back from the trip to North Greenland,
declared enthusiastically that he would not have missed the scene and
discoveries for all the Polar Sea."

Greely speaks of open water the year round. If there be open water the
year round at the farthest point north, can any good reason be assigned
why all have failed to reach the pole? The men that have spent their
time, comfort, and, in several cases, lives, were all men more than
anxious to succeed, yet, strange to

<span id="page_140">p. 140</span>

say, all failed. Was this because the weather got warmer, and they found
game more plentiful? No, it was because there was not such a place.

The following are extracts from Dr. Kane's work, pages 378 and 379: "As
far as I could discern, the sea was open, a swell coming in from the
northward and running crosswise, as if with a small eastern set. The
wind was due N.--enough of it to mike whitecaps--and the surf broke in
on rocks below in regular breakers. The sky to the N. W. was of dark
rain-cloud, the first that I had seen since the brig was frozen up.
Ivory-gulls were nesting in the rocks above me, and out to sea were
molle-mock and silver-backed gulls. The ducks had not been seen N. of
the first island of the channel, but petrel and gulls hung about the
waves near the coast.

"June 26--Before starting, I took a meridian-altitude of the sun (this
being the highest northern point I obtained except one, as during the
last two days the weather had been cloudy, with a gale blowing from the
north), and then set off at

<span id="page_141">p. 141</span>

 

<span id="img_14100"></span>

[![ICEBERGS.&lt;br&gt; Beautiful scenery, showing the icebergs and ship
floating and sailing in open water.](tn/14100.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/14100.jpg)  
ICEBERGS.  
Beautiful scenery, showing the icebergs and ship floating and sailing in
open water.  

 

<span id="page_142">p. 142</span>

<span id="page_143">p. 143</span>

4 p. m. on our return down the channel to the south.

"I cannot imagine what becomes of the ice. A strong current sets in
almost constantly to the south; but, from altitudes of more than five
hundred feet, I saw only narrow strips of ice, with great spaces of open
water, from ten to fifteen miles in breadth, between them. It must,
therefore, either go to an open space in the north, or dissolve. The
tides in-shore seemed to make both north and south; but the tide from
northward ran seven hours, and there was no slack water. The wind blew
heavily down the channel from the open water, and had been freshening
since yesterday nearly to a gale; but it brought no ice with it."

Dr. Kane says that he cannot imagine what becomes of the ice, and that
it apparently goes to an open space in the north or dissolves. Again we
read that for seven hours the tide was from north, there being no slack
water, thus showing that it did not come from the pole. If the tide
carne from the pole, they should have

<span id="page_144">p. 144</span>

had low tide at the expiration of six hours. The tide and wind bringing
no ice during all that time, shows plainly enough there was none to
bring.

In the second volume of Nansen's work (page 505) more information bears
on this point: "I find in my journal for that day: Are continually
discovering new islands of lands to the south. There is one great land
of snow beyond us in the west, and it seems to extend southward a long
way. This snow land seemed to us extremely mysterious; we had not yet
discovered a single dark patch on it, only snow and ice everywhere. We
had no clear idea of its extent, as we had only caught glimpses of it
now and then, when the mist lifted a little. It seemed to be quite low,
but we thought it must be of a wider extent than any of the lands we had
hitherto traveled along. To the east we found island upon island, and
sounds and fiords the whole way along. We mapped it all as well as we
could, but this did not help us to find out where we were; they seemed
to be only a crowd of

<span id="page_145">p. 145</span>

small islands, and every now and then a view of what we took to be the
ocean to the east opened up between them."

Those islands--passed during the long drift and travel for over a
year--were undoubtedly islands that had never been seen before. It is
more than likely that Nansen and his crew were farther into the interior
than anyone had previously been. If they for one moment could have
understood that the earth was hollow, conditions that seemed
unexplainable and unaccountable would have been perfectly clear; but as
they never dreamed of that, it is not strange that they were constantly
mixed, and that currents and winds were always going and coming contrary
to customs and theories.

The mist that Nansen speaks of is one strong proof that the earth is
hollow and warmer in winter than the exterior.

Changes that are nearly always going on--caused by the wind blowing in
or out--must bring about just such effects, as the atmosphere cannot be
the same, and is either dryer or more moist, hotter

<span id="page_146">p. 146</span>

or colder. In either case it would be manifested in some kind of a
change--cloud, fog, snow or rain.

In Vol. I, page 195, Nansen writes of a fellow-explorer: "In his account
of his voyage, Nordenskiold writes as follows of the condition of this
channel: 'We were met by only small quantities of that sort of ice which
has a layer of fresh-water ice on the top of the salt, and we noticed
that it was all melting fiord or river ice. I hardly think that we came
all day on a single piece of ice big enough to have cut up a seal
upon.'"

On page 196 of the same volume, occurs: "We could hardly get on at all
for the dead water, and we swept the whole sea along with us. It is a
peculiar phenomenon,--this dead water. We had at present a better
opportunity of studying it than we desired. It occurs where a
surface-layer of fresh water rests upon the salt water of the sea, and
this fresh water is carried along with the ship, gliding on the heavier
sea beneath as if on a fixed foundation. The difference between the two

<span id="page_147">p. 147</span>

strata was in this case so great that while we had drinking-water on the
surface, the water we got from the bottom cock of the engine room was
far too salt to be used for the boiler. Dead water manifests itself in
the form of larger or smaller ripples or waves stretching across the
wake, the one behind the other, arising sometimes as far forward as
almost amidships. We made loops in our course, turned sometimes right
around, tried all sorts of antics to get clear of it, but to very little
purpose. The moment the engine stopped it seemed as if the ship were
sucked back. In spite of the *Fram's* weight and the momentum she
usually has, we could in the present instance go at full speed till
within a fathom or two of the edge of the ice, and hardly feel a shock
when she touched."

I wish to call special attention to Nansen's information about dead
water. What is dead water? Does he mean water that has no current? It
seems to be one of those phenomena for which they could not account. The
only theory that I can present is: the dead water was at a point

<span id="page_148">p. 148</span>

where the centre of gravity was extremely strong; the salt water, being
heavier than the fresh, was drawn to the earth with such force that the
fresh water could not penetrate it, and laid as separate and distinct
upon it as cream upon a pan of milk. In the absence of any further proof
or evidence, this dead water must have been about half-way round the
curve, entering the interior of the earth, and, if so, was in perfect
accordance with the laws of the universe--that the centre of gravity is
strongest at this point.

According to Nansen, the ship could make no headway, and they turned in
different directions, and the difference between the strata of salt and
fresh water in this case was so great that while they had drinking water
on the surface, the water obtained from the bottom cock of the engine
room was far too salty to be used for the boiler. Is there any
difference between water found in the Arctic Ocean and that found in any
other ocean? If there be a difference, what causes it? In New York
harbor we have fresh water and salt

<span id="page_149">p. 149</span>

water, but when they meet, they mix. The water that comes down the
Hudson River is fresh water, and the water that meets it coming in from
the ocean is salt; but there is no line where one may be called fresh,
and the other salt. Why should there be a difference, then, in the
Arctic Ocean? No other explanation than what I have just stated can be
given--that the centre of gravity is so strong near the poles that the
heavier body is drawn solidly toward the earth, and the lighter one
cannot penetrate it.

Nansen speaks, on page 209, of a different kind of water--a clayey
water--where there is no commingling. "To the north of the point ahead
of us I saw open water; there was some ice between us and it, but the
*Fram* forced her way through. When we got out, right off the point, I
was surprised to notice the sea suddenly covered with brown, clayey
water. It could not be a deep layer, for the track we left behind us was
quite clear. The clayey water seemed to be skimmed to either side by the
passage of the ship. I ordered soundings

<span id="page_150">p. 150</span>

to be taken, and found, as I expected, shallow water--first, eight
fathoms, then six and one-half, then five and one-half. I stopped now,
and backed. Things looked very suspicious, and round us ice-floes lay
stranded. There was also a very strong current running northeast.
Constantly sounding, we again went slowly forward. Fortunately the lead
went on showing five fathoms. Presently we got into deeper water--six
fathoms, then six and one-half, and now we went on at full speed again.
We were soon out into the clear, blue water on the other side. There was
quite a sharp boundary line between the brown surface and the clear
blue. The muddy water evidently came from some river a little farther
south."

Many claim that the Arctic Ocean is a frozen body of water; and for that
reason considerable space is devoted to the question of open water in
the Arctic regions. I contend that the Arctic Ocean is *never* frozen
over, although it appears so at different points where large fields of
ice have

<span id="page_151">p. 151</span>

drifted up from the interior of the earth, and lodged at certain places.
Nansen spent two years drifting in the Arctic Ocean, which is proof
positive that during that time it was not closed by ice. The icebergs
that come up from the interior and fill the Arctic Ocean and connecting
straits and sounds clear into the Atlantic, cause portions of the Arctic
to be filled with ice almost constantly. If it be true that the centre
of attraction is strongest at the turning point, large fields of ice
would naturally be held in that position, until very strong currents,
heavy winds, or large floes coming up from the interior, would shove the
ice past that point.

On page 212 of his work Nansen speaks of making such splendid
time--eight knots by the log. "Sverdrup thought it would be safer to
stay where we were; but it would be too annoying to miss this splendid
opportunity; and the sunshine was so beautiful, and the sky so smiling
and reassuring! I gave orders to set sail, and soon we were pushing
through the ice, under steam, and with every stitch of canvas that

<span id="page_152">p. 152</span>

we could crowd on. Cape Chelyuskin must be vanquished! Never had the
*Fram* gone so fast; she made more than eight knots by the log; it
seemed as though she knew how much depended on her getting on. Soon we
were through the ice, and had open water along the land as far as eye
could reach. We passed point after point, discovering new fiords and
islands on the way, and soon I thought that I caught a glimpse through a
large telescope of some mountains far away north; they must be in the
neighborhood of Cape Chelyuskin itself."

This was on one of the fifteen days in succession when Nansen supposed
he was sailing directly north. If he was not sailing north, or nearly
so, where was he sailing? He ought to have covered a long distance, as
he speaks of making nine knots an hour. Had he only made five knots, the
distance would have been nearly 2,000 miles, yet when he took his
reckoning he found himself in latitude 79 degs. If he had been going
straight north, as he supposed he was, his sailing would have taken

<span id="page_153">p. 153</span>

him over 1,200 miles past the pole. Allowing for loss of speed, owing to
the strength of currents, and dodging bergs and floes, he would still
have been beyond the pole.

This is the strongest proof possible that the earth is hollow, and that
there is no way of reaching the spot where the North Pole is supposed to
be.

On page 217 Nansen writes of one star--the only one to be seen. "It
stood straight above Cape Chelyuskin, shining clearly and sadly in the
pale sky. As we sailed on and got the cape more to the east of us, the
star went with it: it was always there, straight above. I could not help
sitting watching it. It seemed to have some charm for me, and to bring
such peace. Was it my star? Was it the spirit of home following and
smiling to me now? Many a thought it brought to me as the *Fram* toiled
on through the melancholy night, past the northernmost point of the old
world."

From this, it appears as if he had gone a considerable distance into the
interior of the earth--a fact that had something to do,

<span id="page_154">p. 154</span>

perhaps, with his seeing only one star. I hardly think that he was far
enough in to shut out from view all other stars, but his position would
certainly shut out a great many.

On page 218 he mentions sailing southward to avoid some ice-floes, and
making at the time nine knots an hour. "So that we were now off King
Oscar's Bay; but I looked in vain through the telescope for
Nordenskiold's cairn. I had the greatest inclination to land, but did
not think that we could spare the time. The bay, which was clear of ice
at the time of Vegs's visit, was now closed-in with thick winter ice,
frozen fast to the land. We had an open channel before us; but we could
see the edge of the drift-ice out at sea. A little farther west we
passed a couple of small islands, lying a short way from the coast. We
had to stop before noon at the north-western corner of Chelyuskin, on
account of the drift-ice, which seemed to reach right into the land
before us. To judge by the dark air, there was open water again on the
other side of an island which

<span id="page_155">p. 155</span>

lay ahead. We landed, and made sure that some straits or fiords on the
inside of this island, to the south, were quite closed with firm ice;
and in the evening the *Fram* forced her way through the drift-ice on
the outside of it. We steamed and sailed southward along the coast all
night, making splendid way; when the wind was blowing stiffest, we went
at the rate of nine knots. We came upon ice every now and then, but got
through it easily."

It is apparent that he went a long way into the interior of the earth.

On page 220 he tells of losing sight of land entirely. "In the course of
the day we quite lost sight of land, and, strangely enough, did not see
it again; nor did we see the islands of St. Peter and St. Paul, though,
according to the maps, our course lay past them."

This statement shows that the explorer and his men knew nothing about
where they were. If the charts showed that the islands mentioned above
were on the ship's course, then they were wrong, or Nansen did not know
where he was.

<span id="page_156">p. 156</span>

"The channel was still free from ice," writes Hansen, on page 225. "We
now continued on our course, against a strong current, southward along
the coast, past the mouth of the Chatanga. This eastern part of the
Taimur Peninsula is a comparatively high, mountainous region, but with a
lower level stretch between the mountains and the sea, apparently the
same kind of low land we had seen along the coast almost the whole way.
As the sea seemed to be tolerably open and free from ice, we made
several attempts to shorten our course by leaving the coast and striking
across for the mouth of the Olenek; but every time thick ice drove us
back to our channel by the land."

On page 226, Nansen says: "The following day we got into good, open
water, but shallow--never more than six to seven fathoms. We heard the
roaring waves to the east, so there must certainly be open water in that
direction, which indeed we had expected. It was plain that the Lena,
with its masses of warm water, was beginning to assert its

<span id="page_157">p. 157</span>

influence. The sea here was browner, and showed signs of some mixture of
muddy river water. It was also much less salt."

He found the change so marked that he thought the warm water came from
the Lena. Now, the Lena is a river in Siberia, and its waters are no
warmer than those of any other river in that country. In certain seasons
of the year it discharges a great deal of water, which is not warm
enough, however, to have any effect on the Arctic Ocean. Again: the Lena
is right on the opposite side of the pole from where Nansen was, and the
distance between the two points is considerable.

More concerning this connection is given on page 227. "Saturday,
September 16th--We are keeping a northwesterly course (by compass)
through open water, and have got pretty well north, but see no ice, and
the air is dark to the northward. Mild weather, and water comparatively
warm, as high as 35 deg. Fahr. We have a current against us, and are
always considerably west of our reckoning. Several flocks of eider-ducks
were seen in the

<span id="page_158">p. 158</span>

course of the day. We ought to have land to the north of us; can it be
that which is keeping back the ice?"

The reader will note what he says in regard to their location: "and are
always considerably west of our reckoning." So far as knowing their
exact position, they were, in fact, lost. If reckoning was taken on the
basis that the compass was pointing in a certain direction, when, as a
matter of fact, it was pointing in the opposite direction to what they
supposed, their reckoning was all wrong. Nansen himself says that they
were keeping, by compass, a north-westerly course. Is it not fair to
infer that the influence that controlled the compass when Nansen was
steering by it, was the same as had controlled it all the time, and that
the mixing-up, or confusion, was with the individual, and not the
compass?

On page 227 Nansen recounts that they met ice, and supposed, at first,
that it would be the end of their journey. How-ever, it was only small
drift-ice; and he

<span id="page_159">p. 159</span>

states, further, that he had "good sailing and made good progress.

"Next day we met ice, and had to hold a little to the south to keep
clear of it; and I began to fear that we should not be able to get as
far as I hoped. But in my notes for the following day (Monday, September
18th) I read: A splendid day. Shaped our course northward, to the west
of Bielkoff Island. Open sea; good wind from the west; good progress.
Weather clear, and we had a little sunshine in the after-noon. Now the
decisive moment approaches. At 12.15 shaped our course north to east (by
compass). Now it is to be proved if my theory, on which the whole
expedition is based, is correct,--if we are to find a little north from
here a north-flowing current. So far everything is better than I had
expected. We are in latitude 75½ deg. N., and have still open water and
dark sky to the north and west. In the evening there was ice-light ahead
and on the starboard bow. About seven I thought that I could see ice,
which, however, rose so regularly that it more resembled

<span id="page_160">p. 160</span>

land, but it was too dark to see distinctly. It seemed as if it might be
Bielkoff Island, and a big light spot farther to the east might even be
the reflection from the snow-covered Kotelnoi."

For the previous thirteen days he had found no interruption to speak of,
but had continued, as he supposed, steadily north. However, when he took
his reckoning he found that he was in latitude 75½ deg. north, and open
water still ahead.

On page 228 he remarks that it was a strange feeling to be sailing away
north in the dark night to unknown lands, over an open, rolling sea,
where no ship or boat had been before. "We might have been hundreds of
miles away in more southerly waters, the air was so mild for September
in this latitude."

They were surely in the interior of the earth at that point, several
miles past the turning point.

Under Tuesday, September 19th (the following day) (page 228), he writes:
"I have never had such a splendid sail. On to the north, steadily north,
with

<span id="page_161">p. 161</span>

a good wind, as fast as steam and sail can take us, and open sea mile
after mile, watch after watch, through these unknown regions, always
clearer and clearer of ice, one might almost say: 'How long will this
last?' The eye always turns to the northward as one paces the bridge. It
is gazing into the future. But there is always the same dark sky ahead,
which means open sea."

The reader will here notice that the appearance of the sky shows the
condition of the surface of the earth. This is mentioned to show that
when an aurora or a burning fire is reflected in the sky, it should be
called a fire, instead of something produced by electricity.

In regard to their good fortune in finding clear sailing direct, as they
supposed, toward the pole, Nansen remarks: "Henriksen answered from the
crow's-nest when I called up to him. 'They little think at home in
Norway just now that we are sailing straight for the pole in clear
water.' No, they don't believe we have got so far. And I shouldn't have
believed

<span id="page_162">p. 162</span>

it myself if anyone had prophesied it to me a fortnight ago; but true it
is. All my reflections and inferences on the subject had led me to
expect open water for a good way farther north; but it is seldom that
one's inspirations turn out to be so correct. No ice-lights in any
direction, not even now in the evening. We saw no land the whole day;
but we had fog and thick weather all morning and forenoon, so that we
were still going at half-speed, as we were afraid of coming suddenly on
something."

After discussing their good fortune, they again referred to the sky. No
ice-lights were in any direction, not even in the evening; but they had
thick weather all morning and afternoon, and, as a consequence, were
running at half-speed.

"I have almost to ask myself if this is not a dream," writes he on page
230. "One must have gone against the stream to know what it means to go
with the stream. As it was on the Greenland expedition, so it is here."

He regards it as such good fortune that he asks himself, "Is it not a
dream?" Yet

<span id="page_163">p. 163</span>

they were no nearer the pole than they were two weeks before.

On the same page he refers to the water: "Hardly any life visible here.
Saw an auk or black guillemot to-day, and later a sea-gull in the
distance. When I was hauling up a bucket of water in the evening to wash
the deck I noticed that it was sparkling with phosphorescence. One could
almost have imagined one's self to be in the south."

This is the second time that he notes the phosphorescent water and the
fish they caught in that part of the world. In another instance, he
stated that, when emptying a net of fish, they looked like glowing
embers. This condition of things will he found in many cases, perhaps,
in the interior of the earth. Nature provides for every emergency, and
it would not be surprising to find phosphorescent effects throughout the
interior for the purpose of relieving the darkness. This proved to be
nearly Nansen's journey's end; for, on the 21st he met an ice-floe
coming up from the interior of the earth, and supposed it to he

<span id="page_164">p. 164</span>

solid ice in the north. He says (page 233):

"So in the meantime we made fast to a great ice-block, and prepared to
clean the boiler and shift coals. We are lying in open water, with only
a few large floes here and there; but I have a presentiment that this is
our winter harbor."

There is no reason why their progress should have stopped at that point.
Anyone on his way to the interior of the earth would not think of such a
thing, yet one trying to get to the North Pole might well conclude that
that was the commencement of the stopping-place. From this time on to
October 12th, nothing of special note occurred.

Three weeks later, he mentions that the water was still open (page 273):
"Thursday, October 12th.--In the morning we and our floe were drifting
on blue water in the middle of a large, open lane, which stretched far
to the north, and in the north the atmosphere at the horizon was dark
and blue. As far as we could see from the crow's-nest with the small
field-glass,

<span id="page_165">p. 165</span>

there was no end to the open water, with only single pieces of ice
sticking up in it here and there. These are extraordinary changes."

He again speaks of "this same dark atmosphere in the north," on page
278, and "that it indicates open water. To-day again, this stretched far
away towards the northern horizon, where the same dark atmosphere
indicated some extent of open water."

On page 282 he speaks of open water to the north, also the ice-pressure:
"Saturday, October 14.--To-day we have got on the rudder; the engine is
pretty well in order, and we are clear to start north when the ice opens
to-morrow morning. It is still slackening and packing quite regularly
twice a day, so that we can calculate on it beforehand. To-day we had
the same open channel to the north, and beyond it open sea as far as our
view extended. What can this mean? This evening the pressure has been
pretty violent. The floes were packed up against the *Fram* on the port
side, and were once or twice on

<span id="page_166">p. 166</span>

the point of toppling over the rail. The ice, however, broke below; they
tumbled back again, and had to go under us, after all."

On page 291 he is puzzled to know why everything is the reverse of what
he had figured it should be. "I had a sounding taken; it showed over
seventy-three fathoms (one hundred and thirty-five metres), so we are in
deeper water again. The sounding-line indicated that we are drifting
southwest. I do not understand this steady drift southward. There has
not been much wind either lately; there is certainly a little from the
north to-day, but not strong. What can be the reason of it? With all my
information, all my reasoning, all my putting of two and two together, I
cannot account for any south-going current here--there ought to be a
north-going one. If the current runs south here, how is that great, open
sea we steamed north across to be explained? and the bay we ended in
farthest north? These could only be produced by the north-going current
which I presupposed. The

<span id="page_167">p. 167</span>

only thing which puts me out a bit is that west-going current which we
had against us during our whole voyage along the Siberian coast."

What puzzled him was the fact that after he had sailed for fifteen
successive days, from September 6 to September 21, with hardly any
interruption--what little there was arose mainly from fog--there was so
much southerly current and no ice. That would lead to the impression
there was no ice to the north, or it would have drifted with the
south-going current, and closed the vast body of open water he had
sailed through. It is evident the ice in the Arctic is confined to the
floes that come from the interior of the earth. Another evidence that he
had advanced far into the interior of the earth, is the quantity of
fresh water he met.

Had he known that the earth was hollow, and that they were not sailing
north, as he supposed, the answers to these queries would have been
clear to him, or the problem have admitted of a different basis of
reasoning. He was also going

<span id="page_168">p. 168</span>

out of salt water; as he says, "the water is not nearly so salt."

On page 338 he is at loss to know why he should find such deep water.
"Thursday, December 21.--It is extraordinary, after all, how the time
passes. Here we are at the shortest day, though we have no day. But now
we are moving on to light, and summer again. We tried to sound to-day;
had out twenty-one hundred metres (over eleven hundred. fathoms) of line
without reaching the bottom. We have no more lines; what is to be done?
Who could have guessed that we should find such deep water?"

In rounding the curve of the interior of the earth, as I have said
before, it is as likely to be water as land, and is held in position by
gravity. I suppose there is, in many cases, practically no bottom, the
water being miles and miles deep.

On page 399, under date of Wednesday, February 21st, Nansen says: "The
south wind continues. Took up the bag-nets to-day which were put out the
day before yesterday. In the upper one, which hung

<span id="page_169">p. 169</span>

near the surface, there was chiefly amphipoda; in Murray's net, which
hung at about fifty fathoms' depth, there was a variety of small
crustacea and other small animals shining with such a strong
phosphorescence that the contents of the net looked like glowing embers
as I emptied them out in the cook's galley by lamplight. To my
astonishment the net-line pointed northwest, though from the wind there
ought to be a good northerly drift. To clear this matter up I let the
net down in the afternoon, and as soon as it got a little way under the
ice the line pointed northwest again, and continued to do so the whole
afternoon. How is this phenomenon to be explained? Can we, after all, be
in a current moving northwest?"

Again he is at sea, being unable to account for the current, which is
entirely contrary to what he figured.

On page 309 Kane gives some interesting information on this, subject:
"This precipitous headland, the farthest point attained by the party,
was named Cape Independence. It is in latitude 81 deg. 22 min.

<span id="page_170">p. 170</span>

\[paragraph continues\] N. and longitude 65 deg. 35 min. W. It was only
touched by William Morton, who left his dogs and made his way to it
along the coast. From it the western coast was seen stretching far
towards the north, with an iceless horizon, and a heavy swell rolling in
with whitecaps. At a height of about five hundred feet above the sea
this great expanse still presented all the appearance of an open and
iceless sea. In claiming for it this character I have reference only to
the facts actually observed, without seeking confirmation or support
from any deduction or theory. Among such facts are the following:

"1. It was approached by a channel entirely free from ice, having a
length of fifty-two and a mean width of thirty-six geographical miles.

"2. The coast-ice along the water-line of this channel had been
completely destroyed by thaw and water action, while an unbroken belt of
solid ice, one hundred and twenty-two miles in diameter, extended to the
south.

"3. A gale from the northeast, of fifty-four

<span id="page_171">p. 171</span>

 

<span id="img_17100"></span>

[![NORTHERN ENTRANCE.&lt;br&gt; Globe showing entrance to the interior
of the earth at the North Pole.](tn/17100.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/17100.jpg)  
NORTHERN ENTRANCE.  
Globe showing entrance to the interior of the earth at the North Pole.  

 

<span id="page_172">p. 172</span>

<span id="page_173">p. 173</span>

hours' duration, brought a heavy sea from that quarter, without
disclosing any drift or other ice.

"4. Dark *nimbus* clouds and water-sky invested the northeastern
horizon.

"5. Crowds of migratory birds were observed thronging its waters."

Nansen, in Vol. II, pages 534 and 535, says: "We now found that in March
he must have been at no great distance south of our winter hut, but had
to turn there, as he was stopped by open water--the same open water of
which we had seen the dark atmosphere all the winter."

Herein he refers to Jackson, who found him after his long trip on the
ice with Johansen. After leaving the *Fram*, this open water that kept
them apart was seen by Nansen in the skies all winter, whenever the
atmosphere was favorable.

Now, what are the conditions obtaining in the Antarctic region? Louis
Bernacchi, who spent nearly two years in the extreme southern portion,
tells us:

"At Cape Adare huge bergs were often observed during perfectly calm
weather,

<span id="page_174">p. 174</span>

traveling at about four knots per hour toward the northwest." (Page 39.)

"In this open sea is where they meet so many icebergs."

"An open sea, comparatively free from ice, is met with in the Antarctic
regions."

He declares an open sea can be found. If so, why do they not reach the
pole? He tells us that they passed the magnetic pole. They did; and had
they kept on, instead of turning back for fear of being lost at sea,
they would have made a great discovery.

But I am in favor of entering the interior of the earth from the north,
on account of the apparently high winds in the Antarctic. I also am of
the opinion that Mount Erebus--from which Bernacchi saw smoke coming--is
in the interior of the earth, or part of the way in.

After the foregoing evidence, is it possible that anyone can believe
that the respective oceans are frozen bodies of water? If they do not
believe that these oceans are frozen, why do the explorers fail to reach
the poles--if there be such places?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XII. Why it is Warmer Near the Poles](potp16)
