[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Earth Mysteries](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](potp24)  [Next](potp26.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_272">p. 272</span>

# CHAPTER XXI.

### CANNOT REACH THE POLES.

That the earth is hollow is proved by the fact that no one can get to
the poles. In recent years all explorers have made practically the same
progress--from 80 to 84 deg. latitude--and all agree that they find it
warmer, and with an open sea. The difference of a few degrees is owing
to the longitude as well as latitude when taking observations. The land
is not necessarily the farthest north. The curve leading to the interior
of the earth may be land or water, just as it happens, and he that
passes to the farthest point of the circle when the observation is
taken, will show the farthest point north. But if he continues straight
on he will soon be losing ground, or getting farther from the supposed
pole, and eventually be going south and not know it, as the compass
could not then be depended upon. There must be some good reason

<span id="page_273">p. 273</span>

why all have been obliged to turn back after reaching latitude 80 deg.
to 84 deg. They have passed through a much colder

<span id="img_27300"></span>

[![A bird's-eye view of the opening to the interior of the
earth.](tn/27300.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/27300.jpg.md)  
A bird's-eye view of the opening to the interior of the earth.  

climate, where there were more ice, less open water, and no game or
signs of life; yet at this point all failed. It is like looking into the
water and seeing the reflection

<span id="page_274">p. 274</span>

of the moon, then getting into a boat and trying to get it. The moon
always keeps some distance away; and so it is with the PHANTOM OF THE
POLES.

I have quoted from nearly all the explorers, for the purpose of showing
that, at the farthest point reached, either north or south, they found
it warmer, with open water and plenty of game. Their remarks also prove,
beyond a doubt, that what I claim is true--that the Arctic and Antarctic
oceans are bodies of open water, abounding with game of all kinds, and
much warmer than farther inland. If that is true, then why have the
poles not been reached? The poles are but phantoms--the earth is hollow,
or all principle of reasoning must fail.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXII. What is in the Interior of the Earth?](potp26.md)
