[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Earth Mysteries](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](potp18)  [Next](potp20) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_209">p. 209</span>

# CHAPTER XV.

### WHAT PRODUCES COLORED SNOW IN THE ARCTIC?

Why is the snow colored in the Arctic regions? What causes it to be
colored?

The snow has been analyzed, and the red, green, and yellow have been
found to contain vegetable matter, presumably a flower, or the pollen of
a plant. The black snow has also been analyzed, and found to contain
carbon and iron, supposed to come from a volcanic eruption. But whence
did it come? A flower that produced pollen sufficient to permeate the
air with such density that it colored the snow, would require a vast
territory--millions of acres--to grow it. Where is that to be found? If
on earth, it must be near the North Pole; for, if it grew elsewhere,
colored snow would be found at other locations, and not be confined to
the Arctic regions. As no

<span id="page_210">p. 210</span>

such flowering plant is known on earth, we must look elsewhere.

The interior of the earth is the only spot that will furnish us with an
answer to the question. As the colors fall at different seasons, it is
fair to presume that the flower matures at those seasons. It is also
easy to find out where the black snow, frequently mentioned by the
explorers, comes from. It comes out of an exploding volcano--of the kind
that covered Nansen's ship with dust. All unexplained questions could be
easily answered if one would believe that the earth is hollow; it is
impossible to answer them under any other theory. A falsehood could not
furnish so many solutions: one or two might point to some other answer;
but a score of unanswered problems could not be answered by a falsehood.

Kane, in his first volume, page 44, says: "We passed the 'Crimson
Cliffs' of Sir John Ross in the forenoon of August 5th. The patches of
red snow, from which they derive their name, could be seen clearly at
the distance of ten miles from the coast.

<span id="page_211">p. 211</span>

\[paragraph continues\] It had a fine, deep-rose hue, not at all like
the brown stain which I noticed when I was here before. All the gorges
and ravines in which the snow had lodged were deeply tinted with it. I
had no difficulty now in justifying the somewhat poetical nomenclature
which Sir John Franklin applied to this locality; for if the snowy
surface were more diffused, as it is no doubt earlier in the season,
crimson would be the prevailing color."

Kane also states: "The red snow was diversified with large surfaces of
beautifully green mosses and alopecurus; and where the sandstone was
bare, it threw in a rich shade of brown."

Kane speaks of the red snow as if it had a regular season in which to
appear--as he says "if the snowy surface were more diffused, as it is no
doubt earlier in the season." In another place he speaks of the red snow
being two weeks later than usual. Now, taking the fact into account that
the material that colors the snow is a vegetable matter, supposed to be
the blossom or pollen

<span id="page_212">p. 212</span>

of a plant, and that no such plant grows on earth, where does it come
from? The time for its appearance is in July and August. This may not
seem of great importance to many readers, but when taken in connection
with the object of this book, then it becomes important; for if it does
not grow on the earth, it must grow in the interior of the earth.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XVI. Where and how are Icebergs Formed?](potp20)
