[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Earth Mysteries](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](potp26) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_282">p. 282</span>

# IN CONCLUSION.

The earth is either hollow or it is not. What proof have we concerning
the latter? Not one iota, positive or circumstantial. On the contrary,
everything points to its being hollow. If it be so, and there are
burning volcanoes in the interior, would you not see great lights
reflected on the icebergs and the clouds just as any other great fires
reflect the light? Would not great clouds of smoke and dust be
seen?---the same as from any other burning volcano? That is what all the
explorers have witnessed--low, dark clouds rising out of the ocean, or
at the edge of the ice. Nansen says: "Let us go home; what have we here
to stay for? Nothing but dust, dust, dust." Where could such dust come
from--so bad that it was one of the great annoyances in the heart of the
Arctic Ocean--if it did not come from an exploding, burning volcano? If
the earth be hollow, would it not be warmer in winter and cooler in
summer?

Arctic explorers say that a north wind

<span id="page_283">p. 283</span>

in winter raises the temperature, while a south wind lowers it. As an
opposite fact, in summer a south wind raises the temperature and a north
wind lowers it. This is just what would occur if the winds came from the
interior of the earth. Again: if the earth be hollow, it could not he
round, inasmuch as the opening would take from its roundness in
proportion to the size of the opening. All now agree that the earth is
flattened at the poles. Also, it is warmer the farther one goes north or
south. Why is this the case?

There is but one answer, and that is that the earth is hollow, and is
warmer in the interior than on the exterior. As the wind passes out in
the winter it warms the atmosphere. If the earth be solid, neither
science nor reason furnishes any rational theory why it should be warmer
as one passes north. Every known theory is against such a conclusion. As
soon as you adopt the belief that the earth is hollow, perplexing
questions will be easily solved, the mind will be satisfied, and the
triumph of sensible reasoning will come as a delight never to be
forgotten.
