[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Earth Mysteries](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](potp21)  [Next](potp23.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_250">p. 250</span>

# CHAPTER XVIII.

### CLOUDS, FOGS, AND VAPORS.

The fog, clouds, vapor, and peculiar kind of snow met with at the poles
ought to set one to thinking what produces them. There are too many
peculiar conditions to come from no particular cause, and all just alike
at the North and South poles. Take Africa and Norway, regions which are
not at all alike in anything--the game, the vegetation, the people, the
climates are as different as the pies a man's wife makes from those his
mother used to make. Yet if one travels in the opposite direction, till
one reaches the Arctic and Antarctic circles, all become as like as one
is to himself.

The earth being hollow, the atmosphere in passing out, either north or
south, would affect the country it passes into in the same manner. That
is why one finds so many things in common in both polar regions: vapors,
snows, auroras, winds, and falling meteors, each locality filled

<span id="page_251">p. 251</span>

with fowl, warmer, and open water. The following extracts, with comments
there-on, will throw some light on this interesting subject. Peary says:
"On the ice-cap a fresh breeze was blowing, and though the sun was
shining brightly, and there was blue sky overhead, all the upper part of
McCormick Bay was hidden by lead-colored cumulus clouds, and Inglefield
Gulf lay invisible behind a dazzling white mist." (Page 232.)

Nothing appears to be so common in the Far Northern regions as those
low, dark cumulus clouds, that are frequently seen rising on the
horizon, or, as it is frequently expressed, from the ocean, while the
sky is perfectly clear and the sun shining brightly. Nothing but warmer
air from the interior of the earth could produce such clouds. This could
not, or would not, be the case if the earth were solid: there is no
reason why it should be warmer near the poles.

The earth obtains its heat from the sun; and yet when one is where the
sun's rays do not strike the earth for months

<span id="page_252">p. 252</span>

at a time, it is found that the north winds are warmer than the south
winds. This fact ought to suggest that that wind must come from some
place other than the North Pole. The interior of the earth is the only
place from which warm winds could come in the winter.

The same explorer says on pages 314 and 315: "Another discouraging day
with-in sight of the baleful shores of this Arctic Sahara, but we are on
the heights once more--for good, I hope, and, I also trust, free from
further obstacles. If there is any truth in the superstition of the evil
eye, the coast of this Inland Ice surely has evil eyes. Just as long as
the black cliffs peer up at us over the round of the ice-cap, just so
long are we beset with crevasses, slippery ice, hummocks, howling wind
storms, furious drifts, and fogs."

This term "evil eye" seems to apply to conditions that are usually found
on reaching the extreme north, as Peary speaks of being

<span id="page_253">p. 253</span>

one would meet with if the earth were hollow. Note that Peary says the
black cliffs peer up *over* the ice-cap. In making the turn when the
earth curves, one cliff or projection would follow like the spokes to
the wheel of a wagon--one comes up as one goes under. While the earth's
curve is not so short as one might imagine, yet it is short enough to
make things appear strange to persons looking for level country to the
pole. The clouds, mists, slippery ice, etc., are just what one would
meet in summer at the entrance to the interior of the earth; yet if the
earth is solid there is no reason why they should be met.

Bernacchi gives descriptions of weather conditions in the southern polar
regions that have a bearing on this subject. On page 264 he says: "A
dense mist lay over the water, which made it impossible to see any
farther than the length of the ship. The mist or vapor. was in a state
of congelation, so that the whole ship was covered in frost rime. This
mist was no more than fifty feet high, and in the

<span id="page_254">p. 254</span>

crow's-nest it was a gloriously fine day, not a cloud being visible in
the sky, and the sun shining brightly over the barrier (ice barrier). On
deck it was too thick to see anything." Page 266, he says: "The fog was
so dense that we were compelled to stop and lay-to for some time. During
the night the temperature sank to 3° 8 F. When the wind changed to E.
and N. E., it immediately rose to +17° F."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XIX. Arctic and Antarctic Winds](potp23.md)
