[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Earth Mysteries](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](potp20)  [Next](potp22) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_232">p. 232</span>

# CHAPTER XVII.

### THE TIDAL WAVE.

As I contend that many tidal waves are caused by icebergs plunging into
the ocean, let us see what grounds there are for that belief. First,
something causes the waves: they do not start of their own accord. If an
iceberg were to plunge into the ocean, a great commotion would be raised
and several large waves would be started. But how far would they run?
That would depend upon many different conditions--such as the size of
the wave and the force that set it moving. A pebble falling five feet
will make but a small ripple, while a rock ten feet in diameter, falling
one hundred feet, will make a mighty wave. Then, if no obstructions be
met, and the wind be favorable, that wave would go a long way. According
to Wells's "Natural Philosophy," it might get larger instead of smaller.
"This wave," says he, "propagates itself

<span id="page_233">p. 233</span>

into the unmoved space adjoining, continually enlarging as it goes, and
forming a series of undulations." Again: "When two systems of waves,
coming from different centres, meet, some curious effects are produced.
If like phases in both systems coincide, or if the crest of one system
coincides with the crest of the other, the new wave will be equal to the
sum of the two originals."

A wave is a form, not a thing; the form advances, but not the substance
of the wave. Two icebergs might frequently plunge in from different
directions, and send forth just such conditions as Wells writes about.
Or the one plunging in first might be farther away, and as waves move
comparatively slowly, they might frequently meet at some common centre,
and be increased in size and force, as he suggests.

Could anything else produce so large a wave? If not, why should we not
give the greatest cause credit for the greatest effect? The wonderful
ice-pressure can be produced from different causes: winds,

<span id="page_234">p. 234</span>

tides, currents, and tidal waves. The tidal wave, however, makes it
puzzling; for it comes when there is no wind or current, and if the
tidal-wave theory were excluded it certainly would be a hard proposition
to answer. If the pressure occurred only when the current changed, or
the wind blew, or the tides set in or out, the question of ice-pressure
would never have been wondered at. In the absence of those natural
causes, it was the pressure that set people thinking and wondering how
such things could be. Any close observer who reads the reports of the
different explorers will have noticed how mysterious are many things in
the Arctic regions. If a musk-ox were found growing fast to a rock, I
doubt whether such an occurrence would excite more wonder than many
things in that wonderful country, hitherto unexplained. One meets, no
doubt, with many radical changes and puzzling situations--such as a
change from the interior of the earth to the exterior would necessarily
produce; and when one takes into account that no one knew that the earth
was hollow,

<span id="page_235">p. 235</span>

and supposed that whatever brought about those strange conditions was to
be accounted for in a few hundred miles' journey straight north to the
pole, it is not to be wondered at that people called it "the mysterious
land," especially when one saw the surface of the ice, water, and land
reflected in the sky and could not see a great fire. If they *did* see
it, they called it something else--the aurora, a mock sun, a double
moon, or some other wonderful phenomenon; yet nothing is mysterious when
fully understood.

The perplexing situations met with in the Arctic Circle, the grand
scenes of every kind, and the things difficult to understand, remind one
of the man reading the dictionary: the words were fine, but he couldn't
make much of the story.

It is so with the explorers: everything is grand; the ice roars, and
crushes when everything is calm; the heavens are lighted up most
beautifully when there is no storm; the winds blow terribly out of the
clear sky: none of these things can be understood.

<span id="page_236">p. 236</span>

Nansen's second volume, page 29, of "Farthest North" describes what that
famous explorer experienced from ice-pressure--caused, doubtless, by
tidal waves: "To-day, about 12.30 p. m., the *Fram* received another
violent shock, even stronger than that we had experienced during the
night. There was another shake a little later. I suppose there has been
a pressure aft, but could hear nothing for the storm. It is odd about
this pressure; one would think that the wind was the primary cause; but
it recurs pretty regularly, not-withstanding the fact that the spring
tide has not yet set in; indeed, when it commenced a few days ago, it
was almost a neap tide. In addition to the pressure of yesterday and
last night, we had pressure on Thursday morning, at half-past nine, and
again at half-past eleven. It was so strong that Peter, who was at the
sounding-hole, jumped up repeatedly, thinking that the ice would burst
underneath him. It is very singular, we have been quiet for so long now
that we feel almost nervous when the *Fram* receives these shocks;

<span id="page_237">p. 237</span>

everything seems to tremble as if in a violent earthquake."

Nansen's remarks about the tide having nothing to do with ice-pressure,
must be accounted for in some other way. That *other* way is a tidal
wave.

In the same volume, farther on, he says: "The ice-pressure was not
noticeable after 1 o'clock on Friday night until it suddenly recommenced
last night. First I heard a rumbling outside, and some snow fell down
from the rigging upon the tent-roof as I sat reading; I thought it
sounded like packing in the ice, and just then the *Fram* received a
violent shock, such as she had not received last winter. I was rocked
backward and forward on the chest on which I was sitting. Finding that
the trembling and rumbling continued, I went out. There was a loud roar
of ice, packing to the west and northwest, which continued uniformly for
a couple of hours or so. \* \* \* Just after I had come on board again,
shortly before noon, the ice suddenly began to press on again. I went
out to have a look; it was again in the

<span id="page_238">p. 238</span>

lane on the port side; there was a strong pressure, and the ridge was
gradually approaching. A little later on Sverdrup went up on deck, but
soon after came below and told us that the ridge was quickly bearing
down on us."

When speaking of ice-pressure, nearly all explorers speak of great
ridges. Melville calls it a "frozen wave." Bernacchi says the ice was
lifted seventy, eighty, and ninety feet. Nansen termed it a ridge; and
all agree that they look like great ridges, or waves, that can be heard
for miles in the distance before they reach the ship, and for a long
time after they have passed. If the descriptions given by the several
explorers do not correctly represent a set of great waves, I do not know
how to describe them.

Melville describes, in expressive manner, a scene in which ice-pressure
played a part during his sojourn in the Arctic regions. "It was in one
of these oppressive intervals succeeding a gale," says he, "when the
roar and crash of the distant masses could be distinctly heard, that the
floe in which

<span id="page_239">p. 239</span>

the *Jeannette* was imbedded began splitting in all directions. The
placid and almost level surface of ice suddenly heaved and swelled into
great hills, buzzing and wheezing dolefully. Giant blocks pitched and
rolled as though controlled by invisible hands, and the vast compressing
bodies shrieked a shrill and horrible song that curdled the blood. On
came the frozen waves, nearer and nearer. Seams ran and rattled across
them with a thundering boom, while silent and awe-struck we watched
their terrible progress." (Page 12.)

The reader will notice that these weird doings occurred after a storm;
and during it the ice, as a whole, moved along with but slight
disturbance. The swell that comes after a storm has no connection with
it. If a storm raises no swell after raging continuously for ten to
twenty-four hours, it would take a great deal to make me believe that
after it had subsided it had anything to do with the swell that came
later. Melville's description, just cited, proves to my mind that the
whole affair

<span id="page_240">p. 240</span>

arose from a series of tidal waves. The later storm had nothing to do
with what he calls "frozen waves." They were caused by some tremendous
agency, and I can conceive of nothing more powerful than the plunging of
an iceberg into the ocean. Anyone knows that when an iceberg plunges
into the sea it causes the greatest commotion imaginable, and as the
tremendous swells referred to are constantly experienced, why should not
the icebergs produce them? If, at a certain point on a river, laborers
are engaged in rolling saw logs into the water from a high
bank,--causing heavy swells to wash up against the opposite
shore,--would it be a stretch of the imagination to say--if asked what
caused the swells--that men were rolling logs into the water on the
other side? On the contrary, it would be rather stupid on the part of
the questioner if he knew what was being done. We know that icebergs
plunge into the ocean, and we ought to know that when this happens they
make the largest possible wave. As soon as anyone can show what becomes
of those waves

<span id="page_241">p. 241</span>

and that they are not the waves that tumble and crush the ice so
terribly--and, at the same time, tell where those waves come from that
do the damage--it will then be time to reconsider this statement; but
not till then. Icebergs are very numerous; and so are those waves.
Melville says, "one body of ice set in motion crowds on ice not in
motion." That is true, but the wind does not need to stop to bring about
that condition of things.

Nansen's accounts of this subject are most appropriate. On page 278 of
Volume I, he says: "We had kept company quite long enough with the
old--now broken-up--floe, so worked ourselves a little way astern after
dinner, as the ice was beginning to draw together.

"Towards evening the pressure began again in earnest, and was especially
bad around the remains of our floe, so that I believe we may
congratulate ourselves on having left it. It is evident that the
pressure here stands in connection with--is perhaps caused by--the tidal
wave. It occurs with the greatest regularity. The ice

<span id="page_242">p. 242</span>

slackens twice and packs twice in twenty-four hours. The pressure has
happened about 4, 5, and 6 o'clock in the morning, and almost exactly
the same hour in the afternoon, and in between we have always lain for
some part of the time in open water. The very great pressure just now is
probably clue to the spring tide; we had new moon on the 9th, which was
the first day of the pressure. Then it was just after mid-day when we
noticed it, but it has been later every day, and now it is at 8 p. m."

Farther on, in the same volume, we read: "For when the packing begins in
earnest it seems as though there could be no spot on the earth's surface
left unshaken. First you hear a sound like the thundering rumbling of an
earthquake far away on the great waste; then you hear it in several
places, always coming nearer and nearer. The silent ice world re-echoes
with thunders; Nature's giants are awakening to the battle. The ice
cracks on every side of you, and begins to pile itself up; and all of a
sudden you, too,

<span id="page_243">p. 243</span>

find yourself in the midst of the struggle. There are howlings and
thunderings round you; you feel the ice tremble, and hear it rumbling
under your feet; there is no peace anywhere. In the semi-darkness you
can see it piling and tossing itself up into high ridges nearer and
nearer you--floes ten, twelve, fifteen feet thick, broken, and flung on
the top of each other as if they were feather-weights. They are quite
near you now, and you jump away to save your life. But the ice splits in
front of you, a black gulf opens, and water streams up. You turn in
another direction, but there through the dark you can just see a new
ridge of moving ice-blocks coming towards you. You try another
direction, but there it is the same. All around there is thundering and
roaring, as of some enormous waterfall, with explosions like cannon
salvoes. Still nearer you it comes. The floe you are standing on gets
smaller and smaller; water pours over it; there can be no escape except
by scrambling over the rolling ice-blocks to get to the other side of
the pack.

<span id="page_244">p. 244</span>

\[paragraph continues\] But now the disturbance begins to calm down. The
noise passes on, and is lost by degrees in the distance."

On page 383 Nansen begins other descriptions that are worth reproducing:

"Most violent pressures are beginning again. I must go on deck and look
at it. The loud roar meets one as one opens the door. It is coming from
the bow now, as well as from the stern. It is clear that the pressure
ridges are being thrown up in both openings, so if they reach us we
shall be taken by both ends and lifted lightly and gently out of the
water. There is pressure near us on all sides. Creaking has begun in the
old hummock on the port quarter; it is getting louder, and, so far as I
can see, the hummock is slowly rising. A lane has opened right across
the large floe on the port side; you can see the water, dark as it is.
Now both pressure and noise get worse and worse; the ship shakes and I
feel as if I myself were being gently lifted with the stern rail, where
I stand gazing out at the welter of ice masses that resemble giant
snakes writhing and twisting

<span id="page_245">p. 245</span>

their great bodies out there under the quiet, starry sky, whose peace is
only broken by one aurora serpent waving and flickering restlessly in
the northeast.

"Saturday, January 27.--It is remarkable that we should have this strong
pressure just now, with the moon in its last quarter and neap tide. This
does not agree with our previous experiences; no more does the fact that
the pressure the day before yesterday was from 12 a. m. to about 2 p.
m., and then again at 2 a. m., and now we have had it from 7.30 to 10.30
p. m. Can land have something to do with it here, after all? The
temperature to-day is 42 deg. Fahr. below zero (-41.4 deg.), but there
is no wind, and we have not had such pleasant weather for walking for a
long time; it feels almost mild here when the air is still.

"No, that was not the end of the pressure. When I was on deck, at a
quarter to 12, roaring and trembling began in the ice forward on the
port side; then suddenly came one loud boom after another, sounding out
in the distance, and the ship

<span id="page_246">p. 246</span>

gave a start; there was again a little pressure, and after that
quietness. Strange to say, there has been no pressure since 12 o'clock
last night; the ice seems perfectly quiet. The pressure ridge astern
showed what violent packing yesterday's was; in one place its height was
eighteen to nineteen feet above the surface of the water; floe-ice eight
feet thick was broken, pressed up in square blocks, and crushed to
pieces. At one point a huge monolith of such floe-ice rose high into the
air. Beyond this pressure wall there was no great disturbance to be
detected. There had been a little packing here and there, and the floe
to port had four or five large cracks across it, which no doubt
accounted for the explosion I heard last night. The ice to starboard was
also cracked in several places. The pressure had evidently come from the
North or N. N. E. The ridge behind us is one of the highest I have ever
seen yet. I believe that if the *Fram* had been lying there she would
have been lifted right out of the water. I walked for some distance in a
northeasterly direction,

<span id="page_247">p. 247</span>

but saw no signs of pressure there. When the ice has been set adrift in
a certain direction by the wind blowing that way for some time, it
gradually in process of drifting becomes more compressed, and when the
wind dies away a reaction in the opposite direction takes place. Such a
reaction must, I believe, have been the cause of Saturday's pressure,
which stopped entirely as suddenly as it began. Since then there has not
been the slightest appearance of movement in the ice. Probably the
pressure indicates the time when the drift turned."

Concerning ice-pressure, Bernacchi, writing of his voyage in the
Antarctic, on page 120, vividly conveys to the reader a picture of what
he saw. "A deep sonorous roar was audible like the din of a battle; a
battle indeed! A great battle of Nature was raging. We rushed down
towards the shore from whence the noise came, and on reaching it a sight
met our eyes which baffles description; a scene absolutely frightful in
its grandeur. A moving mountain of ice had risen up; a sudden and
terrible

<span id="page_248">p. 248</span>

pressure had set in, was piling the ice on the shore. It extended for
about eight hundred yards, and was on an average sixty feet high; the
mass was moving the whole time and advancing upon the land. The grandeur
of the spectacle was immense. There is nothing comparable to it, and
words can in no degree convey an idea of the majesty of the scene.

"Huge blocks of ice, thousands and thousands of tons in weight, were
lifted up seventy, eighty, and ninety feet with irresistible force to
the top of the mount. They would totter for a few seconds, and then come
crashing down with a reverberating roar; at times great yawning gaps
would appear in the mount, and the whole side would bulge out until with
a fearful crash it would burst, and great blocks of ice fly into the air
like so many straws."

This great disturbance lasted a little more than an hour. There is no
account of any storm or wind, so its cause must be accounted for in some
other way. We will call it a set of mammoth waves started

<span id="page_249">p. 249</span>

by the plunging of an iceberg into the ocean.

The indefatigable Peary, on page 30, describes the effect of
ice-pressure: "One forenoon the barometer dropped rapidly, and in the
afternoon the snow ceased, the clouds lifted, and a tremendous swell
came rolling in from the southeast. Not a breath of wind disturbed the
surface as the long, lazy swells, smoothed by the pressure of the ice
through which they passed, came slipping noiselessly in, lifting and
dropping the, huge bergs as if they were but corks."

Can anyone read the description of ice-pressure, as given here, and say
it was not a set of tidal waves, or large waves, set in motion by some
powerful influence? What is more irresistible than an immense iceberg
plunging into the ocean--one, for instance, a mile long, a thousand feet
thick, and half a mile wide, under fair speed when it strikes the ocean?
Such a berg would go to the bottom unless there was a depth of many
thousand feet. Imagine, if possible, the commotion produced.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XVIII. Clouds, Fogs, and Vapors](potp22)
