[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Earth Mysteries](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](potp22)  [Next](potp24) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_255">p. 255</span>

# CHAPTER XIX.

### ARCTIC AND ANTARCTIC WINDS.

This book has but one purpose--to prove that the earth is hollow.
Therefore, instead of trying to make an entertaining argument, I prefer
making a plain, convincing one. For that reason, some may think I have
spent too much time on certain phases of my argument, yet I believe I
will be able to convince the reader in every point I make. If I convince
him in one case, the rest need no argument. Let us take up the question
of the wind, a subject that has received the best thoughts of our great
scientific men. These scientists cannot agree upon what makes the wind
act so strangely at the poles. Peary says that at the North Pole "it is
invariably radial from the centre outward, perpendicular, so steady is
this wind and so closely does it adhere to the perpendicularity."

How does the Antarctic explorer find

<span id="page_256">p. 256</span>

the wind? If the earth be hollow, as the wind passes through the earth
it would operate about the same at either entrance --under similar
conditions. For instance, a great volcanic explosion at the southern end
would send forth a great force of warm, dry air, which would blow out
radially and upward, and spread in all directions. This is done so
universally that certain writers have termed it an anti-cyclone. It
must, of course, have a name, and why not call it anti-cyclone, although
Granny Cyclone would be more appropriate. Call it what you please, it is
the wind passing out from the interior of the earth, and when released,
it spreads in every direction. The descriptions given by Peary of the
Arctic winds and by Bernacchi of the Antarctic, are alike.

Bernacchi says on page 112: "On the morning of May 4th a gale burst upon
us with great fury and with little warning; ten minutes before its first
burst it blew in whirlwinds, then came a great rush, bringing with it
tons of drifting snow. It was the strongest gale we had as yet
experienced,

<span id="page_257">p. 257</span>

 

<span id="img_25700"></span>

[![THE EMPEROR PENGUIN.&lt;br&gt; Found at the farthest point reached in
the Antarctic Circle. It must migrate for food in winter, but it cannot
fly. If the earth is not hollow, where does this bird go when the ice
prevents it from swimming?](tn/25700.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/25700.jpg)  
THE EMPEROR PENGUIN.  
Found at the farthest point reached in the Antarctic Circle. It must
migrate for food in winter, but it cannot fly. If the earth is not
hollow, where does this bird go when the ice prevents it from
swimming?  

 

<span id="page_258">p. 258</span>

<span id="page_259">p. 259</span>

and it blew with fearful potency all day. Just previous to the first
outburst the barometer had commenced to fall and reached its minimum
reading, 28.227 inches, just before the wind dropped, at 9 p. m. These
winds, always from the same direction, are a remarkable feature in the
meteorology of the Antarctic. Some meteorologists have held that a vast
cyclonic system and low-pressure area continues south as far as the
pole, the more southerly parts being traversed by secondary cyclones;
others contend that the extreme south-polar area is occupied by a vast
anti-cyclone, out of which winds blow toward the girdle of low pressure.

"The prevailing east-southeast and southeast winds at Cape Adare (lat.
71 deg. 18 min.), which is within the area of abnormally low pressure,
tend to prove the existence of a great anti-cyclone stretching over the
polar area, which in its turn necessarily implies the existence of upper
currents from the north, blowing towards and in upon the polar regions
to make good the drain caused by the

<span id="page_260">p. 260</span>

surface outblowing southeasterly winds."

Bernacchi, page 129, after giving de-tails of a great storm, says:
"About this time a very fine specimen of an Emperor penguin was caught
out on the ice-pack; a big, sad, solitary bird, over four feet high. The
presence of these birds so far south late in the year proves that they
do not migrate far north during the Antarctic winter."

This was when the temperature registered 2 deg. below zero. The penguin
is a flightless bird and must seek its food in open water. If the earth
be not hollow, where does this bird migrate to in winter for food? These
birds are found at the farthest point south.

I will now give you a description of an anti-cyclone, written by
Bernacchi, that you may see if there be any difference between it and
Perry's Arctic wind. To account for this surface-wind blowing outward,
it is said that it must blow down from the north from an upper current.
If so, one might, naturally, ask, why would it be

<span id="page_261">p. 261</span>

warmer, dryer, and always from the same direction?

No, it does not come from above; it comes from the interior of the
earth, which accounts for its being warmer, dryer, and always from the
same direction, except on days when the air is sucked into the interior
of the earth. The following is what Bernacchi says about anti-cyclones:

"An anti-cyclone is a portion of the atmosphere in which the pressure is
highest at the centre, and diminishes nearly uniformly in all
directions, and the winds blow spirally outward. A cyclone is just the
reverse, and has the lowest pressure at the centre, and the winds blow
in towards this centre of low pressure in a spiral curve.

"The frequency and force of these gales, and the persistency with which
they blew--always from the same direction, east-southeast,--the
invariably high rise in temperature, and the sudden fall and rise of the
barometer, the dryness of the winds --the relative humidity--generally
between

<span id="page_262">p. 262</span>

fifty and sixty per cent.--and the motion of the upper clouds from the
north-west, point to the fact that the South Pole is covered by what may
be regarded practically as a great permanent anti-cyclone more extensive
in the winter months than in the summer. Nothing more appalling than
these frightful winds, accompanied by tons of drift snow from the
mountains above, can be imagined." (Page 115.)

On page 295 Bernacchi gives consider-able space to the strange phenomena
of the wind at Cape Adare, where he spent nearly two years. He also
quotes Sir John Murray, of the *Challenger*, and others, as meeting the
same experience. If the earth be hollow, this matter of the wind blowing
spirally outward is all right, as it could not blow any other way. If
the earth be solid, there is no telling why the wind blows as it does,
and consequently the mystery must remain a mystery. Bernacchi and Sir
John Murray mention the precipitation occurring on the outflowing winds.
One says it was slight, the other says it was less than two inches in
nearly

<span id="page_263">p. 263</span>

a year. These are statements worth remembering. If there is no rain, and
the snow is so slight in amount that it cannot be measured, where does
the water come from that produces the vast number of icebergs in the
Antarctic region?

"The mean temperature of the air for the eleven months was 5.2 deg.
Fahr.; the amount this E. S. E. wind raises the mean temperature is 8.8
deg. Fahr. This power of raising the temperature is more conspicuous in
the winter time than in summer.

"Thus the mean temperature for the month of July is -9°, while the mean
temperature of the E. S. E. winds for that month is +7.6°, a difference
of 16.6° Fahr. Such a contrast is very striking." (Page 304.)

The power that this wind has in raising the temperature is perhaps
better shown in the table of single storms, printed in Bernacchi's work.

On the meteorological conditions, Bernacchi says: "A mere glance at the
Cape Adare wind-roses shows the prevailing

<span id="page_264">p. 264</span>

winds from E. S. E. and S. E. *in a very marked degree*. These winds
were the most remarkable feature observed in the *meteorological*
conditions of Victoria Land. Their frequency and force, the *persistency
with which they blew front the same direction*, the invariably *high
rise in the temperature*, their dryness, the motion of the upper clouds
from the N. W., and, finally, the gradual rise in the mean height of the
barometer to the south of about Latitude 73 S. seem to indicate that the
Antarctic lands are covered by what may be regarded, practically, as a
great permanent anti-cyclone, with a higher pressure than prevails over
the open ocean to the northwards.

"While this anti-cyclonic region may not be characterized by an
absolutely high pressure at all seasons, it must be high relatively to
the very low pressure which prevails to the northwards.

"Sir John Murray, of the *Challenger* expedition, was one of the first
to advance the theory of a vast anti-cyclone covering the South Pole,
and, on the whole,

<span id="page_265">p. 265</span>

the observations made at Cape Adare, which is almost at the centre of
the area of lowest mean pressure, appear to bear out his views.

"It is, however, impossible to arrive at anything definite respecting
the atmospheric circulation over the Antarctic regions from observations
taken at one station only."--Bernacchi, pages 295 and 296.

"Sir John Murray has said that we might expect the southerly, outflowing
winds which accompany this anti-cyclone to be dry winds, and attended by
a small precipitation. At Cape Adare, the belt of excessive
precipitation has been passed; the total amount of precipitation
registered during the year being under two inches, and of this the
greater part fell in the summer or autumn months, when the ocean to the
north was practically free of ice, and the amount of evaporation from
its surface at its maximum. During the winter months, however,
precipitation generally took place from a practically clear, blue sky,
in the form of very minute,

<span id="page_266">p. 266</span>

hard ice-crystals, and in such small quantities as to defy measurement
by means of an ordinary snow-gauge."

Peary says, on pages 74 and 75: "The regularity of the winds of the
'Great Ice' of Greenland, as I have found them during an actual sojourn
of over seven months upon the 'Great Ice,' and visits to it of greater
or less duration in every month of the year, is phenomenal. Except
during atmospheric disturbances of unusual magnitude, which cause storms
to sweep across the country regardless of ordinary rules, the direction
of the wind of the 'Great Ice' of Greenland is invariably radial from
the centre outward, perpendicular to the nearest part of the coast-land
ribbon. So steady is this wind, and so closely does it adhere to this
perpendicularity, that I can liken it only to the flow of a sheet of
water descending the slopes of the 'Great Ice' from the central interior
dome to the coast."

If the earth be hollow, the wind would pass from the interior of the
earth, just as has been described many times, blowing

<span id="page_267">p. 267</span>

strongly and steadily. At other times heavy gusts, as nearly as possible
like the explosions of a mammoth air-gun, rush out, as described above.

Nansen, on page 373 (Volume I), also speaks of the temperature rising
under the influence of northerly winds. "Thursday, January 18th.--The
wind that began yesterday has gone on blowing all to-day with a velocity
of sixteen to nineteen feet per second, from S.S.E., S.E. and E.S.E. It
has no doubt helped us on a good way north; but it seems to be going
down; now, about midnight, it has sunk to four metres; and the
barometer, which has been rising all the time, has suddenly begun to
fall; let us hope that it is not a cyclone passing over us, bringing
northerly wind. It is curious that there is almost always a rise of the
thermometer with these strong winds; to-day it rose to 13 deg., Fahr.,
below zero (-25 deg. C.). A south wind of less velocity generally lowers
the temperature, and a moderate north wind raises it."

Farther on he says: "It is curious that

<span id="page_268">p. 268</span>

now the northerly winds bring cold and the southerly warmth. Earlier in
the winter it was just the opposite.

"It seems strange to me that there is so much northwest wind, and hardly
any from the northeast, though the latter is what the rotation of the
earth would lead one to expect. As a matter of fact, the wind merely
shifts between northwest and southeast, instead of between southwest and
northeast, as it ought to do. Unless there is land, I am at a loss to
find a satisfactory explanation, at all events, of this northwest
direction."

What Nansen says about the change of the wind since winter began, is
important, and is another of the strong proofs that the earth is hollow,
and that the atmosphere in the interior of the earth is of a more even
temperature than on the exterior.

It would also be warmer in winter and colder in summer, which all
explorers have found to be the case.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XX. The Centre of Gravity](potp24)
