[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Earth Mysteries](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](potp23)  [Next](potp25.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_269">p. 269</span>

# CHAPTER XX.

### THE CENTRE OF GRAVITY.

To many, the question of gravity seems a great argument against the
theory that the earth is hollow. This undoubtedly arises from the fact
that gravity is supposed to be something located in the centre of the
earth, drawing everything in that direction, or to the centre.
Philosophy teaches that the greater attracts the lesser. If the earth is
hollow, and the walls are, say, a thousand miles thick, why should not
the centre of the walls be the centre of attraction, as well as of the
earth, if solid? If gravity is something that repels ether, or air,
above the earth, then it would make no difference whether the earth were
concave or convex.

Again: if the centre of the walls of the earth is the centre of gravity,
then the greatest attraction would be at the poles, where it is found to
be. Nansen's description of the dead water, it will be remembered,

<span id="page_270">p. 270</span>

is: "We could hardly get on at all, for the dead water, and we swept the
whole sea along with us. It is a peculiar phenomenon--this dead water.
We had at present a better opportunity of studying it than we desired.
It occurs where a surface layer of fresh water rests upon the salt water
of the sea, and this fresh water is carried along with the ship, gliding
on the heavier sea water beneath, as if on a fixed foundation."

The centre of gravity seems strongest here, and was probably about
midway round the curve on Nansen's way to the interior of the earth. If
this be true, it is in accordance with the wisdom of the Creator: the
greatest attraction where it is most needed. The laws of the universe
are inevitable; when they seem otherwise we do not understand them.

The question of gravity is most puzzling, and, so far as I know, not
understood. I desire to show that, be the earth hollow or solid, gravity
is not in any way affected. If gravity is something that acts as a
magnet, and draws everything to

<span id="page_271">p. 271</span>

the centre, the walls of the earth would then be the magnet. On the
other hand, if gravity is something *above* the earth that repels--air
or ether--then the earth's shape would in nowise affect it. I believe it
will be found that gravity is strongest at the turning point entering
the interior of the earth, and objects will weigh more at that point
than near the equator or in the interior of the earth. Every substance
will then appear lighter or weigh less in the interior of the earth, for
the reason that the laws of the universe are so perfect that nothing is
wasted, and a substance requires less force to hold it to the inside of
a hollow ball in motion than to hold it to the outside.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXI. Cannot Reach the Poles](potp25.md)
