[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Earth Mysteries](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](potp25)  [Next](potp27) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_275">p. 275</span>

# CHAPTER XXII.

### WHAT IS IN THE INTERIOR OF THE EARTH?

I have been asked what I expect to find in the interior of the earth.
That, of course, is speculative, based on the little evidence found on
earth. It is not like the question, "Is the earth hollow?" We know that
it is, but do not know what will be found in its interior. It is like
seeing an island afar off: we know there is land, but do not know what
it is like till we get there. So many circumstances show the earth is
hollow that the fact cannot be questioned; but its contents are not so
easily determined till we look inside. From what I am able to gather,
and from analysis, game of all kinds--tropical and arctic--will be found
there; for both warm and cold climates must be in the interior--warm
inland and cold near the poles. Sea monsters, and possibly the
much-talked-of sea serpent, may also be found, and vast territories of
arable

<span id="page_276">p. 276</span>

land for farming purposes. This theory is based upon the great
quantities of pollen that finds its way to the exterior of the earth,
and falls with the snow in such great quantities that it colors it, and
thus produces the colored snow of the Arctic Circle. This would require
millions of acres of land to grow. Minerals may be found in great
quantities, and gems of all kinds. The earth contains minerals and gems,
and they are as likely to be in the interior of the earth as on the
exterior. We may succeed, too, in finding large quantities of radium,
which would be used to relieve the darkness if it should be unusually
dark. I do not think this will be the case, however, as there are two
summers of four months' duration and two winters of two months', giving
the interior eight months of summer and four months of winter in each of
our years on earth. In other words, the years in the interior of the
earth are but six months long, and every other year the summer becomes a
little longer and the winter a little shorter. The two just make up the
six months,

<span id="page_277">p. 277</span>

Why? Because the opening into the interior of the earth at the south, or
Antarctic, is fifteen hundred miles in diameter, or forty-five hundred
miles in circumference; while the opening into the interior of the earth
at the north, or Arctic, is only one thousand miles in diameter, or
three thousand miles in circumference. The sun would begin to shine in
the interior of the earth from the south several days earlier than at
the north, simply because the opening is five hundred miles wider; for
the same reason it would disappear later. That would make the
summer--supplied with light and heat from the Antarctic--longer, and the
winter shorter than the summer which derived its heat and light from the
north, as the opening to the interior of the earth is five hundred miles
less in diameter than the opening to the south. The sun consequently
would appear later, and disappear earlier, making shorter the summers
deriving their heat and light from the north, and the winters longer.
This seems to me reasonable and correct.

<span id="page_278">p. 278</span>

The dimensions of the openings at the poles are arrived at in this way:
The magnetic poles, both north and south, have been reached, one five
hundred miles from the supposed pole, and the other seven hundred and
fifty miles, making one thou-sand and one thousand five hundred miles to
the poles, as only one side is estimated. Timber of good size will be
found, as shown by driftwood on the shores of the fiords, islands, and
inlets of the Arctic. I also believe that the interior of the earth will
be found inhabited. The race or races may be varied, but some at least
will be of the Eskimo race, who have found their way in from the
exterior. Camping places have been discovered, and relics that did not
belong to the present Innuits; nor did the latter know for what purposes
certain articles were used. The climate will be much more even than on
earth, as shown by the winds coming from the interior, which are much
warmer in winter and much cooler in summer than on earth. It is about
such a climate as San Francisco, I should judge, where one

<span id="page_279">p. 279</span>

has to stop to think whether it is June or January.

I have been asked about the risk and manner of getting there. Some risks
are to be taken, of course; and dangers are to be guarded against. For
instance, an iceberg plunging into the ocean would swamp a ship, if
near. This can be guarded against, however, by sending out scouts, or
keeping away from the shore. To me it does not seem especially
dangerous.

In going into the earth's interior special care should be taken to guard
against all conceivable accidents; as no pilot can be had for the first
trip to steer clear of breakers, etc. A ship should be well supplied
with very fast auxiliary boats and powerful searchlights, in order that
the ship have the best and safest course. Some plan should be found by
which to steer a boat without a compass in foggy weather, which will
have to be done when passing through and round the turn into the
interior of the earth. Stations should be placed within a few miles of
each other,

<span id="page_280">p. 280</span>

supplied with wireless telegraphy instruments, manned by able operators,
so that hourly communications can be had when passing unusually
dangerous points,--should any be found.

I have a plan for the strengthening of a ship, which seems a good one;
but as I am not a shipbuilder there may be objections to it. A strong
ship should be built in the usual way, then have from three to five
large and strong timbers--not too heavy (Georgia pine)--placed across
the ship,--not fastened to her, but held in position, so that in rough
weather they could not move out of place. Each timber should be in two
pieces, and put together by large adjustable screws, that when in the
vicinity of bergs they could be extended several feet over the edge of
the ship. When a berg approached the ship and she was crowded against
another berg, the timbers would be pressed endwise and thus protect her
from being crushed, as a piece of timber two feet square would resist a
greater pressure when pressed end-wise than any ship's hull could be
made to

<span id="page_281">p. 281</span>

stand. Take a small lead pencil, and note its resistance when pressed
endwise. The object of not having the timbers fastened to the ship, is
to keep them from straining or harming her.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: In Conclusion](potp27)
