[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Earth Mysteries](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](potp13)  [Next](potp15.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_124">p. 124</span>

# CHAPTER X.

### DUST IN THE ARCTIC.

The dust in the polar regions, which Hansen speaks of so many times, and
which was a source of such annoyance while drifting in the ocean many
miles from land, comes from somewhere; it does not grow; is a commodity
without life; cannot reproduce itself; yet it is found in such great
quantities that it colors the snow black. In the sky it looks like great
clouds, and falls on ships in such abundance that it becomes a source of
irritation. Hansen declares it was one of his principal reasons for
wanting to go home.

This ought to be accounted for in some reasonable way. So far as I have
been able to learn, it is dust from a stray comet, and, when analyzed,
is found to contain carbon and iron, supposed to come from some
exploding volcano. If it came from a passing comet, it probably started
about

<span id="page_125">p. 125</span>

the same time as the shooting stars, which fall so frequently near the
poles! After traveling millions and millions of miles, the dust and
shooting stars fall almost continuously; whereas a comet appears only
once in several years. Comets must distribute dust and shooting stars
sufficient to last till they come again; say, in ten or twenty years.
This shows how nonsensical the explanation is; yet, in order to make
things clear, it sometimes becomes necessary to show how ridiculous some
theories are. This comet theory is most absurd, and does no credit to
the first century,--to say nothing of the twentieth.

If it were true that the dust, falling so densely and continuously in
the Arctic, came from a comet millions of miles away, the amount
necessary to cover the space would shut out the rays of the sun from the
earth, which would be veiled in darkness. This dust does not come from a
comet; it comes from the earth, and not a great many miles from where it
is found.

Dust, as a source of annoyance in the Arctic, is what one would hardly
expect in

<span id="page_126">p. 126</span>

that region, if the earth be *not hollow*. Imagine dust as a great
annoyance in the middle of the Arctic Ocean! Nansen says: "The years are
passing here, and what do they bring? Nothing but dust, dust, dust,
which the first wind drives away."

Will some one who does not believe the earth is hollow tell me where
that dust comes from? It isn't an article or commodity that accumulates
very fast on ice, or open water; yet Nansen says: "Let us go home; what
have we to remain here for? Nothing but dust, dust, dust."

If you hold that the earth is solid, there is no answer to this
perplexing question. When it is understood, however, that the earth is
hollow, and the dust comes from the eruption of a volcano in the
interior of the earth, the puzzle is easily explained without accusing a
passing comet millions of miles away of scattering dust over all the
Arctic and Antarctic regions. If the earth is found to be solid, then
the people can congratulate themselves that the dust is mainly confined
to or near the poles,

<span id="page_127">p. 127</span>

where the inhabitants are few in number. But there is no danger of that
being ever proved.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XI. Open Water at Farthest Point North and South](potp15.md)
