[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Asia](../index.md) 
[Myths/Legends](../../neu/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](mps05.md) 
[Next](mps07.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0947593438/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### III

### AVT’HANDIL'S LETTER TO HIS VASSALS

<span class="margnote"><span id="164">164</span></span> He wrote as
follows: "My vassals, my instructors and some my pupils, faithful,
trusty and tried, attentive to my behests like shadows, hearken to my
letter all assembled!

<span class="margnote"><span id="165">165</span></span> "Give ear! I,
Avt’handil, earth beneath your feet, write this unto you; with mine own
hand have I written this epistle. For a little while I have preferred
roaming to drink and song; for bread and meat I shall trust to my bow
and thumb.

<span class="margnote"><span id="166">166</span></span> "I have in hand
a certain matter which makes me journey to a far country; I depart
alone, and this year shall I travel. I ask you only this: I beseech you
let me find the realm unshaken by the foe.

<span class="margnote"><span id="167">167</span></span> "I have
appointed Shermadin to be lord in my stead; until he learn of my life or
death he will shine upon you all like the sun; he will make the rose to
be frosted and not fade, he will cause all misdoers to melt away like
wax.

<span class="margnote"><span id="168">168</span></span> You know, too,
how he has grown up with me like a brother and like a son; you must obey
him as if he were Avt’handil; let him make to sound the trumpet, do
everything as I have hitherto done; if I come not at the time appointed,
mourning and not laughter will be seemly, to you."

<span id="page_29">p. 29</span>

<span class="margnote"><span id="169">169</span></span> The eloquent and
nice-worded one ended this letter, he tied gold round his waist, habited
himself to travel alone; he said: "I shall mount in the plain." The
soldiers formed in line, then they came forth; he tarried no time
indoors.

<span class="margnote"><span id="170">170</span></span> He said: "Let
all go hence; herein I need none as a partisan." He sent the slaves away
also, he remained by himself, alone he withdrew himself, he hastened
through the rushes. His slayer, T’hinat’hin, is always in his thoughts.

<span class="margnote"><span id="171">171</span></span> He galloped over
that plain; he was lost to the soldiers’ sight. Whatever human being
might have seen him and pursued him, his sword could not harm him; his
arm was hampered. He was heavy laden with a burden of grief for her
sake.

<span class="margnote"><span id="172">172</span></span> When the
soldiers hunted and sought their lord, and could no longer find the
sun-faced, their countenances paled, their great joy turned into
heaviness, they ran everywhere to seek him, whoever had a swift horse,

<span class="margnote"><span id="173">173</span></span> O lion, whom can
God put in thy place! They ran and brought out other messengers from
elsewhere; they could learn nothing of him; he passed from that place.
His disheartened hosts shed hot tears.

<span class="margnote"><span id="174">174</span></span> Shermadin
assembled together the courtiers and nobles; he showed them the letter
in which he (Avt’handil) had told them his tidings. When they heard it,
all remained heart-pierced, they beat themselves, there was not a
tearless heart, not an unbruised breast.

<span class="margnote"><span id="175">175</span></span> All said:
"Though our state without him is irksome to us, to whom save thee could
he give his seat and throne? Of a truth we shall obey thee, whatever
thou commandest any of us." They made that vassal lord; all did him
homage.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: IV. Avt’handil Sets Forth in Quest of Tariel](mps07.md)
