[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Asia](../index.md) 
[Myths/Legends](../../neu/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](mps02.md) 
[Next](mps04.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0947593438/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_1">p. 1</span>

# THE MAN IN THE PANTHER'S SKIN

### INTRODUCTORY QUATRAINS

<span class="margnote"><span id="1">1</span></span> HE who created the
firmament, by that mighty power made beings inspired from on high with
souls celestial; to us men He has given the world, infinite in variety
we possess it; from Him is every monarch in His likeness.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2">2</span></span> O one God! Thou
didst create the face of every form! Shield me, give me mastery to
trample on Satan, give me the longing of lovers lasting even unto death,
lightening (of the burden) of sins I must bear thither with me.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3">3</span></span> Of that lion whom
the use of lance, shield and sword adorns, of the king, the sun
T’hamara, the ruby-cheeked, the jet-haired, of her I know not how I
shall dare to sing the manifold praise; they who look upon her must
offer her the sweets for which she hungers.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4">4</span></span> By shedding tears of
blood we praise King T’hamara, whose praises I, not ill-chosen, have
told forth. For ink I have used a lake of jet, and for pen a pliant
crystal. Whoever hears, a jagged spear will pierce his heart!

<span class="margnote"><span id="5">5</span></span> She bade me indite
sweet verses in her praise, laud

<span id="page_2">p. 2</span>

her eyebrows and lashes, her hair, her lips and teeth, cut! crystal and
ruby arrayed in ranks. An anvil of soft lead breaks even hard stone.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6">6</span></span> Now want I tongue,
heart and skill for utterance! Grant me strength! And if I have aid from
thee I shall have understanding, so may we succour Tariel; tenderly
indeed should we cherish his memory and that of the three starlike
heroes wont to serve one another.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7">7</span></span> Come, sit ye down,
ye who have been born under the same fate; let us shed a never-drying
tear for Tariel's sake. I sat me down, I, Rust’haveli, indited a poem,
my heart I pierced with a lance. Hitherto the tale has been told as a
tale; now is it a pearl (of) measured (poesy).

<span class="margnote"><span id="8">8</span></span> To a lover, beauty,
glorious beauty, wisdom, wealth, generosity, youth and leisure are
fitting; he must be eloquent, intelligent, patient, an overcomer of
mighty adversaries; who has not all these qualities lacks the character
of a lover.

<span class="margnote"><span id="9">9</span></span> Love is tender, a
thing hard to be known. True love is something apart from lust, and
cannot be likened thereto it is one thing; lust is quite another thing,
and between. them lies a broad boundary; in no way do they mingle hear
my saying!

<span class="margnote"><span id="10">10</span></span> The lover must be
constant, not lewd, impure an faithless; when he is far from his beloved
he must heave sigh upon sigh; his heart must be fixed on one from whom
he endures wrath or sorrow if need be. I hate heartless love--embracing,
kissing, noisy bussing.

<span class="margnote"><span id="11">11</span></span> Lovers, call not
this thing love: when any long for one to-day and another to-morrow,
(lightly) bearing parting's pain. Such base sport is like mere boyish
trifling; the good lover is he who suffers a world's woe.

<span class="margnote"><span id="12">12</span></span> There is a first
(? noblest) love; it does not show, but hides its woes; (the lover)
thinks of it when lied is alone, and always seeks solitude; his
fainting, dying,

<span id="page_3">p. 3</span>

burning, flaming, all are from afar; he may face the wrath of kings, yet
will he be fearful of her.

<span class="margnote"><span id="13">13</span></span> He must betray his
secret to none, he must not basely groan and put his beloved to shame;
in nought should he manifest his love, nowhere must he reveal it; for
her sake he looks upon sorrow as joy, for her sake he would willingly be
burned (or? willingly burns \[with love\]).

<span class="margnote"><span id="14">14</span></span> How can the sane
trust him who noises his love abroad, and what shall it profit to do
this? He makes her suffer, and he himself suffers. How should he glorify
her if he shame her with words? What a chance if one hurt not his
beloved's heart!

<span class="margnote"><span id="15">15</span></span> I, Rust’haveli,
have composed this work by my art. For her whom a multitude of hosts
obey, I lose my wits, I die! I am sick of love, and for me there is no
cure from anywhere, unless she give me healing or the earth a grave.

<span class="margnote"><span id="16">16</span></span> This Persian tale,
now done into Georgian, has hitherto been like a pearl of great price
cast in play from hand to hand; now I have found it and mounted it in a
setting of verse; I have done a praiseworthy deed. The ravisher of my
reason, proud and beautiful, willed me to do it.

<span class="margnote"><span id="17">17</span></span> Eyes that have
lost their light through her long to look on her anew; lo! my heart is
mad with love, and it is my lot to run about the fields. Who will pray
for me? The burning of the body sufficeth, let (her) give soul-comfort!
In praise of threefold hue, the verse must needs fall short.

<span id="page_4">p. 4</span>

<span class="margnote"><span id="18">18</span></span> With what Fate
gives to a man, therewithal should he be content, and so (? contentedly)
speak of it. The labourer should ever work, the warrior be brave. So,
also, should the lover love Love, and recognize it. Who judges not will
not be judged by others.

<span class="margnote"><span id="19">19</span></span> Minstrelsy is,
first of all, a branch of wisdom; divinely intelligible to the godlike,
very wholesome to them that hearken; it is pleasant, too, if the
listener be a worthy man; in few words he utters a long discourse:
herein lies the excellence of poetry.

<span class="margnote"><span id="20">20</span></span> Like a horse
running a great race on a long course, like a ball-player in the lists
striking the ball fairly and aiming adroitly at the mark, even so it is
with the poet who composes and indites long poems, when utterance is
hard for him and verse begins to fail.

<span class="margnote"><span id="21">21</span></span> Then, indeed,
behold the poet, and his poesy will be manifest. When he is at a loss
for Georgian (words), and verse begins to fail, he will not weaken
Georgian, nor will he let it grow poor in words. Let him strike the ball
cunningly; he will show great virtue.

<span class="margnote"><span id="22">22</span></span> He who utters,
somewhere, one or two verses cannot be called a poet; let him not think
himself equal to great singers. Even if they compose a few discrepant
verses from time to time, yet if they say, "Mine are of the best!" they
are stiff-necked mules.

<span class="margnote"><span id="23">23</span></span> Secondly, lyrics
which are but a small part of poetry and cannot command heart-piercing
words--I may liken them to the bad bows of young hunters who cannot kill
big game; they are able only to slay the small.

<span class="margnote"><span id="24">24</span></span> Thirdly, lyrics
are fit for the festive, the joyous, the amorous, the merry, for
pleasantries of comrades; they

<span id="page_5">p. 5</span>

please us when they are rightly sung. Those are not called poets who
cannot compose a long work.

<span class="margnote"><span id="25">25</span></span> The poet must not
spend his toil in vain. One should seem to him worthy of love; he must
be devoted to one, he must employ all his art for her, he must praise
her, he must set forth the glory of his beloved; he must wish for nought
else, for her alone must his tongue be tuneful.

<span class="margnote"><span id="26">26</span></span> Now let all know
that I praise her whom I (erstwhile) praised; in this I have great
glory, I feel no shame. She is my life; merciless as a leopard is she.
Her name I pronounce hereafter with triumph and praise.

<span class="margnote"><span id="27">27</span></span> I speak of the
highest love--divine in its kind. It is difficult to discourse thereon,
ill to tell forth with tongues. It is heavenly, upraising the soul on
pinions. Whoever strives thereafter must indeed have endurance of many
griefs.

<span class="margnote"><span id="28">28</span></span> Sages cannot
comprehend that one Love; the tongue will tire, the ears of the
listeners will become wearied; I must tell of lower frenzies, which
befall human beings; they imitate it when they wanton not, but faint
from afar.

<span class="margnote"><span id="29">29</span></span> In the Arabic
tongue they call the lover "madman,"

<span id="page_6">p. 6</span>

because by non-fruition he loses his wits. Some have nearness to God,
but they weary in the flight; then again, to others it is natural to
pursue beauty.

<span class="margnote"><span id="30">30</span></span> I wonder why men
show that they love the beloved. Why shame they her whom they love, her
who slays herself for them, who is covered with wounds? If they love her
not, why do they not manifest to her feelings of hatred? Why do they
disgrace what they hate? But an evil man loves an evil word more than
his soul or heart.

<span class="margnote"><span id="31">31</span></span> If the lover weep
for his beloved, tears are her (? his) due. Wandering and solitude befit
him, and must be esteemed as roaming. He will have time for nothing but
to think of her. If he be among men, it is better that he manifest not
his love.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: I. Story of Rostevan, King of the Arabians](mps04.md)
