[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Asia](../index.md) 
[Myths/Legends](../../neu/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](mps14.md) 
[Next](mps16.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0947593438/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### XII

### LETTER OF NESTAN-DAREDJAN WRITTEN TO HER BELOVED

<span class="margnote"><span id="477">477</span></span>"She gave me a
letter, I gazed on it; it was from the light of the face of the lands.
She wrote: 'I have seen the loveliness of thy gemlike brilliancy; fair
wert thou returned from battle, after urging on thy horse; not ill seems
to me the cause of the flow of my tears.

<span class="margnote"><span id="478">478</span></span>"If God hath
given me my tongue it befits me to use it for thy praise; dead for thy
sake I can by no means speak, for lacking thee I die. The sun (*i.e.*,
Nestan) made a little garden of rose and jet, as a garden for the lion;
by thy sun, my self pertains to none save thee.

<span id="page_77">p. 77</span>

<span class="margnote"><span id="479">479</span></span>"'Though thou
hast shed a stream of tears yet have they not flowed in vain; henceforth
weep no more, put away grief from thee. Those who look upon thee curse
unrestrained those who look upon thee. Veil me with that which but now
was bound round thee.

<span class="margnote"><span id="480">480</span></span>"'Give me the
veils that sometime adorned thee; when thou seest me, thou also shalt be
pleased that that which is thine adorns me. Bind on thine arm this
bracelet if thou honourest what is mine, and such another night thou
shalt not pass as long as thou livest.'"

<span class="margnote"><span id="481">481</span></span>Here Tariel,
become like a wild beast, weeps, his grief increases a thousandfold; he
said: "I have the armlet which she formerly bound on her arm!" He undid
it, took it off, man cannot estimate its worth, he pressed it to his
lips, he fainted and fell like a corpse.

<span class="margnote"><span id="482">482</span></span>He lay more
lifeless than a corpse at the door of the tomb. On both sides are seen
bruises from his fist which he had struck on his breast. A stream of
blood flows from Asmat’h's scratched cheeks; she poured water on him
again, she succoured him, the sound of gurgling water is heard there.

<span class="margnote"><span id="483">483</span></span>Avt’handil, too,
sighed bitterly; he gazed on the unconscious form. Asmat’h multiplied
her groans; her tears hollowed out the stones. Then she restored him to
consciousness, his fires she quenched with water; he said: "I live; Fate
even now is drinking my blood."

<span class="margnote"><span id="484">484</span></span>Pale he sat up,
he stared with his eyes like one dazed; the rose was become quite
saffron and wan; a long time he neither spoke nor looked at them; he was
mightily oppressed that he remained (alive) and died not.

<span class="margnote"><span id="485">485</span></span>He said to
Avt’handil: "Hearken! Though I have the mind of a madman, I will tell
thee my tale and that of her who has buried me. It seems to me a joy to
meet the friend thou hast not met. It surprises me that I am alive, that
I survive hale.

<span id="page_78">p. 78</span>

<span class="margnote"><span id="486">486</span></span>"The sight of
Asmat’h, in whom I trusted as in a sister, pleased me. When I had seen
the letter, she gave me this armlet, I bound it on mine arm at once, I
doffed from my head that strange and rare thing of some strong, black
(stuff), the veil.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: VIII. Tariel's Letter in Answer to His Beloved](mps16.md)
