[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Asia](../index.md) 
[Myths/Legends](../../neu/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](mps16.md) 
[Next](mps18.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0947593438/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### XIV

### TARIEL HEARS TIDINGS OF THE LOSS OF NESTAN-DAREDJAN

<span class="margnote"><span id="551">551</span></span>"I sent those
men. I was mad in mind; since I could learn nought of her I grew more
inflamed with grief. I went to look from a wall I had built overlooking
the plain. I learned a dreadful thing, though I lost not my head.

<span class="margnote"><span id="552">552</span></span>"Two pedestrians
appeared, I went to meet them; it was a woman with a slave; I recognized
who was coming,

<span id="page_88">p. 88</span>

it was Asmat’h, with dishevelled head, blood flowing from her face; no
more did she call to me smiling, nor did she greet me with a smile.

<span class="margnote"><span id="553">553</span></span>"When I saw her I
became perturbed; my mind was maddened. I cried from afar: 'What has
befallen us, why does the fire consume us?' She wept pitifully, she
could hardly utter words, she said to me: 'God has engirt the sphere of
the heavens in wrath for us!'

<span class="margnote"><span id="554">554</span></span>"I came near, I
inquired again: 'What has happened to us? Tell me the truth.' Again she
wept aloud piteously, again the flame burned her; for a long time she
could speak no word to me, not the tenth part of her griefs, her breast
was dyed crimson with the blood trickling from her cheeks.

<span class="margnote"><span id="555">555</span></span>"Then she said to
me: 'I will tell thee, why should I hide it from thee? but inasmuch as I
shall make thee to rejoice, so have mercy upon me, suffer me not to
live, let me not survive, I entreat thee, have pity on me, save me from
my fate, fulfil thy duty to thy God.'

<span class="margnote"><span id="556">556</span></span>"She said to me:
"When thou slewest the bridegroom and the alarm was raised, the king
heard it, he leaped up, he was sore stricken thereat; he called for
thee, he ordered thee to be summoned, in a loud voice he cried; they
sought thee, they could not find thee at home, and thereat the king
complained.

<span class="margnote"><span id="557">557</span></span>"'They told him:
"He is not here; he has somewhere passed the gates." The king said: "I
know, I know, too well I understand; he loved my daughter, he shed blood
in the fields, and when they saw each other they could not refrain from
gazing.

<span class="margnote"><span id="558">558</span></span>"'"Now, by my
head! I will slay her who is called my sister; I told her God's, she has
caught her in the devil's net; what have those wicked lovers given or
promised her? If I allow her to remain (alive) I renounce God; this is
ready for her punishment."

<span class="margnote"><span id="559">559</span></span>"Seldom was it
the king's wont to swear by his head,

<span id="page_89">p. 89</span>

and when he thus swore he brake not his oath, forthwith he fulfilled it.
Someone--who knows who?--who heard this wrath of the king told it to
Davar the Kadj, who knows even heaven by her sorcery.

<span class="margnote"><span id="560">560</span></span>"'Some enemy of
God told Davar, the king's sister: "Thy brother hath sworn by his head,
he will not leave thee alive, the people know it." She spoke thus: "The
good God knows that I am innocent, and let that same people know who it
is that slays me and for whose sake I am slain."

<span class="margnote"><span id="561">561</span></span>"'My mistress was
the same as when thou didst leave her, her head was still wrapped in thy
veils, beautifully they became her. Davar spoke words such as I had
never heard: "Harlot, thou harlot, why didst thou slay me? I think thou
too shalt not rejoice.

<span class="margnote"><span id="562">562</span></span>"'"Wanton, harlot
woman, why didst thou cause thy bridegroom to be slain, or why dost thou
make me pay for his blood with mine? My brother shall not slay me in
vain for what I have done, what I have made thee do! Now God grant thou
mayst never meet him whom thou didst incite to hinder this!"

<span class="margnote"><span id="563">563</span></span>"'She seized her,
dragged her along, tore her long hair, wounded her, bruised her,
fiercely she frowned; (Nestan) could make no answer, but only sighed and
moaned, a black woman was of no avail, she could not heal her wounds.

<span class="margnote"><span id="564">564</span></span>"'When Davar was
sated with beating and bruising, two slaves with Kadj-like faces came
forth; they brought a litter, they spoke rudely to her, they put that
sun inside, thus was she made prisoner.

<span class="margnote"><span id="565">565</span></span>"'They passed the
windows towards the sea; immediately she was out of sight. Davar said:
"Who would not stone me for doing this? Who? Before he (P’harsadan)

<span id="page_90">p. 90</span>

slay me, I shall die. Life is wearisome to me!" She struck herself with
a knife, died, fell in a stream of blood.

<span class="margnote"><span id="566">566</span></span>"Why marvel’st
thou not to see me alive, unpierced by a lance! Now do to me what befits
a bringer of such tidings; by the Most High, deliver from this
unbearable life me who have not yet ceased to breathe." Her tears fell
piteously, undiminished, unceasing.

<span class="margnote"><span id="567">567</span></span>"'I said: Sister,
why should I kill thee, or what is thy fault? What shall I do in return
for the debt I owe her? Now I devote myself to seek her wherever rock
and water are found.' I became quite petrified; my heart grew like hard
rock.

<span class="margnote"><span id="568">568</span></span>"Excessive horror
maddened me; fever and trembling came upon me. I said to myself: 'Die
not! To lie idle (in the grave) is of no avail; better is it to roam
forth to seek her, to run and wander in the fields. Behold the time for
thee, who wishest to go with me!'

<span class="margnote"><span id="569">569</span></span>"I went in, I
arrayed myself quickly, accoutred I mounted my horse. A hundred and
sixty good knights of long service joined me, we passed forth from the
gates in order of battle. I went to the seashore, I saw a ship, the
skipper saw me apparelled.

<span class="margnote"><span id="570">570</span></span>"I entered the
ship, I went out to sea, I cruised amidst the sea. I let no ship from
any quarter pass unseen. I waited, but I heard nothing. Mad (as I was) I
became still more maddened; God hated me so that He forsook me wholly.

<span class="margnote"><span id="571">571</span></span>"Thus I spent a
year--twelve months which were to me like twenty--but I found no man,
even in a dream, who had seen her. All those who were attendant upon me
were dead and perished. I said: 'I cannot defy God; what He wills even
that will I do.'

<span class="margnote"><span id="572">572</span></span>"I was weary of
tossing on the seas, so I came ashore.

<span id="page_91">p. 91</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> My heart had
become altogether like a beast's, I hearkened to no counsel; all those
who were left to me in my misfortune have been scattered from me, (but)
God abandons not a man thus forsaken by (Fortune).

<span class="margnote"><span id="573">573</span></span>"Only this
Asmat’h and two slaves remained with me as my comforters and
counsellors. I could learn no news of her (Nestan), not even a grain's
weight. Weeping seemed to me as joy, and streams of tears flowed down.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XV. The Story of Nuradin P’hridon When Tariel Met Him on the
Seashore](mps18.md)
