[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Asia](../index) 
[Myths/Legends](../../neu/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](mps12) 
[Next](mps14) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0947593438/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_63">p. 63</span>

### X

### THE LETTER WRITTEN BY THE KING OF THE KHATAVIANS IN ANSWER TO TARIEL

<span class="margnote"><span id="387">387</span></span>"He wrote: 'I,
Ramaz the king, write a letter to thee Tariel. I marvelled at what was
written in the letter penned by thee. How dost thou summon thither me
who am lord over many peoples! I will look at no other letter which
comes from thee.'

<span class="margnote"><span id="388">388</span></span>"I commanded the
soldiers to be summoned; I sent forth the Lord of the Marches. They
gathered together the armies of India more numerous than the stars, from
near and far all hastened towards me, plain, rock and waste were
altogether filled with soldiers.

<span class="margnote"><span id="389">389</span></span>"They came
swiftly; they made no tarrying at home. I held a review; the good order
of the troops pleased me--their alertness and valour, beautifully drawn
up in squadrons, the speed of their steeds, their Khvarazmian armour.

<span class="margnote"><span id="390">390</span></span>"I raised the
royal standard with flag of red and black. I commanded the countless
troops to set out in the morning. I myself wept, I mourned exceedingly
my evil fate: 'If I see not the sun I know not how I can ever depart.'

<span class="margnote"><span id="391">391</span></span>"I went in. The
sadness of my pensive heart was increased unto me; burning tears welled
forth from mine eyes like a pool. 'My luckless fate,' said I, 'has never
yet ruled. Why did my hand lay hold of the rose since thus it could not
cull it!'

<span id="page_64">p. 64</span>

<span class="margnote"><span id="392">392</span></span>A slave entered;
a wondrous thing befell me. He gave to me in my exceeding grief a letter
from Asmat’h; she wrote: 'Thy sun for whom thou longest calls thee.
Come! ’Tis better than to weep there and moan at the deed of Fate.'

<span class="margnote"><span id="393">393</span></span>"So much did I
rejoice as was fitting. It was twilight, I went forth, I entered the
garden gate; where Asmat’h had first met me, there she appeared
standing; she said with a smile: 'Enter; the moon awaits thee, the
lion.'

<span class="margnote"><span id="394">394</span></span>"I entered the
house reared beautiful with terrace upon terrace, the moon shone forth
surrounded with rays of light at the full; within the curtain she sat
clad in green raiment, majestic and rare, wondrous of face and form.

<span class="margnote"><span id="395">395</span></span>"I went in and
stood on the edge of the carpet; the fire in me began to be quenched,
the darkness of my heart was lightened, joy rose up like a column. She
rested upon a cushion--she was far fairer than the sun's rays--she hid
her face from me, she looked up a moment to see me.

<span class="margnote"><span id="396">396</span></span>"She commanded:
'Asmat’h, beg the Amirbar to be seated!' She placed a cushion opposite
her to be praised as the sun; I sat down, I gave up to joy my heart
abused by Fate. I marvel that my life stays in me (while) I speak the
words she said.

<span class="margnote"><span id="397">397</span></span>"She said to me:
'Last time thou wert ill pleased that thou wert sent away without being
spoken to. I, at parting, as the sun withered thee up like a flower of
the field. Thou wert doomed to shed tears from the narcissus-pool; but
for me, bashfulness and reserve are necessary towards the Amirbar.

<span class="margnote"><span id="398">398</span></span>"'Though great
modesty befits a woman towards a man, yet is it much worse not to speak
and to hide woes; if I smile outwardly I felt inwardly secret grief;
last time I sent the maid I gave her a true message.

<span class="margnote"><span id="399">399</span></span>"'What we two
have hitherto known of each other,

<span id="page_65">p. 65</span>

even now know me thine by these firm promises; I assure thee of this by
great vows and oaths; if I deceive thee may God make me earth, may I not
sit in the nine heavens!

<span class="margnote"><span id="400">400</span></span>"'Go, attack the
Khatavians, fight and make raids; may God grant that thou be victorious,
come (back) to me of good cheer. But what shall I do until it falls to
my lot to look upon thee again! Give me thy heart undivided; take mine
for thyself.'

<span class="margnote"><span id="401">401</span></span>"'Now, that of
which thou hast deemed me worthy no human being deserves; this grace is
unexpected, from God this does not surprise me; thy rays have flooded my
dark heart and made it translucent; thine shall I be till the earth
cover my face.'

<span class="margnote"><span id="402">402</span></span>"Upon the book of
oaths I swore and she swore to me; thus she confirmed her love to me:
'If any save thee give pleasure to my heart may God slay me, henceforth
thus will I speak to myself, thus will I train myself.'

<span class="margnote"><span id="403">403</span></span>"I stayed some
time before her, we spoke sweet words, we ate some pleasant fruit,
talking one to the other; then weeping and shedding tears I rose to
depart, the beauties of her rays were spread like light in my heart.

<span class="margnote"><span id="404">404</span></span>"It irked me to
go far from her crystal and ruby and glass. The world was renewed to me,
I had an abundance of joy; that light appearing in ether as sun seemed
to be mine; now I am surprised that being separated from her I have
(still) a heart like a steep rock.

<span class="margnote"><span id="405">405</span></span>"In the morning I
mounted, I commanded the trumpet and bugle to be sounded; I cannot tell
thee of all the armies nor of their readiness to mount; I, a lion, set
forth for Khataet’hi, none can accuse me of cowardice; the soldiers
marched without a road, they followed no track (?).

<span class="margnote"><span id="406">406</span></span>"I crossed the
boundaries of India, I went on a

<span id="page_66">p. 66</span>

considerable time; a man met me from Ramaz, the khan over Khataet’hi; he
repeated to me a message conciliatory to the heart: 'Your Indian goats
are able to eat even our wolves.'

<span class="margnote"><span id="407">407</span></span>"He presented me
with astounding treasures as a gift from Ramaz; he said: 'He entreats
thee, destroy us; not, it is not a thing thou shouldst do; put us on our
oath, thereby are our necks bound with twigs, without devastation we
shall deliver over to thee ourselves, our children and possessions.

<span class="margnote"><span id="408">408</span></span>"'Forgive us in
that we have sinned against thee, we ourselves repent; by God, if thou
wouldst have mercy on us, bring not thine armies hither, destroy not our
land, let not the heavens fall upon us in wrath; we give thee our
castles and cities, let a few knights come with thee.'

<span class="margnote"><span id="409">409</span></span>"I placed my
viziers at my side, we discussed and counselled; they said: 'Thou art
young, therefore we sages venture to say to thee, alas! they are
exceeding treacherous; we have seen it indeed once already; may they not
slay thee treacherously, may they not bring on us, woe?

<span class="margnote"><span id="410">410</span></span>"'We counsel
thus: Let us go forth with brave heroes only, let the soldiers follow
close behind us, let them be apprised of the tidings by a man; if they
be true-hearted, trust them, make them swear by God and heaven; if they
submit not to thee, pour forth thy wrath and moreover the wrath of
heaven upon them.'

<span class="margnote"><span id="411">411</span></span>"This advice
counselled by the viziers pleased me: I returned a message: 'O king
Ramaz, I know thy decision; life is better than death to thee. We put
not our trust in stone walls. I will leave the soldiers, I will come
with a few, towards thee will I march.'

<span class="margnote"><span id="412">412</span></span>"I took with me
three hundred of the soldiers, good

<span id="page_67">p. 67</span>

brave knights, I went forth and left all the army; I said: Wherever I
shall go, march over the same fields, follow me closely, help me, I
shall call you if I need help.'

<span class="margnote"><span id="413">413</span></span>"I travelled
three days; another man of the same khan met me, again he presented me
with many beautiful robes; he (on behalf of the khan) said: 'I wish thee
to be near me, proud and mighty one; when I meet thee then shalt thou
know (many) such gifts.'

<span class="margnote"><span id="414">414</span></span>"Yet more he
said: 'What I have told thee is true. I myself come forward to meet
thee, I haste to see thee.' (I said, says Tariel): 'Tell (the Khan):
Certainly, by God, I shall do your commandment, tenderly shall we meet
each other, we shall be like father and son.'

<span class="margnote"><span id="415">415</span></span>"Departed thence
I alighted on the bounds of a certain deep forest; again messengers
came, they were not shy to salute me, they brought fair steeds as a
present to me, they said: 'Of a truth kings would desire to see thee.'

<span class="margnote"><span id="416">416</span></span>"They said to me:
'The king informs thee: I myself also come towards thee; having left my
house, early to-morrow I shall meet thee.' I kept the messengers, I put
up a felt tent, with no patrols; I received them very amiably, they lay
down together like groomsmen.

<span class="margnote"><span id="417">417</span></span>"No good deed
done to a man can pass away thus (*i.e.*, unrewarded). A certain man
(one of the messengers of the khan) returned; he came to me and said
secretly: I owe you a great debt hard for me to pay; I cannot for sake
and forget thee.

<span class="margnote"><span id="418">418</span></span>"'I was to some
extent (or, for a short time) brought up by your father. I heard the
treachery planned for you; I ran to let you know of it. It would grieve
me to see thy; elegant-formed, the rose-faced, a corpse. I will tell
thee all; hearken to me, be calm.

<span class="margnote"><span id="419">419</span></span>"'That thou be
not vainly deceived, these men are traitors to thee; in one place are
hidden for thee one

<span id="page_68">p. 68</span>

hundred thousand troops, then in another place are thirty thousand; that
is why they call upon thee to hasten; if thou take not measures at once
mischance will come upon thee.

<span class="margnote"><span id="420">420</span></span>"'The king will
come a little way to meet thee whose admirers can never cease; secretly
they will be clad in armour; thou trusting them while they cajole thee
the soldiers will make smoke, on all sides they will surround, as it is
when ten thousands strike one so must they overwhelm thee.'

<span class="margnote"><span id="421">421</span></span>"I spoke
pleasantly to the man and gave him thanks: 'If I am not slain I shall
repay thee for this according to thy desires. Now let not thy comrades
suspect; go, be with them. If I forget thee may I be surely lost.'

<span class="margnote"><span id="422">422</span></span>"I told no human
being; I kept it secret like gossip. What is to be will be; all advice
is equal. But I sent men towards the armies though the way was long; I
gave the message: 'Come quickly, hasten over mountain and hill.'

<span class="margnote"><span id="423">423</span></span>"In the morning I
gave a sweet message to the messengers. They were to tell King Ramaz: 'I
am coming to meet thee; come, I also come soon.' Another half-day I
journeyed on; I took no heed of trouble; there is a providence, if I am
to be killed to-day where below can I hide myself!

<span class="margnote"><span id="424">424</span></span>"I mounted a
certain peak; I saw dust in the plain. I said to myself: 'King Ramaz is
coming; though he has spread a net for me, my sharp sword, my straight
lance, will pierce their flesh.' Then I spoke to my troops; I set forth
a great plan.

<span class="margnote"><span id="425">425</span></span>"I said:
'Brothers, these men are traitors to us; why should the power of your
arms be weakened on that account? Those who die for their kings, upwards
their spirits fly! Now let us engage the Khatavians. Why should we gird
on the sword in vain!'

<span id="page_69">p. 69</span>

<span class="margnote"><span id="426">426</span></span>"Proudly, with
fierce words, I commanded them to don armour; we clad ourselves for
fight in chain coats of mail with shoulder-pieces; I formed squadrons, I
set out, I went in great haste; that day my sword cut in pieces mine
adversary.

<span class="margnote"><span id="427">427</span></span>"We approached.
They perceived that our forms were clad in armour. A man came with a
message from the king; he said: 'We look upon your treachery as
untimely, now we see your armour, this causes us displeasure.'

<span class="margnote"><span id="428">428</span></span>"I sent back a
message: 'I too know what thou hast contrived for me; you have made
certain plans, but they will not come to pass; give orders, come and
fight me as is the law and custom, I have taken my sword in my hand to
slay you.'

<span class="margnote"><span id="429">429</span></span>"When the
messenger came, why did they send yet another? They made smoke for the
soldiers, they made plain what was hid, they came forth from ambush,
they advanced from both sides, they formed into many ranks, though,
thank God, they could not harm me.

<span class="margnote"><span id="430">430</span></span>"I took a lance,
I applied my hand to helming myself, I was eager for the fray to break
them, I extended a stadium's length, I made ranks and advanced in a long
line. They drew up innumerable cohorts, they stood calm and undisturbed.

<span class="margnote"><span id="431">431</span></span>"When I came near
they looked at me: 'He is a madman,' said they. I, strong-armed, made my
way thither where the main body of the army stood; I pierced a man with
my lance, his horse I overturned, they both departed from the sun
(*i.e.*, life), the lance broke, my hand seized (the sword); I praise, O
sword, him who whetted thee.

<span class="margnote"><span id="432">432</span></span>"I swooped in
like a falcon among a covey of grey partridges, I threw man upon man, I
made a hill of men and horses; the man thrown down by me spins like a

<span id="page_70">p. 70</span>

dragon-fly; I completely destroyed at one onslaught the two front
squadrons.

<span class="margnote"><span id="433">433</span></span>"Crowding they
surrounded me, about me was a great fight; when once I struck none could
stand, I made blood spurt forth as from a fountain, he whom I clove-hung
on his horse like a saddle-bag, wherever I was they fled from me, they
were wary of me.

<span class="margnote"><span id="434">434</span></span>"At the evening
hour their watchman cried forth from the summit: 'Stand no longer, let
us go, heaven looks again on us in wrath, a terrible dust is coming, wee
should beware of this, let not their countless tens of thousands of
soldiers completely destroy us.'

<span class="margnote"><span id="435">435</span></span>"My soldiers whom
I had not brought with me, when they heard of it, set out, they
travelled day and night without stopping, neither plain nor mountain
could contain them; they appeared, they beat the kettledrum, the trumpet
sounded aloud.

<span class="margnote"><span id="436">436</span></span>"(The enemy) saw
them, they started to flee, we raised a shout, we pursued over the
fields in which we had fought our battle. I unhorsed King Ramaz; we
found each other with swords. We captured all his armies; we slew them
not.

<span class="margnote"><span id="437">437</span></span>"Those who fled
were overtaken by the rearguard, they began to seize them, to throw down
the terrified, the vanquished; they (Tariel's troops) had a reward for
their sleeplessness and night-watching; the prisoners, even those that
were unwounded, ceased not to wail like sick men.

<span class="margnote"><span id="438">438</span></span>"We dismounted to
rest on the battle-field. I had wounded my arm with the sword; it seemed
to me a mere scratch. My armies came to see me and praise me, they could
not speak, they knew not how to express their admiration.

<span class="margnote"><span id="439">439</span></span>"The glories
which they thrust upon me were sufficient

<span id="page_71">p. 71</span>

for one man; some blessed me from afar, some tried to kiss me; those
nobles who had trained me wept over me, they saw that which had been cut
by my sword, they marvelled exceedingly.

<span class="margnote"><span id="440">440</span></span>"I sent soldiers
everywhere to bring in booty; they came together loaded. I was proud of
myself; I had dyed the plain with the blood of those who had sought to
slay me. I did not fight at the gate of the cities; I seized them
without a battle.

<span class="margnote"><span id="441">441</span></span>"I said to Ramaz:
'I have learned of thy treacherous deed; now that thou art captured
justify thyself; fortify not strongholds, count them all into thy hand;
else, why should I overlook thy guilt towards me?'

<span class="margnote"><span id="442">442</span></span>"Ramaz said to
me: 'I have no more power left; give me one of my magnates over whom I
may have lordship; I will send him to the guardians of the castles; let
me speak with them; I will give all into thine hands, since I make it
thy property.'

<span class="margnote"><span id="443">443</span></span>"I gave him a
magnate, I sent knights with him, I caused all the governors of
fortresses to be brought before me, they gave the strongholds into my
hands; thus I made them repent the war. With what can I compare the
abundance of treasure!

<span class="margnote"><span id="444">444</span></span>"Then I went in
to travel through and inspect Khataet’hi; publicly they presented me
with the keys of the treasuries; I settled the country, I commanded: 'Be
ye without fear, the sun shall not burn you, be assured you will be left
unburned.'

<span class="margnote"><span id="445">445</span></span>"I examined the
treasuries one by one from end to end; I should be weary if I mentioned
all the wondrous kinds of treasures. I saw together a marvellous mantle
and veil; if thou didst see it thou wouldst desire to know its name.

<span class="margnote"><span id="446">446</span></span>"I could not
learn what (stuff) it was nor what kind

<span id="page_72">p. 72</span>

of work; everyone to whom .1 showed it marvelled. (and) said it was a
divine miracle; neither was the basis of the tissue like that of brocade
nor carpet, its strength was as if it had been wrought like iron--I
might say tempered in, fire.

<span class="margnote"><span id="447">447</span></span>"I put them aside
as a present for her whose ray enlightened me; I chose as a gift for the
king whatever was best: a thousand mules and camels, all strong-limbed,
I sent them loaded; he also learned the good news.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XI. Letter of Tariel to the King of the Indians When He Triumphed
Over the Khatavians](mps14)
