[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Asia](../index.md) 
[Myths/Legends](../../neu/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](mps13.md) 
[Next](mps15.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0947593438/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### XI

### LETTER OF TARIEL TO THE KING OF THE INDIANS WHEN HE TRIUMPHED OVER THE KHATAVIANS

<span class="margnote"><span id="448">448</span></span>"I wrote a
letter: 'O king, great is your good fortune! The Khatavians plotted
treachery to me, though it fell on them to their hurt; therefore am I
tardy in telling you my true tidings. I have captured the king; I come
to thee with spoil and prisoners.'

<span class="margnote"><span id="449">449</span></span>"When I had put
everything in order I set out from Khataet’hi. I took the treasures, I
despoiled the kingdom, I could not get enough camels, I loaded bullocks
with the burdens; I had found glory and honour, for what I had desired
that had I obtained.

<span class="margnote"><span id="450">450</span></span>"I led away
captive the King of Khataet’hi. I came to India, sweet was the meeting
with my foster-father; what eulogy he uttered to me cannot be repeated,
for me to tell it were unseemly; he undid mine arm, he bound it with a
soft bandage.

<span class="margnote"><span id="451">451</span></span>"Fair tents stood
pitched in the public square (*maidan*) for him who desired to speak
with and gaze upon me. That day he (the king) who rested there spread a
banquet, he caressed me, sitting near me he gazed at me.

<span class="margnote"><span id="452">452</span></span>"That night we
spent in feasting; pleasantly we made merry there. In the morning we
left the *maidan*;

<span id="page_73">p. 73</span>

we entered the city. The king commanded: 'Call the soldiers, assemble
them, show me this day the Khatavians, lead in the prisoners.'

<span class="margnote"><span id="453">453</span></span>"I led in King
Ramaz captive before him. The king looked sweetly on him as on a son
whom he had cradled. I made the deceitful and treacherous one seem
deserving, and this is the excess of heroism in a brave man.

<span class="margnote"><span id="454">454</span></span>"He entertained
the King of the Khatavians, he caressed him, he conversed with him for a
long time in a fitting manner; at dawn I was called, he spoke to me a
compassionate word: 'Shall I pardon the Khatavian, my former enemy?'

<span class="margnote"><span id="455">455</span></span>"I ventured to
reply: 'Since God forgives the sinner, be you also merciful to him whose
might is brought to nought.' He said to Ramaz: 'Know that I send thee
hence forgiven, but show not thyself before me again disgraced.'

<span class="margnote"><span id="456">456</span></span>"He levied a
tribute of a hundred times a hundred drachmas, also a thousand
*khatauris*, also brocades and satins; then he clad him and all his
courtiers, and sent them away with pardon in place of wrath.

<span class="margnote"><span id="457">457</span></span>"The Khatavian
thanked him, bent, paid lowly homage; he said: 'By God, I repent my
treachery towards you; if ever I sin against you again then kill me.' He
departed and took all his (folk) with him.

<span class="margnote"><span id="458">458</span></span>"A man of the
king's came; it was dawn, and the morning grey was past; he brought a
message: 'For three months have I been separated from thee, I have eaten
no game killed by arrow in the field; if thou be not tired come forth,
though it be time to be tired.'

<span class="margnote"><span id="459">459</span></span>"I apparelled
myself, I went into the hall of audience; a pack of harriers met me, all
the space round the hall was full of falcons. The king sat decked in
beauty

<span id="page_74">p. 74</span>

like the sun; he rejoiced at the coming of me, the lovely and fair.

<span class="margnote"><span id="460">460</span></span>"He said secretly
to his wife, but unknown to me To gaze on Tariel returned from war is
desirable, he brings light to the onlooker's heart, however dark it may
be; whatever I ask thee to do, do it without delay.

<span class="margnote"><span id="461">461</span></span>"'Now, without
(consulting) thee I have thought of a plan; but thou too must know it:
Since the maid is to be king, and has been so nominated by us ourselves,
whoever shall see her, now let him who is like a tree in Eden see
her--lo! even to-day; seat her by thy side, both of you meet us in the
palace, I shall come joyful.'

<span class="margnote"><span id="462">462</span></span>"We hunted over
plain, mountain-foot and hill; there was a multitude of hounds, falcons
and hawks. We returned early without having gone a stage from the long
road. They did not play at ball; they broke up two games.

<span class="margnote"><span id="463">463</span></span>"Folk eager to
gaze on me filled the city, the bazaar and the roofs; tasselled robes
adorned me who had finished the war; I was fair as a pale-hued rose
bathed in tears, he who looked on me fainted; true is this, and no
falsehood.

<span class="margnote"><span id="464">464</span></span>"The veils I had
found in the city of the Khatavians I bound round me, they became me, I
maddened (still more) the heart of the mad. The king dismounted; we
entered the apartments of my foster-parents. I saw the flash of her
cheeks like sunlight, I trembled.

<span class="margnote"><span id="465">465</span></span>"The form of that
sun (Nestan) was clad in robes of orange; behind her was a host of
eunuchs in cohorts and lines; with light she quite filled house, street
and

<span id="page_75">p. 75</span>

quarter; there, amid the roses (of her cheeks), shone in beauty
coral-pearl twins (lips and rows of teeth).

<span class="margnote"><span id="466">466</span></span>"I who had fought
and been wounded had mine arm hung from my neck in a sling. The queen
rose from her throne (and came) forward to meet me. She kissed me hard
like a son, she made my rose cheek blue; she said to me: Henceforth
expect not the foe to engage thee.'

<span class="margnote"><span id="467">467</span></span>"Near at hand
they made place for me, there where it pleased me; opposite sat the sun
for whom my heart was dying. Stealthily I looked at her, she looked at
me; no other converse was there; (when) I tore away mine eyes from her,
thereby was life made hateful to me.

<span class="margnote"><span id="468">468</span></span>"There was
drinking and feasting on a scale fitting to their might, such another
rejoicing eye has not seen, goblet and cup were all of turquoise and
ruby; the king gave order that no drunk man be suffered to depart.

<span class="margnote"><span id="469">469</span></span>"Being there I
gave myself up to the excess of joy; when she gazed at me and I at her,
my fire began to be extinguished. I called upon my wild, mad heart to
have a care of men (that they observe not). How exceedingly pleasant it
is to look face to face on the beloved!

<span class="margnote"><span id="470">470</span></span>"The minstrels
ceased to sing. 'Be silent!' They bent their heads. He (the king) said
to me: 'Son Tariel, how can we tell thee how we rejoice! We are in
bliss, therefore (? because) our adversaries are woeful; right are thine
admirers, not idly do they vaunt.

<span class="margnote"><span id="471">471</span></span>"Now, though it
is fitting that we should clothe thee who art mighty in glory, we clothe
thee not, we doff not those robes beauteously adorning thee. Now thou
whose rays are spread abroad hast a hundred treasures from us, thou
thyself canst have sewn what thou desirest, be not bashful before us.'

<span class="margnote"><span id="472">472</span></span>"He sat down
again joyful, drinking and singing increased, again the feast went on,
the lyres and tinkling of harps. The queens retired when day met
twilight and until evenings joy was not joy.

<span id="page_76">p. 76</span>

<span class="margnote"><span id="473">473</span></span>"We broke up; we
could no more endure the drinking of great goblets. I went into my
chamber, my perception became like that of one dazed; I had no power in
me, made prisoner as I was, to extinguish that fire (of love). I
remembered, and the memory of being gazed on by her rejoiced me.

<span class="margnote"><span id="474">474</span></span>"A slave came; he
told me true tidings: 'A veiled woman asks tidings of you.' Then I knew
at once, I leaped up in all haste, with trembling heart; she came in, I
saw Asmat’h, who was coming towards me.

<span class="margnote"><span id="475">475</span></span>"For the sake of
her for whom I am dying I was pleased to see Asmat’h, as if I saw
herself (Nestan). I hindered her from doing me homage, I kissed her, I
took her hand and seated her near me on my couch, and greeted her:
'Blessed art thou, come as a shoot from the aloe-tree!

<span class="margnote"><span id="476">476</span></span>"'Tell me news of
her; speak to me of nought else.' She said to me: 'I will tell thee
truth; now from me (thou shalt) not (hear words uttered merely) to give
pleasure. To-day ye saw each other, and tenderly were pleased; now again
she commands to make known news of her through me.'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XII. Letter of Nestan-Daredjan Written to Her Beloved](mps15.md)
