[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Asia](../index.md) 
[Myths/Legends](../../neu/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](mps18.md) 
[Next](mps20.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0947593438/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### XVI

### TARIEL'S AID TO P’HRIDON, AND THEIR VICTORY OVER THEIR FOES

<span class="margnote"><span id="596">596</span></span>"He was healed,
and able to fight and use horse and armour. We prepared galleys and the
number of a host of troops; it needed a man to pray (to God) for some
aid

<span id="page_95">p. 95</span>

for those who gazed upon them.--Now will I tell thee of that knight's
battle, the punisher of his adversaries.

<span class="margnote"><span id="597">597</span></span>"I perceived
their design, and saw them donning their headgear. Ships met me, I know
not if there were eight (in all); swiftly I threw myself upon then; they
began to row; I struck (one of the ships) with my heel and upset it;
like women they bewailed themselves.

<span class="margnote"><span id="598">598</span></span>"I betook myself
to yet another, and seized the lip (prow) of the ship with my hand; I
drowned them in the sea, I slew them; they had no opportunity for
battle. The rest fled from me, they made for their harbour; all who saw
me marvelled, they praised me, they hated me not.

<span class="margnote"><span id="599">599</span></span>"We crossed the
sea, we landed. Mounted they threw themselves on us. Again we engaged;
there began the vicissitudes of battle. P’hridon's bravery and agility
pleased me then; in warfare a lion, in face a sun, that aloe-tree
fought.

<span class="margnote"><span id="600">600</span></span>"With his sword
he cast down both his cousins, he cut their hands clean off; thus he
crippled them; he led them away bound by the arms; the one did not
abandon the two. He made their knights to weep, his knights to vaunt
themselves.

<span class="margnote"><span id="601">601</span></span>"Their soldiers
fled from us, we threw ourselves upon them, we scattered them; swiftly
we seized the city, we wasted no time; we broke their legs with stones,
we tanned their skin into leather. Kill me, if it was possible to empty
the treasure both by lading and stowing!

<span class="margnote"><span id="602">602</span></span>"P’hridon
inspected the treasures and put his seals upon them; he himself led away
his two vanquished cousins; he shed their blood in exchange for his, and

<span id="page_96">p. 96</span>

poured it out on the fields. Of me they said: 'Thanks God who has
planted aloe-trees!'

<span class="margnote"><span id="603">603</span></span>"We went back (to
P’hridon's). The triumph exhibited by the citizens was heard; suppliants
there laid hold on the heart of beholders. All uttered praise to me and
Nuradin, in a panegyric; they said to us: 'Through the strength of your
(right) arms their blood still flows!'

<span class="margnote"><span id="604">604</span></span>"The soldiers
acclaimed P’hridon as king and me as king of kings, themselves as
subjects and me as sovereign of them all. I was gloomy, they could never
find me culling roses; they knew not my story, there it was not lightly
spoken of.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XVII. P’hridon Tells Tariel Tidings of Nestan-Daredjan](mps20.md)
