[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Asia](../index.md) 
[Myths/Legends](../../neu/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](mps11.md) 
[Next](mps13.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0947593438/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### IX

### TARIEL WRITES A LETTER AND SENDS A MAN TO THE KHATAVIANS

<span class="margnote"><span id="373">373</span></span>"I sent a man to
Khatavet’hi and a letter from me; I wrote: 'The king of the Indians is
of a truth powerful from God; every hungry soul of those faithful to him
is

<span id="page_61">p. 61</span>

sated; whosoever is disobedient will have himself to blame (for any ill
that may befall him).

<span class="margnote"><span id="374">374</span></span>"'Brother and
lord, by you we will not be embittered. When you see this command wend
hither; if you come not we shall come; we will not steal upon you. It is
better you should come to us, spill not your own blood.'

<span class="margnote"><span id="375">375</span></span>"I sent the man,
I gave my heart up yet more to rejoicing, I made merry at court; the
fire unbearable in its burning was extinguished. Then the world, Fate,
gave me lavishly what I desired; now I am mad, so that I annoy even the
wild beats if I approach them.

<span class="margnote"><span id="376">376</span></span>"At first the
plan of roaming, then reason soothed me. I feasted with my comrades, but
the greatness of desires hindered me from joy; sometimes they filled me
with melancholy, I uttered curses against Fate.

<span class="margnote"><span id="377">377</span></span>"One day, on my
return from the king's palace, I came to my chamber. I sat down and
thought of her, slumber fell not upon mine eyes, I had the letter of
hope, therefore was I merry. The doorkeeper called the slave; he said it
was a secret matter.

<span class="margnote"><span id="378">378</span></span>"'It is Asmat’h's
slave,' quoth he. I ordered him to be brought into the chamber. She
wrote to me that she whose knife had pierced my heart commanded me to
come. Joy lightened my darkness; she loosened my chains. I went, I took
the slave, I spoke not at all with him.

<span class="margnote"><span id="379">379</span></span>"I entered the
garden; I met none to speak to me (?). The maid met me merry, smiling;
she said: 'I have bravely extracted the thorn from thy heart, it is no
longer therein; come and see thy rose unfaded, unwithered.'

<span class="margnote"><span id="380">380</span></span>"The maid with an
effort raised the heavy curtain,

<span id="page_62">p. 62</span>

there stood a canopy adorned with choice rubies where sat she whose face
was like the sun flashing, her eyes, like inky lakes, looked beautifully
at me.

<span class="margnote"><span id="381">381</span></span>"A long time I
stood, and she spoke no word to me whom she yearned for; she only looked
at me sweetly as at an intimate. She called Asmat’h, they spoke
together; the maid came and whispered in my ear: 'Now go; she cannot say
anything to thee.' Again the flame reduced me to soot.

<span class="margnote"><span id="382">382</span></span>"Asmat’h led me
forth, I went out, I passed the curtain. I said: 'O Fate, who not long
ago didst heal my heart, thou gayest me hope then; why hast thou
scattered my joy? My heart is still more devastated again by the pain of
parting.'

<span class="margnote"><span id="383">383</span></span>"Asmat’h promised
me comfort. We walked through the garden; she said to me: 'Let not the
brand be thus seen upon thy heart because of thy going; shut the terrace
of sorrows, open the door of joy. She is ashamed to speak; therefore she
behaves with dignity.

<span class="margnote"><span id="384">384</span></span>"I said: 'O
sister, I think this heart-balm is from thee. I adjure thee, part me not
from life, extinguish this flame with tidings, cut me not off from
letters, send them ceaselessly; if thou learnest something for me I
think thou wilt not keep it hidden from me.'

<span class="margnote"><span id="385">385</span></span>"I mounted (my
horse), I went thence, a stream flowed from the channel of tears. I went
to bed; maddened, I had no power to sleep. I, the crystal and ruby,
became bluest indigo. I preferred night; I wished not for the dawn of
day.

<span class="margnote"><span id="386">386</span></span>"Denizens of
Khatavet’hi came--it was time for them to come--they brought a proud and
insolent message: 'We are no cowards, neither are our keeps unfortified.
Who is your monarch? What lord is he over me?'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: X. The Letter Written by the King of the Khatavians in Answer to
Tariel](mps13.md)
