[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Asia](../index.md) 
[Myths/Legends](../../neu/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](mps19.md) 
[Next](mps21.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0947593438/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### XVII

### P’HRIDON TELLS TARIEL TIDINGS OF NESTAN-DAREDJAN

<span class="margnote"><span id="605">605</span></span>"One day the king
and I went forth to the chase; we climbed upon a cape jutting out into
the sea. P’hridon said to me: 'I will tell thee how, when we were out
riding for sport, I once saw a wonderful thing from this cape.'

<span class="margnote"><span id="606">606</span></span>"I bade him
speak, and P’hridon told me even this tale: 'One day I wished to hunt, I
mounted this steed of mine. It seemed as if there were a duck in the
sea, a falcon on the land; I stood here and watched the flight of the
hawk thitherward.

<span class="margnote"><span id="607">607</span></span>"'Now and then as
I climbed uphill I gazed out to sea. I perceived a small thing far away
on the sea, going so swiftly that nothing of its kind could equal it; I
could not make it out; in my mind I marvelled at these two things.

<span class="margnote"><span id="608">608</span></span>"'I said to
myself: "What is it? To what can I liken it? Is it bird or beast?" It
was a boat tented over with many-folded stuff; a steersman guided it. I
fixed

<span id="page_97">p. 97</span>

mine eyes upon it, and there in a litter sat the moon; I would have
given her the seventh heaven (as habitation).

<span class="margnote"><span id="609">609</span></span>"'Two slaves as
black as pitch crept out, they put ashore a maiden, I saw her
thick-tressed hair, the lightning that flashed from her--to what colours
can it be likened?--would illumine the earth (and) make the sunbeams of
no account.

<span class="margnote"><span id="610">610</span></span>"'Joy made me
hasten, quiver, stagger. I loved that rose who appeared torn to mine
eyes. I resolved to engage them, I said: "Let me go towards them; what
creature can fly away from my black (steed)."

<span class="margnote"><span id="611">611</span></span>"'I pressed my
horse with my heel. There was a noise and rustling among the rushes. I
could not reach her, however much I used the spur; they were gone. I
came to the seashore and looked round, she appeared only as a last ray
of the setting sun, she went farther away, she was gone from me,
therefore was I consumed by flame.'

<span class="margnote"><span id="612">612</span></span>"This I heard
from P’hridon; heat was added to my fire. I threw myself down from my
horse, I wholly abased myself; with mine own blood shed from my cheeks I
anointed myself. Kill me! That anyone but I should have seen that tree!

<span class="margnote"><span id="613">613</span></span>"This behaviour
of mine astonished P’hridon, it seemed passing strange to him; but he
was exceedingly pitiful to me, by weeping he placated me, like a son he
soothed me, he pled with me, treated me with deference, and, pearl-like,
hot tears sprang from his eyes.

<span class="margnote"><span id="614">614</span></span>"'Alas! what have
I, misguided, madly told thee?' I said: 'It matters not, grieve not for
that! She was my moon; for her the fire consumes me hotly. Now will I
tell thee my tale, since thou thyself wishest to have me as comrade.'

<span id="page_98">p. 98</span>

<span class="margnote"><span id="615">615</span></span>"I told P’hridon
all that had befallen me. He said to me: 'What have I, mistaken, shamed,
said to thee? Thou mighty king of the Indians, wherefore art thou come
to me? A royal seat and throne become thee, a whole palace.'

<span class="margnote"><span id="616">616</span></span>"Again he said to
me: 'To whom God gives for form a young cypress, from him He withdraws
the spear, though at first He lacerate his heart therewith. He will
grant us His mercy, He will thunder it from heaven, He will turn our
sorrow to joy, He will never grieve us.'

<span class="margnote"><span id="617">617</span></span>"We went back
tearful; we sat down alone together in the palace. I said to P’hridon:
'Save thee, none is mine aid. God has not sent thy like to earth, and
since I know thee what more do I want?

<span class="margnote"><span id="618">618</span></span>"'Thou hadst no
friend until the time when thou didst meet me; use now thy tongue and
mind to counsel me in this: What can I do? What is the best thing to
bring joy to her and me? If I can do nought I shall not tarry (*i.e.*,
survive) a moment.'

<span class="margnote"><span id="619">619</span></span>"He said to me:
'What better fate could I have from God than this? Thou art come to be
gracious to me, king, sovereign of India. Needs it that after this I
should desire any gratitude? I stand before thee as a slave to obey thee
slavishly.

<span class="margnote"><span id="620">620</span></span>"'This city is
the highway for ships coming from all parts, an emporium of much foreign
news of all kinds. Here shall we hear of .the balm to assuage the fire
which burns thee. God grant that these woes and pains pass away!

<span class="margnote"><span id="621">621</span></span>"'We will send
out sailors who have fared on the sea before; let them find for us that
moon for whose sake grief is not lacking to us; until then be patient,
so that thy mind torture thee not; grief will not last for aye, shall
not joy overcome it!'

<span class="margnote"><span id="622">622</span></span>"That very
instant we called men, we settled the business; we commanded them: 'Go
with ships,

<span id="page_99">p. 99</span>

sail over the sea, seek her out for us, fulfil the desire of her lover;
undergo a thousand hardships for this, not merely seven or eight.'

<span class="margnote"><span id="623">623</span></span>"He appointed men
wherever there were havens for ships; he gave orders: 'Seek out
everywhere, wheresoever you hear of her.' Waiting seemed to me a
consolation, my pains became lightened; absent from her I felt joy, and
for the sake of that day I am ashamed.

<span class="margnote"><span id="624">624</span></span>"P’hridon set up
a throne for me in the place for the overlord. He said to me: 'Hitherto
have I erred, I could not comprehend what I should have understood; thou
art the great king of the Indians; who can please thee? Wherewithal?
How? Who is the man who would not be thy subject!'

<span class="margnote"><span id="625">625</span></span>"Why should I
lengthen (the story)? From all sides came the seekers of news, empty,
and wearied of empty places; they had learned nothing at all, they knew
not any news. As for me, afresh the undrying tear flowed still more from
mine eyes.

<span class="margnote"><span id="626">626</span></span>"I said to
P’hridon: 'How this day seems horrible to me, I have God for my witness
thereto; to speak thereof is hard for me; without thee night and day
alike seem eventide to me; I am loosed from all joy, my heart is bound
with grief.

<span class="margnote"><span id="627">627</span></span>"'Now since I may
no longer expect any news of her, I can no longer stay; give me leave, I
seek thy permission.' When P’hridon heard this he wept, he watered the
field with blood, and said: 'Brother, from this day vain is all my joy!'

<span class="margnote"><span id="628">628</span></span>"Though they
tried very hard, they could not hold me back; his armies came before me
on bended knees, they embraced me, kissed me, wept and made me weep 'Go
not away; let us suffer for thee as long as life is ours.'

<span id="page_100">p. 100</span>

<span class="margnote"><span id="629">629</span></span>"I spoke thus:
'Parting from you is very hard for me also, but it is hardly possible
for me to have joy without her. I cannot forsake my captive (Nestan),
whom you yourselves pity greatly; let none of you hinder me, I will not
stay nor be held back by any.'

<span class="margnote"><span id="630">630</span></span>"Then P’hridon
brought (and) gave me this horse of mine; he said: 'Behold! this steed
is (given) to you, the sun-faced, the cypress; more I know thou desirest
not, why should I despise thy gift? This will please thee by its
breaking-in and its swiftness.'

<span class="margnote"><span id="631">631</span></span>"P’hridon
escorted me; as we went we both shed tears; there we kissed each other,
with cries we parted, all the host lamented for me, truly, in their
hearts, not with the tongue; our severing was like that of foster-parent
and child.

<span class="margnote"><span id="632">632</span></span>"Departed from
P’hridon, I went on the quest, again I fared so that I missed nought on
land or out at sea; but I met no man who had seen her, and my heart
became wholly maddened, I was like a wild beast.

<span class="margnote"><span id="633">633</span></span>"I said to
myself: 'No longer shall I rove and sail in vain; perchance the company
of beasts may make my heart forget grief.' I said seven or eight words
to my slaves and to this Asmat’h: 'I know I have brought grief upon you;
you have good reason to murmur against me.

<span class="margnote"><span id="634">634</span></span>"'Now go and
leave me, provide for yourselves, look no longer on the hot tears
flowing from mine eyes.' When they heard such discourse they said to me:
'Alas! alas! let not our ears hear what thou sayest!

<span class="margnote"><span id="635">635</span></span>"'Let us not see
any master or lord apart from thee, may God not sunder us from your
horse's footprints! We would gaze upon you, a fair and adorable
spectacle.' Fate, forsooth, makes a man listless, however valiant he may
be.

<span id="page_101">p. 101</span>

<span class="margnote"><span id="636">636</span></span>"I could not send
them away; I hearkened to the words of my slaves, but I forsook the
haunts of human tribes, the retreats of goats and stags seemed a fitting
abode for me; I roamed, I trod every plain below and hill above.

<span class="margnote"><span id="637">637</span></span>"I found these
manless caves, hollowed out by Devis. I combated them, I destroyed them,
they could by no means prevail against me; they killed my slaves, ill
had they buckled on their coats of mail. Fate made me gloomy; her
showers again bespattered me.

<span class="margnote"><span id="638">638</span></span>"Behold, brother!
since that day am I here, and here I die. Mad I roam the fields;
sometimes I weep and sometimes I faint. This maid will not abandon me;
she too is burned by fire for her (Nestan's) sake. I have no other
resource to try but death.

<span class="margnote"><span id="639">639</span></span>"Since a
beautiful panther is portrayed to me as her image, for this I love its
skin, I keep it as a coat for myself; this woman sews it, sometimes she
sighs, sometimes she groans. Since I cannot kill myself, in vain is my
sword whetted.

<span class="margnote"><span id="640">640</span></span>"The tongues of
all the sages could not forth-tell her praise. Enduring life, I think
upon my lost one. Since then I have consorted with the beasts, calling
myself one of them; I am suitor for death, nought else I entreat of
God."

<span class="margnote"><span id="641">641</span></span>He beat his face,
he rent it, he tore his cheeks of rose; the ruby turned to amber, the
crystal was shattered. Avt’handil's tears flowed too; one by one they
dripped from his lashes. Then the maid soothed him (Tariel); on bended
knee she besought him.

<span class="margnote"><span id="642">642</span></span>Tariel, calmed by
Asmat’h, said to Avt’handil: "I have made everything pleasant for thee,
I who never found pleasure for myself. I have told thee the tale of mine
irksome life; now go and see thy sun (T’hinat’hin), thou whose time for
meeting is nigh."

<span id="page_102">p. 102</span>

<span class="margnote"><span id="643">643</span></span>Avt’handil said:
"I cannot bear to part from thee; if I separate from thee tears indeed
will flow from mine eyes. Verily I tell thee--be not wroth at this
boldness--she for whose sake thou diest will not be comforted thereby.

<span class="margnote"><span id="644">644</span></span>"When a
physician--however praiseworthy he be--falls sick, he calls in another
leech, another skilled in the pulse; him he tells what illness inflaming
him with fire afflicts him. Another knows better what is useful; advice
for one.

<span class="margnote"><span id="645">645</span></span>"Listen to what I
say to thee; I speak to thee as a sage and not as a madman; a hundred
times must thou give heed, once sufficeth not. A man so furious of heart
can do nought well. Now I desire to see her for whose sake hot fire
consumes me.

<span class="margnote"><span id="646">646</span></span>"I shall see her,
I shall confirm her love for me, I shall tell her what I have learned;
nought else have I to do. I beseech thee to assure me, for God and
Heaven's sake, let us not abandon one another, make me swear and make
thou an oath to me.

<span class="margnote"><span id="647">647</span></span>"If thou promise
me that thou wilt not go hence, I shall assure thee by an oath that for
nought shall I forsake thee; I shall come again to see thee, I shall die
for thee, for thee shall I rove. If God will, I shall make thee cease to
weep thus for her for whom thou diest!"

<span class="margnote"><span id="648">648</span></span>He answered: "How
is it that thou, a stranger, so lovest me, a stranger? It is as hard for
thee to part from me as for the nightingale from the rose. How can I
forget thee, how can I cease to remember thee! God grant that I may
again see thee, full-grown young aloe-tree.

<span class="margnote"><span id="649">649</span></span>"If thy form
remain a tree (for me), and thy face turn round to see me, (my) heart
will not flee into the fields, it will become neither a deer's nor a
goat's. If I lie to thee or cheat thee, may God judge me in wrath! Thy
presence will charm away my sadness (and) dissolve it!"

<span id="page_103">p. 103</span>

<span class="margnote"><span id="650">650</span></span>Hereupon they
swore, the frank friends, those jacinths of amber hue, wise-worded (but)
mad-minded. They loved each other; for ever would affection's flame burn
their hearts. That night the fair comrades spent together.

<span class="margnote"><span id="651">651</span></span>Avt’handil wept
with him; fast fell the tears. When day dawned he went forth, kissed him
and parted from him. Tariel was so grieved that he knew not what to do.
Avt’handil wept, too, as he rode through the rushes.

<span class="margnote"><span id="652">652</span></span>Asmat’h went down
with Avt’handil, she conjured him with an oath, she kneeled, she wept,
she raised her fingers in entreaty, she besought him to come back soon;
as a violet, so she faded. He replied: "O sister, of what can I think
save you!

<span class="margnote"><span id="653">653</span></span>"Soon shall I
come; I shall not forsake thee nor waste time at home. But let him not
go elsewhere; let not that fair form wander. If I come not hither in two
months I shall be doing a shameful thing; be assured that I am fallen
into unceasing grief."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XVIII. The Story of Avt’handil's Return to Arabia After He Had
Found and Parted From Tariel](mps21.md)
