[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Asia](../index) 
[Myths/Legends](../../neu/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](mps21) 
[Next](mps23) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0947593438/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_113">p. 113</span>

### XIX

### AVT’HANDIL'S REQUEST TO KING ROSTEVAN, AND THE VIZIER'S DISCOURSE AND ENTREATY

<span class="margnote"><span id="710">710</span></span>When day dawned
the knight arrayed himself and went forth early. He says: "I would that
my love be not revealed, that I may conceal it!" For patience he prays:
"Contrive something for my heart!" The moon-like one mounted his horse;
he went to the house of the vizier.

<span class="margnote"><span id="711">711</span></span>The vizier heard
of it, went to meet him: "The sun is risen upon my house; this day,
meseems, a presentiment of joy announced to me this good news." He met
(Avt’handil), saluted him, respectfully addressed to the perfect one
perfect praise. A welcome guest should have a cheerful host.

<span class="margnote"><span id="712">712</span></span>This host, not
listless, ill-disposed or idle, helped the knight to dismount; they
stretched on the floor under his feet a Cathayan (rug). The knight
illumined the house as the sun's beam the universe. They said: "To-day
the western gale has wafted us the fragrant odour of roses."

<span class="margnote"><span id="713">713</span></span>He sat; they that
looked on him truly maddened their hearts. They who gazed on him
accounted it an honour to swoon for his sake; many sighs were uttered,
not once but a thousand times; they were ordered to depart, they went
away, the household was thinned out.

<span class="margnote"><span id="714">714</span></span>When the
household was gone, the knight addressed the vizier; quoth he: "In the
council chamber nought will ever be hidden from thee; in every matter of
state the king does what thou desirest, and agrees with thee. (Now)
hearken to my woes; cure me with what will heal me.

<span id="page_114">p. 114</span>

<span class="margnote"><span id="715">715</span></span>"The fire of yon
knight burns me, the flame that consumes him afflicts me; I am slain by
longing and by not seeing the object of my desire; he would not grudge
his life for me; what is due must be paid; one must love a generous
ungrudging friend.

<span class="margnote"><span id="716">716</span></span>"The sight of him
caught my heart as in a net, therein it stays; my patience, too, remains
with him; in that he burns those near him, God created him indeed a sun.
Moreover, Asmat’h is become a sister to me, more than a born sister.

<span class="margnote"><span id="717">717</span></span>"When I departed
I swore with a fearful oath: 'I shall come again, I shall see thee not
with a face despised of foes; thou art of darkened heart, I shall seek
light for thee.' It is time for me to go, therefore am I burned with hot
fire.

<span class="margnote"><span id="718">718</span></span>"All this I tell
thee truly, not with braggart speech; he awaits me, and I cannot set
forth. This it is that adds (fuel) to the hot fire; I cannot break my
vow, I mad cannot abandon him mad. When and where did ever a breaker of
oaths prevail?

<span class="margnote"><span id="719">719</span></span>"Go to the
palace, report on my behalf to King Rosten what I have told thee. By his
head I swear to thee, Vizier Ustasra, if he keep me not captive I shall
not stay; if he keep me captive what can he make of me? Help me; let not
the fire hurt and destroy my heart!

<span class="margnote"><span id="720">720</span></span>"Say from me:
'Let every mouth which is not speechless praise thee! Let God, the means
of light, make known to thee how I fear thee. But that knight, an
aloe-tree in form, burned me with fire; forthwith he took away my heart,
in no wise could I keep it.

<span class="margnote"><span id="721">721</span></span>"'Now, O king,
for me existence lacking him is utterly impossible; he, the dauntless,
has my heart. Of what avail am I here? If I can be of any service to
him, to you first will the glory belong; if I fail to accomplish

<span id="page_115">p. 115</span>

aught for him I shall set my heart at rest, mine oath will not have been
broken.

<span class="margnote"><span id="722">722</span></span>"'Let not my
going anger or grieve your heart. Let that befall my head (self)
whate’er God wills. May He grant you the victory, and send me your
(servant) back to you; but if I return not may you still reign, may your
foes be affrighted.'"

<span class="margnote"><span id="723">723</span></span>Yet again the
sun-faced one says to the vizier: "I have shortened my speech. Now speak
thus to the king till (others) come in (to inform him), pleasantly
entreat for me my congee, summon up thy courage, and a hundred thousand
red (pieces) shall be bestowed on thee as a bribe."

<span class="margnote"><span id="724">724</span></span>The vizier said
with a smile: "Keep thy bribe for thyself; for me it is sufficient
favour from thee that thou hast found the road hither. How can I dare
tell the king what I have now heard from you! I know of a truth he will
fill me (with favours), and gain is not disagreeable!

<span class="margnote"><span id="725">725</span></span>"By his head! he
will slay me straightway; I doubt whether he will delay even a moment.
Thy gold will remain with thee, but for me, luckless, there will be
earth for a grave. Slay me! What is of equal value with life to a man!
The thing cannot be said and I cannot say it, however much anyone should
reproach me.

<span class="margnote"><span id="726">726</span></span>"A road cannot go
over (beyond) itself.? How can I, luckless, lay down my life for thee?
He will despoil me or kill me. He will say: 'How dost thou speak these
words? Why didst thou not inform me there and then? Why art thou such a
madman?' Life is better than loot; this I even now learn.

<span class="margnote"><span id="727">727</span></span>"Even if the king
permit thee to depart, why should

<span id="page_116">p. 116</span>

the hosts also be deceived? Why should they let thee go, why should they
be hoodwinked, or why should they be removed far from their sun? If thou
depart, our foes will become bold, will even themselves with us; but
this must not be, as sparrows cannot change to hawks."

<span class="margnote"><span id="728">728</span></span>The knight wept;
with tears he spoke: "Must I strike a knife into my heart! O vizier, it
is apparent in thee thou knowst not what love is, nor hast thou in
others seen friendship or oath. Or if thou hast seen such, how canst
thou prove that without him my joy is possible?

<span class="margnote"><span id="729">729</span></span>"The sun has
turned. I knew not what would make the sun turn. Now let us help him; it
is better for us, in return he will warm our day. No one knows mine
affairs like myself; what embitters me, what sweetens me.. The discourse
of idle men greatly grieves a man.

<span class="margnote"><span id="730">730</span></span>"Of what profit
can I be to the king or his hosts, since I am mad now, (and) my tears
flow unceasingly! It is better that I go away; I will not break my word;
oaths prove a man. The griefs a man has not seen cannot, be comprehended
by him at all (?).

<span class="margnote"><span id="731">731</span></span>"Now, O vizier,
how can thy cursed heart be calm in this juncture! Iron in my place
would become wax and not hard rock; I cannot repay his tears, even if
Gihon flowed from mine eyes. Help me if thou wouldst, desire help from
me.

<span class="margnote"><span id="732">732</span></span>"If he give me
not leave I shall steal away,. unknown shall I depart from him; as it
entreats me so-shall I deliver my heart to be consumed by fire. I know
he will do nothing to thee because of me, if he be not disposed to exile
thee. Promise me--whatever may happen to thee--'I shall sacrifice myself
to be tortured!'"

<span class="margnote"><span id="733">733</span></span>The vizier said:
"Thy fire consumes me also with fire.

<span id="page_117">p. 117</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> I can no longer
look on thy tears, the world itself vanishes; sometimes speech is better
than silence, sometimes by speaking we spoil (things). I shall speak; if
I die it matters not, my life will be sacrificed for thee."

<span class="margnote"><span id="734">734</span></span>When the vizier
had said this he arose and went to the palace. He saw the king arrayed;
the sunlike face looked straight upon him. He was afraid, he dared not
tell him unpleasing news; perplexed he stood, he thought not on warlike
matters.

<span class="margnote"><span id="735">735</span></span>The king saw the
vizier struck dumb by sadness. 'He said: "What grieves thee? What
knowest thou? Why art thou come sad?" He answered: "I know nothing at
all, but I am indeed wretched. You will be justified in slaying me when
you hear the astounding news.

<span class="margnote"><span id="736">736</span></span>"My mourning
neither adds to my grief nor surpasses it; I am afraid, though an envoy
has no care for fear. Now Avt’handil bids thee farewell, he entreats, he
wrangles not; (he says that) for him the world and life are nought
without yon knight."

<span class="margnote"><span id="737">737</span></span>With timorous
tongue he told him all he knew. He added, thereafter: "How canst thou
know by such words in what a plight I saw him and how his tears flowed?
Though you should let your wrath fall forthwith on me, you are just."

<span class="margnote"><span id="738">738</span></span>When the king had
heard this he was wroth, he lost his senses, his colour whiled and he
became terrible, he would have terrified onlookers. He cried: "What has
made a madman of thee? Who else would have related this? It is the
choice of a bad man to learn early what is evil.

<span class="margnote"><span id="739">739</span></span>"Traitor-like,
thou hast told me of this as if it were a merry matter; what more could
anyone do to me save slay me faithlessly, treacherously? Madman, how
couldst thou employ thy tongue to dare to speak thus to

<span id="page_118">p. 118</span>

me now! Such a madman as thou art is unworthy to be vizier or aught
else.

<span class="margnote"><span id="740">740</span></span>"Should not a man
spare his lord what is irksome, when he stupidly chatters stupid speech?
Why were mine ears not deafened before hearing such a thing! If I kill
thee, my neck must bear the responsibility for thy blood!"

<span class="margnote"><span id="741">741</span></span>Again he spake:
"If thou hadst not now been sent hither by him, by my head! I had cut
off thy head, let there be no doubt of this! Go, withdraw! Look at the
mad, stupid, desperate, improper (fellow)! Brave word, brave man, brave
the deed done by him!"

<span class="margnote"><span id="742">742</span></span>He bent down, he
threw chairs, he hit the wall and shattered them; he missed his aim, but
for his (the vizier's) sake he made them (the chairs) like adamant, not
willowlike. "How couldst thou tell me of the going of him who plaited
the aloe-tree branches!" (?). Hot tears hollowed out channels in the
vizier's white cheeks (?).

<span class="margnote"><span id="743">743</span></span>The wretched
vizier hurried away; he dared say no more. He crept off crestfallen like
a fox; his wounded heart pains him. He comes in a courtier, he goes out
gloomy, so (much) does the tongue dishonour him. A foe cannot hurt a foe
as a man harms himself.

<span class="margnote"><span id="744">744</span></span>He said: "What
more will God show me like unto my woes? Why was I deceived? Why was I
darkened? Would that someone might enlighten me! Whoever announces
anything so boldly to a sovereign, my (evil) days stand upon him too;
how can he ever enjoy peace!"

<span class="margnote"><span id="745">745</span></span>The disgraced
vizier went away in black luck. Gloomily, sad-faced, he said to
Avt’handil: "What thanks can I give thee! Thanks to thee, what a
courtier am I become! Alas! I have lost my peerless self by mine own
fault!"

<span class="margnote"><span id="746">746</span></span>He begs the bribe
and behaves sportively, albeit his

<span id="page_119">p. 119</span>

tears were not dry. I marvel why he spends his time in making jokes, why
he is not grieved in heart! (Quoth he): "He who gives not what he
promised quarrels with the Mourav <span id="fr_15"></span>[1](#fn_15).
It is said: 'A bribe settles matters even in hell.'

<span class="margnote"><span id="747">747</span></span>"How he took the
matter, what he said to me, it is not to be told by me. What evil, what
stupidity, what idiocy, what madness (he attributed to me)! I myself am
no longer worthy of the name of man; no longer have I sense. At this I
marvel--why he slew me not; God must have given him patience.

<span class="margnote"><span id="748">748</span></span>"I knew too what
I did; it happened not to me by mistake. I had pondered, I knew he would
be wroth with me, therefore is my grief increased. None can avoid
vengeance for a deed done with forethought. Still, for thy sake death
seems joy to me; my woes are not in vain."

<span class="margnote"><span id="749">749</span></span>The knight
replied: "It is wholly impossible for me not to depart. When the rose
withers the nightingale then dies; he must seek a dewdrop of water, for
the sake of this he must rove everywhere, and if he cannot find it what
will he do or wherewith shall he soothe his heart?

<span class="margnote"><span id="750">750</span></span>"Without him I
cannot bear to sit or lie. I will choose to roam like the beasts, with
them to run. Why does he (Rostevan) desire me who am in such a state to
fight his adversaries! It is better to have no man at all than to have a
dissatisfied one.

<span class="margnote"><span id="751">751</span></span>"I will tell him
once again; now, however angry the king may be, surely he can judge how
my heart burns and flames. If he grant me not leave, I shall steal away
when hope is gone. If I die, my portion and village will be uprooted."

<span class="margnote"><span id="752">752</span></span>When they had
conversed, the vizier made a banquet befitting them; he played the host,
gave fair gifts to the

<span id="page_120">p. 120</span>

fair (guest), he enriched his attendants, both youths and greybeards.
They parted; the knight went home as the sun was setting.

<span class="margnote"><span id="753">753</span></span>He (Avt’handil)
sent a message (to the king) saying: "How can I give or bestow on thee
that which befits thee? What return can I think of for the debts I owe
thee? If I survive I shall die for thee; I shall make myself thy slave.

I shall repay love with love, with a like weight."

<span class="margnote"><span id="754">754</span></span>How can I tell
his peerlessness, valour, and praise him! He was a man fitting and
worthy even of such a deed. Thus should service be, as much as lies in
one's power (?). When a man is in trouble then needs he brother and
kinsman.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_15"></span>[119:1](mps22.htm#fr_15) Headman, governor,
chief of police, arbitrator.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XX. Avt’handil's Discourse With Shermadin When He Stole
Away](mps23)
