[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Asia](../index) 
[Myths/Legends](../../neu/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](mps25) 
[Next](mps27) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0947593438/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### XXIII

### KING ROSTEVAN HEARS OF AVT’HANDIL'S SECRET FLIGHT

<span class="margnote"><span id="795">795</span></span>When he saw the
vizier arrived with reverence in the hall of audience, Rosten said: "I
recall not what thou saidst yesterday; thou didst annoy and enrage me,
for a long time I could not compose my soul, therefore did I scold thee,
vizier, heart of heart.

<span class="margnote"><span id="796">796</span></span>"I remember not
what he (Avt’handil) wanted, (nor) why I treated thee so ill! Truly say
the sages: Spite is a net of woes!' Never act in such a way! Consider
the matter carefully. Now, tell me what thou saidst! Speak and repeat
thy discourse!"

<span class="margnote"><span id="797">797</span></span>Again the vizier
submitted his speech of yesterday. When he (Rosten) heard it, he made no
lengthy answer: "If I think thee not mad may I be the Jew Levi! <span
id="fr_18"></span>[1](#fn_18) Let me hear no more of this, else I wholly
give thee up!"

<span class="margnote"><span id="798">798</span></span>When the vizier
went forth to seek, he could not find the crystal one (Avt’handil); only
the slaves with

<span id="page_128">p. 128</span>

flowing tears told of his flight. He (the vizier) said: "I cannot go to
court; I should remember former days. Whoever is daring let him dare; I
repent what I have already said."

<span class="margnote"><span id="799">799</span></span>When the vizier
came not, the king again sent a man; the man learned the news and stood
outside, none dared report the departure. Rosten began to suspect,
therefore grief increased tenfold. He said: "Doubtless he who alone
overpowers hundreds has stolen away!"

<span class="margnote"><span id="800">800</span></span>With bent head he
meditated; in his heart was great gloom. He sighed and looked up; he
commanded a slave: "Go, let that villain come hither and tell me now;
let him enter." When the vizier came back his colour paled and he was
careful.

<span class="margnote"><span id="801">801</span></span>Again the vizier
entered the audience chamber, gloomily, not gaily. The king inquired:
"Is the sun gone away, become inconstant like the moon?" (The vizier)
told him all, how he (Avt’handil) had gone away secretly: "The sun no
longer shines on us; the weather is not bright!"

<span class="margnote"><span id="802">802</span></span>When the king
heard this, he cried out with an exceeding great cry, he lamented, he
said: "Alas, my foster-son, my dazed eyes shall see thee no more!" He
made the onlookers to marvel by scratching his face and tearing his
beard. "Whither art thou gone, and where hast thou lost those pillars of
light?

<span class="margnote"><span id="803">803</span></span>"If thou hast
thyself, none will think thee an orphan; but as for me, what can I do, O
foster-son? Now plagues befit me as an abode; thou hast left me
orphaned, me whose wretched heart longs for thee. Till I am reunited to
thee, tongues cannot tell my sufferings!

<span class="margnote"><span id="804">804</span></span>"When shall I see
thee joyous returning from the chase? I shall no longer see thee after
the game of ball, graceful in form, a faultless gem! No more shall I
hear

<span id="page_129">p. 129</span>

thine alluring voice. Now without thee, alas! what shall I do with the
throne and whole palace?

<span class="margnote"><span id="805">805</span></span>"I know that
hunger will not kill thee, however far thou roamest; thy bow will
provide thee, and thine arrowheads. Perchance God in His mercy will
again lighten our woes; but if I die, O foster-son, by whom shall I be
mourned!"

<span class="margnote"><span id="806">806</span></span>A noise was
heard, a great host of men had assembled; there is a crowd of courtiers
at the palace, seizing their beards with their hands; all rend and
strike themselves, the sound of their slapping is heard. They said:
"Darkness is upon us, accursed, since our sun is gone from the sky!"

<span class="margnote"><span id="807">807</span></span>When the king saw
his magnates, he complained to them with tears and groaning. He said:
"You see our sun has made his rays quite rare to us! In what have we
annoyed him, wherein have we sinned, why has he parted from us, why
forsaken us! How can any take for us the leadership of the hosts he
maintained!"

<span class="margnote"><span id="808">808</span></span>All wept,
lamented; then at length they grew calm. The king commanded: "Ask! is he
alone, or with a squire?" The vassal Shermadin came fearfully,
shamefacedly; he gave (the king) the testament, he wept, life seemed to
him but loss.

<span class="margnote"><span id="809">809</span></span>He said: "I found
this written by him in his chamber; weeping slaves stood there, they
tore hair and beard; he is stolen away alone, neither youth nor
greybeard is near him; if you slay me it will be just, an unseemly life
irks me."

<span class="margnote"><span id="810">810</span></span>When they read
the will, again they wept a long time. Then (the king) commanded: "Let
not my troops

<span id="page_130">p. 130</span>

don gay colours. Let us make the downtrodden, the orphans and widows, to
pray; let us help them that God may give him paths of peace!"

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_18"></span>[127:1](mps26.htm#fr_18) ? reference to Gen.
xlix. 5-7. (i.e. "cursed for mine anger").

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XXIV. Avt’handil's Second Departure and Meeting with
Tariel](mps27)
