[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Asia](../index) 
[Myths/Legends](../../neu/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](mps20) 
[Next](mps22) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0947593438/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### XVIII

### THE STORY OF AVT’HANDIL'S RETURN TO ARABIA AFTER HE HAD FOUND AND PARTED FROM TARIEL

<span class="margnote"><span id="654">654</span></span>When he was gone
thence sadness was surely slaying him; he scratched his face, he rent
the rose (of his cheeks), his hand he shortened; all the beasts licked

<span id="page_104">p. 104</span>

up the blood that flowed from him. His swift pace shortened the long
course.

<span class="margnote"><span id="655">655</span></span>He came there
where he had parted from his armies. They saw him, they knew him, they
rejoiced in such manner as was fitting. They told the good tidings to
Shermadin too; .men quickly ran to him: "He is come for whose sake
hitherto joy has been embittered to us."

<span class="margnote"><span id="656">656</span></span>He went to meet
him, he embraced him, he put his mouth on his (Avt’handil's) hand,
pouring forth tears he joyfully kissed the destroyer in the field. Thus
he spoke: "O God, do I see really or darkly? How am I worthy of this,
that mine eyes should gaze upon thee (safe and) sound!"

<span class="margnote"><span id="657">657</span></span>The knight
saluted him low, he put face upon face; he said: "I thank God that no
grief afflicts thee!" The magnates did homage, whoever was worthy kissed
him; there was great jubilation, great and small alike rejoiced.

<span class="margnote"><span id="658">658</span></span>They came where a
dwelling-house had been built; all the city was assembled to see him;
forthwith he sat down to feast, gay, proud, merry; an assemblage of
tongues could not fully describe the joy of that day.

<span class="margnote"><span id="659">659</span></span>He told
Shermadin, he narrated to him all he had seen--how he had found that
knight whom he likened to the sun. Avt’handil was hampered by tears; he
said with half-closed eyes: "Without him it seems to me alike to dwell
in palace or hut."

<span class="margnote"><span id="660">660</span></span>(Shermadin) told
him all the home news: "None knows of thy departure; whatever thou
toldst me so have I done." He went not thence that day, he feasted and
rested; at dawn he mounted, he set out when the sun enlightened the day.

<span class="margnote"><span id="661">661</span></span>He sat no more at
feasting, nor stayed he again private; Shermadin, the bearer of good
tidings, went to

<span id="page_105">p. 105</span>

announce (Avt’handil's) arrival; swiftly he fared, in three days he made
a ten days’ journey. That lion (Avt’handil) rejoiced that he was to see
the sun's rival.

<span class="margnote"><span id="662">662</span></span>He sent a
message: "O king, proud art thou in might and majesty! I venture to tell
thee this thing with fear, respect and precaution: I esteemed myself
worthless in that I had learned nought of that knight; now I know and
will tell thee all; I come in joy and safety."

<span class="margnote"><span id="663">663</span></span>Rostevan is a
king, proud, puissant, imperious, (so) Shermadin delivered all his
message in person: "Avt’handil comes to the royal presence having found
that knight." The king said: "(Now) I know that which I entreated and
prayed for from God."

<span class="margnote"><span id="664">664</span></span>Shermadin made
report to T’hinat’hin, that night-less light: "Avt’handil comes to thy
presence; he brings thee pleasing news." Thereat, light flashed forth
from her, even braver than the sun's. She gave him a gift, and robes to
all his people.

<span class="margnote"><span id="665">665</span></span>The king mounted
and went to meet the knight who was coming thither, for this (honour)
the sun-faced one incurred a great debt (of gratitude); joyous and
warm-hearted they met, and some of the multitude of magnates seemed as
if drunken.

<span class="margnote"><span id="666">666</span></span>When he
approached, the knight alighted and did homage to the king. Rosten,
possessed by excess of joy, kissed him. Glad-hearted and merry they
entered the royal hall; all there assembled rejoice at the arrival of
the knight.

<span class="margnote"><span id="667">667</span></span>Avt’handil, the
lion of lions, did homage to her, the sun of suns; there the crystal,
rose and jet were beautified by tenderness; her face was brighter than
heaven's light; a dwelling-house was no fit abode for them, the sky
itself was their (proper) palace.

<span class="margnote"><span id="668">668</span></span>That day they
made a feast; drinking and eating they made abundant. The king gazes on
the knight, as a tender father on a son. They were both beautified by a

<span id="page_106">p. 106</span>

snowfall on fresh snow, a dew on the rose; generously they gave gifts,
pearls like small coin.

<span class="margnote"><span id="669">669</span></span>The drinking was
done, the drinkers separated each to his own home; they suffered not the
magnates to go, they set the knight near before them. The king inquires,
and he relates what trials he had undergone, and then what he had seen
and heard concerning the stranger.

<span class="margnote"><span id="670">670</span></span>"When I speak of
him, be not astonished if I ceaselessly lament, saying: 'Ah me!' To the
sun alone can I liken him, or the face of him, the extinguisher of the
mind of all who see him; a wilted rose among thorns, alas! he is far
away!

<span class="margnote"><span id="671">671</span></span>"When unendurable
Fate makes a man suffer grief, the reed becomes like a thorn, the
crystal turns to saffron colour." While Avt’handil was telling this his
cheeks were bedewed with tears. He told in detail the story he had heard
from (Tariel).

<span class="margnote"><span id="672">672</span></span>"Having captured
the caves in battle, he has for his house the abode of the Devis. He has
the damsel of his beloved as his attendant. He is clad in panther's
skin; he despises brocade and cloth of gold. No more sees he the world;
an ever-new fire consumes him."

<span class="margnote"><span id="673">673</span></span>When he had
finished the story--the matter of his grief--the sight of the light of
that sun, not ugly to look upon, gladdened him. They praised his
rose-like hand which had been firmly held. "This prowess is sufficient
for thee since thou art the undoer of grief."

<span class="margnote"><span id="674">674</span></span>T’hinat’hin
rejoiced at the hearing of this news. That day she was merry at the
drinking, and eating was

<span id="page_107">p. 107</span>

not wearisome to her. That sun met in his bedchamber a slave with a
courteous word. She ordered him to come to her. Tongue cannot tell how
pleased he was.

<span class="margnote"><span id="675">675</span></span>The knight went
joyful, tender, not ill content, the lion who had roamed the fields with
the lions of the field and had lost his colour, a knight of the world,
in quality a gem and a faultless ruby, but for heart's sake he had
exchanged heart for heart.

<span class="margnote"><span id="676">676</span></span>Bold sits the sun
upon her throne, majestic, unconstrained, a fair aloe planted in Eden,
generously watered by Euphrates’ stream; the jetty hair and the eyebrow
thickets adorned the crystal and ruby (of her countenance). Who am I
that I should praise her? It needs the myriad tongues of Athenian sages
to praise her fitly.

<span class="margnote"><span id="677">677</span></span>She set the
joyful knight before her with his chair, they both sat full of gladness
to converse as befitted them; they spoke with dignity and fluency, not
with unpolished words. She said: "Thou hast found him in whose quest
thou hast seen misfortunes?"

<span class="margnote"><span id="678">678</span></span>He answered:
"When the world gives a man his heart's desire, it befits not to recall
grief (which is) as a day that is past. I found the tree, an aloe in
form, watered by the stream of the world; there (I found) the face
(which was) like the rose, but now is wan.

<span class="margnote"><span id="679">679</span></span>"There saw I the
cypress, the rose-like, whose power was spent; he (Tariel) says: 'I have
lost the crystal, and that where the crystal unites with glass (?).' I
burn (for him) because, like me, unendurable fire consumes him." Then
again he told the story he had heard from (Tariel).

<span id="page_108">p. 108</span>

<span class="margnote"><span id="680">680</span></span>He recounted all
his misfortunes and sorrows by the road during the quest. Then he told
her how God had thought him worthy to find what he desired. "World,
life, man, (all) seems to him as to a beast; alone he roams mad with the
brutes, he weeps in the field.

<span class="margnote"><span id="681">681</span></span>"Ask me not, what
praise can I speak, how couldst thou understand from me! nothing can
please one who has seen him; the eyes of the beholders are weakened as
by the brilliance of the sun; the rose is not become saffron, now the
violet is gathered in nosegays."

<span class="margnote"><span id="682">682</span></span>He told her in
detail what he knew, what he had seen, heard: "Like a panther he has a
trail, and for house and abode a cave; a damsel is there ready to
cherish him, to maintain his life and bear his sorrows. Alas! Fate makes
all dwellers in the world to shed tears!"

<span class="margnote"><span id="683">683</span></span>When the maiden
heard this story she had attained the fulfilment of her will; her
moon-like face shone as ’twere with radiance at the full. She said:
"What answer can I make to give comfort to him, and pleasure, and what
is the balm for the healing of his wound?"

<span class="margnote"><span id="684">684</span></span>The knight
replied: "Who has confidence in a rash man? He for my sake sacrifices
himself to be burned, he who must not be burned. I have appointed the
time of my return; I have promised him to sacrifice myself for him. I
swear it by my sun whom I contemplate as a sun!

<span class="margnote"><span id="685">685</span></span>"A friend should
spare himself no trouble for his friend's sake, he should give heart for
heart, love as a road and a bridge. Then, again, the grief of his
beloved should be a great grief to a lover. Lo! without him joy is
nought to me, and myself I hold of none account."

<span id="page_109">p. 109</span>

<span class="margnote"><span id="686">686</span></span>The sun-like one
said: "All my heart's desire is fulfilled: first thou art come in safety
having found that which was lost, then the love implanted by me in thee
has grown, I have found balm for my heart hitherto burned.

<span class="margnote"><span id="687">687</span></span>"Fate treats
every man like the weather, sometimes there is sunshine and sometimes
the sky thunders forth in wrath; hitherto grief has been upon me, now
this gladness is my lot; since the world has joy in it why should any be
sad!

<span class="margnote"><span id="688">688</span></span>"Thou dost well
not to break the oath thou didst swear; it is necessary to fulfil strong
love for a friend, to seek for his cure, to know the unknown. (But) tell
me, what shall I, luckless, do if the sun of my heaven be hidden!"

<span class="margnote"><span id="689">689</span></span>The knight
replied: "By nearness (to thee) I have united to seven woes eight. Vain
is it for one who is frozen to blow on water to warm himself therewith;
vain is the love, the kiss from beneath, of the sun at its setting. If I
be near thee, once is it woe, and if I go far from thee a thousandfold
woe.

<span class="margnote"><span id="690">690</span></span>"Woe is me if I
wander where, alas! the simoom burns the roamer; my heart is the target
of an arrow, a dart is shot to pierce it; the term of my life seems by
this day to be shortened to one-third; I long for a refuge, but the time
is past for seeking shelter against troubles.

<span id="page_110">p. 110</span>

<span class="margnote"><span id="691">691</span></span>"I have heard
your discourse, I have understood what you command; the rose reveals the
thorn, why should I prick myself therewith? but, O sun, become
altogether a sun for me, and let me carry with me some hopeful token of
life."

<span class="margnote"><span id="692">692</span></span>The knight,
sweetly and in sweet-sounding Georgian, giving good for good, spoke on
this theme like a pleasant instructor to a pupil. The maiden gave him a
pearl, she fulfilled his desire, and God grant that their present joy be
perfected.

<span class="margnote"><span id="693">693</span></span>What is better
than for a man to approach the jet to the crystal and ruby, or to plant
in the garden the aloe near the cypress, to water it and make a tree of
it, to cause joy to the gazer and sorrow to him who cannot look thereon?
Woe to the parted lover! He will be groaning, moaning, groaning.

<span class="margnote"><span id="694">694</span></span>They found all
their joy in gazing at each other. The knight went away, sundered from
her he went dazed in heart; the sun wept tears of blood more abundant
than the sea, and said: "Fate is insatiable, alas! in the drinking of my
blood!"

<span class="margnote"><span id="695">695</span></span>The knight went
melancholy away, he beats his breast and so bruises it, for love makes a
man weep and melts his heart. When a cloud hides the sun the earth is
shadowed, so parting from his beloved makes twilight again, not morning.

<span class="margnote"><span id="696">696</span></span>Blood and tears
mingled made channel upon channel on his cheeks. He said "My sun
(T’hinat’hin) is by no means satisfied with me because I sacrifice
myself to comfort the peerless (Tariel). I marvel how the black eyelash
brands the heart of adamant. Until I see her, O world, I wish for no joy
from thee.

<span class="margnote"><span id="697">697</span></span>"Him who
yesterday was an aloe planted, watered

<span id="page_111">p. 111</span>

and fully grown in Eden, him to-day Fate thrusts through with her lance,
pierces with her knife. To-day my heart is caught in a net of
unquenchable fire. Now know I the way of the world; it is a tale and
nonsense."

<span class="margnote"><span id="698">698</span></span>Thus speaking,
the tears gush forth, he trembles and shudders; with heart-sigh, with
deep groan, his form bends and sways (as he goes). Converse with the
beloved is a embittered by parting. Alas! O Fate! The end enshrouds and
swathes the beginning.

<span class="margnote"><span id="699">699</span></span>The knight went
and sat in his chamber; sometimes he weeps; sometimes he swoons, but in
spirit he is near his beloved, he is not cut off from her. Like verdure
in hoarfrost the hue of his face fades; see how soon lack of sun is
apparent on the rose!

<span class="margnote"><span id="700">700</span></span>Accursed is the
heart of man, greedy, insatiable; sometimes the heart desiring joys
endures all griefs; blind is the heart, perverse in seeing, not at all
able to measure itself; no king, nor even death itself, can master it.

<span class="margnote"><span id="701">701</span></span>While he spoke to
his heart hearty words, he took the pearls, the love-token of his sun
(T’hinat’hin), which had engirt the arm of his sun, and were comparable
to her teeth; he put them to his mouth, he kissed them, his tears flowed
like Pison.

<span class="margnote"><span id="702">702</span></span>When day dawned
there came an inquirer calling him to the court; the knight went forth,
proud, gentle, not having slept, unrefreshed by sleep. A host of
spectators who had hastened stood crowding one upon another. The king
was arrayed for the field; drum and clarion were prepared.

<span class="margnote"><span id="703">703</span></span>The king mounted.
How can the pomp of those times be told now? By reason of the beating of
the copper drums no word was heard by the ears. The hawks

<span id="page_112">p. 112</span>

darkened the sun; hither and thither coursed the hound that day the
fields were dyed purple with the blood shed by them.

<span class="margnote"><span id="704">704</span></span>They hunted, they
returned joyful, having traversed the meadow; they took in with them
magnates, princes and all the hosts. He (the king) sat down; he found
the couches and all the pavilions adorned; harp harmonized with lute,
there was a full choir.

<span class="margnote"><span id="705">705</span></span>The knight sat
near the king, one questioned, the other replied; the crystal and ruby
of their lips shone transparent, the lightning of their teeth flashed;
those who were worthy sat near, they listened; afar off the hosts were
grouped; none dared speak without mention of Tariel.

<span class="margnote"><span id="706">706</span></span>The knight
departed sad at heart, his tears flowed on the fields; nought save his
love passed before his eyes; sometimes he rises, sometimes he lies down.
How can one sleep who is mad! Whose heart e’er hearkened to a prayer for
patience!

<span class="margnote"><span id="707">707</span></span>He lies down; he
says: "What can I imagine as, any consolation for my heart? I am
sundered from thee, thou tree, in form as a reed, reared in Eden, thou
joy of thy beholders, cause of woe to them that cannot gaze on thee.
Since I am unworthy to see thee manifestly, would that I might behold
thee in a dream."

<span class="margnote"><span id="708">708</span></span>Thus spake he,
weeping, with flowing tears. Once more he addressed his heart: "Patience
is like the fountainhead of wisdom. If we endure not what can we do? How
can we adapt ourselves to anguish? If we desire happiness from God we
must accept griefs also."

<span class="margnote"><span id="709">709</span></span>Again he says: "O
heart, however much thou hast the desire for death it is better to bear
life, sacrificing self for her; but hide it, let not the flame of thy
fire be seen again. It ill befits a lover to expose his love."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XIX. Avt’handil's Request to King Rostevan, and the Vizier's
Discourse and Entreaty](mps22)
