[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Asia](../index) 
[Myths/Legends](../../neu/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](mps26) 
[Next](mps28) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0947593438/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### XXIV

### AVT’HANDIL'S SECOND DEPARTURE AND MEETING WITH TARIEL

<span class="margnote"><span id="811">811</span></span>When the moon is
far from the sun, distance makes her <span id="fr_19"></span>[1](#fn_19)
bright; when she is near, his ray consumes her--she is repelled, she
cannot approach. But sunlessness dries up the rose and lessens its
colour. Not seeing the beloved renews in us our old grief.

<span class="margnote"><span id="812">812</span></span>Now will I begin
the story of that knight's departure. He goes away and weeps with
boiling heart; it cannot be said that his tears diminished. Every moment
he turned back; he prayed that he might find his sun-like one in
sun-like beauty. He gazed, he could not detach his eyes; if he tore them
away he lost consciousness.

<span class="margnote"><span id="813">813</span></span>When he was near
fainting, he had no power to move his tongue, but tears run from his
eyes, pouring forth as from a spring. Sometimes he turns; he looks for
means (aid) to bear his pains. When he goes forward he knows not whither
his horse has borne him.

<span class="margnote"><span id="814">814</span></span>He said: "O mine
own! let him who is far from thee and yet silent be accursed; since my
mind remains with thee, let my heart also return to thee; the weeping
eyes, too, wish and long to see thee. It is better that the lover should
be subjected as much as may be to love!

<span class="margnote"><span id="815">815</span></span>"What shall I do
till I am united to thee, or in

<span id="page_131">p. 131</span>

what thinkest thou I shall find joy! I would slay myself but that I
doubt it would displease thee, but it would grieve thee to hear I was no
longer living. Come (then) and let us living give our eyes to the
shedding of tears.

<span class="margnote"><span id="816">816</span></span>He said: "O sun,
who art said to be the image of the sunny night of Him who is One in
unity of being and Everlasting, whom the heavenly bodies obey to the jot
of a second, turn not away my good fortune; hear my prayer till our
meeting, mine and hers!

<span class="margnote"><span id="817">817</span></span>"Thou whom former
philosophers addressed as the image of God, aid me, for I am become a
captive, iron chains bind me! I, seeker of crystal and ruby, have lost
coral and glass; formerly I could not endure nearness, now I regret
absence."

<span class="margnote"><span id="818">818</span></span>Thus he lamented
and cried out; like a candle he melted. The fear of being too late made
him hasten; he wandered on. When night fell, he found delight in the
rising of the stars; he compared them to her, he rejoiced, he gazed on
them, he held converse with them.

<span class="margnote"><span id="819">819</span></span>He says to the
moon: "I adjure thee in the name of thy God, thou art the giver of the
plague of love to lovers; thou hast the balm of patience to make them
bear it; hear my prayer to unite me with the face fair, through thee,
like thine own."

<span class="margnote"><span id="820">820</span></span>Night rejoiced
him, day tortured him, he awaited the sunset. When he saw a stream he
dismounted; he gazed on the rippling of the water, with it he united the
rivulet of blood from the lake of tears; again he set out, lie hasted
onward on his road.

<span class="margnote"><span id="821">821</span></span>Alone he
lamented; he who was like the aloe-tree in form wept. He killed a goat
in the plain where he came to a rocky place, roasted and ate of it and
went on, sun-faced,

<span id="page_132">p. 132</span>

martial in heart. He said: "I forsook roses, and behold me here woeful!"

<span class="margnote"><span id="822">822</span></span>I cannot now tell
the words then spoken by that knight, or what he discoursed and lamented
with such elegance. Sometimes his eyes reddened (with their tears) the
rose (of his cheeks) scratched by his nail. When he saw the caves he was
glad; he went up to the door of the cave.

<span class="margnote"><span id="823">823</span></span>When Asmat’h
perceived him, she went to meet him, her tears fell fast; she rejoiced
so greatly that she will never have such joy again. The knight
dismounted, embraced her, kissed her, and conversed with her. When a man
has waited for a man, the coming pleases him wondrously.

<span class="margnote"><span id="824">824</span></span>The knight said
to the damsel: "Where and how is thy lord?" The damsel wept with tears
which might have fed the sea. She said: "When thou wert gone, he roamed
about, for it irked him to be in the cave; now I know nought of him,
either by sight or tidings."

<span class="margnote"><span id="825">825</span></span>The knight was
pained as if some lance had struck him in the midst of his heart. He
said to Asmat’h: "O sister, not thus should a man be! How could he break
his oath! I deceived him not; how could he be false to me If he could
not keep it, why did he promise? If he promised me, why did he lie?

<span class="margnote"><span id="826">826</span></span>"Since save for
him I counted not this world as grief, why did he forget me when I
departed? Why could he not endure, what troubled him? How dared he break
the oath he had sworn? But why should I marvel at evil from my fate!"

<span class="margnote"><span id="827">827</span></span>Again the maiden
spoke: "Thou art justified in such sorrow; but when thou shalt judge
aright--suspect me not of complaisance--is not heart needed to fulfil
oath and promise? He, bereft of heart, awaits only the curtailment of
his days.

<span class="margnote"><span id="828">828</span></span>"Heart, mind and
thought depend one upon

<span id="page_133">p. 133</span>

another. When heart goes the others also go and follow it. A man
deprived of heart cannot play the man; he is chased forth from men. Thou
sawest not, thou knowest not, what fires consumed him.

<span class="margnote"><span id="829">829</span></span>"Thou art right
in murmuring that thou art separated from thy sworn brother, but how can
it be told into what plight he fell, how can I tell thee the fact?
Tongue will fail, will be exhausted, the aching heart will ache (still
more). Thus think I, for I saw, I luckless born.

<span class="margnote"><span id="830">830</span></span>"Hitherto none
has heard in story of sufferings like unto his; such torture would
affright' not only men, (but) even stones; sufficient for a fountain are
the tears that have flowed from his eyes. Whatever you say, you are
right; one is wise in another's battle.

<span class="margnote"><span id="831">831</span></span>"When he went
forth, burned, consumed with fires, I asked him: 'Tell me, his adopted
sister, what will Avt’handil do when he comes?' He replied: 'Let him
come to seek me, me useless for his sake. I shall not leave this
vicinage; I will not break my promise to him.

<span class="margnote"><span id="832">832</span></span>"'My vow I will
not break, that oath will I not belie; I shall wait till the time
appointed, however much the channels (of tears) may flow. If he find me
dead, let him bury me, let him say Alas! and mourn. If I meet him
living, let him marvel, (for my) life is doubtful.'

<span class="margnote"><span id="833">833</span></span>"Henceforth the
sundering of the sun and the mountain-top hath befallen me, only I must
shed tears moistening the plains; maddened, I am tortured by the
exceeding multiplication of groans; death has forgotten me, behold the
deed of Fate!

<span class="margnote"><span id="834">834</span></span>"This true saying
is written on a stone in China: 'Who seeks not a friend is his own foe!'
Now that to which nor rose nor violet could be likened is become
saffron. If thou seekest, then, seek him; do what befits thee."

<span class="margnote"><span id="835">835</span></span>The knight said:
"Thou art right in not justifying me in murmuring against him. But
bethink thee what

<span id="page_134">p. 134</span>

service I have done as one prisoner (of love) to another: I fled from my
home, like a stag seeking water I seek him and think of him, I wander
from field to field.

<span class="margnote"><span id="836">836</span></span>"The crystal
pearl-shells guard the ruby-hued pearl and apparel it; from her I have
gone away, I could not stay near her, I could not make her happy, nor
could I be happy; by my privy flight I have angered the equals of God,
in return for their favours I have troubled their hearts.

<span class="margnote"><span id="837">837</span></span>"My lord and
upbringer, by the grace of God living in might, paternal, sweet,
merciful, a sky snowing graciousness, to him have I been faithless; I
went away, verily I forgot all, and, guilty toward him, I no longer
await any good thing from God.

<span class="margnote"><span id="838">838</span></span>"All this
afflicts me thus, O sister, for his sake. I have not deceived him, but
am come a wayfarer by night and day. Now he is gone somewhere, he for
whom I am consumed with fire, wearied in vain and weeping I sit with a
sad face.

<span class="margnote"><span id="839">839</span></span>"Sister, the hour
and time give me no more leisure for converse. I repent not the past,
early will I fulfil the word of the wises: I go, I will seek, either
shall I find him or bring death early upon me; otherwise, since I am
thus doomed by Fate, what can I embolden myself to say to God."

<span class="margnote"><span id="840">840</span></span>No more than this
he said; he wept and went his way. He passed the rocks, crossed the
water, went through the reeds and came to the plain. The wind blowing
over the fields froze the rose to a ruby hue. "Why givest thou me this
plague?" He reproached Fate for this.

<span class="margnote"><span id="841">841</span></span>He said: "O God,
wherein have I sinned against thee, the Lord, the All-seeing? Why hast
Thou separated me from my friends? why didst Thou lure me on to such a

<span id="page_135">p. 135</span>

fate? One thinking of two, I am in a parlous plight; if I die I shall
not pity myself, my blood be on my head!

<span class="margnote"><span id="842">842</span></span>"My friend cast a
bunch of roses on my heart, and so wounded it; that oath fulfilled by me
he kept not. If, O Fate, thou partest me from him, my joy is past, to
mine eyes another friend were reviled and shamed."

<span class="margnote"><span id="843">843</span></span>Then he said: "I
marvel at the spleen of a man of sense; when he is sad, of what avail is
a rivulet from the terrace of tears? It is better to choose, to ponder
over the fitting deed. Now for me, too, it is better to seek that
sun(-like one), reed-like in form."

<span class="margnote"><span id="844">844</span></span>The knight,
weeping, besprinkled with tears, set himself to search; he seeks, he
calls, he cries aloud, watching by night as by day; for three days he
traversed many a glen, reedy thicket, forest and field; he could not
find him; sad he went, unable to learn any tidings.

<span class="margnote"><span id="845">845</span></span>He said: "O God,
wherein have I sinned against Thee? how have I displeased Thee so
greatly? why bring this fate upon me? What torture hast Thou sent upon
me! Judge me, O Judge, hearken to my prayer; shorten my days, thus turn
my woes to joy!"

<span class="margnote"><span id="846">846</span></span>Weeping and pale,
the knight went his way and spoke; he mounted a certain hill, the plain
appeared in sunshine and shadow. He saw a black (horse) standing with
the reins on his neck on the edge of the rushes. He said: "Undoubtedly
it is he; of that there can be no doubt."

<span class="margnote"><span id="847">847</span></span>When he saw, the
heart of the knight leaped up and was lightened; here to him,
distressed, joy became not tenfold, but a thousandfold; the rose (of his
cheeks) brightened its colour, the crystal (of his face) became crystal
(indeed), the jet (of his eyes) grew jetty; like a

<span id="page_136">p. 136</span>

whirlwind he galloped down, he rested not from gazing at him.

<span class="margnote"><span id="848">848</span></span>When he saw
Tariel he was indeed grieved; (Tariel) sat with drawn face in a state
near unto death, his collar was rent, his head was all torn, he could no
longer feel, he had stepped forth from the world.

<span class="margnote"><span id="849">849</span></span>On one side lay a
slain lion and a blood-smeared sword, on the other a panther stricken
down a lifeless corpse. From his eyes, as from a fountain, tears flowed
fiercely forth; thus there a flaming fire burned his heart.

<span class="margnote"><span id="850">850</span></span>He could not even
open his eyes, he had wholly lost consciousness, he was come nigh to
death, he was far removed from joy. The knight calls him by name, he
tries to rouse him by speech; he cannot make him hear; he leaped about;
the brother shows his brotherliness.

<span class="margnote"><span id="851">851</span></span>He wipes away
(Tariel's) tears with his hand, he cleansed his eyes with his sleeve; he
sits down near by and only calls him by name; he says: "Know’st thou not
me, Avt’handil, for thy sake wandering and mad?" But he heard little,
staring with fixed eyes.

<span class="margnote"><span id="852">852</span></span>This is all thus,
even as related by me. He wiped away the tears from his eyes, he
somewhat recalled him to consciousness; then only he knew (Avt’handil),
kissed him, embraced him, treated him as a brother. I declare by the
living God none like him was ever born.

<span class="margnote"><span id="853">853</span></span>He said:
"Brother, I was not false to thee, I have done what I swore to thee;
unparted from my soul I have seen thee, thus have I kept my vow; now
leave me; till death I shall weep and beat my head, but I entreat thee
for burial, that I be not yielded to the beasts for food."

<span class="margnote"><span id="854">854</span></span>The knight
replied: "What ails thee? Why doest thou an evil deed? Who hath not been
a lover, whom doth the furnace not consume? Who hath done like thee

<span id="page_137">p. 137</span>

among the race of other men! Why art thou seized by Satan, why kill
thyself by thine own will?

<span class="margnote"><span id="855">855</span></span>"If thou art
wise, all the sages agree with this principle: 'A man must be manly, it
is better that he should weep as seldom as possible; in grief one should
strengthen himself like a stone wall.' Through his own reason a man
falls into trouble.

<span class="margnote"><span id="856">856</span></span>"Thou art wise,
and (yet) knowest not to choose according to the sayings of the wise.
Thou weepest in the plain and livest with the beasts; what desire canst
thou thus fulfil? If thou renounce the world thou canst not attain her
for whose sake thou diest. Why bindest thou a hale head, why openest
thou the wound afresh?

<span class="margnote"><span id="857">857</span></span>"Who hath not
been a lover, whom hath the furnace not consumed? Who hath not seen
pains, who faints not for somebody? Tell me, what has been unexampled!
Why should thy spirits flee! Know'st thou not that none e’er plucked a
thornless rose!

<span class="margnote"><span id="858">858</span></span>"They asked the
rose: 'Who made thee so lovely in form and face? I marvel why thou art
thorny, why finding thee is pain!' It said: 'Thou findest the sweet with
the bitter; whatever costs dear is better; when the lovely is cheapened
it is no longer worth even dried fruit.'

<span class="margnote"><span id="859">859</span></span>"Since the
soulless, inanimate c rose speaks thus, who then can harvest joy who
hath not first travailed with wee? Who hath ever heard of aught harmless
that was the work of devilry? Why dost thou murmur at Fate? What hath it
done unexampled?

<span class="margnote"><span id="860">860</span></span>"Hearken to what
I have said, mount, let us go at ease. Follow not after thine own
counsel and judgment; do that thou desirest not, follow not the will of

<span id="page_138">p. 138</span>

desires; were it not better thus I would not tell thee, mistrust not
that I shall flatter thee in aught."

<span class="margnote"><span id="861">861</span></span>(Tariel) said:
"Brother, what shall I say to thee? Scarce have I control of my tongue;
maddened, I have no strength to hearken to thy words. How easy to thee
seems patience of the suffering of my torments! Now am I brought close
to death; the time of my joy draws nigh.

<span class="margnote"><span id="862">862</span></span>"Dying, for her I
pray; never shall I entreat (her) with my tongue. Lovers here parted,
there indeed may we be united, there again see each other, again find
some joy. Come, O friends, bury me, cast clods upon me!

<span class="margnote"><span id="863">863</span></span>"How shall the
lover not see his love, how forsake her! Gladly I go to her; then will
she wend to me. I shall meet her, she shall meet me; she shall weep for
me and make me weep. Inquire of a hundred, do what pleaseth thine heart,
in spite of what any may advise thee.

<span class="margnote"><span id="864">864</span></span>"But know thou
this as my verdict, I speak to thee words of truth: Death draws nigh to
me, leave me alone, I shall tarry but a little while; if I be not
living, of what use am I to thee? If I survive, what canst thou
[1](mps03.htm#page_1) make of me, mad? Mine elements are dissolved; they
are joining the ranks of spirits.

<span class="margnote"><span id="865">865</span></span>"What thou hast
said and what thou speakest I understand not, nor have I leisure to
listen to these things. Death draws nigh me maddened; life is but for a
moment. Now the world is grown distasteful to me--more than at any time
(heretofore). I, too, go thither to that earth whereon the moisture of
my tears flows.

<span id="page_139">p. 139</span>

<span class="margnote"><span id="866">866</span></span>"Wise! Who is
wise, what is wise, how can a madman act wisely? Had I my wits such
discourse would be fitting. The rose cannot be without the sun; if it be
so, it begins to fade. Thou weariest me, leave me, I have no time, I can
endure no more."

<span class="margnote"><span id="867">867</span></span>Avt’handil spoke
again with words of many kinds. He said: "By my head! by these empty
words I shall do thee some good! Do it not! It is not the better deed.
Be not thine own foe!" But he cannot lead him away; he can do nothing at
all by speech.

<span class="margnote"><span id="868">868</span></span>Then he said:
"Well, since thou wilt by no means hearken to me, I will not weary thee;
my tongue has hitherto spoken in vain. If death be better for thee, die!
Let the rose wither--they all wither! One thing only I pray thee, grant
me this"--for this his tears were flowing--

<span class="margnote"><span id="869">869</span></span>"Where the
Indians (black lashes) engird the crystal (brow) and rose (cheeks) with
a hedge of jet--from this am I parted; hastily I went, not quietly. The
king cannot keep me by his paternal converse. Thou wilt not unite with
me, thou wilt renounce me; now how can I speak my joy!

<span class="margnote"><span id="870">870</span></span>"Send me not
heart-sore away, grant me one desire: Mount once thy steed, let me see
thee, ravisher of my soul, on horseback; perchance then this present
grief will flee away, I shall go and leave thee, let thy will be done!"

<span class="margnote"><span id="871">871</span></span>He entreated him,
"Mount!" He begged and prayed him, and said not Alas! He knew that
riding would chase away his sadness, that he would bend the reedy stems
(of his form), and make a tent of the jet (eyelashes). He (Avt’handil)
made him (Tariel) obedient; it pleased (Avt’handil); (Tariel) sighed not
nor moaned.

<span id="page_140">p. 140</span>

<span class="margnote"><span id="872">872</span></span>He said plainly:
"I will mount; bring forward my horse." (Avt’handil) brought (the horse)
and gently l helped him to mount; he did not make him pant with haste;
he took him towards the plain, he made his graceful form to sway. Some
time they rode; going made him seem better.

<span class="margnote"><span id="873">873</span></span>He (Avt’handil)
entertains him, and speaks fair words to him; for (Tariel's) sake he
moved his coral-coloured lips in speech. To hear him would make young
the aged ears of a listener. He put away melancholy; he took unto
himself patience.

<span class="margnote"><span id="874">874</span></span>When the elixir
of grief (Avt’handil) perceived the improvement, joy not to be depicted
lightened his rose-like face--(joy which is) the physician of the
reasonable, the sigh and moan of the foolish. He who had formerly spoken
senselessly now spoke reasonably.

<span class="margnote"><span id="875">875</span></span>They began to
converse; he spoke a frank word: "One thing will I say to thee: Open to
me what is secret. This armlet of her by whom thou art wounded--how much
dost thou love it? How dost thou prize it? Tell me, then let me die!"

<span class="margnote"><span id="876">876</span></span>He said: "How can
I tell thee the likeness of that incomparable picture! It is my life,
the giver of my groans, better to me than all the world--water, earth
and tree. To hearken to that to which one should not listen is more
bitter than vinegar!"

<span class="margnote"><span id="877">877</span></span>Avt’handil said:
"I truly expected thee to say this. Now, since thou hast said it, I will
answer thee, and think not I shall flatter thee; to lose Asmat’h were
worse than the loss of that armlet. I commend not thy behaviour in
choosing the worsen.

<span class="margnote"><span id="878">878</span></span>"This armlet thou
wearest is golden, molten by the goldsmith, inanimate,' lifeless,
speechless, unreasoning;

<span id="page_141">p. 141</span>

thou no longer wantest Asmat’h! Behold a true judgment! First, she,
luckless, was with her (Nestan); then she is thine own adopted sister.

<span class="margnote"><span id="879">879</span></span>"Between you (and
Nestan) she formed a bond, by thee she has been called sister; she was
the servant who contrived your meeting, (while) she herself was worthy
of being summoned by thee; she, upbringer of her and brought up by her,
she is mad for (Nestan), (and) thou forsakest her, wretched (woman),
(and) wilt not see her? Bravo! a just judgment (indeed)!"

<span class="margnote"><span id="880">880</span></span>He said: "What
thou sayest is only too true. Pitiable is Asmat’h, who thinks of
(Nestan) and sees me. I thought not to live; thou are come in time to
quench the fires. Since I still survive, come, let us see, albeit I am
still dazed."

<span class="margnote"><span id="881">881</span></span>He obeyed.
Avt’handil and the Amirbar set out. I cannot achieve the praise of their
worth: teeth like pearls, lips cleft roses. The sweetly discoursing
tongue lures forth the serpent from its lair.

<span class="margnote"><span id="882">882</span></span>Thereupon
(Avt’handil) says: "For thy sake will I sacrifice mind, soul, heart; but
be not thus, open not thy wounds afresh. Learning avails thee not if
thou do not what the wise have said; of what advantage to thee is a
hidden treasure if thou wilt not use it?

<span class="margnote"><span id="883">883</span></span>"Grieving is of
no use to thee; if thou art sorrowful what good will it do thee? Know'st
thou not that no man dies undesignedly? Awaiting the sunbeams the rose
fades not in three days. Luck, endeavour and victory, if God will, shall
be thy lot."

<span class="margnote"><span id="884">884</span></span>The knight
(Tariel) replied: "This teaching is worth all the world to me. The
intelligent loves the instructor; he pierces the heart of the senseless.
But what shall I do, how can I endure when I am in excessive trouble? My

<span id="page_142">p. 142</span>

griefs have hold of thee too. If, then, thou justify me not shall I not
wonder?

<span class="margnote"><span id="885">885</span></span>"Wax hath an
affinity with the heat of fire, and therefore is lighted; but water hath
no such affinity, if (wax) fall into (water) it is quenched. Whatever
thing afflicts someone himself, in that will he be bold for the sake of
others too. Why know’st thou not once for all in what way my heart
melts?

<span class="margnote"><span id="886">886</span></span>"With my tongue
will I relate to thee in detail all that hath befallen me; then indeed
with wise heart judge the truth. I expected thee, awaiting thee was
irksome to me, I could no longer endure the cave, I wished to ride in
the plain.

<span class="margnote"><span id="887">887</span></span>"I came up that
hill, I had traversed these reeds; a lion and a panther met, they came
together; they seemed to me to be enamoured, it rejoiced me to see them;
but what they did to each other surprised me, horrified me.

<span class="margnote"><span id="888">888</span></span>"I came up the
hill, the lion and panther came walking together; they were to me like a
picture of lovers, my burning fires were quenched. They came together
and began to fight, embittered they struggled; the lion pursues, the
panther flees. They were not commended by me.

<span class="margnote"><span id="889">889</span></span>"First they
sported gaily, then they quarrelled fiercely; each struck the other with
its paw, they had no fear of death; the panther lost heart, even as
women do; the lion fiercely pursued, none could have calmed him.

<span class="margnote"><span id="890">890</span></span>"The behaviour of
the lion displeased me. I said: Thou art out of thy wits. Why annoy’st
thou thy beloved? Fie on such bravery!' I rushed on him with my bared
sword, I gave him to be pierced by the spear, I struck his head, I
killed him, I freed him from this world's woe.

<span class="margnote"><span id="891">891</span></span>"I threw away my
sword, I leaped down, I caught the panther with my hands, I wished to
kiss it for the sake of her for whom hot fires burn me. It roared at me,

<span id="page_143">p. 143</span>

and worried me with its blood-shedding paws. I could bear no more; with
enraged heart I killed it too.

<span class="margnote"><span id="892">892</span></span>"However much I
soothed it, the panther became not calm. I grew angry, I brandished it,
dashed it on the ground, shattered it. I remembered how I had striven
with my beloved. (Yet) my soul tore not itself altogether out of me.
Why, then, art thou astonished that I shed tears!

<span class="margnote"><span id="893">893</span></span>"Behold, brother!
I have told the woes that grieved me. Life itself befits me not. Why
didst thou wonder that I am thus fordone? I am sundered from life, death
is become shy of me." So the knight ended his story, sighed, and wept
aloud.'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_19"></span>[130:1](mps27.htm#fr_19) In Georgian folklore
the moon is male and the sun female; in \[this\] English translation the
genders are changed.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XXV. Here is the Going of Tariel and Avt’handil to the Cave, and
Their Seeing of Asmat’h](mps28)
