[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Asia](../index.md) 
[Myths/Legends](../../neu/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](mps30.md) 
[Next](mps32.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0947593438/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### XXVIII

### AVT’HANDIL'S DEPARTURE FROM P’HRIDON TO SEEK NESTAN-DAREDJAN

<span class="margnote"><span id="1004">1004</span></span>The knight
speaks as he goes on his way (majestically) like the full moon; there is
the thought of T’hinat’hin to gladden his heart. He says: "I am far from
thee; alas! the falseness of cursed Fate! Thou hast the healing balsam
for my wound.

<span id="page_162">p. 162</span>

<span class="margnote"><span id="1005">1005</span></span>"Why doth the
ardour of grief for the heroes continually burn me? why is my heart of
rock and cliff become a hard rock? even three lances cannot show a
bruise on me. Thou art the cause that this world is thus envenomed for
me."

<span class="margnote"><span id="1006">1006</span></span>Avt’handil
fares on alone to the seashore with the four slaves, with all his might
he seeks balm for Tariel; weeping by day and night he pours forth pools
of tears; all the world seems to him as straw, even as straw in weight.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1007">1007</span></span>Wherever he
sees travellers walking by the shore he addresses them, he asks tidings
of that sun (Nestan). He roamed a hundred days. He went up a hill;
camels loaded with stuff appeared; merchants distressed stood in
perplexity on the shore.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1008">1008</span></span>A countless
caravan was there on the seashore, they were distressed, they were
gloomy, they could neither stand nor go forward. The knight greeted
them; they hailed him with praise. He asked: "Merchants, who are ye?"
They began to converse.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1009">1009</span></span>Usam was the
chief of the caravan, a wise man. He uttered respectfully a perfect
eulogy, he invoked blessings on (Avt’handil) and praised his manners; he
said: "O sun, thou art come as our life and comforter. Dismount; we will
tell thee our story and business!"

<span class="margnote"><span id="1010">1010</span></span>He dismounted.
They said: "We are Bagdad merchants, holders of the faith of Mahmad; we
never drink new wines; we haste to trade in the city of the Sea-King; we
are rich in wholesale goods, we have no cut pieces of stuff.'

<span id="page_163">p. 163</span>

<span class="margnote"><span id="1011">1011</span></span>"Here on the
seashore we found a man lying senseless; we succoured him till he could
speak clearly with his tongue. We asked him: 'Who art thou, stranger?
What business dost thou follow after?' He said to us: If ye go in they
will slay you. It is well that I still live!'

<span class="margnote"><span id="1012">1012</span></span>"He said: 'From
Egypt we set out with a caravan and a guard, we embarked upon the sea
laden with many kinds of stuff, there pirates (in ships) with sharp
(iron) pointed wooden rams slew us. All was lost; I know not how I came
hither.'

<span class="margnote"><span id="1013">1013</span></span>"O lion and
sun, this is the reason of our standing here. If we return, our loss
will be a hundredfold; if we embark, alas! they may slay us, we have no
strength for battle. We cannot stay, we cannot go, the power to maintain
ourselves is gone from us."

<span class="margnote"><span id="1014">1014</span></span>The knight
said: "Whoever grieves is nought, and strives in vain; whatever comes
from above, we cannot avoid its coming. I am surety for your blood, I
take upon myself what you shall shed; whoever fights with you, my sword
will wear itself out on your foes."

<span class="margnote"><span id="1015">1015</span></span>They of the
caravan were filled with great joy; they said: "He is some knight, some
hero, not timid like us, he has self-confidence, let us be calm in
heart." They embarked, they went on board ship, they set out from the
coast.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1016">1016</span></span>With pleasant
weather they journeyed without hardship; their convoyer, Avt’handil,
leads them with brave heart. A pirate ship appeared with an exceedingly
long

<span id="page_164">p. 164</span>

flag; that ship had an (iron-shod) plough with (beam of) wood for
shattering ships.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1017">1017</span></span>(The pirates)
yelled and came on, they shouted and trumpeted; the caravan was afraid
of the multitude of those warriors. The knight spoke: "Fear not their
hardihood; either I slay them all or this is the day of my death.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1018">1018</span></span>"Nought
undecreed can they do to me, even if all the hosts on earth engage me:
if it be decreed, I shall not survive, the spears are ready for me,
neither strongholds nor friends, not even brothers, can save me; he who
knows this is stout-hearted like me.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1019">1019</span></span>"You merchants
are cowards, unskilled in war. Lest they slay you with the arrow from
afar, shut the doors behind you. Behold me alone how I fight, how I use
my lion-like arms; see how I make the blood of the corsair's crew flow."

<span class="margnote"><span id="1020">1020</span></span>With gesture
like a swift panther he clad his form in armour; in one hand he held an
iron mace. He stood forth with dauntless heart in the front of the ship,
and as he slew onlookers with his gaze, so he slew foes with his sword.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1021">1021</span></span>Those warriors
yelled; their voices were uninterrupted. They thrust the beam upon which
was the plough. The knight stood fearless at the head of the ship, he
trembled not; he struck with the mace, he broke the beam, the lion's arm
swerved not.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1021(a)">1021(a)</span></span>The beam
was destroyed, and Avt’handil remained with ship unshattered. Those
warriors feared, they sought a way to shelter, they could not contrive
it in time; he leaped on his foes, threshing them down round about him;
there was not left there living man unhacked by him.

<span id="page_165">p. 165</span>

<span class="margnote"><span id="1022">1022</span></span>With intrepid
heart he slew those warriors like goats; some he threw down on the ship,
some he cast into the sea; he threw one upon another, eight upon nine
and nine upon eight; those who were left were hidden among the corpses,
they stifled their cries.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1023">1023</span></span>As much as his
heart desired was he victorious in the fight with them. Some humbly
adjured him: "Slay us not, by thy faith!" Those he slew not, he enslaved
them, whoever survived his wounds. Truly saith the Apostle: "Fear makes
love."

<span class="margnote"><span id="1024">1024</span></span>O man! boast
not of thy strength, brag not drunken like! Might is of none avail if
the power of the Lord aid thee not. A tiny spark overcomes, and burns up
great trees. If God protect thee, it cuts alike well whether thou strike
with a log or a sword.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1025">1025</span></span>There
Avt’handil saw their great treasures. He grappled twin-like ship to
ship. He called the caravan. Usam was merry when he saw, he rejoiced, he
lamented not, he spoke a eulogy in his praise, he gave form to great
imaginings.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1026">1026</span></span>Praisers of
Avt’handil need even a thousand tongues; even they could not tell how
fair he appeared after the fight. The caravan shouted, saying: "Lord,
thanks to Thee! The sun has shed down on us his beams; the dark night
has broken into day for us."

<span class="margnote"><span id="1027">1027</span></span>They came up to
him, they kissed his head, face, feet, hand; they spoke praise unstinted
to the fair, the praiseworthy; the sight of him maddens the wise man as
well as the fool!" We all are saved by thee in so hard a mischance."

<span class="margnote"><span id="1028">1028</span></span>The knight
said: "Thanks to God, the Creator, Maker of all, by whom the heavenly
powers decree what

<span id="page_166">p. 166</span>

is to be done here; ’tis they that do all deeds hidden and some
revealed. It is necessary to everyone to believe; a wise man has faith
in the future.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1029">1029</span></span>"God hath
deigned to spare your blood, so many souls! I, alas! vain earth, what am
I? Of myself, what have I done? Now I have slain your foes, I have
fulfilled what I spoke; I have brought you the ship complete with its
wealth as a gift."

<span class="margnote"><span id="1030">1030</span></span>Pleasant it is
when a good knight has won the battle, when he has surpassed his
comrades who were with him. They congratulated him, they praised him, in
this state they were ashamed. The wound becomes him well, but little was
he hurt.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1031">1031</span></span>That day they
looked at that ship of the corsairs, they put not off till the morrow.
How could they count the quantity of treasure lying there! They conveyed
it to their ship, they completely emptied the (pirate) ship; they
smashed it up and burned some of it; the wood they bartered not for
sixpence.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1032">1032</span></span>Usam conveyed
to Avt’handil a message from the merchants: "We are strengthened by
thee; we know our baseness. Whatever we have is thine, of this there can
be no doubt; whatever thou givest us, let it be ours, we have made an
assembly here."

<span class="margnote"><span id="1033">1033</span></span>The knight
announced: "O brothers, but now ye heard it: the stream which flowed
from your eyes has been perceived by God, He hath saved you alive. What
am I? What joy, alas! have I given you? What could I do with whatever
you gave me? I have myself and my horse!

<span class="margnote"><span id="1034">1034</span></span>"As much
treasure as I desired to amass I had of mine own, countless priceless
coverlets of silk. What use

<span id="page_167">p. 167</span>

could I make of yours? What do I want? I am but your companion.
Moreover, I have some other dangerous business.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1035">1035</span></span>"Now, of this
countless treasure I have found here, take what you each wish; I shall
be a claimant against none. One thing I entreat: grant my request, one
not to be mistrusted; I have a certain matter to be kept hidden within
you.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1036">1036</span></span>"Till the time
comes, speak not of me as if I were not your master. Say, 'He is our
chief,' call me not knight. I will clothe myself as a merchant, I will
begin chaffering; keep the secret, by the brotherhood between us."

<span class="margnote"><span id="1037">1037</span></span>This thing very
greatly rejoiced the caravan; they came and saluted him, saying: "It is
our hope--the very request we should have made to you, you yourself have
made to us--that we may serve him whose face we acknowledge as the face
of the sun."

<span class="margnote"><span id="1038">1038</span></span>Thence they
departed and travelled on, they wasted no time; they met fair weather,
they sailed ever pleasantly; they delighted in Avt’handil, they sang his
praises; they presented him with a pearl of the tint of the knight's
teeth.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XXIX. The Story of Avt’handil's Arrival in Gulansharo](mps32.md)
