[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Asia](../index) 
[Myths/Legends](../../neu/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](mps29) 
[Next](mps31) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0947593438/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### XXVII

### OF AVT’HANDIL'S GOING TO P’HRIDON'S WHEN HE PARTED FROM TARIEL

<span class="margnote"><span id="948">948</span></span>Weeping the
knight went seventy days along the road to the seashore. Afar off he saw
in the sea sailors approaching; he waited and asked: "Who are you, I beg
you to tell me this: Whose realm is this or whose voice doth it obey?"

<span class="margnote"><span id="949">949</span></span>They dutifully
answered: "O fair of face and form, strange and pleasing to us thou
seemest, therefore with praise we address thee; hereunto is the boundary
of the Turks, marching with the border of P’hridon, whose (men) we are;
of him shall we tell thee, if we faint not from gazing on thee.

<span id="page_153">p. 153</span>

<span class="margnote"><span id="950">950</span></span>"Nuradin P’hridon
is king of this our land, a knight brave, generous, mighty, on horseback
a swift racer; none has power to harm so fair a sun; he is our lord, he
like the beams spread forth from heaven."

<span class="margnote"><span id="951">951</span></span>The knight said:
"My brethren, in you have I happed upon good men. I seek your king,
teach me whither I should go. How shall I go, when shall I come thither,
how long is the road?" The sailors guided him; they left not the shore.

<span class="margnote"><span id="952">952</span></span>They reported to
him: "This is the road going to Mulghazanzar, there our king will meet
thee, he of the swift arrow, the keen sword. Thou shalt arrive there ten
days hence, O thou of the cypress form, ruby in hue. Alas! why dost
thou, a stranger, burn us strangers, why consumest thou us like a flame
of fire!"

<span class="margnote"><span id="953">953</span></span>The knight said:
"I marvel, brethren, why you are heart-slain for me, or how the faded
winter roses can please you thus! If you had seen us then when we sat
proud, uncrippled, we charmed them that gazed on us, with us they sat
joyful."

<span class="margnote"><span id="954">954</span></span>They departed,
the knight turned to pursue his road, he whose form is like the cypress,
whose heart is like iron. He puts his horse to a canter, he discourses,
he speaks aloud to comfort himself; the narcissi (his eyes) thunder, it
rains tears, they lave the crystal and glass (of his face).

<span class="margnote"><span id="955">955</span></span>Whatever
strangers he met on the road served him, were subservient to him; they
came to gaze on him, they courted him, it was hard for them to let him
go, scarce could they bear parting, they gave him a guide for the road,
whatever he asked they told him.

<span class="margnote"><span id="956">956</span></span>He neared
Mulghazanzar; soon he ended the long road. In the plain he saw an army
of soldiers, and they were seen to be destroying game; on all sides a
chain was formed, they encircled the outside of the field; they

<span id="page_154">p. 154</span>

shot and shouted, they mowed down beasts like standing corn.

<span class="margnote"><span id="957">957</span></span>He met a man, he
asked him tidings of that host; he said: "Whose is this sound of
trampling and stir?" He answered: "P’hridon the monarch, King of
Mulghazanzar, hunts, he holds the edge of the sedgy plain engirt."

<span class="margnote"><span id="958">958</span></span>Matchless in mien
he went towards the troops, he became merry, how can I ever tell the
beauty of that knight! Those who are parted from him he makes to freeze,
like the sun he burns them that are met with him; he renews, if they
look on him, those who gaze, his form sways like a tree.

<span class="margnote"><span id="959">959</span></span>In the very midst
of the hosts an eagle soared from somewhere. The knight urged on his
horse, he emboldened himself, he feared not; he drew his bow and let the
arrow fly; (the eagle) fell and blood flowed (from it); he dismounted
and clipped its wings; calmly he remounted, he panted not.

<span class="margnote"><span id="960">960</span></span>When they saw
him, the archers ceased to shoot; they broke the circle, they came, they
pressed upon him, they fainted, from all sides they surrounded him, some
followed behind. They dared not ask him: "Who art thou?" nor could they
say aught to him.

<span class="margnote"><span id="961">961</span></span>In the meadow was
a hill, on it stood P’hridon; forty men worthy to shoot with him
attended him; thither Avt’handil made his way, after him followed the
centre of the host. P’hridon marvelled. "What are they doing?" said he;
he was angry with his armies.

<span class="margnote"><span id="962">962</span></span>P’hridon sent out
a slave, saying: "Go, see the armies, what they are doing, why they have
broken the circle, whither blind like they go." The slave swiftly
reached them, he saw the cypress, the sapling form; he

<span id="page_155">p. 155</span>

stood, his eyes became dazed, he forgot the words he had to say.

<span class="margnote"><span id="963">963</span></span>Avt’handil
perceived that this (man) was come to learn news of him. He said: "I beg
thee to convey this message to thy lord from me: 'I am a stranger,
lonely, far removed from my home, sworn brother to Tariel, sent to
you.'"

<span class="margnote"><span id="964">964</span></span>The slave went to
P’hridon to tell him his message. He said: "I have seen a sun arrived,
he seems like the lightener of day. I think even sages would be maddened
if they saw him anywhere. Quoth he: 'I am Tariel's brother (thus come)
rudely to join P’hridon.'"

<span class="margnote"><span id="965">965</span></span>When he heard
(the name of) Tariel, P’hridon's woes were lightened, from his eyes
tears sprang forth, his heart grew more agitated, a blast froze the
rose, from his eyelids whirled snowstorms (of tears). They met each
other, each was praised by the other, not dispraised.

<span class="margnote"><span id="966">966</span></span>Hastily P’hridon
came down from the ridge; he descended to meet (Avt’handil). When he
looked on hint he said: "If this be not the sun, who is it?"
(Avt’handil) outdid the praise (P’hridon) had heard from the slave. They
both dismounted; joy made tears gush up.

<span class="margnote"><span id="967">967</span></span>They embraced;
they were not shy for being strangers. The knight seems peerless to
P’hridon, and P’hridon pleases the knight. Any onlookers who saw them
(would) despise the sun. Slay me! if another like them will ever be
bargained for or sold in the bazaar.

<span class="margnote"><span id="968">968</span></span>What knights are
there like P’hridon! But near him is one whom praises still more befit;
the sun makes the planets invisible when they come near; a candle gives
no light by day, but its rays shine by night.

<span class="margnote"><span id="969">969</span></span>They mounted
their horses and set out for P’hridon's palace. The chase was broken up;
they made an end of

<span id="page_156">p. 156</span>

the slaying of beasts. From all sides the troops thronged to gaze on
Avt’handil; they said: "What creature can compare with him?"

<span class="margnote"><span id="970">970</span></span>The knight said
to P’hridon: "Thou art eager, I know, to hear my tidings. I will tell
thee who I am, whence I come, inasmuch as thou wishest to know, also
whence I know Tariel and why I spoke of our brotherhood. He calls me
brother; 'Thou art my brother,' quoth he, though I am scarce worthy to
be his slave.

<span class="margnote"><span id="971">971</span></span>"I am King
Rosten's vassal, a knight nurtured in Arabia, Grand Commander-in-Chief;
by name they call me Avt’handil, I am a noble of great family, reared as
son of the king, one to be respected, bold, none dares meddle with me.

<span class="margnote"><span id="972">972</span></span>"One day the king
mounted, went forth to hunt; in the plain we saw Tariel, he poured forth
tears watering the fields; we were astonished, he surprised us, we
called and he came not, he made us angry; we knew not how fire consumed
him.

<span class="margnote"><span id="973">973</span></span>"The king shouted
to the troops to seize him, and he was irritated; without trouble he
slew, battle was not grievous to him; of some he broke the arms and
legs, some he slew outright; there they learned that the course
(chariot) of the moon is not to be turned back.

<span class="margnote"><span id="974">974</span></span>"The king,
greatly indignant, perceived that the troops could not capture him;
himself he mounted and went against him, the haughtily unfearing. When
Tariel knew it was the king, then he avoided his sword, he gave the
reins to his horse, he was lost to our eyes.

<span class="margnote"><span id="975">975</span></span>"We sought and
could find no trace; we believed it devilry. The king was sad, forbad
drinking, feast and banquet. I could not endure lack of certainty about
his

<span id="page_157">p. 157</span>

story. I stole away in quest of him, fire burned me, and smouldering.

<span class="margnote"><span id="976">976</span></span>"Three years I
sought him; I enjoyed not even sleep. I saw Khatavians he had mauled;
they showed him to me. I found the yellowish rose, faint-rayed,
pale-tinted; he welcomed me and loved me like a brother, like a son.

<span class="margnote"><span id="977">977</span></span>"He took the
caves from the Devis after great bloodshed. There Asmat’h attends the
solitary, none else is with him; ever the old fire burns him, it is not
newly roused. Groaning befits one parted from him, a black mourning
kerchief bound round the head.

<span class="margnote"><span id="978">978</span></span>"Alone in the
cave the tearful, tear-stained damsel weeps. The knight hunts game for
her as a lion for its whelp; he brings it, and thus he feeds her. He
cannot rest in one place. Save her (Asmat’h) he desires not the sight of
any of man's race.

<span class="margnote"><span id="979">979</span></span>"To me, a
stranger, he pleasantly narrated his wondrous and pleasing (story); he
told me his tale, and his beloved's. What woe he has suffered this
tongue of a madman cannot now tell; longing slays him, and lack of the
sight of his grave-digger.

<span class="margnote"><span id="980">980</span></span>"Like the moon he
unceasingly roams, he rests not; he sits on that horse thou gayest him,
he never alights; he sees no speaking being, like a wild beast he shuns
men. Woe is me, remembering him; alas for him dying for her sake!

<span class="margnote"><span id="981">981</span></span>"The fire of that
knight burns me, I am consumed with hot fire; I pitied him, and I became
mad, my heart grew furious; I wished to seek remedies for him by sea and
land. I returned and saw the sovereigns, whose hearts were gloomy.

<span class="margnote"><span id="982">982</span></span>"I entreated
leave of absence; the king was enraged at me, and fell into sadness. I
deserted my soldiers, therefore they there cried, 'Woe!' I stole away, I
freed myself from the flood of tears of blood. Now I seek balm for him;
I turn about hither and thither.

<span id="page_158">p. 158</span>

<span class="margnote"><span id="983">983</span></span>"He told me
tidings of thee, how he had made brotherhood with thee. Now have I found
thee, peerless, worthy to be praised by the tongue; counsel me where it
is better to seek that heavenly sun, the joy of those who gaze on her,
the disturber of those that cannot see her."

<span class="margnote"><span id="984">984</span></span>Now P’hridon
speaks, utters the words spoken by that knight (Tariel); both in unison
lamented in a threnody worthy of praise; sobbing, they wept with
impatient hearts, there the roses were sprinkled by the water of tears
dammed up in the jungle.

<span class="margnote"><span id="985">985</span></span>Among the
soldiers there arose the sound of great weeping, the scratching of the
face by some, from others comes a torrent (of tears). P’hridon weeps,
laments aloud the seven years’ separation. Alas! the inconstancy and
falsity of this vain world!

<span class="margnote"><span id="986">986</span></span>P’hridon laments:
"How can we tell forth thy (*i.e.*, Tariel's) praise, thou who canst not
be praised, thou inexpressible one! O sun of the earth, who transferrest
the sun of the firmament from its course, joy, life, quickener of them
that are near thee; light of the planets of heaven, consumer and
swallower up!

<span class="margnote"><span id="987">987</span></span>"Since I was
removed from thee life has been hateful to me. Though thou hast no
leisure for me I long for thee; to thee lack of me seems joy, it
oppresses me greatly. Life without thee is empty; the world is become
hateful to me."

<span class="margnote"><span id="988">988</span></span>P’hridon uttered
these words in a beautiful lament. They grew calm, they were silent;
they rode with no sign

<span id="page_159">p. 159</span>

of song. Avt’handil is fair to beholders in his ethereal loveliness; he
covers the inky lakes (of his eyes) with the jet ceiling (of his
lashes).

<span class="margnote"><span id="989">989</span></span>They entered the
city, there they found the palace adorned in perfection, with all the
officers of state mustered, the slaves delicately apparelled were in
faultless order; they were enraptured and ravished in heart with
Avt’handil.

<span class="margnote"><span id="990">990</span></span>They entered and
held a great court, not a privy council; on this side and on that side
ten times ten magnates were ranged; apart sat the two together; who can
tell forth their praise? Here glass, there jet, adorned the crystal and
ruby (of their faces).

<span class="margnote"><span id="991">991</span></span>They sat, they
banqueted, they multiplied the best liquor; they entertained Avt’handil
as kinsman (treats) kinsman; they brought beautiful vessels, all quite
new. But the heart of those who looked on that youth, alas! was given to
flame.

<span class="margnote"><span id="992">992</span></span>That day they
drank, they ate, there was a banquet for the tribe of drinkers. Day
dawned; they bathed Avt’handil; there lies abundance of satin; they clad
hint in raiment worth many thousands of *dracanis;* <span
id="fr_27"></span>[1](#fn_27) they girded him with a girdle of
inestimable worth.

<span class="margnote"><span id="993">993</span></span>The knight
tarried some days, though he could not brook delay; he went out hunting
with P’hridon and sported, he slew alike from far and near whatever
offered itself to his hand; his archery put every bowman to shame.

<span class="margnote"><span id="994">994</span></span>The knight said
to P’hridon: "Hear what I have now to tell thee. Parting from you seems
to me like death, and thereby shall I harm myself; but I,

<span id="page_160">p. 160</span>

unhappy, have not time to stay; another fire also consumes me. A long
road, an urgent deed I have to do, I shall be very late.

<span class="margnote"><span id="995">995</span></span>"Right is he who
sheds tears at parting from thee. To-day without fail I depart,
therefore it is that another fire burns me; to tarry is a mistake of a
traveller, he will do well to teach himself this; lead me to the
seashore where thou sawest that sun (Nestan)."

<span class="margnote"><span id="996">996</span></span>P’hridon
answered: "Nothing shall be said by me to hinder thee. I know thou hast
no more time; another lance pierces thee. Go! God will guide thee, may
thy foes be destroyed! But tell me, how shall I bear the lack of thee?

<span class="margnote"><span id="997">997</span></span>"This I venture
to tell thee: It is not fitting that thou go away alone, I will give
thee knights with thee to serve and attend thee, armour and beasts, a
mule, a horse. If thou take not these thou wilt have trouble, tears will
flow on the rose cheeks."

<span class="margnote"><span id="998">998</span></span>He brought out
four slaves, trustworthy in heart, complete armour for each man, with
armpieces and greaves, sixty pounds of the red (gold), full weight, not
with any shortage, a peerless stallion with complete harness."

<span class="margnote"><span id="999">999</span></span>On a
strong-legged mule he packed bedding. He set out, and P’hridon mounted
and went forth with him also. Now fire burned and consumed him who
awaited the parting. He laments: "If the sun were near us, winter could
not freeze us!"

<span id="page_161">p. 161</span>

<span class="margnote"><span id="1000">1000</span></span>The rumour of
the knight's departure spread, they gave themselves up to grief; the
burgesses flocked together, those who sold silk goods like those who
sold fruit; the voice of their lamentation was like thunder in the air;
they said: "We are removed from the sun; come, let us close our eyes."

<span class="margnote"><span id="1001">1001</span></span>They passed
through the city, they went on, they came to the seashore where P’hridon
had formerly seen the sun (Nestan) seated (? landed); there they shed a
rivulet of blood from the lake of tears. P’hridon tells the story of
that shining captive.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1002">1002</span></span>"Hither the two
slaves brought by ship the sun, white-teethed, ruby-lipped--a black
sight! I spurred my horse, I determined to steal her by sword and arm;
they saw me from afar, they soon fled from me, the boat seemed like a
bird."

<span class="margnote"><span id="1003">1003</span></span>They embraced
each other, they multiplied the springs of tears; they kissed, and both
their fires were renewed; the inseparable sworn brothers parted like
brothers. P’hridon remained, the knight went away, the form the slayer
of gazers.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_27"></span>[159:1](mps30.htm#fr_27) Value seems to be
unknown; Ch. gives *drakhma* as about sixpence.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XXVIII. Avt’handil's Departure From P’hridon to Seek
Nestan-Daredjan](mps31)
