[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Asia](../index.md) 
[Myths/Legends](../../neu/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](mps45.md) 
[Next](mps47.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0947593438/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### XLIII

### THE COUNCIL OF P’HRIDON, AVT’HANDIL AND TARIEL AS TO THE ASSAULT ON THE CASTLE OF KADJET’HI

<span class="margnote"><span id="1369">1369</span></span>P’hridon said:
"I will speak a word, I think I am not at fault: We are few, the city is
only expugnable by many; we have not strength for a direct attack--this
is no time for boasting--in a thousand years we could not anywhere win
in if they shut the gate against us.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1370">1370</span></span>"In my
childhood my tutors instructed me in gymnastics, they taught me their
tricks, they made me

<span id="page_223">p. 223</span>

leap, they trained me, I used to go along a rope so that eyes could not
follow me; whatever little boys looked at me they also desired to do it.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1371">1371</span></span>"Now, whichever
of you knows best how to cast a noose, let us throw the end of a long
rope to that tower, it seems as easy for me to cross as a field; I shall
make it a trouble to you to find a sound man inside.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1372">1372</span></span>"To me it seems
nought to cross in armour, no trouble to bear a shield; nimbly shall I
leap down inside, strike like a wind, slay the soldiers; I shall open,
you will see the opening of the gate, you too come thither where you
hear the uproar of alarm."

<span class="margnote"><span id="1373">1373</span></span>Avt’handil
said: "Ha, P’hridon! friends cannot complain of thee; thou hast hope in
thy lion-like arms, wounds hurt not thee; thou counsellest hard counsel
to make foes lament; but hearest thou not how very near the garrison
shouts!

<span class="margnote"><span id="1374">1374</span></span>"When thou
goest over, the garrison will hear the clatter of thine armour, they
will perceive thee, they will cut the cord, of this thou must be
assured. Everything will turn out ill for thee; only the vain attempt
will remain to thee. That counsel is of no value; let us help ourselves
in some other way.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1375">1375</span></span>"This is
better: you stay hidden in ambush. These men will not lay hands on a
traveller coming into the town. I will dress myself as a merchant, I
will do a treacherous deed; I will load a mule with helmet, hauberk and
sword.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1376">1376</span></span>"It is of no
use for the three of us to go in, there is risk that they would perceive
it; I shall go alone as a merchant, and well shall I win in unnoticed;
secretly shall

<span id="page_224">p. 224</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> I don mine armour,
I shall appear, I shall deceive them. God grant that I may make channels
of blood to flow generously in there!

<span class="margnote"><span id="1377">1377</span></span>"Without any
difficulty I shall remove the guards inside; you strike outside the
gate, all like heroes; I shall shatter the locks, I shall open, you will
see the opening of the gate. If aught else would be better, say so; I am
for a plan of this sort."

<span class="margnote"><span id="1378">1378</span></span>Tariel said: "I
recognize your heroism exceeding that of heroes; your counsel and advice
is like your own stout-heartedness; I know you desire fierce fight, not
a vain brandishing of swords, when the battle becomes perilous then are
ye men.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1379">1379</span></span>"But let me too
have some choice in the matter. The sound will be heard by her who
maddens me; like the sun she will be standing aloft; you will have
fierce fight, she will see me as a non-combatant! This will be a slur on
me. Nay, speak no flattering words!

<span class="margnote"><span id="1380">1380</span></span>"Better than
that counsel is this--let us do as I say: Let us divide the men by
hundreds; when night turns to dawn let the three of us start out from
three places, swiftly let us urge on our horses; they will send out to
encounter us, we shall seem insignificant to them, we shall lend a
powerful palm to the sword.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1381">1381</span></span>"Swiftly shall
we engage them, we shall get round them; they will not be able to shut
the gates against us; one of the three will go in, the others from
outside will strike with battering-rams (?); that one who is inside will
fall on those within, making their blood flow; again let us lay hold of
the arms mightily used by us!"

<span class="margnote"><span id="1382">1382</span></span>P’hridon said:
"I understand, I perceive, I know what (it is). None could forestall at
the gates that horse that once was mine; when I gave it I knew not that
we

<span id="page_225">p. 225</span>

should want to mount guard over the Kadjis in Kadjet’hi; if so, I tell
thee I would by no means have given it to thee, such is mine avarice!"

<span class="margnote"><span id="1383">1383</span></span>P’hridon the
gay jests with such discourse as this; thereupon they, the eloquent,
wise-worded ones, laugh, they joke one with another, with merriment
beseeming them. They dismounted and arrayed themselves; they mounted
their excellent steeds.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1384">1384</span></span>Again they
interchanged words, not tart to the mouth. They resolved on that plan
proposed by Taria. They divided among them by hundreds the men, all
equal to heroes. They mounted their horses; their helmets they raised.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1385">1385</span></span>I saw those
heroes shining with rays excelling the sun; those three are covered by
the seven planets with a column of light. Tariel with slender form sits
on the black (horse); they consumed their foes in fight as their
admirers by gazing.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1386">1386</span></span>Now, this is
what I shall say is their image and likeness: When clouds rain down, and
the stream pours from the mountains, it comes and glides through the
glens, turmoil and uproar is heard; but when it unites with the sea then
is it even so calm.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1387">1387</span></span>Though P’hridon
and Avt’handil are unrivalled in valour, yet to engage with Taria is to
be desired of none; the sun hides even the planets, nor do the Pleiads
shine. Now give heed, O listener; thou shalt hear of fierce fights.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1388">1388</span></span>The three split
up into three, one for each gate; with them they had three hundred men
all equal to heroes. That night they hastily made a reconnaissance, not
illusory.

<span id="page_226">p. 226</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Day dawned, they
appeared, they set forth, they each had his shield.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1389">1389</span></span>First they went
quietly in the guise of some travellers; those inside could not
perceive, they could not meet them alertly, they had no fear in their
hearts, quietly they stood at ease. They approached; for the time being
they covered over their helmets.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1390">1390</span></span>Suddenly they
spurred their horses, their whips swished. When they saw, they opened
the gates, a tumult came forth from the city. The three set out in three
different directions, thus risking their lives (?). They played on fifes
and drums; they made the trumpets sound shrill.'

<span class="margnote"><span id="1391">1391</span></span>Then the
measureless wrath of God struck Kadjet’hi. Cronos, looking down in
anger, removed the sweetness of the sun; to them (the Kadjis) also in
wrath turned round the wheel and circle of heaven. The fields could not
contain the corpses; the army of the dead was increasing.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1392">1392</span></span>The sound of
Tariel's mighty voice made men unwounded faint, he rent the armour, the
strength of the chain-mail was brought to nought; they attacked the
gates on three sides, they found no difficulty in cutting them down;
when they entered the city they began swiftly to destroy the castle.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1393">1393</span></span>Avt’handil and
the lion P’hridon met inside, they had wholly destroyed the enemy, whose
blood flowed in streams; they shouted and saw each other, they rejoiced

<span id="page_227">p. 227</span>

greatly; they said: "How goeth it with Tariel?" Their eyes roved round
seeking him.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1394">1394</span></span>None of them
knew; they could hear nought of Tariel. They wended to the castle gate,
no care had they for the foe; there they saw a bank of armour, shattered
chips of sword-blades, the ten thousand guards lifeless, like dust.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1395">1395</span></span>All the castle
guard lay like sick men, every one wounded from head to foot, their
armour rent in pieces, the castle gates open, the fragments of the gates
flung aside. They recognized Tariel's handiwork, they said: "This is his
doing."

<span class="margnote"><span id="1396">1396</span></span>They found the
roads prepared, they entered and crept up the passages; they saw: the
moon was freed from the serpent to meet the suns; he raised his helmet,
his reedy hair thrown back became him (well), breast was glued to
breast, neck was riveted to neck.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1397">1397</span></span>They (Nestan
and Tariel) embraced each other, they kissed and shed tears; they were
like when Musht’har and Zual are united. When the sun surrounds the rose
they become fair and reflect the rays. They that have hitherto seen
griefs will henceforth rejoice.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1398">1398</span></span>They kissed
each other, they stood neck-welded; again full oft they glued the roses
of the opened lips. Now those also (Avt’handil and P’hridon) came forth,
the three sworn brothers were gathered together; they gave greeting to
that sun, they presented themselves as they were called on.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1399">1399</span></span>The sun
(Nestan) met them with lovely, laughing face, the proud one kissed her
helpers with gentle mien, she humbly gave them thanks with dainty words;
both together talked with fair discourse.

<span id="page_228">p. 228</span>

<span class="margnote"><span id="1400">1400</span></span>They greeted
Tariel too, that tree like an aloe sapling, they wished him joy of the
victory, they asked news of one another; it irked them not, they
regretted not, for their armour had not failed them; they themselves had
quit themselves as lions, those that fought against them had been as
hinds and goats.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1401">1401</span></span>Out of the
three hundred men, a hundred and sixty came in with them; it grieves
P’hridon for his troops, but on the other hand he rejoiced; they sought
out and suffered not to live whatever adversaries were left. What
treasures they found, now how can their number be told!

<span class="margnote"><span id="1402">1402</span></span>They collected
mules, camels, whatever they could find that was swift, they loaded
three thousand with pearls and gems, every gem cut, jacinths and rubies;
they placed that sun in a palanquin, precautions are taken by them.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1403">1403</span></span>They appointed
sixty men to guard the castle of Kadjet’hi. They led away that sun--hard
would it be to ravish her from them--they set out for the City of the
Seas, though long is the way thither. They said: "We must see P’hatman;
we owe her a due recompense."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XLIV. The Going of Tariel to the King of the Seas and to
P’hridon's](mps47.md)
