[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Asia](../index) 
[Myths/Legends](../../neu/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](mps39) 
[Next](mps41) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0947593438/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### XXXVII

### LETTER WRITTEN BY P’HATMAN TO NESTAN-DAREDJAN

<span class="margnote"><span id="1248">1248</span></span>P’hatman
writes: "O star, heavenly sun of the world, consumer and griever of all
them that are afar from thee, elegant and eloquent in words, lovely,
fair-tongued, crystal and ruby both welded in one!

<span class="margnote"><span id="1249">1249</span></span>"Though thou
gayest me not to hear thy story, I have learnt the truth, thereby hath
my heart been comforted. Console with news Tariel, who is become mad for
thee! May you both attain your desire, may he be a rose and thou a
violet!

<span id="page_203">p. 203</span>

<span class="margnote"><span id="1250">1250</span></span>"His sworn
brother is come in quest of thee, Avt’handil, an Arab knight renowned in
Arabia, Commander-in-Chief of King Rosten, to be contemned of none.
Write news of thyself, thou proud one, wise in understanding!

<span class="margnote"><span id="1251">1251</span></span>"For this
purpose have we sent this slave to your presence: We would know tidings
of Kadjet’hi. Have the Kadjis come home? We wish to know in detail the
number of warriors there. Who are thy guards, and who is their chief?

<span class="margnote"><span id="1252">1252</span></span>"Whatever thou
knowest concerning that place, write to us, make it known. Then send
some token for thy lover. All the sorrow thou hast had hitherto, change
(it) into joy! May it please God that I unite the lovers so befitting
each other!

<span class="margnote"><span id="1252a.">1252a.</span></span>"Go, O
letter, hasten, if swift be thy knee! I envy thee, thou goest to see the
crystal, jet and rubies. In fate thou art happier than I, O letter; the
eyes of her who consumes me will look upon thee. If thou hearest of my
life after thee, shalt thou not pity me!"

<span class="margnote"><span id="1253">1253</span></span>P’hatman gave
the letter to that cunning sorcerer: "Give this letter to the sunlike
maiden!" The wizard donned a certain green mantle over his form; in that
very moment he was lost to view, he flew over the roofs.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1254">1254</span></span>He went like an
arrow shot by a swift-bowed archer. When he reached Kadjet’hi it was
just dusk twilight. Invisible he passed the multitude of knights
guarding the gates. He gave to that sun the greeting of her who longed
for her.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1255">1255</span></span>He passed the
closed gates of the castle as if they had been open; the negro entered,
the black-faced, long-haired,

<span id="page_204">p. 204</span>

cloaked; that sun was affrighted, she thought it was somewhat to harm
her; the rose was changed to saffron and the violets to sky blue.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1256">1256</span></span>The Kadj said:
"Whom think’st thou me to be, and why faintest thou thus? I am
P’hatman's slave despatched to thy presence, this letter will justify
me, I speak not falsely to thee. Let the sun's rays come forth, O rose,
fade not so soon."

<span class="margnote"><span id="1257">1257</span></span>The sun-faced
marvelled at P’hatman's wonderful news; she split her almonds (opened
her eyes), the jets (? black pupils) quivered with the rod of jet (her
lashes). The slave gave her the letter with his own hand. She sighs, she
reads the letter, she wets it with her hot tears.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1258">1258</span></span>She asked the
slave: "Tell me, who is my seeker, or who knows me to be alive, treading
the earth?" He said: "I will venture to tell you only what I know. When
thou wentest forth, since then hath our sun been darkened.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1259">1259</span></span>"Henceforth
P’hatman's heart hath been torn by lances; the tears she shed are (such
as) to be united to the seas. Once already I brought news of thee to
her. I call God to witness that for her since then the tear hath not
ceased.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1260">1260</span></span>"Now there came
a certain knight? fair of face; in detail she told him all, what trouble
you are in; he with hero-like arm is thy seeker; they sent me, they
entreated me to hasten with ceaseless haste."

<span class="margnote"><span id="1261">1261</span></span>The maiden
said: "What thou hast said, O man, seems to me to be truth. How could
P’hatman know from whom I was carried away! Doubtless somewhere is he
who burns me with fire. I will write to her; thou also shalt tell how my
heart boils."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XXXVIII. The Letter Written by Nestan-Daredjan to
P’hatman](mps41)
