[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Asia](../index) 
[Myths/Legends](../../neu/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](mps46) 
[Next](mps48) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0947593438/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### XLIV

### THE GOING OF TARIEL TO THE KING OF THE SEAS AND TO P’HRIDON'S

<span class="margnote"><span id="1404">1404</span></span>To the presence
of the King of the Seas he sent a messenger (of good tidings); he bade
him announce: "I, Tariel, come, vanquisher of foes, their destroyer and
slayer; from Kadjet’hi I bring my sun, piercer of me with arrows; I
desire to see thee with honour, as father and parent.

<span id="page_229">p. 229</span>

<span class="margnote"><span id="1405">1405</span></span>"Now I have the
land of the Kadjis and their hoards. O king, all that is good hath
happened to me from you: my sun was freed by P’hatman, she was a mother
and a sister to her. What can I give thee in return for this? I hate
vain promises.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1406">1406</span></span>"Come, see us
before we have passed thy land. I present to thee outright the kingdom
of the Kadjis, accept it from me; let thy men be posted there, hold the
castle strongly. I am in haste, I cannot come to see thee, come thou
forth, wend towards me.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1407">1407</span></span>"On my behalf
tell Usen, P’hatman's husband, to send her, the sight of her will please
her she freed; whom else can she desire to see more than her who is
brighter than the sun, even as crystal is brighter than pitch?"

<span class="margnote"><span id="1408">1408</span></span>When Tariel's
man was received by the ruler of the seas--it is the custom that the
heart is agitated by startling tidings--he gave thanks and glory to God
the Just Judge. Straightway he mounted; he needed no other messenger (or
invitation).

<span class="margnote"><span id="1409">1409</span></span>He loaded
baggage, he appointed the making of their wedding, he takes a number of
pretty things, not a great quantity of jet. He has P’hatman with him,
they made a journey of ten days; the sight of the lion and the sun, the
light of the lands, rejoices him.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1410">1410</span></span>Afar off the
three met the great King of the Seas, they dismounted, he humbly kissed
them, they were encompassed by a host of troops; they rendered praise to
Tariel, he gave a thousand thanks, when they saw the damsel he (the King
of the Seas) was fascinated by her crystal-halo rays.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1411">1411</span></span>Slow fire
consumed Dame P’hatman at the sight of her, she embraced her, she
covered with kisses her hand, foot, face, neck; she said: "O God, I will
serve Thee, since

<span id="page_230">p. 230</span>

my darkness is lightened for me; I recognize the shortness of evil, Thy
goodness is everlasting."

<span class="margnote"><span id="1412">1412</span></span>The maiden
embraced P’hatman; sweetly she speaks, not angry: "God hath enlightened
my rent, faded heart; now am I as full as formerly I was waning; the sun
hath shed his beams upon me, therefore I appear a rose unfrozen."

<span class="margnote"><span id="1413">1413</span></span>The King of the
Seas celebrated there an exceeding great wedding; he thanked (Tariel)
too for Kadjet’hi; he would not let them go for seven days; generously
he dispensed gifts, the treasure he had loaded; they wore out (by
treading) upon (it) the scattered gold coin as if it were a bridge.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1414">1414</span></span>There stood a
heap of silk, brocade and satin. He gave to Tariel a crown, a price
could not be set on it, of a whole jacinth, yellow, exceeding pure,
likewise a throne of gold, red, refined.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1415">1415</span></span>He presented to
Nestan-Daredjan a mantle adorned with gems, red jacinths, rubies of
Badakhshan and rubies; they both sat, the maid and the youth, with faces
flashing lightning; they that looked on them burned with new fire.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1416">1416</span></span>He presented to
Avt’handil and P’hridon measureless great gifts, a valuable saddle, an
excellent horse, to each a jewelled coat shedding rare-hued rays; they
said:

<span id="page_231">p. 231</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> "What thanks can
we utter! Prosperous be your state!"

<span class="margnote"><span id="1417">1417</span></span>Tariel rendered
thanks with his tongue in fair words: "Greatly have I been pleased, O
king; first at seeing you, then you have filled us with many fair kinds
of gifts; I wot we did well not to pass by afar off from you."

<span class="margnote"><span id="1418">1418</span></span>The King of the
Seas says: "O king, lion, valorous, life of those near you, slayer from
afar of those that cannot look on you, what can I give you like unto
yourself, O fair to look upon! When I am away from you what shall avail
me, O desirable to be gazed on!"

<span class="margnote"><span id="1419">1419</span></span>Tariel said to
P’hatman: "I adopt thee as my sister. O sister, great is mine unpayable
debt to thy heart! Now whatever treasure of the Kadjis I have brought
with me from Kadjet’hi I give it to thee, take it, I sell it not."

<span class="margnote"><span id="1420">1420</span></span>Dame P’hatman
made obeisance, she proffered exceeding great thanks: "O king, parting
from thee burns me with unquenchable fire. When I shall be away from
thee what shall I do! Thou wilt leave me like one bereft of sense. Ah,
blessed are those near thee; woe to him that cannot gaze on you."

<span class="margnote"><span id="1421">1421</span></span>The two radiant
ones spoke to the King of the Seas; their teeth were crystals, their
lips as pearl-shells. "When we are deprived of you we desire not
merrymakings, harps and kettledrums. But give us leave, it is time, let
us depart, we are in haste.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1422">1422</span></span>"Be our father,
parent and hope! But this indeed we beseech of thee: grant us a ship!"
The king said: "I grudge not to give myself as earth for you (to

<span id="page_232">p. 232</span>

tread on); since thou art in haste, what can I say to thee! Go! Thine
arm be thy guide!"

<span class="margnote"><span id="1423">1423</span></span>The king fitted
out a ship on the shore. Tariel set out; those who were parted shed
tears, they beat their heads, they tore their hair and beards (and) cast
them away. P’hatman's tears in their flow even augmented the sea.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1424">1424</span></span>The three sworn
brothers crossed the seas together, again they confirmed by their word
what they formerly affirmed; singing and laughter were beseeming to
them, who were not ignorant thereof; the ray from their lips shone upon
the planks of crystal (their teeth).

<span class="margnote"><span id="1425">1425</span></span>Thence they
sent a man to Asmat’h as a messenger of good tidings; also to the
households of P’hridon's chiefs who had been in the fight, to announce
to them: "He comes hither, as the sun he rises high, reinforcing (?) the
planets; we erstwhile frozen shall be frozen now no more."

<span class="margnote"><span id="1426">1426</span></span>They seated
that sun (Nestan) in a palanquin; they wended their way along the coast.
They sported like children; the passing away of woe gladdened them. They
came where was the land of the hero Nuradin, they were met, they heard
the sound of frequent song.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1427">1427</span></span>There all
P’hridon's magnates met them. Asmat’h, full of joy, whose wounds no
longer appeared, was riveted to Nestan-Daredjan so that axes could not
unloose them. Now she had ended all her faithful services.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1428">1428</span></span>Nestan-Daredjan
embraces her, kisses her face with her mouth. She said: "Mine own, woe
is me, I have filled thee too with grief. Now God hath granted us grace,

<span id="page_233">p. 233</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> I acknowledge His
(boundless) bounty. I know not with what I can repay so great a heart as
thine!"

<span class="margnote"><span id="1429">1429</span></span>Asmat’h said:
"Thanks be to God, I have seen the roses unfrozen. At length
understanding hath thus revealed things hidden. Death itself seems to me
life when I see you happy. Better than all friends are suzerain and
vassals that love one another!"

<span class="margnote"><span id="1430">1430</span></span>The magnates
did homage, they rendered great praise: "Since God hath caused us to
rejoice, blessed is His divinity; He hath shown us your face, no longer
doth the burning of fires consume us; even He that gave the wound, He
hath the power to heal it."

<span class="margnote"><span id="1431">1431</span></span>They came and
put their mouths on their hands; thus they kissed them. The king
(Tariel) said: "For our sake have your brethren sacrificed themselves.
They have found joy in eternity a reality and no dream. They have
attained communions with the One; their glories are increased an hundred
and twenty fold.''

<span class="margnote"><span id="1432">1432</span></span>"Though their
death is sore to me and grievous, yet the great immortal gift hath there
fallen to their lot." This he spake, gently he wept, and the rain (of
tears) was mingled with the snow (of his cheeks). Boreas blows from (?
shakes) the narcissi; January freezes the rose.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1433">1433</span></span>There all wept
when they saw him in tears; whoever had lost any (kinsman) moaned,
weeping and sobbing. All were hushed. Then they said respectfully (to
Tariel): "Since sages liken thee to the sun, it befits them that look
upon you to be merry; wherefore should they lament!

<span id="page_234">p. 234</span>

<span class="margnote"><span id="1434">1434</span></span>"Who is worthy
of your so great weeping and sorrow? Death for your sake is far better
than walking upon the earth!" Then P’hridon said to the king: "Make not
bitterness to thyself from aught. May God in return render to thee a
thousand joys!"

<span class="margnote"><span id="1435">1435</span></span>Avt’handil also
sympathized; he speaks with great sorrow. They rendered praise, and
said: "Let us now yield ourselves to smiling; since the lost lion has
found the vanished sun, no more will we weep what is deplorable, no
longer will we set canals in our eyes."

<span class="margnote"><span id="1436">1436</span></span>Thither they
went where is the great city Mulghazanzar. They played trumpet and
kettledrum, there was trampling and uproar; the sound of drums and
copper drum blended fairly; the burgesses crowded round, they left the
bazaar.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1437">1437</span></span>The merchants
came from their rows, on all sides there is a host of onlookers; the
officers kept a wide space round them, they had arms in their hands;
families came crowding in, causing trouble to the officers; their
entreaty is to be allowed there to look upon them.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1438">1438</span></span>At P’hridon's
they alighted, they saw a pleasing palace, many slaves with golden
girdles met them, they have nought but gold brocades as a carpet for
their feet; they threw up gold above their heads, the crowd marching
there picked it up in heaps.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XLV. The Wedding of Tariel and Nestan by P’hridon](mps48)
