[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Asia](../index) 
[Myths/Legends](../../neu/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](mps52) 
[Next](mps54) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0947593438/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# APPENDIX II

### BIBLIOGRAPHICAL NOTE

THE following is a list of some books and pamphlets collected by the
translator, and now the property of the Bodleian Library, Oxford.

#### TEXT.

KING VAKHTANG'S edition in quarto, with a commentary. The *editio
princeps*. Tiflis, 1712. A defective copy.

D. CHUBINOV'S edition in octavo. St. Petersburg, 1846. This copy lacks
title, and some pages are damaged. Wooden boards covered in velvet, with
leather straps. Given as a wedding present to Euphrosyne Cldiashvili,
and presented by her to the translator. It was the custom that all
Georgian girls learned the poem by heart, and a copy of it was always
included among the presents to a bride.

D. CHUBINOV's edition in octavo. St. Petersburg, 1860. References to
this are marked "Ch." in the notes.

C. LORTHKIPANIDZE's edition (in unusual type). Kutaïs, 1883.

G. D. KART’HVELISHVILI'S edition de luxe in folio, illustrated, and
adorned with borders from old designs. Tiflis, 1888.

T’HAVART’HKILADZE'S edition, with aphorisms in large type, octavo.
Ozurget’hi, 1892.

T’HAVART’HKILADZE'S edition, illustrated, octavo. Batum, 1899.

A. S. KHAKHANOV (Professor at Moscow): Gruzinskaya

<span id="page_266">p. 266</span>

rukopisnaya poema "Barsova Kozha" iz Moskovskago Glavnago Arkhiva
Ministerstva Inostrannykh Dyel. (Gives many additional quatrains of
doubtful authenticity from the MS. in the Archives of the Ministry for
Foreign Affairs at Moscow; extracted from vol. ii. of "Trudy" of
Oriental Commission of Moscow Imperial Archæological Society.) Quarto.
Moscow, 1895.

VLADIMIR QIPHIANI's edition, illustrated, octavo. Tiflis, 1899.

D. CARIDCHASHVILI'S edition (the nineteenth). With four portraits and
twenty-one illustrations. Octavo. Tiflis, 1903.

A handy cheap edition, with preface and glossary and notes. The
numbering of the quatrains is that now usually adopted, and agrees with
the foregoing English translation. References in the notes are marked
"Car."

E. C. (?Bishop Cirion): Vephkhis Tqaosanis shesamotsmebeli masali.
(Gives variants, marked in the footnotes "var. E. C.," from a
seventeenth-century MS.) Pp. 20-38 in No. v. of "Moambe." Tiflis, 1904.

In December, 1911, Prince George Tseret’heli presented a MS. with
illustrations. It seems to be of the seventeenth century.

#### OTHER WORKS.

PROFESSOR N. MARR: Vstupitelnyya i zakliuchitelnyya strofy Vityazya y
Barsovoi Kozhie (the introductory and concluding strophes of "The Man in
the Panther's Skin") being t. xii. of "Teksty i Razyskaniya." St.
Petersburg, 1910. References to this are marked "M."

PROFESSOR N. MARR: Drevnegruzinskie Odopistsi (ancient Georgian writers
of odes, twelfth century), being t. iv. of "Teksty." St. Petersburg,
1902. References to this are marked "M. iv." or "Odes."

J. ABULADZE: Me-xii saucunis Kart’hulis mtserlobis khasiat’hi da
Rust’hvelis Vep’hkhis Tqaosani. (Contains a glossary of words derived
from Persian, Arabic, etc.) Printed in vol. i. of "Dzveli Sakart’hvelo."
Tiflis, 1909. References are marked "Abul."

ARTHUR LEIST: Der Mann im Tigerfelle. (A German verse translation.)
Octavo. Preface dated 1889. Dresden and Leipzig.

AL. S(ARADJI)SHVILI: "Vephkhis Tqaosanis" qalbi adgilebi (The spurious
passages in "The Man in the Panther's Skin"). Published in "Moambe,"
beginning in No. xi. of 1895, and ending in No. vi. of 1901, and would
make a volume of 590 pages octavo; it gives the results of a critical
examination of the whole poem. Tiflis, 1895-1901. *Cf*. articles in
"Iveria," Tiflis, 1899, Nos. 3, 34, 47.

E. C.: An article in "Iveria," No. 93 of 1895.

<span id="page_267">p. 267</span>

M. BROSSET: De la littérature romanesque géorgienne (in Mélanges
Asiatiques tirés du Bulletin de l’Acad. Imp. des Sciences de St.
Pétersbourg, t. viii). St. Pétersbourg, 1877.

FELIX HOLLDACK: Zwei Grundsteine zu einer Grusinischen Staats- und
Rechtsgeschichte. Leipzig, 1907.

P. CARBELASHVILI: An article in the Tiflis journal "Iveria" for 1880,
pp. 3-54.

ACHAS BORIN: La Peau de Léopard. Tiflis, 1885.

ACHAS BORIN: Contes orientaux. Paris, 1886.

ILIA CHAVCHAVADZE: Ai Istoria! Tiflis, 1887.

ACACI (TSERET’HELI): Ramdenime sitqva bat. Ilia Dchavdchavadzis
sapasukhod "Vephkhvis Tqaosanis" gamo. (A reply to his fellow-poet
Chavchavadze's pamphlet "Ai Istoria!" on the question whether Tariel,
Avt’handil, and P’hridon, are to be taken as types of Karthli, Imerethi,
and Guria.) Tiflis, 1887.

ACACI (TSERET’HELI): T’hanamedrove hazrebi Rust’hvelisagan me-12-e
saucuneshi natsinastsari. (In the Tiflis paper "Themi," No. 20 of 1911.)

A. S. KHAKHANOV: Ocherki po istorii gruzinskoi slovesnosti. (History of
Georgian Literature.) Vol. ii., pp. 243-298. Moscow, 1897. Vol. i., pp.
281, 282. Moscow, 1895. Vol. iii., pp. 73-84, 94. Gruzinskii poet xii.
vieka Shota Rustaveli i ego poema "Barsova Kozha," in "Journ. of Russian
Min. of Publ. Instr.," part cccii., 1905, No. 12, pp. 200-223.

M. DJANASHVILI: Shot’ha Rust’haveli. Tiflis, 1896.

M. DJANASHVILI: Izrecheniya gruz. poeta Shota Rustaveli. (Aphorisms from
the poem translated into Russian.) Tiflis, 1903.

M. DJANASHVILI: Rust’havelis garshemo (criticism of Professor Marr's
views), in "Nashromi," part iii. Tiflis, 1910.

N. GULAK: O Barsovoi Kozhe Rustaveli. (Two lectures delivered in Tiflis
in 1884. Extracted from part iv. of Sborn. materialov dlya opisaniya
myestnostei i plemen Kavkaza.)

U. (? P. UMICASHVILI): O poezii Rustaveli (criticism of N. Gulak's
lectures), in No. 248 of the newspaper "Kavkaz." Tiflis, November 6,
1884.

BARON SÜTTNER: Mnyenie inostrantza o "Barsovoi Kozhe."

(Opinion of a foreigner on "The Man in the Panther's Skin.") Russian
translation of articles based on Meunargia's prose translation into
French, which has not been published. In Nos. 265, 267, 268, of
"Kavkaz." Tiflis, 1884.

SH. DAVIDOV: A translation into Russian prose of part (about 300 lines)
of the poem, in "Zakavkazie," December 12 and 19, 1910.

E. S. STALINSKII: Barsova Kozha, part ii. (Translations of short
passages into Russian, French, German, and Armenian, with an essay in
Russian, including notes on versification.) Tiflis, 1888.

<span id="page_268">p. 268</span>

G. JOSELIANI: Vephkhis Tqaosani naambobi mozrdilis qmatsvilebisat’hvis.
(A prose summary of the poem, for children.) Tiflis, 1892.

G. JOSELIANI: Another edition, illustrated. Tiflis, 1898.

A. P’HURTZELADZE: Shot’ha Rust’haveli da misi tzoli. (A popular legend
about the faithlessness of the poet's wife. With a preface of 12 pages.)
Batum, 1899.

"R. KINVARI": V Barsovoi Kozhe. Kartiny dlya stseny. (An adaptation for
the stage in Russian verse, with preface and illustration.) St.
Petersburg, 1901.

Z. MT'HATSMINDELI: Shot’ha Rust’haveli, 1172-1216. Tiflis, 1884 (bound
up in volume lettered "Karthuli Mtserloba"). Gives the following rough
bibliographical references on pp. i,

(*a*) Kart’hlis Tzkhovreba. 1852.

(*b*) Theimuraz Mephe: Sakarthvelos Istoria. 1848.

(*c*) Brosset's Preface to Chubinov's Dictionary. 1848.

(*d*) Brosset's Preface to Text of "Man in Panther's Skin." 1840.

(*e*) Archbishop Timothé's Travels. 1852.

(*f*) Journal "Tziscari." 1867.

(*g*) Casimir Lopczynski's Preface (in Polish). 1870.

(*h*) D. Djanashvili: Sakarthvelos Istoria. 1875.

(*i*) Newspaper "Droeba." 1881.

(*j*) D. Djanashvili: Karthveli Kalebi, in journal "Iveria." 1883.

(*k*) P. Umicashvili: Article in "Iveria." 1884.

(*l*) Acaci Tseret’heli: Lectures not yet published.

(*m*) Arsen the Monk (MS.), xvii c.: Leaves from Georgian Ecclesiastical
History.

(*n*) Archimandrite Tarasi: Materials in the Monastery of Kvat’ha Khevi.

(*o*) King Vakhtang: Preface to Tiflis edition of 1713.

(*p*) King Theimuraz and others: Poems.

(*q*) Prince David: MS. information.

(*r*) Catholicos Anton: Tsqobili Sitqvaoba. 1852.

(*s*) Platon Joseliani: Notes on Rusthaveli.

(*t*) Georgian Chrestomathy, part i. 1848.

(*u*) Khosro T’hurmanidze (xvii c.): Rostomiani (translation of Shah
Nameh).

(*v*) Prince Bagrat's Poems, written in xvii c.

(*w*) D. Bakradze's Preface to Calmasoba. 1862.

(*x*) Vakhusht's Geography. 1848.

All the above are in Georgian; the following are in Russian:

(*aa*) Progress of Science in Georgia, article in "Syevernaya Pchela."
1840.

(*ab*) Short Sketch of Georgian Literature, in "Tifl. Vyed." 1832.

<span id="page_269">p. 269</span>

(*ac*) Brosset: Georgian Literature in "Syn Otechestva." 1840.

(*ad*) Monuments of Literature in Georgia, in "Kavkaz." 1849.

(*ae*) Zakavkazskii Vyestnik. 1850.

(*af*) "Kavkaz." 1846.

(*ag*) "Kavkaz." 1870.

(*ah*) Bakradze: Ancient Meskhia, in "Kavkaz." 1855.

(*ai*) Pl. Joseliani: Journey from Tiflis to Mtzkhet. 1871.

(*aj*) Brosset: Review of Georgian Literature, in "Journ. of Education
Dept." 1838.

(*ak*) Golovin: History of Georgia. 1865.

(*al*) Georgia, published by Alexander Nevsky Academy. 1802.

(*am*) Prince David: History of Georgia. 1801.

(*an*) R. Eristov: Rust’haveli, an article in "Kavkaz."

(*ao*) G. Joseliani: Rust’haveli, an article in "Kavkaz."

(*ap*) N. Gulak's Lectures on Rust’haveli.

(*aq*) Bakradze: History and Ethnography of Tiflis. 1873.

(*ar*) Pl. Joseliani: Shot’ha Rust’haveli.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Appendix III. Groups of References](mps54)
